GODS ARRAIGNEMENT OF HYPOCRITES: WITH AN ENLARGEMENT concerning Gods decree in
ordering sin.

AS LIKEWISE A DEFENSE of Mr. CALVINE against BELLARMINE; and of M. PERKINS
against ARMINIVS.

(...).
Cernit Deus omnia vindex:
GENESIS 18.13. Shall not the Judge of all the world do right?

PRINTED BY CANTRELL LEG, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT Worsh. Sir WILLIAM AYLOFE, Knight Barronet, and chief Justice of
the liberties of HAVERING upon the Bower: Grace and peace from the Father,
Prince, and Spirit of Peace, AMEN.
TRVTH speaks with plainness, and modesty bears with patience; the
plainness of the one, might disturb the patience of the other; but truth
keeps modesty from blushing, and modesty preserues truth from shaming: No
shame for plainness, whose plainness is the truth; nor blushing for modesty,
whose forbearance is patience; which is hardly angered, but soon reconciled;
easily injured, but seldom offending; sparing much, but stirring little: these
two are so privileged, that they may keep their court where they please,
without controlment of the proudest. But alas, the fashion of this world is
changed, and all is become complement; he is no complete Gentleman, that
cannot be as humble as the toe; as plain, as if he meant to open all his
heart; and as modest, as though he had learned a whole year to compose his
gesture: but nature forced, is always most unruly; and the face that has most
flushings of heat, has the coldest heart; and burnings without, are coolers
within. Maskes once served for sporting, but I fear them now to be used in
good earnest: painting was but a circumstance, but now it is the best substance:
yet let me tell this disordered age, that painting is meeter for ragged walls,
then fine marble; for an unruly Iezebel, then a chaste matron: in a word, all
strange complements, they are no better then court holy water, or a Popes
blessing; and I am sure, where he blesses, God curses. The earth is full of
fair words, but they pay no debts, neither is any man the richer for them. And
I would to God the fashion had rested in the body; but woe is me, it is crept
into the soul, and makes all learning but a flourish: Therefore I thought it
(right Worsh.) very good to abstain from the fashion, because in all kinds,
we may find them by experience to he but a days wearing: The Tailors care is
over, if he hit the cut; the Shooemaker, if his shoe hold the pulling on: and
every tradesman thinks his shop then best furnished, when his wares will serve
the time: but for my part, I know not how to cut out the truth, better then by
plainness; to pluck it on, then by modesty; and make it serve the time, then
by patience. I care for no more, if so be I may but be a friend of the
bridegroom, to woo his spouse; or as one of his eunuchs to trim her for
himself: neither ever did I intend to entreat for welcome by flattery, which
is always entertained as long as self-love is at home: and to what purpose
should I be more curious? I am sure that the painting of windows stops the
light, and that plainer glass, would permit the sun a clearer entrance: a
black ground best beseemes a white counterfeit; and a fair countenance needs
no varnish: where the wine is neat, there needs no ivy-bush; neither the
right coral any coloring: So where the truth it self brings credit, the
man with his gloss, wins small commendation: where the matter is of
sufficient excellency, there is more show of a pregnant wit, then perfect
wisdom to use superfluous eloquence: the naked tale most sets forth the naked
truth, and the plainest style, is the soonest understood. I do not condemn
eloquence or humane learning in divine mysteries; it is lawful, I confess, for
the Israelites to take jewels, gold, silver, and other precious ornaments; but
let them take heed how they use them, least they make a calfe, and then they
loose their beauty, having lost their true service. Neither would I be so
curious in trimming up of the truth, as though my greatest care should be for
the habit of words: for I know that skillful Apelles, coveting to mend the
nose, marred the cheek; and often the foolish dyer, is not content with the
die of his cloth, until he have burned it. I know the word of God has been
sufficiently tried to my hands, and the holy Ghost has given it a sufficient
tincture of beauty. Indeed, in nature there is no tree, but has some blast;
no countenance, but has some blemish; the fairest leopard is not without his
spots; the finest cloth is made with his list, and the smoothest shoe with his
last: But the word of God is a tree of life that is never blasted, a glass
that does never show us a blemished countenance, a storehouse of all garments
to be worn without list or seame; and as strong as a leopard, without any spot
or blemish; a gospel of peace, prepared without any wooden last of humane
eloquence, and yet sits as close to the feet of the soul, as heart can wish.
Neither do I speak this to excuse my self; for I might well learn wisdom
from the Estrich, that though she takes greatest pride in her feathers, yet is
content to pick some of the worst out, and burn them: so might I pick out
many things and purge them in the fire. Alexander laid his singer on his
cheek, least Apelles should paint his skarre: but it is my mind to hold my
finger off my skarres, least some skillful Apelles paint the finger, not
covering but pointing at the skarre; and so lay open as much hypocrisy in the
writer, as blemishes in the writing. Therefore (right Worsh.) seeing I am to
undergo censure, and be brought before every man's judgment seat, I have
great cause to seek out my advocate and patron: Iudicem aditurus? patronum
quare; must you before a Judge? seek out your patron. In duty and love I could
seek none beside your self, and my confidence of your acceptance is so
strong, that I fear not the least denial: you gave me the first
entertainment that ever I had abroad, and therefore in reason I could not but
present you with the first fruits of my labors. I doubt not but that your
self does both see and bewail the misery of these wretched times, in which
Atheism, and Policy (falsely so called, being indeed little better then
plain villainy) and Tomporizing, have like a canker, fretted out the very
heart of piety. Few there are that seek for established hearts, and to know
precisely whether God or Baal be the true God: and for resolution, they
resolve that the best course is to halt between two opinions, that so all
times might serve their turns. But you have not so learned Christ: for this
can I testify of your pain and diligence, that you labor for nothing more,
then the gaining of advised resolution. If I should say all that I know, the
world would censure me of flattery: and if I knew that self-love were at home
with your self, then should I never fear want of intertainment in learning to
dissemble: but both the world, and your self must pardon my boldness; for I
speak not to blaze abroad your praise, but to entreat that kindness, that men
would admit of your example, as a pattern for imitation. Three things
constrain me to utter my mind: First, that continual care which you have for
resolution of many difficulties in divinity: the means which you have used are
but practiced of few: one is, that you have not bin content to take your
resolution of divine truth from translations; but have taken that pains, that
you are able to fetch it from the original, and drink of the purest
fountain: A second means is, that of the Philosopher, (...), to make question
of matters of religion, whenever you have seen just opportunity, and fit
persons to resolve; neither have you been content to admit of superficial
answers, but have pressed argument upon them to see the true trial; and often
your own resolutions have bin more agreeable with the truth and context of
Sciptures, then that which others have said: let this teach men of your place,
besides their continual imploiments, to set some time apart, for this
excellent knowledge of the originalls of the Bible, and knowledge of that art.
A second good example is, your continual care that the legs of justice may
not lie broken in the streets, and no man to raise it up: A happy thing when
men of place count their dignities to be conferred, as a common good for Church
and Commonwealth. Thirdly, for all manner of election, this you only have not
affirmed by word, but performed by action, that the place, more then the
person, might have cause to rejoice. For my self, I confess I had no cause to
be i^ticed from you, as the Leuite was from Micah, Judge. 17. to become a Priest
unto a Tribe or family in Israel: but least through ignorance I should as soon
serve in the ministry of Idols, as the true God, I desired to be a little
longer trained up in the schools of the Prophets. For my love unto your
family, whereof once I was a member, it is this, that all of them might know
the God of their fathers, and serve him with a perfect heart, and a willing
mind. For your virtuous Lady, who^ God has made as a fruitful vine on the
sides of your house, that she might likewise grow into the true Vine, Christ
Jesus; and be fruitful unto her own salvation. For all your children, that
they might be as the Olive plants of God round about your table. For your
eldest son Benjamin; (I hope in name and nature the son of your right hand)
the Lord make him the strength and crown of your age, the excellency of your
dignity, and the excellency of your power. But I fear I have already
offended; your desire is brevity: therefore to conclude, I commend and commit
this small labor to your patronage: the text I am sure is excellent for these
days: but for my manner of handling it, I leave it to the censure of Gods
Church: How-euer it be, I do more then hope, that you will kindly accept it
from me, and entertain it as a testimony of my love; and not only so, but
use it for your comfort. Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead
our Lord Jesus, the great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the
everlasting covenant; make you perfect in all good works, to do his will,
working in you that which is pleasant in his sight: to whom be praise for ever,
and ever. Amen.

Yours in all good affection, JOHN YATES.

To the Christian Reader.
IT is a common saying, that an Exorcist may sooner conjure up a logion of
devils, then adjure one of them out of his habitation: And as it is with
bodily possession, so is it with the obsession of the soul: for although the
devil cannot penetrate the souls dimensions, yet he will sit so near it,
that whosoever admits him the least good fellowshippe, he shall not be freed of
his company, when he is weary, and with all his heart would shake hands with
him. The Papists challenge all our Churches as false, because we can cast out
no devils; but the whole world knows that they can do it to the admiration
of thousands: but for my part, I know not how they conjure the devil from the
body; yet this I dare boldly affirm, that where they have gotten one devil
out of men's bodies, they have admitted a thousand into men's souls: and surely,
the devil were a fool, if he would not change his room for a better lodging:
I am sure, that there was never any church that has coniured up more heresies
then they have done; and as yet I know not one that they have adjured, and sent
packing into hell. No marvel that they have need of strange exorcismes, for
otherwise how should men be confirmed in their strange doctrines? these
questionless have bin strong delusions to make them believe lies. But if they
please to admit of the holy Scriptures, we shall at the first resolve them of a
double means: Math. 17.20.21. the first is miraculous, and for a time: the
second ordinary, and so remains in the Church: the one is in the 20. v. the
other in the 21. and this second means we have: I am sure the Church of God
may pray and fast, to deliver both body and soul from the devil. But perhaps
they will say, show us whom you have dispossessed? I answer, Prayer and fasting
are of the same nature that preaching and administering the sacraments: they
being conscionably used, work where and whenever God pleases. I doubt not
but by the preaching of the word, thousands have bin converted unto the faith:
and where men get the devil out of the soul, he will have small hope or
comfort, either to enter or stay in the body: and so, no marvel the devil
holds them so strongly, and takes such good liking of them, that he will be at
their command, to leave the body, and ascend into an higher room: for he is
proud enough to intertain such a motion. And though I deny not but we have had
some possessed among us, yet I dare boldly say, the most have bin of their own
making: Let them take the credit of their art, for questionles, a black art
best beseemes a religion of darkness, blindness, and ignorance.

But to apply our Saviors rule unto our purpose: Fasting and prayer are
admirable means in the Church of God; not only to cast out devils and
unclean spirits; but also to fill the soul with the spirit of grace, and
goodness. And here I tremble to speak, and charge mine own heart with
exceeding great negligence, as often as I call to remembrance, the
extraordinary fasting and prayer of Arminius; especially whenever he entered
this mystery of mysteries, Gods eternal predestination: A point that has
troubled the Church of God, more then ever the devil vexed that young man in
the Gospel. This has made many no better then lunaticke, cast others into the
fire of contention, and drowned numbers in the waters of everlasting perdition.
Now alas, what good soul would not down on his knees, cry with all his heart,
Lord Jesus take pity on this destressed world, restore them to their senses,
deliver them from these fierce fires, and pull them out of these dangerous
waters: often has it bin in the hands of thy Pastors, but as yet they could
not heal up these brawles: surely it is, because we are a faithless and
crooked generation: Long have thou been with us, and we have had a large time
of thy patience, and it could not be but that thou would have brought it to
pass long before this, except our unbelief had hindered it. Arminius has
taken in hand to work this cure, but I fear he has raised up more spirits,
then can easily be laid again. Questionless, as our Savior Christ spoke of
that kind of possession, that it could not come out but by prayer and fasting:
so no more can these dangerous spirits of error be quieted and laid to sleep,
but by the prayers and fastings of Gods faithful people. Isa. 58.3. condemns
all fasting to seek our own wills, and require our own debts: it cannot be
good to fast for strife, and to smite with the hand of wickedness. Surely I
have heard, that when Arminius was entreated to defend the received opinion of
Predestination in the reformed Churches, did so distaste it, that he broached
in his readings the clean contrary, whereupon strange rumors were raised,
that he was become a maine heretic. It was Bezas judgment of him, when he
was a young man, that he would either prove an admirable minister of God, or
a dangerous enemy to Gods truth: These reports are not to be passed over
without consideration; for though he seem to cry down the former rumors in a
book now extant: yet both the book, and the rumors together, demonstrate
that he sought an opposite will to the reformed Churches. We deny not but that
Gods true Church may err, and so his will might not be against Gods will: yet
for my part, I esteem so reverently of my ancients, and the truth admitted,
defended, and propagated by them, that I dare not otherwise judge, then that
Arminius in fasting and prayer, sought his own will: and therefore no marvel
if he have labored to strive with that worthy man M. Perkins. In the beginning
of his book, he professes nothing but brotherly love: yet I entreat you,
observe but the whole carriage of his book, and see how he scannes every word,
exults and triumphs over him, as though he meant to censure him for a
blasphemous heretic against God. The man is dead, his book is now his
memorial: and to my reading savors of nothing more, but that he meant to
smite this worthy man, if not with the fist of wickedness, yet of hard
censure and judgment. This likewise may appear in his followers, who bear a
most deadly hatred to all that profess M. Calvin, and his best followers; and
most shamefully rail on them: the Papists shall find more love at their hands,
then a Caluinist. Alas, my brethren; is this the fast that the Lord has
chosen? No, no: the Lord would have us loose the bands of wickedness, take off
the heavy burdens of sin, and heresy, deal the bread of life to the
hungry, bring the poor that wander into Gods house, and not hide our selves
from our own flesh: If we would consider this, then would the Lord make our
light break forth as the morning, our health grow speedily, righteousness
go before us, and the whole glory of the Lord embrace us. The want of this,
makes the Papists rejoice, and triumph to see us, their professed enemies, to
quarrel and strike at one another. Oh that I had a body to fast night and
day! and a heart to pray that the Lord would reconcile us, and make his
glorious truth shine among us, to expel that darkness that makes the
division! When my book was in the press, I intended nothing but the mere
explaining of Gods ordering of sin, and so make use of it: but I could not in
my mind be at rest, until I had attempted some thing, in this maine
controversy. I acknowledge it might have bin much better atcheiued by some of
the Lords great Worthies, unto the least degree of whose strength, I have not
attained: But being as yet neglected by them, I thought it better,
notwithstanding my great weakness, to say something in the love of the truth,
then to pass it over with silence. I hope it will put others in mind who are
of greater ability, what they ought to do: and I would to God my labors
might serve as foyles, to show the greater glory of their surpassing
excellencies: or as courser wares, to make their finer stuffes more saleable
and commendable. For mine own part, I am so resolute, that I put it in my
creed, as an error that I will never believe; and I hope in God it is now at
his height. Christian Reader, be not offended with my young years, to make
thee distaste my timely writing. I hope I have keept me to Gods truth; esteem
that, and then judge me as thou please. Consider what is said, and the Lord
give us understanding in all things.

Thine in the Lord, JOHN YATES.

To every godly, zealous, and sincere Professor of Gods true Religion; the
wishes of the Author.
THis vacant white, I could not pass away,
Perchance the black is worser, thou will say:
The worst is said, and better is my creed,
That thou in this my love wilt ever read.
To give and take is neither more or less,
But love is more, then can our gifts express.
The former terms as relates, thine and mine,
Let Us pass proud terms, and then the gift is thine.
Thine as his own, if better were his own,
Love is the best, hence let the rest be known.
As purest wine runs from the homely press,
So plainest love gives comfort in dissresse.
Perfumes have sweetest smell, which fire find,
And love the greatest grace, which zeal can mind.
The rose in still is sweeter then on stalk,
Distill thy love, and sweet shall be thy talk.
My good to God is none, to thee is all,
Yet both to God must for a blessing call.
The silly Be suckes honey from the weeds,
But flowers seen, full soon on fairest feeds.
Make some thing of the worst, but gain the best,
That after death thou may have happy rest.
The press has stamped these lines, for thee to press
A deeper stamp then can my lines express.
Press not my skill, for art presume my heart
As thine, that loves no further for to starte.
The gift is thine by due, the debt is mine,
God grant thee joy in reading of each line.
Amen.
The general heads of the Controversy concerning Gods decreeing of sin.
1. Objections: from the Text. 47. answered. ibid. from attributes. 48.
answered. ibid. from subject. 49. answered. ibid. 2. Arguments proouing: from
the end. 50. from method. 52. from God, first and last. 54 3. Of sins
entrance: his causes principal, isntrumental, and accidental. 55. how God
purposed this entrance. 56. how the law works sin. 58. positions of the
manner. 59 4. Of sins progress and consequents. 63. what is Gods work
therein. 64 5. Obiectiions that God is the author of sin: from Scripture. 66
answered. ibid. from Bellarmine. 68. Caluins judgment. ibid. from reason. 73.
answered. 74. from orthodoxe writers concerning Gods will, decree, man's will,
and his reprobation. 78 6. Answered. 88. how God wills sin to be. 89.
Arminius sophystrie. 91. determination no cause of necessity. 96. when a thing
is, how necessary. 97. of Gods concourse. 98. of Gods irresistible will. 106.
the nature of Gods decree. 107. freedom of man's will. 121. reprobation no
punishment. 123 7. Collation of M. Perkins and Arminius. 127. in 10. principles
to. 139. for the definition of predestination. 139. how counsel 139. of the
subject and his degrees. 140. to 152. lastly of the end and subordination of
means. 152. to 160.
PSALM. 50.21. These things have thou done, and I held my tongue: therefore
thou thoughtest that I was altogether like thee: but I will reprove thee, and
set them in order before thee.


CHAP. I. Of the general Analysis.
IN the world we have three sorts of people: All men in th^^ world are either
Atheists, Hypocrites, or Saint^.
First Atheists, that care for no religion: secondly Hypocrites, that care for
formal religion: thirdly Saints, that care for true religion. Atheists
discover themselves, and therefore the word of God is not large in ripping up
their sins. Hypocrites make a fair show, and therefore the word of God is
very copious in revealing their sin, and threatening judgment against them:
it tells them plainly they are all for the ceremony, nothing for the truth;
they lay hold on the shadow, but loose the substance: these men's sacrifices
are no better then abomination unto the Lord, he has no ear to hear them
withal, he has no eyes to look upon their sacrifices, no smell to savor a
sweet savor of rest in them; but his soul is displeased with them, and his
heart does rise against them, that he must needs spewe them out of his mouth:
he has no taste to say that the sacrifices they have prepared, are any sauoury
meat unto his palate, and yet the Lord is no dainty taster, for he would say
it were well, if there were but a willing mind. Jacob and Esan a true type of
Gods militant Church, which is, cum^^ani^.
Indeed Izaac the father of Jacob and Esau, might be deceived in his sons,
and in their venison: but surely he was not deceived in their garments; for
when he had kissed Jacob, he smelled the favor of his garments, and blessed
him, and said most truly, behold, the smell of my son is as the smell of a
field, God is not dimsighted to judge betwixt the ta^es and wheat.
which the Lord has blessed; but the Lord is not as man that he should any way
be deceived: Jacob should never have gotten the blessing from Esau by having
his brothers hands in show, except the Lord had brought that to pass which
long before he had decreed, Jacob have I loved, Esau have I hated: So stands
the case betwixt all hypocrites and true professors, they may have the hands of
(...), but their voice will be the voice of Jacob: or morally, their hands may
be the hands of Jacob, but their voice will be the voice of Esau: the world
might be deceived by the works of their hands, but if they listen to their
words, they shall find them relish of Esaus heart: but the Lord knows their
works that they are not only covered with goats skins, but that they
themselves are goats indeed, and so shall one day appear, when the Lord
shall go through the flocks, and separate from all the sheep the little
spotted, the great spotted, and the black spotted, not to be the wages of
Jacob, but the inheritance of the denil: and therefore blessed are all they
that shall be found in the garments of Christ Jesus, that so not Izaac, but the
God of Abraham, Izaac, and Jacob may bless them with the dew of heaven, the
fatness of the earth, plenty of wheat and wine, that all the world may be
their servants, and all their mothers children honor them: and therefore cursed
be he that curses them, ^^pocrites fi^al be rewarded.
and blessed be he that blesses them: let the hypocrites complain, we have
done thus and thus, and yet thou regardest not: we have bin thy eldest sons
in casting out devils, working miracles, preaching, fasting, sacrificing,
giving of alms, and what have we left undone for thy names sake? have thou not
therefore one blessing in store (o father) to bless us withal? Well, it may
be they will imitate Esau in his passion, lift up their voices and weep, and
surely God will say of them as he did of Ahab, See thou not how Ahab plays
the hypocrite? yet because he humbles himself in show, I will bestow a
blessing in show upon him, I will spare him for a time: so because ye have
wept with Esau for a blessing, behold the fatness of the earth shall be your
dwelling place, by your swords and cruelty to my Saints shall you live,
Cruelty of hypocrites.
I have made you your brethrens servants, but it shall come to pass when you
shall get the masterie, that you shall break their yokes from your necks, and
as soon as the days of your mourning are come and gone, you will slay your
brethren, for that has been the thought of your mind: God will surely bless
th^^g ^ly and curse the wicked.
yet let me tell you my mind, them have I blessed, and they shall be blessed;
but for you hypocrites which would seem to have the little spots among my
sheep, I tell you, Civil hypocrites. Gross hypocrites. Mere Athei^^ Little
spo^. great spots. black upon.
that I have separated you for the day of slaughter; and again you hypocrites,
which are not of the number of these civil professors, but gross hypocrites,
with great spots in my congregation, and yet defy my servants which tell you
of your damnation, I tell you, that you are in the self same predicament of my
decree of reprobation. And lastly, all you Atheists, which have the black
spots upon you, which will acknowledge no more then bruit beasts, I tell you,
that you and all the rest, are the goats that I must set on my left hand, and
pronounce this sentence against you, Go you cursed into hell fire, prepared for
the devil and his angels, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth for
ever.

This Psalm is as I may term it, an Assize or session holden of the Lord:
unto whose judgment seat are called his holy ones, such as fear him in
sincerity of heart; and hypocrites, such as fear him in show, whose lips call
upon him, but their hearts are far estranged from him: therefore that we may
profitably behave our selves in this matter, and set our selves to the true
consideration of the form and manner of proceeding, let us give the sum of
the whole Psalm in a plain and orderly analysis of the whole matter: and the
rather I take it in hand, because that if I shall understand the Church of God
to reap benefit by it, I shall proceed in the rest of my purposes tending this
way: for this I have purposed to do by the grace of God, and the assistance of
his spirit. First, to show the changeable estate of Gods Church, in outward
things. Secondly, to discover the lights of Prophecy, which have made these
diverse colors apparent, least through our corruption we should ascribe all to
fortune. Thirdly, Due performance of his promises, in making all things work
together for the good of his Church and children: whereby all doubts that might
spring out of the two former, are fully resolved, and God proved most wise in
disposing of all things, and most true in foretelling of all future accidents.
Fourthly, Because the most lively color of Gods Church in this world, is
affliction, to lay down a discourse of that, whereby every faithful soul may
see, what damage it is to the profession of Christ. Fifthly, Because affliction
is the worst estate of Gods Church, I will show that it is a more happy
estate, then the best estate in the world. Sixthly, To draw men from the
confidence of the world, and from that vain conceit of religion, as the
discontentedst life in the world, I will plainly show, that the world and all
the excellency of it, can not give a man content in all his wants, joy in all
his sorrows, neither to reach unto eternity: and therefore men shall find the
issue thereof, nothing but vanity, and vexation of spirit: and that their
only happiness consists in the fear of God, and keeping of his
commandments. Seventhly, To take away all Balams wishes, and the persuasion of
hypocrites, we will show what the Lord requires for the attaining of true
happiness. Eighthly, We will lay down the true trial of our estates, least
with hypocrites we build the spiders house, and so be swept down with the
besome of Gods wrath, and with hypocrites thrown down into hell. Ninthly, We
will lay down Gods admonition to all whose case is not desperate, that they
look to themselves, whilst the gracious call of the day of the Lords
visitation is upon them, that they be reclaimed. Lastly, we will show the
comfortable invitation of the Lord, to every one that is hungry and thirsty
for the bread and water of life. Wherewith we will join Gods awaking of every
sleeper to stand up from the dead, that Christ may give him light. And because
many deceive themselves, this shall be the conclusion, that after the light
has appeared, how they ought to walk until the day star of righteousness
has guided them to the place of all bliss and happiness. These things have
so inflamed my heart, that I would feign have the fire break out: and yet my
years make me with Elihu, to say, I am young in years, and many about me are
ancient: Therefore hitherto have I doubted, and still am afraid to show mine
opinion: for it beseemes youth to say, the days shall speak, and the
multitude of years shall teach wisdom: neither (blessed be God) need I to
speak, because I have waited till the ancient have spoken, and yet perceive
that they have found out no matter to comfort good Christians, and condemn the
world, for the world is full of their learned writings, and they have brought
sufficient testimonies to prove all truths, convince all errors, establish the
godly, and throw down the wicked and profane: yet seeing God will have line
upon line, and precept upon precept, I have been bold to do something, for
the building up of Gods sanctuary. Surely, there is a spirit in man, but the
inspiration of the Almighty gives understanding. Therefore renouncing my own
spirit, and desiring wisdom from the true fountain, I trust in God I shall
not speak out of my turn, nor show mine opinion in an unseasonable time: for
I confess God has made me full of matter, and the spirit within me
compels me, behold my belly is as the wine which has no vent, and like the
new bottels that brast, therefore will I speak that I may take breath, I will
open my lips, that so I may be cased of my travel. And God grant that when I
have delivered my hearts desire, I may rejoice that God thereby is glorified,
his Church edified, poor Christians comforted, and my own soul saved; when I
shall come to give up my accounts to my God, that bestowed his talents upon
me, to trade withal unto his coming: and therefore in confidence that God
will accept of my poor desire, and that it shall not be in vain, I offer this
as a pledge of the rest.

But to return again to our former subject, the parts of this Psalm are in
number two: The coming of the Judge, and his order of proceeding: the coming
of the judge to the seventh verse; his proceeding in judgment in the rest.
The coming of the Judge, lays down his excellency and power: his
excellency in the two first verses. His excellency consists in his authority
and majesty: his authority in the first verse, a great commander, for he is
the God of gods, and the Lord of lords. And the manner of his commanding is
forcible, for it is but speaking and calling, and at his word heaven and earth
obey. 2. The extent is exceeding large, for it is from the rising of the sun
unto the going down thereof: and therefore when the Lord shall come to judge
both quick and dead, he shall not extend his authority beyond his commission.





Secondly, his power is proved, first by his messengers, 2. by his faithful
witnesses: By his messengers, verse. 3. most excellently set out unto us: 1. by
their names, declaring their nature, fire and tempest, and therefore who shall
be able to stand before him: if they miss the fire, the tempest shall meet
with them, so that there shall be no escape out of the hands of this Judge. 2.
By their effects, devouring and moving, therefore judgment and swift execution.
3. From their attendance, they shall go before him, and round about him,
therefore way shall be made before him, and room shall be gotten round about
him. 4. By the adiunct, a mighty tempest, therefore shall it ouerturne all the
bulwarks of the wicked.



Psalm. 1 5.
seeing the wicked shall not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the
assembly of the righteous? yea they shall stand, even as they have made the
godly to stand in their assemblies, to the perishing of them in regard of their
wrath: so shall they stand in the assembly of the godly before the Lord, to
the perishing both of body and soul. 5. Circumstance in the conuention, is
the worship of an hypocrite, and that is, a covenant with sacrifice, and
therefore let the wicked know, that their righteousness shall not be hid
with the Lord, but they shall have their trial according to their own
righteousness: therefore let all proud Pharisees thank God, they are not as
poor publicans, they have fasted twice a week, they have given tithes of all that ever they possessed, they are no extortioners, unjust, adulterer, etc.
well when they are tried with all their righteousness, if they fall for lack
of just payment, let them thank themselves, for that they thought they had
paid all, and that they were in debt to no body.



and that is this, first to manifest his love, v. 7. 2. to manifest their
error, v. 8. which must needs be very seasonable after the former: 3. to take
away the occasion of their error, which must needs be profitable to ouerturne
the second: 4. And to give reasons of the remoouall, which must needs take away
all cavil and fond oppositions of our untoward natures, v. 10, 11, 12, 13. Let
us look upon them all: first the manifestation of his love, v. 7. First, a
kind compellation, and loving invitation to attention, in this word (hear:) if
a man were sick in his body, he would be very desirous that the Physician
would never make an end of speaking, and therefore if we had the same wisdom
for our souls, how attentive should we be when so excellent a Physician as
the Lord shall speak. 2. From the relation that is betwixt God and them: a
graceless child that will not hear his father before all men in the world; O
my people, oh Israel: every word an argument, (people) therefore if all people
shall bow down, and worship the Lord, then is it their duty not to exclude
themselves. 2. A note of peculiaritie, (my people) chosen out of all nations.
3. They are (Israel,) so called of Iaacob their father, because he prevailed
with God, and therefore assuredly he should prevail with Esau, and all wicked
men. Israel therefore is a strong bond, first because it points out unto them
the covenant that was made with Abraham Isaac and Iaacob: 2. the power they
should have with God, and from God, to prevail with all power even of hell,
death, and damnation: 4. Gods vehement affection to his people, in doubling his
exclamation, (O my people, oh Israel.) 3. Reason to persuade, is drawn from
the best testimony in the world; I will speak, I will testify; and therefore
shall not Gods people hear, when the Lord of hosts shall speak? and shall
they not believe, when the most faithful witness shall testify unto them?
surely it were intolerable, if God should not have the hearing with all
reverence. 4. Reason is drawn from the right of creation, preservation, and in
a word from the only fountain of our happiness: for I am God, therefore, as
able to do what I will, either for the saving, or destroying of my creature;
so also most willing and ready to do both, when it shall stand for my glory:
therefore must I be heard because I am God, and have good right to command it:
5. and lastly, an argument of arguments to persuade to this duty, (for I am
God, even thy God:) it is much that I said I am God, this argument have I often
used to persuade in many weighty matters, but when I shall add further, God
even thy God, what heart shall not be moved with all fear and reverence to
take notice of that which now I will deliver unto thee.



will not take it at their hands.

de proprio, and therefore we should but steal for him in one place to enrich
him in another. This is the first reason.

The second reason is drawn from the right of election, v. 11. the Lord has
the best skill to choose for himself: first, because he has the most exact
knowledge of all his creatures, and therefore able to please himself best in
his choice: secondly, his knowledge is most general, because he knows all
the fowls on the mountains, and all the wild beasts, very hard to be known
of man, for he can neither take them, nor count them: thirdly, the Lords
election is most free: for he may take where he will, and yet enter into no
man's possession, for all is his own.



is in the sacrifices of the heart, a contrite and a broken spirit I will never
refuse; I have ears to hear of such provision, eyes to look upon it, a smell
to savor the sweet savor of rest in it, a taste to please my palate, and a
touch of lively feeling, to do them good that shall thus worship me in spirit
and truth: but all other sacrifices are abomination unto me, against them I
will close up all my senses.

Four things notable for Christian practice; 1. purpose, 2. promise, 3. vows,
4. oaths.
Thirdly, the extent of our praise, which must reach as high as vows: for
there be four excellent helps in the practice of all Christian duties, which
carefully being observed, will strengthen all our actions. The first is, when
we go about any good duty, to deal thus with our souls: surely by the
grace of God I purpose to set my self about this action. 2. That my purposes
be not vain, I enter covenant with the Lord, and promise that that which I
have purposed, I will perform unto him. 3. That I may be no couenant-breaker,
I vow unto the Lord my obedience. 4. That I may not be rash in my vows, I
proceed further, and say with David, I have sworn that I will keep thy
righteous statutes. Now when the Devil, my corrupt flesh, the world, or any
worker of iniquity, shall set upon me, thus will I answer; Why would you have
me break my purposes, and be inconstant in my resolutions, seeing the world
despises all inconstancy: again, though I might change my purpose, yet my
promise I will not alter; for infidelity is hated of all: but if you will say,
you may put off the performance of your promise, because you bear men in hand
with dispensations of future obedience, yet I have a third thing that binds me
more straightly, and that is a holy vow unto the Lord, which being lawfully
made. I must not break for a world of wealth: yet if you will be instant upon
me, and say, I was too rash in my hasty vowing, then I pray you consider, that
I have sworn unto the Lord; and therefore to have God to count me for a
perjured person, would sting me at the heart, and suffer my conscience never
to be at peace with me: therefore putting all these together, purpose,
promise, vow, and oath, how should I do this great thing you require, and
sin against my God: these things being practiced, I dare boldly say every
Christian shall find daily increase of grace, and more readiness to serve God.



hypocrites, from the sixteenth verse to the end: the parts whereof are three,
conviction to the 21. v. sentence of judgment in the 21. v. and application in
the 22.23. v. The conviction is of two sorts of crimes, first, against God, the
breach of the first table: the second against his neighbor, the breach of the
second table: the first which is against God, is in the sixteenth and
seventeenth v. and that is a form of Religion in the sixteenth v. but a
denial of the power in the 17. v. The show of religion is set forth by his
effects, declaring and speaking. 2. By the object, ordinances, and covenants:
3. From the injury they offer unto God, what have thou to do? 4. From a
testimony of God himself witnessing against him, but unto the wicked said
God. Therefore the religion of all hypocrites is formal in the fruit, and in
the object, to the injury of God himself, and the provoking of a sharp
witness against themselves.





end. 2. From the instruments, the mouth and the tongue, abused of wicked men
to the hurt of others, and the destruction of themselves. 3. From their willing
practice, in these words, thou give thy mouth: as though they would sell
themselves to commit iniquity: thou forgedst, as though they were always in
the fire of mischief.





The truth is most exact, consisting of all requisits: Truth.
first knowledge without all error: 2. integrity without all partiality: 3.
equity without all contradiction. The first is clear, in that the Lord enters
upon the very particular sins of an hypocrite, (these things) and therefore
can no way be deceived; for he that sees things in general, and these things
in special, leaves nothing untouched. The second is also most evident, for the
Lord respects neither the person, nor the sin of the person: but says
plainly, thou, and these things. And the third is apparent to every eye, for
the Lord handles no matters either upon suspicion or malice: for he is most
certain of the fact: neither does he complain of any thing but the fault,
have thou done: and therefore what shall an hypocrite plead for himself, when
he shall see his doings plainly detected?

The holiness of the Lord has two parts, Holiness.
both which are contained in the second part of this sentence, and they are
mercy and justice: for a holy God must be a merciful God, and a just God: his
mercy in these words, I held my tongue, and thou thoughtest that I was like
thee: his justice in the rest. Mercy.
Gods mercy is described by four things: First, by his adiunct or quality,
silence. 2. By the subject about which it is conversant, and that is the doings
of the wicked. 3. By his accidental effect, and that is the thoughts of the
wicked. 4. By the form and manner of these thoughts, and that is to make God
like themselves, or measure God by themselves.

The second part of Gods holiness is his justice, Justice.
described by power and comely order: by power in these words, I will reprove
thee: where we have four things to manifest the power: First, the efficient
cause, the Lord, and therefore most powerful justice. Secondly, the form,
reproof, justice vindicatiue or punishing, not remunaratiue or rewarding; and
therefore so much the stronger: the touch of his little finger is able to do
much, and therefore what shall be the power of his whole hand, and the strength
of his arm? his breath which in man is nothing, yet in himself makes smoking
coals, and flames of fire issue out of his mouth to the destruction of all
sinners. 3. From the object, sin, which all the justice of man is not able to
find out: yet shall this justice search it to the quick, and ransacke it to
the bottom. 4. Because of the person which is an hypocrite, who for the most
part deceiues the whole world, yea and his own soul too, yet now woe unto
him, for he has fallen into his hands that can not be deceived.

The comely order in these words; And set them in order before thee. First,
giving us to understand, that sin is confusion and disorder: and all sinners
are confused and disordered persons. 2. That there is an order to be taken with
all sin and sinners. 3. That when God shall have taken order with them, then
the conscience shall take horrible notice of their sin, and the punishment
thereof, to their everlasting shame and confusion in plagues, and punishments,
that never would see any disorder in sin and wickedness.

godly, a serious instruction: the earnest admonition to the wicked is in the
22. ver. amplified first from due consideration, Oh consider this, make good
use of my judgments, let them not be idle speculations, but profitable
instructions to your souls: Secondly, from the forlorn negligence of all
wicked men, which is to forget God, even in the time of judgment: Thirdly,
from the imminent danger; and that is tearing in pieces of the Lord: Fourthly,
from the ineuitablenesse of it, and the vain confidence of help, in these
words, And there be none that can deliver you.



CHAP. II. Of the particular explication of the words.
ANd thus have I unfolded the whole Psalm, which if I shall perceive to be a
profitable way for the instruction of Gods Church, I shall proceed in the rest:
but if it shall be disprooued, I will trouble the world with no more
discourses: for we have already books enough, which make us wast our times
unprofitably: but I trust in God, seeing that I am not guilty unto my self of
any private motion, that it is the work of the Lord; and therefore, as
already it is approved of some, so I doubt not, but they that love the Lord
will bear the like affection. And therefore I pray with the Apostle, that both
I and they may consider what is said; and the Lord give us understanding in all
things.

I. Part. Of the arraignement, day, and persons.
The general discourse of the Psalm is already cleared, only I have selected
this one verse for the ground of all my future proceedings. I call it Gods
arraignement of hypocrites: first, because the Lord himself brings in the
evidence against the^, Evidence.
These things have thou done. Patience in trial.
Secondly, because the Lord has made long trial of their repentance, I held
my tongue. Thirdly, Abuse of Gods patience.
because they had fulfulled the measure of their sin, by making God an idle
judge of them, thou thoughtest that I was like thee. Fourthly, because God upon
good evidence, long experience, and the full measure of impiety, could contain
no longer from the sentence of condemnation, Sentence of judgment.
I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thee: the chief Justice
must handle the cause even in the court of conscience; because no reproof will
serve the turn, but that which arraignes him before himself, and makes his
conscience his own executioner.

I might well term it the Critical day of an hypocrite. D^^^indicances,
(...).
Physicians observe two kind of days in the sickness of their patients:
first, the indicative days, and then the critical days: the indicative days
go before, and show what hopes are approaching of death or life: these days I
may well say went before, from the 16. verse, to this 21. ver. every day
prognosticating nothing but some horrible accident, to befall on the critical
day: first, he will no ways be reformed in his life, and for counsel he
casts all Gods words behind him: he no sooner sees the way of death, but he
runs into it; and for any unclean behavior he will become a partaker with
the worst; his mouth is as black as though the fire of hell were within him;
and his tongue is so scorched, that it can forge nothing but deceit; nature is
so far spent within, that he speaks against his brother; and the bowels of
pity and compassion, are so eaten up, that he slaundereth his own mothers
son: therefore it cannot be but that the critical day should be most
dangerous.

That I lie not, 1 Judgment. 2 Day. 3 Symptoms. 4 Cure.
see the sentence of the Lord most plainly unfolding it, v. 21. in the
judgment, in the day, in the Symptoms, in the cure. The judgment, these
things have thou done: the day, I held my tongue: the Symptoms, thou
thoughtest I was like thee: the cure, I will reprove thee, and set them in
order before thee. The crysis or judgment is most exact; first in the cause of
his disease, these things, profanation, adultery, theeuerie, evil speaking,
slander, deceit, causes sufficient to destroy the soundest temper. Secondly,
in the subject, thou: God is not deceived of the principal part and member,
that suffers actionem laesam, it is an hypocrite, even poisoned at the very
heart. The third crisis is in the effect done, a perfect concoction of the
disease, and therefore presently to be purged. As the crisis is very manifest:
Da^
so the day is not the seventh day since the disease took him, but seven
twice told, nay I dare be bold to say, seventy times seven times: Matthew.
18.22.
for he that taught Peter Matthew. 18.22. not to forgive seven times, but unto
seauenty times seven times, has practiced the same; and therefore doublesse
the hypocrite has often been visited of the Lord in hope of amendment. These
things have thou done, was no false judgment: and I held my tongue, was no few
days of trial.

Now for the third, the Symptoms of his discase, Symptoms,
what can more sensibly be perceived? First, his pulse shows the temper of his
heart, thou thoughtest: a weak pulse showing the decay of the spirits, neither
reason nor grace, but a mere dream of his weak fantasy. Let us handle his
pulse, and we shall find in it all mortal and deadly signs: Pulsus
intermittens.
First, it intermits, showing his soul to be so burdened with sin, that it
cannot strike one good stroke: suppose there were a motion to goodness, as to
declare Gods ordinances, and take his covenant into his mouth; yet his ungodly
heart, and profane life, strike all dead.

The next pulse to this, Caprizan^.
is a skipping or capring pulse; a plain sign that his heart is unequal, by
reason of the smoakie excrements of vanity and pleasure, Date ^uam verbo.
which push his heart this way and that way: and therefore as he intermits all
good, so he is skipping and capring in his impiety: for what a proud thought
is gotten into him, that he is like God. But a third pulse follows this,
Vndosus.
and that is swelling, full of waves and surges, Vermiculans.
tossing him to this vanity and that vanity: but alas, all is but as the
rolling of a worm, not able to get up the head, but still sticking it in the
ground, until God tread on them by his judgment, and then would they feign
lift up the head to heaven, Formicaus.
call upon God, offer sacrifice, etc. but alas, all this creeping is so soft
and dainty, as though their spirits were a company of antes, creeping under the
hand of their confidence; and may be, makes them smart a little with the
feeling of the venom of their sin, but as yet they have not learned the
thing that God requires, Micah. 6.8.
Surely to do justly, and love mercy, and to humble themselves to walk with
their God. Hence follows a sixth pulse, which they call minute, Myurus.
so small that it can scarce be felt, not able to extend to the outward props
of their confidence, but they sink down as ready to give up the ghost, for
fear of Gods vengeance. And then comes the last pulse, which we call
trembling, Tremulus.
always expecting when death will give the heart his deadly blow. And these
be the symptoms of his heart, which God alone was able to feel and discover,
and therefore tells him, thou thoughtest.

The second principal Symptom is, Actio laesa.
actio laesa, the action annoied; in these words, to make God like himself: a
strange imagination that has so besotted his senses, that nothing can please
him, but mere idolatry, a wrong sense of God, and a wandering motion from God:
therefore as in the body, the loss of the action is either of animal or
natural forces; natural, as the loss of stomach, hurt of the liver,
obstruction of the veins, oppression of the heart, swelling of the splen,
convulsion of the sinews, consumption of the lunges, etc. animal actions are
sense and motion, the hurt whereof is either privation, diminution, or
deprauation: as in the eye, (...).
blindness is the privation, dullness of sight the diminution, and wrong
apprehension the deprauation: in the hearing, deafenes the privation,
difficulty in hearing, or hardness of hearing the diminution, the glowing of
the ears the deprauation: so in feeling, tasting, smelling, etc. This may most
fitly be applied: First, Application ^ the similion^^.
he is shroudly wounded in his very natural actions; he suffers the dart to
strike through his liver by his adultery, his heart by his consent unto
theeuerie, he has lost his breath by running with them, his taste by
participation, his mouth has suffered a strange convulsion, all the sinews
have drawn it awry, the lips are the doors of evil, the tongue the forge of
deceit, both of them are set to speak against his brother, and slander his
mothers son: all the passages of goodness are filled up with obstructions,
there is no way to the hands for the works of charity, to the feet to run
in the paths of righteousness; every member is decayed, and wholly put out
of joint: if he eat, he is given to gluttony; if he drink, to surfeit with
drunkenness; if he sleep, to become a sluggard, etc. for his spiritual
senses, he has no eye to see withal, no care to hear withal, he savors not
the things of the spirit, he has no feeling of his sin, nor the love of God,
he can taste none of the means of his salvation, his fantasy is possessed
with dreams of peace and welfare, his understanding is taken with a spiritual
madness, and his memory with a forgetful Lethargy, even of his own name,
that he took in his baptism; for he never remembers what was therein promised
unto God: and for motion he is stark dead, can neither move hand nor foot:
nay alas his sickness is surely unto death, for the disease has so wounded
him, that he cannot perceive any thing amiss; his fancy works so strongly,
that God only must be imagined to be like him, and therefore the action is a
plain Symptom, that all is not well with him: and surely there needs no
further inspection, his water is cast already, and the prescript is a fearful
receipt, worse then pills of hierapicra, or any extreme purgation, it is, Take
him, bind him hand and foot, and cast him into hell fire, where shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth for ever.

Yet let us see the cure that the Lord prescribes in this place: and first, How
God meets (...).
if any make the question, whether curatio debetur Symptomati? I answer, No:
for it is a rule, that the physic must be applied to the cause, and not to
the effect; yet with the Lord judgment is as sure in the effect, as the cause:
for he cannot be deceived: he brings us to the knowledge of the disease by the
Symptoms, but he himself first sees the cause, and therefore he discouers the
hypocrite from the very fountain, thou thoughtest: and also tells us the
action of his thought, to make God like himself. Yet if God should ask his
patient, whether he felt this thought in himself or no, I am persuaded he
would most impudently deny it; yet if he had any eye but to look on his
practice, he should soon conceive his thought to be no better. (...). Wicked
men (...) so senceles (...) nothing will make the^ feel (...).
But the disease is desperate, and therefore what remedies will the Lord use?
the Apothecaries shop can afoard him none; therefore questionless that
course is to be taken, that men use to take with gangrens, to cauterize and
burn them to the quick: even so the Lord must deal with all hypocrites, for
they have suffered the disease to run so long, that nothing can help it but
a hot iron. And for this purpose the Lord has two: First, he will reprove
him; this iron shall try and search him to the quick; but alas if God will
handle this iron, even to sift out one that is rotten at the heart, when shall
the iron cease burning, all must be burnt away; and if that were so, then
happy were the hypocrite, for then should he be without all sense and feeling:
but alas, better had he been if he had never been born, then that the Lord
should take a second iron into his hand, and that is after the searching of the
sore, should burn them in the very consciences, by setting their sins in
order before the eye of the soul, Conscience most apprehensiue.
which is most quick in sense and feeling.

But let us descend from the title, (...).
to consider who this Thou is, that the Lord will thus handle. He is plainly
described from the 16. verse, to my text: First and principally, he is such an
one as will become a public teacher of his law and covenant: but because this
description may well agree to any professor unreformed, I will understand it
of all unreformed professors, that will needs make a show of godliness, but
hate to be reformed, by denying the power thereof in their life and
conversation: and therefore my text will tax many an one. Yet before I come to
the special explication of the words, I cannot but a little show myaffection
to our distressed congregations, that are full of these ministers, that will
have to do with Gods ordinances, and talk of his covenants, and yet hate all
reformation: often have our ignorant, scandalous, and negligent ministers been
warned to beware of their callings, and know what they meddle withal: God is
not mocked, neither ever will he suffer the malice of the devil to rage in
these persons against his little ones: for alas, what have they done? I know
not what arrowe might more deeply perice them, then this fearful sentence of
the Lord, which never cease cutting and wounding until it come at the very
conscience.

The best shast that Gods archers may use for the battles of the Lord, is
always to be drawn out of Gods armorie, framed by the hands and skill of
himself, and his own workmen, fit to make the manof God absolute and
perfect, 2. Timoth 3.17.
unto all good works, and blessed is the man that has his quiver full of
them. I know no arrowe that is able to dart and enter through, even unto the
dividing asunder of the soul and spirit, Hebr. 4.12.
of the joints and marrowe, and lay open the very thoughts, and the intents of
the heart, as the arrows of Gods quiver: and therefore the word of God deals
most roundly with hppocrites in this place, sparing neither sin nor person,
these things, and thou, even thou that take upon thee to declare my
ordinances, and will have my covenant in thy mouth, I tell thee, this shall
never cloak thy sin, seeing thou hate to be reformed.

It is a case lamentable, These things, first caxe all un(...) mi^isters.
deserving the bowels of all Christian pity and compassion, and able to cause
the tears of sorrow to gush out, and stream down the face of a man, who is
not frozen too hard in security, and uncharitable carelessness, when he shall
but lift up his eyes, and see the wastes and desolations of so many distressed
souls, pined and consumed to the bone, for lack of Gods sustenance, the bread
of life, the word of God, the only preservative of the soul: The cause of all
this is, because the very trash and rif-raf of our nation, have laid their
sacrilegious hands on the Lord's ark irreverently, entered with shoes and all
into his temple, taken his undefiled testimonies into their defiled mouth,
disgraced, defaced, and defamed the glory and majesty of divine rites and
mysteries. Alas, is the Church of God so destitute of laborers? must Christ
needs for their sakes call again from the net, the receipt of custom, and
other trades, such men as after a nights sleep, or an hours trance, are made
able to turn the book of God, declare his ordinances, and manage the keys of
heaven? (...) 13 5.
but my friend be not deceived, awake out of sleep, and dream no more;
confess, I am no Prophet, I am no husbandman; for man taught me to be an
heardman from my youth up: If any man ask thee, what are these wounds in thine
hands? answer willingly, thus was I wounded in the house of my friends: do it
quickly, least the Lord wound thee in thy conscience, when he shall tell thee,
these things have thou done, and these things will I set before thine eyes. If
God has said, Arise, o sword upon my shepherd, and him that is my fellow,
what then will he do unto thee? smite thee deadly, that his sheep be no more
scattered, and that he may turn his hand from his little ones: for alas, what
have they done? O therefore get with speed from the Lords house, if thou be a
cleauer, to thy wedge and axe; if a husbandman, to the plough and share, horse
and harrow. But in vain do I complain, for hard hearted men have so flinted
their foreheads, seared and sealed up their minds and consciences in all
impiety, as they have made a league, and bound themselves to forget Christ and
his flock, who are as great and dear unto him as the price they cost him:
they cannot stagger, but run like hungry dogs with an eye only to the
fleshpots, and sell both themselves and their people, for a morsel of bread and
a mess of pottage to the devil: and have sworn like sons of the earth, to
possess the earth for ever, and leave heaven, and the heirs thereof to God
himself.

Alas poor souls, feign would they have somewhat to keep life and soul
within them, and therefore as famished and starued creatures, which have for a
space been pownded up, and pinfolded in a ground of barrenness, debarred from
all succor and releife, will suffer any thing to go down the throat, be it as
bitter as gall, as deadly as poison: they swallow bitterness as sugar, and
lick up death as sweet honey. These things (God knows) are too common among
us; and for these how many threats and warnings from heaven, from earth, from
God, from men, from foes abroad, and friends at home: Ierem 9.^.
Shall not I visit for these things, says the Lord? or shall not my soul be
avenged on such a nation as this? I will assuredly prove my self to be Lord
of hosts, muster up the clouds, call forth the winds, cause the fire to
devour before me, Psalm 50 3.
and a mighty tempest to be round about me: all powers in heaven and earth
shall be shaken, and I will take the four corners of the world, and shake out
this offscouring: I will raise up the standerd, blow the trumpet, bring
destruction upon destruction, death upon death, plague upon famine, sword upon
both.

Another sort there be that declare my ordinances, against which I have many
things: such are like the Ostrich, Job. 39.
which have wings and feathers, not like the doves, to fly unto God's ark, to
bring the faithful news of the abating of the waters of Gods wrath: they have
no olive leaves in their mouth, no Gospel of peace unto the heirs of
righteousness, received into the arc of Gods covenant: but when the time is,
that is, when they have gotten themselves the wings of honor, they mount on
high, mock the horse and his rider: they leave their eggs in the earth, and
small thanks unto them: if they be made hot in the dust, it is not their own
heat, but the heat of an other sun, which perhaps the Lord makes to shine
unto them: but in the mean time they forget, that the fool might scatter
them, or the wild beasts might break them. Alas, how many in their pride
tread the godly vnderfeete; and what store of wild beasts, break into the
Lords vinyard: therefore it cannot be but that they show themselus cruel unto
their young ones, as they were not theirs, and are without fear as if they
travailed in vain. But let me tell them, for all their learning and wisdom,
yet while they forsake Gods heritage, they are deprived of all wisdom,
neither has God given them any part of his understanding. Oh therefore, for
the love of God, and comfort of your own souls, recall your selves before this
sentence come out against you: God has a long time holden his tongue, it
cannot be for ever; for it is most certain, that he will reprove for these
things, and set them in order: re-enter therefore and recover your forsaken
charges, languishing and worn away for want of pasture, stretching on the
ground for faintnes, fetching their groans deep, and their pants thick, as
ready to give over, and yield up the ghost; if they die, it must needs be laid
to your charge, Ier 5.3.
and for these things, God will have you arraigned hereafter. O Lord, are not
thine eyes upon the truth? yes assuredly, and therefore the harmless sheep
that drop away by famine of the word, has raised a louder cry and clamor
in thine cares, then any man is able to make by his just complaint in the ears
of men: yet, O God, if any place for mercy, (and why should we doubt of mercy
with thee, who art the God of mercy) look not upon this dross and filth, but
sweep them out, and open the rock of stone again, let again (sweet Jesus)
the waters, even the living waters of the word flow out, and let the saving
rivers of thy Gospel run in all the dry places of our land. We see the
fruitful weeds and thorns of prophannesse and iniquirie, oh give thine
husbandmen hearts to root them out: we see the woeful ruins of virtue and
piety, oh let the builders be ready to repair them, that so to thee, who art
the great Shepherd and Bishop of our souls, we may render an account at the
dreadful day of thine Oecumenicall visitation. In the mean time, thou, oh
God, which instructest the husbandman to have discretion, Esaias. 28.
and do teach him to cast in wheat, and by measure every grain; teach thy
servants how to plowe up the fallow ground of men's hearts, and keep them from
sowing among thorns.

Again, Secondly, (...) tax all v^^e formed professors.
as the words are specially directed against such ministers, as would declare
Gods ordinances, and yet hate all reformation: so likewise may they be applied
to every professor that would make a show of godliness, yet wholly denies the
power thereof; and therefore the sentence is very large: neither can we come
to make any use of it, until we have cleared it by the rules of Gods wisdom,
which is better then man's.

The wit of man has many strange inventions, Gods wisdom our direction, first
seen by analysis, then imitated by genesis
and therefore seeing I have been so large upon one small verse, it may rather
be thought to be mine invention, beside the nature of the text, then that which
Gods wisdom will any ways afford; I will not therefore think it grievous to
express the way of mine invention.

All wisdom looks unto God as the author, analysis. genesis.
and will acknowledge no more in man then observation, and after that to
follow God by way of imitation: for the wisdom of God is as the Sun, ours
as the beams; no beams where the sunn has not gone before: his wisdom as
the real and substantial face, ours as the reflection or image in the glass;
no image or reflection without the presence of the body: Gods wisdom is as
the seal, ours as the stamp; no stamp but by the seal: his wisdom is the
fountain, ours the streams; no streams where the fountain is not open, and
sending forth his water. Let Jacobs well be stoped, and he will presently
complain for want of water: therefore no work of the creature is primarie,
Imitation by observation.
but an imitation of Gods work. The husbandman could never have pianted trees,
except he had first observed Gods plantation in the world: Apelles could never
have painted any exquisite colors, unless he had taken notice of Gods most
beautiful colors in nature.

Let it therefore be our wisdom, to follow Gods footsteps, and sobriety to
stay our selves where he has left no impressio^, else shall we loose the
sweet inspiration that issues out of the flowers of Gods wisdom: neither
must we breath upon it any of our unsavory notions, for then the sweet
influence will retire into the flower, and the smell that we have breathed out
of our selves will return, not to recreate the spirits of grace and goodness,
but to puff up in us a spirit of pride and self-conceit; which is nothing,
but like a blown bladder, euacuated with the least prick of sound knowledge.
For as extreme windy stomachs, do not only hinder digestion, by
interposition with the wholesome meat, and relaxation of the mouth of the
stomach, which ought to shut it self so close about the meat, that not so
much as the least vacuitie may be left, but also either by ill digestion, fills
the bodies with crudities, obstructions, and consequently putrifactions; or
else because wind is so stirring, makes eiaculation, and a sudden
regurgitation of all that is received: so in like manner, windy knowledge
above wholesome sobriety, makes such an interposition, and relaxation of the
mind, that it can digest no wholesome doctrine, but fills it self with all
manner of raw humors, and unstable opinions, which breed such obstructions in
the mind, that presently it falls into diverse sickenesses, and can keep
nothing that is good, but presently being received, by the pride and
self-conceit it has in it self, casts it up again; and so by a continual
casting breeds that weakness, that so much leaven of evil doctrine is soked
into the very filmes (as I may say) of the mind, that it breeds that disease
which is termed of Physicians, corruption ad aciditatem, corcorruption into
sowernesse, which sets such an eager and sharp appetite in the mind, that it
hungers continually to be fed with new opinions; and so at the length,
rottenness and putrefaction is bredde therein, and then consequently death and
destruction: therefore if we mean to prevent these sicknesses, we must look
to God our pattern.

But alas you will say, how can that be done? seeing he dwells in a light
vnapproachable, 1. Tim. 1.16
and therefore is (...), incomprehensible by our Logic or reason, and (...),
vnnamable, by our gra^mar and speech: but here let us wonder, that God being
one most simple being, and therefore to be apprehended as one, which he
himself alone is able to do, has made himself many in his attributes, that
so by many attributes we might come to apprehend this one God. Now these
attributes are according to our measure and manner: the measure of our reason,
and manner of our speech: a vessel can hold no more then his measure, neither
is there any ways how it may be filled, but by the mouth: so our souls hold
the wisdom of God according to their measure, and are to be filled with it
according to their manner. Now the Lord is said to speak mouth to mouth, both
in himself, and by his ministers: so then the wisdom of God teaches us,
that the words of every text are to be explaned for the manner of our
apprehension, and then the arguments and reasons for the measure of our
knowledge. Therefore in the fear of his majesty, and the love of his wisdom,
let us eye his work before us, and write upon it, nil vltra, here is my stay,
I will range no further: if this flower do inspire wisdom, then God give me
the taste of it, and keep my appetite and desire from that imbecillitie and
strange weakness, that nothing will content it but new inventions, and
unaccustomed devises of men: my desire is to handle nothing, but that which
has logical ground in it. But first let us clear the words, for they are the
engraven characters of the mind, and therefore must we know them, that we
receive no false reports by them: the one serves for communication, the other
for information; therefore the rules of speech and reason being observed, we
doubt not but to communicate our text to the information of the weakest.

II. Part. Of the clearing of Gods evidence, These things have thou done.
These] This word points out their special sins, and is to limit a more
general to his specialls; which are these, theeuery, adultery, evil speaking,
deceit, false witness, slander, and profanation.

Things] This is an ambiguous word; first, it signifies the being of any
thing: secondly, it signifies any quality in that being: thirdly, any action
proceeding either from the being or quality of any creature: fourthly, it
signifies any sin, either in the qualities, as vicious habits, or actions, as
transgressions, in thought, word, or deed: fifthly, misery: it is here taken in
the fourth signification for sins; because as actions proceed from the being
and qualities of every creature, so the being or quality being infected, the
action proves bad and sinful. But here arises a great difficulty, whether
the action be the subject of sin, or the effect? It seems to be the
subject: for a sinful action is expounded, sin in the action, and so the
subject, an action; which is a thing should be put for sin, his adiunct,
which properly is nothing. But under the correction of the learned, I judge no
action to be the subject of sin properly: ^^tions no subject of sin.
my reasons are these, which I bring most willingly, because in my apprehension
it notably cleares God, in working in sinful actions.

Reason. 1. from punishment in^d.
That which is properly the subject of sin, may be punished: but actions
cannot be punished: for sinful actions a man is punished: therefore it is the
man that is the subject, and his sinful action is the meritorious cause:
therefore when God is said to punish sin with sin, it is to be understood,
sinful action with sinful action: therefore to conclude that God is the author
of sin, is a fallacian of composition and division: for it is one thing to
be the cause of sin, and an other the cause of a sinful action: for the
sin is not in the action, but in the agent, and therefore in man alone, but
the action is common to both: as for example, I cast a glass against the stone
wall, the stone wall breaks the glass, so does the hand that sast it: but the
one is a blameable cause, the other unblameable: so man sinning, casts himself
by his own free will against the law of God, which being stronger then man,
breaks him in pieces: Here the law and will of God wrought in this sinful
action; God and his law most justly, man by his own free will most unjustly:
the action therefore from both; but the sin only did stick in the nature of
man, and so made him for his part in the action culpable and guilty of Gods
wrath: and therefore the action having no sin inherent in it properly, may be
handled of God without sin.

Reason. 2. from the obligation of the law.
That which is bound to the law, is properly the subject of the breach of the
law: now men and angels are only bound to Gods law, and therefore men and
angels may only be termed the subject; their actions therefore only as
belonging unto them are sinful, that is, flowing from sinners, and so are
their works: so that man's nature works, and sin, and God: man's nature
works, and has God working in it, and so the action is good: again, God
beside his general influence and concourse with his creature, has a special
work in the action which concerns himself; and that is likewise good, yea,
and very good; for it is the last end of the creature: but the other cause
which is sin, cleaving so fast unto our nature, qualifies our nature to do
sinfully. The sunne-beames coming thorough a red glass shines on the opposite
wall, with the tincture of the color of the glass; now the question is,
whether the red color be only in the glass, or likewise in the shining?
surely, it seems that the whole color remains still in the glass, and
rather dimmes the shining, then infects it: so the beams of Gods wisdom,
shining through our corrupt souls, seems to be an action tainted with sin;
but surely the corruption sticks in our souls, and only hindered the bright
beams of Gods glory, from appearing in our actions.

Reason. 3. from the sole nature of an effect.
That which is only an effect, can never be a subject: now the motion is only
an effect, and can no otherwise be considered: and therefore is always joined
with his cause: as a sinful action, is in sense and reason, the action of a
sinful man, that is, whereof sinful man is the cause. Hence being an
effect, it must needs exist or stand out by many causes, and therefore
according to every cause has his special affection: so a sinful action has
one reference unto man, an other unto God, and yet may stand out of both.
Christ's death had many causes, and all subordinate causes were according to
Gods determinate counsel; the action was sinful, yet the sin did inhere in
Pilate, Herod, and the accursed Jews.

Reason 4. from the nature of goodness.
That which is simply good, cannot be the subject of sin: now actions are of
this nature; the reason is, because causes give being unto things, and
therefore are absolute, as causes: now motion having no other being, but that
which it receives from causes, Causa cuius vi res est. This vis must needs be
Gods.
and causes producing that by a motive force in themselves, which force is from
God, cannot any ways leave in the effect an evil inherent, but only in
themselves, which wanted true force whereof the effect should have existed:
hence we call sin rather a deficient cause, then an efficient cause. Rom
6.12. Romans 7.5.
Indeed sin in us is said to reign, and have force in our members, and so
sin with his subject, is exceeding powerful: but it is by turning Gods
created force the wrong way, even as a wheel set a running wrong way, is
carried with as great force, as when it run the clean contrary: so man's
nature set a rebelling against God, turns Gods created forces against
himself: that the force is put into the action, it is Gods, but that it was
put in by the hand of a rebel, it became sinful, yet God will acknowledge his
own force in the action, and turn the fault and crime to the proper owners.
That the Jews and Pilate laid hands on Christ, it was Gods created force in
them, but the abuse of it is their own, and takes up a proper habitation in
their miserable souls: then causation being a created force, and motion only
acknowledging the same, well may the motion be Gods, and yet no cause at all of
sin.

Reason. 5. from privation.
Sins are properly the privation or want of action: and therefore though they
may be both in one subject, yet never can the one be the subject of the other:
for so should deadly enemies become loving friends, and the worst kind of
opposites be reconciled: for I am sure that privation, though he be no being,
yet he denies a being in the self same subject which is capable of it.
Blindness is a worse not being, then not seeing; for not seeing may be in a
stone, which is never the worse for it: but blindness can be no where but where
sight may be, and therefore the eye is much worse for it: if then sin be the
privation of an action, it can never be in an action, but always against an
action.

Reason 6. from action and passion, which seem to differ but in respect of the
agent and patient; and therefore the patient should sin more then the agent,
seeing the action wherein lies the sin, is most properly in the patient, but
from the agent.
The action from the worker, is a passion in the receiver; and therefore if
sin were in the action, it should go along with it to the patient; yea
rather should it be in the patient then the agent, seeing the action rests most
in the patient. Hence murder should rather be the sin of the patient, then
the agent, seeing the action of murder as it is from the agent, so most
properly is in the party slain: and therefore the murderer should be the
murdered, which is against reason. It is plain then that sin abides in the
murderer, and the action is good: let this therefore be observed that God may
be justified, even in sinful actions, yet no cause of sin, because sin
alone rests in the bosom of fools, and will not stir one iotte out of that
subject: it is therefore dangerous to defend, that an action is the material
cause of sin, for so should sin not only be said to be in the action, but
of the action, and then I know not how God should work the action, and be
freed from sin, for causa causae est causa causati. The words then are thus
to be expounded, Things, are here put for actions, by a metanomie of the cause
for the effect, for actions proceed from things; then actions for the sins
which are committed by sinful things; and so the action is an effect of the
sinful man, and is put for his cause, which be sins in the things.

Neither is this any new opinion, Motus, modus actionis.
for all agree that the motion is good, only the manner of doing is evil. Now
examine the point well, and we shall always find the manner in the doer, and
not in the thing done: and therefore the evil is properly in the doer, and not
in the thing done; only it is said to be in it, in that regard that an evil
cause wrought it; and so the motion is both Gods and man's, yet not both of one
manner of working. Man's fall was an action; therefore Gods and man's, but man
wrought it one manner of way, and God another: now all learned men know that
the manner of any thing, makes it not many, as one cause may beget and
preserve, be alone and with others, work by it self and by accident: and
therefore no need to multiply the action. Effectuum relationes omnes sunt ad
causas suas; separatas, concurrentes, concausas, and simul ac similiter
agentes: that is, the relations and respect of all effects, are to their
causes, whether they be separate, concurring, concausing, or together and in
like manner working: if to separated causes, then the effects obtain their
names from the manner of the cause, by which these effects exist: if
necessarily they come forth, then of necessary causes they are called
necessary effects. And here by the way observe, that the decree of God, and
man's free will in his fall are rather separate, then concurring causes: and
therefore, if you please, Gods decree may be called, a necessary cause of his
own effect: but man's free will was another manner of cause, and therefore being
a contingent cause, his fall was co^tingent: observe this against we come to
the difficulties that arise out of Gods ordering of sin. So then in separate
causes, if necessary, then necessary effects; if contingent, then continge^t
effects: but if many causes concur to produce one effect, then this one
effect can never be said to be contingent and necessary: for so one nature
should be contradictorie to it self, and therefore if the principal cause of
man's sin be contingent, as who dare deny it, seeing it came from man's
(though free) yet mutable will: and therefore that Gods decree should either
necessitate the cause, or the effect, is impossible: for so a contingent cause
should become a necessary cause; and a necessary effect, should be the same
with a contingent effect: so then Gods decree though it make his own effect
necessary, yet concurring with man's fall, works in sustaining, ordering,
limiting whatsoever shall be done, but without all violence or coaction of his
nature. For the third, concauses which are absolute in their working, and
neither will, nor can be frustrated, always produce a necessary effect; as
the first cause, and the second, not only concurring, but concausing, each of
them for their full power and freedom that which they work, cannot but produce
that which they intended: therefore God the first cause, concausing in man's
fall, his own good pleasure; and man for his freedom in the self same
effect, concausing his own will, could do no other but produce unto himself
a miserable effect; but unto God, who made this serve his own will, a glorious
consequent, to manifest a greater good, then otherwise the world should ever
have conceived: and therefore give every effect his right in his cause, but
wrong no cause for the effect, because that which you may charge one cause with
all, was proper to another.

Thou] This word has relation to 16. ver. but to the wicked said God: thou
whose heart is full of hypocrisy, worship ungodliness, conversation
unrighteous, and every action an impudent lying before God and man.

Done] Doing is to be limited: for generally it signifies to do well or evil;
but the second is meant, done amiss; whether in omitting true reformation, or
committing vile abominations against the sacred laws of God; both are judged
of God in this place: Gods law is cast at the back, and therefore all good
duties omitted; the contrary performed in profanation, adultery, the every,
deceit, slander, etc.

Held] When it is taken for holding to work, Plowing. Meditation. Laboring.
it properly signifies plowing, hence meditating, and thirdly any kind of
laboring: the second signification is a metaphore: hence Sampsons proverb,
they plowed with my heiffer: the third is a Synecdoche. A second head of
significations is to hold from work: and then it signifies, either to omit,
Omit. Remit. Cease.
wholly to pass it over, or else to remit, to hold back some of the whole:
thirdly wholly to cease; which all of them may be applied: First, I omitted
wholly from calling of thee to an account, and therefore thou thoughtest that
all reckonings were made up betwixt thee and me. Secondly, I remitted thee many
offenses, for which thou never was thankful unto me. Thirdly, a long time
have I ceased from my anger, and therefore as in my mercies thou scantedst me
as a nigardly, and pinching giver, so now in thy sins thou have been
exceeding liberal, and large, taken my hands, and arms as bound up in a
cloth, and cannot be pulled out to strike thee withal.

Tongue] The word being given to reasonable creatures, First, signifies as
dumme: Thou thoughtest that I was tonguetied, alas, did thou never hear me
in my word? Secondly, deaf, thou thoughtest I could not here thy mouth given
unto evil, thy tongue to forgerie, deceit, cursed speaking, slander, etc.
Thirdly, blind, that I had no eyes to see thy secret hypocrisy. Qui tacet
consentire videtur.
Fourthly, silent, as one consenting with thee. Fifthly, ouerseeing, as one
winking at thy sins. Sixthly, sparing, as never meaning to call thee to
account. But there is one signification more, and that is to think a secret;
and therefore O hypocrite, it might be that God all this time was thinking a
secret against thee. To hold the tongue is put for silence, which is a Metanomy
of the cause for the effect: now the Lord can properly be said neither to hold
the tongue, (...).
or keep silence: therefore a third thing is meant, by a metaphor drawn from
men keeping silence, to wit, clemency, gentleness, patience, forbearing, long
suffering, bountifulness, and a large time to repent. The justice of God as it
burns more remissely against sin, is called anger; as more sharply, wrath;
in sentencing, judgment; (...). What is mercy
in executing, revenge: now in all these God uses mercy, which is a
compassion toward his creature offending: and this is double, either
gentleness, or bountifulnes: gentleness, gentleness,
whereby in his justice he remembers mercy, and this appears in his
patience, patience,
and longanimitie: patience whereby he most gently suffers sinners, and
deferreth his punishment: longanimitie whereby he expects long time
repentance: longanimity,
his bountifulness, bountifulnes.
whereby he is rich in goodness, pouring forth his good gifts upon his sinful
creatures, notwithstanding their sins: and in all these appears this which
the Prophet has said, I held my tongue.

III. Part. The explication of wickedmens conceits.
Thoughtest] 1. 1. Consent.
It signifies to consent unto a thing, and that is nothing else but the fitting
of natures together, either in their causes, as like causes will have like
effects, and so on the contrary, like effects like causes: or of subjects with
their adjuncts, as this is a fit subject for such a quality, or this is a
quality for such a subject. Let us then apply, thou thoughtest, that is,
consentedst: but alas how fitly does Gods silence and their thoughts agree?
fire and water, good and evil, may as well be reconciled. In deed Gods
silence, might have wrought better effects in the mind of these wicked men, but
they have so hardened themselves, Romans 2.4.
and brought impenitencie upon their hearts, that they are become subjects
unfit to be wrought upon; neither have they that wisdom, as to turn
themselves unto such a subject as Gods silence, to ponder seriously thereon: so
that neither can it work upon them, nor they upon it: and therefore what
consention betwixt God and their thoughts.

2. Acception, is to conform; the fruit of agreement, 2. Conformiti^^
by a metanomie of the effect for the cause: for conformity is the effect of
consention: neither will this stand in any good sense, thou conformedst: for it
is the only thing that God complains of in this place, R^u. 2.21.
that he did not conform himself unto the large time that God gave him to
repent: for how can there be any peace, as long as the whoordomes of Iezabel
are in such multtiudes: peace is where men agree together, but where they are
up in arms, all is in an vproare, and the tumult is so great that they will
be brought unto no order. The men of Ephesus when they were troubled about
their goddess, made the whole city full of confusion, Act. 19.
one crying one thing, another the clean contrary, all out of order: and the
more part knew not wherefore they were come together: the Town Clarke, for
all his wisdom, can hardly bring them unto any conformity: so as long as the
tumult of sin disturbs all within us, it is impossible that God should have
audience, especially when for his silence he would be heard of us. Let a son
of thunder cry at a door, where all are fighting and quarrelling, and they
will outcry him: but if he should stand silent at the door, it were
impossible that they should hear him when they were at the best: therefore God
may stand at the door, and knock by his silence as long as he will, and he
shall never be heard: therefore thou thoughtest, was no conformity with Gods
silence.

3. Signification is assimulation, 3. Assimulation.
either to assimulate himself unto the thing, or the thing unto himself: if
it had been of himself unto the thing, the^ had his thought without all
question been lawful and honest; but it is of the thing unto himself, and
therefore let the thing be what it will, it must be made to serve his turn.
And this signification is very emphaticall, and serving for our purpose, and is
thus much in sense; as if the Lord should have said, As a wicked man thinks of
me, so must I be indeed, he will frame me according to his own conceit, and
not his conceit according to that which I would have him think of me, and my
silence toward him; and this is the first beginning of his thought: now
assimulation is never without a conceived image, Imagination.
coming betwixt the two things that make themselves like. Hence a fourth
signification, to imagine; and that is a second degree unto this thought:
first, by turning Gods silence unto his own will; he saw no great difference,
but that there was proportion and similitude enough: then in the second place
he imagined, that he saw God well pleased with him. Resolution.
Now a third degree is to be added, and that is from the imagination a direct
resolution; that I may think it, and acknowledge it for the truth.

The reason of the phrase is this; because when any thing approaches toward the
mind of man, then the mind turns it self unto it, sees how it likes it,
imagines what contentment may be drawn out of it, and then thinks on it: if
the thing be good, and the mind frame it self according to the same, then the
thought that rises from that thinking is good: If on the contrary it be bad,
and the mind will impresse his image, then the thought is bad: silence and
mercy from God in this place were exceeding comfortable, they enter the mind
of this wicked hypocrite, but they are not entertained in their own name,
neither will he part with so much as a cup of cold water for his sake that sent
them, but he will be refreshed by them according to his own liking. Amos 4 5.
The people will bring sacrifices, yea betimes in the morning, tithes after
three years, a thanksgiving of leaven, free offerings, etc. but according to
whose liking? even their own: and therefore God counts of it as to transgress
at Bethel, Esa. 58.
and multiply transgressions at Gilgal: Esaias 58. they fasted, punished
themselves, but it was to seek their own wills, and require all their own
debts; they care not to have a good glass to look in, but they must needs
breath in it; and therefore the inward corruption of the heart, sends out such
smoakie fumes, that the true image is dimmed, and so they see nothing but
themselves.

The flowers that God sent them all the time of his long silence, were
exceeding sweet; but the mind being corrupt in it self, and also in his
breathing, infects, or rather drives back the pleasant smell; and so most
truly sents it self, yea takes the deeper poison, because a sweet flower
poisoned, is more lovingly embraced of the senses, and so the poison does
creep in with the pleasant smell, and strikes with the spirits presently to
the heart: so often they poison the good graces of Gods spirit, which willingly
would be embraced, but the poison creepes in too, into the soul, and strikes
all dead at the very heart: the glass that is colored, casts about all the
beams of the sun with the appearance of his color; so the glass of our
mind being colored, and deep died withal impiety, makes every beam of
Gods goodness shine according to his own mind; intus apparens prohibet
alienum, was an old axiom of Aristotle, but well may it be brought into
divinity: sin that only appears within, hinders all grace and goodness:
for alas they come but as strangers unto us, and therefore they find very mean
intertainment. As Christ was dealt withal when he came unto the inn, all
inward rooms were taken up, and only the stable is left for him: so do we
deal with his grace and mercy; all the chief roomet in our souls, are taken
up with greater personages then Christ and his grace: there is either lord
covetousness, or lord pride, or ambition, or pleasure, or revenge, etc. and
therefore must Christ and his grace into the stable; for we will not have these
men to rule over us: and therefore if his grace will become our servant, we
will give it entertainment, but to be Lord over us, is too much, we will not
have it take so much upon it: and for our service, we have no other place for
grace, but the stable; and therefore no marvel if all goodness disdain once to
come near the houses of these wicked men.

That this may the better appear, consider three kind of thoughts: the first
is a direct thought, and thinks it self: the second an indirect thought, that
thinks first the thing, and then it self: the third is a corrupt thought,
that thinks it self out of it self: the first is only proper unto God, that
knows himself first, and in himself all things: God looks not out of
himself to know any thing, for all things are in him: and therefore he knows
himself directly, the creatures indirectly: this thought is above the thoughts
of men and Angels, Esaias 55 9.
as far as heaven is higher then the earth.

The second belongs to men and Angels in their best estate: for they must first
think the thing, and then out of the thing themselves: and this we call, a
reflexed thought; as for example, a man looks his natural face in a glass,
he sees first the image of his face, and then by that he knows the complexion
of his real face: so a man sees Gods wisdom in his creation, which being as
a glass, (...) scit s^ s^^^e.
casts upon man the knowledge of himself. So that man must look himself out
of himself: and to know himself in himself, is to labor to be like God.

The third thought, is of corruption, when a man will needs look through his
own medium: now be that looks through his own corruption, can see nothing
but corruption; as a man that looks through a red glass, sees nothing but
rednes: so he that will see himself through himself, can see nothing but
himself. And herein we see that corruption would become a God, desires to know
nothing but it self, and love nothing better then it self: And this is that
thought which is to be conceived in this place. Gods silence must be tempered
according to his appetite; and their taste is so dainty, that they can taste
nothing but that which they themselves have prepared; nothing is sauorie which
comes out of Gods kitchen, dressed by his own cooks: but they will have their
own provision, and so like unskillful dames, they put death into the pot: and
when they are sick, they will physic themselves, until they have brought
themselves past all cure: and then it shall be too late, to cry father
Abraham, have mercy upon us, we are grievously tormented. And suppose God
should then yield them a cup of cold water, it should not refresh them: for
as upon earth, they counted the kingdom of grace and goodness a hell unto them,
so questionless if God should let them feel the least joy in heaven, it would
be a torment unto them. Their taste is always an aguish taste, justice and
mercy can not relish with them, and therefore they swallowe down all things
vnsauourily. And this is the meaning, thou thoughtest; that is, turned all to
thine own conceit.

Yet one thing more is to be added, to wit, that this is not the express
thought of hypocrites; for they will soon reply, Lord, when thought we so of
thee? Oh, be content, Job 9 4. Amos. 4.13.
God is wise in heart, and able to declare unto man what is his thought: the
Lord is no false expositour, he judges thy thoughts by thy practice: in tantum
scimus, in quantum operamur; for if thou did not think thus much, thou
would never have practiced it: Psalm. 139.17.
if thou had always with David, cried, Lord, how dear are thy thoughts unto
me, how great is the sum of them, indeed I cannot count them: but when I
awake, I am still with thee: then assuredly God would never have censured thee
so deeply: but alas, thou art asleep, and thou dreamest all is well; but when
the Lord shall awake thy conscience, and set thy sins before it, then shall
thou cry, Just and righteous art thou, O Lord, but I am sinful: therefore
thine own mouth shall condemn thee, and thy life shall testify sufficiently
what thou think.

Like thee] A strange wonder: when all the nations of the world in respect of
God are nothing: say they were counted as a drop of a bucket, which is but a
small thing to all the water contained therein, yet let the^ come with God upon
the balance, and this drop of water shall be turned into the dust of the earth;
and if he take away the very Isles as a little dust, what shall become of this
drop of water, when it is spilt upon the earth? shall it not be counted less
then nothing, even vanity it self? how then should we hear this voice of an
hypocrite, God is like me? If reason will excuse him, we will plead for him.
Being in any creature is li^er God which i^ the first being, then that which
is no being.


First therefore, every creature of God, may say he is like God, because he
has being: therefore liker God, that is being, then that which is no being.
For God that is the first being, will acknowledge the rest as from himself;
for the first being must needs give all beeings: therefore the grass in the
field proves his creator, and his creator approoues of him: for the cause and
the effect do well agree: but alas, God never made an hypocrit, for he is the
work of his own hands: therefore we dare not do so much for him, as for the
least spire of grass that grows out of the earth.

Again, 2 Man Gods image by creation.
man is the image of God, and therefore very like God, not for being, but
holiness and righteousness of being: but alas, when I look upon man, and ask
whose image and superscription does he bear? and find that it is Adams, then
needs must I say, give unto Adam, that which is Adams, but unto God that which
is Gods. Now I find no stamp in an hypocrite, but the stamp of Adam; and
though he has covered himself with fig leaves, yet God has found him out;
therefore I dare not in charity cover him. Wherefore I enter a third
consideration, 3. of redemption.
for love would cover a multitude of sins: and find the Lord saying in the
Scriptures, be ye holy as I am holy. If any thing will serve the turn, here is
matter to justify him: for who is able with the hypocrite, to thank God, that
he is not as other men, an extortioner, unjust, an adulterer; but a faster
twice a week, a giver of alms, even the tithe of all he possesses. Who dare
now speak against him? if the Lord had bin silent, I should have bin amazed
once to have opened my mouth in dislike of him: but he is no Saint, for all
this glistering show: he is not purged from his sin, still is he in the gall
of bitterness, and the bond of iniquity: and yet the thought of his heart is
not forgiven him: therefore his prayer of thanksgiving is an abomination unto
the Lord; for as yet he has made no petition for the remission of his sin,
as yet he has not learned the first step to Christianity: therefore now I
will show what we are to think of him.

He may make all the world to admire at him in this place, for strange
impudency, and horrible blasphemy against God: for in these two words [like
thee] is a gradation of three steps, every one rising a step above an
other. First, to compare God with him in any similitude of quality is
sinful, In quality.
because he has no quality that answers any thing in God: but it were well,
if he would have rested in the quality: for things like, are also dislike: In
essence.
but the original in this place tells us plainly, that he passes all the
bounds of logical comparison, and extends it to the very being of God: for so
the words are to be expounded out of the Original, In being, to be like: that
is, according to our English phrase, altogether like thee: strange impudency,
and void of very reason it self, to make things compared as like, any further
to argue then their qualities: but wickedness in the bosom of fools is
restles: for he rises one degree higher, In immortality of being.
and brings in an eternity of being altogether like God: for the verb is in
the future tense, and signifies thus much, not only in being to be, but also
in being shall be: therefore wicked men promise unto themselves an eternal
fellowship with God.

Let us therefore consider what things are here compared: Wicked men's innention
is (...) of comparisons and that with the best.
2. in what quality they are compared. 3. what truths or falsehoods they make.
4. what be the discourses of wicked men's hearts: for all these are contained in
this thought of a wicked man. For the first, the things compared, Terms:
sin, silence, God, man.
are God and his silence; a wicked man and his thoughts: the proportion stands
thus; as wicked men's thoughts are, so shall Gods silence be, and consequently
as wicked men are, Quality from condition to substance, and so to eternity.
so shall God himself be. The quality wherein they are compared, is
threefold: 1. of condition, God must be like minded unto them: 2. of substance
and being, for they frame Gods Image according to their own image: 3. for the
quality of time, God must be an everlasting Patron, and favorer of all their
causes.

For the third, what truths shall we expect out of this strange invention of
wicked men? surely none that will agree with the nature of Truth: for they have
abused the truth, and God himself, who is the author of truth: therefore three
horrible falsehoods are contained in these words. First, The falsehoods of wicked
men: Gods thoughts as man's.
that Gods thoughts are as man's thoughts, and Gods ways as man's ways,
directly against the truth of God: Isa. 55.8, 9. For my thoughts are not your
thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, says the Lord: for as the heavens
are higher then the earth, so are my ways higher then your ways, and my
thoughts above your thoughts.

The second falsehood that God is as man, 2. He makes God no better the a
himself.
against that place, God is not as man that he should lie, neither as the son
of man that he should be deceived: therefore may he well expostulate the matter
with these hypocrites (worse then idolaters, for they make themselves the Idol,
therefore deny all gods) as he does with his people, Isa. 40.18. To whom will
ye liken me, or what similitude will ye set up unto me? (or rather set up your
selves cheek by joule with me) know ye nothing? have ye not heard it? has it
not been told you from the beginning? have ye not understood it by the
foundation of the earth? how that I the Lord sit upon the circle of the earth,
and the inhabitants are as grassehoppers: how I stretch out the heavens as a
curtain, and spread them as a tent to dwell in? O hypocrites, are you better
then Princes, and Judges of the world? see, I pray you, how I bring Princes to
nothing, and make the Judges of the earth as vanity; as though they were not
planted, as though they were not sown, as though their stock took no root
in the earth: for I did but blow upon them, and they withered, and the
whirlewind has taken them away as stubble: therefore I counsel you lift up
your eyes on high, and behold who has created all things, and brings out
their armies by number, and calls them all by their names: by the greatness of
my power and mighty strength nothing fails: Why say thou then (O wicked
man,) and speak (O hypocrite) the Lord is as man, and the mighty God of
heaven, as the silly worm that crawleth upon the earth?

Thirdly, 3. God shall dwell with him for ever.
that their estate shall be as unchangeable as God himself, for they say God
shall be with them for ever: wherefore let them hear the word of the Lord that
say thus in their hearts, We have made a Covenant with death, and with hell
are we at agreement, though a scourge run over, and pass thorough, it shall
not come at us; for we have made falsehood our refuge, and under vanity are we
hid: therefore thus says the Lord, Judgment will I lay to the rule, and
righteousness to the balance, and the hail shall sweep away thy vain
confidence, and the waters shall ouerflow thy secret place, and your covenant
with death shall be disanulled, and your agreement with hell shall not stand,
when a scourge shall run over and pass through, then shall ye be trod down
by it: thus will I make your bed straight, that it cannot suffice for your rest
in my wrath: and your couerings so narrow, that you cannot wrap your selves
from my rods. Go too then, O hypocrite, thou saidest, I shall be a Lady for
ever, like the Lord of heaven, whose days have no end; I am, Re^ 18.7
and none else, I shall not sit as a widow, neither shall know the loss of
children: therefore hear thou that art given to pleasures, and dwell
careless, that do not set thy mind to righteousness, neither do remember
the latter end of thy sin, how that these two things shall come to the
suddenly, the loss of children, and widowhood; they shall come upon thee in
their perfection: for thou have trusted in wickedness, and have said, none
sees me^: thy wisdom and thy knowledge have caused thee to rebel; therefore
shall evil come upon thee, and thou shall not know the morning thereof;
destruction shall fall upon thee, which thou shall not be able to put away: And
this shall be the end of all them that falsify the truth of God.

The fourth thing, is the discourse of wicked men, Wicken men's discourses.
that rises out of these apparent truths: First, I sin, and God is silent;
therefore he either sees not, or if he see, yet he regards not my sin; or
if he regard my sin, yet his silence makes me trust that he consents with
me; or if he do not consent, Quitacet consentire videtur;
yet he will spare me for a time; or howsoever, I will hold mine own
conclusions, whatsoever the Lord shall do unto me.

IIII. Part. Of Gods reproof, and order in sin.
Reprooue] This word signifies four things: First, to argue or reason upon
any matter: secondly, by reasoning to prove or disprooue any cause: thirdly,
by proouing or disproouing, to absolve or condemn any person: fourthly, after
condemnation to punish or execute: This fourth signification is specially meant
in this place; for he had his conviction before, therefore to reprove in this
place is as much as to plague; for the reason following makes it plain, Oh
consider this, least I tear you in pieces: showing plainly what his reproof
was, nothing but vengeance.

Set] This word presupposes things out of place: secondly, the placing of them
again in their ranks and orders, showing us the nature of sin. First, that
sin is gotten out of his own place; for never a creature of God by his
creation did acknowledge him, and God himself did always abhor him:
therefore before the fall of men and angels, Gods er^ation a deadly ^uemie to
sin.
sin was like unto that which we call in nature vacuum, which is so abhorred
of nature, that the very fire will descend, and the very water ascend, before
they will yield him the least corner in the world: so sin, by Gods creation
was wholly excluded, and God gives his testimony, that every thing that he
made was good, and very good: therefore that sin should obtain that in
nature, as to get him a place in the best of Gods creatures, was never the
placing of the Lord; therefore the Lord cannot be said to set sin in this
manner. The way of Gods placing Cane.
The second setting is here understood, to wit, bringing that into his proper
place, which hitherto has been out of his place: and is done two manner of
ways; First, by bringing it unto himself, and the rule of his wisdom; and
so sin is set in the decree of God, and ordered by his wisdom: for that of the
Philosopher is true, Veritas iudex sui and obliqui; but what need we the
testimony of the Philosopher, seeing that we have the Apostle Paul, Romans 7.7.
I knew not sin but by the law, and without the law sin is dead: now the
rule is always before the breach of the rule, and therefore must needs
determine of every fault. Secondly, sin is set in order, when it is brought
unto man by making him feel what his sin was by the punishment of it.

Order] Includes three things, Confusion, di^ontion, i^^^u^ination.
first confusion: secondly, comely disposition: thirdly, plain revelation: as
in the creation of the world, Gods order is set forth unto us in the confusion
of the first matter, wherein all things were buried, as in a dark dungeon.
Secondly, how the Lord proceeded to bring out of this, the heavens in their
rank, with all the host thereof, the firmament in his place, the water and all
therein in his place, the earth and all thereupon in their place: and thus was
the work of the Lord comely and full of beauty. Thirdly, the Lord brought
forth a light, to separate from the darkness, and so was there a plain
revelation of his works: so in this place, here is sin, a greater confusion
in m^n, then ever was in that first chaos. Secondly, as the Lord brought all
things out of that into their place; so will he bring all the sins of man unto
a comely order: so that plainly in the third place every man shall see what he
has done to the dishonor of his creator. This order is threefold, according
to a threefold book: the first is the book of decrees; 3. Books, Gods
dec^es, Law, Cons^ence.
the second is the book of Gods law, the third the books of conscience: and
these three books do most plainly order sin. The first book being secret,
orders sin secretly, yet most justly, because most wisely: for if the
wisdom of God should not be seen in sin, then should not God have his glory
out of sin; therefore to answer all objections that may arise out of this
ordring of sin, and the proving of the truth of this point; I will in a few
words take in hand the clearing of these two things; first the remoouall of
that which may obscure the truth: secondly, I will bring reasons for the
confirming of this difficulty.

The first objection may be out of the words of the Psalm, I will set them in
order before thee: therefore the order that is taken for sin, is after that
sin is committed. For first God says, These things have thou done: 2. these
things will I order: 3. before thee: all which plainly prove, that this order
follows sin.

And the books were opened, and another book was opened, which is the book
of life: and the dead were judged of those things which were written in the
books according to their works. Here is mention of two books, the book of
Gods decree, and the book of the Conscience; Why the Lord terms the book of
conscience books.
called books, because of the manifold bills and inditments that are written
in the leanes of the conscience, which are sufficient for the judgment of the
wicked: therefore as often as we hear of Gods executions in punishing, we
hear nothing of the book of his decree, because to what purpose should God
bring in his decree to convince a wicked man, when his conscience gives in
evidence sufficient against him: it might rather cause cavil, then true
conviction. But in the execution of his mercy, we hear of the book of life,
because therein lies a principal cause of our salvation. Therefore I take it
in this place, Death only from finne; and therefore has no ^^gher cause, and
further then the cause, no inqui^^e.
that the Lord speaking of books and of a book, would have us take notice
that for judgment we need to look no further then the books of conscience:
therefore I take it that the Scripture never speaks of a book of death.
Again, when we look upon our salvation, we must eye the book of life, that
so we may ascribe all the praise of our salvation unto the Lord. So in this
place the Lord is about his execution upon the wicked, God in himself works
out of all time in the are ^ure in due time.
therefore he pulls not out the book of his decree, but appeals unto their
own consciences: so that order which was before the Lord from all eternity, is
now before the eyes of the hypocrite. For the Lord says not, before me, but
before thee: for the Lord never begins his work in himself, therefore in
himself he did this from all eternity; but now he will manifest his ordering
of sin, which he always does by the book of his law: but because this was
cast at his back, and set at his heels, which ought to have lien at his
heart, the Lord will open the third book, which shall prick him to the
quick, and make him most fearfully to look about him.

his attributes, Attributes simgle, conditional
some of them not following the nature of the creature; as omnipotency, power,
goodness, immensitie, eternity, and the like: but others have no work in the
creature, until the creature have had his work; as no mercy can be wrought
upon the creature, until his misery be presupposed; and no justice executed
upon the creature, until he have bin sinful. For mercy cannot be where
there is no misery; neither justice where there is no sin: for that ius
dominij, is an abuse of Gods wisdom, for there is no rule for it: and for the
Lord to do any thing in punishing as dominus, and not as iudex, is to make him
unjust. Indeed by the law of creation, as he made man of nothing, so may he
annihilate him, and bring him again to nothing; but to let him live, and
punish him standing in his innocence, is to do against the law of his justice.

absolute, eternal, infinite; but being manifested in his creatures, become
conditional, and to have respect unto the creatures: therefore creation makes
manifestation of power, goodness, wisdom, eternity, and the like, as well as
man's fall of mercy and justice: therefore mercy and justice were equally
first in God with the rest: for God was in himself both just and merciful,
before man was either sinful or miserable: for the execution of justice or
mercy I confess to be in regard of sin and misery, but there is one reason
of the execution, another of the decree; the just cause of the one is his will,
the just cause of the other is man's sin.

Gods decree must have a subject, The subject of Gods decree.
therefore either being or no being; no being can undergo no decree, for it
can have no end, and therefore it must be a being; therefore either the first
being, or that being which is from the first being: not the first being,
for he can have no end nor beginning, and therefore no decree can pass of him:
so that only remains the other being which is from God, therefore created:
therefore man created is required for a subject of Gods decree: now the end of
creation, can not be reprobation; for the end of creation, is man's happiness
with his Creator: therefore a second estate of man must be considered, and that
is the fall of man, in which estate a just ground is given of Reiection and
Election.

The answer. It is granted, that Man is the Subject; The subject and his
manner of consideration.
yet we distinguish of man, and answer that in every subject two things are
required; res considerata, and modus considerandi: the thing considered is
always one, but the manner of considering makes diverse special subjects in
this one subject. As for example; being from God is the subject of all Gods
revealed wisdom, yet this one subject has diverse manner of considerations,
according to diverse acts and operations that lie in him. As for example; Reason
is a particular act, and therefore becomes a particular subject of Gods
wisdom, to wit, the Art of Logic: so the will, a particular work in Gods
creatures, becomes the subject of Divinity: so speech, a particular work,
becomes the subject of Rhetoric and Grammar. Now that general Subject, is
before all these particular subjects, and the foundation of all the rest; and
in them the thing considered as common to them all: but the manner of
considering it, is proper and special to every one. So man is the thing
considered in Gods decree, therefore the most general, going before all
particular considerations of creation, fall, redemption, salvation, damnation:
for all these are but particular considerations of man, therefore keep their
order appointed of the Lord for the obtaining of his own end, which is the
glorifying of himself in his Justice and Mercy: therefore as man is the
Subject of Gods decree, so creation, the fall, redemption, salvation, and
damnation, are but the means for the accomplishment of his will. Again, every
one of these particular actions, have their special ends, not opposing, but
concurring to the general end of the whole subject; so that the end of
creation is happiness with the Creator, and no misery at all; but this is the
special end, and therefore no opposite of the general. Again, the special
end of man's fall, is misery of body and soul in the first and second death;
yet no opposite of glorifying God in the demonstration of his mercy. Thirdly,
the special end of man's Redemption, is salvation to all that are in Christ,
and damnation to all that are out of Christ: therefore all these ends being
special, must needs aim at the general: for so goes the Rule of all true
reason, that subordinata non opponuntur: 2. that fines intermedij sunt pro
subordinatione finium ad vltimum finem. And this shall suffice for the
opposition: now I come to the confirmation.

Arguments proouing the decree of sin: first drawn from ends.
The first Argument: That which has any end, is decreed; but sin has an
end; therefore is decreed. The first proposition is proved from the true
distinction of ends, laid down by the Philosopher in the first book of his
Ethics, and the first Chapter; where the Philosopher disputes most excellently
for the subordination of arts, and so consequently of beeings, by an argument
drawn from the distinction of ends; to wit, that all ends are either the last
end, or ends tending unto the last: now the last end, gives goodness and
amabilitie to all other ends, and does virtually contain them all in himself,
therefore must they needs be appointed for him. This ground is a most enident
proof that sin is decreed: for the end of sin must either be the last
end, or tending to the last end: now it cannot be the last end, for that
alone is challenged of the first being: therefore an end tending unto this last
end. And who dare deny, but that all ends unto the last end are decreed: for
they make for the manifestation of his glory. Object. Sin is evil, and
therefore has no end, seeing ends and goodness are the same.
But it will be objected, sin is evil, and therefore has no end: for finis
and bonum conuertuntur. Unto this I answer, that sin is not in it self, but
by accident good, and serving for Gods glory: but the Lord which can bring
light ort of darkness, good out of evil, is able to dispose of the evil of
sin by accident, and of the goodness (which is his own work) by it self,
to make for his glory. True it is, that God in his work goes no further then
the good of the evil, and that he decrees the other, is said very improperly;
for evil in his abstract nature, is neither being, nor the cause of any
being; and therefore no good in the true approbation of goodness: being not
good, it has no end, and therefore is referred to Gods decree, as it is said
to belong to a being, and the goodness of a being, and this is accidental,
therefore accidentally decreed; Sin accidentally decreed, yet impossible to
be vndecreed.
but yet it cannot be vndecreed; because the thing in him decreed, could not
have been without him, for that good that comes out of sin, could not have
been, except sin had been; and sin could not have been, except goodness
had been: and therefore being in Gods created goodness and also God bringing
from him, his own goodness to his own glory, he cannot escape Gods decree,
because both the other are of necessity (all men confessing) under Gods decree
directly. And therefore if God would have sin to be in his good creatures,
and also goodness from sin in them, then must sin stand to Gods
determination, because the other two cannot but presuppose sin because a
goodness from him. Now that God is no author of sin in all this, it is
plain, because the two former have God for their author, and bring in the
other as a hang-by, and unwelcome guest, yet such a one as they could not throw
off at their pleasure. Diseaseslie in nature, and sometimes do good to nature,
yet nature will never acknowledge the kindness, because he knew the intent was
his subversion. Jason had an impostume in his body, An evil thing may do
good by accident.
the enemy thrusts his sword into it, and heales him of his impostume, which
the Physicians could never accomplish; but no thank to Iasons enemy which
sought his life: and therefore if sin do any good either for God, or to man,
it is no thanks to sin, seeing that sin would dishonor God, and destroy
man. Again, one may appoint the journey lawfully, but an other may walk it
unlawfully: God appoints every man his race, but he himself runs it: the horse
carries a man to his iourneyes end, and knows not that he does so much for
man's good; yet man knows it well enough, and guides him all the way; yet for
all this the horse undergoes the travel, and would be feeding by the way, and
if he eat his own poison, or lame himself by a fall, it is the horses fault;
yet must he to his end, if the man have power to effect it: so the Lord has
laid upon man his decree, he carries it with him all the days of his life, he
knows not to what end, yet the Lord knows it well enough, and does always
dispose of him, until he come at his iourneys end: Now in his way man feeds
on the poison of sin, falls and stumbles in his way, yet the Lord will have
him go on, for he is able to do it; and he shall never rest, until he have
accomplished the will of the almighty. And therefore if this be just in men, in
the rule and dominion over their beasts, shall it not be as just in the Lord?
I am sure that the Lord has as much authority over us, as we have over our
beasts: therefore let us not be too bold in disputing with our creator, but give
him the praise and glory of all ends.

ordered, that is decreeed, but sin is ordered, therefore decreed. That sin
is ordered, my text is plain for it. But you will answer, that sin is
ordered in the books of conscience, and not in the book of Gods decree. This
is but a shift: for grant the last book, and you shall grant both the
former, which I prove thus: If no books of conscience, without the book of
the law; and no book of the law, without the book of Gods decree; then the
third being granted, the two former are concluded. For if we would make
these three books one complete book, Three books one complete book.
we must of necessity divide them in this order and method: the first part is
Gods decree, the second is Gods revealed law, and the third is the testimony
of the conscience. Now method tells me plainly, that the first may be without
the second, for Gods secret will may be without his revealed will; but his
revealed can not be without his secret will. And again, the law may be without
this book of conscience, but this book of conscience can not be without the
law; for no accusation or excusation but by the law of God. Therefore grant
the third, and you grant the two former by inevitable consequence. Now this
third book can not be denied, because my text proves it; and no man of reason
contradicts it.

Again, every schoole-boy can tell me that the breaking of Priscians head,
must be healed by Priscian himself; the writing or speaking of false latin
either against the first or second part of Grammar, The rule before the fault.
must be ordered by the rule of Grammar it self: now the rule was before the
false latin, therefore determines what false latin was, long before the school
boy practiced it. So the Law of God tells me what sin is when I have
committed it, but it determined what sin was, and to what end, long before
either I, or my father Adam committed it: therefore the determination was not to
follow after, though indeed the conviction followed after the commission.
Therefore orthodoxall is the distinction of Gods decree, and the execution of
his decree: of Gods determination, and the accomplishment thereof: of Gods
definitive sentence, and the manifestation of it: of his reprobation of a man,
and the conviction of a sinner: all the former I may term the premises, and
the latter Gods conclusion in the premises. Again, there is the first
proposition, which is Gods truth and sole wisdom; the second (which we call
the minor) is the special application of it unto man in his good time. Genesis
15. Israel must serve 400. years; but Exodus 12. 400 are complete; therefore
must Israel out of Egypt that very self same day. There is a day in which God
will judge the world; Atheists may deny it, 2. Pet. 3. but when the decree
shall be assumed, now is the day, I dare boldly conclude, that those persons
shall perish. So in like manner all men are decreed of the Lord to manifest his
justice and mercy, in all that either God himself does, or man can do: but I
am one of these all, and therefore must I manifest either his justice or
mercy: if that, then either I must be saved, or damned: but alas, that is a
harsh conclusion both in regard of God, and in regard of my self: well
consider, that it is one thing to determine of thy sin, and another thing to
punish thee: assure thy self that this is good reason, that every law of God
must determine before thou do any thing, else were the rule no wisdom of God;
but also take this with thee, that thou shall never take any hurt by the law,
until thou thy self have done some hurt unto it: the Law will not sting,
until thou have stung thy self, and then take heed of poison unto death. And
therefore seeing Gods wisdom runs along in this order to determine all
matters, not casually, but certainly, long before they come to pass; we should
yield it, and not deny it, because of the execution which follows after,
which has other just causes then Gods decree, but none to exclude it.

God is Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, the beginning and the end,
therefore nothing before him, neither any thing after him: therefore he closes
all things in these two terms: therefore every thing must have something to
do with this first and last, as from him, and to him: therefore must they be
decreed, else should they not be from him, and to him. Hence sin coming
within the limits of this circle, that incloseth all things, must needs some
way come from God, and be for God, and therefore decreed. How sin may be from
God, and to God, is hard to explain; yet in my poor judgment, under the
correction of my betters, I judge this the most true and safest, that the good
the Lord will have out of evil, is from God, and to God; all the rest that
remains, is nothing at all for Gods purpose, and therefore he has no hand in
it; he will have the gold by his own fining, but the dross he will leave to
the first inuentors, that dug unto themselves such kind of pits, that would
hold no water for the Lord of hosts, but such as he drew out by his prerogative
royal, over all his creatures and their actions. Therefore thus is sin
decreed, and the Lord had his hand in it. For the other consideration of sin
as sin, it is a by-respect in it self, nothing tending to Gods purpose; but
only as the Lord drew his own goodness out of him. And this makes us speak so
of sin, that he is decreed, meaning the goodness out of sin, which the
Lord has appointed for himself.

II. Part in the ordering of sin, concerning his entrance and progress.
This point would a little more be insisted upon, for the slanders that
Bellarmine has laid upon Calvin, Luther, Martyr, and sundry other of the
greatest Divines of the Reformed Churches, making them to defend, That God by
reason of his decree, is made the cause of sin. Of this sinful, wicked,
and lying report, we are sure God is not the author, but the devil. For the
clearing of this point, two things offer themselves to our consideration: the
first, entrance of sin; Entrance, pr^gresse, cause^ of sins entrance
principal, isntrumental, accidental.
and secondly his progress. For his first entrance, sin had two causes; one
blameable, the other holy and good. The blameable cause, is either principal,
or isntrumental: principal the devil and man. The devils being Apostates
and rebels, through their pride against God, and malice against man, became
liars and murderers of man, by bringing him into his fall: man by his free
receiving of the tentation, and harkening thereunto, contrary to the
commandment of God, when he might have resisted the same.

The isntrumental causes, were the serpent, and the woman: the serpent abused
by the devil, was used as an instrument of seducing Evah; the woman deceived
by the devil and the serpent, became an instrument to deceive man.

The unblameable cause was God and his law; for as his law did it, so he
himself did it: and if there had been no law, there had been no transgression:
yet the law of it self, sauoured nothing but life unto life, which thorough
man's default, became the savor of death unto death. But how could this be,
seeing man's will was created good? How man's will being good, could produce
evil.
I answer; First, it was created mutably good: secondly, though there was no
imperfection for kind of being, yet his being was defective and imperfect, in
regard of absolute being; therefore man compared to God was defective, and
imperfect, and so might come short of his created perfection, and fall away
from that wherein he was created: Hence man might fall, but how should this
power come into act? here divines lay down a substraction of grace, which they
affirm to be double: first of that without which man could not but fall, and
without which he could not continue in his integrity; if God had denied man
this grace, it could not be imagined but that God should have been the author
of sin: (...).
this was debitum naturae, due to his nature, and this God gave him, and would
have continued, with the supply of actual grace to have lived for ever, if he
had once pleased God. A second substraction, or rather withholding of grace,
was that without which God saw he would not continue, though both in duty he
ought, (...) posse si ve^^^t. sed non veil (...).
and in respect of ability, he might if he would; God gave him not a would to
his might, yet a might if he would: neither was God bound unto this by law of
creation: for it was expedient, giving him freedom of will to try him how he
would exercise it, yet most certain he would abuse it: no man denies, but that
God might have given grace to Adam, in such degree, measure, and kind, as might
have preserved him from all possibility of falling, and have holden him
inseparably to himself for ever: which while he denied, he gave way unto the
fall of man.

Thus then we conceive of the entrance of sin. First, God purposed eternally
to make man a rational and intellectual creature, endued with knowledge of
all things, Understanding.
and faculty and power to make choice of what he would. Secondly, man could
not be thus made, and be naturally free, Election.
from possibility and danger of making an evil choice, disposing himself
amiss, and offending against the laws of his righteous Creator. Thirdly,
Means.
God wanted not gracious means whereby to hold him inseparably to himself,
and to preserve him infallibly from falling away, though he were not, nor could
be, Fall contingent
naturally free from possibility of falling. Fourthly, God knew man being so
left, would sin^efully depart from him, not necessarily, but contingently, yet
most certainly, not by any constraint, but by his own created free will.
Fifthly, God saw this to be the best for the manifestation of his glory, and of
that good, which otherwise the world could never have known. Sixthly, God
seeing man this way to determine his will, Mans^ determination.
made the determination thereof, a just way for his own glory. God decreed
man's fall, and he also decreed that he himself would not be the cause, but
that man himself should only cause his own ruin. Thus then God did
absolutely decree, but not absolutely determine man's will, for that was left
unto man himself; Determination no impulsion.
yet the determination of that determination was absolute, and that without
impulsion, or coaction of man's will: for determination is always of things
unto their ends; therefore is called absolute in regard of the end: but
coaction is only of an efficient, which is not necessary for an absolute
end. All Gods ends are absolute and necessary, yet the means, that God uses
are of all kinds, contingent, necessary, dependent, independent. Suppose God
had decreed to have given man actual grace, as already the angels have it in
heaven, had it therefore been necessary, that man could not have fallen? or
that God should have constrained his will to have embraced this grace? no
assuredly; therefore on the contratie God decreed not to give man this actual
grace of standing, is therefore his auersion necessary and constrained? no,
but God by this means gave way unto the sin of auersion, and permissiuely,
yet willingly did suffer it for to enter, (for otherwise it could not have
entered) and by a positive decree resolved, that auerting himself from the
fountain of all goodness, and the rule of all righteousness, he should run
into innumerable dangerous evils, and grievous sins, both of commission and
omission.

Omission is always the first sin; Omission a privation.
for a man falls first from the love of God, before he can love or desire any
other thing: now this sin being a neglect, has no positive cause, it self
being a priuatio^; neither need we seek any higher spring of it, Non (...).
then the will of such a creature as is defective; and therefore does not
always necessarily attend to the rule, it should conform it self unto: and
thus of the first sin, we can find no cause in God, because he is no ways
defective. The second sin is commission, which is a positive act, and
therefore has a positive cause: now God that never cease to do his work of
moving, but always carries forward all things with restless motions, cannot
but cause the very substance of a sin of commission: (...) of the Sch^olman.
neither here am I of the opinion of the Schoolmen, that defend the very
deformity of this sin, to be nothing but the act and very substance of it:
for an act is a general term, and has special limitations added unto it;
therefore it is said to be well done, when it keeps his rule; evil, when it
misseth his rule: now the Lord in no action goes against the rule of his
wisdom, therefore he can work no deformed act, only man that is defective may
go against the rule, and so causes the deformity. A cunning artificer makes
a clock, but he suffers his apprentice to help to join it together, the
deformity of the motion is none of the artificers, but only from the
unskillful apprentice; yet will the skillful artificer have his praise in
correcting of that aberration, and turn the motion to his own end. The
causes then why sin entered as efficient, are properly the devil and man; as
determined to an end, properly Gods; who might well so determine of man,
seeing he created him mutable.

But to come more nearly, How Gods law works sin.
we may express this most familiarly in a comparison taken from an earthen
pitcher, dashed by the hand of a man against a stone wall; that the wall
breaks it, that is no fault of the walls, but rather the commendation of it,
working according to his own nature; but the fault is in the party that
dashed it against the wall: so man being dashed by the devil, and himself,
and the serpent, and the woman upon the law of God, (too hard to be
ouerwrastled of man) was broken in pieces: yet the law was without all fault;
only the fault was in the devil, Adam, and the woman: the law therefore a
most just, and holy cause of man's fall: as the law caused man's sin, so I dare
boldly say that God cansed it, yet most holily and justly. Hence it follows
most plainly, that God was no bare permitting cause, or a forsaking cause; but
a working cause, even in the fall of man: now as God did it, so he was able to
do it, and so to decree it to his own glory, according as it seemed best
unto his own wisdom; and so might it be willed as absolutely good and just,
and therefore no sin. God made them the beginners of their own actions,
being endued with free will; by well doing they might deserve both praise and
prize; and by ill doing might deserve both dispraise and punishment. But you
will object, then God might both will it, and not will it. Very true, as God
willed it, it had respect of good, and was just, and therefore to be willed;
but as they willed it, it was evil, and so God hated it, and his law forbad
it. The son may desire the death of his father, and so may God too; but in so
doing the son sins against God, yet God is free from sin: the Judge
desires that a malefactor should die, so does the hangman, yet may be the
hangman is guilty of murder, when the Judge is a true executioner of justice.

Observe then for the entrance of sin these positions: Positions for sins
entrance
First that to sin, is directly beside the scope, intent, and purpose of the
law; and therefore if the law cause sin, it is by acccident; as to the law,
so to Gods will, which can neither intend, purpose, or will any impiety; and
therefore sin is accidental and external in regard of God: now an
accidental principle, is either in regard of necessity or fortune: How a
cause by accident may be given unto God.
now for necessity to sin, that cannot be given unto God, for he can suffer
of no causing principle; and fortune is too strange a term to stand with Gods
providence, where then is this external principle? I answer, if we soberly
conceive of the nature of a cause by fortune, we shall not much swerve, if we
say sin was chance in regard of Gods will: for chance and fortune according
to true reason, is nothing but the accident or event of any thing beside his
end and scope: now only good is the end and scope of Gods will, and therefore
sin which is not good is beside Gods scope and end; therefore it is
accidental in Gods scope and end. But you will say, then God was ignorant of
man's sin: I answer, no; because sin is not only accidental to a good
end, but also an aberration from the true rule of wisdom, and must stand to
the judgment and sentence thereof; which cannot be done except wisdom take
notice of it, and most truly God understands the aberation: and from hence it
follows, that he conceived it could never touch that goodness which was well
pleasing unto himself: fortune and chance to men, is both in the scope and
aberration to the intended scope: the ignorance never lies in the scope, but in
the aberration: for a man that misseth his scope, intent, and purpose, knows
that it is so; but yet he conceiues not the means that brought that thing to
pass; and so he is ignorant, not for the scope and end that has happened, but
he knows not how he came to that end: therefore sin being beside Gods scope
is accidental, and never intended of God: yet God cannot be ignorant of it, in
so much as his eyes did see the aberration, and how it was the direct way to
frustrate man of his good end with himself.

blindness, except there were an eye: this makes contrariety, hence enmity,
betwixt the law and sin; and from enmity contention, therefore the law must
plead for it selse, and be earnest in his own defense, so will sin on the
contrary part: Genesis 3. Sin pleads, Has God said ye shall not eat of every
tree? no it is not so, the law is your hinderance; God knows when ye shall
eat, that ye shall be like God himself. Hence rises an irritation or
provocation of the law, when man expounds him, as a bridle to his liberty,
therefore he labors to pull his ne^ke from such a yoke: now a work of
contrariety comes from their natures; and here the law works by his own
force: for as often as we conceive the law to be our enemy, it will wrestle
with us, and before we are aware the law gives us the fall; and this is called
fighting against God, when men will be more wise and strong then God; therefore
Job 9.4. he is wise in heart, and mighty in strength: who has been fierce
against him, and has prospered? and in this regard no strange accident befell
the devils and men, when they would become disputers with the law of their
maker. The Smith that has his hammer often beating against the inward parts of
his hands, has them hardened even by that mutual opposition: so the heart of
man often beating against the hammer of Gods law, is hardened and made
senseless, until God mollify it by his saving grace.

being, and the other no being, that which is being is always to be
conceived for the knowledge of the other: I could not tell what darkness were
but for the light: so sin being a privation, can no otherwise be known but
by his contrary, and that is the law; except it had bin for the law, there
would have bin no knowledge of sin: again, being is before not being;
therefore the law being before sin, detemins of sin long before he be, in
his nature, in his use, or in his end: and why should we deny unto God the
determination of sin, long before he had any existence? God must needs know
man's fall long before it was, and determine of it.

action and passion, therefore betwixt the law and sin, must there needs be
action and passion, the weaker must always suffer: and good reason that sin
should suffer of the law, yea and oftentimes punish it self with it self: but
this is not for the first entrance of sin, for man was holy until his first
sin, which could not punish a former sin: yet for action and passion, it is
true in the first sin, for in that sin man did fight against God: hence no
marvel if the law, stroke him out at the first brunt. A man that will fight
with the stone wall, may have his fingers easily stricken out of joint: and so
man being compassed about with Gods law, as a wall of defense, might most
cafily break himself in pieces, when he labored either to leap against it,
or else skippe over it.

wrath, and to make his power known, suffer with long patience the vessels of
wrath prepated to ^estruction? who has resisted his will? Now if the question
be, whether the law was determined to refist man before he fell, it is easily
answered: The law was not to prepare for man, when man took the battle in
hand: he is an improvident General that has all to do, when his enemies are
in the field up in arms against him: but the wise God of heaven and earth
could not be out of readiness, when the rebellious angeli, and mankind meant to
wage war with him and his law, he had prepared yrons, and harrowes, sawes
and gybets to bring all his enemies under them, and after to imprison them in
hell for ever. Romans 9.23.
Yet what and if he would declare the riches of his glory upon the vessels of
mercy, which he has prepared unto glory, long before they need any
redemption? And this is a fifth way for the entrance of sin, even the
manifestation of his power.

Sixthly, 6. Position.
opposites being laid together, make things more eleare and evident; and one
opposite stirs up another, and they never cease quarrelling, until one have
gotten the victory, and so leads his enemy in fingular triumph. Pharaoh stirs
up God, and God stirs up Pharaoh; now if the question be, whether had the
first purpose to the battle; the Scripture says it for God, Romans 9.17.
yea and to Pharaoh too, that God may give him the challenge; and why should
the war be continued so long, but even for this same purpose, that God might
she we his power in Pharaoh, and that his name might be declared thorough all
the earth: neither is God in any fault, for he intended that Pharaoh alone
should fight for the kingdom of darkness; but God would fight for the clean
contrary, for his own name: and what is his name? surely his glorious
attributes. Exodus 34.6.7. and what are his attributes? all his virtues:
therefore God opposed Pharaoh for virtue; and the manifestation of his virtues
was his glory: but Pharaoh opposed God for vice, and therefore for his shame
and confusion. Contraries can do no better then fight, but always for a
diverse end and purpose: therefore, O man, Romans 9.20.
who art thou which pleadest against God? will thou needs make the opposition
worse? consider that thou art the thing formed, and therefore say not to him
that formed thee, why have thou made me thus? thou art the clay in the potters
hand, the lump is one, therefore be content to serve thy maker as a vessel of
honor or dishonor.

Seventhly contraries, 7. Position.
though they can never agree to the same thing, according to the same part, or
in the same respect, or in one and the self same time: yet they must both of
them be about the same thing, or else the opposition cease. If I should say, a
man is blind and not blind, it were no contradiction, if I understand his
blindness of two diverse subjects, to wit, he is not blind in his body, but
blind in his soul; therefore the law and man's sin, Gods will and man's will, are
not opposed, except we conceive it to be about one and the self same thing:
therefore though sin be against Gods decree, will, and law, yet may both sin,
man's will, Gods decree, will, and law, all be about one thing, and that is Gods
glory: and so for Gods glory, sin may be decreed, willed, and approved by
the law, yet for all this have no agreement at all with sin: and thus much
for the entrance of sin.

The progress of sin, is to be considered in the effects, Sins progress.
and consequents of the first sin; for out of that did spring the whole
misery of man. The effects are three blame, or guilt, or punishment: blame is
the next effect of the fault committed; guilt is the tying of us to undergo
punishment; punishment is the just anger of God upon Adam and all his
posterity.

The subject of this punishment, is the devil, his instruments, and man: to
pass by the two former, and come to man. His punishment is either sin or
death: sin original and actual original, the exorbitation of the whole
man, both inward and outward; inward in himself, outward in the government of
the creatures: actual, the iarring of man upon outward objects, by reason of
natural, or original exorbitation; every thing he meets withal either in
thought, word, or deed, is either a sin of commission, or omission: death is
the deprivation and loss of life, and thereby subjection unto misery.

The progress being clear, let us see how God works in it. For the blame,
God is altogether to be freed; for the guilt, that likewise is a thing that
nothing concerns God; let man look to both these. Punishment.
But the third, which is punishment, being an act of his justice, and
respecting his holy law, is a thing that only he acknowledges. For death, we
need make no question, but the whole controversy is about sin as a
punishment. Matter, contrat^etie^ ^onse^^^^^.
In the punishment, we may note three things: the matter, with which a man is
punished; the contrariety between the party and the punishment; and the
order of consequence, that where such an offense went before, such an evil
shall follow, to make the party offending feel the smart of it. In those
punishments which be punishments only, and not sins, God is the author of
all these things, implied in the nature of punishment: in those which be
punishments and sins, God is the author only of the order of consequence,
and the contrariety between them, and the party punished: not of the matter,
wherewith they are afflicted and punished. As for example; pride is punished by
envy; envy is not of God, but the contrariety between it and the soul of
man, which makes it bitter and afflictiue is; and the order of consequence,
that where pride went before, envy must follow. The reason that iustifies
this, is fetched from the rule of reason: all contrariety is a wisdom of God,
for it is a logical argument: and therefore if Logic be Gods wisdom, then
every rule in Logic. The other is justified by method, which can not be
without him that is the God of all order: the order of sin is, that original
should follow the first actual sin, and then all actual sin, original;
this order is a wisdom o^ God: for sin in his own nature is mere
confusion, and his order must needs be Gods: and so God professes that he will
do in this place, set men's sins in order.

Furthermore, God does not only punish one sin with another, where there is
such a dependence of one upon the other, that where one goes before, the other
must follow; but oftentimes, when there is no such necessary dependence, yet
he withdraws his grace, and for the punishment of one sin, lets men
run into another. In this sense, there are three things attributed to God, in
the punishment of wicked and godless men. 1. the blinding of their
understanding. 2. the hardening of their hearts. 3. the giving of them up unto
a reprohate sense: Esa. 6.10. Make the heart of this people fat, their cares
heavy, and shut their eyes, etc.

These things God is said to do three ways. 1. in denying grace, which should
lighten the understanding, and soften and mollify the hearts of men. 2.
permitting Satan to work upon them, and no way either strengthening them
against him, or weakening his force. 3. occasionally and by accident, when God
does that which is good, which yet he knows through the evil disposition
that is in men, will increase their wickedness, and make it greater then it was
before. Efficienter (...) effecta, moraliter vt iudi^ia, permissiue vt peccata,
non concedendo sed non unpediendo.
To this agree other Divines, that say God works in the progress of sin, 1.
positiuely, as it is a physical act. 2. morally, as he makes it a just
punishment of sin. 3. permissiuely, as it is a sin, not by giving his
consent unto the doing, but in not hindering of them from the execution.

Lastly, for both entrance and progress, a double action is given unto God: 1.
limitation, 2. direction. For the first, that God sets bounds to wicked men
in their wickedness, not only in respect of the effect and event, but also in
the very inward purpose, affections, and designs, and at his pleasure stops
them when he will, is a thing denied of none that confess a God. Job. 1.12.
The devil was limited how far he should proceed in afflicting Job: neither
Matthew. 8.31. could he enter so much as into a heard of swine, without leave
obtained of Christ: the proudest sea must stay her waves, where Gods lays his
command.

Secondly, for direction that is most necessary, he puts no sin into men,
yet he directs it for the kind, that it should be rather this sin then
another, rather against these persons then others, and the time when it shall
break forth, and for what end and purpose it shall be committed. For often men
are wicked in that sort, which had rather show it in another kind; it breaks
forth at such a time, when they would feign have kept it close; and it falls
upon such men, which they had rather should have been done to others, whom
they more malign, and desire to despite, if they were left to themselves. God
may stop all ways of sinning, and open only one, yet without all fault. As
for example: suppose a man were in an high tower, and were fully determined to
cast himself down yet among many passages only one is open, and at that he
casts himself headlong; now why he fell rather this way then another, is
because the rest were stopped; yet he alone is guilty of his own death. ^.
Sam. 16.10.
Shemei is said of David, to curse, because God commanded; yet did God neither
inwardly nor outwardly fill his heart with malice: only David respects the
time, that God rather suffered it at this time to break forth, then at any
other, because now David was in extremity, and fit for him to be humbled,
seeing that Shemei durst not so much as open his mouth all the time of David's
prosperity. Job 1.21.
Job was robbed by wicked men, yet he confesses that God has taken, because
he directed that for his trial and patience. The Jews crucified Christ, yet
was it the determinate counseil of God, turning their wickedness and furious
malice, Acts. 2.23.
to the effecting of his own purposes.

III. Part, answering the places of Scripture that are brought to prove God
the author of sin.
Object. God decreed the selling of Joseph into Egypt: Genesis 45.8. Christ was
crucified of the Jews, according to Gods decree: Act, 2.23. and 4.28.

Ans. To decree any thing, has a special consideration of the end: now Gods
end in both these were exceeding good; first Joseph for a temporal
deliverance in the time of famine, Christ for a spiritual in the time of
sin: for the sin of their actions, God did only permit, and wrought it, as
before has bin showed.

Object. 2. Prou. 16.4. Romans 9.17.26. he that creates, and stirs up men to
sin, must needs be the author of sin.

Ans. God determines the end of all men's sinning, that he himself will be no
cause, but leaves man to himself; yet so as he will limit, direct, and punish,
whatsoever he shall do amiss.

Object. 3. 1. Sam. 24.1. 2. Sam. 16.10. 2. Kin. 22.20. and 11.37. and
12.15.24. 2. King. 10.30. Job. 1.21. Esa. 10. v. 5.15. and 13.17. Ier. 51.1.
Ezech. 12.13. Psalm. 105.25. Matthew. 6.13. where God is said to impell men to
sin, and use them as instruments to produce sinful actions.

Answ. It is one thing to incline the will, an other thing to make the will
evil, and so to incline it, that it is not to sin, but to judgment and
punishment: The Judge inclines the executioner to put away the malefactor, but
if he do it of private malice, it is his own sin: Shemei sinned in his
private malice, yet David acknowledged Gods secret judgment. There be three
things in the works of wicked men: 1. motion: secondly the (...), or
inordination of that motion; and Gods hidden judgment: the first and the last
are Gods by dispensation; the second by permission; not bare and naked, but
first in denial of grace, secondly permitting Satan to work upon them,
thirdly by occasion of some good, permitting their evil disposition to abuse
it; but to incline, persuade, or impell the will to evil before it have any
thought or inclination, is a hellish blasphemy: the will being evil is
driven like a charet of the devil, and runs apace, and the Lord in just
judgment blows upon it, and in their running runs them headlong into hell
fire.

Object. 4. Exodus 4.21. Deuteronomy. 2.30. 1. King. 12.15. Job 12.16.24. Isa. 19.14.
and 63.17. Ier. 20.7. Ioh. 12.39. Romans 1.24.26.28. Romans 9.18. 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.
God is said to harden the heart, and blind the eyes.

Ans. God does this by substraction and denial of that grace, which should
lighten the understanding, and soften and mollify the hearts of men: this
substraction is to be understood of that grace which God might justly hold from
man: secondly, men being hardened in their sins, and blinded in their minds,
do still in crease their hardness by fighting against God and his law, as you
have heard before.

Object. 5. 2. Sam. 12.11. Luke 2.34. Romans 9.33. Esa. 8.14. Ese. 18.16. and
45.7. Amos 3.6. God in all these places is said to do evil.

Ans. Here is to be understood the evil of punishment, which is an act of
Gods most pure and unblameable justice.

Here likewise in few words may we clear Calvine and other of our orthodoxall
writers from Bellarmines calumniations. Calvin and the rest, seem to digest
all their judgment in these few positions concerning Gods simple
determination of man: First, what he meant to bestow upon him, to wit, so much
perfection that both in duty he ought, and in respect of ability he might if
he would have continued in his integrity; and therefore his creation was his
happiness, and there was found no necessity why he should fall into misery:
this is the first.

The second is, what he meant to deny unto him; to wit, that free
confirmation of his estate, without which God saw he would not continue, but
most certainly fall away from God his creator: now if God had bestowed this
upon him, then had there been no way for eating and dying, for then would God
have kept away the devil confirmed his will, put that fear into his heart,
whereby he should never have departed from him. And that this is the truth, we
may see it by comparing of our estate in innocence, and in grace: in the
estate of innocence God made with man the covenant of works, and so tied man
unto himself by the bond of love, Love the bond in creation.
which he left in man's nature; man brake this bond: hence came in religion,
properly so called, Faith in redemption.
a tying of man again in a second covenant, not of works, but of faith: now
if this bond were no surer then the former, it should argue God of the want of
wisdom: therefore God giving man this second bond, meant to tie him more
infallibly unto himself: this fear being put into his heart, shall make him
never depart from God. Thus then the Lord intended to deny man such a
confirmed estate, as now he has obtained in Christ.

Thirdly, that God did foreknowe most certainly, In things poss^ble, but not
to be done, there is a bare prescience: but (...) things possible, and to be
do^^ both prescie^^^ and purpose.
what would fall out, upon the bestowing of such benefits only, and the
denying of others; namely, sin and Apostasy: neither was this in their
indgement a prescience, presupposing no purpose nor decree; for then would not
God so have bestowed, and denied, except according to that proportion he had
intended a further end in man. For I would ask this question; Why did God
bestow so much as was sufficient to set him in state of happiness, and deny
him that which should have confirmed him in the same, except he intended a
further end by his fall? consider well the ends of man, and we must now upon
the event, be constrained to grant a further end, then either Papists or
Lutherans do profess. For I constantly affirm, Man has a more general end
then that of creation, fall, or redemption.
that it is blasphemy to say, that the end of man, as created, was any thing
but happiness; neither from thence arises any other demonstration; Man, qua
creatus, as created, is in no intention but happiness: come to his fall, and
then again I say, homo qua lapsus, est miser tantum, man as fallen, is only
to be considered as miserable: as redemptus, or redimendus, only sub salute,
or saluandus, where then is the end of man? As man, generally considered,
electus or reprobus, elect or reprobate, these be the most general: and here
only reprobation and election, is (...), truly first and primarily: i^ all
the rest, gratia huius, for this cause; therefore happiness of creation, misery
of the fall, salvation by Christ, are subordinate and come under it. Indeed I
confess that election and reprobation have their manifestation to the
creature, only in redemption, and in that part which is the application of it
unto the church in general; here only both angels and men, know and feel
their state of election; and on the contrary, reprobation is there to be
sought for of the wicked.

But Bellarmine says, A defense of Calvin.
that Calvin denies Gods determination, decreeing what shall be, to depend on
his prescience, and that in all things his prescience presupposes his purpose
and decree. For answer whereunto we must consider, whether there go any
prescience in God before his will (I mean according to our apprehension,
Whether the Lord understand or will first.
and as things are revealed to us, out of God in his works) my reason is this,
because if the Lord understand it, then it is a possible being: now I press
my argument, that every being, whether possible to be, or already existing,
is demonstrated from his will; for his will makes things to be, or possibly to
be; therefore if a thing must be before it can be understood; and to be,
howsoever conceived, yet is from Gods will that gives all beeings, either in
posse or esse, I know not what can be, that first comes not from his will. But
wisdom according to sobriety is commendable, and in high mysteries it is good
to go with the current of our best approved divines: therefore according to
the way trodden before me, Intelligentia diuina.
I answer: There is a double prescience, one simplicis intelligentiae, and
another diuinae visionis; the first is of all those things that are possible,
and which upon any supposed condition may be; as was the prescience of God,
whereby he foreknew, that if in Tyrus and Sidon those things should be done,
which afterward were done among the Jews, they would repent: this does not
presuppose the decree of God, but extends to many things God does not decree,
nor purpose to be, as it appears in the example proposed. The other is of
those things only which hereafter shall be, and this always presupposes
some act of Gods will: for seeing nothing can be, unless some act of Gods will
do pass upon it, at least not to hinder the being of it; and thus nothing can
be foreseen, as being hereafter for to be, unless some decree of God pass
upon it: Of this kind of prescience, Calvin speaks, and not of the other; it
was not considered what it was possible for the creature to do, or what he
would do being so created, and left unto it self: this may well be said, to
presuppose no decree of God, or determination what he would do: for if it had
pleased God, he might have turned the possibility to another end and issue;
but the truth is that other, to wit, what hereafter shall be, which though it
be future and therefore contingent, yet to God it is most certain, with whom
all future things are present: and therefore being to be done, was most
certainly decreed; and whatsoever is done and come to pass, we may
absolutely conclude it was Gods will, even long before it happened; therefore
Calvin rightly affirms, that Gods foresight of the entrance of sin,
presupposed his decree, that it should enter.

Fourthly, Gods foreknowledge and purpose in sin, Sin (...) dec^^^^ that
God might ^^nis^^
upon the bestowing of such benefits of his rich and abundant goodness, was
not that man should fall, that he might punish, but that man should freely make
his choice; upon which choice the Lord both knew and purposed, that his justice
and mercy should be manifested: yet for all this it will not follow, that the
Lord should purpose the entrance of sin originally out of his own liking,
that he might have matter of punishment, Bel^arm^^^ false expos^^^ of Calvin.
as Bellarmine most injuriously charge Calvin to affirm; but the end of his
purpose of bestowing such benefits only, and no other, notwithstanding his
foreknowledge what would fall out, if so he did, was, that he might show his
mercy and justice, in saving and condemning whom he would. Therefore it is
idle in Bellarmine to follow this argument of the severity of justice; as
though Calvin should any where affirm, that when God thought of creating man,
the first end that God purposed, was the severity of his justice, and the
riches of his mercy: and that this purpose was before and without respect unto
the prescience of any thing, that afterward might or would be in man; and that
because there was not any thing wherein he could show mercy and justice,
unless sin did enter: therefore secondly, he purposed that sin should
enter; so that first he purposed to punish, before he saw any cause; and then
purposed the entrance of sin, that there might be cause; which is no less
excusable from injustice, cruelty, and tyranny, then if he should purpose to
punish, and so do without any cause at all: therefore he concludes, that the
first original and spring of sin, is from the will of God, according to
Caluins opinion. Answer to Bellarmine for his false imputation upon Calvin
But he is easily answered, out of that which has been spoken concerning
Calvin's judgment in this point: for he does no where say, that God did purpose
the manifestation of his mercy and justice before all prescience, but only
that which is named prescientia visionis, which always has Gods decree going
before it. The possibility of a thing is, before God decree it to be, and so
God knows it simplici intelligentia: but that this thing possible shall be, the
Lord decrees it before that bare knowledge that it shall come to pass.

Secondly, Calvin denies not all p^escience before his decree.
Calvin does no where pronounce, that simply and absolutely the end wherefore
God purposed to make man, was the manifestation of the severity of his
justice, and the riches of his mercy, or that he might save some, and condemn
others; but that first he meant to bestow upon man as much as was sufficient to
make him perfect: fecondly, there was something he meant to deny him, How God
sh^w^d his ius^^ce and mercy
which being done, God knew he would fall: therefore in the third place,
being assured that he would fall into sin and apostasy, made his sin and
apostasy a way to a greater good, then the world otherwise could ever know:
fourthly, his purpose was not earatione, to bring in this former good, but for
this former good, God was content that man should fall; yet without any
imputation to God, seeing he gave him all that could be required by the estate
of his creation. And surely against this, neither Bellarmine, nor any other can
except: indeed he heaps up infinite testimonies and reasons against him, and
other Divines.

Therefore seeing the matter is so weighty, and that reasons are brought both
to dishonor God, and bring a blasphemous report upon his faithful servants, I
will according to mine own apprehension, object that which may be objected,
either from appearance of reason, or from testimonies of the writings of our
best Divines. And the rather I will do it, because Bellarmine triumphs in
nothing more then this, That Gods does not only, permit the wicked to do much
mischief, and the godly to suffer an hard measure at their hands; but also
does praesidere ipsorum malis voluntatibus, eosque regere and gubernare,
torquere ac flectere in ijs inuisibiliter operando: that is, does not only
suffer them, but also places his regiment in their evil wills, rules them,
gouernes them, nay does wreath, bend, and bow by working in them inuisibly.
This is more then to impell, which is the worst word, that he can snatch out of
our writers. And therefore seeing all Divines run so much to Gods ordering of
sin, and Bellarmine makes it as Delph^cus gladius, Apollos sword, to cut
asunder all Gordian knots, I will the more liberally insist upon it, being so
direct with my text.

Reasons objected to make God the author of sin.
Object. 1. Because whereof God is the cause, thereof he is the author; but he
is the cause, because every positive act or being is from God; and sin is of
this nature: which I show in the first sin. 2. in original sin, which
springs from that. 3. in sins of omission and commission, the fruits of
original. 4. First sin objected.
from the subject. 5. from the nature of habits. From the first finne, because
no circumstance, or manner of eating the forbidden fruit, is the sin; but the
very action it self: because that is forbidden in substance, and not in
circumstance. 2. Original.
Original sin is not a mere privation, want, or defect; but also an
inclination, and pronnesse to all evil: therefore it is said to reign in our
members, carry us headlong to all impiety, and work mightily in us. 3. In
sins of omission and commission, Omission. Commission.
first because God does not only know that he will permit, but also he is
resolved that he will not co-worke with men and angels, to the producing of a
necessary act: and therefore by consequent omits: and again, he knows that
he will not cooperate, to free men and angels from an act that is forbidden,
and so by consequent does commit. 2. a greater difficulty is this, seeing that
sins of commission, and omission are distinguished: And therefore in
commission, there must be some thing beside omitting of that which is
commanded; and that can be nothing but doing: and therefore the difference can
be nothing but some positive act: neither is the substance of this act one
thing, and the deformity an other: but the act it self, which should not be
done, is out of form, order, and rule, and is repugnant to the rule of
righteousness: therefore this kind of sin being positive, has a positive
cause: neither is the will of man, only the cause of it, but God also, even of
the deformity of it, as well as the substance; seeing the deformity in a
sin of commission, is nothing else but the very substance of the act which is
done, but ought not to be done.

Fourthly, The subject of sin.
from the subject: every sin is in that subject out of which the goodness is
expelled, and therefore though it have not formam vel materiam constitutiuam,
tamen est in subiecto vnde recessit habitus, that is, though it have no matter
or form for his being, yet it comes into that subject where goodness was, and
possesses his room; therefore is more then merum ens rationis, a conceit of
the brain: and being something, extra conceptum intellectus, more then the
work of reason, is being, and therefore from God, from whom all being is.

5. Habits objected
Lastly, it is an habit, and they be qualities, and every quality is being,
therefore from God. These and such like, are arguments that the wittiness of
corrupt reason, may make against God, that is so pure and holy, that he can no
ways be a God that wills any iniquity.

Ans. 1. The first argument is answered by this distinction: to eat of the
forbidden fruit, is either a natural act, or a moral act; A natural act, a
moral act.
as a natural act, it is no sin: and this is the very being of that action,
and in this God works: the second, which is a moral act, is not absolute,
but relative and respective to the divine law of God; and this was only man's
act, which did refuse to give his respect, and due obedience to this law.

2. Ans. To the second I answer; original sin is considered either
materially, or formally. Materially, according as all the faculties of man are
set a running: and this is positive, and from God, that carries all things with
restless motions. The formalitie is the (...), or exorbitation and wheeling
awrong of all the faculties: and this is done either by the freewill of man, or
the law of God; that being opposed, as an enemy punished man, and by his
abuse, turned him out of the way of righteousness: and therefore as a just
judgment of God, the sin is called a punishment, and so being: again,
working out of man's will as in concreto, is likewise called being, by reason
of his subject who gives him power to work, and is inclined by it: but the
mere formalitie, and the sin in abstracto, considered without the subject,
and in opposition to virtue and goodness, is mere nothing.

3. Ans. To the third, this must be answered; First, First for omission.
that God gave both men and angels sufficient for the estate of their creation,
to make them able to stand, yet not so much that they should be confirmed to
stand: therefore if God had not co-operated in regard of the first, he had
sinned in omitting and committing; but for the second, it was not necessary
that God should cooperate and confirm them in their estate of goodness. To
the second difficulty, Secondly commission.
the Doctors of the Church of Rome have made it, and affirm it: Respectu
peccati commissionis duplex est deformitas, prima carentia rectitudinis debitae
inesse voluntati elicienti actum quem non habet: secunda est ipse actus
elicitus quem deus prohibet.
Occam in sent. lib. 3. quest. 12. says there is a double deformity of the
sin of commission; first, the want or privation of that rectitude which ought
to be in the will, making his own choice of an action which he ought not:
secondly, the very act that is drawn out of this will, is a deformity
forbidden of God: so then besides the wills deformity, the act it self is a
deformity. Other Divines understand, by the deformity found in sin, the
want of rectitude, or omission of due circumstances: and thereupon say, there
is no cause of it, but privative only: but Occam understands (as you have
heard) by the deformity of a sin of commission, the act it self done
without due circumstances, without which it should not be done; and so seeks
a positive cause of it. If any of our Divines should have affirmed this, how
would Bellarmine have handled them, and imputed strange and outrageous
blasphemies against them. Cameracensis in lib. sentent. lib. 1. q. 13. art. 1.
and q. 14.
Of this opinion are many other of their Doctors, as may well be seen in
Cameracensis. Hugo de S. vict. erud. theol. de sacram. lib. 1. part. 4. cap.
12. and 13.
Scotus l. 1. did. 41. q. Vnica sola permissio aliculus actus, and certitudo
de permissione non facit certitudinem de illo actu, quia opportet habere
aliqua^ causam effectiua^: igitur ex hoc quod deus praescit se velle permittere
Luciforum peccare, ex hoc inquam solo non videtur quod sciat Luciferum
peccaturum, soluitur haec obiectio, quia deus non solum scit se permissurum,
sed etiam scit se non cooperaturum ei ad actum necessarium and per consequens
onuttet; and scit se cooperaturum ad substan iam actus prohibiti sine debitis
circumstantijs, and per consequens committet.
Scotus another great doctor says, Gods bare permission of some action, and
certitude of his permission, makes not any certitude of that action; because it
ought to have some effectual cause: therefore for as much as God did foreknow
that he would permit Lucifer to sin, from this it could not be that the
objection of Lucifers fall should be answered; seeing that God does not only
know it, but also knows that he will not co-oporate with him to the producing
of a necessary act; and therefore withdrawing, he omits as well as Lucifer:
for how should Lucifer but omit, when the first cause withholds his influence,
and again the Lord that he will cooperate to the substance of an act
forbidden; and therefore it follows that God commits it. What blasphemies
would these be in the mouths of Calvin, and others? yet good divinity in the
schools of Rome. But thus they expound themselves, that God works, decrees,
and wills the deformity that is found in the sins of commission, not by
his antecedent will, whereby he works things out of his own liking, but by
his consequent and conditional will, whereby presupposing the purpose of
suffering his creature to auert and turn from him, he still intends to
move, impell, and carry them forward, though being by their own fault out
of the way, he carries them thither whither they should not go: first, say
they, by substraction of grace, upon the withdrawing whereof he saw the
creature would turn from him, he purposed to suffer the sin of auersion or
omission to enter: secondly, this purpose being presupposed, and foreseeing
that which would follow upon it, in his consequent and conditional will, he
positiuely decreed the other, which is of commission. Man by creation was made
to seek an infinite good, and love it infinitely; which if he omit to seek in
God, then must he needs commit the contrary, and seek it in himself: for so
God decreed, that man not continuing to adhere unto him, should fall into
self- love, pride, and all evils of that kind. All this might be borne
withal, save only they make deformity of the essence of an action, which
cannot be borne withal: for indeed it is so far from agreeing with an
action, that he will not suffer him to take up any dwelling in him: and
therefore I proved before in exposition of those words [These things have thou
done] that no action was the subject of sin; and therefore well might the
action be caused of God without all fault of his. But to answer the doubt. 1.
They differ, in that omission is a moral defect, but commission is a moral
act; the one is not doing morally that which is commanded, and the other is a
moral doing of that which is forbidden. 2. The one looks at the law, as
commanding, but denies his act; the other at the law, as forbidding, and yet
performs his act. Now the will of God is positiuely carried unto neither of
both; but permissiuely to the creature, and accidentally to the effect. Yet you
will object; then God permits that which he wills not, and if he will it not,
how can it be done? Here I dare not be so bold as our Divines are, though I
think we have all one meaning; that Gods will is first carried upon his
permission; secondly upon the thing permitted: As his will is carried upon his
own permission, he wills that absolutely, and by an affirmative act, but as
upon the thing permitted, it is non impedire, not to hinder it; and that is
actus negativus. And this must be taken notice of, because Gods will must have
some thing to intercede, and come betwixt it self and sin: for a will
immediately carried upon sin, is always sinful: therefore permission
coming betwixt Gods will, and sin, frees God from the action of sin.

To the fourth objection, I answer, that priuations are either considered as
opposites with their habits, or as adjuncts with their subjects: in the first
consideration, the habit is that which does affirm it self to be existent,
or in nature may be existent: the privation clean contrary, denies this to be
in nature, nay worse then that, shows that he is expelled from such a subject,
which now makes him appear, as though he were the Lord of the house, and bear
the full dominion. As life is a natural thing, death comes and says, there
shall be no life in this subject; and when life is gone, the subject makes
death appear, as though he were the commander of life's habitation: night comes
and says, where now is light? and because no man can see the light, he is
feign to give darkness a good word, and say he has possessed the circle of
the world: yet neither will the world confess he has received any being by
darkness, or the subject of life any further existence by the presence of
death. Therefore he is neither being in himself, or giving being to his
subject, but taking away a being: yet because the subject into which he is
received, by reason that he always looks upon his adiunct, gives him the
denomination of being, as long as he rests with him; yet in his simple nature
the never can be so considered, but as a mere tyrant to being and essence;
which agree so ill, that if the one come, the other must be gone. And this is
the reason why original sin is said to reign; which could not be, but for
our members which give him leave to stay with us. The Ivy has no root or
existence from a proper principal of life, but most lovingly embraces the
Oak, and for all his strength, the Ivy will eat out his heart, secretly, and
bring him to death: so sin has no root of his own, yet most familiarly be
closes with our nature, and eats out the heart of all goodness within us, and
speedily brings us unto misery.

For the last objection: sin is called an habit and quality, therefore
being. The answer is, as sin is habitus in subiecto, it has that name: yet
properly, sin is no habit: for it is always his negation and opposite,
therefore can not properly have the name of his opposite: yet being crept into
virtues closet, desires to put on his habit, that so he may have the more love
and welcome; as tyrants when they have gotten the kingdom of lawful Princes,
will be very glad to put on any title that might please them, whom they desire
to become their subjects; and for this cause will be content to change their
names: so sin, a mere tyrant, will mask it self in the habit of virtue,
that so we may esteem the better of him, and willingly subject our selves to
his intolerable yoke.

Objections from the testimonies of our Orthodoxall Divines, whereby they are
said to have made God the author of sin.
Object. 1. The objection may be formed according to these four heads: 1. from
Gods will. 2. from the effect of his will, his decree. 3. from the subject of
his decree, man. 4. from the end, reprobation of man. The argument in general
is thus framed; They which make the will of God evil, his decree (causam
energeticam) an effectual cause of sin, the will of man compelled to sin,
and his end everlasting punishment, without consideration of sin; make God
the author of sin: but this is defended by our Divines. I will at large
enforce every objection, because it is one of the most damnable opinions that
blasphemously the Papists urge us withal.

The objections against our Divines, concerning Gods decree.
Object. 1. That they make the will of God evil, it may thus be pressed;
Voluntas mala dicitur a volitione mala, volitio mala est quae fertur in
obiectum non debitum: obiectum non debitum est malum; ergo, volitio mala est,
qua quis vult malum, and qua vult malum fieri: distinctly, that will is evil,
whose act of willing is evil; the act of willing is evil, which is carried
upon an unlawful object; Vell^ man velle melur^ (...) sunt idem.
now an unlawful object is nothing but evil: All this is laid upon our
Divines, to attribute it to God; which seems thus to be proved; He that wills
sin to be, or that it may fall out, either whereby he may sport himself, as
Nero did when he had set Rome on fire; or else that he may use it for some good
end, as he that bids a man take poison that he may show his art in curing him:
or another steal that he may cover the naked, or feed the hungry, is all one
as to will the sin it self. The truth of this is thus cleared; to will sin
to be, or exist, or happen, is all one with sin it self: For first, what is
the being of sin, but sin it self; and what is the existence of sin,
but that it exists from that being; and this existing or standing out of the
causes of his being, what is it but the event? so then as God wills sin to
be, exist, or happen; so he wills sin it self: God as he loves not sin,
so he loves that sin should not be, exist, or happen: he wills again that
sin should be, exist, and fall out for his glory: and with as good reason may
he be said to will sin for his glory: so that no difference is, or can be
given, betwixt the willing of sin, and sin to be, exist, or fall out. If it
shall be resolved; God wills, non impedire peccatum, sed permittere peccatum,
that is, Distincta sunt (...).
not to hinder and stop sin, but permit it to be; this will not free the
speech; for these three things are distinct, first to will sin not to be,
that is, to hinder it that it shall not be: secondly, to will it to be, or
fall out: thirdly, to will to permit it, or not to hinder it. The two former
are affirmative acts, and work for the willing or not willing of the thing: the
third is a negative act, willing but not working; this permission in willing,
is an act; but in working a negation; first not to hinder others in their
liberty and power: secondly, not to help, but yield the whole carriage of the
sin to themselves, and their own free wills, yet hereby explorare, to try
and prove what they would do: and secondly upon his evil doing, to make way,
that for evil doing, the Lord might do well, and become man's greater
benefactor. Again, to will sin for a good end, is no excuse of this evil:
non sunt facienda, imo nec volenda mala vt eueniant bona: we must not do, nay
not so much as will evil, Velle. perp^^rare.
that good might come thereof: for the first sin is to will; the second to
do: and he sins that wills evil, though he does it not.

A third consideration to excuse the point is, how sin can be the object of
Gods will: Here it is said of our Divines, that sin in his causes and
circumstances, (...), wholly considered, has a double respect; one to man as
sin, another to God decreeing it as good: but this seems also with a dry
finger to be defaced, it needs no washing, for it washes away it self: seeing
all Gods considerations of sin, are of sin as it is sin: he permits it,
not as good but evil, yet his permission is good: he punishes sin as sin,
he forbids it as sin, he forgiues it as sin: he decrees his permission; and
this coming betwixt sin and Gods decree, gives him liberty to produce what
good he can out of it, not qua bonum, as good, but as sin and evil: the
reason is good, every thing has his best consideration according to his
definition: And thus much from Gods will to the object.

A second thing that they impose upon our men is, Contradiction put upon Gods
will.
that they make God in his will contradict himself; to will sin to be, and
to will sin not to be, are contradictorie: these cannot differ respectively,
but (...) and integris essentijs, simply and in their whole being: if there be
any difference, then either of the will it self, or the act, or the object;
not of the will, for first he cannot will it, voluntate beneplaciti, with his
secret will; for that always wills the best: nec voluntate signi, with his
revealed will; for we are sure his law forbids it: neither with both together;
for then if the one should will it, then likewise should the other; but we are
sure that Gods revealed will hates sin, and the very being of sin;
therefore no will in God that would sin to be, and not to be. Again, for the
act of his will, we say it is threefold in the creatures, first, (...), that
is, according to his good pleasure: this God approoues, effects, and is
delighted with it; and that can no ways be carried to two contrary objects,
as to will sin to come to pass, and to will it not to come to pass. The
second act is, (...), Gods dispensation; and this belongs to providence, where
God wills no evil thing to happen, yet upon the accident will he dispose of it:
A careful master of a family wills not evil to happen in his house, yet he is
careful to dispose of any evil accident; and this has nothing to do with
Gods deeree. The third action is, (...), and here it is true, that God does
permit sin; but to permit sin, comes far short of willing sin to be:
and for the object that is most certain, that the very terms are
contradictorie, to will sin to be, and to will it not to be: wherefore
finding neither contrary wills to bring forth contrary acts, nor contrary
acts about one subject, nor one subject to be applied to contrary acts, we
conclude, to will sin to be, and not to be, to defend contradiction.

Thirdly, they make Gods will to have evil effects, as to incline to finne, to
harden not only by desertion, but actiuely, and positiuely, yea to impell,
constrain, command Satan and wicked men to conceive, plot, and attempt
mischeife. nay more, efficaciter procurare, effectually to procure that they
perform the same, etc. And thus much concerning the first argument, drawn from
that which they seem to impose upon Gods will. I will produce the rest of the
arguments, and then I will resolve them.

2. Object. The second general argument, is from Gods decree: that which makes
Gods decree an effectual cause of sin, makes God himself the author of sin,
but this seems to be done by our Divines: ^um effi^ax pe^m
first, because they make Gods decree of sin not a bare permission, and then
must it needs be the other, which is effectual: for betwixt the permissiue
decree of sin, and effectual, there is no mean; and therefore either the
one or the other: and that they make it not the permissiue, it will appear if
we consider these three things, primo, quod deus vult vt fiat, E^ficere,
impedire, p^^mttere.
hoc efficaciter efficit: secundo, quod vult vt non fiat, hoc efficaciter
impedit: tertio, quod neque vult vtifiat, neque vult vtmon fiat, hoc permittit
creaturae: that is, that which God would have to be, that God effects:
secondly, that which God will not have to be, that he effectually hinders:
thirdly, that which he neither would to be, or not to be, that he permits unto
the creature. Now our men will not have Gods decree to be of this third kind,
and therefore must it be one of the former; not the second, for if God should
will to hinder sin, then it could not be; and if the first, to will sin to
be, then must he needs effect it efficaciter, and so an effectual decree.

Secondly, I^^editio dei and euentus sunt causa and e^fe^tum.
the point is thus further urged; quod Deus non impedit, ideo euenit quia Deus
non impedit; and quod non est, ideo non est, quia Deus vult non esse: that is,
Gods not impedition, or hindrance, and the event that follows upon it, are
coupled together, as the cause and effect, and that immediately: therefore if
our Divines hold that man falls, because God does not hinder it, then must they
needs make Gods not impedition, or not hindering, an energeticall or operative
effecting of the event, existence, or being of sin. And this is further to
be pressed upon our Divines, by the consideration of a double sin; one of
commission, and another of omission: the one de vetito, of the thing forbidden,
and that is commission; the other de praecepto, of the thing commanded, and
that is omission. Now not to hinder a sin of commission, is by our Divines,
to concur to the very act, which cannot be done of man without sin; yea and
God is said so to concur, that he is the first cause of that act, man the
second; God moving man, and in that sort, that man necessarily must follow
Gods power in moving him, and so of necessity must produce this act: and
therefore the commission is principally laid upon God. Again, not to binder a
sin of omission, is (by their sentence) not to give man that grace whereby he
might be kept from the sin of omission, or made able to perform the
contrary: therefore God concurring to the first, and denying his grace to the
second, must needs commit and omit, that which man commits and omits. Nay more
then that, not only a concause, but a sole cause; because man can not resist
the motion of the first cause, and therefore cannot offend following an
irresistible motion, seeing he could not sin propria voluntate, but by Gods
compulsion. Here then it seems that the decree is effectual, 1. because not
barely permissiue, and 2. because they make the not hindering join with the
event, as a necessary cause.

But here they distinguish, first of the necessity of consequence, and the
necessity of a cause, or the reasons themselves; as if I should say, a man is
a lion, then the consequent is necessary, that he has four legs; yet the
reasons or parts are not necessary: for it is neither necessary that man
should be a lion, or four footed. But the answer may be infringed, that the
consequence is either of a proposition, or a syllogism: and then the
consequence which is the conclusion, follows by way of cause: as for the
example, if a man be a lion, then he is four footed, is a necessary
consequence: but now assume; a man is a lion, this is contingent, yea false;
and will never suffer the consequent to be concluded. But in Gods decree they
make it also to assume and infer the conclusion, and therefore a cause. As
for example; That which God has decreed, comes to pass; but man's fall is
decreed; therefore it comes to pass. Here Gods decree, can have no other force
of reason to press the conclusion, but a cause.

Secondly they answer, that the antecedent being granted, and from thence the
consequent concluded is causall, when there comes no middle cause betwixt them:
but God decrees that man should fall by his free will, coming betwixt the
fall, and Gods decree thereof. But this is no answer: for so man's free will,
came betwixt the Devils temptation, and the yiedling thereunto: and so the
Devil should be no cause of man's fall: this then is but a shift.

Thirdly they answer, that God may will that man should fall, and yet man might
fall by his own free will. The answer is ouerturned, because a man might have
fallen infallibly, and freely: but necessarily, and freely, can never stand
together. Infallibility is in respect of Gods infinite divine prescience: but
necessity is of the thing done, Infallibilitas est ^ognitionis imnustibilitas
rei.
which is immutable; and immutabilitie takes away all contingencie in the
thing, and consequently liberty: so then necessity, contingencie, and
liberty, can never stand together.

Fourthly, they answer, per desertionem nempe ipsius, and non collationem
necessary ad cauendum peccata auxilij: vnde sequitur hominem necessario
peccare, that is, by desertion of him, and not collation of necessary helps to
beware of sin, man fell necessarily: But this will not salve up the matter,
because God gave the law, therefore it was necessary that he should affoard
man all necessaries to obey him; otherwise the transgression might be given
unto God: but they will say, that Gods desertion, had man's free will to come
betwixt it and the fall: but to that it may be replied, then man deserved that
desertion. But the question is, whether man could will such a thing or no; if it
be said he could, then he sinned freely; but again how could he will this? if
it be answered, he could not, then surely God made him will it: if he could,
then what was the cause of it? surely they defend that God did forsake him,
before he willed to be forsaken, in that he forsook to give him that grace
which should have kept him from sin.

Lastly, there comes nothing betwixt Gods desertion, and man's willing of it;
if so, then either God or man must be the cause; not man, because he suffers
it, therefore God: and indeed they confess, that peccatum est merum
consequens decreti, a mere consequent of Gods decree, nothing interceding,
must necessarily be a cause. But they answer, this cause is deficient: for
desertion is but the taking away, not concurring: but this deficient cause was
a necessary cause, why Adam should fall, because he could not otherwise escape
it. And thus much from the Decree; now I come to man's will impelled to sin.

Object. 3. That man is compelled to sin, Nece^^^^e of Gods decree
it is first proved from the decree; grant the decree, and then man could not
abstain from the act of sin; if he could, then might he have frustrated Gods
decree: De^^ (...) of (...).
but that is impiety once to think; consilium enim deistat. Secondly, that
which makes the will to loose his liberty, must needs compel the will: the
liberty is gone, because it is not free ad opposita, but must needs incline
it self to one thing, and that necessarily. Neither are we here to conceive
coaction or violence; for the will has two motions, one of nature, another of
liberty: liberty is taken away, when the will is carried with his natural
motion; this is spontaneus assensus, a natural willing, which is always of one
thing. To be happy, is willed of all, but neither by violence, or freedom,
but natural inclination; for no man wills miscrie. Therefore Gods decree takes
away his liberty, but not his assent, to move naturally which way God would
have it. And though it be not constrained, yet can it not resist, neither
indeed would it resist, for this determination. Necessity and liberty cannot
stand together.
Thirdly and lastly, necessity takes away all liberty, because all liberty
is in contingent things. What liberty has a man over the fire, or any
immutable thing? Again, liberty is always with consultation: now
consultation is in things contingent. What man will consult whether the fire
burn? and surely God and man understands one truth, how then should I conceive
that necessary to God, which must be contingent to me? Contingencie and
necessity can never stand together. And to say Adam fell contingently, and yet
necessarily, is an impossibility. The principle of necessity is
immutabilitie, not infallibility. Certitude makes infallibility: that which
is certain, is infallible: Time changes not nature.
and so may a contingent thing be certain. Neither must we measure the thing by
time: for time is not of the essence of any thing, but a thing adjoined to all
created beeings. Now then, time past, present, or to come, change not the
nature of any being, but diversely qualify him. Was the thing contingent
before it fell out, then why should it be of the nature of necessity when it
is come to pass? has the time present made it otherwise then it was in time
past? Define me Adams fall; was it not an apostacy from God his Creator? this
is one thing, and is never changed: now necessity follows the nature of
things, and not of time in things. You grant it contingent until it came, was
not this a truth? and truth I am sure, pronunciat vti res est, pronounces as
the thing is: will you then make truth pronounce one thing before the thing
was, and another thing when it is? is the nature changed, because the time is
varied? then farewell all truths, and that common axiom, which is no more
common then true, That definitions of things, are not only to be conceived in
the present time, but also past and to come.

Let us examine the definition of contingencie and necessity. ^^e definition
of contingency
Contingencie, is that which is so true, that it may be false: is this only
for future? no, but thus; may be false, or might have bin false. I am sure you
will say, that man's fall might have bin false; for God might have decreed
otherwise: and therefore mark what you do affirm, to wit, that God might
change necessary truths; then may he make contradictions true. He may make a
man, and not reasonable; fire, but not hot. Let it then be what it will be, if
once it might have bin changed, it can never be made an unchangeable nature by
time. Achilles might have killed Hector; Saul might have fallen on his own
sword; Adam might have run into the finne of auersion from God. These before
they were done, you confess, were contingent: but Achilles has slain Hector,
Saul is fallen on his own sword, Adam is become an Apostata from God: now the
case is altered, and they are become necessary. But do you not understand
reason? tell me, I pray you; Achilles to kill Hector, Saul to fall on his
sword, Adam to sin, what arguments are they in reason? surely causes and
effects. Now to kill, and may kill; fall, and may fall; sin, and may sin,
what new invention have they brought into reason? are they not still cause and
effect? A man may laugh, therefore if he bring his faculty into exercise, it is
become necessary. Surely betwixt a reason in potentia, in power to argue, and
actu, there is no substantial change. The Coryphaeus of Logitians defines an
argument, quod est ad arguendum affectum, that is, which is affected to argue.
All men know, that the power of a thing, is more near the being then the act,
and therefore a thing can part with his act, but never with his power or
faculty. A man does not always laugh, nay he may always be a mourning
Heraclitus, yet he cannot part with the faculty. And if it was contingent for
Adam to fall, surely being fallen the cause is not altered, only that which
might be, is come to pass: That which I feared, says Job, is come upon me:
when he feared it, it was contingent; but now it is necessary: strange reason,
that for bringing a thing into act, that was in power to the act, or for a
little change of time, nature should be altered: fire will be fire wheresoever
it is, and nature will be nature whenever it is. Let any answer me this one
thing; did God intend to create all things necessary, or some things
necessary, and some things contingent? If all things necessary, then let us
become Stoickes: if some things contingent, then I ask when those contingent
things were made? did they then become necessary? where is then any contingent
thing made of God? Every thing you say is necessary, when it is: therefore
when God had made all things, all things were necessary. This kind of
discourse will hold no water: and for my part, away with this necessity. But
do you desire to know what a necessary thing is? then in a word it is this;
The definition of necessity.
That which is always true, and neither can, nor could be otherwise. To be
always true, is common to contingencie and necessity: for God with whom all
things are present, knew them always to be true, yet not necessary: but here
lies the difference, that neither can nor could be otherwise. Dare any affirm
this of Adam? surely then farewell all liberty, and make God the true cause of
sin: for beloved, immutabilitie and necessity are most principally in God,
and therefore from him: and where you find them, acknowledge God the author.
If then Adams fall was of this kind, it must needs be from God. This argument
shall be cleared, when I come to the answers.

4. Object. Is drawn from the end; or if you like not that, because may be you
will say, reprobation is not man's end, but Gods glory in reprobation:
therefore thus I frame the argument: Reprobation is a punishment; now our
Divines hold, that God reprobated man without consideration of his sin;
therefore he punishes man, and yet not for sin, which must needs be
injustice. That it is a punishment, I prove it thus; Punishments according to
the Schools, are either poena sensus, or poena damni; the punishment of sense,
lies in sensible torments; the punishment of the damned, by an Emphasis, is a
separation from God: now reprobation is a separation from God, because it is
Gods desertion of man: thus then if they make Gods will evil, the decree of
his will an effectual cause of sin, man's will necessarily thereunto
compelled, and reprobation man's end (or if you please) a means unto the same;
then will it follow, that they make God the author of sin: but all this you
see proved; and therefore our divines make God the author of sin. The
accusation is heavy: in love therefore unto Gods Saints, and the defense of
his faithful ministers, I will labor to resolve every one of these arguments.

The resolution of the former arguments.
To the first argument from Gods will, that he wills the being, existing, and
event of sin: I answer by this distinction, that there is a double being,
Gods willing of sin to be, is not the being of sin.
existing, or event of sin; in regard of a double cause: First, that which
man gives unto it, proceeding from his free will, and this is none of Gods: the
second is from God, and that is an existing, being, and event which God will
draw out of sin; and this is not sins being, existing, or event; but Gods:
therefore when they say, God wills that sin should be, that is, he wills a
being out of sin; first, his own glory: secondly, a better good then
otherwise man could have known: and this fiat, sit, eueniat, existat, (which
be the words of our Divines) is good: and that this is their meaning it is
clear: for say they, God wills sin to be for his glory; now sin in his
own nature is against his glory; therefore he cannot will the being of sin:
for then should he will against his glory; but he wills some event, being, or
existing, which he knows will make for his glory. Secondly, God wills sin
to be, exist, happen, from man only; but that is the first being of sin,
as the sinful action looks at the sinful man, whereof you heard before,
that a sinful action was only in sense an action, done by a sinful
person. But you will say, how should this be done without sin? I answer, here
God is first said to permi^it to be done: secondly to work it by accident: but
you will say, comes any thing to pass because God permits? yes, therefore it
comes to pass, because God will permit; for that which God will not permit,
cannot come to pass; and this he does most willingly: Now when God permits in
this sort, he is said not to concur with the worker of the thing; but leaves
him freely to himself: and this is that desertion which our Divines speak of;
for if God should have concurred to have produced in man the act of not willing
sin, and have confirmed him in the contrary, then man should not have
fallen: and this is that which Calvin affirms, that God gave Adam posse quod
voluit, sed non velle quod potuit: that is, to be able to do what he would,
but not to will that which he had power to will: therefore that not impedition,
permission, or desertion, was a cause why he did not will; but none why he did
will that which he did will. But you will object, that not to will was a sin,
and God was the cause of that: I answer, it is both a sin, and no sin: a
sin when it flows from a will that is immediately bound unto it, therefore
the very not willing was in Adam a sin of omission: but that not to will,
which Adam might have willed, did not bind God at all: for God was not bound to
make Adam to will: God might with-drawe himself from that willing, which Adam
doing sinned against God: Adam was bound to do it actually; and God was only
bound by the law of creation, and his own wisdom to give him sufficient power
that he might do it: Man was bound actually to obedience, but that God should
bring forth the act was not necessary.
God was not bound unto the act of willing Adam to stand: now both the will and
deed are from God, and therefore where God denies the deed, he is the cause why
the deed is not: as if I deny to help an idle man, which has power to go; I
am the cause, why he is not helped, and for want of my help he will not go;
that he would not go, it is a fault in himself; and if he go backward, it
is also his fault. If a friend should say unto me, I will not go unto such a
place, except you will go with me: I answer him peremptorily, I will not go
with you: now that he is not gone withal, I am the cause; but that he
himself would not go, it is his fault; and if he promised his journey, he
alone has broken his word. God says, I will permit sin; and man says, Lord
then I both can, and it is my will to do it; well, go too man, and try the
issue; but Lord will thou not binder my being tempted by the devil: no, man, I
will not do it: why then Lord I and the devil will consent together to sin
against thee: well, try your freewill: so then, Gods permission is a not
impedition; this not impedition is a desertion, not of his power to the power
of the creature, for in him we live, move, and have our being: but of his will
to the will of the creature; and therefore the will of the creature becomes his
own will; by his own will he turns from God, and so he turns it unto himself;
for he will be like God: therefore I dare boldly say, that the not willing of
Adam, was from God, because he would not give the deed; and that deed being
denied, man did the contrary. The answer to the distinction of non velle,
velle permittere.
But dare thou, O man, dispute with God? I could not do otherwise: yes, thou
would not do otherwise: for thou had power enough; and that I held my act
from thee, I did it according to my good pleasure, to glorify my self more in
thy fall, then in thy creation.

For that threefold act: Non velle est impedire, vel non approbare.
first to will sin not to be: secondly, to will it to be: thirdly, to permit
it; are in simple signification distinct, speaking of an absolute will, or else
they may fall together: the first may have a double meaning; for to will sin
not to be, is either to hinder it from being, or else not to approve it when
it is. So then God may be said not to will sin, when he hinders man from it,
and this he did not for Adam: and therefore Jacob. Arminius has sinned
grievously against God, by this distinction to make M. Perkins blaspheme
against God: it is witty I grant, but only with the simple: God will have me
speak, and I profess against all the crew of Arminius defenders, that they do
greatly derogate from the Majesty of God, and abuse their wits to ouerturne
Gods wisdom. Mark therefore I beseech you, the distinction of this subtle
Confuter, whom the world begins to flock after. He begins his book, as
though he bare a great love to the truth, and the worthy man M. PERKINS, yet
his poison be spits out in coining distinctions to ouerturne the truth, and
make him, whom he called a brother, to blaspheme against God.

And that I may give you a taste of his wit, I entreat you consider what a
flourish he has made in these two distinctions. Look the places: the first
is, Page 118. l. 21. Detection of Armintus sophistr^e.
Sunt enim tria inter se distincta, quorum nullum alterum includit, velle vt
peccatum non siat, hoc est velle impedire ne fiat, and velle vt fiat seu
eueniat, and velle permittere seu non impedire. That this is a false
distinction, let the learned judge: for if this be true, I can prove directly,
that it was impossible for sin to be: and let the proudest Arminian answer
it, if he can: (I speak in the love of the truth, bear with me.) First, I am
sure out of his distinction, that he cannot deny but God willed not sin to
be; now they are his own words, That that which Gods wills not to be, that he
wills to hinder: and therefore if God will sin not to be, he wills to hinder
it: and what God wills to hinder, that cannot be: and therefore sin cannot
be. But he is to know, that God wills sin not to be, two ways: first, non
impediendo: secondly, non approbando: therefore that which God wills not to be,
may be, but yet hated of God, because he never approo^ed of it: and so God
wills sin, not only in hindering of it, but also in that he approoues not of
it: the one will not suffer a thing to be, the other distasteth the being of
it. For the second member, Arminius rather blasphemeth.
that proves him to blaspheme: for whatsoever God wills not according to his
mind, is hindered of God: therefore nothing can be but that which God wills:
for say the thing is, and God would it not; and then you say plainly, some
thing is that God could not hinder: and then where is his omnipotency? for his
position is, what God wills not, he hinders. For the second member, that which
God wills to be, is also twofold; either effectual, or permissiue; for
propriety of speech will bear both these senses; God wills a thing to be either
effectualy, or permissiuely: for he deceiues himself, not knowing from whence
this distinction is taken; The distinction of a permissiue will, and effectual
is not in the cause but effect
not from the cause, but effects of one will diversely disposed to diverse
objects, as evil and goodness; to goodness his will is said effectual, to
evil permissiue: the efficacy of his will is manifested in the production of a
good thing; his permission in the production of an evil: and therefore the
speech is proper and familiar to say, that as God wills a good thing to be by
his effectiue will; so he wills an evil thing to be by his permissiue will: and
as by efficacy he is carried toward good things; so by his permissiue will he
is carried toward evil: and this distribution is warrantable, seeing diverse
effects are carried upon diverse objects, and I urge him with reason. The act of
his effectual will is excercised upon some object, which all our men say is
toward goodness, and never bends to evil: therefore in like manner I demand on
what object is his permissiue will carried? surely on evil: and therefore God
permissiuely may will evil for to be: and so in the second member he puts the
effectual willing of sin, for both effectual and permissiue; which is a
mere collusion of his reader.

Here can I urge him again with blasphemy, A second appa^^^^ blasphemy
if words must be pressed in stead of sense: he that defends whatsoever God
wills for to be, that he wills it effectually; then God wills sin: for on
whatsoever his will is carried, that he wills; but his will is carried on
sin: for I ask him on what object is his permissiue will carried? if he say
on evil, then he wills evil: but he will answer, that is done permissiuely:
we grant it, and so think charitably of him: why then can he not in like
manner conceive of ours. For the third, to will to permit, is to will not to
hinder: we grant it him; but that may be in either of the former: for first,
that which God wills not to approve, he may will not to hinder: and secondly,
that which he wills for to be, he wills not to hinder: yet we also here conceive
his meaning, to wit, that not to hinder, is a middle betwixt an absolute
hindering of a thing, and an absolute willing of a thing; but to will sin
absolutely was never imagined of our Divines: neither with all his Logic and
Grammar can he draw it out of them: and therefore as you have found his
faithfulness in this, so believe him in the rest.

A like place to this you have, Page 120. Efficaciter (...) efficaciter
impedere permitter^ creaturae.
Quod Deus vult vt fiat, hoc efficaciter efficit, add vel permittit: quod vult
vt non fiat, hoc efficaciter impedit, add iterum vel non approbat: quod neque
vult vt fiat, add tertio simpliciter, neque vult vt non fiat, iterum
simpliciter, deinde conclude hoc permittit creaturae: That which God would have
to be, he effectually brings to pass, or add I pray you, permits: that which
God would not have to come to pass, he effectually hinders, stay a little and
add, or approoues not: for the third, that which God neither wills to be, you
must mean simply, nor wills not to be, that also simply, and then you may
conclude, he permits unto the creature.

A second collusion is out of these words, proinde sic facere decreuit, that
is, God decreed so to do: Arminius comes in with a tail, as though he would
sweep all to the ground, add, vel permittere, or so to permit. If you please
to see a Sophister, turn to the 145. Page de permissione in genere:
Permissionem ad genus actionis pertinere ex ipsa vocis flexione est notum, etc.
Permission, says he, belongs to the predicament of action, and has no nearer
cause, or immediate then the will; not science, power, or ability, though
these be required in him that must permit. No man permits any thing, but he
knows what, and to whom: again, he must have power, authority, and will to
do it. It is very strange, if all these be true, and yet God should do
nothing in his permission: and therefore to do, and permit, may well agree. If
he mean, to do iniquity, then the object has limited the act; and so we
deny it God, and that most justly.

Again, to follow this Sophister a little, (and I would some would do it
thoroughly) but says Arminius, to permit, is nothing but not to hinder, and
therefore a negative act: but where is the negation? not in the will, but in
the denial of the object: and therefore we deny not but God has such a
hatred against sin, that he denies it his good pleasure; yet wills it: A good
confession of Arminius, that to permit is nothing but that God is welpleased to
let man have his freewill to try him, and of his fall take occasion of doing
the best good.
and likewise by his own confession in the same place says, God is willingly
content to put the matter of sin to man's free will, yet thereby to prove
him, and upon his evil doing, to do an infinite good: hold thee there
Arminius, and that which thou called for at the hands of M. Perkins, we will
grant thee, all love and respect for the acuteness of thy learning.

But further the argument is urged; no evil is to be done, nay not so much as
willed, that good might come thereof. To will evil, or to do evil, and bring
the end as an excuse, is impious: therefore who speaks in this sort? Our
Savior Christ says, Do good to them that curse you, that you may be the
children of your heavenly father. If God do good for evil, must he therefore
will evil that he may do that good? It is true, God wills good out of evil,
that is, not to turn evil into a better nature; for heaven and earth will as
soon meet; but only make it the object of his permissiue will. Now God can
have his will, neither permissiue nor effectual about any object, but he will
raise his glory out of it: and therefore out of the ruins of sin and
ungodliness, is he able to build up his glory: and this is to will evil, the
object of his permissiue will, for his own names sake. I am sure every slender
Logitian knows there is great difference betwixt an object, and an effect. If
Adam had made evil but his object, and never have effected it, it would have
proved but a temptation iniected of the devil, and no sin of his. Why then
should it follow, if God do decernere de peccato, exercise both judgment and
will about sin; judgment to know it, will to limit it, discretion to direct
it, and justice to punish it. And therefore as the argument from the end is
nothing, so from the object, that sin is always considered as sin. Let it
be granted, can therefore the excellent wisdom of God extract nothing out of
it? yes: for evil will be in good, and God will so separate it from the good,
that it can not otherwise be but some thing should be fined and refined by it;
yet so, that sin shall always be nothing but dross and dung, stubble and
straw for hell fire. For the contradiction in Gods will, it is none at all: for
in contradiction, the affirmation and negation must be of one thing. A man is
blind, and not blind, are no contradiction; because the one may be understood
of the eyes of the body, and the other of the eyes of the soul; Apius est
caecus, Apius non est caecus, is no contradiction. Therefore God to will sin
by his permissiue will, and not by his effectual will, make no contradictions.
For the last branch of this argument; God inclines, impells, constraines, as
they are natural acts, add also hardness, commands wicked instruments, and
does effectually procure them to execute his just judgments; the motion is
Gods act ordinary, the judgment is Gods act moral, and the sin his
permissiue act. He that strikes against God, shall be so stricken again that
he shall suffer: and therefore as the smiths hammar striking against his hands,
hardens them by opposition; so God the hearts of men, by his just judgments
opposing them.

Solution of the second Argument drawn from Gods decree.
The first part of the Argument resting upon that Sophisme of Arminius, is
already cleared. To the second, Gods decree not the works of sin, but
conversant in it, in ordering and disposing.
concerning the necessary copulation of Gods decree, and sin: First I answer,
they are not cause and effect; because Gods decree is an act upon sin, and
therefore subject and adiunct. But you will inquire what necessity is there of
the connection of these two parts? I answer, Gods decree, and man's fall, do not
make a necessary sentence, but contingent, yet most infallible and true;
because it was the act of an infinite wisdom, that could not be deceived; and
hereupon his judgment was most infallibly true of man's fall. If an expert
Physician should foretell the death of his patient, and were most certain of it;
must it therefore be necessary when it comes to pass, Determination no cause
of necessity.
because he foretold it? no; for the truth is the same that it was before,
only it is now more evident to others that knew it not: so God most certainly
knew the fall of man and determined of it, even as the Physician determines of
the fit in an ague wherein his patient shall die, and far more certainly: he
will not misseit a minute of time. Could the devil tell Saul, yea, and
determine of it, To morrow shall thou and thy sons be with me; and yet shall
not God be able to set down the exact time of man's apostacy? And if the Lord
have determined the day and hour wherein Adam should die, shall he therefore
be the necessary cause of his death? You will not accuse the Physician as a
murderer, because he foretold the time wherein his patient should depart; nay,
you will scarce accuse the Devil, because he said, to morrow; but confess
that Saul himself fell on his own sword: only this makes us say the Devil
did it, because he has bin a murderer from the beginning. And as God says,
Is there any evil of punishment in the city, and I have not done it? so dare
I say, is there any evil of sin in the world, and Satan has not done it?
Therefore I must crave pardon to hold a certentie, but no necessity, that man
infallibly should fall; yet most freely and contingently, but not necessarily
at all: for necessity is against Gods decree. Things necessa^^ need no decree
for their consequents.
God never decrees the fire to burn, because if it be fire it is good reason
it should burn: God never decrees man shall have reason, for if he will have
him a man, then it is necessary he should have reason: but to decree, in all
proprierie of speech, both with God and man, is of things contingent.

Man he decrees upon deliberation and consultation: and the subject matter
thereof is some contingent thing, which he would produce or hinder: for if it
be a necessary thing, he can neither produce it, or hinder it: man is not a
stone, he can never produce out of this the arffimatiue part, man is a stone:
God is just, is a necessary truth; let him bring all the arguments he can
invent or devise out of his wit, and yet he shall never produce this, that God
is the author of sin, or unjust. Suppose an army of men were coming against
England, would not the King and his Council, assemble to deliberate and
consult, that they might prevent them? and therefore though the thing be most
certain, yet it is not necessary: The town is on fire; if it were necessary
it should burn the town, what then should men do crying for help? yet it
might be some knew for a certentie, that the town would be burnt; is it
therefore necessary? But you will say, every thing when it is, is necessary
that it should be: I answer, that this being should become existent, was never
necessary; A thing to be when it is, is not necessary for the cause, but
that it is a kind of being under some head of entity where it is necessary.
yet that this being should be something, is most necessary. And therefore I
admire that though many mean well, yet they should never distinguish betwixt an
an effect, and a species of being. The effect looks only at causes; now the
causes of man's fall, were no ways necessary; either when they were in power to
act, or when they did really produce: and therefore as man was a contingent
cause till he fell; so when he was fallen, he was still the same cause; only
his power was brought into act; and all our dispute is on this head, as man's
fall was an effect.

But now you come and say, this effect was necessary; how I pray you? because
you say, quicquid est, quando est necessarium est esse: mark your predication,
which is of that word esse, upon quicquid est quando est: now, what is that
esse, to quicquid est quando est? I tell you no effect, but a species: now the
species of any genus, is a necessary axiom when it is disposed. And therefore
that which is existing in the world, to be brought under some head of being is
most necessary; for God is the God of order: sin therefore, or rather the
action of sin, (for sin cannot have an est, though it may have a quando
est) as being referred to the predicament of action, One thing as an action is
an example of that order, and another thing as produced into that order.
or the catagorie of effects, is necessary; because this action, or this
effect, is an example or species of that general nature; and with that
general nature he is necessary: hence Logitians call these arguments disposed
(...), the second degree of necessary affirmation: but recall these actions to
their agents, these effects to their efficients, and the argument is changed:
therefore dispose Adam and his sin together, as cause and effect; Gods decree
and man's fall as subject and adiunct, and both are but contingent axioms; the
former contingent and uncertain unto Adam, until he had committed his sin;
the second contingent and most certain, because God that decreed it knew all
things, and with whom all time was present.

Argument repeated.
Further, it is urged from commission and omission: from commission, because God
did concur to the doing of it, seeing it could not be done without him: and
being the first in it, is the principal actor, man but his instrument, and
that so necessarily urged, that he could not resist God the first moouer. From
omission, because God did not give him so much grace as was necessary to keep
him from omitting his duty: for if God had concurred with man to this
necessary act, then should man have done his will.

Answered from Gods concourse with his creatures.
Concerning the concourse and confluxe of Gods grace with man in his operation,
is a matter of great difficulty. The schoolmen have so clouded this point with
distinctions, that our men have looked for the mystery of it in them; but even
thereby have been so damped, that they have spoken they know not what: for my
self, I know I shall come far short of that which I aim at, yet leaving
the schoolmen, I am bold to extract what I can from the observation of Gods
wisdom in his creatures; and for the conceiving of this truth, I lay down
four general axioms. 1. All beeings are from God. 2. They are made of God
for an end. 3. They are made with power to work for this end. 4. That they
may obtain it, God has stamped upon them his wisdom.


In these four, Every being working unto his end by the power God has given
it, is guided by a rule.
I trust in God to show how God is said in some sort to concur with man: But
a little to express the propositions by some examples. God made man, therefore
for some end, for some end therefore to be able to work unto it; and how
should he do this without his guide; and some rule of wisdom must be given
him, which rule is able to guide him in every action unto his end: therefore
Gods concourse or confluxe with his creature is nothing but the stamping of
this wisdom upon him, whereby he is carried unto his Creator, that gave it
him. God has given man a will, this will of man is for an end, this end is to
please his Creator; that he may please his creator, he must be doing of good,
and that he may do good, he must attend unto divinity, the rule that God has
given him to bring him to this end: Hence I dare boldly say, that the
concourse of this rule, with the faculty of man's will, in every special
action, had been able to make man happy. But let us have a few more
examples, before we come to application and resolution: God has given man his
reason, this being is for some end, this end is been disserere, to reason
well: now for this end the faculty must exercise it self; and that the
faculty may exercise it self, God has stamped upon man's reason the rule of
Logic, or discerning well of every thing that god has made; for all things
were made for man: and therefore must God bestow an eye upon him whereby he may
see all things, and this eye is the eye of reason guided by Logic, so that
Logic concurring with my reason, is able to make me produce any act, directly
carried unto his end. God has given me speech, this is for some end, as to
speak well or eloquently; for this end must I exercise my speech, and that I
may not exercise in vain, he has given me the rule of Grammar and Rhetoric;
which rules concurring with my speech, I speak both truly and eloquently.

The Apostles, many of them unlearned, spoke languages, The Apostles spoke
tongues by the rules of Grammar.
and that as Grammatically and Rhetorically as ever did Tully or Demosthenes;
and God did that for them immediately, which others come unto by long practice.
Now how did God concur with them? surely no otherwise then by the true rules
of art, immediately taught them of the holy Ghost.

The sun in the heavens runs his race with ioyfulnesse; and if you ask me
by what concourse of God; I answer peremptorily, by no other then the rule of
natural Philosophy, which God created with the sun. That this may a little
the better show it self, consider that all beeings besides himself were made
of nothing for himself: in all these things, God can but have the respect of
two causes; the first is efficient, the second final: hence God is called
Alpha and Omega, the first, and the last, the beginning and the end: and hence
he can give a being unto things, but not his own being; and so his being
must be out of creatures, and therefore must other causes be given by him, The
efficient and the end give to the effect, but not themselves, matter and form
give all they have.
which cannot only give a being, but their own being: and these be two,
matter and form: the wood and form of a table are in the table it self; but
the carpenter only gives a being of efficiencie, and not himself: and thus
God made all his works stand out from himself, to himself, and that with
their matter and form: and thus all the creatures became beeings from God, not
only of that esse, that God gave them, but also of that essentia which gave
being, and his own being, that so in themselves by the form extending it
self over the matter, qualities and faculties being araised, it might have
power to act and work not only for the glory of his creator, but also for
that special good which God saw in all that he had made, when he said, they
were good, yea, and very good.

Hence I would entreat these observations; First, that every creature owes unto
God, Acceptum refer in causis, effectis, subiectis, adiunctis.
first his being: secondly, his nature from that being, (for natura est res
nata:) thirdly, all his welbeeing; because all these they came from God either
mediately or immediately.

Secondly, observe that the whole glory of the creature, is the glory of the
Creator: because the glory of a thing lies especially in his end, which end
is an individual companion of matter and form, which matter and form were
given of God.

Thirdly, all things in the creature, are depending upon the Creator; the
being, nature welbeeing, eupraxie, virtue, actions, and life it self: in him
we live, move, and have our being.

4. The end of every thing is necessary.
Observe. If all depend upon God, then are all governed by him; first because a
thing dependent works mutably; yet the end of this mutable nature is
necessary: and therefore must he be guided by him that is immutable unto the
end. Hence observe, that the end which God has appointed his creature is
necessary, though the creature it self be contingent and mutable. And this
has deceived our Divines, not distinguishing betwixt Adams fall, and the end:
the end is necessary, yet the action and agent were both mutable: the reason
is, because it is absolutely impossible to conceive any action, but it is for
some end: the end is essential to the action, but the action it self being
dependent, was contingent, and so was the agent.

Observe. 5. The same ^^dom that (...) gouernes
The selfsame wisdom that produced the creature, gouernes him being
produced. First, because for the selfsame end, he is both produced and
governed: to be for an end, and not to be governed to that end, are (...),
incompatible. Therefore mutually affirming or denying, grant the one, and
grant the other; deny the one, and deny the other. Secondly because it is
not only the part of a wise man, to produce his work, but also to direct it
to his end; therefore most absurd to deny it of the wisest. Thirdly, because
it is impossible, that a thing should be produced by one wisdom, and governed
by another: thus things would not serve the end of their creation, but another.

Observe. 6. According to this wisdom, every nature works, and to this he
ought to obey. Reason. 1. Because they are Gods effects: and therefore obeying
the cause, must needs obey the wisdom that ordered the causes: sin therefore
being nothing, obeies not God, neither any sinner, as he serves sin.
Secondly, this wisdom carries to the end; and every thing obeies his end,
and inclines, bends, and bows unto it.

Observe. 7. This obsequie or obedience of the creature, is the (...), or true
impression of this producing and governing wisdom. This first wisdom is the
(...), The government of the Creator. and the obedience of the creature.
or lively seal that stamped that mark upon the creature: therefore the
stamp is the lively effigies, or impression of that first wisdom: and the
obsequie or obedience of the creature, is nothing but to imitate his governor.
A familiar example of this, you may see in the seal, and the impression upon
the wax: the seal leaves his mark, and the mark is a plain representation
of the seal, though the seal it self could be seen of none but him that
stamped his mark upon the wax. The wax sets forth the creature, the stamp
the obedience, and the seal Gods wisdom: and this is that Idaea which is so
much dreamed of, whereof the creature is not capable; yet the reflection of it,
may be in the creature. As for example; six or seven men may see their faces
all in one glass, yet the glass is far less then any one of their faces:
for the natural face of a man can not be put into the glass, but the image of
his face reflected, and that in most lively proportion: so Gods face no man can
see, yet his back parts may be seen, Exodus 33. now this face, as I may say,
of Gods wisdom, being stamped upon his creatures, carry them in all their
motions to their ends appointed of his Majesty. These things being well
conceived of, we find two things most necessary to concur to the producing
of any act. (...) and (...).
First, faculty or power, which God gives the creature, when he gives them
being: 2. a rule of Gods wisdom, to bring that faculty into exercise, and so
carry it along unto his end. The rule is the principal cause, the faculty
the isntrumental, or ministerial cause to join with the principal: neither
alone can do any thing, but both together can do any work that the Creator
would have to be done. To come then to our purpose: God created man a
reasonable creature, endued with two most excellent qualities, will, and
understanding: so that man was made able to understand his Creator, and will
him as his only good. Yet man could not actually will God, except God had
given a rule to have taught him so to do: the Lord bad man love him with all
his heart, soul, mind, and strength: and then to love his neighbor as
himself. And for the effecting of this, he gave him a perfect rule of
righteousness, to join with his will in the performance of any duty; neither
did God withhold this rule from him at any time: and therefore God gave man by
creation power to will, and rule sufficient for to have taught him how to will:
so that neither for power, or act, any thing was wanting.

Let us see then how these two things concurred in man's first fall. How rule
and faculty meet together in the first fall.
The devil comes in the serpent, and he begins to withdraw man from his
rule, knowing if man and woman had sticked close thereunto, sin should have
had no entrance. He begins first to propound a question, that so he might
bring the woman to dispute with him: and the question is made about the rule of
obedience; Has God indeed said, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the
garden? To this the woman answers, first by affirmation, we eat of the trees
of the garden: secondly, by negation, from the sentence of the law, of the
fruit which is in the mids of the garden God has said, not only I, The
dispu^^^ on of the (...) man and (...) devil.
but neither I nor my husband must eat of it; neither shall ye touch it: and
to the prohibition, she lays the curse, least ye die. So then the rule would
have made his part good against the Devil, and have taught the woman to have
holden this conclusion against all the devils arguments. The devil replies
again upon the woman; and first he begins to take away that which might fear
her in breaking the law, ye shall not die at all: and then to her negation,
brings a testimony, first from God, God does know: secondly, from
contradiction to the law, when ye shall eat thereof: thirdly, a threefold
reason to persuade them to that act of eating: first knowledge, your eyes shall
be opened: secondly, the measure of this knowledge, it shall make you like God
himself: thirdly, from the kinds of their knowledge, knowing both good and
evil. As yet no hurt was done.

Let us now see how the Law concurres in the next, The con^^ of the (...)
and we shall easily see both Gods and the laws confluxe with Adams fall. The
1. act of the woman, was approbation of the devils reasons; so the woman:
here is consent against both God and the law. The 2. act was seeing; here God
concurred naturally, and that by the rule of nature in optickes: neither was
this the breach of that rule, but presently the will wheels or turns it self
upon the object, and says the tree was good; and that approbation was also
good, for the tree was good by Gods creation: but this goodness did so affect
the will, that Gods law must be forgotten: and the tree being made good for
that which the law forbad, to wit, that it was good for meat, when before out
of the sentence of the law, she had said, the law and God himself has said,
ye shall not eat; and to say it was good for meat, was a direct affirmation
against both God and his law, and so could not have their concourse: and this
was her internal judgment. The next, is her external judgment, in regard of
the tree objected to her eyes, in these words, and that it was pleasant to the
eyes. Now this was no where forbidden, but that they might look on it: and it
may be she said too much, when she added, we may not touch it: yet this
likewise is made a sin, for after the will is spoiled, then all the other
members become sinful. It is not simply a sin to look on a woman, for so
much as to see is done by the concurrence of a rule of Gods wisdom; but in
that it is to lust after a woman: and so here the eye looking upon this tree,
is made sinful, because inwardly she lusts after it: and that is expressed
in the next words, when she says, a tree to be desired: and the end of that,
is to get knowledge. This end is good, but will not justify the action;
because the very eating for this end, was expressly forbidden. The 3. act, is
taking of the fruit thereof; neither can this simply be condemned: for it might
be they might have gathered the fruit: and I am thereunto persuaded, because
this tree, as well as the rest, was for man: and some good use might have been
made thereof. (...) of (...) con^^^ing the first sin.
The 4. act, And did eat: neither here am I of Arminius mind, that meant
subtly to cross an argument in M. Perkins, by affirming that the very act
was forbidden. The natural act was good, but only the moral act which was
respective, and in reference to Gods law; that only was sinful. The 5. act,
And gave also unto her husband: this was likewise a sin, seeing God had made
her a helper unto him, to become his ruin; this was the breach of charity.

The last act, and he did eat: To this some might reply, but how could this
be a sin, seeing he was ignorant of it? to which I answer; (...) present
(...) in (...).
First, I doubt not but by that excellent knowledge he had, he was able upon
the very sight thereof to know that it was the fruit of the forbidden tree: God
brought him the beasts of the field, and he named them according to their
natures: he knew his wife when she was brought unto him: these were far
more difficult, then to know every several fruit in the garden, seeing they
are so easily distinguished by many outward appearances; therefore
questionless he knew the fruit. But then you will object, man was more foolish
then the woman; for she did it by strong persuasions: and he without any more
ado upon his very wives giving it, did eat thereof: alas, never think so.
But how then was he tempted? surely, I think it was not a new disputation
betwixt his wife and himself; that as the devil had dealt with her, so she
might deal with her husband: for if Adam had been absent all the while of that
communication, and then the serpent, and the devil in the serpent had been
departed, that Adam would so soon have yielded unto her motion. Secondly it is
said, that as soon as she desired it, she took it, and did eat: if this was
done in the place where she stood, then assuredly her eyes would have been
open, to have seen the offense, before she could have brought Adam unto it.
Thirdly, if she must first have plucked the fruit, and then have carried it to
Adam, and lastly have disputed with Adam for the eating of it, it had been too
long a time, for a woman with child in sinning, and longing for an apple or a
fig, (or what else the fruit was) to have stayed her appetite so long: and
therefore as I doubt not but she presently are it, so presently her husband
yielded too; and so both their eyes were opened together.

But you will say, did Adam stand by all the time of their disputation? I know
no other meaning of the text, but that it should be so: and therefore Adam was
exceedingly too blame to suffer his wife to have such communication with the
serpent; he should have shut him out at the first entrance; for God set him to
keep the garden, that no beasts should come in it. Now tell me, I beseech you,
what concourse Gods law had in man's fall, and the selfsame is my judgment
that God had in it: Now the law stood at hand, to have joined with man, to
have brought forth his obedience unto God, and have kept him from all sins of
omission; but man would not hear the voice of the law, but of the devil
against the law, therefore no marvel if he fell. So then the Lord concurred by
his law; I will use the word of Arminius, quantum decuit, yea, and quantum
oportuit, as much as was seemly, and as much as was expedient: and this none
of our Divines deny, if I may speak it bona venia, with the good liking of
all Arminians: so that God withheld none of this grace from him: but as I said
before, the deed of his will, or that velle quod potuit, which was not of such
absolute necessity; neither wanted man any concourse, if he had been as good
as his means were.

But you say further, Gods will no irresistible motion to man's ^ill.
the motion was irresistible, and so man was no faulty cause, seeing he could
do no better. Alas, had they all those free actions in sin, and yet did
nothing proprijs voluntatibus? I see nothing at all done by them, but was done
most freely. But then you say, the will of God might have been frustrated:
Alas, senseless creatures! when the Apostle says, who has resisted the will
of God at any time? is most certain in very reason it self: for the superior
cause, can never suffer of the inferior cause: therefore if man's will should
go about to resist or frustrate the will of God, it were even against reason
it self; for then should Gods will suffer of man's will. And again with
Arminius, God forbid it should be otherwise, but that consilium Deistaret, that
Gods counsel should stand: and therefore God has an irresistible will: and if
that, then the motion of his will is also irresistible; if this, then man
cannot resist it, and if he cannot resist, then is he moved irresistably to
sin: Five propositions to explain how Gods will cannot be resisted.
stay, there the consequence is false. I know you will grant me these five
propositions, and I know no more that our Divines defend: first, that Gods will
is the supreme cause: secondly, that Gods will cannot suffer: thirdly, that
none can resist it: fourthly, that his motion is likewise irresistible: fifthly,
that neither men nor angels can resist it. But tell me how you can prove your
consequence, therefore man in sinning follows Gods irresistible motion; I know
no such consequence, either in the Scriptures, or our men; for every motion of
Adam and the woman were most free, and they followed most willingly their own
motion. But you will say, God decreed this motion; true, yet no cause thereof:
for he decreed man should be the cause of it himself. But could this be done,
and yet God be no cause thereof? yes assuredly; for you are deceived of Gods
decree, by putting it into the thing, when it is in himself. And here I will
clear unto you another way, that God takes in his decree then you imagine.

First, Gods decree arises from his efficiencie, The nature of Gods decree.
and omnipotency: and is generally nothing else, but sententia definita in
consilio suo ab aeterno de rebus faciendis; that is, Gods definitive sentence
in his eternal counsel, concerning the making of all things. And that it
rises from omnipotency and efficiencie it is plain: for in that he did it,
we say he could do it, and so decreed it: and the sentence must be of such
things as are within his power; so that election is nothing but the choice of a
thing, and decretum the decree, nothing but the setting of it done
definitiuely: the word is of decerno, to see a sunder, and very fitly
signifies this determination of God: sententia, sentence, though the Lord does
all things simul, and semel, at once and together, in respect of himself, yet
to us he shows it, as if he did it peditentim, step by step, and that with
great and long determination: therefore a sentence where his will and power
give in their verdict, and say, sic sentio, so I judge. The third word
definita, or definitiua, definite or definitive, is the determination or
defining of a thing inter cancellos, within his bounds: in consilio, con and
salio, where many things leap together, or concur to make up one sentence:
so that a man is as it were distracted about the composing of them, the Lord
did it without all distractio^; yet were there many things that the Lord
brought together: Eterno, eternal, because it was long before any thing was
existent: de rebus faciendis, it is of matters to be done, and not of things
already done; Properties in Gods deciee
for that is more properly ordination: the ordering and ranking of every work
brought forth according to his eternal decree. Out of this breaks forth his
constancy, in performing every thing by deed, that he has decreed; not
that God is tied thereunto, but rather the thing to be done is tied unto him,
and his good pleasure: so that stoicall destiny is not thereby brought in, but
true constancy. 2. Verity, in performing it according to his word: for so is
verum, quod pronuntiat vti res est, that says as the thing is: yet here we are
to inuert, quando res est vti pronuntiat, that the thing is, because he
pronounces it: Constanti test qua constanter decretum essicit, veritas est qua
dicretum essi it s^cun lum vor^^, side est qua siat dictum.
for Gods pronunciare, to pronounce, is before the thing; and God pronounced
what should become of every thing, long before they existed. The third is
sides, fidelity, which is in performing the thing according to his promise. A
constant decree as he effects it, most true as be effects it according to his
word, and most faithful as he keeps his promise: constancy, truth, and
faithfulness, be three effects of Gods decree.

If from the effects, we inquire of the manner of the cause: we must needs
confess it was neither by nature, nor necessity, or any chance and fortune,
but by counsel: and therefore counsel being the manner of Gods working,
could not be considered as the genus of Gods decree, but as it belongs ad
causam illius essicientem, to the efficient. Ephesians. 1. God works all things,
secundum consilium voluntatis suae, according to the counsel of his will. And
therefore Gods counsel is his deliberation of bringing every thing to pass
after the best manner. So then by his decree appears his counsel, and his
counsel makes his decree to be wrought most willingly, and most wittingly:
therefore his decree of sin must be most willingly, and wittingly performed:
otherwise it should be no decree: therefore fecit, Order of consequence in
(...) d^cree.
qua potuit; qua potuit, decreuit; qua decreuit, consulio fecit; qua consulto
fecit, gloriam spectauit; qua gloriam spectauit, sapientiae visum est; qua
sapientiae visum est, bonum fuit; qua bonum fuit, absolute voluit: God did the
thing as he might do it; as he might do it, so he decreed it; as he deereed
it, so he did it by the best counsel; as by the best counsel, it respected
his glory; as that, it seemed to accord with his wisdom; as that, it was
good; and as good, he absolutely willed it. Surely with men in giving counsel,
plus vident oculi quam oculus, the more counsel they give and the better; but
it is not so with God; for he sees all things simul and semel, together and at
once: now when we speak of deliberation, we must understand it more humano,
according to our capacity, that the Lord takes the best way to effect any
thing. Observe further, that the Lord when he is said to be causa consilio, a
cause by counsel, must needs have his end and scope set before him; and this
must be of all things: and what is that but his glory. Counsel therefore
intends the glory of God: Glory the fruit of virtue.
for as God is the beginning of all things, so he is the end of all things.
Now glory is called the end of God, by a metanimie of the adj. for subj.
because it is properly the fruit that follows upon virtue intellectual or
moral: in a word, all his goodness. Exodus 33. Moses cries to God, that he
would show him his glory; God makes answer, What Gods glory, verta^^ or
goodness. are.
that the glory which Moses can see, is the going of his goodness before him,
whose back parts he might see, but for the face of it he could not see, and
live: this goodness breaks forth in the proclamation, Exodus 34. And that
goodness is nothing but the appearance of his most absolute virtues, especially
justice and mercy: the reason is, because these shine in the creatures: and
secondly, because the end thereof is to set forth his glory. As his counsel
had a scope, so it had some form of working, which we call the Idaea of all
things. A builder of an house, first conceiues in himself the work he intends
to produce, then secondly he looks again upon his work wrought, and sees how
it answers his first intended form; the painter eyes the natural face, and
from that stamps by drawing, limming, and coloring the express image thereof,
and then he looks upon his work to see how it answers the pattern. The first
knowledge we call direct, the second indirect, or reflexed: so in God there is
first of all the Idaea and plat-forme of all things, and this is in God most
direct, who seeing in himself all things, knows how to make all things out of
himself: How God in knowing differs from man.
and these may well be called Gods plots, which he has formed and fashioned in
himself. Now this wisdom of God differs from man's, because his idaea or plot
is first in the thing; because he does nothing primarily, but by imitation and
observation of that wisdom which he has seen God lay open before him in his
creatures: now Gods is first in himself, and then in the things. Secondly, in
man his plot is but a form in his head, distinct from his being; but in God
both the form of his working, and himself are all one. Thirdly, there is in
man an Idaea or form of working, before he work the thing in genesi, that is,
before he compose any thing according to his first conceit, which is not
before, but after himself: but Gods, is neither before, nor after himself:
and therefore we must not look first for Gods Idaeas in things, and then in
God; but first in God, and then in things.

And here I beseech you, take notice of the absurdity of many Divines, and
gross ignorance, concerning the point of Election and Reprobation, expraevisa
massa corrupta, that it needs must be of man in the estate of his sin: and so
make Gods Idaea, or the plot of his counsel, whereby he decreed, to be first
in the things, and then in God; which is clean contrary. Indeed we use to
say you stand there, therefore I see you; and not I see you, and therefore you
are there: but in God it is contrary: God saw Adam to fall, and therefore be
fell. Again, prescience can not be properly in God, seeing God directly sees
all at once and together, and therefore can not see one thing before an other:
yet as God looks upon the creature, one thing is said to go before an other;
and this may be termed prescience: but this is that second knowledge of God,
which we call indirect: and here all things are seen of God, as they are the
images of his wisdom. For if he see all things in himself, then must he
needs see all things out of himself indirectly; the reason is, because
whatsoever God sees directly it is himself: and therefore the creatures being
not himself, he sees them indirectly. The Schoolmen speak much of this
speculum trinitatis: for, say they, Angels and Saints see in God, otherwise
then by the creatures, and therefore are able to know any thing. It is true God
can reveal, yea and has revealed, not only unto Saints in heaven, but
Apostles and Prophets, many things that never came by the way of the creature:
yet we must conceive that the Lord did irradiate and shine upon their
understanding by an other image then his own: and therefore it was divine
revelation, by working upon their understandings an Idaea or plot of knowledge
which is out of himself. As God is said to view all principles, that is, the
simple being of things, he is called an intelligent, wise, and understanding
God: 2. the truth of these things: and this is Gods omniscience, for the
present, God fore know ledge.
or prescience for future: and neither of both are idle speculations. Therefore
Gods knowledge, or foreknowledge, being of truths, and truths are to pronounce
as things are, and things are, because God does pronounce them to be: therefore
God uses to say, I know you not, I do not acknowledge you. Again, the Lord
knows the way of the righteous, that is, works it, approoues it. And therefore
it is not according to the Papists, whom the Lord foreknew would do good; or
the Lutherans, whom he knew would believe; or others, whom he knew would not
fall: but his will and knowledge go together.

I can as well say, God had a will to do all things that were possible, as
well as a prescience: for his will was omnipotent as well as his knowledge; and
therefore he could as well, if it pleased him, to will any possible thing to
be, as to foreknowe it to be: yet this I am sure of, that a thing possible, and
now come to pass, was as well willed of God, as foreknowne of God. And though
I would bring no strange opinions, yet this seems to be reasonable, that
whatsoever God knows, it is either something or nothing: now something is
immediately demonstrated from his will: this thing is, because God willed it,
for his will is the cause of all beings, and not his knowledge: therefore to us
in any being, we must first take notice of his will, and then of his
knowledge. Man is fallen, this is the will of God, and not his mere foresight:
for things done, can never be resolved into an higher cause then his will: and
for nothing, that is always understood per oppositum ens, by his contrary,
which is some thing.

Now because further we find in the creatures, No discourse in God, yet in his
creatures, one reason pulls in another.
prius and posterius, a first and a second; so that here we conceive of God, as
though he did discourse of one thing from another. The truth is, he sees them
simul and semel, yet because for our capacity he has said, he has antica,
postica, a face, and back parts; and his back-parts are revealed unto us by a
prius and posterius, a first and a last, we give sapience unto God, which is of
all co^clusions, and diductions from their true fountains. Again, because the
Lord has set an order, and contrived every thing most fitly and conveniently
for time, place, and person, we call him a prudent God. And as he has most
substantially effected all things, we call it great art and skill. Now all this
cannot be, without the good will and pleasure of our God, which respecting
himself, makes himself the chief good: and therefore he made the world, for
no need he had of it. Secondly, in respect of the creatures bearing his image,
they were all of them good, yea and very good: if all were done, (...), by his
good pleasure, or according thereunto; then is God the most free agent, because
first most absolute, (...), proprie: and therefore Arminius blasphemes against
God, in saying that God does work most necessarily, because he has no
liberty of will, as well to evil, as to good: for, says he, that which is
only unto good, has no freedom, but necessity thereunto. He knows not, that
liberum arbitrium, free will, belongs to counsel; and that cause that can work
by counsel, has free will. For arbitrium, belongs to reason; liberum, to
will: and therefore free will, Free Will, a wit and a will, or a ^^lling
wittines.
is nothing but a willing wittiness, and that is counsel. To do willingly,
is the work of the will; and to do wittingly, is of the wit, or understanding.

Thus then you have heard the concourse of God with his creature; the creature
depending, must be governed; being governed, must obey; obeying, must observe
his rule; and yet being mutable, may leave off to give due respect unto it:
and this, non attendentia, makes him slip out of Gods way into his own, as
may plainly be seen by the first sin, where the Law offered his concourse,
but man denied his.

Again, you see how God does decree in himself; and therefore first we are to
know, that God in decreeing, follows no creature, directa cognitione: secondly
in manifesting his desree, it is done cognitione indirecta, first general, in
his creation; for from his efficiencie and omnipotency, potuit, he could
reveal it: hence in respect of himself, being mere acts, he could not have
any such attribute; for potuit, may be, or could be, can never be said of him
that ever was actu: therefore must it respect the things that may be, and may
feel the act of God: hence qua potuit, efficit, as he could bring them forth,
so he did it most effectually. Now because omnipotency, and efficiencie,
respects both posse, and efficere, to be able, and to do; Constanter, ver^,
sideliter.
and what God can do, and will do, that must he needs decree, constantly,
truly, and saithfully. Now because this decree of God, cannot but be brought
to pass after the best way and manner: therefore must he decree by counsel;
if by counsel, then must the scope be prefixed; therefore must the end of it
manifest his glory; therefore all his goodness, therefore his virtues, which
are his attributes; and if them, then his justice and mercy. To do by
counsel, is to have some express form of working, the plot whereof makes
every thing agreeable to his counsel: this plot seems good unto his wisdom,
and this the Lord wills, and that with a most free will, arbitrio iudicij,
liberate voluntatis, wit and will.

Out of these grounds we easily answer the doubt, Application to the doubt.
that God did neither omit or commit any thing in man's fall: he did not omit,
for the rule was at hand, and man's faculty to do well was sufficient: the
concourse was not in man, therefore did he omit, denying the law that due
respect that it challenged. I told you before, that neither the law alone, nor
the faculty alone was able to produce the act of obedience; therefore the law
alone could not do it: not that it was an insufficient rule, but because man
would not practice this rule. Now you know it is said to be impossible unto the
law, not in regard of it self, but in regard of us that cannot concur with
it, to that righteousness which it exacteth, which we might have done by
creation. For commission it is plain, that the Lord did no otherwise concur
with man's fall, then the law did; which you have heard in explication of the
causes of the first transgression, was no causa perse, but causa per accidens,
and therefore an unblameable cause. If man will rush against it, what fault can
he find with the law, if it do mischief him? He that takes a sword by the
point, is sure to wound himself, which if he had taken by the handle, might
have been used both for defense, and offense. But it is further replied, the
motion of man to finne followed Gods motion, which was irresistible: True it
is, the will of God is irresistible when it is opposed; and therefore in
resisting the will of God, he followed an irresistible motion; in opposing the
law of God, he suffered his own overthrow. So that resistentia, being only
of enemies, that suffer mutably, and God being sine passione resistentia,
without passion or resistance, and therefore cannot be resisted. Then your
meaning is this, that man was a resolute enemy to sinning, and fought with God
about this action; but God would have man to sin, and so man should not
resist. But alas, it was clean contrary, Gods will was not to have man to
sin, and man's will was to sin; and therefore he fought against Gods will,
yet could he not resist Gods will, or falsify the least of his decrees.

Romans How God concludes hi^ mercy and justice, not ex pr^u^sa fid^, or ex
pec^ato, b^t from the promise which was his mere good will and pleasure.
9.19. the conclusion in the 18. verse is, the manifestation of Gods mercy and
justice; by what argument you shall conceive, if you look from the 6. verse: it
is drawn from contraries; man's infidelity, and Gods fidelity: the
infidelity of man cannot frustrate the promise of God: first, because his
promise is either general or special: general, as it respects the root:
special, as it respects the branches: therefore he says, all are not Israel,
that is, the true living branches, which are of Israel, that is, the root unto
which the promise was made, it was made to Abraham, it was made to Isaac, etc.
Abraham the root, and some of the seed of this root, were indeed the seed
of Abraham; but yet in Isaac must the true seed be called: this second promise
is the effectual promise which must stand, v. 8. for there be some the
children of the flesh, having Abraham for their root; but others are the
children of God, which have God for their father; and therefore must needs
effectually be made partakers of the covenant: and these say the Apostle are
properly counted for the seed: this he shows, first, because of the time
appointed, ver. 9. secondly, from the paritie of co^ception, Sarah had a son,
but the other was by her maid: and therefore no marvel if God sanctified the
true seed; the other was bastardly borne: yet v. 10. the matter was brought to
more equal terms, even Rebecca she conceived by one, even by our father
Isaac; therefore this conception would admit no exception for the parents:
Nothing either in the parents or children why God should purpose one to life,
the other to death.
but yet it may be the exception is to be made in the children themselves,
therefore v. 11. he proves Gods purpose, to exclude all outward or inward
considerations, that might be found in them: First, from the constancy of his
purpose, that it might remain: secondly, from the form of his purpose,
according to election, a settled decree: thirdly, from the eternity of it, yer
the children were borne: fourthly, from the denial of all causes out of
himself: first by an ennumeration either good or evil; it was neither the
goodness of Jacob, nor the evil of Esau, that caused the Lord to purpose any
such thing: secondly, from the practice of good or evil done; that distinction
of facta, and facienda, of done, or to be done, is idle: for the fifth and
last argument knocks it in the head; which is drawn from the remotion of a
false cause, and the position or laying down of the true cause, not by works,
generally done, or to be done; but by him that calls: if this be the true
cause, then say the other, and you oppose Gods call: for works and Gods call
be membra diuidentia, and therefore (...), such as cannot stand together. This
cause is proved to be the truth; First, by Gods oracle, Genesis 25.23. the elder
shall serve the younger; this is against the ordinary course of nature, but
God that calls will have it so. Secondly, from a testimony, Mal. 1.2.3. as
it is written, I have loved Jacob, and have hated Esau: that is, I have called
Jacob to the feeling of my love, and Esau to the feeling of my hatred: and
therefore here by these acts we are to understand Gods appointment.

Against this arises the argument of flesh and blood, The argument of flesh
and blood against Gods everlasting decree.
being not able to distinguish betwixt Gods appointment, and his actual love
or hatred in the creature: therefore verse. 14. surely then there is
unrighteousness with God: To this the Apostle answers; First, by a correction,
execration, and holy indignation, God forbid. Secondly, from a testimony,
Exodus 33.19. God says it unto Moses, and therefore it must needs be most
true: and that is proved in the very testimony it self: First, from the
true cause of all righteousness, and that is Gods will: secondly, from the
liberty of his will, he is bound to none, and therefore he can iniustly
deprive no man of any right he can claim at his hands: thirdly, every subject
is equal for the receiving of it, otherwise it could not be, on whom he
would: fourthly, because it is above the reach of man, v. 16. it is neither in
him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows merci^. But
you may object, this testimony is imperfect, for it only proves that which
you have said of election; but this is nothing for reprobation: but mark what
follows, v. 17. The example of reprobation, to set forth Gods purpose, power,
and name, which he simply wills.
and you shall see the second testimony for reprobation exemplified in
Pharaoh; the supreme causes whereof, are Gods purpose, power, and name; his
name is proclaimed, Exodus 34.5, 6, 7. and it is nothing but his glorious
attributes; and they are his justice and mercy; and therefore the name of his
justice is proclaimed on Pharaoh: this name God did purpose with himself; and
that he might purpose, he had power whereby he might show it on Pharaoh; ergo,
qua potuit fecit, and qua fecit and potuit, decreuit, etc. God did it on
Pharaoh, and therefore he might do it; as he did it, and might do it, he
purposed and decreed it; as he did that, so it was his counsel; this his
counsel had no scope, but his own name; this his name was wel-pleasing unto
his wisdom; this his wel-pleasing made his purpose good; and this good, God
absolutely willed: therefore that which he concluded only of mercy, v. 16. in
this 19. he concludes on both mercy and justice, he has mercy on whom he
will, and whom he will he hardens: this conclusion plainly shows, that
Gods will is the supreme and absolute cause, otherwise no need why either that
objection should be made, v. 14. is God unrighteous? or this which follows,
how should men complain? seeing no man can resist his will: to what purpose (I
say) if it had been for sin? but the former is cut off with this resolution,
it is Gods will; and therefore he knows how to justify it: and this second is
answered accordingly as I have said, from the nature of passion and resistance:
Gods will is the supreme, therefore an irresistible will, and void of all
passion.

Shall the thing forming, As man cannot resist God; so God will not resist man,
until man have offered the first resistance.
suffer or be resisted of the thing formed? or the potter of his lump of
clay? how much more should Gods will be resisted of man? But what is all this
to Gods resisting of man's will? the Lord offered no violence to the will of man
in his fall, neither did he himself make any resistance to the temptation, but
most willingly embraced it, and gave as free a consent as possibly could be
imagined: and therefore God put upon man no irresistible motion. But you say, he
could not resist the decree of God, etc. True: what then, could be not resist
his own will? it is therefore one thing for man to resist Gods will, and
another thing for God to resist man's will. If God should have resisted man's
will, he should not have sinned. Therefore the causes being separate, so judge
of the effects; the effect of Gods will is necessary, because it has the best
end; but man's effect was contingent, and had the worst end. Therefore God by
his decree imposes no irresistible motion upon the will of man.

To the necessary copulation of Gods decree, The copulation of Gods decree and
sin is not causall.
and man's fall, it is to be answered, that it is not causall. For if you
understand it as a copulative axiom, God decrees, and man falls; then the
whole axiom is absolutely affirmed, and the former part does not pull in the
consequent, but both of them are considered as going cheek by ioule: but their
meaning is of a connex axiom; if God decree, then it is necessary that man
should fall. Here we distinguish, betwixt the parts of an axiom, and the
connection; the parts may be contingent, or false, where the connection is most
necessary. As for example; If he be a learned man, then he respects wisdom:
the connection is necessary, if Cicero be an Orator, then he knows how to
speak well: these be necessary connexions, but the parts are contingent.
Again, the connection may be a necessary truth, yet the parts may be false: as
if a man be a dog, then he has the faculty of barking: a man to be a dog
is false, or a man to have this faculty, is also false. God decrees, that was
not absolutely necessary, nay as out of himself, it was contingent: so man's
fall is likewise contingent. Actio interna seu formalis, externa seu
materialis, and coniuncta seu (...).
Therefore our Divines distinguish of actions. First, there is an internal
action, which they call formal; and this is in God himself, eternal,
immutable, and neither has beginning nor ending. And in this sense say they,
the whole cause of reprobation, or election is in God alone: and this is a most
necessary truth. The second, is external or material, which is exercised
upon the creature: and this is in time, and limited according to the nature of
the creature that receives it; and this is contingent. The third is, a
complete or perfect action of both, which they call (...), Extremam admouere
manum.
a perfect finishing of the thing: and this being absolute, and proceeding
from absolute causes, is in his conjoined nature, necessary: yet no argument
to prove, that one cause should make the other necessary. And therefore the
will of God, makes man's will no necessary cause of his own fall. But to this
connection it is formerly replied, that it is not only so in the mayor
proposition, but also in the minor, and therefore the assumption being taken
out of the mayor, and concluding necessarily, must needs be causall; as if God
decree, then man must fall: but I assume, God decrees, and therefore man must
fall: so that Gods decree inferring the conclusion upon man's will, as following
necessarily, must needs be a cause. The answer is, it is a necessary
conclusion by way of ratiocination or discourse, but not from the argument it
self; the disposition makes it necessary: but the third reason is no
necessary cause, seeing that the action of Gods decree, as out of himself,
and in the creature, is externally and materially to be considered; and so is
not necessary, but contingent, temporary, and mutable: and therefore if it
had pleased God, it might have fallen out otherwise: for every necessary
truth, is an eternal truth. And therefore that which is in time, and not
eternal, is contingent, mutable, and alterable.

That which is said to the interceding cause, betwixt Gods decree and the fall,
Of the interceding cause.
to wit, man's free will, to exempt God from sin, is most true: for God did
not immediately work man's fall. But you object, that the remote cause is as
well sinful as the next, because the devil was the remote cause, and yet
guilty of the same sin Adam committed. A special neuerprooues a general.
The answer is, when the causes are univocal, homogeniall, and of the same
order of working; but in causes heterogeniall and equivocal, which are of
diverse natures, the remote cause is never tainted with the same fault, that
the next cause is: As wine is a remote cause, why a man is drunk, yet no
faultie-cause of his drunkenness: The Gospel and our Savior Christ, came to
send a sword into the world, but yet were no true causes of sedition and
quarrels among men; The Sun raises putrified creatures out of dead carkases;
it can harden as well the clay, as melt the wax: A son desires the death of
his father, so does God; One thing effected of diverse causes may be faulty
in one but not in another.
but the son breaks Gods commandment, God does it according to the true
rule of justice: a son would have his father live, God would the contrary,
yet a sin in neither. And therefore a remote cause is only guilty of the same
offense with the next, when they work all after one form and manner;
otherwise the immediate cause is the only author of the sin, all the rest by
accident and by abuse. The Gospel is the savor of death unto death, as well as
the free will of man, but not eodem genere causandi, after the same manner of
working. Pharaoh hardneth his own heart, so does God, but the one immediately,
the other mediatly, by the abuse of man's freewill. Therefore the answer is, from
the distinction of remote causes, in univocal causes the remote cause is as
guilty as the next, and therefore the devils will, In causes univocal all
are guilty of the same crime, but not in equivocall.
and man's will working vnivocally, are both in the same offense; but Gods will
and man's, work equiuocally, the one, one way, and the other another: and
therefore no need of participation, seeing they have no next genus of a cause
in which they should communicate.

Answer to Gods desertion.
To the third evasion, betwixt infallibility and necessity, it is granted that
man fell infallibly, but not necessarily; except we understand it of Gods
decree in himself, and then the truth was an eternal truth. And in this sense
our Divines hold it; not of any necessity in man's will, therefore it was only
necessary in Gods wll, but contingent in man's; yet the truth it self in the
thing, is to God and man contingent, to God most certain, but to man uncertain.
For desertion, we hold that God did not forsake man in any necessary,
requisite for his true obedience unto the law, only he withheld his
confirmation of man. If a man were set in some office for trial of his gifts,
is it necessary that he should be confirmed in it? I trow not and therefore
this desertion was of confirmation, and not of necessary helps for execution.
And here our Orthodoxe writers, when they answer to that argument, that justice
and mercy presuppose misery, Mis^rie potentiall, real, habitual.
make answer of a threefold misery: first actual, which is in sense and
feeling: secondly habitual, which is in the bosom of a man, but as yet puts
not forth it self: the third potentiall, into which a man may fall: and this
they call a misery in comparison: Job 4.18. Behold, he found no steadfastnesse
in his servants, and laid folly upon his angels: Job 9.2. How should man
compared unto God, be justified? Habitual and actual misery had no place in
man by his creation: but possible or potentiall misery, was laid in the
freedom of his will, which if God had inclined unto good, and man so
determined, then had he come into the estate of the blessed Angels; and so
misery had been impossible, and his estate should have been confirmed unto him
with God for ever; not from the freedom of his will, but from his obedience,
and Gods promise thereunto. Therefore that desertion, and not collation of
necessary help to avoid sin, is to be understood of this third grace;
which was not a grace of creation, but a further liberallity, which God might
have bestowed, if it had pleased him. But I dare not rest satisfied with this
answer, because I see this third grace was only to be obtained by the
obedience of the creature, that is, if he did the will of God, then would God
have been as good as his promise, thou shall live: therefore in my judgment,
Confirmation of life by creation was to follow our obedience unto the (...).
confirming grace was a subsequent grace, to follow obedience, and not an
antecedent grace, to go before it: and so the angels obtained it by their
obedience, and from their obedience are confirmed: if then without their
obedience they could not be confirmed, then must confirming grace belong unto
the law of creation, as well as any other: for what grace should man have
received by creation, but that which God would have communicated unto him by
the rule of obedience; do this and thou shall live: to confirm him in life,
was upon his doing.

I answer therefore, Desertion 1. in not rebuking Satan. 2. In dividing of the
law and his faculty. 3. In that God suffered man to be distracted and did not
hold him close unto his law in despite of the devil.
that desertion is no cause of man's sin: but that God was wel-pleased to
suffer the devil to work more strongly in the temptation, then man's will
should be able to oppose; not for power given, but for present act: and as in
this temptation the law forsook man, so God may most justly be said to
forsake him. I have before declared that two things are most necessary for
every good action, rule, and power; which if both concur not, the action
cannot be produced. Now the law concurred not, and therefore man was forsaken
of the law: not actiuely, but passiuely; even as a master should promise his
servant all aid and succor, as long as he would be faithful; but after he
begins to manifest the least appearance of his infidelity, utterly to cast him
off: so Gods law would have utterly vanquished the devil; but man proouing
unfaithful, Gods law wholly rejected him. Secondly, if it had pleased God, he
might have kept the devil from man, or have assisted his will, that he might
never have yielded unto the temptation: so then, God not giving the will and
the deed, and the law being forsaken, no marvel if upon these desertions man
sinned: the one had not been wanting, had not man been wanting unto himself:
and the presence of the other was not necessary; neither did God in his
wisdom think that it was convenient: man then had sufficient, but not
absolutely to stand: and this desertion, or confirming grace, might well be
withdrawn from man. And herein there was no merit of desertion, except that of
the law: neither did God make man will any such thing: yet concerning the
former distinction it may well be said, that Gods election freed his own from
the possibility of everlasting misery, and so their fall was but a passage to
a better life: and reprobation on the contrary suffered the rest to fall, and
lie in everlasting misery. For the other, that man's fall was a mere
consequence of Gods decree, it is false in simple propositions; but in
connection it may be true, where the parts do not force it, but the connection;
as if God decree, then it must needs come to pass.

To the third argument, from man's will; I answer, Concerning the freedom of
man's will.
it is not necessary, that the thing which cannot be frustrated, should
constrain men to sin: The gates of hell shall not prevail against Gods
Church, this is no constraining of the liberty of the wicked: Romans 9. the
Jews were cut off; yet v. 6. it cannot be that the word of God should take no
effect: He is said to be frustrated of his hopes, that misseth of his end; but
he that is certain of his end, can no ways be deceived of his expectation:
neither for this purpose is it necessary, that the means tending thereunto,
should be brought in by violence. To be frustrated is one thing, to be
constrained is another; they are indeed both under a cause by accident: yet the
efficient is constrained in the one to produce his effect, in the other not
constrained; yet produces an effect beside his scope and intent: To work by
violence, and ^^^stra, differ modo (...).
they have both of them an external worker, yet in the one it is necessity,
in the other fortune and chance: the one is because of ignorance, and so may
be frustrated of his intent: but the other cannot have his scope and liberty
to go about that which he intends. Now with God there is no ignorance, and
he cannot work any thing frustra, or in vain; and therefore nothing can fall
out beside his scope, I mean, that which he intended directly to bring to
pass: therefore it is chance and fortune that makes us give God an
infallibility of decreeing, not a necessity of performing: it is one thing
for God infallibly to bring a thing to pass, and necessarily.

To the second, The difference betwixt the internal and external act.
liberty is not taken away, because his act is to one thing, therefore observe
this distinction; there is a twofold act, one internal, which is immediately
from the form, acting upon his own matter, and this is eternal, inseparable,
and immutable. But the second, which is more external, and working on objects
out of it self, is mutable, temporal, and separable: as for example, the
faculty of laughter, as it flows from the reasonable soul, acting and
bestirring it self in our bodies, is an inseparable act; yet that motion which
should be in regard of external objects of laughter, is separable; yea, a man
may be without it for ever. So then to our purpose, that liberty that arises
from our wills, inwardly acting, is inseparable; yet that which should work
upon external objects, is separable, and God may determine it at his will and
pleasure; and yet let man have his essential liberty, The external act is
separable.
without which the will is not a will. If then in all natural things, the
external act, or that which we call the second, be separable, why may not the
will of man be deprived of such an act as this? In sin surely our will for
external objects only flies on evil, yet that first act is not taken away,
whereby by Gods grace it may be set again, and that in heaven, only to run
upon good: the angels in heaven have their liberty, and yet they are al ways
to act good: God is most free, yet he has neither first nor second act which
may possibly be inclined unto evil.

Here Arminius for his opposition is feign to defend, that God has no liberty
of willing, and angels in heaven have such as they might become devils: for I
am sure if they have freedom as well to good as evil, then may they will
evil: which if he should understand of the first act, then it were most true,
but they are confirmed in the second act still to cry, holy, holy Lord God of
Sabboths. But Arminius says and confesses, that although God by us, be
defended to take away liberty, which he says is secundum motum voluntatis,
yet he affirms, that the natural motion of the will is still remaning: but
neither liberty, nor natural motion, can stand with coaction or violence,
seeing that both natura, and consilio efficere, to work by nature and
counsel, are causes that produce by an internal and innate principle: and
therefore free from coaction and violence. And here I admire, that he has
forgotten his Logic. For the third reason: it is true that necessity and
contingencie, can never stand together, but (...) and (...), wholly and simply
differ: and therefore I will never hold, that man fell necessarily: and in
that, I consent with Arminius.

To the fourth objection, that reprobation is a punishment, it is thus
answered; Reprobation is either a simple reiection or preterition, or else
damnation it self. The first, is opus voluntatis liberae: the second,
voluntatis necessariae. The preterition of God, is his most free will; but
damnation is a necessary act of divine justice for sin and transgression: 2 Thessalonians. 1.6. that all men are vasa, vessels, that is from God, but that they
are vasa irae, vessels of wrath, that is from themselves. Genesis 1. all Gods
works were good: Ioh. 8. when the devil speaks a lie, ex proprijs loquitur,
he speaks it of himself, because he is a liar, and the father of lies: and
therefore, when we sin, we sin of our selves. Yet besides all this, there
is a third, and that is vasa praeparata, Reprobatio est praed imna^^^ non
damnatio ipsa.
vessels prepared; and that is from God. So then Gods preterition is no
punishment, neither is his preparation of a vessel: but damnation is a
punishment, and that is never without sin. Again, discernere and ordinare,
differ as a general and special. To discern of any thing, is the whole work
of reason; but to ordain, is a special part of reason in disposing of all
things orderly. So then Gods decree is the (...), or perfect work of his
counsel concerning man: ordination is that, which a principio ad finem media
respicit, looks how to lay things together from the beginning to the end. Now
all this may be done of God in reprobation, and yet makes it no punishment.
First, that God does discern or decree by counsel, is reason and judgment;
which are no punishments, but necessarily go before them: so then Gods decree
of reprobation, is not the Iayler in the prison, or the hangman on the
gallows, but the Judge on the white throne, whose putitie tries all things. It
is not therefore necessary, because God sentenceth all things, that he should
punish them: for this is sapientis iudicis praevidere, A logical act and a
moral ^uffer.
non iusti vindicis punire: so then in reason to decree, is not the illation of
any punishment. For the other, ordination which more properly is in the things
done, God disposes of them according to his decree that went before with
counsel and deliberation; neither is this any punishment: for as decreeing, so
ordaining are of reason and judgment: now reason and judgment punishes no man,
for they are logical acts, but to punish is a moral act: and therefore no
necessity why we should confound them. So then simply to pass by, or prepare
a damnation by decree, counsel and ordination are no punishments at all. But
you will say, to be forsaken of his creator, cannot but be a punishment: Alas
you do here misconstrue the meaning of our divines: for they say, that election
is ad supernaturalem gratiam, non naturalem: and reprobatio est praeteritio non
quoad naturalem gratiam, but supernaturalem: that is, election is to a
supernatural grace; and reprobation is the forsaking of a man according to
this estate, not for his natural estate, or that wherein he was created, and so
God never forsakes him; but in the other, he forsakes him, and yet it is no
punishment, that so the Lord should do: for it is neither a privative evil, or
positive unto man, Reprobation neither a privative or positive evil.
seeing all priuations and wants, are of such things as once we had: and
positive evils of such, as vex and trouble us. Now to want supernatural
grace, was never the want of a created man, because he never had it: neither by
creation could he feel any want of it, seeing God had given him enough. And
thus much of the Arguments.

The conclusion of the whole disputation, declaring by reason, the Scriptures,
and Church, that God is no author of sin.
Exodus 34. God is Jehovah, (...). God is omnipotent, el shaddai, (...); God is
justice it self, el tsaddick: God is the supreme cause, and chief good,
shaddiel, (...). Jehovah, absolute being, cannot produce that which is
nothing; his omnipotency, cannot produce impotencie; his justice, impiety; or
supreme cause, any defect. Sin is peshange, defect; gnavou, iniquity;
(...), a fall from righteousness; (...), an aberration from a scope: (...),
transgression: and for his production, non est (...), nec (...), sed (...):
sin is produced from impotencie and imbecilitie, (...), from mere mass and
impersection: therefore not from God, that is (...), pure act: (...), power and
strength, and therefore free from all imbecilitie: shaddai, sufficient: (...),
deus plenitudinis, a God of fullness: therefore heaven and earth may as soon
join, as perfection become imperfection, act power, good evil, sufficiency
deficiencie, God sin. Add the Scriptures: Genesis 1.31. All was very good.
Deuteronomy. 32.4. Habak. 1.13. Romans 3.5, 6. Romans 9.14. The Scripture teaches, 1.
that God wills no sin. 2. that he neither commands, or stirs up any to sin.
3. that he punishes it, grauissime, iustissime, certissime, most justly, most
grievously, most certainly. 4. that he hates it in that extremity, that no man
was able to bear it, but he that was God and man; no blood able to wash it
away, but the blood of his well-beloved Son; no sacrifice able to pacify this
wrath, but of him in whom only he said he was wel-pleased: no prayers, no
tears to prevail, but only those that are put up in this name. Lastly, every
page in the Bible, is either exhorting to piety, or threatening plagues and
punishments upon those that will not be reclaimed. Add to the Scriptures, the
Church triumphant, and the quire is (...), sanctus, sanctus, sanctus, sacro
sancto Trinitas, holy, holy, holy, most holy and sacred Trinity; and the
Church militant is fighting and praying, that at the length it may be
delivered, not to be with a God of sin, but with him that can free them from
all sin and misery. We therefore conclude, he that will not hear the voice
of reason, is a beast; that will not believe the Scriptures, is an infidel;
that will not hear the Church, is a bastard. Reason ought to convince us, as
men; the Scriptures, as Christians; and the Church, as children. We hear the
voice of reason, that we may confess our Creator; of the Scriptures, that we
may love our father; and the Church, that we may kiss our mother. And God
forbid, that ever any of us should otherwise be minded.

The collation of M. Perkins and Arminius in this point of Gods decree.
IT was well said of Seneca, Lib^de ira. Vtrique pirti actiones dares, dares
te apus, non semel audires: magis anim veritas elucet, quo saepius ad manum
venit.
that in matters of controversy, each party should have time to try his
action, and be heard more then once; and the reason thereof as well given by
him; because the aftner the truth comes to hand, (to be skauned) the more the
light thereof appears. Seeing therefore it has pleased the [Church] with
some patience to hear, and I am afraid, to allow, the examination of M.
Perkins, by Arminius the Coryphaeus of all the Lutherans, in the point of
Predestination; I hope, for the love of that worthy man, and the acuteness of
his adversary, she will vouchsafe the reading of this Collation, to see how
the Truth is more apparent by their opposition. If the opposition were but like
an ouerblowne bladder, then would it burst of it self, and vent the wind
thereof, without any further pricking: but seeing the common fame, runs
through the world, that it is so learnedly and absolutely done, that it may
give all men satisfaction, and that no man would ever be able, to make any
sound reply to it: it is become as the wind in the bowels, that will not be
removed, except the hotest medicines be applied, and that by the judgment of
the best Physicians. These rumors may daunt a weak spirit, and make him
despair to encounter with such a tempest, that strikes all down before it.
But seeing God is in the calm, more then in the rushing wind, and that the
truth is freely to be bought of all that mean not to sell him, for the
plausible opinions of the world, I am bold in the confidence of my God, and the
love of his truth, to rescue a faithful servant of God out of the hands of as
subtle an adversary, as ever set pen to such a work. And why should I be
afraid, seeing he that walks in the midst of the golden Candlesticks, holds
every star in his right hand, to protect, guide, and defend them, as long as
they walk with him: O therefore, thou which art the truth, teach me in thy
truth, that I err not: thou which art the way, guide me in thy way, that I
wander not: and thou which art the life, quicken my soul with the life of
grace, that I may speak in the chief mystery of my salvation, from the true
experience of thy love shed abroad in mine own heart.

M. Perk. Predestination is first to be grounded out of Gods word, secondly out
of true principles of reason.

I. Ar. It is true, that the word of God, and innate principles are the true
foundation of all this doctrine: yet because the fall has blotted out these
principles, we must always have recourse to examine them by Gods word, which
is, (...), in stead of all.

Collation. This is Christianly spoken on both sides: indeed the Philosopher
says, contra negantem principia non est disputandum, he that denies
principles, is unworthy to be disputed withal: yet man's principles, be they
never so common, are not to be trusted without Gods word.

M. Perk. First principle: God is always just, though man be not able to
comprehend it in his own reason.

I. Ar. This notion is most true, only caution is to be taken, that we judge
not the cause by the effect: it is just, therefore God wills it; but from this
antecedent, God wills it, therefore it is just.

Collat. This confession, as yet makes no breach betwixt them: yet this I would
add, that seeing we only understand God (...), and not (...), a posteriore,
and not a priore, his backeparts, and not his face, that it is lawful to
conclude from the effects to the cause: as this thing is done, and except God
had willed it, it could not have bin done, and therefore there is a just reason
for it in Gods will, though we can not perceive it: which is the mind of M.
Perkins, which he would have corrected.

M. P. 2. Principle: God is independent from all second causes; yet all second
causes are dependent upon him, even when they do unjustly.

I. A. Occasion taken from the creatures, is not to make God depend on them for
his will, but absolutely to will that occasion; yet if that occasion had not
bin given from them, God would never have willed, decreed, or ordained it. The
subjection of the creature to vanity, is from him that subjected it; yet if
man his cause, had not given this occasion, God had never willed this
subjection. It was Gods will, that Christ should be sent, which never had bin
willed of God, but upon the occasion of man's fall. It is Gods will that sin
should be punished, yet man's fall gave the occasion, without which God would
never have punished man. Genesis 18. Exodus 32.1. Sam. 2. The Judge of the whole
world, will do justly. 2. He that sins shall be put out of my book. 3. God
forbid, but that they that honor me, should be honored of me; and they that
contemn me, should be contemned of me. Yet in all this irrogation, or imposing
of punishment, the Lord is absolute and independent; otherwise the creature
would leave nothing unassayed, to escape Gods hand.

Collat. M. Perkins meaning is, to make God independent every ways; and
therefore by a Synechdoche, he puts second causes, for all kind of reason that
can be drawn from them. Now causation is the first, and most perfect reason
that can be in things from God; therefore God is not only independent, as his
creatures work with him; but also for all other reason that can be drawn from
them. Therefore occasion given by the creature, being a reason, must either
depend from God, or God must depend from it: if it depend from God, then Gods
will was before it; but if God depend from it, then was this occasion before
Gods will: and to make any thing before Gods will, is to deny his will to be
absolute. For the three examples: First, it is true, that the occasion of the
creatures subjection unto vanity, was man's sin; but no occasion of Gods
will, who absolutely willed as much as he occasioned. For the second, man's
fall was the occasion of Christ's sending into the world; but not of Gods will
to send his Son, which was before all occasions. For the third, man's sin is
the occasion why God will punish, but no occasion why he should ordain to
punish. For his admonition to distinguish between, to ordain, and decree, is
profitable, but not according to his exposition: For, says he, to ordain, is
to set an order in things done, and not to ordain facienda vt fiant, things to
be done, that they may be: But he is to know, that discerno, is to see
asunder, and is as general as all reason, whereby all Gods works are seen
asunder. Of the same signification is (...), from whence comes dialectica, the
art of reason; now reason is first to find out things: secondly, having found
them out, to judge them: which judgment is either of truth or falsehood, as in
propositions; or of consequence and inconsequence, as in Syllogismes; or of
order and confusion, as in method. And in this last part, to ordain is
properly manifested, therefore is a special branch of discerning: and by a
Synecdoche, of the special, for the general, may be put for decreeing: yet
properly to decree, is a work of counsel, wisely discerning of every
special reason, truth, consequent, or any other thing, that may make for his
scope prefixed: then to ordain, is the wise laying together of all these
things, that all confusion and disorder may be escaped, and every thing most
sweetly brought unto his end appointed of the Lord.

Here take notice of three kinds of knowledge disputed among the Schoolmen:
Knowledge possibile, actual, conditional.
1. possibilis intelligentia: 2. actualis: 3. conditionalis. The first is of
all possible things, that never shall be: the second, of all things that are,
or shall be: the third, of such things as would be, if such and such things
went before; If Caine do well, he shall be accepted, Genesis 4. if David stay in
Keilah, the lords of the city will deliver him: if I continue in believing,
then I shall be saved; if I continue in sin, I shall be damned. And on this
knowledge, for any thing that I can perceive, do the Papists and Lutherans
hang all predestination: and so make Gods will the consequent in decreeing, and
man's will the antecedent in giving God the occasion. The deceit is this, that
from the connection of things, they judge of Gods will about things; which is
most indirect, and a knowledge that agrees not to God, but at the second hand.
It is true, that the first knowledge, being judged according to logical
invention, is of things possible: for arguments or reasons before they come to
be disposed, are only in potentia ad arguendum, have an affection to argue:
and so many things that might be, have this potentiall kind of reason; and so
we say they are known of God, because we so conceive of them. The second
knowledge, which is more actual, is properly science; the laying together of
those things which before were only in affection to argue. The third is of
these things, which being laid together, can no otherwise have force of
reason, but upon connection and supposition: and in this head, would they tie
Gods decree and knowledge; when indeed God follows no such suppositions, but
absolutely knows and wills what he pleases: yet seeing his decree is as large
as all reason, it cannot otherwise be imagined, but that in the manifestation
of it, all reason should appear. And so we grant a connection, supposition,
condition, and occasion in all Gods works that is in the effects of his will,
but none of all these in the will it self. Therefore they do amiss to put
that upon his will, which is the cause, which ought to be in the effect of his
will, and thereupon no antecedent of Gods will, but mere consequents: That
creation should go before the fall, the fall before redemption, redemption
before salvation, and sin before damnation, are all of them most necessary
suppositions, connexions, conditions, and if you please, occasions. And thus
much for that occasion, which is to Arminius, delphicus gladius; but it cuts
asunder such knots as God has tied together, whose will in all things draws
the first link, and cannot be drawn of any.

M. Per. 3. Principle in sense is this, that God does all by counsel,
therefore he has his scope, which he knows, wills, and disposes unto most
prudently: and therefore decrees every thing thereunto.

I. Ar. The most wise God does all things for some end and purpose, even that
which he does not, yet he permits it for some end and purpose: therefore,
first it is a fault to say, that God must either agere, be doing; or otiose
spectare, become an idle beholder; which is no good distribution: for agere and
permittere, to do, and permit, are really distinguished; and both these are
for good purpose; and therefore, God must either be doing, or an idle beholder,
are too scant, for he may permit. Secondly, prudence is too short a word to
enlarge it self to all Gods wisdom. Thirdly, adhibito certo fine, the end
applied, and finis gratia, and for the end, are not all one: for no man works
for the end applied; but for the good therein implied. Fourthly, Deus non
vult, aut non decernit quod non potest, God neither wills, nor decrees that
which he cannot: here no sense, except it be further added, which he cannot do,
or permit: and therefore the conclusion is most imperfect, so God decreed to
do, except this be added, or permitted.

Collat. Agere prudenter, to do wisely, will bear the sense of permission:
for permission coming from Gods will, is considered of us as an effect; this
effect is produded by counsel, therefore for a good end and purpose: so then,
that which God does permittere, he does prudenter agere: grant then, that Gods
permission comes from his counsel, and aims at his glory, and then it must
be more then a negative act. But to speak the truth; permission, as it is
expounded of Arminius, maintains nothing but absurdities: First, in regard of
the cause; for says he, permission is voluntatis remissae: now such a will as
this cannot be in God, whose will is mere act, and therefore cannot admit of
degrees: all remissiuenesse of Gods will, is in regard of the subject, which is
quantum; and may be less and more, but in regard of himself it is impossible.
Secondly, a remiss will, does either will, or not will, or suspend: to
suspend, is neither to hinder nor further the act, and so the Lord should have
no stroke in sin, which is the denial of his providence in the apostacy of
man: if his providence did not suspend, nor his power, then his will was not to
suspend in that action: if he did more then suspend, then it was either to
will, or not to will; if not to will, then sin should not have been:
therefore God did will it, per modum actionis.

That this may appear, Gods manner of working in sin.
we are to consider what manner of efficient causes true reason lays down
unto us: And the first manner of causes efficient, are either to beget, or
preserve: the second to work alone, or with others: the third by himself, or
by accident; and agere is given to every one of these. Let us then see where
Gods action in sin comes in: and because it is most apparent in the third; I
answer, God is the cause of sin by accident: And this will appear, if we
consider how many causes wrought by an internal principle; and these were
four: the devil, and Adam principally; the serpent, and the woman
instrumentally; and all these were blameable causes. The external cause was
the law, and will of God; which in man's transgression, did all they did by an
external faculty: for the law is made the savor of death unto death, not by
his own faculty, but by the devils and man's free will: and this work of the
law was most holy and just. And this is a working cause, justified by the true
rule of reason, and not a bare permission. If a man take a knife, and thrust it
into his bowels, it is the cause of murder, and no permission: if man therefore
was thrust through and wounded to the death by the law of God, it was no bare
permission, but a working cause, yet in all things unblameable. And therefore
to deny Gods will all causation, is impossible. If a man would feign kill
himself, and could find no instrument to effect it withal, he would be kept
from the fact for want thereof: so if the Law had not bin, man could not have
died. Therefore it is most true, when our Divines speak of permission, that
they do not in the general latitude of action, exclude it from coming under
that General head, which Arminius does in every place, and so takes all manner
of working from God in sin.

For that which he objects of prudence, it is true, The sieve intellectual
virtue.
that this virtue is a special one: for first, we define intelligence, that
virtue whereby God understands every particular, concerning every thing. 2.
his knowledge or science, whereby he knows all truths in things; as it is of
things to come, it is called his foreknowledge, or prescience. 3. his sapience,
whereby he knows whatsoever may follow, or ensue of every thing. 4. his
prudence, whereby he knows his fittest opportunity for all things. 5. his
skill, whereby he knows to effect every thing most skilfully. The first of
these virtues, belongs to all kinds of reason, which we call arguments simply
considered in invention: the 2. is seen in axioms, where all truths are
contained; the 3. in syllogismes, that teaches how to conclude out of truths
known; the 4. is seen in method and order; the 5. in practice. Hence we
observe, that these 5. virtues being distinguished, yet one by a Synecdoche,
may be put for all. And therefore when M. Perkins says prudently, he
understands, not only Gods orderly proceeding, but intelligence of all things,
science of all truths, wisdom in all diductions, and the most skillful
handling of the matter that possibly can be imagined. For the third, it is but
a mere Grammatical enasion: for M. Perkins meant no more but the end it
self, though he further added the application of it. For the fourth, God
neither wills, nor decrees that which he cannot; is no imperfect sense, seeing
that God, fecit qua potuit, and quafecit and potuit decrevit, that is, God did
it, as he could do it, and as he did it, and could do it, he decreed it. And
therefore there was no need of such addition, seeing that Gods posse brings in
his officere, and that posse and efficere bring in his decree. But I see if I
should follow him step by step, his acuteness would make me heap up an
infinite writing; therefore I content my self with a general view of him,
because a just confutation of him ought to be in an other style. Therefore that
I may only free the point in hand, I will generally labor to do it in the
maine points, and leave the other to some more special tractate hereafter.

4. God decree man table, granted of both, yet Arminius by permission, and
occasion taken, opposes M. Perkins.
Principle: Gods decree is immutable, even in those things which are mutable.
This is confessed of Arminius, both in Gods decree of effectual working, and
permission: the secret opposition lies in two things, first in that he exactly
distinguishes betwixt to do, and permit, and will grant no efficiencie to
permission: which being defended, ouerturnes the nature of a decree: for if to
permit, be to do nothing; then God should decree to do nothing. If he answer,
to do some thing in himself, but nothing in man's sin, then God should
decree some thing with himself, which should never be effected in the creature
by himself, and so God should not perfect his own will. But it may further be
replied, God decrees to permit, Permissiion yields the creature his liberty,
ver denies not God his work in sin.
that is, to give the creature free liberty to fall into sin: this is true
permission, that God will not do it himself, but permit man to do it; yet
still we are further to add, that the wisdom of God, which is his will
revealed in his law, did work in the very sin: and therefore sin is caused
by the law, not by any internal faculty or power in the law, but external;
which being accidental, is always reduced to other causes: and therefore the
last resolution of sin, is into the free will of man. For neither the abuse
of the law by the deuiil, or his temptation, had proved sins in man, except
he had conjoined with them. Secondly, though Gods decree in both these be
immutable, yet God follows the creature, in taking occasion from him in his
greatest mutations to set forth his glory. This cannot stand: for
immutabilitie makes a necessary truth, and all necessary truths are eternal:
therefore taken from no occasion of such things as should be in time, which are
mutable and contingent, and never to be the grounds of eternal truths, which
only have their original from him that is immutable and eternal; No eternal
or immutable truth that follows things (...) contingent, and therefore an
immutable decree cannot be upon the contingent occasions of God, creatures.
and therefore before all occasions, are considered: for it is impossible,
either that Gods will, or the decree of his will, or the immutabilitie of that
decree, or the necessary truth from that immutabilitie, should ever be upon
occasion taken from creatures mutable and changeable. For whatsoever follows
upon contingent things, is contingent; and therefore if Gods decree should
follow upon contingent things, it would become contingent.

Indeed there is a connection or disjunction of contingent things which is
necessary, not from the contingent things themselves, but either from the
connection or disjunction it self. As for example; if thou believe, thou shall
be saved, the connection is necessary; but that thou should believe, or be
saved, are both contingent. A man is either learned or unlearned, is a
necessary disjunction; but that thou should be learned, is contingent; and so
is the other. If God decree, then it must come to pass; but if the decree,
should follow upon the thing come to pass, though but occasionally, yet would
it cross the nature of immutabilitie. And we grant him that which he says,
that the terms of the creatures mutation, which make a most certain
determination, and by connection, a necessary truth: yet in simple
consideration, the Lord might have done otherwise: which never can be in a
necessary truth.

5. Principle: All Gods judgments are to be honored and acknowledged.
Exception: if they will agree with the word of God, and his justice: and this
cannot be, except they be inflicted upon man sinful: a just exception, but not
against the principle: for three things are to be considered in man: first, his
workmanship, and that is Gods: secondly, the appointment of it for use unto
his maker: thirdly, what may follow upon fault of the vessel. Men are vessels,
and so they are Gods; secondly, they are prepared of God for his use: but the
third, that they are vessels of wrath, that is of themselves. Therefore
Augustine would not man to dispute with God, either for his making, or for the
end of his making: for this can be resolved into no higher a cause then his
own will. But if he will dispute with God, for his wrath and vengeance
executed upon him, he shall find no other meritorious cause, but his sins. That
he says Augustine was too bold with the place to the Romans, Arminius
reprehends. Augustine of rashness, yet bona venia, with greater rashness.
seeing the Apostle intended no such thing as humane infirmity to dispute with
God, but to musle up the mouths of the refractorie and perverse Jews, and
such like: but yet he is to know, that if the Apostle had brought his argument
to that purpose only, then should he have dealt with them, as our Savior
Christ did, Ioh. 8. the Jews they say, we have no need to be made free;
Christ tells them, Ye are the servants of sin; and therefore in vain do you
boast of your freedom: so here the Jews might have said, we are cast off and
reprobates, for so was the will of God, and how should we have helped it? The
Apostle might presently have stopped their mouths, Ye are rebels against
God, and therefore he has cast you off: what could flesh and blood have
opposed to this? But the Apostle makes no mention of this, but resolves all
into Gods will, and that most justly; seeing to make and prepare his vessels,
is his own will alone. When he shall come to the third, to handle them as
vessels of wrath, the cause shall easily be found out, to justify God and
condemn man.

6. Principle: No mon can do any thing, but where God works the will and the
deed: and it is done, according to that measure, less or more, that God
bestows upon us. Of the concourse of Gods grace, both of them agree, only
that word absolute is disliked; yet if in all effects the first cause be
absolutely required, that the second may work, then God must absolutely
concur to the effecting of any good.

Seventh principle: No evil is avoided, that God does not keep us from in the
working. Of this it is agreed; but the manner of working is doubted of: whether
it be by omnipotency, causing a necessary impedition; or of counsel, causing
an infallible impedition: the first mooues the will naturally, the second
voluntarily. To answer, the distinction is not good: for omnipotency goes
along with providence, in the preservation of the creature, as well as it did
in creation for the production of the same; and therefore omnipotency is seen
in the creatures motions, whether natural, or voluntary. Secondly, that
distinction of the wills natural motion, and voluntary, is false: for I
demand, whether the will in both be an internal agent? if internal, then it
suffers neither violence nor coaction, but acts most freely, and therefore by
that modus efficiendi, which is counsel. Thirdly, a necessary impedition, and
infallible, are not always distinguished; nay a necessary impedition is
always infallible, though infallible be not always necessary: and therefore
to make distribution of a whole into a part, and a whole, is against reason,
and opposes those which are not opposed. Fourthly, the natural or voluntary
motion of the will to an external object, is never necessary, but contingent.
Therefore if the Lord should move the will, with a most certain
determination, upon some external object, it should not make the act
necessary.

Eigth Principle: Gods will is judged of by his word, by revelation, and by
event. Arminius excepts against the third, because the event may as well belong
to Gods permission of it, as his action in it: the former teaches us to
resolve the event affirmatively upon the second cause, but negatiuely upon Gods
will; because he would not hinder it, either by his power, secundum modum
naturae, or persuasion, secundum modum voluntatis liberae. If we grant that
God permitted sin (which before I have showed to be false, in regard that a
manner of working in sin is justified of God without all blame) yet does it
not follow, but that the event should be Gods: Zach. 6.1. the four charets of
the world, that is, all events, East, West, North, and South, come from
between mountains of brass, Gods immutable decree, which is as immooueable
as a mountain of brass. Again, that God must needs will the event, it is
plain from the order of his wisdom, which runs before and after all
events: before to work in them, and dispose of them; without which two causes
they cannot be: he that is the first wisdom, and the last, will not suffer
any event that shall not be from him, to him; for in as much as any thing is to
him, in so much it is from him, seeing it is equally good to both, that is, as
good for God, so good from God. Now surely, all events fall between these two
terms, and therefore from God to God. Again, as after the event, Gods
wisdom does either approve or disprooue of the second causes working it: and
hence all events are either ordered, limited, or punished of God.

9. Principle: No man can do that good which he might do by grace, except God
should work in him both the will, and the deed to effect the same. To this
Arminius replies, that God never gives power, but secondly all things that
might concur to bring that power into act. This is most true; for before we
showed, that two things were required to produce any work; faculty, and rule
of working; and God never put any faculty into his creature, but he gave him a
sufficient rule to work by. But the strait tying together of these two, makes
the creature to stand firm and immooueable: therefore religion (which since
the fall is properly so called) a tying again of man unto God, is this strait
bond, that ties the faithful soul for ever unto God; I will put my fear into
their hearts, and they shall never depart from me: This is eternal life to
know thee, etc. So then, beside the rule, and the faculty, a third thing is
required, not for sufficiency of working, but for certentie of working, and
that is, when the Lord shall put into us his spirit of grace, which shall lead
us into all truth, and keep us from falling away. And this third thing Adam
wanted, and therefore Phil. 2.13. It is God which works in you both the will
and the deed, even at his good pleasure: Observe, first it is said in you,
that is, his faithful ones: secondly, it is both will and deed: thirdly, it
is his most free will and pleasure, and therefore he may do it to whom he
will, and when he will: therefore man had power and rule sufficient to have
stood, but God did not so necessarily tie these together, but that man might,
if he pleased, deny his concourse with the rule, and so sin against God.

10. Principle: The government of the whole world, and all execution of
justice, is to be ascribed unto God. The exception to this is of small moment;
God does all not only in justice, but also in mercy, and knows where to
bestow both: this M. Perkins included in the government of the world, wherein
both justice and mercy are manifested.

The definition of Predestination reprehended in the genus or common nature, in
the subject, and in the end.
The next examination is concerning the definition of Predestination: wherein
Arminius reprehends three things, Rather reconciled then ^pposed in the first.
first the genus or common nature in it: secondly the subject: and thirdly the
end: for the first, Counsel cannot be the genus of predestination, because it
shows the manner how Predestination is effected: so that Predestination is not
Counsel, but that which is done by Counsel; Ephesians. 1.11. where predestination
is said to be wrought, after the counsel of his own will. To this I answer,
that by Counsel, M. Perkins understands the decree it self, by an usual Trope
of the cause for the effect, to wit, Counsel, for a decree by counsel; so
then Predestination is a decree by counsel: and thus both of them are rather
reconciled, then opposed.

For the second, The subject of Predestination is of man qua peccator, as
sinful: and in this Arminius does triumph, as the only ground whereby he
ouerturnes all other opinions of predestination; so that if we be able to
discover an other subject of Predestination, the cause will easily be euicted in
all the rest. Now for this purpose, let us first see how God wrought his
decree: and this must be done by resolution, Analysis and genesis of Gods
decree the only way to know it.
which always begins with the most special, and goes backward to the most
general: secondly, when we have brought it to the most general, to carry it
along, as God wrought it. He that will view the body of a man by Anatomy,
must first of all lay open the outward parts, and so by cutting, enter into the
secrets of the body, until he come unto those parts where sense, life, and
motion have their beginnings: so we that will look into the secret decree of
God, as it is revealed in his word, must begin with the most specialls, and so
ascend till we come to the highest: which though it be last in our resolution,
yet will it be the first in Gods working. Genesis
Gods knowledge direct
Alpha, God, Omega Glory Goodness His Virtues Intellectual Moral
Justice, Mercy. Analysis.

Gods knowledge indirect.
Creation. A world. Man. Made. Holy. Unholy. Redeemed. A Church. a latere.
Faihtfull. Singular.
Analysis.




The most special subject that can be imagined, The first subject in
resolution which is last in composition,
is one individual and singular man; and in this regard men are said either to
be written or blotted out of Gods book, that is, either chosen by name, or put
out by name; as in a register, wherein men are entitled unto some honor, he
that brags of it, and yet when the register is searched, has not his name
therein, is put to greater shame: and this book is called in the Scriptures,
the book of life, wherein God is said to write and blot out men's names; not
that any is blotted out, but that God manifests that he never had them in his
election. And this is made of Arminius his fourth and last decree, wherein he
inserts two most uncomfortable points: First, that the basis and foundation of
this, is nothing but Gods foreknowledge in the use of sufficient means
administered; which being received and kept, men should be saved; Grat^^
praeueniens subsequent.
if otherwise, damned. Secondly, though by preventing grace, men might believe,
and by subsequent grace persevere, yet he might loose both, and of a believer
become no believer; which first of all breaks in pieces the chain, Romans 8.3.
the consequent of justification is glorification: this is contradicted by
Arminius: a man may be justified, that never shall be glorified: for I am sure,
he that believes, is justified; yet he that believes, may fall from grace: and
therefore a man may be justified, that never shall be glorified. But the
Apostle says the contrary, Whom he has justified, them also he has
glorified. Again, it breaks the next link: for God calls all, seeing he
gives means sufficient to know and believe; and therefore effectual means
are used, whereby men are called, yet never shall be justified: when the
Apostle says the contrary, whom he calls effectually and sufficiently, they
are justified. So then, a man may be called, but never justified; and
justified, but never glorified.

Secondly, it makes against our redemption: Ioh. 10.27. My sheep hear my
voice, and follow me, etc. Here he contradicts three maine things in v. 28.
First, eternal life; he that believes has it; but he may loose it; therefore
eternal life, may suffer death, and so eternal should become temporal, and
immortal mortal. Secondly, they shall never perish; a good consequent from
eternal life: yet Arminius contradicts it, and says, Christ's sheep may
perish. Thirdly, No man shall pluck them out of his hand: but they may fall,
says Arminius, and therefore shall they be taken from him: but he will say, it
is of themselves: but that makes the co^tradiction much the worse. For then, 1.
Christ's sheep may not hear his voice. 2. Christ may not know them. 3. they
may not follow him. 4. they may extinguish that life, for which they are
content to loose their natural life: and their eternal life may be as subject
to casualtie, as their mortal and miserable life. 5. they that shall never
perish, may perish of themselves; therefore Christ shall not be as good as his
word, that said never. 6. Christ shall fuffer that of his own, which he would
never permit unto others; and therefore should be weaker to oppose the violence
of his own, then the tyranny of others. 7. his fathers gift, and greatness
shall be surprised; his Gift committed to the trust of his Son, shall not
faithfully be restored, and his Father that is greater then all, though he
shall prevail against all others, yet his own shall overcome him.

Thirdly, it takes away all Christian confidence; how durst Paul so triumph,
Romans 8.31.
challenge principalities and powers? Paul says, If God be for us, who shall
be against us? Why Paul, thou may be against thy self: God spared not his Son
to give us all things; yet Paul he gave us not perseverance. Who can charge
Gods chosen? who? Paul there is an answer; They can do it themselves. God
justifies, who shall condemn? The answer is easy; they may condemn
themselves. Christ is dead, yea rather risen, and makes intercession: but Paul,
for all his dying, we may die; for all his resurrection, we may rise to
condemnation; and for all his intercession, we may live not only in
purgatory, but hell it self. But to stop the mouths of such disputers, the
Apostle in the 35.38, 39. makes an ennumeration of all that can befall us; as
tribulation, anguish, persecution, famine, nakedness, peril, sword, death,
life, angels, principalities, powers, things present, things to come, height,
depth, or any other thing: and what more then these can be found. If thy self
be more then all these, then thou art assuredly a most wretched person, that
when all is taken away that might draw thee from Christ, then thou will draw
away thy self: what more desperate then this? In all these things, says the
Apostle, we are more then conquerours: and how should more then conquerers, be
conquered? and they that are thus persuaded not in themselves, but in him that
loved them, ever turn this their persuasion into miserable despair. And thus
much of the lowest step in Predestination.

2. ^^delis cum infi^^^.
Subject is a believer, or an infidel. Hence the Scripture bids us make our
election sure; Prove your selves, whether you be in the faith or no: know ye
not Christ dwells in you, except you be reprobates? now this is in the second
application of our redemption. For first, application is made unto the Church:
secondly, unto the members in the Church: so that this is more special then
that, and therefore by analysis rises first, yet is after the last, not in
Gods work, but in our seeing and feeling: and to this, concur preparation
unto faith, infusion of this grace, insition into Christ, vocation, union,
instification, imputation, reconciliation, regeneration, and glorification.
Infidels on the contrary, have no participation of these mercies; and
therefore forsaken of God. And this is the second decree of God, according to
Arminius, which he calls absolute and precise, Electio and reprobatio
qualatatu^ non personaru^.
because the other was but conditional in singular persons. To believers and
penitent, God gives salvation in Christ, for Christ and by Christ; but
impenitent and infidels damnation, as strangers from Christ. You are to
understand, that this decree is precise, in regard of faith, and not of the
person: for he may deny the faith, and become an infidel, and so be damned.
And here again he offers violence to the faith of Gods Elect, against which
Christ has said, The gates of hell shall never prevail. And thus by analyzing,
by the way, we have discovered two of Arminius decrees, with the falsehoods
therein contained.

3. Subject more general then both these, is the Church: Ecclesia ^zanijs.
and here is the proper place, of the manifestation of Gods decree. The Church
consists of mon, and angels: and so both men and angels, are the subject of
Gods decree; Reprobation, the manifestation of his hatred, both upon men and
angels, which are excluded from the true society and communion that is in his
Church: Election, the true declaration of his love, both upon men and angels,
which he has received into communion with himself under Christ Jesus the head
of the Church. I must descend a little in this, that I may discover a third
decree of Arminius, which only belongs unto this place; but yet I am not come
to the special head of it. The Church is militant, or triumphant: for the
triumphant Church, in which God has manifested his election, as well as the
militant, consists of saints and Angels. Here then observe, that sin and
misery, do not go before election, and reprobation: for so should they agree
to the whole subject, and every member of the same; but sin and miscrie,
agrees not unto the holy angels, Angels elect in the Church, and yet never
miserable.
and yet they are elect: now as many as were elect, could not fall into the
sin of apostacy, and therefore the rest were not elected; if not elected,
then rejected in Gods decree, and that before they fell; and therefore
reiection before sin. But to descend to the Church militant, which is with
the tares; first in Adam, election and reprobation appeared in Cain and Abel:
in Abraham, in Ismael and Isaac: in Isaac, in Jacob and Esau: in Jacob, called
Israel, the true Israel of God, and the fleshly seed: and now in the time of
the Gospel, here and there as it pleases God to reveal his will and counsel,
which long before was set down with himself: and for the gathering together of
his Church here upon earth, he has left means sufficient. And here comes in
the third decree of Arminus, that God has left in his Church sufficient,
necessary, and effectual means, to bring men to faith and repentance. And
this we grant, only we desire that these means may be understood as only
resting in the bosom of the Church, where God has laid open the riches of his
treasuries, and only to be effectual where Christ will apply them by the
gracious work of his spirit: for the Church is not compounded of tares and
wheat: but the militant Church is wheat with tares; as the sores of a body,
are not the part of a body, but with the body, and all cures are applied for
the body against the sores: and so all these means are for the welfare of his
Church, but against the tares; and the means are applied to both, to the one
for salvation, but to the other for damnation. 2. Tim. 2.19. Hymeneus and
Philetus have erred concerning the truth, and means of their salvation: this
might make weak Christians stagger, but the Apostle takes away all these
doubts, the foundation of God remains sure, and has this seal, The Lord
knows who are his: and therefore will apply these means only effectually, to
his own; for that opinion of universal grace is damnable: greater love then
this has no man, to lay down his life, etc. If then he have laid down his
life for the wicked, he has no greater love for his own, then he has for the
damned: and if Gods justice be satisfied for the wicked, how should he punish
them? and if Christ died for them, then God will acknowledge a satisfaction. But
they say, all the fault is for want of application: To this I answer, that
applicetion is as necessary an effect of redemption, as burning is of the fire;
and there can be no redemption, but of necessity it must bring in application:
first, in regard of Gods justice, which being appeased, cannot but be
reconciled to all those offenders, with whom he is well pleased in his son.
Secondly, in regard of Christ's sacrifice, Dan. 9.24. Messiah must be slain to
reconcile the iniquity, and bring in everlasting righteousness: this cannot be
done without application, for both justification and reconciliation belong to
application. Thirdly, in regard of believers themselves who are his members,
and therefore cannot be without the deriuation of grace, from their head Christ
Jesus.

4. Subject, is man captiuated under sin, Homo redimendus or redemptus.
and standing in need of a redeemer. Here comes in redemption, which is in
nature before application, either to the Church, or faithful: and therefore
going backward, we come most orderly unto it in the next place; and here shall
we find Arminius building up his first decree; and having detected him here,
Arminius his four decrees.
we shall never find him a step higher. He has four degrees, which all of
them are to be found, not in the apostasy or falling of man, but in his
anastasie, or rising again. The first is in redemption; Volo Christum esse
Mediatorem totius mundi, I will have Christ to be the Savior of the whole
world. The second is in special application; Volo resipiscentes and credentes
in gratiam reoipere, eosque perseuerantes ad finem vsque, saluos facere in
Christo, propter Christum, and per Christum, impenitentes vero, and infideles
in peccato, and sub ira relinquere atque damnare tanquam alienos a Christo:
that is, I will receive unto my grace and mercy, all that repent and believe,
persevere, and continue unto the end, in, thorough, and for my Christ: On the
contrary, all that are impenitent, and infidells, leave them in their sins
to their everlasting condemnation: and both these are peremptory. The third
decree is to be found in the Church militant; and that is, Volo omnia media ad
resipiscentia^ and fidem necessaria, sufficienter, administrare, etc. I will
decree all means necessary to repentance and faith, and sufficiently and
effectually administer them, etc. Fourth and last is of every singular person,
which belongs to the opening of the books at the day of judgment, special or
general: and this is all that he can say for Gods decree. And because we are
come to his first decree, which is that which he presses in all his book, we
will show that when he has pressed all his arguments, he proves no more, then
Christ to be the cause of redemption, but none of election.

Ephesians. 1.4. Elegit nos in Christo, he chose us in Christ: v. 6. he accepted of
us in his beloved: Romans 8.39. 2. Cor. 5.16. the argument is framed thus; If God
can will any to have eternal life, without respect of a mediator; then can he
give eternal life without satisfaction of a mediator; but this is impossible.
Secondly, if God can love no man but in Christ, then can he elect no man but
in Christ; for he elects none but those which he loves. These and all other
places concerning Christ, and the redeemed in Christ, Christ a means of
election, but a principal cause of redemption.
are thus to be answered: Christ is either considered as a means appointed of
God, or as a principle and proper cause: in the first he is subordinate: in the
second, supreme: as a means appointed of God, so he is subordinate to Gods
decree of election: and therefore neither as cause, nor means, nor condition,
goes before the decree: but as Christ is considered in redemption, he is the
principal, supreme, and maine cause of all that come within the limits of
redemption: we are chosen in Christ, not to be elected, but redeemed; not as the
cause of election, but as means appointed of God in our election; yet a
meritorius cause of our salvation and redemption: so then it is most true, that
God elects no man but in Christ, loves, saues and redeemes no man but by
Christ: in the one, the cause; in the other, the effect. So then election can
not presuppose faith in Christ, remission of sins by Christ, renouation of
the spirit, and perpetual assistance, because they follow election, the cause
of redemption, and redemption the cause of all these. So then while Arminius
disputes his decree in redemption, he commits these errors: first, he makes the
cause to follow the effect, as election to follow redemption: secondly, he
makes Christ's love in redeeming, to be the cause of Gods love in electing:
thirdly, he makes the means appointed for the end, to go before the end it
self: fourthly, he makes the fruits of redemption, as faith, remission of
sins, renouation by the spirit, perseverance, etc. occasions antecedent, to
Gods decree of election. So that these shall be no fruits of our election; which
if he grant on the contrary, then must they as occasions follow our election:
for the fruit is no ways before his cause, neither any occasion why the cause
should produce them: fifthly, though he deny it, yet he must confess that
these occasions as they are holden of him, must be causes for Gods decree to
save us by Christ, by faith, by repentance, by remission of sins, by
renouation, by perseverance in weldoing: what are these but causes of eternal
life? I am sure salvation is given unto Christ as a meritorious cause, Arminius
forgets him self when he says we are chosen in Christ as a meritorious cause,
for so his occasion at vn^wares slips into a cause.
and so in Christ to all the rest. These then going before Gods election to
left and salvation, can no ways be considered, but as causes: and indeed his
words sound so much, when he says, we are chosen in Christ, not as a means,
but also as a meritorious cause; of what effect I beseech you? if he say of
redemption, then we are all of one mind; but if he say of election, then we
reject him: but his meaning is, we are chosen in Christ, as a meritorious cause
of that choice, and so the occasion was not taken from thence, but the true and
only cause.

Many other absurdities follow from this, but I pass them over: and yet
before I ascend to the next step, let me tell you how Arminius contradicts
himself: First, he says, that the subject of election is man fallen: but how
can that be, seeing no men are elected before they be in Christ? I am sure that
he dare not deny, but that they were sinners before they were in Christ, and
therefore they were elected before they were elected. Secondly, he says, that
we are elected in Christ as a redeemer; and yet Christ is a redeemer before we
be in him, for application follows redemption. Again, both man fallen, and
man to be redeemed are all alike, and Christ is equal to all, where then is
election? Thirdly, a man must be in the Church, before he can be of the number
of the faithful, and until he be faithful he cannot be elected, therefore
election comes after the fall, redemption, and the Church. Fourthly, a
faithful man may fall, and so election may change, and therefore no certain
election but of singular persons. Thus then the first subject of election that
he can find, is either a faithful person or a singular person: so that it is
lower then the Church, redemption, or the fall. And he may as well begin with
the creation of the world, as with any of these three; for all are but media
precedanea: and though some of them show more just occasion for election or
reprobation, yet the proper subject by his doctrine cannot be found out, until
we come to the consideration of a man as a beeleeuer or an infidel: neither
here is it fixed, but it must skip again to a singular person: for says he,
that former decree is rather qualitatum then personarum, of qualities then
persons: so that he is uncertain in all his notions.

The next step that we ascend unto, Homo peccator the fifth step in ascending.
is man fallen: where God shows these attributes: First, his holiness, in
that the Lord was free from all fault: Secondly, his justice, whereby he being
most just in himself, cannot but execute justice: as in well-doing to them
which do well; so in inflicting punishment on them which do ill: as it burns
more remissely against sin, it is called anger; as more sharply, wrath; as
it does give sentence, judgment, as it does execute, vengeance. Thirdly, he
shows mercy, not that which is properly understood in Christ: but that which
is understood in my text, compassion, gentleness, patience, longanimitie,
bountifulness, etc. and these most properly appear in the fall: yet the fall
being more general then all that follow, has his use in them all, and is
subordinate with all the rest to the decree of God. And even here God manifests
his decree of election, even before the sending of Christ: Ioh. 3.16. God so
loved the world, that he has given his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. 1. Ioh. 4.9. In
this appeared the love of God toward us, because God sent, etc. in both these
places, the love of God is the cause why Christ was given and sent; and
therefore this love went before Christ, else should the cause follow the
effect; this love was decreed. So then, God loved the world, before he either
gave or sent his Son: actually he loves none but in Christ, neither does any
feel his love, but he that is in Christ: and therefore for the comfort of the
Church, the fittest place to teach the decree in, is application of Christ; yet
the determination of his love, was before all this, and the only cause why
Christ was sent into the world.

6. H^mo ad imaginem dei. gradus 6.
Step, is a man according to Gods image: and in this estate man was holy and
righteous, and to this image we are restored again in Christ, Romans 8.29. and
therefore God decreed to maintain this image in some of his creatures, that so
he might have the glory of his creation maintained for ever: and this is the
thing that made God have a Church from the beginning of the world, and no
Church wherein there is not Gods election, and the decree of his everlasting
salvation. Hence man in his innocence, was of Gods election; such a one as
then was ordained of God, could not die without the renouation of his image,
therefore our everlasting salvation was decreed in the estate of our integrity.

7. Step is man made, Homo creatus a^^ per creat^onem se ctus. gradn. 7.
and this is the first manner of consideration that we can find in a man; and
in this likewise appears the decree: for God made man for the manifestation of
his glory: not only in regard of general goodness, wisdom, and
omipotencie, seen in all the creatures, neither of that which was seen in the
angels, to wit, goodness communicated from an infinite good, to which being
joined their obedience, brought Gods rewarding justice, to confirm them in an
everlasting estate: and this is called, bonitas cum iustitia coniuncta,
goodness conjoined with justice, wherein appeared the election of the good
angels. Again disobedience, to dissolve and break off the communication with
that infinite good, brought in punishing justice, everlasting and eternal,
wherein appeared the reprobation of the bad angels. Thus far then it pleased
God generally to show his goodness, omnipotency, wisdom, etc. Secondly,
more specially his goodness and rewarding justice upon the blessed Angels; and
the loss of his goodness, with the inflicting of his punishing justice upon the
accursed angels: but as yet no subject to show goodness, justice, and mercy;
and therefore man must be made the subject on which he will show all his
goodness; in what order, you shall hear when I come to show the ends in Gods
decree.

8. Is man, more general then all these: For man made, Homo generale subiectum
o^^i bus adiunctis praesuppositum. grad. 8
has a special end, to wit, happiness of creation: man made holy,
happiness with the creator: man made unholy, misery with himself: man
redeemed, salvation by Christ: and so of all the rest, special ends may be
assigned; which can be nothing else, but the manifestation of Gods glory in
his justice and mercy.

9. Mundus exnihilo. gradus. 9.
A world, made of nothing, exceeding good, whereof man is a part, and the most
principal, and therefore made for man. Now even before this subject, was
election, Come, receive the kingdom prepared for you before the foundations of
the world: So then, God intended a kingdom for his elect, before he made this
world.

10. Creatio omnium or goad extoriora: gr^dus vl^^mus, and sup^^mus.
Creation, the original of all things, and before which there was nothing, and
without this man could not be: so then, when they say, man was by creation, it
is true, that man there took his original; and creation is more general then
man, but so creation is taken actiuely; but passiuely as in man, it is more
special; therefore man created, is a special consideration of man; but man in
Gods creation, is more general. Hence the Lord in making of him, appointed him
all his ends. To conclude, the creation of man, was for the manifestation of
all Gods divine attributes, as well justice and mercy, as the rest. And now
being come to the highest staire in creatures, we slip presently out of
them, and lay all the rest on Gods will, as the only subject. This is as it
were, the body of Gods decree, the rest is as the soul: this external, that
which follows internal; in this is manifested Gods indirect knowledge, in
the other, his direct and proper knowledge: the lowest step of this is
justice and mercy; and the subject in which these two rest, is his will; I
will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and compassion on whom I will have
compassion, Romans 9.15. and v. 18. He has mercy, on whom he will have mercy;
and whom he will, he hardens. (...) in (...) re(...) 2. ^irtus mor^^s. 3
intellectuals. 4 (...). 5 bo mitas. 6. Gloria 7. Deas ipse: ^l pha and om^ga.
Second head we call moral virtues, whereby God wills every thing most
readily that is good, and is most prompt in the performance thereof: so that
justice and mercy coming under this head, according to our capacity, are
moved to nothing but that which is good: third, intellectual virtues, whereby
God is most prompt in the performance of every act of understanding: fourth,
virtues, whereby God is known unto us to be absolutely good: fifth,
goodness, the head and fountain of all these: sixth, glory, the perfection of
goodness: seventh, God himself, which is known unto us by all these. That
this is the Scripture, see all in the 33. of Exodus and also in the 34. Chap.
33. ver. 18. I beseech thee show me thy glory: v. 19. God answers Moses, my
glory is too excellent for thee, but my glory, which is seen in my goodness,
shall go before thee: I will make all my good go before thee: that is, thou
shall see the backe-parts of my glory: these backeparts are Gods virtues,
which are able to proclaim his name: for virtue is the only thing, to blaze
abroad the name of Jehovah: these virtues are mercy and compassion: more
special, Chap. 34.6.7. strength, mercy, grace, patience, bountifulness,
longanimitie, gentleness, etc.

Here you see is special mention of mercy and justice, Mercy and justice Gods
chief glory.
as though in regard of them, all the rest were obscured: these are as the two
great lights, the one to rule the day of his election, the other to rule the
night of man's misery. Now all these are simply willed of the Lord; and
therefore as we have come upward by analyzing, so now may we boldly compose
again the whole matter.

First, God wills his glory, secondly his goodness, Genefis, or the order of
Gods proceeding as far as the Scripture guides us.
thirdly his verues, fourthly the virtues of understanding, fifthly the virtues
of will, sixthly the principal virtues of his will, justice, and mercy: this
is all done in himself absolutely without all respect unto the creatures. But
God will manifest all this out of himself: First, therefore he will create:
secondly by creation, he will make a world: thirdly in the world, he will have
a man: fourthly that he may have him, he will make him: fifthly he will make him
in his own image: sixthly man thus made, may by his own free will become
unholy: seventhly man being unholy, may be received unto mercy, or plagued
with justice: eighthly that man may be received unto mercy, Christ shall
redeem: ninthly that Christ may redeem him, he must bring him to his
sheepefold, and save him in the arc of his church: tenthly that he may be
saved in the Church, he must create in him the spirit of faith: lastly, he must
bring him to those heavenly mansions, where his name was written long before
the foundations of the world; the rest being left in their sins, must dwell
out of heaven, where there names are written in the earth. And thus much of the
subject.

Now I come unto the end: Concerning the third thing in the definition which is
about the end.
where I will show three things: first the end it self; secondly, the
manifestation of it; thirdly, the order. The end, on all parts is granted, to
be Gods glory: for as he is the supreme efficient cause of all things, so is
he the last end; and before him, and after him, nothing is to be found.
Secondly, all agree, that the manifestation must be in regard of his essential
properties; only all the question is of the last, in what order they are to be
manifested. That this may appear, we will show what the order of ends is:
Subordination of ends to some last.
secondly, which end is exactly the last in this order: thirdly, the order of
the means: fourthly, the order of subjects, out of which, these means are
produced. Order of ends, is the subordination, or bringing under of all ends to
one last end: the reason of this is, because order is always of things
coming betwixt an absolute first, and an absolute last: this the heathen
Philosophers called (...), eruditio in cinculo, wisdom running round in a
circle. In a circle you know, that there must be the same beginning and ending:
so God, the beginning and ending of all things, makes his wisdom in all his
creatures run round from him to him. This the heathen Poet Homer, called,
(...), auream catenam, quae de coelo vsque ad terram descendebat, a golden
chain, coming from heaven to earth; in which every footsteppe or impression
of Gods wisdom, is as a golden lincke, coupled with some-other from the
beginning to the end. So then, the first point is plain, that all things are
united together for some last end. Many lines meet in one center, and so all
make but one; yet being drawn unto the circumference, spread themselves abroad.

For the second, The last end consists in all Gods attributes which are one as
himself is one.
all Gods attributes, are the last end; his glory is the last, his goodness
is the last, his virtues are the last, and so of the rest. If it be inquired
which of all these we are to conceive of, as the last exactly; I answer,
justice and mercy. This shall the better appear, if we consider how God is
the best in every thing. If we speak of beeings, then God is the best, and
most absolute being: if we speak of life, then God is the best life:
therefore will and understanding, which belong unto the best life. Now will and
understanding, are considered of us, either for faculty, or virtue: for
faculty, then the Lords understanding being the best, must be able to
understand together and at once all truths, and his will most free to will all
good: faculty we say, makes able, but virtue makes prompt and ready; as the
intellectual virtues make a man prompt and ready to understand, the moral
virtues prompt and ready to will that which is good. Virtue is whereby God is
known unto us, to be absolutely good, therefore absolute happiness, both for
understanding, and will. These being premised, let us see where we may note
the greatest perfection and excellency. First, virtues are more excellent then
faculties; and so the Lord had rather show his goodness, then his
omnipotency. Secondly, moral virtues, are better then intellectual, in so
much as the will is better then the understanding; therefore I dare boldly say,
the Lord had rather show his moral virtues, then intellectual: The best
virtues justice and mercy.
for it is a greater praise to be just and merciful, then wise and
understanding. Lastly, among moral virtues, none comparable to justice, and
mercy: why then may I not conclude, that exactly the last end that God would
have manifested, is the glory of his justice and mercy: and if this be the
last, then all other must be brought under these, and aim at these principally.

Reasons of this assertion, are many. First, that which brings out of the
creature the special manifestation of Gods glory, is the last and best end;
but justice and mercy do this: Exodus 33.19. I will proclaim the Name of the
Lord before thee: and what is especially proclaimed? justice and mercy: and
mercy more then justice: so, Romans 9. God will get him a name on Pharaoh, a
reprobate by his justice; and a name on his Elect, by his mercy: and therefore
God is often said in the Scriptures, to delight himself in justice and mercy.

Secondly, justice and mercy, are the chief, because they are the virtues of
the will, which is properly conversant about good. Thirdly, these make us
conceive of God, as the chief good. It is worth our observation, to see even
how by the light of reason, the Heathen have ascended to this consideration:
they referred all things to four heads. 1. Such as have only being. 2. that
have being, and life. 3. that have being, life, and sense. 4. that have
being, life, sense, and reason: backward again, 4 return into 3. 3 into 2. 2
into one: so all these, though diverse, yet founded in one. Now this one once
was not, and therefore when it was, it was by the power and force of some
chief and first being; and this they termed absolute essence: this being
always, they termed it eternal essence. Again, to being finding life, the
next they called God, (...), a living God. In the third place, because life was
in trees, and the beasts of the field, they gave unto God the name of (...),
mind, or understanding. In the fourth place, because they thought the mind of
man to be bare and naked, having nothing written in it, yet capable of all
things, and therefore imperfect, they called God further, (...) and (...),
power and act, and so a perfect mind. 5. Because power and act might be
abused, and so the greater and the worse, they called God, (...), goodness it
self. 6. Because they thought the chief good to be according to all virtues,
they gave virtues unto God, both intellectual and moral. 7. Because virtues
were qualities, and so comprehended within the limits of subjects, they called
God infinite in being, living, understanding, working, infinite goodness, and
infinite virtue. Now in the 8 place, because infinite virtue must be one most
simple virtue, and comprehend all in it, they saw not how Gods providence,
should rather be counted providence, then justice; and justice rather justice,
then mercy; and mercy more mercy, then knowledge; knowledge then life, and
life then essence.

True it is, God simply one, to us diverse.
God is simply one in himself, yet apprehended of us as diverse. For so we
define him in his attributes; that he is one God, diversely apprehended of us.
Therefore the manifestation of himself in his creatures, is to be considered
in diverse heads: yet the greatest meeting together of all his attributes, is
most to be seen in his justice and mercy. Therefore both Scripture and
reason, prove God especially glorified in his justice and mercy. If then
justice and mercy, be most exactly the last end, then must all ends, and
means, and subjects, be subordinate unto this end: and this end must be
decreed before all the rest. Hence we may conclude, that God intended to
manifest his justice and mercy, before all things.

For the third, the order of the means, The order of means.
it must thus be conceived, that that which is first in execution, is last in
the intention of the workman, and most remote from the end; and the lower we
go, the nearer we come unto the end. M. Perkins makes creation and permission
of the fall, two general means of Gods predestination. This Arminius
reprehends: for, says he, both creation and the fall, go before
predestination: it is true in the execution; but if predestination rest upon
the last end, intended of God, it must needs go before as an end, and have all
these means come under him. As for example; I would determine a journey to
London, to speak with some dear friend; this is before all the means that I
use to come unto him: yet before I can accomplish this, I must come where he
is; and that I may come where he is, I must get me a horse, and all things
necessary for my journey: then must I go from place to place, until I come
where he is: so that the first in intention, is last in execution; and in the
progress, the further I go, the nearer I am to consider the means subsequent
unto the end. In like manner, God intends the manifestation of his justice and
mercy; therefore this is the first with God, and the last, that all means
drives at. That this may be brought about, God will create, create a world, man
in this world, man holy, man holy may by his own freewill become unholy, man
unholy may be punished with the justice of God, but redeemed may be received
unto mercy.

Concerning the fourth, order of subjects: The order of s^biects manifesting
Gods divine attributes.
The first subject is nihilum, nothing, out of which God must bring something;
and here steps out to our view, omnipotency. The second subject is a world,
admirable for beauiie, and perfect for goodness: and here arises the
manifestation of Gods wisdom, and goodness. Thirdly, in this world there
shall be creatures, either to communicate with a finite good, or an infinite
good: in those that communicate with a finite good, God shows his wonderful
love to men and angels, that made all in heaven, and earth for them: secondly,
with an infinite good, that is, with God himself, as men and angels; where he
meant to lay open all the treasury of his glory; goodness, and virtues. And
here first of all, he made them all in his own image, and therefore able to
express any of his attributes: God is a spirit, so are they spiritual: God is
understanding and will; and so they have both understanding and will. The
understanding and will of men and angels are special subjects to declare his
goodness.
Hence may men and Angels show forth both his intellectual virtues, and
moral virtues; they have intelligence, to conceive of principles; science, to
judge of truths; sapience, to make diductions from those truths; prudence, to
carry all things orderly; and art or skill, to practice in any subject the
excellency of their reason: Again, for moral virtues, as compassion,
gentleness, patience, longanimitie, bountifulness, liberality, magnificence,
fortitude, but especially justice and mercy. So then; in that God made them
with holy and righteous vnderstanding^ and wills, they were to set forth all
his virtues: and therefore Saints restored are commanded, to set forth the
virtues of him that has called them into his maruailous light.

To descend first to angels: Angels set forth goodness and justice.
God by creation did communicate with them infinite goodness, wherein did
consist their happiness; now in reason it was necessary, that this
communication should be by compact, and the square of justice; wherefore a law
must be given them, according to which, this communication was to be
maintained. Hence commination, as well in the loss of this goodness, as
participation for the observation of the rule. Here then may the Lord manifest
his justice; to obedience, remuneration and everlasting communication; and this
is the manifestation of infinite goodness, conjoined with Gods rewarding
justice, wherein appeared the election of the good angels: to disobedience, the
loss of this infinite good, wherein appeared punishing justice, peremptorily
inflicting damnation on all the bad angels; and here appeared their
reprobation: but in both these could no mercy be showed: not in the first,
because in the good angels, there was no misery: except we coneciue possible
misery, which is not a fit subject for mercy, seeing there was no want for the
perfection of a creature: neither could it be unto the bad angels, for though
by their fall, they became miferable, and so might have received mercy; yet
because they sinned against the holy Ghost, their sin was unpardonable, and
incapable of mercy.

Leave we the Angels, and come to men, where more especial communication is to
be observed from the divine wisdom of God. First, Men set forth goodness,
(...) and mercy.
God did communicate with them infinite goodness, but it must be received by a
rule of justice, Do this, and thou shall live: and also a commination of the
loss of it, But if thou do not, thou shall die the death: here no man
communicated with God in observing of the Law, and therefore could there not be
found in man any rewarding justice, as was found in the good Angels: so that
man was now for ever put out of the possession of happiness, by the Law of
God: and if ever he receive this happiness again, it must be by mercy. O
therefore, for the love of God, you Papists, consider this one thing; That man
is not now to be saved, as the Angels are in heaven: and therefore deny all
your works, if it were for no more then Adams sin: for now will he have it
under the condition of mercy. Man then having put himself out of Gods favor,
and not by a sin against the holy ghost, may be received unto mercy. So here
is a fit subject for God to show his goodness, justice, and mercy: and where
he had decreed, the manifestation of his mercy, it shall appear when he has
sent his Son, gathered his Church, and ingrafted every faithful soul into
the mystical body of this Savior. Again, where he has decreed the
manifestation of his justice, it shall appear in all those that are passed
over of Christ, and have not his blood sprinkled upon them. This shall make all
spiritual Egypt, even at the midnight of their misery, to cry out most
lamentably: but Israel shall then receive the best Jewels, costly attire, and
every precious thing that heart can wish. I should follow Arminius in the rest,
but because I hear some other are about it, that are worthy men, I break
off: for I confess, that I was drawn unto it, by considering how many run
after Arminius. If the learned of the Land, shall approve this which I have
done, and no others shall have taken it in hand, I will be ready to stand at
their command, to proceed in the rest. And I can not but break out, to bless
and praise God, that has lately raised up such worthy Bishops, the true
Defenders of the Orthodoxall truth, and resolute enemies to all that oppose it.
I am at their command to stay, or go forward: and if I have slipped in any
thing, (for I confess my ignorance may soon draw me into error, and error may
plunge me in heresy it self) I am willing to hear any, and yield presently:
but I hope it is the truth, and then it will stand. We have great cause to
bewail the miseries of these wretched times, in which Atheism, clouds of
heresy, worldly policy, (fasly so called, being indeed little better then
plain villenie) and temporizing, have like a canker, fretted out the very
heart of piety: they are but a few which seek to search out the certainty in
matters of Religion, or which care to have established hearts, and know
precisely which is the true God, Baal or the Lord. We had rather halt between
two opinions, that so we may be for all times, then undergo the labor of
gayning advised resolution. Some slip into Popery, being lead captive (God
in justice sending them strong delusions) by those false brethren, which are
privily crept into every corner, through the remissenes of these evil times.
Others run headlong to prophannesse, and that which is of all other the
worst, luke-warmenes. This brings in want of love to the truth, and want of
this, heresy: so that we may well say, except the Lord of hosts had reserved
unto us, even a small remnant, culling out (as it were) one of a city, and two
of a Tribe, as the shepherd takes out of the mouth of a lion two legs, or a
piece of an ear, according to the election of grace, we should long ere this
have been as Sodom, and like unto Gomorrha: we had bin (as it is said of a
cursed tongue) a very world of wickedness. And surely except the good Governors
and Shepherds of our Land, be vigilant and careful, we shall not so much have
the sheep, in the mouth of the lion, as the Shepherds themselves; and then,
woe be to the flock. It is reported, that Beza conferring with Arminius, and
seeing in his young years such ripeness of wit, brake out into these words,
Go thy way, for I am fully persuaded, that thou will either prove an
excellent instrument of Gods Church, or a most pestilent heretic; which
prophecy we see now come to pass. God deliver our Shepherds out of his
mouth, and establish them in soundness of doctrine, that so the silly sheep
may not be devoured by their own Pastors. Propositions.
1 Gods will his glory. 2 His glory is his goodness. 3 His goodness is all
his attributes. 4 His attributes are his virtues. 5 His virtues are
intellectual and moral. 6 His moral virtues, are his justice and mercy. 7
All these he wills absolutely. 8 That which he wills, he can do. 9 That which
he can do, and wills, that he decrees. 10 That which he decrees, is done by
counsel. 11 That which is done by counsel, is wisely done. 12 That which is
wisely done, is for some good end. 13 That which is for some good end, has
all good means. 14 Creation, is a good means of Gods end. 15 The world is
made for Gods end. 16 Men and Angels are made for this end. 17 Angels show
forth his goodness and justice. 18 Men show forth goodness, justice, and
mercy. 19 Christ is a means to declare Gods mercy. 20 Men only receive
mercy from Christ. 21 All out of Christ, are justly condemned. 22 A just
condemnation is for sin. 23 All this God has done. 24 That which he has
done, he could do. 25 From both these, he decreed. 26 That which he decreed,
he purposed. 27 That which he purposed, respected his glory. 28 His glory was
agreeable to his wisdom. 29 That which agreed with his wisdom, was good. 30
That which was good, he absolutely willed: therefore he absolutely willed all
these things.


Observe that the end confists not in use, but in his goodness and fitness
for use: the end of an house is not habitation, for that is after the house is
made; now the end is before the making of the house; and therefore that a
house should be good and fit for habitation, that is the end; though the house
it self were never inhabited. The world was made for man, yea, and that before
man was existent; yet that goodness and fitness which respected man, was put
into the creature, and should be brought forth after the creation of man,
according as he had use of them. So God made all these things fit for his
glory; this fitness was good, and absolutely willed of God; and the use that
God made of this fitness was likewise good; but no excuse for man's sin: no
more then the fitness of an house for habitation an excuse, when it is made a
den of thieves, whores, and profane persons.

Of the second special book, wherein Sin is ordered, to wit, the Moral Law.
THe Law of the Lord is the perfect Rule of righteousness, and the forbidder
of all unrighteousness: it shows us what ought to be our worship of his sacred
Majesty, and the love we must bear unto our neighbor. In the first
Commandment, all our sins of Atheism, either in not worshipping God, or
worshipping another god, or preferring any thing before him, whether it be in
thought, word, or deed. In the 2. Commandment, we shall have ordered all our
ill worship, devised by others, or our selves in the service of God. In the 3.
we shall be condemned for all kind of prophannesse, and light estimation of God
and his goodness, and here will come in an infinite number of sins, called
in one word ungodliness. In proper signification, impiety is against the
first Commandment; superstition against the second: and ungodliness in this
third, which was a principal sin in these hypocrites. In the 4.
Commandment, all employments of the seventh day to any other use, then it was
appointed of God, whereby holy exercises are hindered: and here, alas, a whole
year would scarce suffice to number them up, but I doubt not but he that said
he will order, will make a quick dispatch, and yet leave none out of his
catalogue. For the 5. in this Commandment shall come in all neglect of duty
toward our superiors. In the 6. all want of care and neglect of my brothers
life. In the 7. all kind of uncleanness whatsoever, yea in the very thought.
In the 8. all corrupt dealing. In the 9. all lying, yea every speech that may
do harm unto my neighbor. In the 10. all repining and envying at another
man's prosperity. O Lord, thy Law is perfect, thy testimonies are sure, thy
statutes are right, thy commandments pure, thy judgments truth: but alas, who
can understand his faults? surely thou can order all our sins, O therefore,
for the merits, death, and passion of thy Son, cleause us from our secret
sins. James 1.25. teaches us, how we may be blessed, Gods law the true
discerner of complexions.
if we use the perfect Law of God as a glass appointed of the Lord: and is
able to show unto us the good face, or the bad face of our conscience, what
kind of complexion we bear; whether well tempered, ruddie, fresh, and
well-liking, having the blood of Christ sprinkled upon us in just proportion
and measure, that the King of glory may be delighted with our beauty; or ill
tempered with the pale and deadly complexion of our sins and transgressions,
hated and detested of God, on which God can show never a good look.

It is reported of a certain fountain, in which a glass being dipped, and
holden before a man sick on his bed, if it show him a deadly face, then it is
a plain sign he must die; but if a cheerful countenance, then he is sure to
live: of the truth of this, I will not dispute, yet this I am sure of, take
this glass of the Law, and dippe it in the blood of Christ, if it show a pale
face, then there is no hope of life, because the law shows nothing but a man
looking upon it, with his deadly sins hanging upon him; but if it show a
merry countenance, then the law shows that we have the beauty of Christ
reflected upon us, and this may assure us of life and salvation. Now as a
glass helps to order men in the carriage of themselves for their bodies among
men; so the law of God, does direct and show unto us, what course we are to
take to walk with God. And herein it declares three things. The law shows
what is comely and uncomely what apparel must be put on what off, and then
what must be our behavior.
First, what is comely or uncomely: Ephesians. 5. To be followers of God as dear
children, and walk in love, as Christ has loved us, is a seemly thing: but
fornication, uncleanness, covetousness, filthiness, foolish talking, jesting, etc.
are things not comely, and rather giving of thanks, then the very naming of
these things becomes the Saints. Secondly, after it has showed us what
beseems Saints, it teaches what apparel we must off, and what must be put
on: Ephesians. 4.22. The old man, with his whole conversation must be cast off, and
the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness, must
be put on. Thirdly, after we have apparelled our selves, it will order the
behavior and carriage of our selves, all the days we have to live upon this
mortal earth. Tit. 2.12. For the grace of God that brings salvation has
appeared, and teaches us to deny all ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to
live holily, righteously, and soberly in this present world.

Yet may we admire, what should be the reason that for all this, sin is no
better ordered. when the Lord has left us so perfect a law, The law no false
glass.
better then all the looking glasses in the world: for it tells men most truly
their bad faces, and their good faces, it beguiles no man, in making him better
the^ he is: nay, it has a privilege above all other laws, to wit, many
particular examples, which are as little glasses contained in this great
glass; wherein men may see their own faces by the face of another. As good
Kings, may not only see themselves in Gods law, what is to be done, and left
undone, and what is the reward of both; but they may see themselves in David, a
man after Gods own heart, Josias, Ezekias, true reformers of religion: evil
Kings, in Saul, Jeroboam, and Manasses: good rich men in Abraham, evil in
Dives: ambitious persons, in Hammon; contented in Mordecai: covetous in Judas,
liberal hearted in Zacheus: evil counselors in Ahitophel, good in Samuel, 1.
king. 12. embracers of the world in Demas, close stickers unto Christ and his
servants in Philemon: sound friends in Jonathan, rotten at the heart in Ioab:
faithful children in Solomon, rebellious in Absalom: good servants in Abraham's
servant, evil in Onesimus: obedient and loving wives in Sara, evil in Michal
David's mocking wife. Alas, will neither precept, nor example, deal with man,
but the Lord must bring in a third bnoke to order sin, and that is to set it
in the eyes of the conscience, as he does in this place? surely it were not
amiss, by the way, to show the reason of this last refuge of the Lord, and
this last appeal to the court of conscience. Reasons why Gods law can order
sin no better, but the last refuge must be to the co^rt of conscience.
First is an evil conscience it self, that may not endure the Law to rub on
that sore: as timorous patients had rather die and rotte away, then that either
bitter purgation should be inwardly taken, or any corasiues applied outwardly:
or like bankerupts, hate nothing worse, then to look upon their books of
accounts: or like the Elephant, least he should see his foul great body, muds
the water that he may drink. So these in like manner, had rather rot away in
their sins, then that the purging physic of the law should be administered,
or the corasiues of Gods curses should be laid upon their sores: the soul
bankerupt of grace, may not endure to hear of the accounts and reckonings that
it must make with Gods law: and the body of sin is so foul, that he would
not look upon it: and therefore by his pleasures and pastimes he laughs sin
out of countenance: but woe be unto him, when he shall be pressed of God, to
confess his sin, upon the rack of his conscience.

2. is continual living in dar^nesse.
The second reason, is the love of darkness, and the hatred of the light. A man
that has a long time bin shut up in close prison, and kept from the light of
the sun, when he is drawn into the open air, his eyes are so dazeled with
the bright beams thereof, that he cannot look about him, but desires to be in
his den again; and with the owl, had rather put his head into a hole, then
have the sun shine on it: his time is with the Bat to fly abroad when the
night is come: therefore Gods law being as the shining of the sun, and his
life lead in darkness, he will not to the light, least his works should be
reproved.

Thirdly, 3. Negligence.
men are either so lasie in themselves, that they will not go to the glass of
Gods law, or else they can endure no smart, because the law would have them wash
and be clean; like little children though they see their spots in a glass,
yet they may not endure the cold water.

Fourthly, 4. Lusts.
men are not ordered by Gods law, because they will attend upon their lusts.
Like schoole-boies that see their foul faces, yet because they are given to
play, run away from the water: so many a man, by the cares of the world, as
of pleasure, profit, honor, or such like, cannot stay to make any use of the
beholding of themselves in Gods law: Iam. 1.24. For straight way he is gone,
and so forgets what manner of person he was. Our Savior Christ when he
invited his guests to his marriage feast, found many idle excuses returned unto
him. One has bought a farm, and he must go see it: others a yoke of oxen,
and they must go try them: others have married a wife, and they desire
likewise to be excused. Every one has something to do, to keep them from God
and his law; it were well if they knew how faithful reckonings, make long
friends: and therefore it were very good not to delay the time with God: for he
will not be mocked. Christ has stood a long time knocking: he is standing, if
we put off to answer, he may soon be gone away from us. We use Christ as he
was used in his birth; no room for him in the Inn; if he please, he may have
the stable and the manger; and good reason, for great personages and usual
guests, have taken up the inner rooms: so deal we with our Savior, our
souls are taken up with great personages, as lords and commanders, whom we
cannot but obey: as lord covetousness, ambition, pride, self-love, pleasure,
and many usual guests, with which we have had great custom, so that Christ
being an unknown guest unto us, it may be for mere pity we will bestow upon
him our worst rooms; if he please to go into the stable, and will not vex us
in the inner rooms of our souls, he shall have a nights lodging, and we will
bestow upon him some of our refuse, such as our great lords care not to meddle
withal. This I tell you, is a strong means to keep us from Christ and his
law, when like slaves we will be at the command of our base affectons.

Fifthly, disordered callings take away the ordering of sin; as what law can
order our common beggars, stage players, fiddlers, and such like: so many a
wretched calling into which men thrust themselves, takes away all ordering by
Gods law, and makes them run headlong into all shame and confusion: nay
further, many callings from God, by the wickedness of man's heart are become
exceeding sinful, when indeed Gods callings are all happy orders for our
good. As for example, shopkeepers, they cannot live except they sell their
wares upon the Sabbath day; how should Gods law order these persons in the
sanctification of the Sabbath? for it is in vain for that person to wash,
which presently after he has washed his hands, must foul them again: so Ale
wives, how should they sanctify themselves, when they are ready to serve
every filthy puddle, and durtie foul? it is hard to ride with an other in
foul way and not be plashed by him; for one to be at the mill, and not to be
dusted; to touch pitch, and not be defiled; to carry burning coals in his
bosom, and escape the burning.

Sixth, is a misconceit of the word of God, and his ministers, 6. Want of love
that they would make him worse then he is. We see a man, when the glass does
discontent him, throws it away, and will not believe that he is so deformed,
and therefore that glass shall not teach him to apparel himself: so men
deal with Gods word and his ministers, as Ahab dealt with the Prophet, Shall I
seek unto him, he never prophesied any good unto me? wherefore have thou found
me, O my enemy? thou art the troubler of my state, and therefore shall have no
hearing.

Seventh, inquiry of their companions, 7. Mis information of others.
whether the matter be so heinous, as the word of God and his ministers would
have it? What, is good fellowship for half a douzen of ale, so great a matter?
Is playing a game or two at the cards on the Sabbath day so great an offense,
as nothing will pay for it but damnation? Alas, he surely is too precise, and
denies all liberty: truly, truly, as long as one slovin inquires of another,
there is like to be no handsomnesse: so as long as one drunkard will be
resolved by another, one whoor-master by another, one swearer by another, one
beastly companion by another, the law of God shall appease no tuinults among
them.

Eigth, 8. Habit of finning.
the habit of vndecencie; hence no care to look into the glass: he applauds
himself in that profession, and would have the world so account of him; he
laughs at his own foul face, and this unhandsome apparel: so the habit of
sin makes men laugh at reformation.

Ninth, 9. Hardness of heart.
desperation: the blacke-moore will not wash, for he may as soon wash his
skin off, as take away his color: the leopard cannot change his spots: and so
is it with them that are accustomed to do evil.

Lastly, 10. Presumption.
the hope of a good day (as we say) makes men put off their washing; as they
will wash at Christmas, on Sunday, or when a holy day comes, or some feasting
day: so many a soul under the hope of mercy, puts off the day of his
visitation, and means to repent in his old age: But alas, repentance is the
gift of God, and therefore not to be commanded at their wills. I remember the
good counsel that one gave to one of these delayers, who inquired the best
time to repent: the answer was made according to his mind, one day before his
death: that is well says he, but yet I am not resolved: for I know not when I
shall die: neither do I, says his Counselor, yet this is my counsel to
prevent that danger, repent every day, and then shall you be sure to repent
the day before your death. And these may be some of the reasons why men will
not be ordered by Gods law, and therefore very requisite that God should have
another book, for the ordering of sin and sinners, and that is the
conscience, which is to be understood in this place: yet so, that the other
ought not to be excluded, for this can do nothing but by the information of
the former: for this book is as I may term it, the application of the
former; this makes use of the precepts laid down in them: and therefore
conscience is very necessary, that the law might have his work in
commanding and forbidding sin: now the conscience from the evidence that the
law gives in, either absolues or condemns, and so the Lord has made it a
little Judge, sitting upon his throne in the souls of men.

Before] The proposition in the original, gives us to understand, that after
the ordering of sin, sin should be so visible, that it were impossible for
a wicked man to look off it: it shall still meet him in the face, and suffer
his conscience to take no rest, night nor day.

Thee:] The original has it, in thine eyes: Eye of the body
man has a threefold eye; first, the eye of the body, but that is no
discerner of sin: for wicked men have this eye active enough to behold vanity
and pleasure. Hence rises the extraordinary sensuality of mankind, after the
pleasures and profits of this world; they live all by sense, blinded in their
understanding, and conscience: but this eye is not meant in this place. The
second eye, is the eye of understanding, Eye of reason no sufficient judge in
the matters of sin.
which is the true discerner of all Gods works: for God having made all for
man, he must needs give him an eye, to behold all things that were made for
him. By this eye, Adam was able to name the creatures, to know their natures,
ends, and uses: this eye since the fall is notably bleered; in heavenly things
which truly concern God, he can see nothing at all, because the object is
too far distant, and cannot be reached unto by any faculty in him: even as
an aged man can see things about him, but to look afar off, he is not able,
neither can he discern any thing: so our aged understandings can see some
things at hand, as what belongs to this estate: as he is a man for civil
society, he can do some moral duties, exercise himself in civil matters,
and labor to maintain his natural life. Yet in all these his eye is so
dim, that he commits many disorders in them all: for his morallitie, see how
he abuses it in the first of the Romans: for his ciuillitie, see how he breaks
the legs of justice, and makes him lie in the streets: for strange be the
contentions that are in the world betwixt men, to supplant one another in their
rights, to infringe good titles, and make up broken: and for this purpose, many
a lawyer has even sold himself to be a man of contention, for himself and
his neighbors; and so far he makes himself for every body, if so be he can
make every body for himself. Lastly, in natural things he has lost the use
of sobriety; and therefore in eating and drinking, he becomes either a
glutton, or a drunkard: therefore this eye cannot be quick enough for the
sense and feeling of Gods judgments: Lie of conscience the best judge.
therefore God above sense and reason has given a third eye, which is the eye
of conscience, and this is a most powerful eye; in so much that the learned
have affirmed that conscience is supra hominem, infra deum, above man, under
God.

Concerning the third book, which is the Conscience.
Conscience in signification is nothing else, but knowledge with an other; when
I am persuaded, that another knows with me, and that all my secrets are as
well known unto him, as they are unto my self. Hence conscience may be said
to act three parts: Conscience the Lawyer, Register, and Judge.
first part, is the Lawyer, which pleads the cause, and this is called (...),
or pure part of the conscience: Saul if he had pleaded with his conscience, and
taken counsel of this best part, he should have been informed, that
rebellion was as the sin of witchcraft: but we blind this eye of our
conscience, and therefore we will do what pleases our selves, be it right or
wrong. Second part is the act of a register, which en^oules all matters of fact
against the times of inquisition: and so the conscience is called a book or
books, Revel. 20.12. the act of this is called (...), the assuming part of the
conscience: for as the first laid down the propositions, maxims, and general
rules; so this assumes from them: as for example, Rebellion is as the sin of
witchcraft; but I Saul have rebelled, constat de facto; and this my rebellion
shall for ever be written in the leaves of my conscience, which page and line
shall be easy to turn unto, as often as God shall call me to an account. The
third part is performed by the conscience, as a Judge, that concludes the
sentence: and this is called the (...). All these parts are always contained
in a syllogism, the proposition is the (...), that explaines the cause, and
lays down the controversy like a skillful lawyer: the assumption which is
the (...), and pleads guilty: and the conclusion out of both is the (...),
that gives sentence. Proposition. Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft:
Assumption. But I Saul have rebelled: Conclusion. Therefore I Saul have
committed a sin as the sin of witchcraft.


After the conscience has thus propounded, assumed, and concluded, the
disposition of the heart may be seen; Conscientia in effectu affectu, ^u^n^u.
vel pro effectu praeterito, vel pro affectu present, vel pro eue^tu futuro:
for the fact past, that is either in regard of God, or man; of man, it either
absolues or co^demns; in regard of god, a witness; either to excuse or accuse:
for the affection, that follows upon this, it is either joy, or sorrow; joy
upon absoluing and excusing, sorrow upon accusing and condemning: and for the
future event, it is either the expectation of reward, or the fear of
punishment. That this may a little the better appear, let us see how the
conscience is locked, or unlocked: this eye is always as a book, that is both
clasped and open at the same time: or else wholly clasped and locked up. The
claspes that do all this, are in number three: goodness, Claspes of conscience.
1. Goodness.
sin, and punishment: Goodness clasps up the accusation of the conscience,
but always leaves open the conscience for excusation; therefore a good
conscience will open for no accusation, nor shut for any vain excusations.
Secondly, 2. Sin.
sin is either the clasper and vnclasper together, or the clasper alone: the
clasper and vnclasper by excusation or accusation; as in our first parents, it
is said, when they had sinned, their eyes were opened: not that they were blind
before, but that now the eye had lost the power of excusing, and therefore in
that was shut up and blinded; but was altogether unlocked for accusation and
condemning of themselves: yet by reason of custom and long continuance in
sin, that very self same thing which opened the eyes of our first parents,
has wholly seared up the eyes of some, that their consciences neither accuse
nor excuse, except you will say they falsely excuse, when they make us cry,
peace, peace, and all is well with us. Now this for the most part, is the
claspe of men's consciences, so that except God bring judgment, the conscience
will never be awaked from his security. 3. Punishment.
Therefore the third claspe of the conscience, is punishment, and this holds
most surely in excusation, in so much that none can either unclasp it, or by
any means be able to mitigate the strait holding of punishment from all
comfort: so that neither angels, nor men, nor any other creature, can give a
dram of comfort: but for the vnclasping of the conscience, it will do it most
forcibly, and exceedes all other means; and therefore is to be understood in
this place. Hence arises a fourefold distinction of conscience: the first,
that is at peace with it self, Conscience quiet, but not good. quiet nor good.
but not with God; and that is the conscience that is wholly locked up: the
second, that is neither at peace with God nor it self: and that is the
conscience under the horror of the punishment of sin: good not quiet.
the third conscience, which is not at peace with it self, but with God; and
that conscience has two claspes in it, goodness, and sin; goodness from God,
sin from it self. good and quiet
The fourth, that has peace with God, and with it self: and this is a
conscience that feels a claspe of Gods mercy, to bind up the broken heart,
and make it break forth with joy, and gladness. So that now if we look into
the world we shall find that every man is either a Prince, or a peasant,
either the basest among the sons of men, and most ignoble, or else courageous
as a lion, and stout hearted as a giant. If a man were as poor as Lazarus, and
as naked as Job, yet if he bad a good conscience, he would be higher then
Princes, and scorn to yield a foot for the proudest: but on the contrary, if
he were as stout as Alexander, as merry as Belshazzar, as wise as Ahithophel,
as proud as Hammon, and as rich as Nabal: yet having an evil conscience, he
would tremble with Alexander for the touch of an ague; quiver with Belshazzar
for the appearance of a finger; hang himself with Ahitophel for that his
counsel was brought to naught; mourn with Hammon upon his bed, for the loss
of his honor; or his heart would die within him as it did within Nabal for the
loss of a field; or in a word, he would tremble at a very leaf: and
therefore fearful shall be the estate of these men, when the Lord shall thus
unlock their consciences, as he has promised he will do in this place.

Now this vnlocking is threefold: Keys to unlock conscience 1. Amazement.
First by a general amazement, when a man is suddenly stricken, but he knows
no particular cause, as Belshazzar was in the 5. of Dan. the writing on the
wall unclasped his conscience by a sudden amazement. Secondly, 2. Particular
knowledge.
by a particular knowledge of the sin that they have committed, as it was with
Indas; who said, Phaue sinned in betraying inocent blood: this did strike so
deeply into his conscience, that be departed and hanged himself; and for
very grief, the rimme of his belly rent in pieces. Thirdly and lastly, 3.
Gods departure.
by a most lamentable farwell in hell: when the Lord shall say, (O my creature,)
I made thee glorious, but thou have spoiled all thy glory, and lost my favor:
farewell my creature, I the fountain of living water, I the living God, I thy
life and length of days, thy very breath must leave thee; and come unto thee
as a consuming fire, as a roaring lion, heap upon thee all torments in body
and soul: Again, thou shall say, Farewell creator, farewell loving wife,
farewell my children, and all my friends; farewell my pleasures, prosits, and
all my worldly lusts: Alas, will none of you pity me? will thou, O Lord,
look on, and take no compassion? and will you my friends, if with me, curse
me, and cry, A vengence on me? will you thus reward my love upon earth? If in
heaven, will you cry with father Abraham, Remember that you had your pleasure,
when many a Saint starued at your door, and therefore justly art thou
tormented, and we most mercifully rewarded? you did us much hurt in your
pretended love; and blessed be God you prevailed not in your will. Alas, is it
so: why then, O worm of conscience, do thy worst: burn fire that can not be
quenched; I gnash with my teeth to see the prosperity of my friends; and
blaspheme God with the rest of my friends here in hell: not as sinning, for that
we did in bravery upon earth; to tear God in pieces was our credit: but now we
together see all to be our punishments; and we can take no sweet solace in our
company, as we did upon earth. Thus the wicked go down to hell to see their
sins set in order before their consciences, to their everlasting shame and
confusion, that could not see it upon earth: the devil has lead them into the
mids of hell, as the Prophet the Aramits that came to take him, into the mids of
Samaria, whose eyes were opened; to let them then see how they were in the
midds of their enemies, that meant to do a mischief unto Gods messenger: so
the devil has lead these men blindfoulded into the midds of hell, and there
the Lord has opened their eyes, to let them see what they have done against
himself and all his Saints.

The sum then of the words is thus much: A brief recapit^^ation.
(these things) that is, these sins before mentioned: (done) that is
committed: (and I held my tongue) that is, was merciful in sparing: (and thou
thoughtest) that is, framed me and my silence to thy own conceit and liking:
(like thee) that is, of the same mind; nay more then that, one altogether like
thee; and that which is most shameful, should never alter my mind toward thee:
(but I will reprove thee) that is, most certainly I will plague thee: (and set
them) that is, sin shall be brought unto his own place: (In order) that is,
make the book of conscience most evident that thou may read in it distinctly,
without all confusion, and have it so fixed before thine eyes, that I will keep
thee to thy reading, though thou would feign turn thine eyes another way.
(Before thee) that is, in the eyes of thy conscience, which shall be so
unlocked, that it shall be impossible for thee, ever to get them shut again.
And thus much of the words.

CHAP. III. Concerning the disposition and reasons.
NOw I come unto the reasons contained in the words, The logical analysis.
and as I go along with them, I shall raise my doctrines, and my uses, which
after resolution is our imitation of Gods work: And therefore I first enter
the consideration of the disposition of the words: secondly, of the simple
invention: the first, shows how reasons are joined together: the second what
they are asunder. For the first; the bond that ties them is twofold; general,
or special: the general bond is in this word (but,) all that goes before it,
is called the antecedent, all that follows, the consequent. The nature of the
bond is, to set apart such things as do not disagree in themselves, but in
respect of some third thing, unto which they cannot both be given; and this
alone makes them disagree. So in this place, the antecedent, which contains
the mercy of God; and the consequent, which contains Gods justice, do agree
in themselves: for mercy and justice kiss each other: and therefore the
hypocrite has set them at variance, that God must no longer be merciful, but
just in punishing him. Partiu^^ (...), partium discre^es.
Therefore in this bond are two things to be judged: first, the truth of both
parts: secondly, the distinction or disagreement: Truth is required on both
sides; for falsify the one side, and the other will not stand good; because
both of them make but up one joint truth: from whence these observations are
truly gathered;

Obser. 1. First, that that God is equally just and merciful; he that will
have his mercy, must be sure that he falsify not his justice; for a breach of
the one, makes a breach of them both.

Reason. 1. Because they are equal in God, for they are indeed his very
being. Hence arises an impossibility in God, to forgive an offense against
his justice by his mercy, until a satisfaction of his justice be made: for the
Lord cannot deny himself: indeed men may pass by offenses committed against
them, without satisfaction, because their justice is not their being, but a
quality in it, and therefore the injury is less: but in nature we see, that
whatsoever makes against the being of it, cannot be endured, or any peace made
with it: and therefore sin being against the very being of God, God can make
no peace with man, until reconciliation be made by Christ, that has given a
full satisfaction to Gods justice for the sins of his children.

Reas. 2. Is the manifestation of his glory; God will equally have the glory
of them both: wicked men should never glorify God, except it were for his
justice. Indeed we grant, that in regard of man, there is an inequality: for
God may be said to be more merciful unto them that are saved, then just to
them that are condemned: for of condemnation, the just cause is in man; but of
salvation, it is wholly from grace: yet in himself they are both equal, and
also by them he is equally glorified; seeing that nothing in God can receive
augmentation or diminution.

Reas. 3. Is to leave man without all excuse; for he shall have no cause to
complain of his justice above his mercy; but shall confess, that the Lord is
equal in all his doings.

Use. 1. For confutation of error. 1. If God be equal in justice and mercy,
then no mercy to be expected, but that which will stand with the justice of
God: therefore mercy in Christ must stand with the justice of God: and Christ
must bring in mercy by perfect fulfilling of the law. Christ is the cause of
life and salvation; In Adam, dying to die, was necessary upon the
transgression (else peradventure we shall die, had been true) therefore die we
must, either in Christ, or in our selves; if in Christ, then by his death we
are freed from that sentence of the law, In the day that thou eatest thereof,
thou shall die the death: being dead in Christ, we are justified from the
sentence of condemnation. But yet there is an other more effentiall part of the
law; Passive obedience might free from death; but actine brings life.
and that is, do this, and thou shall live: and God may as well free us from
death without dying, as bring us to life without doing. We grant then, that the
passive obedience of Christ, has taken away death; and this is legally done on
Christ's part, but most mercifully in regard of us: if then no more but this
righteousness were imputed, it would prove of works in regard of Christ,
though of grace in regard of us. So then, this mercy of our deliverance from
death, is equal with Gods justice: Here is dying, in stead of dying; and so
that part of the law, that is, sin, and die, is repaired, and fully answered:
but as yet all righteousness is not fulfilled: for I am sure, that this is a
righteousness of the law, as well as the other, do this, and thou shall
live: and if this be not done, then Christ has not fulfilled the special
part of the righteousness of the law for us: To do, and live, was our debt unto
God; and therefore Christ our surety must fulfill it for us. And this will
prove a wonderful mercy to miserable man, that has Christ to pay his debts,
and bestow the whole purchase of life and salvation upon him: It is a false
dream, to think that non peccator, and iustus, a just man, and no sinner, are
equipollent terms: For, non peccator, is a contradiction to peccator; but
iustus is an opposite habit, and in act an adverse to a sinner: and so the
arguments differ. Adam by creation was a just man in habit, but not in act,
and according to that which the Lord required; and so death being taken away,
we are in the way to justification, but not actually just, until actually the
law be performed, in our selves, or another: And because the point is in
controversy, thereasons to establish this truth may be these.

Arg. 1. Lex regale (...) iusti^e.
That which is the perfect righteousness of the law, is both active and
passive: but that whereby we are justified, is of this nature: For I demand,
by what rule of righteousness is life and salvation conuaied unto us? If they
say, by faith; then I demand, what is that righteousness of faith? is it the
very (...)? then assuredly it excludes both the righteousness of Christ, and
that of the law; and yet faith is said, to establish both. If it be the
righteousness of Christ, then I demand, is not that moral? if moral, then
either perfect or imperfect; if perfect, then active and passive: That we
apprehend Christ's righteousness, that is of grace, but that Christ has it for
us, that is of the law.

The second Argument against this opinion, may be this; Christ did all as a
n^ediator, for those that have need of a mediator.
That which Christ did as a Mediator, was not only for himself, but for us,
and for us more principally then himself; but all that Christ did, were the
actions of a Mediator; his humane nature had no subsistence but by the divine;
and every action being in supposito, was of him as a Mediator; and therefore
for us; and so both active and passive obedience were for us. But they will
say, his active obedience did fit him for our Mediatorship. To this I answer;
if his active obedience, be the obedience of a Mediator, then in his whole
latitude it was for us: and as soon as he was born he was fit to redeem: and
so never an action, but it was for us. If then these actions of fitting, be
properly the actions of a Mediator, then they tautologise and speak no sense:
for so that fitting, was nothing but redeeming: for I am sure, every action of
our Mediator, is to redeem; and to redeem, is to seek those that were lost:
and so his active obedience was for those which were lost: and if that, then
had we need of all Christ's obedience.

Argum. He fulfilled the ceremonial law both actiuely and pass^^ely for
others. ergn the moral.
3. Christ fulfilled all righteousness, moral, ceremonial. The ceremonial was
not fulfilled by passive obedience, but also by active: if the ceremonial
required both, then much more the moral: Deuteronomy. 4.1. Sam. 22. Hos. 6.6. mercy
more then sacrifice, and knowledge more then burnt offerings: and this in both
was done for others: he was circumcised for others, for he was without sin;
and therefore in Christ to signify any pollution, circumcision had no use: so
was he baptized, but it was not for the washing away of his own filthiness, but
ours. The reasons why he must keep the law for others are these: 1. because
perfect obedience depended on him for the performer. 2. both the law moral and
ceremonial acknowledge him for Mediator, for seeing it was impossible to be
fulfilled of us, it was possible unto him. 3. because he did establish and
fulfill both. 4. he alone is the bond of both: seeing then he performed active
obedience to the Ceremonial law, and that not for himself but for us., the
like must be confessed of the moral, especially the ceremonial law being but
an appendix and addition to the moral.

Argum. Against reason that death should cause life.
4. Christ's death could not bring life: because no death can be the cause of
life, seeing they are contraries. Fire cannot cause cold, neither water heat;
blindness cannot cause sight, neither sight blindness. Christ's death to take away
death, is good reason; but to cause life, is against all reason. This is very
agreeable with the Scriptures and reason, that as Christ's death does free us
from death; so Christ's life does bring us unto life: He died for our sins,
and rose again for our justification: Dan. 9.24. the slaying of the Messiah,
brings in the expiation of sin; and his living again, brings everlasting
righteousness. Sin brought in death, therefore righteousness must bring in
life: for if death should bring in life, then life should be the reward of
sin: for I am sure that the Scriptures affirm that death is the reward of
sin, and the reward of sin, can never be the cause of life. What has a
schoole-boy deserved when his master has whipped him? so what have we deserved
in Christ, when we are only punished in him. Sin and the reward of sin,
have no agreement with life. Therefore it is true that the expiation of sin,
is wrought by Christ's passive obedience, and life by his active.

Argum. 5. All types, whereof Christ is the truth, Types prove both actine and
passive obedience to be found in Christ.
point at this assertion: first, in the covenant of grace, there was the Arc
and the Table, Exodus 24.7. in the Arc was the book of the law, and so the
book of the law went with the covenant, and was to be found in Christ for us.
Exodus 25.22. the Mercie-seat was between the two Cherubims, and these were
upon the Arc of the Testament: Mal. 3.1. therefore no seat of mercy, without
the Arc of the Testament. The pascall lamb must be without spot, eaten with
sweet bread, and sour herbs; both must be in Christ, therefore not only the
sour herbs of his death and passion, but the sweet bread of his
righteousness. Vrim and Thummim must be on the Priests breast when he carries
the peoples judgment before God; and this must be had beside blood; therefore
righteousness beside passion.

Ar. 6. From similitudes familiarly applied in the Scriptures, whose end and
purpose are to prove this. First, the wives debt is made the husbands: and we
being married unto Christ, the debt that we owe God by our creation, must be
paid before he will admit of us: now that debt was, Do, and live: and this
Christ has done, and so we shall live. Secondly, Christ is the head of his
Church: and therefore must he give unto his members, life, motion, and all
things needful. Thirdly, the surety must pay and discharge the whole debt of
him for whom he is bound; all of us are bankerupts, and stand in need to have
a great debt discharged for us, and likewise a new stock purchased. To
conclude, it is foolish to make such a distinction as this, seeing all the
actions of our Mediator, are as well active as passive: his life is not taken
from him, but he lays it down willingly: and even from his conception, his
humanity being assisted by his deity, which could not suffer, turned all
Christ's sufferings into actions. I have bin drawn to enlarge my self in this
point, for we can not give too much to Christ: and surely we have given no more
then the justice of God required. And here by the way, I would have a common
speech amended, That one drop of blood was sufficient for the whole world:
Alas, then why did God in justice draw from Christ more then need? My doctrine
is most firm and sure, that God is equal in justice and mercy: see but the
proportion, man finite, sinned finitely; but finite sins, being against
infinite God, did violate infinite justice, and so an infinite violation:
Christ as man, suffered finitely: but finite passions were from a Mediator that
is infinite, and so were of an infinite merit: finite sins, finite passions:
infinite justice, infinite merits.

2. Use is, to reprehend the fond dreams of the world, that when the Minister
inquires how they mean to be saved, they will answer, by their good meanings.
Why? but is not God offended by your sins? Yes: but he will have mercy: for
he is a good God, and means to damn none. Alas, these damn themselves, while
they thus damn Gods justice: for to tell them of Christ, to make justice and
mercy meet, is but to tell them an idle tale: and therefore they will have
all by their good meanings, and Gods mercies: but except their meanings will
answer Gods justice, they are sure to go to hell for all this vain persuasion
of mercy.

3. Use, correction of a secret fault in Gods Israel, that presume too much of
Gods mercy, and are over much indulgent to themselves. Gal. 4. He is an enemy
that tells us an untoothsome truth: much lingering and listening after the
voice of the charmer, stoppes the ear: and flattery never wants welcome,
while self-love is at home: this has more of the serpent to beguile, then we
to beware. It is not the Temple of the Lord, for the Lord is just in the
midst of it: Zeph. 3. it is not, we are his people, or any vain title that
can make up the breaches betwixt God and our souls: the justice of God is no
trifling matter, his eyes cannot be bleered with our small gifts, nothing can
do it, but the precious blood of Christ Jesus, which is God and man, that so
both God and man might be brought together: therefore be sure that as the Lord
will do no iniquity, so he will have us to do no iniquity. If we commit our
sins in the night, or under any pretense, or false couerings, be sure the
Lord will bring his judgment to light every morning, and therefore let us be
ashamed of sinning.

2. General use, is instruction, branched into two specialls. First, an
admonition to the wicked, that they look unto themselves: for Gods much
silence, and their many sins, will fill up a great measure of wrath, which
the Lord in his justice must needs power upon them. The second special use,
is a direction of a Christian, to carry himself before God as a son and a
servant, because God is equally a father and a master: a father of compassion,
but a master that will have his own. Therefore let God have the fear and the
honor, both of his justice and mercy.

3. General use is consolation, which has two branches: First, in adversity:
Is God equal in justice and mercy? then fret not at the prosperity of the
wicked, or be cast down for the adversity that they bring upon thee: for God
is just, and therefore will he revenge thy cause, and bring all the wicked to
naught. Secondly, in prosperity, take heed of pride; for as I am. 1.9, 10.
counsels, that the poor brother of low degree must rejoice that he is
exalted: so likewise, the rich brother (which is exalted) in this, that he is
made low, as well by Gods justice, as exalted by his mercy; otherwise shall
he perish as the grass and flower of the field: so that the best consolation
in prosperity is humility; because thereby our hearts are kept from for
getting Gods justice, and making him all mercy.

Observe. 2. It is most certain that the Lord will reprove sin, Gods nature.
for it is a necessary truth: I am silent, but most surely I will reprove.
Reasons. First, Gods nature which is truth it self: and therefore shall God
say, and not do? assuredly, the one shall prove as good as the other: look
then to thy self that sinnest securely. Secondly, the nature of sin, Nature
of sin.
which cannot be without punishment: Good of church and commonwealth.
for the soul that sins shall die. Thirdly, the good of the Church and
common wealth, which could not stand without Gods reproouing: for except God
did cut off and restrain offenders by his justice, we should have men live
together worse then bruit beasts, lions, wolves, and tigers. And in the Church,
they would become devils incarnate, to make havoc of Gods people: if God had
not met with Hammon, what had become of poor Mordecay, and of all Israel?

Use 1. for reprehension. 1. Confutation of the wicked, which say, Tush God
sees not, he cares not for our doings; he is silent, and therefore like us; all
things go alike, we suffer no change: all is peace, let the minister threaten
what he will: But be you sure that thus forget God, that he will reprove, and
tear you in pieces, that others may consider it, and be afraid. The 2. use is
correction of Gods children, that they dally not with the least sin, neither
put off their repentance for an hour; for be sure, that the Lord will
reprove, and that suddenly: this then must make us look for our masters
coming.

Use 2. for instruction. First, it is an admonition to the wicked, that they
break off their sinful ways against the Lord: for as fure as they live,
the Lord is coming with his angels in a flaming fire, to render vengeance to
all that know not God, nor obey the Gospel of our Lord Jesus, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. if
want of obedience will do this, what shall become of their rebellions? for the
former they shall be punished from the presence of God, the holy angels and all
Saints, with sire that cannot be extinguished: therefore this added shall
kindle a fire to burn to the very bottom of hell. Secondly, a direction to
Gods children, that they always prepare for the coming of the Judge to
judgment.

Use 3. for consolation. First, to all that are afflicted, that the Lord will
not forget their troubles, and let their enemies go unreproved. Secondly, to
all that are at ease in Sion, and yet can mourn for the afflictions of Joseph:
a sure testimony of their consolation with Joseph; when the King of Kings
shall come to loose him, and reprove even kings for his sake, Touch not mine
Anointed, nor do my Prophets no harm. Therefore as they have bin touched and
harmed, so God will touch the wicked, and vex them in his sore displeasure.

Observe. 3. from the distinction of the parts. The Lord has the days of his
visitations: there is a day of his silence, and there is a day of his justice:
and the Lord will not break his days with the righteous and sinners upon
earth: for the day of mercy, man has a bond from God, but for the day of
paying vengeance, the Lord has man's bonds: man cares not how often God forfeit
his bond of mercy, for he would willingly have God to be in his debt for ever:
yet the Lord is not so negligent in the requiring of the forfeit of his bond of
justice: and therefore having already discharged his bond of mercy, it will
be high time to look unto man that he answer him for his justice; especially
seeing the wicked for Gods silence have not broken forth with David, and said,
What shall we give unto the Lord for all his benefits? nor as yet upon
conditions performed, are able to say, We have taken the cup of salvation,
and called upon our good God: nay, as yet we have nor so much as resolved to
do it: So that the Lord may most justly break silence, and after the
expiration of their days of peace, vex them in his sore displeasure.

Reasons. 1. from the nature of time. From time appointed of God for all
purpose^.
The Lord is before and after all times, yet in his works he has revealed
himself to perform all actions in time: and he has appointed every thing his
certain time, ( Eccles. 3.) that so every work of God might be seen
distinctly. The Lord has a time for his silence, and a time for his justice,
that so the mercies which he shows unto the sons of men, and the judgments
which he brings upon them, might be seen distinctly, and he praised for them
both.

2. Reas. Lone unto his creatures. First, Love to (...) creature.
to show his general goodness: secondly, to move him to repentance and
thankefulnes, for his patience and long suffering.

3. Reas. To leave man without all excuse: To leave rea^ without excuse.
seeing God has labored by mercies to allure, and judgments to terrify; so
that when his last doom shall come, the Lord shall say, What are become of all
my mercies? and why was thou not reclaimed by my foretelling thee of
judgments? therefore go thou accursed wretch into hell fire, where thou shall
never have again the time of my silence.

1. Use, reprehension: either confutation of all those that cry, Mal. 3 14.
It is in vain to serve the Lord: and what pleasure have we that we have
bowed our selves before him? surely you are blind that cannot see, what large
days the Lord has given you here upon earth; and what long silence has
passed betwixt him and you: nay he has not only been silent, but also he
has been bountiful unto you in many a temporal blessing, even above his own
Saints. Second use under this head, is correction of the hasty desires of Gods
children, first, to have judgment on their enemies, and secondly to have speedy
dispatch of affliction in themselves. Thus they hasten the time of the mercy
and justice of the Lord. Know therefore that God will have his times completly
ended, and it is your duty to stay his leisure: for he that believes, will not
make have.

2. Use is instruction: first an admonition to all the wicked, that they harden
not their hearts, deny not Gods call, but listen unto him, least they call
when he will not hear them. For your time is to day, but Gods time is his will
and pleasure in silence and reproof: your time is present, for time past is
not called again with had I wist, and the time to come is in Gods disposing. 2.
Branch is a direction to the godly, that they make use of all times: for the
Lord would have them exact in the computation of the years of his mercy and
justice: yea, and of seasons in these times: for he complains for the want of
it, Isa. 1. The ox knows his owner, the ass his masters cribbe: these know
their masters, and the times wherein they refresh them: the swallow and the
crane their appointed times: therefore let it not be said of Gods Israel, that
they know not him which does all for them. God is pleased to call them his
people, and what greater shame then this, my people have not known me?

3. Use is consolation: first, for tribulation. Is this the day of Gods
affliction? then happy is my estate, for the time of deliverance is
approaching: therefore in this Psalm, v. 15. Call upon me in the day of trouble,
and I will deliver thee: mourning may rest for a night, but joy comes in the
morning. Secondly, for the day of prosperity, to have a heart as joyful and
glad, to think of his affliction, as then to puff up himself with his
present estate. David has more joy of heart, that Gods countenance is lifted
upon him, then because his corn, wine Psalm. 4.
and oil are increased. Heb. 11.
Moses can take more joy to be a partaker with Gods people, then in the
inioying of all the sinful pleasures of Egypt for a season.

Observe. 4. from the order. Silence goes before Gods reproof; as a silent air
before a fearful tempest. The Lord spared the old world a long time, before
he drowned it: he suffered Sodom and Gomorrha to burn a long time in lusts,
before he burnt them with fire and brimstone from heaven.

Reasons. 1. Just puwi^^ment.
That just cause may be given for all the wrath of God that falls upon the
wicked. 2. Reason, because the sin of man cannot be but in that which God
has made good, no more then blindness can be any where, Good before eu^ll.
but in the eye which had power to see: now sight is before blindness, good
before evil; and therefore Gods silence, before his justice; because justice
will not reprove before man have sinned. 3. Measure of sin.
Reason is, because a measure of sin is to be made up, Genesis 15. before God
can judge; and therefore the Lord will be silent unto that time, that then he
may answer them with a like measure of judgment.

1. Use, is reprehension: which serves first for the confutation of the
ungodly, which think that God is forgetful of his anger: but let them know,
that method is the very rule of memory, and God keeping so close to an exact
method, can not by long silence, forget what he has to do. Indeed we say,
old things are out of date; and long silence makes contentious matters cease:
but the Lord is the same to day he was when he began the world: and Cains sin
is as fresh in his memory, as the sin that is committed this day. 2. Use, is
correction of Gods children, that can no sooner hear the faults of their
brethren, but presently they speak of them: this is no good method, they ought
to have paused on the matter by silence, and after have reproved when time
would have served.

2. Use is instruction. 1. An admonition to the ungodly, that think God has
no good method, but does every thing confusedly. Indeed they judge as they
think, and as they live: for their thoughts are most confused, and their lives
disordered, and so they think of God. But yet let them know, that although
they make no good use of his silence before his justice, yet God himself will
make singular use of it, even by their own testimony, when they shall
confess Gods equal doing. 2. Direction to the godly, that they see how God
goes a long in his government of the world: and in all his judgments, praise
him for his former mercies.

Use 3. for consolation. First, in trouble; hence we learn that the Lord
keeping an exact method, will dispatch all things most quickly: for order makes
things go on apace, therefore affliction must go on apace toward consolation.
Secondly, in prosperity, to see how they go on along to Gods trials, and
therefore ease themselves with resting upon God. And this may be observed from
the general bond.

The special bonds follow; and first of the antecedent, wherein there lies two
bonds, one of inference; and a second of coupling together: The bond of
inference, teaches us what manner of conclusions wicked men use to make out of
Gods own premises. Let us therefore eye that bond which is contained in that
word therefore, binding together Gods silence, and man's thoughts.

Doctrines from the conclusion.
Doctr. 1. Wicked men out of the best premises, draw the worst conclusions:
silence a singular argument to persuade unto obedience; for who will abuse a
loving friend? yet we see what the wicked hypocrite concludes from Gods
silence; to think that God is like unto him; a patron of evil courses, and
one that must needs favor an hypocrite, because of his profession.

Reasons. Perverse judgment.
1. Because they are men of perverse judgment, and therefore every wicked man
concludes contrary to the premises. If Gods judgments be the premises, he
will conclude all is peace: if silence, he will conclude there is no wrath.

Reas. 2. Want of conscience: No conscience.
for oftentimes the proposition shall go current with them, but the assumption
they may not endure: for that is special application. As for example: (...).
no drunkard, whoremaster, or unclean person, (...).
shall come in heaven, that shall be granted: but thou art one of these, (...)
The judgment is the pure part of the conscience, the will the assuming part,
and the heart and affections ought to wind up the matter.
that must be denied; and therefore the conclusion shall never follow. Or thus;
Gods silence ought to lead every man to repentance, that shall be confessed;
but come to the application, and because it is good, he will be content to take
that; but yet the end shall not be attended: and therefore shall it never lead
him to repentance. Hence the assumption is called (...), conscience: because it
is an applying faculty in man; which a wicked man wanting, must needs
misapplie, and therefore we shall have no good conclusions from him.

3. Reason, is from the conclusion it self, Want of application.
which is called (...), a perfecting, or knitting up of a thing together: now
wicked men make broken conclusions; they will not gather up all together: and
therefore no marvel, if they do amiss in good premises.

4. Reason is this: Their own conclusions defended.
wicked men have gotten already unto themselves such conclusions, and they
hold them so strongly, that nothing shall overthrow them. It is vain to bring
Gods judgments to terrify them: for they have already made these conclusions,
That death shall not come near their habitation: they have made a league with
death, and a compact with hell, as the Prophet says, and therefore destruction
shall not come near them. Again, speak of the mercies of God to allure them
to repentance, and it shall not profit: for they have already determined, that
they will not serve God at such a rate: Job. 21. Their seed is established,
their houses are peaceable, their bullock casts not her calfe, their
children dance for joy, and they take the tabret and harp, and r^ioyce in the
sound of the organs: Thus they spend their days in wealth. But where is the
conclusion of worshipping God? alas, they say, let God depart from us: who is
the Almighty that we should serve him? what profit of we pray? well, we have
resolved that we will not so much as desire the knowledge of his ways.

Use 1. for reprehension. First confutation of the profane, that brag so much
of their knowledge, they cannot for their lives make a true Syllogism; all
that they think, speak, or do, are mere paralogismes, and dangerous
fallacies. Secondly, for correction of the godly; which often think wicked men
may be followed for their learning: take heed of them, for though they may lay
down some general truths, yet their conclusions are dangerous, and full of
poison.

Use 2. for instruction. First, an admonition to the wicked, that they labor
to deny their own wisdom, and be more careful of their conclusions, least
they lay a trappe, and a net to catch themselves withal. Secondly, a
direction to Gods children, that as much as lies in them, they labor to see
both premises, and conclusion out of Gods word. Indeed it is true that laying
down a general proposition; as whosoever believes shall be saved; and then
out of this he may assume, but I believe, and therefore most certainly conclude,
that he shall be saved: yet let me put in a caution, that his assumption be
not out of himself, but from the testimony of Gods spirit: neither the
conclusion of his own confidence, but that he lays all upon Christ. None so
bold as the wicked inconcluding peace with God
Indeed ask the world, do you believe? and mean you to be saved? yes, or
else God forbid, I should be a wretch if I should not believe God: and I am
sure that God never made me to damn me: but never had you any doubtings?
doubtings! why should I doubt? God forbid that I should be so forlone and
forsaken of reason, as once to doubt of Gods promises: but can you tell me when
you began to believe? I never was without believe since I was borne: but I pray
you tell me, have you any combats between the spirit and the flesh? alas, what
purpose should you ask me this? I have lived a peaceable life all my days,
and I thank God, I am at peace with God, my self, and all the world. These
be Jobs wild horses prepared for the battle: These cannot be made afraid as
though they were grasshoppers: they dare go forth to meet the devil with all
his harness: these mock at fear, and are not afraid: these will not turn
their backs from the glistering of any sword: though the quiver rattle against
them, the glittering spear, and the shield; yet they can swallowe the ground
for their fierceness and rage: and believe not that it is the noise of any
trumpet that calls to judgment: therefore their sound is ha, ha, they smell the
battle a far off, and they never regard the noise of the Captains of the
Lord, and the shouting of the mighty angels, with their approach attending upon
God: neither shall they stagger at the thunders and the appearance of flaming
fire, when the Lord shall come to render vengeance on every one that knows him
not, or has not obeyed his holy Gospel. These are like the giants of Gath,
they have fingers and thumbes enough they will not loose it for the catch: but
alas, poor creatures, I fear these Giants of Gath, will prove poor
Adonizabesech, that wants both fingers and thumbes to feed withal, and
therefore shall they perish as he did for want of apprehending the food of
their souls Christ Jesus: therefore let all our propositions be out of Gods
word, nothing from our selves.

Use 3. for consolation. First, for well-doing: when our hearts will tell us, we
have bin affected as well with mercy as judgment to serve the Lord, and that
all our care was the keeping of a good conscience. Secondly, in regard of
trouble, whether it come for weldoing as a trial, or for evil as a
correction: and that is to draw good out of all, clean contrary to the
wicked, which conclude all in very ill form, and contrary to the mind of
God: for thereby shall we come to that blessed comfort, which is laid down,
Romans 8.28. all things work together for the best of them that love God: which
we may prove best by our conclusions.

Obser. 2. Wicked men do more then they directly think, and yet in truth they
think as much as they do.
It is the nature of a wicked man to make unknown conclusions, for surely a
wicked hypocrit will deny this conclusion: Did I ever make God like my self? I
know his ordinances, and am well seen in his statutes; therefore such matters
are far removed from my thoughts. But the conclusion is made and pronounced
by the spirit of truth, and therefore is no lie: they have made it, but the
Lord must infer it, their lives, and practice have set to their seals, and
it is as good in law before God, as if they had thought it: for the Lord
knows, they were not asleep, when they hated to be reformed, and cast his
laws behind their backs: they did this willingly: and yet as willingly would
they seem to have on their backs Gods apparel: they would cloth themselves
with an outward profession: they would have his law at their fingers ends,
declare his ordinances, and take his covenant into their mouths. The devil
will speak as well as they, Acts 16.17. These are the servants of the most
high God, which show unto us the way of salvation: neither was this
constrained; for she did it many days: surely for this end, that Paul might
take notice, that by her confession, she was as good a professor, as the best
that followed Paul: yet his spirit was able to see the imposture and deceit of
Satan, and therefore grieved for her, he turns about, and bids the unclean
spirit be gone: So these persons, they cry the temple of the Lord, they have a
fair cry; but alas, it is that they might live in the church, as the devil
lived in the woman: yet assure themselves, that as the devil by this
confession made a conclusion directly against himself; so these men by these
fair words make an unknown conclusion, and for the same shall be cast out of
Gods Church, and packt to hell, with all those unclean spirits, which for
their advantage can open their mouths and speak like the blessed angels. The
Indians would none of the Popes Catechism, because they saw the Priests lives
demonstrate nothing but cruelty.
The Indians could judge the Spaniards and priests in their army, by their
lives: when they were ready to hang them, and put them to death, then must the
priest stand out to catechize them, and show them the way to heaven: but these
poor Indians were able to join a better conclusion to all their premises
then going to heaven: for having asked, what master they themselves served, and
whither they meant to go? answer being made, they meant all of them to go to
heaven, and there should be their resting place after this life: presently they
bid the priest spend no more words in vain: for such servants, could have no
good masters: and if they meant to go to heaven, then they would go to hell:
good judgment from the practice of these Priests and Spaniards: all their
fair show of godliness, made conclusions against themselves, to wit, that it
was impossible that a good God would ever acknowledge them, or that any place
of bliss should be their resting place: and therefore best for them to go the
clean contrary way, even to hell it self, then have such companions to be
with them in heaven.

Reas. 1. Blindness of mind, Ignorance.
which sees no further then the present propositions. Every man will say, that
a drunkard, whoremaster, unclean person, shall never inherit the kingdom of
heaven; the word of God is plain for it, and they yield to the truth. Again,
come to the assumption, and tell them; You are of the number of these persons,
you know it your self, and all your neighbors can testify with you this
present truth; he will yield up that too: but the conclusion that follows most
necessarily, he will not see: but defy all them that shall bring it, and say
he shall be damned. Great blindness, that will not grant a consequent, as
necessary as burning to the fire; would not the world count him a very
ignorant person, that should say here is fire, but I make question whether it
can burn. Well fool, the best argument for thee is, put thy singer into the
fire, and see if thou can feel it: So these men will yield up all, but that
which is as necessary as the rest, shall not only be called into question,
but denied with an execration of all that bring it. Therefore no resolution
until God come, and say, In to hell fire; and then shall they feel the
conclusion of their ways.

Reas. 2. is the diversity of lusts, that leads them about, Multitudes of
lusts which make distraction of the mind.
and always unto it self; nothing must conclude that pleases not his lusts:
2 Thessalonians. 3.7. Which women are ever learning, and are never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth: the reason is in the verse before, because they are
simple women laden with sins, and lead with diverse lusts.

Reas. 3. is want of all good method in their living: Disorder of life.
for he that keeps no order in his actions, can never be able to bring any
thing to good pass; and it makes such a confusion in his head, that he cannot
tell what will be the issue of his days work. For we see men when they are
confounded in their way, stand still, Ig^^ satuus.
and forty to one, they presently get into the wrong, and so loose their
journey: for as the going fire, when once it has dazeled the eyes, is in
danger to lead a man into some pit or other; so fares it with wicked men, when
they have confounded themselves in sin, they know not what to do, but run
about like mad men: so that now the devil having gotten them into his mill,
and dealt with them as men usually do with mill-horses, to put out their eyes,
that so they may serve their turns the better: so the devil blindes the
wicked, after that, drives them about by their lusts: and alas, when know they,
how soon they may dash out their brains against some post or other. They that
walk in their sleep, are in danger to wrong themselves, or others; yet
awaked, mourn most bitterly: so these persons shall do when they come in hell.

1. Use reprehension. 1. Confutation of the wicked, which condemn Gods
Ministers for being too rash in their conclusions; Who made you judges of your
brethren? where is your charity, that censure men so severely? we hear
nothing but damnation, and all is judgment: you make men go out of their
wits: therefore we will hear you no more. Alas, poor wretches, let the
premises alone, and you shall hear nothing of the conclusion; but in this you
condemn your selves; for if you were not guilty, neither galled already,
these conclusions would never trouble you: for without premises, no
conclusions are made: therefore I pray you rather examine the premises, then
the conclusion: and as you find the premises, so judge of the conclusion. 2.
Use correction of the godly, that are like Peter unto Christ, Master, Master,
spare thy self: be not so hasty in going up to Jerusalem: so oftentimes good
Christians tell the Minister, it is good to keep in some conclusions: but they
must be answered, I will not leave a conclusion vnvttered, that the premises
of Gods truth would have concluded. I would ye were more wise in other matters,
for I see by daily experience, that you are urging good Ministers to make
conclusions, when they have no premises for it. Concealing of Gods truth is
good, when there is no ground out of the text to utter it; but he that speaks
from the premises of his text, shall be able to justify himself, and
convince all gainsayers.

2. Use is instruction: 1. an admonition to the wicked to let them understand
their miserable estate, how unreasonably they deal with their own souls,
that will make inquisie for the truths, as far as the conclusion, but then
give over. Alas, there lies all the danger: for it is the termination and
winding up of the matter: and therefore they see not that good which follows
from good premises, neither can they avoid that evil which follows from the
contrary. 2. A direction to the godly, to deal sincerely with their souls,
and make good application of all Gods premises.

3. Use is consolation, first for well-doing: when thy soul tells thee that
thou have as great a care to serve him in thy doings, as in reading of his
word; that is, to apply all to thy self that thou finds in Gods word, and
make some good conclusion out of it: for so shall thou make the word sweeter
then the honey or the honey comb: secondly, art thou in trouble, happy man,
for thou art under one of Luthers best schoolemasters: for he has but three,
affliction, meditation, prayer: the first helps to meditation, and both of
them stir up unto prayer: and therefore must thou needs take both large and
profitable lessons, out of which thou shall gather such conclusions, that thou
may fill thy soul with a world of comfort: and these two from the
conclusion it self, the rest arises out of his argument: first jointly out of
sin and silence.

Obser. 3. Wicked men are exceeding wise to deceive themselves: for the
argument here drawn forth to infer his conclusion, is neither Gods silence
alone, for then should there be no force in the argument; neither their sins
alone, for then should it be blasphemous; but put them both together, and then
it will make a brave show, I sin, and God is silent, therefore God is like
unto me.

Reas. 1. Because the prince of this world, The wisdom of the world.
is become as an angel of light, that so he might carry men the better to
hell. Until the coming of Christ, he carried himself in express terms of
worship; but when Christ was come, he could no more be worshipped in that
manner: and therefore since that time, he has gotten a new form, even good
confessions and gracious prayers, (as the world terms the^.) Act. 19.13. when
the sons of Sceua could conjure no more in their old form, they begin a new,
and took in hand to name over them which had evil spirits, the Name of the
Lord Jesus, saying, We adjure you by Jesus, whom Paul preaches, etc.

Here I must crave pardon a little, Against deluded witches which swarm in the
world under the name of blessers of men and beasts, but more usually of beasts
then men or themselves.
to detect a strange deal of mischief in the world. There are a sort of
healing witches, which are called Blessers of cattle, and the world thinks
too well of them, and they think well of themselves. Once discoursing upon
this point, one (I trust that fears God) came to me, and told me he had used
a form for healing of the eyes, wherein he conceived no evil, but now by the
grace of God before he used it again he would die: therefore in hope that some
other ignorant persons, may be pulled out of the fire, I will amplify this
reason in regard of those delusions. And that they may see their good prayers,
I bring in the sins of some of their forms of prayers. I will not utter the
forms any further, then the sins contained in them.

First, 2. Superstition.
for the blessing of cattle: let them take notice of these sins. 1. They go
thrice about the beast forespoken, and say over a set form of words three
times; this can be no less then superstition.

Secondly, 2. Blasphemy of Christ's birth,
they blaspheme against Christ most horribly, and the blasphemy is threefold:
first, against his birth, as though he had been borne for cattle: for so are
their words, Thou that was born in the bourght of Bethelem heal this beast:
Baptism,
secondly, against his Baptism; and was baptized in the fleame of Jorden (or
rather flumen: Office.
) thirdly, against his office, Thou that shed thy blood; as though either
Christ was baptized, or shed his precious blood for the washing and purging of
bruit beasts.

Third sin, 3. Abuse of Gods power.
is abuse of Gods authority: for stand ill, stinch ill, stanch ill, can not be
done but with great abuse of Gods commanding authority: he that bad the
Theames stand, if he had not gotten away, he should have known what they would
have thought of his power: so shall the Lord deal with them when his wrath
shall overtake them, and they shall not be able to fly away.

Fourth sin, is blasphemy against the Trinity: 4 Sin against the whole
Trinity.
for they conclude these damnable words in the name of the father, son, and
holy Ghost.

Fifth sin, is profanation of Gods holy ordinances; 5. Profanation.
for then comes in a creed, a pater noster, and an Aue-maria.

The sixth sin, 6. A sign of i^ in the just punishment.
or rather an admirable punishment falling most secretly upon them: and that is
this, if the beast be forespoken, then the blesser shall fall a goning or
yoning, (that is, be sick at the heart:) and if this follow, then an evident
sign the beast is forespoken. Oh consider this, ye simple and ignorant
people, that will needs forget God: Are not all sicknesses the plagues of God?
then a plain case that God plagueth you by the devil, when you are about your
good prayers. Superstition. Abuse of Baptism,


A second kind for beasts is no better then this; For first, if the beast have
no name, then must they give it one; or if they have one, then must they tell
the name: If this be done, that the beast may the better be blessed, it is
superstition: or secondly, if for dedication to their office, then abuse of
baptism, wherein we are named that we may give up our names unto Christ.

Second sin, is the abuse of Gods providence, Providence.
for after this they say; if thou be forspoken, by heart, by eye, or by tongue,
as though these were any causes. David saw more in Shemeis cursing and railing:
and therefore God will say unto them, ye have abused me, for I did that evil
unto your goods, because ye sinned against me, and have not repented; therefore
have you done sinfully, with Saul, to go unto a witch.

The third abuse is, of a grace in reconciliation: for they say, Reconciliation.
Three bitter brists have thou borne, and three good meanings be thy boot;
that is, thou have been troubled exceedingly, but thou shall have great
comfort. A strange thing, that that which can be applied to no creature, but
the sons of adoption, Romans 8.28. should be applied to brute beasts.

Fourth sin, is blasphemy: 1. Against the Trinity, in that they conclude as
before, 4 Against the Trinity, Christ, grace.
in the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost. 2. Against Christ, in that
they bring in his five bloody wounds. 3. Against grace; for they say to the
beast upon those words, would give thee grace to amend: strange, that grace
should be given to beasts, even that which follows the passion of our
Savior Christ.

Fifth sin, 5. Profanation.
is against Gods worship, for then come in again a company of prayers: and it
must be done three times before and after sun rise or set. A work of
darkness, and full of superstition.

Another kind they have for the healing of men, both of their eyes, and also of
their teeth, which are of the same nature. That for the eyes, is full of
ridiculous jesting, and can hardly be named without blushing; yet because men
are so blind that they will perceive nothing, until we just gall them upon the
sore, I will as modestly as I can, show how they sin against God. First, they
use lying, in that there is neither such meeting, asking, 1 Lying.
and answering, as they speak of: for the 3. virgins (as they term them)
never met those 3. that they speak of: to wit, Frith, Frith-well, 2 Forsaking
God.
and our Lady, as they say. Secondly, a great sin to ascribe such power unto
them as shall make them mightifull, for the curing of the eyes, that is, to
forsake God and trust in they know not what. 3. Abuse of the Saints.
Thirdly, to join the blessed virgin Marie with two devils, (for what these
two names signify else, I know not) must needs be a great abuse of the
glorified Saints. 4. Jesting.
Fourthly, there is ridiculous jesting in serious matters: for the form is so
foolish, that it would make any man break out into laughter. Now the curing of
the eyes is no small matter; the eye is dear and precious, and therefore ought
to be dealt withal in a more serious manner. 5. Abuse of the creatures.
Fifthly, abuse of Gods creatures, as read gold, running water, green grass,
gray-goose feather: which neither by divine ordinarion, as Sacraments; nor
physically have any such power of curing, 6. Superstition.
and therefore they shall rise against them at the day of judgment. Sixthly,
these being dipped in the water, and the eye thrice washed, is the cure: mere
superstition, and a mere ceremony of the devils, which has his power and
efficacy from the devil.

Lastly, for the tooth: for feign would I make an end, yet still do I respect
the good of men's souls. This is but short in form, yet full enough of sin:
first, 1. Coniuring. 2. Abuse of the creatures. 3. Of Gods sacrifices.
it contains in it the form of coniuring: secondly, abuse of Gods creatures:
thirdly, abuse of Gods sacrifices, for the creatures that they have abused, as
a hasel stick written on must be burnt in the fire: I know not for what end,
except to sacrifice for the teeth: fourthly, the words written are both
senseless and ridiculous: 4. ^ly
for illa, abs, Hur, Sur; who can expound them to any good sense? surely I may
expound them out of Latin and Hebrew, she is without a double prince; for Hur,
signifies a Prince in the Hebrew tongue, and so does Sur: and without all
question, a witch is without any king upon earth: for she ought to die, and she
is without God.

But alas they have reasons to persuade; The (...) ^he ignorant.
there is a salve for every sore, we see the cure wrought by them, and all
that they do is by good prayers, and we see no hurt in them. Well, a falue for
every sore must be gotten lawfully, and also applied lawfully; but here is
neither of both. Secondly, they do the cure; that is a lie, for it is the
devil that does it, to get men to believe him, and so for their pains they
loose their souls. Examples of this we have in the Scripture: Witches do
many thing, but the whole efficacy is from the devil.
Saul had the matters came to pass that the devil told him, and therefore
says God, Deuteronomy. 13.2. though it come to pass, yet thou shall not listen
thereunto: for the Lord does it to try thee withal, whether thou will serve
him, or other gods. Act. 8. Samaria was seduced by Simon the Sorcerer; they
esteemed him as some great man, gave heed unto him from the least to the
greatest, because he had bewitched them with sorceries: One was that he would
die as Christ did, and rise the third day: therefore deluding the people with a
ram which they beheaded in stead of Simon, and having carried it forth and
buried it, Simon himself appears again the third day: yet see I pray you
this Simon will be baptized as well as the rest, and make a show of believing,
continue with Philip, wondering at the signs and miracles which were done: yet
when they were to be confirmed by Peter and John, and by laying on of hands the
holy Ghost to be received, he would bestow money that he might have that for
the perfection of his art; but now for all his baptism and believing, he is
found out of Peter to be in the gall of bitterness, and the bond of
iniquity: and all that he prays for, is only that the judgments might not
light on him: And I would to God that these persons would but be so much
touched, that they would fear Gods judgments for these sins.

History is plain for it: A woman in Italy having sore eyes, and could by no
means be eased of the pain, was persuaded that a Priest could do it for her:
therefore coming unto him, and entreating with a great reward in her hands,
the Priest against his skill writ her a paper to be hanged about her neck,
wishing her no good, but all mischief, yet she taking the paper and following
his rule, was presently cured of her eyes; yet when a year was expired, she
would needs have the paper read, wherein were written these words, Diabolus
eruat oculos tuos, and foramina stercoribus impleat: which when she
understood, burns the paper for anger, and presently her eyes were in as ill
case as ever before. Hemingius reading the Logic lecture in the schools, and
being disposed to make merry with his auditors, in jesting manner told them,
that if any man should say these two verses over one sick of the fever, it
would presently leave them. The verses were used of ancient Logitians for the
figures of a Syllogism: Fecana, Cage, Daphenes, Gebare, Gedaco,
Gebali stant, sed non stant, Phebas, Hecas, and Hedas.
One in the company more simple then the rest, tried his words, and the event
followed for the space of a year before it was known, insomuch that he was
famous for his art: But as soon as Hemingius knew the matter, and had preached
against it, all his practice came unto an end: showing that the devil will
work no longer then men serve him ignorantly: and therefore if the effect
follow, no wonder: for the parties that do these things, and the persons that
seek unto them are ignorant and blinded people, such as have no true fear of
God; for every one that seareth God, speaks against them; nay, they speak
against themselves: for tell me. I pray you, how many of these use to bless
themselves, children, and family by earnest prayer unto God? tell me how many
of them have Bibles in their houses, and godly exercises: surely they may
profess what they will for beasts, but they proclaim themselves to be worse
then bruit beasts. Is there never a man of God able to pray as well as they
has God given them a greater measure of his spirit, then he has done to any
other? If this be so commendable, why send they not to the minister before
these wretches, to entreat him to pray for their cattle? but, alas, no
marvel, if the world be deluded, when they will not intertaine the truth of
God in the love of the truth. For it were strange to consider, how persons
being galled, did even gnash against these declarations, that they should be
taught by any young headed boy. Well, let them know, that they have every
mothers son of them, made anvnknowne conclusion against themselves: for
except they repent, I tell them as much in writing, as I have done in speaking,
that they cannot be saved.

2. Reason, Carnal wisdom.
is the high conceit men have of their own wisdom: Romans 1.22. When they
professed themselves to be wise, they became stark fools. Pharaoh, Exodus 1.
come let us work wisely: and what is that I pray you? 1. burdens: 2. tyranny:
3. secret murder by the midwiues: 4. Wickedness hunts the wicked to his
destruction.
open drowning by all his people: and what became of all this wisdom? drowning
indeed of Pharaoh and all his host in the red sea. What became of Ahitophels
wise counsel? surely the hanging of himself. Therefore letall such foxes as
Herod was, know for a certentie, that Gods children shall walk to day, and to
morrow, and for ever most safely: for they have bin simple to deny their own
wisdom, yet happy are they, for they have found a better, that shall never
deceive them.

Reas. 3. is their practice: Evil practice.
they think all is well that begins well: they never respect the end, but
run along with the present satisfaction of their hearts: and therefore they
are bold to say, we shall never be moved. Thus promising fair things unto to
them selves, A present misery, is better then a future mercy to the wicked.
they make a conclusion more bitter then death, before they have lived half
their days to an end. It is the godly man that sees the sword come, and hides
himself: when wicked men are so blinded with the glistering shows of this
world, that they can not behold the glittering appearance of Gods armor
coming into the field to fight against them.

1. Use is reprehension: first the confutation of the wicked, that build upon
false grounds, and lay sandy foundations of all their hopes, and therefore
shall it perish as the house of the spider, when the Lord shall come with the
besome of his wrath, and fetch them down out of their kings palaces. Secondly,
correction of the godly, that often think the wicked have built themselves so
strongly, that there is no way to bring them down. Israel in Egypt is out of
heart, and the Lord cannot have the hearing, because of the anguish of their
hearts: yet if with Moses, they will be but still a little, they shall see the
salvation of the Lord.

2. Use is instruction: first an admonition to the wicked, that they cry not
with Dives, soul, take thy rest, for thou art rich enough for many years.
Take heed, the conclusion is otherwise, then he took it to be: for it is, this
night, thou fool, shall thy soul be taken from thee, and then whose goods
shall these be? Secondly, a direction to the godly, that they make right steps
unto their feet.

3. Use is consolation: first in prosperity, to see the fetches of the devil
to persuade us that there can be no change: let us not rejoice in this, but
because our names are written in the book of life. A sorrowful beginning with
a joyful ending is more sweet, then a paradise of pleasure with hell
hereafter.
Secondly, in all trouble, this may afford consolation, because by afflictions
we are made more wise unto salvation, then wicked men, in all their crafty
fetches to plant themselves, while the Lords silence is upon them: for
affliction lets a man see at the first, the worst conclusion that shall befall
him in the profession of his God: and therefore being best known, he may
assure himself that all other consequences shall be joyful and exceeding
comfortable. It shall not be so with the wicked, for they make the best
conclusions first, and therefore blind their eyes that they cannot behold how
they run to fearful woes and sudden destruction: now follows the
conclusions of a part of the argument, to wit, Gods silence alone.

Obser. 4. This bond (therefore) lets us see a fourth collection, to wit, that
wicked men suck poison out of every word of God: his very silence and mercy,
which ought to have a sweet relish unto their souls, shall by the corruption
of their natures become the baine of the body and soul. If God be but silent,
then will they be filled with wicked thoughts of God himself.

Reas. 1. The corruption of nature, From corrup nature.
which turns all into it self. A corrupt stomach makes all meats relish of
his quality, it turns sweet into sour, pleasant into as bitter as gall: so
the heart of a wicked man, makes silence sin, judgment blasphemy, love
hatred, peace war, and the fears of hell the thoughts of pleasure. Corpus
tabed^^ quo plus nutrias, eo magis laedas.
A naughty temperature the more it is fed with good nourishments, the worse
it becomes: so an ill tempered soul, with the untempered mortar of sin,
becomes worse for the mercies of God: and such excellent food is turned into a
most dangerous nourisher of the very canker and gangrene of body and soul.

Reas. 2. Ill digestion either of mercy or judgment. From the ill digestion
of the soul.
That which lies raw in the stomach, and so consequently spoiled in the first
concoction, can never be mended again in the liver, or in the assimulation of
the parts, where every thing draws, and sucks for his own use: So all the
mercies and judgments of God, lie raw at the heart of a wicked man, and there
are spoiled, so that no good blood can be dispersed through body and soul, to
make the sanguine complexion of a Christian; neither shall you see any member
to gather strength, but rather to pine away: even as men do that labor of
consumptions, Good things without Gods blessing, heavy curses.
when they are fed with the best nourishments; when we may see a poor
beggars boy, that fares hardly, even with such diet as would make a man
melancholic to look on it; yet he is fresh and well liking: so Christians,
which are of the blood royal, are like Daniel, which was better liking feeding
on the pulse, then when he had his diet off the Kings table. So these under
affliction, profit more then all the wicked do in their prosperity. Lazarus
is better in soul, though he cannot obtain the crummes that the rich man's
dogs might be welcome unto, then the rich-man that fared daintily every day,
and yet pined in his soul. The woman of Canaan, for all her strange repulses;
first no answer, 2. the disciples speaking against her, 3. Christ giving her a
cold answer, I am not come but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel: 4. an
utter distaste of her kindred, it is not meet to take the childrens bread, and
cast it unto dogs; such a one art thou, because a Canaanitish woman, and no
Israelite: well, for all this cold comfort, she will have her soul fed, or
she will never give over: True Lord, I am neither son, nor servant to sit at
thy table; yet seeing it has pleased thee to style me a dog, I pray thee let
me at thy table be but as one of thy whelps, to gather but the crummes that
fall from thee, or thy children, yea or thy servants, and that shall suffice my
hungry soul. This woman by this means, was fed better then any Israelite,
even by the very testimony of Christ himself, I have not found such faith in
Israel: ah woman, great is thy faith, go in peace, and let all be according to
thy desire.

3. A wicked m^n makes no use (...) Gods mercy.
Reas. Is that which follows a bad concoction; and that is ill distribution,
whereby all the vital parts wax weak, and the spirits decay; and so
consequently, sense and motion lie dead in the body: he is not able to move
up and down, to perform the duties of his calling, his hands which are the
keepers of his house, begin to tremble with the palsy; his limbs, and legs,
which were the strong men bow themselves; his senses decay, his eyes wax
dark, that look out by the windows: his ears with all the daughters of
singing are abused; his taste is gone, he is like old Barsillai, that is not fit
to set at the kings table: in a word, his senses shall be so decayed, that
nature shall not be able to bind them up in the night time, to refresh him
with comfortable sleep, but he shall be awake before the bird sing in the
morning, and shall be so out of heart with the disquietnes of the night, that
the bird shall be no means to lull him asleep, but he shall rise at the voice
of the bird: Even so is it with wicked men, they make no good distribution of
Gods mercies and judgments in their lives, and therefore no marvel if their
life languish, if their spirits to good actions be cold and frozen with the
dreggs of impiety, and can no ways be dissolved: for move they cannot, or
bestirre themselves, that so heat might be gotten into them, to dissolve the
frosts of their souls, and expel the abundance of vapors, that arise out of
the sink of sin, whereby they are choked; neither can they be chafed, for
they have utterly lost all sense and feeling: Let the grace of God shine never
so clearly, yet they have no eyes to seee withal: let God thunder from
heaven, and they are so hard asleep, that they cannot hear it: let God
threaten them, and they have yet no touch of their conscience: let God promise
them mercy, and they cannot taste it: let him offer them some of the flowers of
his garden, yet they cannot smell them. And thus it comes to pass, that as
every thing work together for the good of Gods children; so every thing works
together for the destruction of the wicked.

Use 1. reprehension. First, confutation of the wicke^d, that brag and boast
of their prosperity. Alas, what cause have they to rejoice in that they poison
themselves: There is a kind of poison, that will make men die laughing: surely
so is it with the wicked, they are fed fat for the day of slaughter, and yet
they perceive not how fast they run to the slaughter house. Secondly,
correction of the godly, that are discontented with affliction; would they have
the estate of a wicked man, for the inioying of all his wealth? I hope no good
soul would wish it: neither would I wish it my very enemy: and therefore ye
godly, set your fowls arrest with the worst of Gods provisions: for it is not
only too good for us, but it shall prove better in the feeding upon, then
ever we expected; and therefore David often said, It was good for him that he
was afflicted: small comfort for a man to drink of a cup of wine, that has
but one drop of poison in it: to be at a feast, and yet casting his eye
upward, sees a sword hanging in a weak thread, with the point toward his head.
The wicked die, because they do not die; and the godly die not, because they
do die; perijssem, nisi perijssem: the Phoenix dies, that she may live again;
and the eagle casts her bill, that she may renew it.

Use 2. Instruction. First, an admonition to the wicked, that they be more
wary in tasting the benefits of the Lord. Let them feed more sparingly: for
every morsel they take down, presently becomes poison; and therefore
miserable is the estate of a wicked man; for eating, drinking sleeping, waking,
and whatsoever he does, is nothing but the poisoning of himself: Touch not,
taste not, handle not, is no ceremony that passes away with the using, for if
wicked men do it in their service of God, it is but abomination; and if the
godly do it with the wicked, it is in all things dangerous. Secondly, a
direction to the godly, to refrain from wicked men's company; because a man
can hardly participate with them in good things, but he shall be defiled. We
dare not eat with some persons very wholesome meat, or drink of the cup
after them, because they have in their bodies some poysonfull disease: If we
have this natural wisdom, for to save the body, let us, I beseech you, have
as great wisdom for the soul, least it be hurt in wicked men's company even
by good things: that poison in nature is most dangerous, that is offered in a
sweet flower; because the one delights the senses, and so is willingly
embraced, but the poison enters in with it, and so causes death.

Use. 3. consolation. First, in that thou art out of the estate of a wicked
man, and now become the servant of Jesus Christ. Secondly, in all misery and
distress be of good comfort; for God has bestowed on thee so able a soul,
that it shall be able to digest iron into good nourishment. The stomach that is
used to be put to some hardship, will not be complaining so often as theirs
that keep themselves to easier diet.

Observe. 5. Wicked men, especially hypocrites, will think God favors them, if
he do but look on them: nay, if he hold but his tongue, and be silent with
them a little, they will grow into such familiar acquaintance with the Lord,
that presently they will judge the Lord to be like them, and none so highly in
favor with God as they. The proud Pharisie, because he was able to part with
something to the poor, is presently at defiance with the poor Publicane, as a
no-bodie in respect of him: Hypocrites conceit most of Gods love, best of
themselves, and least of others.
and with God he is bold to make this confession of his goodness; and I admire
how those words brake out (I thank God,) but that I see the world, where good
fellowship is most, to be the fullest of thanks: and therefore this is
nothing, but a bold stepping into the presence of God, as hail fellow, well
met. But alas, where is the poor Publican? A far off striking his breast,
confessing his unworthiness, craving pardon for his sin; desiring that God
would lift upon him the light of his countenance, in the face of his anointed:
better for the pleasing of God, then all their burnt offerings, calves of a
year old, Micah. 6.
thousands of rams, ten thousand rivers of oil, the first borne, or the
fruit of their bodies: and more comfortable to a poor Publican, then the
increase of corn, wine oil, or any precious thing in this world.

1. Reason, a fond conceit of their own brain. A fond conceit.
The fond lover, thinks that if the party look but toward him, or give him
presently no hard words, that she loves him at the very heart; yet when the
trial is made, and he sues for grace and favor in her eyes, she may not
endure his presence, fix her eyes upon him, but rather let him feel the smart
of her hands, for being so bold and malapert with such as he was unworthy to
look upon: he like a fond fool, may follow the suit, but let him be sure, he
shall never obtain: for his very offer has made an inueterate hatred. So
these wicked persons, for the silence of God, are so incensed with Gods love,
that they must needs be like God; yet when they shall sue unto him for the
performance of this hope, they shall hear him break silence to their small
comfort, Depart from me ye cursed, I never knew you. And if they shall urge
him, Have not we for the love of thee done many good things? O fools, this
praise is not of God, ye have your reward already: Away from me, and that I
may put you out of all hope, into hell fire, there shall be your weeping and
gnashing of teeth for the loss of my presence, and the presence of my
judgments. And this is my reward of your weldoing.

Reas. ^^^sent estate.
2. Their present estate: God surely would not be thus liberal unto us,
except be loved us: A frantic brain thinks all is his that pleases his
eye: as the fool at Athens, when he was on the sea shore, thought every ship
to be his that pleased his eye; and when he was in the city, where he fixed
his eye, laid claim unto that as the only owner: and yet alas, he had not
rags to put on his back, but as men pitied him: so the Lord has taken a
little pity on them, and given them liberty to walk abroad in the woald, and
they are so conceited that all is theirs by sea and by land: but alas, they can
not examine their title; and therefore when the Lord shall come and say, Give
up thy accounts, thou art no longer to be my officer: Alas, what acount shall
they make, that have spent all their Masters goods, and have neither in their
own hands, nor in the hands of another, one penny to discharge all with. These
men all the days of their lives, have been paying debts where they ought not:
even like a gallant, that has a wife, and company of poor children sitting
at home, while he is in the Alehouse wasting his goods. Now when his rent day
comes, he gathers in his rents, comes again unto the ale-wife, tells her, he
is come to pay his debts: now, alas, poor soul; he was bound to pay no debts
there, but at home to his wife and children: So wicked men pay all to the
devil, nothing to God: and therefore because they will be thus debt-bound to
the flesh, to live after it, they shall be sure to die.

Reas. Comparison with others.
3. is comparison with others: First, wicked and profane, which are
extraordinarily beastly: these men oftentime, live a fair life, and die a
quiet death; and therefore if God loved them a little in both these, then
surely must I needs be loved of God much more. Again, with the godly; they are
a company of precise persons, men of melancholy dispositions, at peace with no
men, cannot live quietly at home, but they must abroad to hear sermons; and
yet for all this, I sit still at home, content with that which God sends, and
am as well esteemed of my neighbors as they, and why then should not I be in
the favor of God, as well as they? Thus dealing with their own souls, they
are far gone in a conceit, that God is like unto them, and loves them most
dearly: and therefore are sure to die in it.

1. Use reprehension: first, confutation of the wicked, that they are of an
other kind of stamp, then they dream of: they conceit heaven and happiness,
when indeed they are but one step from hell. 2. Correction of the godly,
that if they trust for any favor at the hands of wicked men, they shall be
deceived: for it is impossible they should do them good, except the Lord work
it out of them; for they are forlorn creatures, and forsaken of God.

2. Use instruction. First, admonition to the wicked, that they brag not too
much of their prosperity, in so high a conceit of all is well with them. 2. A
direction to the godly, to conceive best of themselves, when they have learned
the greatest humility, to confess that they are but dust and ashes, and less
then the least of Gods mercies. This will make them mount upon Eagles wings
unto the kingdom of heaven, and the throne of glory.

3. Use consolation. First, in our exaltation, when we shall consider what a
difference there is betwixt the true love of God, shed abroad in our hearts,
and that vain conceit that we had of it in our own thoughts. Paul thought he
did well, and that it was an acceptable sacrifice unto God, to shed the blood
of the poor Christians: he was zealous for the law: and surely he had no small
conceit of Gods love toward him. But when the Lord had appeared unto him, and
told him of his service, he becomes of an other mind, and triumphs in nothing
but in Christ crucified; and that with an execration, [God forbid:] now he sees
the world crucified unto himself, and himself unto the world. 2. This
observation may vouchsafe comfort in affliction, that therefore the Lord does
afflict us, that we may not trust too much to our selves, but truly resort unto
him, that will deny us no comfort.

Reason for all opinions.
Obs. 6. No opinion so absurd, but men will have some appearance of reason for
it. That God is like man, is a conceit vain enough, and full of absurdity;
yet the hypocrite has his reason for it, because God is silent. This point is
clear in all kinds of errors, Atheism.
which for brevity, I refer to four heads; Atheism, Idolatry, heresy,
prophannes. Atheism, a strange opinion, even against reason it self, and the
cry of the whole world, which cannot but make God the first and the last. For
if there be any being, which cannot be denied, then must it needs be either
the first being, or a being from the first: for to say that there are two
first beeings, is false; seeing that two does always presuppose one, but one
does not always presuppose two; one may be without two, but two cannot be
without one: therefore every being will say that God is this first, that God is
this one. Secondly, every creature is for some next end, as all things are for
man: now for what next end is man? surely for God, or else he is good for
nothing. A stately building can not be, except some man have his hand in it,
though I can see never a man about it. This stately palace of the world, could
not be, except God had showed his power in it, although we cannot see his
presence, according to his essence: yet see how Atheism preuailes: 1. Of God.
there is no cause above nature or fortune, for into these two may all things
be resolved as the first principles, and therefore there is no God: Tush, God
sees not, neither is there any knowledge in the most high. 2. Of creation
Atheism of his works; first, of creation; that could not be because the Lord
had no workmen to help him, no instruments to work by, nor any matter to
work from. 3. Of providence.
Again, no providence, because bonis male, malis been. Neither any last
judgment, 4. Of last judgment.
because all things come a like since the fathers.

Neither have we these general Atheists alone, Partial Atheism.
but also many partial Athiests, denying of his particular providence over all
creatures: ^. Of special prou^^ence in all creatures.
It is too base for the Lord to take care for small creatures, and actions of
small moment; because he sits like a king, and therefore judges the great
matters of the world; ^. In sin.
and the rest he puts over to angels and men, nature and fortune. Again, those
that deny the providence of God over sin, saying he has a bare knowledge
of it; as though there were any providence which did not contain in it
knowledge and care: and they are not without reason for it; God is not the
author of sin: a good reason, if it were not mis-applied. Again, the
Aramites, the 1. of King. 20. v. 23. 3. Of Gods vbiquitie.
will fight no more with Israel in the mountains, because their Gods are the
Gods of the mountains, and therefore they overcome us; but let us fight
against them in the plain, and doubtless we shall overcome them. Here is an
undoubted argument, that God is not every where; and therefore they might as
well have said, no where. Beside, 2. Of his special and extra^^dinary
pr^^idence.
we have more secret Atheist; as some physicians, which when God shows his
extraordinary providence, in preserving some without food for many years,
will show how this may be done by the loss of stomach, liver, and the rest of
the instruments which serve for nutrition; and they further add, for the
preventing of the death of the body, that these parts are turned in salinam
substantiam: which saltie substance is so far from corrupting the body, that
it preserues it: now for the continuance of life, they add further, that the
brain, heart, and lungs, being in their natural force, give life, sense, and
motion, by reason that breathing is from without, as well as from within,
whereby the lungs are preserved, and that the spirits vital and animal, are
generated from pure air, whereby the heart and the brain are preserved in
their functions; so that what shall be without reason, to deny God his
providence. 3. In Judicial Astrology.
Neither would I have the Astrologians to think themselves free from this
conceit, when they make the stars the rule to square all actions, as well
voluntary, as natural; and to determine of the ends and issue of them both.

Secondly, it is strange, Idolatry.
that there should be any conceit of idolatry; seeing that nothing can be like
God, either in being or doing, Isa. 40. Again, all the idols of the heathen
are known by their causes; which to imagine of God, is absolutely impossible.
The smith, Isa. 44. takes an instrument, works in the coals, eue^ with the
strength of his arms: is an hungered, his strength fails, he drinks no
water, and is faint: the like is said of the carpenter, ver. 13. and therefore
very strange that such feeble creatures as these should bring forth their
creator: nay, stupid blockishnes, that the workman should esteem the work of
his own hands, better then himself that made it. The like may be said of the
matter, which is as fit in his own conceit to warm his body, and prepare his
meat, as be an idol for his soul: folly incomparable! that fit matter for the
fire in his chimney, should be as fit for the kindling up of the fire of his
zeal and devotion in his heart: strange again, that the picture of a man,
beast, or the fowls of the air, should be counted better then the living man
himself; nay alas, then the living God. Lastly, that whose end is vanity, to
be counted the felicity of the soul, is most shameful and intolerable: yet
for all this, Iere. 44. v. 17. We will burn incense to the queen of heaven,
and power out drink offerings unto her: have they not reason for this? yes
assuredly, they have a double reason: First, loss, in that they have not done
it; ver. 18. Since we left off this worship, we have had scarceness of all
things, and have been consumed by the sword, and by famine. A second reason is
the profit of idolatry, v. 17. when we did this, then had we plenty of
victuals, and were well, and felt no evil.

Thirdly, Heresy. Transubstantiation, Consubstantiation.
no heresy, but some reason for it: as Transubstantiation must needs be
true, because Christ has said, this is my body: and consubstantiation must be
as good as this, because of the personal union of manhood with the deity. A
pretty dispute we have in the 12. Christ not the Messiah.
of John, betwixt Christ and the people concerning the Messiah: In the 32. v.
Christ lays down this proposition, If I were lift up from the earth, I would
draw all men unto me: this Christ meant of his death, and so the people
understood it; but he has put an argument into their heads, whereby they will
conquer him; ver. 34. We have heard out of the law, that Christ bideth for
ever: therefore by thy own confession thou art not Christ, because thou say
thou must die. And I pray you consider, how they triumph in this their
argument, How say thou now, that the son of man must be lift up? who is
that son of man?

Fourthly, Profanation.
for profanation: see how the Apostle labors to prevent the wicked conceits
of man concerning the abundance of grace: 1. Of grace.
where sin abounds, there grace abounds much more: a good reason in the
conceits of wicked men, to make them sin the more, that grace may abound.
Again, for Election and Reprobation: see how men profane them; If I must be
saved, let me do what I will, and I shall not be damned: 2. Election,
Reprobation.
and if I must be damned, let me do what I will, and I shall not be saved.
Now should I come to discover that the ground of all these opinions is nothing,
but thou thoughtest, or it was thy conceit: but because this is the last
observation in the conclusion, I will put it off until I have briefly given the
reasons, and made the use of this point.

Reason. 1. No man will denic himself, and therefore though oftentimes he
deny the rule of reason, yet never will be absolutely deny reason; because
reason is one of the principal faculties in man; and therefore must it trudge
to make up his broken conclusions. Reason cannot act without reason, and
therefore men will have false reason, before they will have none.

Reas. 2. Is the simplicity of truth, and multiplicitie of error: From errors
multiplicity.
and therefore though men cannot bring in truth to maintain falsehood, yet may
they have many falsehoods, to make a fair show for one falsehood.

Reas. 3. Is the nature of opposition: From opposition, which on both sides is
to defend his own.
Truth and falsehood are deadly enemies, and therefore as truth labors to
confirm himself by all those that love him; so falshoold labors to gather
together all his forces by those that maintain him. Hence it comes to pass,
that heretics will never be coufuted, but as long as they can breath, they
will vent what they have conceived.

Use 1. reprehension. First, confutation of the wicked, in that they add sin
unto sin: First, to poison themselves with strange opinions: and secondly to
enquire for reasons whereby they may ground themselves in these poisoned
errors: so that from errors they grow to heresy; from simple ignorance, to
that which we call affected ignorance: ignorance is so good a mother to
devotion, that she will nource up error, and error will grow up to heresy, a
child of rebellion. Secondly, correction of the godly, that they yield not at
any time to the least motions of error, least they become disputers for errors
and opposers of Gods truth. Many honest and well-minded persons, have gotten
such familiar acquaintance with heretics, that they have been poisoned by
them, and so have come to hate the truth, which once they embraced.

Use 2. instruction. First, an admonition of the wicked, that they be a little
more sober in broaching of their errors, least that the Lord seeing their
malice against his truth, come with a sharp reproof, and cut them off
suddenly. Secondly, direction for the godly, to keep themselves to Gods word,
and never labor to wrest it, either to the right hand, or to the left, for the
upholding of any conceits that the devil, their own flesh, or the wicked
world shall suggest unto them.

Use 3. consolation. First, in prosperity to remember that every good thing
we enjoy, shall willingly be spent for the maintaining of the truth, and the
opposing of error, even unto the death. Secondly, in adversity, to consider
how we have used no indirect means to bring our purposes to pass, but still
have rested upon the Lord, for the revelation of his will, and the time of our
deliverance.

Obser. 7. The ground of all wicked men's opinions, and likewise of hypocrites in
this place, Absurdity of Atheism.
is nothing but a thought, and a conceit of their own: for so the words run
plainly, (therefore thou thoughtest:) and this will be plain, if we examine
it in all the former opinions. First, Atheism, there is no God; Of God.
because they think he sees them not: even as if the owl or woodcock, when
they have gotten their heads into a hole, should think no body sees them,
because they see nobodie: or like the blind man in Athens, which going to bed
with his eyesight, and admiring at the extraordinary length of the night,
cries out against the gods, that they kept the day so long from appearing;
when alas, in the night time he fell blind, and therefore thought that all the
world was blind as well as he; when indeed other men had been up, and at their
works, now ready to sleep again: So deal these men with God: they blind
themselves, and therefore God must be blind too; but he will find them out, and
then they shall know that this was but a conceit.

Again, nature and fortune are the two supreme causes. I would that these men
had stood by the ouens mouth in Daniel, cap. 3. and had seen the three
children in the midst of the fire, bound in their coats, their hosen and
their cloakes, with their other garments, and yet not an hair of their heads
to be burnt, neither their coats changed, nor any smell of fire to be upon
them, and yet the flame of the fire issuing out of the oven to have slain
those men that brought them forth: what reason would they have given of this? I
fear not but with the king, they would have made a decree, that they would
never again blaspheme against this God, because there was never God that could
deliver after this sort: we will therefore declare his signs and wonders, and
confess that his kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and his dominion is from
generation to generation.

The conceit of the Epicures: No world, Creation.
because no instruments, nor matter; is a fond conceit: for the best workman
in the best work, is able to work without any of these; and to work by any
of these, is imperfection: for who goes to the market to buy instruments to
make him reason with all? and yet to reason is a more excellent work then to
build a stately palace; therefore God being most perfect, could not work by
instruments; for then should be have been imperfect.

Again, for his providence; Providence.
if a man see a father whippe his child, and spare his servant, and should say
he loved his servant better then his child, every man would laugh him to
scorn: so if the Lord whip his children, spare the wicked, it is not for want
of love to the one, or manifestation of love to the other. So for the last
judgment, Peter tells them, 2. Pet. 3.5. Last judgment.
That this they willingly knew not, how all things were by the word of God,
and by the same word are still kept in store against the day of judgment, and
of the destruction of ungodly men: for one day is with the Lord as a thousand
years, and a thousand years as one day: no slacknes with him, only the
creature must have his time, and then shall be perish, or be saved.

The conceits of partial Atheists: Partial atheism
It is too base for the Lord to take care for base creatures; they might as
well say, to have created them: for the Lord made nothing which his providence
did not guide; and if he be the first and last of all creatures, then as all
creatures are from him, so all must be unto him; and that by his own wisdom.
It is the cunning Musician that must have the handling of an instrument
composed of many strings, and in nature dissonant, to make it sound forth his
skillful praise: and therefore to keep that excellent harmony among the
creatures, must needs be the hand of God alone: He can make lice, swarms of
flies, and an host of grasshoppers, fight most stoutly against Pharaoh: now no
general was able to order the battle, but the Lord of hosts, and this is no
base thing: for hereby would the Lord get him a name for ever. Of sin.
Again, for the decree of sin: cannot the Lord bring good out of evil, light
out of darkness, health out of sickness, glory out of shame? and therefore may
he decree sin, and yet be no author of sin: for he has goodness enough
out of sin, which shall serve his turn, and the rest he will leave to the
first inuenters. Of Vbiquitie.
The conceit of the Aramites shall appear, when they come to fight with Israel
in the plains, then shall they know that God is as well the God of the
plains, as of the mountains. For Physicians, that feign would exercise their
wits in the wonders of the Lord. Of extraordinary providence.
If reason may be given for fourteen years fast, surely Christ's fasting
forty days shall be worth nothing: I had rather say as Christ did to the devil
after his fast, Man lives not by bread alone, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God. The Israelites apparel, and the shoes on
their feet, as new at the end of forty years, as they were the first day they
entered into the wilderness, was the work of this word; and no natural reason
can be given for it.

Astrologians are well answered even by their own lies: Astrology.
An Astrologian coming before a Bishop to be made Minister, and professing
this art, the Bishop asks him, if he could tell by the stars, whether he
should be made Minister, or no? He answers, he could tell; for he had
already calculated that he should: Then says the Bishop, I will see whether
I can oppose the stars, or no: and thus the simple Astrologian was made a
liar.

Again, Idolatry.
for idolatry, a mere conceit: they had plenty, and felt no want, therefore
idolatry was good: the world is all secure, therefore the devil is very
quiet. The ships can not pass over Goodwine sands as in times past,
therefore the old-mans judgment was better then all the rest, because he never
knew it until Tenterton-steeple was built; a reason of a doting fool;
Tenterton-steeple is built, therefore no ships can pass over Goodwine sands:
baculus stat in angulo, ergo coelum mouetur: the staff is in the corner,
therefore the heavens are moved. See it in the children of Israel; Up Aaron,
make us gods to go before us for we know not what is become of this Moses:
every word a strange absurdity: first, make a god; a mere contradiction, that
a creature should make his creator: secondly gods, that was a calfe, which is a
blockish creature, and more foolish then any: now that the foolishest creature
should become the wisest of all beeings, is as strange as the other: thirdly,
to go before us: all Israel were not able to put life into that dead picture,
and therefore to go before them was impossible: it would not so much as follow
them, except they carried it: and therefore beasts they were, that saw how God
went before them in a pillar of fire by night, and in a cloud by day, and when
there enemies were behind them, made this pillar stand behind them, should
now put their confidence in a dead picture. The Papists say man is Gods image,
which may be painted, therefore may there be an image of God: Alas, what Papist
can paint the soul of man, or the righteousness and holiness that is in the
foul. Thomas Aquinas says the stars might be worshipped, but for fear of
Idolatry: even the self same, as if I should say, a man might cut an other
man's throat, but for fear of murder: to cut the throat, and murder, are
not far asunder: for the first is the cause, and must needs bring in the
other.

For heresy, mere conceits. This is my body, Heresy.
therefore it is so in deed. Christ is a rock, a stone, a vine, therefore he is
so in deed: nothing but a rock, a stone, a vine, surely stones and rocks will
reason better then thus. Christ's manhood is united to the deity, therefore it
is every where; as though things united were confounded, and the manhood were
equal with the deity, nay the very self same: for to have the same
essential properties, is to have the same essence. Christ must die, therefore
he is not Christ: because be that dies, endures not for ever: as though the
grave having shut in Christ three days, should have kept him for ever: well,
he rose again, and has openly manifested himself to live for ever. Dives
calls in bell, father Abraham, have mercy upon me, therefore to call to the
Saints is no such intolerable thing: a good argument, that must needs be fetch
out of hell to prove so damnable an assertion. Pope Alexander treading upon
the neck of Frederick, has his conceit for it; upon the basiliske shall thou
go: the kissing of his feet, because the sinner kissed the feet of Christ;
therefore his church, because bone of his bone; therefore the Pope, because he
is the church: as beasts, Psalm. 8. are subject unto man, so all men unto the
Pope: surely as beasts, for he is the master beast of them all, Reu. 13. Two
swords in Christ's family, therefore two kingdoms on the Popes head. Peter Act.
10. rise and kill; therefore may the Pope excommunicate and kill Princes. As
good conceits as may be, and at the best they are no better.

For profanation: Profanation.
let us sin, that grace may abound: who will deal thus with a kind friend;
he is liberal unto me, therefore will I provoke him to do me good by my
unkindness: the Physician is skillful, and has cured a deadly disease,
therefore I will drink some more poison, that the physician may not be idle:
the surgeon has healed a dangerous wound, therefore will I stabbe my self in
the same place, that I may try him again. If I must be saved, I must be
saved; if damned, no remedy: why then deprive I my soul of joy in my
pleasures? If I should tell thee, thou must live, and that is according to Gods
appointed time: why will thou eat or drink? this thou will say is a conceit;
therefore judge so of the rest, for the cause is alike. Now I come unto the
reasons.

1. V^nity.
Reas. Vanity of mind. Romans 1.21. But became vain in their imaginations, and
their foolish heart was full of darkness. Hence did arise those conceits
following; that the glory of the incorruptible God, was to be turned into the
similitude of the image of a corruptible man, and of birds, and four footed
beasts, and of creeping things: this is Idolatry. They turned Gods truth into
a lie: there is heresy. And for profanation, strange to consider what
followed hereupon.

2. Reason is the abuse of the object, Self-conceit.
turning it unto their own conceit, and not their conceit unto it. They would
have their knowledge like unto Gods, that first sees all things in himself,
and after, all things in the creatures: So would man do, he would first see
all things in himself, and then himself in all things; when indeed by Gods
creation, man is made to look upon all Gods wisdom in the creatures, and so
by reflection to see himself; even as a man sees a face in a glass, and by
that knows his own: and he that will first know his own face, before he see
it in Gods glass, will be sure his face shall be a good one; and therefore
will he never see any bad face in Gods law, and so shall his judgment be a
conceit of himself.

3. Reason, the violence of passions, which are in wicked men; Violent (...)
as a melancholic humor in the body, which makes men strangely conceited,
and so stiff in their opinions, that neither wise men by counsel, or learned
Physicians by purgations and cordialls, are able to remove it; except they
turn the conceit into an other, by letting them plainly see that which fed
their humor was so, but now is otherwise. Tralianus cured a woman, that could
not be persuaded but that she had swallowed down a serpent, by causing her
cast, and privily caused a serpent to be put into the basin, and so she was
delivered. Philotomus cured a person that was conceited that his head was cut
off by a tyrant, by causing an iron ball to be put into his hat, the weight
whereof did so sore oppress him, that he cried out his head did ache: the
standers by tells him, why then thou have an head. Some have thought they have
been dead men, and therefore would not eat, because dead men can not eat;
yet one faining himself to be dead, and they putting meat into his mouth falls
to eating; and the conceited person seeing that, he falls of eating too, and so
his life was preserved. Others have been so resolute in their conceits, that
they have died in them: as Arthemidorus a Grammarian, who upon the sight of a
crocodile, was so sore amassed, that he forgot all his learning, and became so
mad that he thought his legs and arms were cut off, neither would he ever
be persuaded to the contrary. Even thus falls it out with wicked men, that
either they see one conceit by another, to prove foolish, or else they do so
strongly ground themselves in their conceits, that they will never be drawn to
any better persuasions. As many an ignorant Papist, his fathers were so, and he
hopes well of them, and God forbid that they should be in hell, therefore he
lives as they did, he hopes well. Yet others after they have seen, as the
Apostle says, no profit of those things whereof they are now ashamed, become
to change their minds, and see all was but a conceit of pleasure. Thus men
become more wise after sin committed then before, because the passions begin
to swage: hence the proverb, sero sapiunt Fryges: they shut the stable door,
when the steed is stolen. And so many like Dives in hell, would be wise when it
is too late. Thus when we are taken away, we come to had I wist, and do
penance in hell to no purpose.

1. Use reprehension. First, confutation of all wicked men, that boast of their
new inventions. We have many that cry with Pythagoras, (...), but alas, what
have they found? parturiant montes, nascetur ridiculus mus: they have found out
strange matters, yet when all is brought to the birth, it was but a mountain
conceiving, and the offspring was a poor mouse. They were in the tops of
Kings houses in their vain conceit, but alas, all is but the spiders web,
fitting for nothing but the besome to sweep it to the dunghill. 2. Use is
correction of the godly, that are too credulous of wicked men's opinions. Good
Bereans will search whether the things be so or no, and these shall be wiser
then they of Thessalonica. It behooves a wise man in these cases to have his
eyes in his head.

2. Use instruction. First, admonition. Thou say thou art rich, and
increased with goods, and have need of nothing: and know not how thou art
wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. Reu. 3.17. This is
the conceit of all hypocrites, therefore let them look to Christ's admonition,
v. 18. I counsel thee to buie of me gold tried by the fire, that thou may
be made rich: and white raiment that thou may be clothed, and that thy
filthy nakedness do not appear, and anoint thine eyes with eye salve, that
thou may see. Surely if God love thee, he will rebuke and chasten:
therefore in the second place, let it be a direction to the godly, that they be
zealous, and in their zeal ielous over their hearts with a holy inquisition,
how it stands betwixt God and their souls: if they find Gods truth rooted in
their hearts, praise God for it; but if they see the deceits of their hearts,
repent and amend, least the Lord come against them, and cut them in pieces with
the sword of his judgments, that would not suffer the word of God, lively and
mighty in operation, sharper then any two edged sword, to enter through, even
to the dividing asunder of their soul and their spirit, of their joints and
marrow, and to discern of the thoughts, and intents of their hearts: let this
be powerful, and we shall never be conceited.

Use 3. consolation. First, when we do not conceit too high of any grace or
gift of God in us, but say from the very heart, glory be to God: When David
can say, I am not puffed in mind, I have no proud look; then he found joy at
will. Secondly, in our affliction not to conceit with Cain, my sin is greater
then can be forgiven: but as we descend down into our own hearts, and plead
guilty; so again by the eye of faith, to ascend upward unto God in Christ; and
then shall we say with Job, although he kill me, yet will I trust in him: and I
know my redeemer lives, and shall stand the last upon earth, and that I shall
see him with these eyes. And thus much of the bond of inference: the bond of
copulation follows.

These things have thou done, and I held my tongue:] Sins, Sin and Gods
silence may for a time agree together.
and Gods silence, are no kindly friends, yet they are here yoked together; and
that by a bond, that does not only conioyne, but gather together; and that not
by connection, but cheek by ioule; not one drawing in another, for neither can
sin by any good consequence draw after it Gods silence; neither Gods silence
(except abused) any ways allure unto sin: both are absolute, and therefore
soon may they be parted. From hence might be observed; first, that more may
absolutely be affirmed of sin and silence coupled together, then can be upon
condition: for God makes no condition with sinners for the time of his silence,
neither have they any lease from God how long they shall sin, and he will say
nothing: for God will have his liberty. Secondly, wicked men shall have
nothing to excuse them from God. Indeed their sins go before Gods silence;
Gods silence comes after, and they again come after with more sin: for so
are the words joined together: 1. They do: 2. God is silent: 3. They think:
it may be by their latter sinning, they have a persuasion of conditions of
peace: but alas they are deceived; for hereby rises a threefold judgment
against them: one for their first sin; a second for the abuse of his silence;
and a third for that they have had no measure in their sinning, and therefore
shall God have no measure in his punishing.

Obser. But the observation proper to the place is this, that man's sins, and
Gods silence may stand together for a time. The disciples of our Savior Christ
knew not of what spirits they were, when they asked Christ, that he would
call for fire from heaven to destroy his enemies. Indeed if any tender hearted
man should sit but one hour in the throne of God almighty, and look down upon
the earth as God does continually, and see what abominations are done in that
hour, he would undoubtedly in the next set all the world on fire, and not
suffer his wrath to be pacified, or the fire to be quenched.

Reas. From opposition.
1. From the nature of opposition: Two things that disagree may be coupled
together by some third: and in that third, they may agree. Heat and cold may
stand together in water; but because water has cold naturally, and heat
accidentally, the heat must out again, and the water remain in his nature.
So our sins and Gods silence, even fire and water, stand together in this
world, and sin burns very hot in this world, insomuch, that the whole world
boyles with it: and the Lord has a long time been silent with the world,
very cool and patient with sinners; but this burning must out of the world,
for the world in Gods creation did never acknowledge him, as any home borne
brood. The deluge once cooled him sufficiently: and again another fire
stronger then he shall get the conquest: and then shall an end be made of Gods
silence, and smoking coals shall issue out of his mouth for ever, to augment
the fire of hell, that it may never be extinguished.

Reas. 2. The order of laws; which is to promise, threaten, The order of law.
punish: all the while the law is promising and threatening, the Judge sits
still as one at rest; but when that time is expired, he ascends the throne of
judgment, gives sentence, delivers to the executioners, and straightly commands
that such villaynes be dispatched out of the world.

Reas. 3. From meth^ de.
Method makes a good agreement betwixt things that dissent, when it brings
every thing to his proper place: First, it brings sin to Gods goodness,
then along to Gods law, and thirdly to Gods plagues. They that tame unruly
creatures, first bring them to the thing and place where they have done the
injury, then labors to let them see the fault by beating of them: So the Lord
first brings us to our selves, and his silence, lets us see what we have done
against our selves and his silence, and then does he let us feel the power of
his wrath, that hereafter he may be our fear: either filial or slavish, for
he will have every knee to bow unto him: either a knee of power or of
reverence, of love or constraint, from heart or from body.

Use 1. reprehension. First, confutation of all those that deny Gods
providence, because they see not present execution of judgment for sin, and
present reward for weldoing: the Lords times are in his own hands, and he is
very wise in them all: therefore it is my wisdom to rest content with
patience, and expect Gods leisure. Secondly, correction of the godly, that are
too importunate with the Lord to destroy the wicked: Will thou not break the
heavens and come down? but he that believes will not make have.

Use 2. instruction. First, admonition to the wicked, that they agree with
their adversary while he is in the way, least he deliver them to the judge,
and they be cast into prison, and there lie until they have paid the uttermost
farthing. Secondly, direction to the godly, never to be at rest, until they
know themselves reconciled unto God in Christ Jesus; for that is Gods hearty
love, no bare silence: for one may hold his tongue, and yet be extremely
angry.

Use 3. From Gods direct knowledge
consolation. First, in weldoing: surely if God can agree with a sinner for a
time, how shall he rejoice to do his child good that labors to serve him.
Secondly, in misery this may affoard comfort, that God will not be worse unto
me, then he is unto the wicked, nay he will spare me as a father spares his
child, that he sees endeavor to do well.

CHAP. IIII. Of the simple invention.
First, of Gods knowledge.
NOW I come to the simple invention, and consider every reason by himself: the
sentence has two parts, Gods truth, Gods holiness. Gods truth in these words
(these things have thou done,) wherein we have knowledge without all error:
secondly, integrity without all partiality: thirdly, equity without all
contradiction.

Obser. 1. Gods knowledge is a most exact and particular knowledge of all
things: these things are known unto the Lord, to wit, the very consent unto
adultery and theeuery, the very running of the heart, though the world could
never condemn them of any such crimes: this knowledge therefore is most
particular of sins, persons, things, causes, ends, effects, and all
circumstances that accompany them.

Reas. 1. Because all things are in God long before they exist in the world.
Hence is God called the most perfect idaea of all things: a skillful workman
has the plot of his building in his head, long before he begin his work out
of himself: Psalm. 139.2. thou understand my thought afar off: and v. 16.
thine eyes did see me when I was without form: for in thy book were all
things written, which in continuance were fashioned, when there was none of
them before.

2. Reason. As all things were in God, From creation.
so all things were from God; and that which was from him, must needs be
known of him. Psalm. 94.9. He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? he
that formed the eye, shall he not see? Psalm. 139.13. Thou have covered me in my
mothers womb, therefore thou have possessed my reins. v. 15. My bones are not
hid from thee, though I was made in a secret place, and fashioned beneath in
the earth. And it is a most clear knowledge: for Heb. 4.13. Neither is there
any creature which is not manifest in his sight: but all things are naked and
open unto his eyes, with whom we have to do. The word in the original is
taken from a beast, that has the skin fleaed off his neck, so that all the
nerves and arteries that run that way may plainly be seen: or else from a man
cast on his back with his face toward heaven, which may be seen of all.
Neither is this a bare knowledge, but with care and counsel: Ephesians. 1.11. Which
works all things after the counsel of his will: and most particular, Matthew.
10.39. A sparrow falls not to the ground without Gods will: yea, and all the
hairs of your head are numbered: and most certain, Numb. 23.19. God is not as
man, that he should lie: neither shall it be resisted: Exodus 4.11. he will give
a mouth to man, make the dumme speak it, and the deaf hear it, before it
shall be silenced by man: the very stones shall speak out of the wall, and the
timber, before man shall bury Gods truth, or obscure that which he would have
revealed.

3. Reason. As all in God, and from God; From pro^dence.
so for his providence and preservation of them, they live, move, and have
their being continued from him, Act. 17.25. And therefore seeing the Lord has
gone with us all our days, he must needs be privy to all our doings. There
is not a motion in the heart, a stirring of the hand, a turning up of the eye,
or a foot of ground trodden, but the Lord knows it, because he was in that
motion. Again, for our living, whether general or special, the Lord takes
notice of it; general, with what conscience, good or evil; with what faith or
infidelity, whether we have had our conversation in heaven, or upon earth:
particular, first to himself, what piety in his worship, thankfulness for his
blessings, prayer in our needs, providence in the use of means, and without
means. Secondly toward man: first, all in general; what charity, justice,
peace, love: in special, toward superiors, what reverence, equals
humility, inferiors kindness: lastly, to thy self, what modesty, temperance,
sobriety.

4. From the end.
Reason. God must dispose of all things for himself, therefore must he know
them: Romans 11.36. For in him, and through him, and for him, are all things, etc.

5. From circumstances of time, place, and person.
Reason. In that the Lord knows not all things as in himself, from himself,
and working by himself, and for himself, but also in that he knows every
circumstance of time, place, person. Of place, Psalm. 139. first, for the
positions of it, v. 3. Thou compassest my paths, and my lying down, and art
accustomed to all my ways: thou hold me straight behind and before, and
laiest thy hand upon me. Again, for the place it self, v. 7. Whether shall I
go from thy spirit? or whether shall I flee from thy presence? if I ascend
into heaven, thou art there: if I lie down in hell thou art there: let me take
the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea, yet
thither shall thine hand lead me, and thy right hand hold me. Secondly, for the
circumstance of time, v. 11. If I say, yet the darkness shall hide me, even the
night shall be light about thee: yea, the darkness hides not from thee, but the
night shines as the day: the darkness and light are both alike. Here is no plea
that old things are out of date, and sins committed many years ago, are
forgotten of the Lord: for be sure, that the sin of Cain in murdering of his
brother, is as freshly bleeding in the presence of God, as the sin thou have
committed this day; so that neither time past, present, or to come, will help
us at all with the Lord. Thirdly, for the circumstance of persons: he knows
all by their names, Psalm. 147.4. therefore no company shall excuse thee.
Indeed in the world, multitudo peccantium, tollit poenam peccati: when
multitudes sin, then men's laws dare not execute: yet be sure with the Lord,
he that runs with a multitude to do evil, shall be sure to be punished with
them. Neither great men, nor rich men, shall be able to rescue us out of the
hands of God: therefore the point is clear, that the Lords knowledge is most
exact in all particulars.

1. Use is reprehension: first, confutation of the wicked, that are ashamed to
do that in the presence of men, which they dare most impudently do before
God: surely he is able to judge more exactly of our offenses then any man: and
therefore if we labor to keep our selves secret from the eyes of men, how
should we not tremble to sin before God? Secondly, correction of the godly,
that do not always set themselves in the presence of God, but sometimes take
liberty to slip into the ways of their own hearts, thinking that this is but
a small sin, and therefore the Lord will be merciful to me in this thing:
never considering the purity of the Lord, and the brightness of his glory,
which is always shining round about them.

2. Use instruction: first, an admonition to the wicked, that beat their fellow
feruants, because their master deferreth his coming: let them take heed, for
he will come at unawares upon them; and let them blush for shame, seeing that
men's scruants here upon earth, hearing that their master approaches, betake
themselves to their work, although before they were at their sports and idle
recreations: we know that schoole-boies in the absence of their master, leave
their seats, spread themselves abroad, yet the very voice of (venit magister)
the master comes, presently makes every one hastily betake himself unto his
seat. Shall then man be so bold, as to dare to leave his place, betake
himself to his own pleasure, when the very eye of his God looks upon him?
surely nothing is more obuious unto our eye then this, which argues that the
world is very destitute of the fear of God. Secondly, this may be a driection
to the godly, to examine themselves in all their particular carriages. Thus
David deals with his soul, upon the consideration of Gods excellent
knowledge, Psalm. 139. to the end: first, a precious estimation of it, 17, 18.
how dear, how great, what account to make up the sum: all is too short: yet
this will he aim at, when he awakes, he will still be with God. Indeed in the
violence of passion, David may make war a pretense to excuse Vrias death; but
yet Psalm. 51. it shall cause him utter many a bitter word, heavy sighs, and
even water his couch with tears. The second, is the manifestation of his
zeal: 1. in his love of the majesty of God, v. 19, 20.2. of his hatred to the
wicked, that dishonor God, v. 21, 22. See them both: Oh that thou would
slay, O God, the wicked and bloody men, to whom I say, depart ye (from me;)
which speak wickedly of thee, and being thine enemies are lifted up in vain:
I hate them, I contend with them as with mine utter enemies. The 3. his
confidence, v. 23. Try me, O God, and know my heart, prove me, and know my
thoughts, consider if there be any way of wickedness in me, and lead me in thy
way for ever.

This consideration, can not but have powerful operations in the hearts of
Christians, fire all that is within them: let us see it in a few of David's
affections in the Psalms, breathing zeal out of every pipe.

How do I love thy law (O Lord) more then the honey or the honey comb, Love.
more then thousands of silver and gold.

Thine enemies I hate with a perfect hatred. Hatted.


Thy testimonies are my delight, Joy.
I rejoice more in them, then they that find great spoils, more then in my
appointed food.

Mine eyes gush out rivers of tears: Grief.
Oh that my head were a fountain of tears, because they destroy thy law.

Mine eyes are dim with waiting: Hope.
how do I long for thy salvation.

Thy judgments are terrible, Fear.
I tremble and quake.

Look what pitch of affection the natural man bestows upon his dearest
darling; what insatiable thirst the covetous worldling upon his mammon; the
ambitious upon his honor; the volup^uous upon his pleasure; the same the
Christian strives in equal, yea, (if possible) far exceeding; in as much as
the more pure the heart is, the more active we shall find it: Zeal is to the
soul, that which the spirits are to the body; wine to the spirits, putting
vigor and agilitie into them: be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess, but
be filled with the spirit: an excellent Antithesis, the soul may be filled
with this zeal, and yet never exceed. As wings to the foul, as wheels to
the chariot, as sails to the ship, wind to the sails, courage to the
soldier, mettell to the horse, and dust to make the earth fruitful; so is
zeal as wings to the soul, to fly above earthly and worldly cogitations; as
wheels, not to go, but run the ways of Gods Commandments; as sails to
drive us with a plerophorie unto God. This makes us fight, and puts mettle into
us: yet must we take heed how we meddle with this fire, least we heap coals
upon our own heads, and bring an ill savor upon all ^ur service, as Nadab and
Abihu being unsanctified. Aguish and distempered heats, are far remote from
the radical; nay, an enemy unto it, and the very causes of sickness and
death: a very empericke may judge of them: For first, some of these are deeply
sick of the Pharisaicall humor; they jove more to be seen of men then God,
and yet God will see them the best; as I^hu, Come and see how zealous I am for
the Lord of hosts. These trumpets praise them before men, but shame the^ before
God. An aguish or consuming heat by his flushings, is seen more in the face,
then the natural heat that warmeth the heart. In wisdom and skill, artis est
celare artem, hiding of art is the best art: so hidden zeal, is often the best
zeal.

The second sort that abuse this all-seeing eye of God; are such as labor of
Ahabs disease: very passionate, affect strange gestures, exceed in all
external humiliation: horse-coursers iaydes will bound, curuet, and show more
tricks, then a horse well metled for the rode or cart: these learn by smart to
know their Masters, and gain no commendation by these outward fetches.

The third sort know God, as courtiers know one an other, complementally; and
bestow much holy water on one another faces: but alas, these fair words pay
no debts: these have the worlds wealth, yet care not to see their brother in
want: these stick up feathers for the carcass, beguiling the simple, coozening
the world, but chiefly themselves.

The fourth sort is, such as cannot keep their eyes at home, their fire on
their own hearths; but like brinish lights, sparkle and spit at others; and
like ill couched fireworks, let fly on all sides: only out of their wisdom,
they know how to spare Agag, and the great ones. These cry out of such as
labor to be precise in their courses; and yet alas, how should we be too
precise, seeing the eye of the Lord is never off us?

Lastly, others there be, that are unconstant: commonly in the beginning, they
blaze like straw fires; but in the end, go out in smoke and smother. These
have not cleared their eyes, to consider with David, how dear they ought to
make Gods thoughts unto them, and thereby to be awaked, that they might still
be with God. Iehu marched as a man of God, and his word was, The Lord of hosts;
but his project was the kingdom: and therefore soon will the song be changed:
Demetrius cried, great is Diana; but he meant her little silver shrines: many
have spoiled copes, but it was to make themselves cushions: Judas complains of
wast, but his sorrow was, that it fell besides his bag: If Iezabel proclaim
a fast, let Naboth look to his vineyard. But he that knows God indeed, and is
warmed with the heat of it, will become a true Zealote, whose feruency is in
the spirit, not in show; in substance, not in circumstance; for God, not
himself; guided by the word, not by humors; tempered with charity, not with
bitterness: such a man's praise is of God, though not of men: such a man's worth
caunot be set forth, with the tongues of men and angels. Neither let any
grieve that it cannot be done: God that knows all things, takes notice of
it; and that which is kept in secret, he will reward it openly; only let us
labor to keep nothing in secret from him. But it is woe to see, how little
this walking with God is practiced: and to burn in the spirit, is but counted
the frenzy of the brain. Such zeal as this is every where spoken against,
it has many enemies, and few friends: the world can no more abide it, then the
beasts can the elementarie fire: the rebukes of many have fallen upon it; the
devil weaues cunning lies to bring down the honor of it: in this our earthly
mould, little fuel, much quench-cole, is hardly fired, soon cooled: in the
worlds opinion it is as common as fire on every man's liearth; no man's heart
without it, if every man might be his own judge: But if they mean to follow
David, they must rise a little sooner to rake it out of the embers of
luke-warmenesse: David had care from Gods fire within him, to maintain it all
the time of his own life, and also that it might not off Gods altar; he would
suffer the temples of his head to take no rest, until he had found an house
for it to dwell in: therefore he is not unmindful to leave it in command unto
his son; and furthermore, to enforce all the people to join with Solomon, he
urges them in the presence of God, to keep and seek for all his
Commandments; especially he gives the charge unto Solomon, 2. Chron. 9. And
thou Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy father, and serve him with a
perfect heart, and with a willing mind: The argument that must move unto this,
is the same with this in my text: for the Lord searches all hearts, and
understands all the imaginations of the thoughts: therefore know thy God, and
serve him perfectly, and willingly.

Use 3. consolation. First, in trouble, to know that they are not hid from the
eyes of the Lord: secondly, in reproaches, when the world shall slander us with
the name of hypocrites, to consider that the Lord knows the uprightness of
our hearts: thirdly, in our imperfections, when we find that we are not able to
utter so much concerning our profession, as we believe; neither to lay open
our wants unto others, as we could desire for our comforts: here (I say) is
sweet consolation, because the Lord knows the willingness of our mind, and
will accept of that, as well as of our deeds.

Section 2. Of Gods integrity.
Observe, 2. Is the integrity of the Lord, without all partiality, in that he
has respect neither to the person, nor the actions of an hypocrite; but points
him out, and discouers his particular sins? Integrity contains two things,
truth ltheia.
and freedom: parresa.
for an entire God must be most true, most free, in thought, word, and deed:
in thought, because he knows the thing in himself, and by himself; and
therefore is not tied unto any thing, but knows it, and thinks it most freely:
when man is feign, first to know the thing, and himself by the thing; and
therefore his knowledge is dependent, and not of that freedom which is in God.
Secondly, most true and free in speech: for the Lord can neither lie, nor any
ways be made to recall his words; for shall the Lord speak, and not do? no
verily, Let God be true, and every man a liar, that he may be justified in his
words, and overcome when he is judged. Thirdly, most true and free in his
actions; Shall not, says Abraham, the judge of the world do right? let there
be but a righteous person found in Sodom, and he shall find mercy: so that
we may say the understanding of the Lord is most true, his will most free, his
desire most holy and pure: praecipiens omnibus quae ipse facit. Hence no
accepter of persons, or actions: Act. 10.34. Of a truth I perceive, that God is
no accepter of persons: of works, Ecle. 12. last ver. God will bring every
work unto judgment, with every secret thing whether it be good or evil:
both these are together the 1. Pet. 1.17. If ye call him Father, which without
respect of persons judges according to every man's work: and in all these he
is most holy. Zeph. 3.5. The just Lord is in the midst thereof, he will do
no iniquity, every mourning will he bring his judgment to light, he fails
not, but the wicked will not learn to be ashamed: they will needs have the
Lord to respect them, because he is in the midst of his temple: which thing
the Prophet grants, yet makes this exception, that he is a just Lord in the
midst thereof, and will do no iniquity for their sakes: therefore the Lord
does punish grauissime, iustissime, certissime: most grievously, because of the
greatness of sin: most justly, because of the holiness of his law: most
certainly, because of the truth of his judgment.

But it will be objected, Wicked men prosper.
wicked men flourish: The answer is easy; First, it is but short, Psalm. 37.35,
36. I have seen the wicked strong, and spreading himself like a green bay
treee, yet I passed away, and lo he was gone; and I sought him, but he could
not be found. Secondly, they are punished in their consciences with deadly
security, while they live in their prosperity. Thirdly, the more they live in
delight, the greater is their punishment: for that feeds them fat for the day
of the Lord.

Secondly it may be objected, that he which is sum misericors, debet
remittere, aliquid de suo iure; he that is most merciful, must remit some
thing of his right: or else shall we verify that of the Lord, which we speak
of oppressions, summum ius, summa iniuria, the uttermost right, is the
uttermost wrong: and therefore if it be the commendation of a man, to forgive
injuries, and the glory of the King to pass by offenses, shall we not think
that the Lord has greater liberty to dispense with his justice, and pardon
offenses without satisfaction? I answer, mercy and justice, are in God in the
highest degree, and therefore equal, as being God himself; yet may they be
intended or remitted, appear more or less in his creatures. Secondly, the
Lord has just reason with himself, of the showing of his mercy and justice;
yet this may we boldly say, that the Lord can not pardon any sin, without the
satisfaction of his justice; because justice in God, is fater an other manner
in him, then any other creature: for in him it is his essence, and therefore to
deny his justice, were to deny himself.

The point then being cleared, these may be the reasons. 1. Reas. First, from
the perfection of his nature: for Integrity is that, which consists of all
complements, and can admit of nothing, neither in the excess, nor in the
defect.

2. Reas. The rule of his wisdom, which admits no exception, but contains in
it the conditions of a most absolute and necessary truth. A law more
unalterable, then the laws of the Medes and Persians.

3. Reas. Because he will be judge of the whole world, and therefore must
needs be entire, and just in all actions.

1. Use reprehension: first, of the wicked, that dream of all mercy, and
think with the hypocrite, that God is nothing but silence: yet let them know,
that it is impossible for God to cross his nature, and therefore must they
needs feel the hand of his justice. Secondly, a correction of the godly,
which by reason of some privileges, abuse their christian liberty: surely if
we be not the servants of sin, we must be the servants of righteousness, and
not our own masters.

2. Use instruction. First, admonition to the wicked, that they put not too
much on Gods skore; because the Lord will prove a hard master, and be sure to
ask his own. Secondly, a direction to the godly: first, To pass their time
in fear: for that is the use that Peter makes of it, 1. Pet. 1.17. And if ye
call him father, which without respect of persons, judges according to every
man's work, pass the time of your dwelling here in fear. 2. Chron. 19.7.
Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you: take heed and do it, for
there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, neither respect of persons, nor
receiving of reward.

Secondly, confession of the Lords righteousness: Nehem. 9.33. Surely thou art
just in all that is come upon us: for thou have dealt truly, but we have done
wickedly. Dan. 9.7. O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, and unto us
open shame, as appears this day unto every man of Judah, and to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem: yea, unto all Israel, both near and far off,
through all the countries whether thou have driven them, because of their
offenses that they have committed against thee. Therefore v. 14. Has the Lord
made ready the plague, and brought it upon us: for the Lord our God is
righteous in all his works which he does: for we would not hear his voice.
Psalm. 119.137. Righteous art thou, O Lord, and just are all thy judgments. An
admirable disputation is laid down in the 9. of Job: the question is this,
Whether any man compared with God, may be justified. The first argument, is
drawn from the confession of all mouths, that they shall not be able to
answer him one thing of a thousand. The second argument, is drawn from his
wisdom and power: Never any being fierce against God has prospered. The
third argument, is an induction of particular examples, drawn from the
mountains ouerturned in his wrath, and yet they feel it not; the displacing
of the earth, that the very pillars thereof do shake; the staying of the Sun
from his rising; the closing up the stars as under a signet; the spreading of
the heavens; the walking on the sea; the making of Arcturus, Orion, the
Pleiades, and the climates of the South; he does great things and snsearchable,
yea, marvelous things without number: so that he may pass by, and no man
perceive him: take the pray, and no man restore it. Thus does the Lord not
withdraw his anger, and the most mighty helps stoop under him. Hence arises
these confessions, v. 15. to the end; Though I were just, yet could I not
answer; only this would I do, make supplications to my judge: if I speak of
strength, he alone is strong: if I speak of judgment, he alone shall plead:
if I would justify my self, mine own mouth should condemn me: thus goes Job
along in confessions unto the 34. v. where he shows the way to bring in his
confidence; Let him take away his rod from me, and let not his fear astonish
me; then will I speak, and fear him not: but because I am not so, I hold me
still. Thus from arguments, God brings forth these confessions; and these
confessions do better quiet the soul, then arguments against the Lord.

Use 3. Consolation to all those that labor for sincerity, and strive to
serve the Lord with willing and perfect minds; for unto all those that dispose
their ways in this sort, shall be showed the salvation of God.

Sect. 3. Of Gods equity.
Obser. 3. Is the equity of God without all contradiction? the Lord judges
not upon malice or suspicions, as though he hated the person of the hypocrite,
or suspected him for some notorious crimes; but tells him plainly, his
conscience judging with the Lord, that these things are done, already
committed; and therefore no cause to complain of the Judge. Thus the Lord
dealt with our first parents, Genesis 3. the Lord exaamines the matter, and says
unto the serpent, because thou have done thus, thou are accursed: unto the
woman, I will greatly increase thy sorrows: unto Adam, Because thou have
obeyed the voice of thy wife, and have eaten of the tree whereof I commanded
thee, saying, Thou shall not eat of it; cursed is the earth for thy sake. Thus
dealt he with the whole world, Genesis 6.5. When the Lord saw that the wickedness
of man was great in the earth, and all the imaginations of the thoughts of his
heart were only evil, and that continually: therefore, v. 7 I will destroy from
the earth, the man whom I have created, etc. Thus dealt he with nations, Ezech.
18.2. The fathers have eaten the sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set
on edge: this proverb has no good meaning; for the soul that sins, it
shall die: Therefore, O house of Israel, are not my ways equal? and are not
your ways unequal? surely, I will iugde you every one, according to his
ways. Again, for particular cities, Genesis 18. I will go down to see whether
the cry which is come up unto me be so or no. Lastly, special persons, Genesis
4.9. Where is Abel? v. 10. what have thou done? the voice of thy brothers blood
cries unto me from the earth: now therefore, v. 11. Thou art accursed from the
earth, etc.

Reas. 1. Drawn from the nature of punishment, which is always a consequent
of sin, and therefore cannot go before the doings of men.

Reas. 2. The conscience of wicked men, which must needs contain in them, the
bills of Indictment, according unto which the Jury must proceed, and the Lord
himself will give sentence, Reu. 20.12. The dead were judged of those things
which were written in the books according to their works.

Reas. 3. That all may be without excuse: for what shall man say unto his
Creator, when the Lord has told him, These things have thou done? surely, lay
his hand upon his mouth, and confess that the Lord is just in all his works.

Use. 1. reprehension. First, of such as complain with Israel in Ezekiel. 18. thy
fathers have sinned, and we have borne their punishments: It is not so, O house
of Israel: for Gal. 6.5. every man shall bear his own burden: 1. Cor. 3.8.
every man shall receive his wages according to his labor: therefore to thee, O
Lord, mercy, for thou rewardest every one according to his work, Psalm. 62.12.
Secondly, a correction of the godly, that murmr at the silence of God toward
the wicked, and are grieved for his hand upon themselves, conceiving it an
injury done unto themselves, because they judge themselves better then the
wicked: but let them also know, that the cause of their afflictious is their
own doings: Iam. 1.13. Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God:
for God cannot be tempted with evil; neither tempts he any man, but every
man is tempted when he is drawn away by his own concupiscence, and is
enticed: then when lust has conc^iued, it brings forth sin, and sin when
it is finished, brings forth death.

Use 2. instruction. First, a direction to the wicked, that they be more
careful of their actions. Secondly, a direction to the godly, (...) 2.12.
that they learn to deny all ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and live soberly,
and righteously, and godly in this present world.

Use 3. consolation. First in trouble, 2. Theff. 1.6.7. For it is a righteous
thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you; but to you
which are troubled, rest with us. Secondly, in weldoing thou may have this
consolation, Psa. 37.3. trust thou in the Lord, and do good; dwell in the
land, and thoushalt be fed assuredly; delight thy self in him, and he shall
give thee thy hearts desire: for the Lord is a most equal God, and will not
suffer either the doings or the sufferings of his children to go unrewarded.

CHAP. V. Of Gods silence in general.
THE second part is the holiness of the Lords sentence; which is twofold,
mercy and justice. Mercy, Silence.
I held my tongue; Justice, but I will reprove thee. Mercy is described by
sour arguments; first, by his quality, silence: secondly, by his object,
about which he is exercised; and that is the doings of the wicked: thirdly, by
the accidental effects, and they are wicked thoughts: fourthly, by the form
and manner of these thoughts, and that is, to make God like themselves.

First, of Gods silence: which is nothing else, but Gods clemency in his
patience and long suffering, with his bountifulness, and general goodness
toward sinners. That this may more clearly appear, we are to understand that
the Lord which is absolute being in himself, Exodus 3.14. can have nothing
given unto him, which is not himself: for I am, that I am, is a proposition
that has no more in the consequent, then was in the antecedent: for I am, is
the antecedent, and I am, is the consequent: therefore every consequent in God,
is God. God is silent, God the antecedent is I am, and silent the consequent is
I am: for nothing is given to God that is less then I am, and greater then I
am, is impossible. Hence God is one most simple being, and impossible to be
understood of our shallow capacities: therefore has it pleased his majesty,
that we might vnderstnd some thing of him, to show us his back parts, Exodus
33.23. which are his glorious attributes, Exodus 34. v. 6, 7. among which, we
have this silence of God; slow to anger, and abundant to goodness and truth.
Now these attributes are of diverse sorts: Absolute attribate^. Conditional.
some absolute, some conditional, some both absolute and conditional:
absolute, which at all have no arise from the creatures, but follow his
absolute being: as his infiniteness, eternity, and the like, which do follow
from that he is without causes, not looking at him for his effects in his
creatures: others merely conditional; as in creation, omnipotency; which is
only in God in regard of his creatures, which in time might feel the work of
an everlasting worker. For in God, creation was always act, and never power:
otherwise should the Lord have begun his act, and then it should not have been
eternal. Indeed his creature felt the beginning of it, for once it was
nothing: and to make that something, we term it omnipotency, which is in the
creature alone: for God is not ommpotent in the generation of his son,
neither the son and the father omnipotent, in the proceeding of the holy
Ghost, because this is an absolute and eternal genreation, and procession,
that was never out of act, and therefore incapable of any power.

In the fall of man, this silence is merely conditional: for if there had bin
no sin, then should God have had no silence. So in the state of redemption,
grace is given to God only from that work in the creature, receiving him to
mercy for Christ's sake. For attributes, that may be said to arise from his
being, and yet appear in his works; are in creation, goodness, wisdom, and
the like, which are absolute in God, and before creation, yet manifested from
creation, seeing he has placed in these creatures, the foote-steppes of his
goodness, and wisdom. Now his eternity and infiniteness, may be collected
from the creation, Deus cognoscitur per modum n^gation^^, enunentiae,
causationis.
but that will be by way of negation: for there is a threefold way of giving
attributes unto God: first, per modum negationis, as all imperfections in the
creatures: man is finite and has beginning of days, therefore deny them both
of God, and say Jehovah is infinite and eternal. A second way, is per modum
eminentia, by way of excellency; as what is excellent in the creature, to give
it to God in the highest degree: man is good, wise, just, holy, therefore God
is goodness it self, wisdom it self, justice it self, holiness it self.
The third, per viam causationis, by way of making; as the world is a work
above the reach of a creature, therefore God made it: redemption a work above
the power of angels and men, therefore God must redeem: sanctification no gift
in man, therefore the work of the holy Ghost: and for any creature to thrust in
with God, is no less then blasphemy. Again, in man's fall, justice puts forth
it self, yet was it absolute in God before, and therefore might it appoint,
prescribe laws, and set down certain ends, having no consideration of the
creatures sin; yet the execution will always follow man's sin. So in
redemption, mercy which is not the same with silence in this place, but a free
acceptance of the creature in Christ: this is also absolute in God, and so
might have his work in God, long before man was miserable: but to execute this
mercy upon the creature, must needs be in his misery, where it appears to
us: and so both election and reprobation are manifest unto the creature, yet
were long before in God, and with God. Therefore that distinction upon which
some Divines build, to overthrow Gods decree of reprobation and election,
before the corrupt mass, is not sound; for thus say they: Gods attributes, are
some of them absolute, as eternity, infiniteness, goodness, wisdom, and
these are presupposed before the being of the creature: others again
conditional, and always have respect unto the creature; as justice, and
mercy: no justice but upon the condition of sin, and no mercy but upon the
condition of misery: All this is true, being understood of the execution of
mercy and justice: but absolutely it is false, being conceived of the first
actions of justice and mercy: for the first action of any wisdom, is to
dispose of all things for their ends; and then consequently to execute: one
thing to speak what God does in himself, and another thing what he does in
his creatures: therefore by the rule of divinity in this place, we understand
by silence such a kind of mercy, as appears unto man in the state of his
sin and misery, which is equal to all, and no distinct favor of God in
Christ, but his general goodness.

First, on man's part; for as soon as he had sinned against God, presently
upon the very sin he was guilty of hell; death, and damnation, and the
justice of the Lord apprehended him, and therefore present execution; and if he
had cried, have patience with me, and I will pay thee all; it had been in
vain: for he should have promised more then he had been able to pay: therefore
the Lord must have patience with him for his mercy sake, and a little releive
him in his misery. Hence one reason is man's misery: a second is in regard of
God himself, who will be holy in all his works, and therefore just and
merciful: just because of iniquity, merciful because he will have all just
commendation. Shall it be the commendation of man to spare, and shall not the
Lord spare? yes assuredly, the Lord is full of clemency and bountifulness:
From his clemency appears his patience and long suffering: and from his
bountifulness many a temporal blessing, as we see by daily experience, to
the tempting of the very godly, that there is no divine providence.

For the Rhetoric in the words: here is first to hold the tongue, put for
silence: then secondly, silence put for patience, meekenes, gentleness,
long-suffering, and bountifulnes: for the Grammar, the word signifies, such a
kind of silence, as goes with deafnes, as though God were both dumme and deaf:
but the Lord is not so, for he has made both the dumme and deaf, Exodus 4.11.
and therefore can he be dumme and deaf at his pleasure, and also speak and
hear at his pleasure. So then I find this word in a more significant
conjugation, wherein a double action is signified: Tacitum cogitare, to think a
secret, to be silent for better deliberation: and therefore Gods silence is no
idle silence, but full of wisdom.

Lastly, for the logic, this is an adiunct given unto God; now adjuncts make
not for the being of any thing, but for his welbeing: and therefore the
Logic tells me, that though silence be not for Gods being, yet it is a grace
that the Lord will put upon himself, when he says, I am silent: And therefore
having found out in some measure the wisdom of God in his word, let us
magnify him in it, and apply it to our own hearts.

Obser. The great God of heaven and earth that is provoked to wrath every day,
is full of mercy, clemency, patience, longsuffering, and bountifulness toward
all. Reasons drawn from God; secondly, from the creature.

Reas. 1. It is Gods nature; Esa. 55.7. for he is very ready to forgive,
that is, it is his very nature.

Reas. 2. Gods will: Ezekiel. 33.11. As I live, says the Lord, I desire not the
death of a sinner.

Reas. 3. His glory: Exodus 33.19. Moses desires to see Gods glory: the Lord
answers him, I will make all my good go before thee; and what is that? I will
show mercy on whom I will show mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I
will have compassion.

Reas. 4. From his words and deeds; both by himself, and by his Prophets: Isa.
1.18. Come let us reason together: though your sins were as crimisin, they
shall be made white as snow: though they were red like skarlet, they shall be
as wool. Isa. 30.18. yet will the Lord wait, that he may have mercy upon you;
and therefore will he be exalted, that he may have compassion upon you. 2.
Chro. 36.15. The Lord God of their fathers sent to them by his messengers,
rising early, for he had compassion on his people, and on his habitation.

Reas. In regard of the creature: First, serious meditation on the time of his
patience: Acts 13.18. About the time of forty years suffered he their manners
in the wilderness: no idle circumstance but worth the observation; that evil
manners should go uncorrected forty years; which ought now to be laid to
heart, and drive us to a better consideration of the time present.

Reas. 2. By this means a provocation to repentance: Romans 2.4. Despisest thou
the riches of his bountifulness, and patience, and long sufferance, not
knowing that the bountifulness of God leads thee to repentance, etc.

Reas. 3. Because the creature shall find nothing commendable in himself,
which he shall not see in God: now silence being commendable in man, it shall
plainly appear to be with God: the commendation of silence in man is often
in the proverbs: as for example, Prou. 10.19. In many words there cannot want
iniquity, but he that refraineth his lips is wise: 25.12. A word spoken in his
place, is like apples of gold, with pictures of silver: 26.23. The heart of the
wise guides his mouth wisely, and ad leth doctrine to his lips. Therefore will
the Lord be free from many words, he will speak in his place, and guide his
mouth most wisely.

Reas. 4. The law of creation: Eccles. 3. a time for every thing; and
therefore that which is to the creature, shall be unto himself: he has a time
for mercy, and he has a time for justice.

Reas. 5. Because an appointed day: Acts. 17.30, 31. The time of this ignorance
God regarded not, but now he admonishes all men every where to repent,
because he has appointed a day in which he will judge the world, etc.
Therefore God for the time of the ignorance of the Gentiles was very silent,
but now having made his grace shine most apparently, according to his own
appointment, will sleep no more in silence, but awake all by the trumpet of
the Gospel; and if they disobey the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, then
shall he show himself from heaven, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7. with his mighty Angels in
flaming fire, rendering vengeance unto them (not for the days of their
ignorance, or miscariages in them) but because they do not know God, and have
not obeyed his gospel: then shall they be punished with everlasting
perdition, from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power.

Use. 1. reprehension: First, confutation of the wicked, which cry, Mal. 3.14.
It is in vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we have kept his
commandment, and that we have walked humbly before him? we count the proud
blessed, even they that work wickedness are set up, and they that tempt God,
yea, they are delivered. Alas, poor wretches, if there were no more to
condemn thee, yet this were sufficient, that God has been silent with thee.
Secondly correction of the godly, that as yet have not learned this lesson, to
imitate God in refraining their tongues from speaking against wicked men: if
they know their calling, they may do it: but to exasperate the wicked, is not
always necessary: nay alas, they cannot refrain their tongues from speaking
against their brethren; when they may see plainly by this doctrine, that the
Lord is silent with his very enemies. Again, it reprehends all fretting at
the prosperity of the wicked, Psalm. 77.8. yield God his silence, and wait upon
him: also all censuring is here condemned: Romans 2.1, 2, 3. Iam. 3.

2. Use instruction: first, admonition to the wicked, that they have some
consideration of the Lords mercies toward them. The Sun often beating upon the
stones, causes them to have some heat, though not at the heart, yet in the
outward parts, and therefore a shame for them, if they be never the warmer for
Gods silence: the wicked are worse then little children, who when they have
gotten any thing of their parents, will away without either look or leg: yet
if they know they will have duty, then they do it in such fashion, that all
men may see their hearts another way on their game abroad. But wicked men,
though they have bin often told, that the Lord looks for duty at their hands,
yet he shall have none at all: and surely, suppose they have so good a nature,
as they will take off their hatts before they sit down to the table, yet I am
afraid it is more for custom, then any thing else. Thus a sensual mind
counts nothing sweet, but what is taken in hugger mugger, without Gods
allowance: like some gallants, think no venison sweet, but that which is
stolen: fools they are, which admire the brightness of the sun in the
watter, and never look up to the body. The whelps that feed under the tables,
will fawn upon their masters; if any smite them, they will presently fly at
them: the ox and ass knows their owners, but wicked men are worse to God
then oxen, asses, and dogs are to them. And surely for the best of their
speeches, they are as I may say, no better then common terms of holiness
without affection, and therefore like court holy water, good words, but pay no
debt. And if at any time, with Balaam, they see the beauty of Gods church in
the days of Gods silence, then like hypocrites they wish as Balaam did, Oh,
that their souls might die the death of the righteous, and that their eude
might be like his: yet all is but a flash of lightning, soon come, soon gone:
for there is a thorn caught in their foot, which hinders their pretended
journey. For this loath to depart, he sings unto his own soul: Shall I in
this calm of Gods mercy, loose my pleasure? in this time the cost is clear:
but alas, to live a godly life, makes me think a lion is in the way, and
therefore must I needs slip my neck out of the collar. And thus by their
high estimation of the present, they become penny wise, but pound foolish: so
that when they shall be taken away from this estate, they come to had I wist.
But alas, let them know for conclusion, that they are worse afraid, then hurt:
they know not, that to physic in the spring is the best time of the year:
the vomit of the soul, which is the grief of repentance, shall do the most
good, while it pleases the Lord to visit them with the day of his silence.

Secondly, here is excellent direction to the godly, first to praise God, Psalm.
136. all things must praise God, why? be cause his mercy endures for ever:
which is repeated in every verse: and surely this may be an excellent motive to
Christians, to make them full of holy affections: for it is a great mercy of
God to have a large affection of well-doing, when we have good occasion
thereof. For God never cease in offering occasion, but we often cease in
having affections. Therefore it were an excellent thing, to keep reckoning
what woe run upon Gods score: we do it with men, but alas they are hardly
found which think how deep they are in Gods books, such ill husbands we are
for our souls: if I ouershoote my self with men, that they may have a saying
of me, behold an ungrateful person, that will cut me at the heart: but rare it
is to know, how I have ouershot my self with God, in forgetting his long
silence: if ought cross my corrupt nature, I have grief at will; if I have
broken a day, and not kept touch with men, I would not look them in the face:
if my servant have loytered, he blusheth, and is ashamed to come before me: and
shall not I change my countenance? if I were displeased, my affections would
come before they were sent for: but when God is displeased, even for the abuse
of his mercies, I can not have my affections, although I would send many a
messenger for them: so ponderous is my corruption which presses down, that
unless Harbor by a better spirit, I shall never give the Lord the answer of
his mercies.

Let us therefore help our selves a little at these dead lifts: first, with
some rules to ouerwrastle them: secondly, with some motives to blow up our
devotion. Consider therefore for the first rule, how little we are bound unto
the flesh, Romans 8.13. If ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye; a heavy reward
for a flauish service: but on the other hand for the second rule, see how we
are debt-bound unto the spirit; But if ye mortify the deeds of the body by
the Spirit, ye shall live. From these two rules, we have motives innumerable and
inualuable, to praise the silence and mercy of God: for what a misery would
it have bin to have bin debt-bound to the flesh, which rewards with nothing
but hell, death, and damnation? therefore happy souls, that have cast off
this yoke: and again, what a joy and felicity to be under the yoke of Christ,
and debt-bound to his spirit? we need no more to make us sing joyfully unto
the Lord. But alas, sinful passions prevent our wills, and come as we say of
foul weather, before they are sent for: but holy affections in these most
admirable mercies of God. are often quenched for want of zeal: for alas, when
do we beat our brains, not suffering the temples of our heads to take any
rest; till we have given our God some argument of our thankefulnes? We use our
God, as if it skilled not greatly how he were dealt with, when he deals most
graciously with us. If a man bids me to supper once a quartar, I thank him
then, and thank him again when I am come next time after, not only of my
present being with him, but also of my last being with him; I tell what kind
welcome, what good cheer, bid him sometime again, or check my self if I
forget it: but for some great matter, what kindness? what speeches? what service
will I tender unto my friend? Shall one supper, and not daily bread? shall
riches, and not Christ deserve a thousand thanks? for a small benefit I will be
at command, and shall I not surrender my self unto God, who has paid my debt,
and purchased me a new stock, even the hope of eternal life? shall I blush at
small unthankfulness toward man, and not condemn my self before God? surely
when the Lord shall take away his mercies, we shall come to had I wist, and do
so much more penance, by how much we were more careless. We will not let go our
leases to men for want of payment of the rent; therefore let us give God no
cause to enter and strain upon us, and all that we have, for not magnifying
and praising him: and let this follow every repetition of a favor, that David
has taught us, Psalm. 136. For his mercy endures for ever.

A second instruction, is to imitate God in his silence, in being kind toward
others. 1. Tim. 1.16. For this cause was I received to mercy, that Jesus
Christ should first show on me all longsuffering, unto the ensample of them,
which shall in time to come believe in him unto eternal life: especially
Christians must observe it. 2. Tit. 2.3. Showing all meekenes unto all men, for
we our selves were also in times past, unwise, disobedient, serving the lusts
and diverse pleasures, living in malitiousnes and envy, hateful and hating one
an other. Thus David approoues himself a man of God, 1. Sam. 24. by his
innocence unto Saul, in cutting off his garment, when he might have cut his
throat. Motives to this we have many: Matthew. 5.7. Blessed are the merciful:
for they shall receive mercy: again, for this shall they be received into the
kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 25.34. thirdly, because it makes us walk worthy of
our vocation: Ephesians. 4.2. Walk worthy the vocation whereunto ye are called,
with all humblenes of mind, and meekenes, with long suffering supporting one
an other through love. fourthly, it proves unto us our election: Coloss. 3.12.
Now therefore as the Elect of God, holy and beloved, put on tender mercy,
kindness, humblenes of mind, meekenes, long suffering, etc. lastly, this serves
for instruction of all, to take care for displeasing of God: Matthew. 5.25. Agree
with thine adversary quickly, whiles thou art in the way with him, least
thine adversary deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge deliver thee to the
sargeant, and thou be cast into prison, etc. Esperially those must look unto
it, that have had long time of Gods silence: Romans 11. Behold therefore the
bountifulnes and the severity of God: toward them which have fallen severity,
but toward thee bountifulnes, if thou continue in his bountifulnes, or else
shall thou be cut off.

Use. 3. consolation. First, in misery to consider that God spared us, when we
were sinners; was reconciled unto us, when we were his enemies: therefore much
more being justified by Christ, made his sons, will he love us, and be well
pleased with us, Romans 5. Secondly, consolation in our welfare, because we have
the silence of God, in regard of the true cause of it, and therefore have hope
that it shall be continued unto us. And thus much of Gods silence.

Section. 2. The object of Gods silence.
The object is the doings of the wicked: for the explication whereof, let us
first see what the word of God makes the object of Gods silence: First, it
cannot endure any silence at sin, because it teaches plainly, that as soon
as sin is committed, God speaks, the law speaks, and the conscience, as we
may see, Genesis 3. and therefore must it be in regard of the consequent of
sin: which is first of all the fault: 2. the guilt. 3. the punishment: now
the two first are equal with the sin, and therefore will they suffer no
silence: therefore must it be in the punishment threatened or executed; in
threatening the Lord is never silent, therefore must it be in the execution,
Silence in regard of the misery of sin and not of sin it self.
which is either present, or in coming; present original and actual sin,
wherein there has appeared no silence of God; for presently upon the fall, man
became exorbitant, and his freewill ran only unto evil: therefore must it be
in the punishment coming, which is the sensible misery of man, to wit, the
first and second death: wherein plainly we have the silence of God, first, in
regard of the first death; the Lord did not presently deprive him of all the
goods of body, whether internal or external: Internal; first, in the sense
of his nakedness, it pleased God to cover him; in the loss of his created
majesty wherein stood his shame, it pleased God a little to relieve him; for
the beauty of his body, it pleased God not to make him altogether deformed;
for the health of his body, not presently to make him weary of his life,
leaving him to dangers, filling him with diseases, and setting the footsteps of
death in him. Again, for the external goods of body, serving for honesty
and necessity, were not presently removed: for first, he left him some
dominion over the creatures, some honor and friendship amongst themselves.
Lastly, for goods, whereby his life was maintained, some releife from the
earth, though with his labor, and the sweat of his brows, from among thorns
and briers: some from the creatures, first clothing: secondly, possession:
though in the first was his shame, and in the second calamity and loss. Thus
was the Lord silent with man in regard of the first death, only concerning the
incoation of it: but when the perfection came, then the voice of the Lord
breaks out, as he did to the rich man, This night shall thy soul out of thy
body, thy body to the dust, and thy goods to their owners. Secondly, for his
silence in regard of the second death, first, in the incoation of it, and that
in regard of the conscience or some extraordinary judgment; in regard of the
conscience, not presently, the extremity of horror and fear, whereby man
flies from God, and hides himself: nor dead security, whereby there is no
sense of hell, but desperate searing up of the conscience. Lastly, the Lord is
silent a long time before he bring some extraordinary judgment upon them, as
he did upon Baltashar, Saul, Ahithophel, Hammon, Judas: and this is Gods
silence with wicked men in regard of the second death; but when the perfection
is come, the Lord breaks his silence, and says, my creature, away from me,
pack into hell, where I will roar upon thee as a lion for ever. So then, it
plainly appears, that God is only silent in regard of man's misery, in the
incoation of the first and second death.

Indeed profane men restrain Gods silence to an other object, to wit, their
sins: and hypocrites, to their good actions; Isa. 59.3. We have fasted, and
thou see it not: we have punished our selves, and thou regardest it not.
Lastly, the Saints, to their troubles and afflictions, wherein they think the
Lord is too silent and too slow in hearing of their cries: but all these three
have brought in an object about which the Lords silence can not be conversant:
for wicked men have the Lord always calling by his word, to forewarne them of
their sins; and hypocrites blaspheme against God, in saying he regards not
goodness: and the children of God have forgotten the consolation which speaks
unto them, as unto children: Heb. 12.5. My son, despise not the chastening of
the Lord, neither faint when thou art rebuked of him. And thus have we cleared
the point by the word of God. The Rhetoric is this, first these things, for
these doings; secondly, these doings, for these sins; thirdly, these sins,
for the deferring of the punishment of these sins, for in that is the Lord
silent. Concerning the Logic, the arguments are the subject, and the adiunct,
wherein is contained an agreement of reasons; and therefore we may take notice
how the Lord out of sin, a deadly enemy unto his will, can frame himself an
object wherein he will delight: from whence the observation rises, that the
Lord has great respect unto the misery of man.

Observe. God that is holy in all his ways, and such a God that wills no
iniquity, is able in the excellency of his wisdom, to see something in
sin, which shall move him to pity and compassion, even that which the
creature feels not: the Lord lays it unto his heart: for Genesis 3.22. the Lord
God said, Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil, etc.
is not an Ironie, but a kind of pity and sorrow for the misery of man: and
therefore we find in the Scripture phrase, that the Lord is moved with good,
to love it; with sin, to hate it; and misery, to pity it.

Reasons. 1. Gods creation: he loves the work of his own hands, and it pities
him to see it any ways out of order. Genesis 6.6. It repented the Lord, that he
made man in the earth, and he was sorry in his heart.

2. Reas. Man's misery: Genesis 6.3. My spirit shall not alwaie strive with man,
because he is but flesh. Genesis 8.21. I will henceforth curse the ground no more
for man's cause: for the imaginations of man's heart is evil, even from his
youth. Psalm. 78.38, 39. Yet he being merciful forgave their iniquities, and
destroyed them not, but of times called back his anger, and did not stir up
all his wrath: for he remembered that they were flesh, yea a wind that passes
away, and comes not again.

3. Reason, his promise: Act. 13.18. About the time of forty years, suffered
he their manners in the wilderness, because of his covenant: Psalm. 105. where
all the good that he did unto his people, is brought in by reason of the
covenant and promise that he made with Abraham, swear unto Izhak, confirmed
unto Iaakob, and left it to Israel for an everlasting covenant.

4. Reason, is the measure of sin, which the Lord will suffer to be made up:
Genesis 15.16. For the sins of the Amorites is not yet full.

1. Use reprehension. First, confutation of wicked men's conceits of the silence
of God, thinking that all is well with them, as long as they hear of no
messengers from the Lord of hosts: alas, it is the misery of their sins,
that mooues the Lord a little to pity them; and therefore small cause to
conceive so highly of Gods mercy. Indeed it were well, if they would magnify
God in this his mercy, by humbling of themselves and confessing the long abuse
of his silence: but they on the contrary, set up themselves, and confidently
believe, that they shall never be moved. Again, this confuteth the hypocrite,
that takes the silence of the Lord, for the approbation of his thoughts, words,
and actions; when, alas, all is but a silence at his sin, and a pitying of
his misery: the Lord can not but be angry with them, because they draw him
into a league of iniquity, dishonor him before men, and conceive amiss of
him in themselves. Lastly, it confutes all despisers of the riches of Gods
bountifulnes, patience, and long suffering, having no knowledge how the
bountifulnes of God should lead them to repentance: and therefore after the
hardness of their hearts, heap unto themselves wrath against the day of wrath.

Secondly, a correction of the godly, in the want of Christian discretion; and
that is, in being too prompt and ready in blazing abroad the faults of
others, especially the infirmities of their brethren. We see the Lord is silent
at the gross sins of profane hypocrites; and therefore shall not we pass
by the infirmities of those that ought to be dear unto us? surely this will
bring us to communicate with the hypocrite: Psalm. 50.20. Thou sit and
speak against thy brother, and slanderest thy mothers son: therefore my
brethren, judge your selves, least the Lord judge you with the hypocrite, for
this offense.

2. Use instruction. First, an admonitian of the wicked, to consider with
themselves, that God will not always be abused; he will not always keep
silence: for it is but the holding of the tongue: so that he is neither dumb
nor deaf, but refraineth his lips for a time, that a word may be spoken in his
place, and it shall be a most fearful one: for it shall be in flaming fire,
rendering vengeance upon them for the abuse of his mercy. Secondly, a
direction to Gods children, to magnify his majesty for giving them so large a
time of repentance: and also to be careful of the day of our visitation: Hebr.
3.13. Exhort one an other daily, while it is called to day, least any of you be
hardened through the deceitfulnes of sin.

3. Use consolation to all those that lie under the burden of their sins:
for if the Lord spare them that never seek unto him, much more will he spare
us that seek unto him earnestly.

Sect. 3. Of wicked thoughts.
Concerning wicked thoughts. First, the original of them. Kinds of thoughts.
Thoughts have diverse considerations: First, they are given to God; and that is
a direct thought, whereby God first thinks himself, and then in himself all
things else. Gods knowledge and thoughts are direct of himself, and indirect of
all things that are not himself: the reason, because God directly knows no
less then himself, and therefore can think no less then himself: so that
out of himself, he knows all things, which no creature in heaven or earth is
able to do. And this thought may be called a direct thought, free from all
error and false hoode; because it can no ways be blinded by any external or
internal object, seeing it is tied to none.

The second thought is indirect, when the thing must first be thought, and then
may it think it self: for as in a glass, first I must see the image of my
face, and then from that my natural face; so in thinking, I must first see the
image of the thing represented unto my understanding, and then by knowing of it
I know my self to know: and this is a reflexed thought, agreeing both to
angels and men: and hence rises the possibility of being deceived, because
they may judge of the object amiss: and if they do so, then they judge amiss
of themselves. Hence the Angels and Adam overthrew themselves: the angels by
proud thoughts of their estate, and in contempt and disdain to be ministering
spirits for the good of man: Adam again was deceived in neglecting of his true
conformity with Gods law, but thought it was to limite him from a great good
in becoming like God.

A third thought is, when a man will think all things out of himself, and
through his own corruptions: and therefore all the beams of Gods wisdom,
coming through so corrupt a medium, must appear according to his corruption;
even as the sun shining through a glass window which is painted, resembles
the color of the glass. And thus man that would needs become like God, is in
a paritie of contraries like God. God thinks himself first, and then all
things out of himself; so corrupt man will now needs think himself, and so
all things out of himself: but here lies the difference, that God being no
thing bur goodness it self, can think nothing but good thoughts: but man
being nothing but a lump and mass of sin, can think nothing but evil
thoughts: it is Gods happiness to think himself, but man's misery as long as
he flickes to his own thoughts: and therefore no marvel, if the silence of
the Lord take no better impression in his mind, but become like his mind, a
wicked thought. Yet observe this by the way, that as the beams of the sun
coming through the glass, are not changed by the glass into another nature,
nor lighting on the dunghill polluted by the filthiness thereof; so the beams
of Gods goodness passing through the soul of a sinner (though he abuse them)
yet still they retain their goodness. Hence we learn three kind of thoughts,
first a direct thought, the second a reflexed thought, the third a corrupt
thought, which is meant in this place: the fountain of corrupt thoughts is the
heart, Genesis 6.5. whose conception is in imaginations, the very forming and
laying of an accursed birth: showing that the frame of the heart is full of
corruption: and secondly that his fruits are accursed: as the conception is, so
is the birth: for the thoughts coming from the corrupt frame of the heart
cannot be clean but must needs relish of their original: and therefore the
holy Ghost has styled the very imaginations of the heart to be evil, only,
and continual, Genesis 8.21. even from his childhood: as soon as we begin to use
reason, we frame evil in our hearts. Hence the cause plainly rises; want of
all good thoughts, or want of all consideration, with the concourse of all the
contraries: want of consideration made the covetous man even in temporal
things destitute of all the comfort of them: Isa. 44. the cause of all that
strange Idolatry is, v. 8. because they have not known nor understood: and v.
19. none considers in his heart, neither is there knowledge nor understanding
to say, how foolish have I been to burn half of my wood in the fire, for to
bake my bread, and roast my flesh, and yet of the residue to make an
abomination to bow unto it, Ier. 8.4, 5, 6. There is more consideration in
the very bruit beasts, then in Gods Israel; and therefore the heart being so
polluted, and destitute of all good consideration, how should it possibly
prove otherwise, then that man should become full of all evil thoughts: And
thus much of the fountain, which will better be discovered in the other points.

For the second, The ways to discern of men's thoughts.
there be two ways of knowing men's thoughts, 1. immediate and direct, and
this is proper unto God, 1. Kin. 8.39. 2. indirect, and by means: For as God
only first knows himself, and then all things by himself; so every
creature, even angels themselves; first know the thing, and then themselves by
the thing; this makes their knowledge indirect. And there be four means to
help in the knowledge of thoughts: First, the agreement of natures; as spirit
with spirit, may have secret familiari^y, and a communication of thoughts. Thus
the devil being a spirit, can come more near our souls, then suggestion by
objects, even to a spiritual communication: else tell me how it is possible,
that the devil can often inform ignorant persons with the knowledge of tongues
and arts; which cannot be done by objects, but by familiar converse of natures
agreeing. And this is one dangerous way, how the devil may come to have
knowledge of out thoughts: Act. 16. how learned the woman her divination, but
from the information of the devil? how made she that confession, These men are
the servants of the most high God, which show unto us the way of salvation:
this was not the holding out of an object, but effectual operation upon the
glass of her mind: therefore the devil is said to work powerfully in the
hearts of unbelievers. Working by objects cannot be so powerful: for how long
might ministers preach the way of salvation, before men would confess as much
as this woman has done? how long might a schoolmaster hold the Grammar before
the eyes of an unlearned man, before he would come to understand the tongue?
or any Artist hold the Art before an ignorant man, before he would make a
syllogism, etc. And therefore necessarily betwixt spirits, must there be a
communication. Hence the Scripture defines a witch, a woman or ignorant person
that has a familiar spirit: 1. Sam. 28.7. Seek me a woman that has a
familiar spirit.

2. Means, is by instinct: examples of this, 2. Kin. 6.12. and 5.26. and Act.
5. Peter knew the thoughts of Ananias and Saphyra: when Eliah complained, 1.
King. 19.18. Yet will I leave seven thousand in Israel, etc. Romans 11.4.

3. Means, is revelation by the Scriptures: by it we may know what be the
maine thoughts of all men naturally, Heb. 4.12.

4. By signs; as by speech, gesture, etc. Genesis 4.6.

Beside these four, the Papists have two more: 1. Of the Saints in heaven, to
wit, the glass of the Trinity: but this glass was never revealed unto any,
neither is it possible that it should be revealed: for whatsoever is in God,
is God himself: and therefore if we cannot see God according to his glorious
essence and perfection, Job 11.7.8.9. Exodus 33.20. Thou can not see my face;
for there shall no man see me and live: yet may we see Gods backe-parts, which
are his attributes, and his works, which only are to be seen in this world,
and in the world to come: Therefore a mere dream of seeing any thing in the
glass of the Trinity, any further then the revelation of divine attributes.
Isaiah the Prophet never learned, or tanght such a doctrine as this, nay he
has taught the contrary, when he says, Abraham knows us not: and John that
evangelical Prophet, called the eagle for soring aloft into deep mysteries;
and the divine, because he was most exercised in unfolding the divinity of
Christ, yet never reached so high as this point, neither ever acknowledged any
such divinity: nay, he has taught the contrary in the Reu. How long Lord,
holy, and just! his holiness and justice they know and acknowledge; but of the
time when the Lord shall manifest his holiness and justice, they are wholly
ignorant: which could not have been, if they had been able to look into the
glass of the Trinity. Thirdly, Josias, 2. Kin. 4.22. was taken away, that he
might not see the evil to come; therefore the Saints in heaven see not the
evil days here upon earth. In a word, against all Papists; God as he is one
most simple act, cannot be apprehended of any creature: for God in himself is
infinite, therefore no finite thing can apprehend him. Secondly, he is most
simple, therefore one: now many acts of understanding cannot apprehend this
one; therefore is it absolutely impossible to reach unto God by one act of
understanding, which is absolutely necessary to understand God simply one:
therefore God alone knows himself, and his creature, according as he has
revealed himself.

A second, the chamber of meditation, wherein they put men, and bid them
meditate, and afterward they inquire of them what they thought, and so see what
they are fit for; if bloody minded, then treason; if deep meditations, then
Jesuits.

A strologians have found out a seventh way of knowing the thoughts, and that
is by the stars: but they are to know, that the stars work nothing further
then their proper subject, and natural qualities; and therefore have no work
upon the mind, wherein the thoughts are framed: for corporal things cannot
work upon spiritual things, save only in the altering of their instruments.

An 8. means is invented, which we call physiognomie, that can tell men's
destines by their hands, called palmestrie: by the face, as the eyes, nose,
for-head, or the countenance; but this is an idle coniecturing, and full of
uncertainties: and if the heart be deceifull above all things, surely if we try
by the face, and hands, we shall never understand the least of his
imaginations: therefore I rest content in these means as sufficient, to wit,
beside that direct knowledge that the Lord has, man's knowledge, or angels, by
communication spiritual, by instinct, revelation of Scripture and signs.

The hypocrites thoughts are here detected of the Lord, The kinds of wicked
thoughts.
that every man may take notice of them; therefore let us proceed to the third
point, to see what be the heads of these thoughts: They may be reduced to three
heads; either they concern God, or his neighbor, or himself: God profanation
of his ordinances, and yet think God was like him: his neighbors, breach of
charity, and yet think God did approve of him in these sins: thirdly,
against himself, in conceruing so well of himself; as against both sobriety
and modesty, to pull God into any comparison with him.

The first point of thoughts concerning God. Four capital thoughts against
God.
There are 4. capital thoughts, and damnable imaginations that run naturally
in every sinners mind touching God: First, that there is no God, Psalm. 10.4.
and 14.1. Touching this thought, four things: First, in whom it is? Answ. It
is in the corrupt mind, and imagination of every man naturally that comes of
Adam: this appears, Psalm. 14.1. for the fool in Scripture is euerre sinner
uncalled and unrepentant. Again, Romans 3. Paul goes about to prove that all
are sinners by proofs out of the Psalm. 10. and 14. thereby intimating, that
the fool is to be understood of all sinners whosoever.

Object. But nature tells every man that there is a God. Sol. These two
contrary thoughts, may be both in the profane mind: By nature a man thinks
that there is a God: by corrupt nature that there is no God: for two contraries
may be in one subject, as light and darkness, cold and heat, when neither is
in the highest degree.

But in what manner shall any man deny God by his thoughts? Ans. First, by
turning the true God into an Idol of his own brain: and thus every man does
by nature, Call. 4.8. Ephesians. 2.12. why so? because in heart they did not conceive
of God, nor in life worship him as he ought to be conceived of and worshipped:
and therefore, Psalm. 96.4. all the gods of the Gentiles are called Idols. Now
the heart of man turns the true God into an Idol by three thoughts: 1. That
God is not present in all places, Psalm. 10.11. Tush, God shall not see. Isa.
29.15. 2. That there is no providence of God, whereby he observes, rules,
governs, and orders all things on earth in particular: Psalm. 10.11. God
hides his face, Zeph. 1.12. ^. That there is no justice in God, as when men
think, that although they sin, yet God will not punish them: Deuteronomy. 29.19.
Psalm. 10.3. The wicked man blesses himself in the desire of his heart.

The second way whereby a man in thought denies God, is by placing some thing
in the room of the true God: Phil. 2. whose God is their belly, and riches
are the covetous man's idol. Col. 3.5. Ephesians. 5.5. Quest. How can this be? Ans.
Look what soever a man thinks to be the best thing in the world for him
besides God, that is his god: thus riches and pleasures are called the gods of
men, because they set their hearts upon them, and take them for the best things
in the world: for after affection follows opinion. And the fruit of this
thought, thus lead by affection, is Atheism, whereby we sundry ways deny God:
in practice, in judgment: in practice many are infected with this sin, first
hypocrites which give their lips and bodies to God, but hold back their
hearts: secondly Epicures, whereby men give themselves to pleasures in eating,
drinking, playing, as though they were made for nothing else: these, do not eat
that they may live, but live that they may eat: thirdly, witches, who either
by tradition, or express compact, worship the devil: to these also belong
those that seek unto witches, ^s Saul. etc.

Atheism in judgment has three degrees: first, to conceive otherwise of God
then he has revealed himself in his word. To this head, first, Turks belong,
who though they hold Christ more famous then any Prophet, yet will not have him
God: and therefore worship God out of the Trinity, and so worship an Idol.
Secondly of the Jew, who though he acknowledge the true God, yet he neither
acknowledges, nor worships him in Christ, and therefore worships an idol: for
Ioh. 4.23. and 24. Christ says, that the Samaritans they worship they know not
what. Thirdly of the Papist, whose religion in substance and scope is mere
Atheism: for in word, they acknowledge the true God, the Trinity, the
personal union of both Christ's natures; yet if we regard their manner of
worshipping, it is colored and close Atheism. As appears by these two
reasons: First, the god that they worship is no true God: for the true God is
infinite in justice and in mercy, but according to their doctrine he is not
so: because for the justice of God, they hold that the satisfaction of sinful
men are sufficient to satisfy the justice of God: and for his mercy, they
make that imperfect; in that they make a supply to Gods mercy, by man's merit:
for if Gods mercy be not every way mercy, it is no mercy: for grace must
every way be grace, else it is no way grace.

Second reason: the Church of the Papists is a false Church: first, in that
they rob Christ of his manhood, by teaching that he is not in heaven locally,
but in all places where the mass is offered. Secondly, they disgrace him in
his offices: in his kingly office, in that they place the Pope above him, his
deputy in his presence; whereas we know that all commission stays in the
presence of the King: secondly, in that they ascribe this unto the Pope, that
his laws bind conscience; which is as much to take the crown off Christ's
head, and give it to the Pope. For his Priestly office, which consists in
satisfaction, and intercession, they likewise abuse Christ: 1. of his
satisfaction; because they join with it the satisfaction of men in the work
of redemption: 2. of his intercession, in that they join the virgin Marie an
intercessor for them in heaven: thus they degrad^ him of his offices, and so
make him no Christ. Now if they deny Christ, then the faith, 1. Ioh. 2.23. and
that religion that denies the faith, is no true religion, but Atheism in
judgment.

The second degree of Atheism in judgment, is when men place some creature in
the room of the true God. Thus the Gentiles worshipped the Sun, Moon, and
stars, in the room of the true God.

The third degree in judgment is, when a man holds and professes no God at
all, the highest and most notorious degree of all. These are not worthy the
common breath of men. For if a man that says a lawful Prince, is no Prince,
must die for it; much more is he worthy of death, that holds God to be no God.
Now by the way, let every one of us examine our selves, whether we have any of
these thoughts and imaginations. Every one will say, I never discerned any such
thoughts in my self: but alas, soon may we deceive our selves: for there is in
all of us, first a single thought, when a man simply thinks this or that:
secondly, a double and reflecting thought, when a man judges and discernes
what he thinks: the first belongs to the mind, the second to the conscience,
which is corrupted since Adams fall, and therefore can not tell certainly, but
may be deceived.

For the examination of our selves, we must proceed by certain tokens and
signs, whereby we may discern this thought in us: Psalm. 14.3. notes 1. a
disordered life: 2. not to call upon Gods name: 3. contemning those that put
their trust in God. If we examine our selves by these three, we shall find that
this thought reigns among us. For first, we hear the word often, but we are
not amended and reformed by it: I appeal to men's consciences. Secondly, men
go on in their calling, but never call upon God; or if they do, it is but for
form and fashion, in a few words, at ordinary times: but who cries with a
hunger after Gods graces, or for a supply of their wants. Thirdly, no love of
them that trust in God, but their profession is hated and contemned. Again,
whosoever denies the presence of God, it is a token he holds there is no God.
In the presence of men, we will not offend men; but in the presence of God, we
offend God. Again, what is the cause that men use all unlawful means to get
riches, but only because they deny Gods providence. Again, every man reasons
thus; Though I go on in my sins, yet God is merciful: hereby Gods justice
is denied, and so no God: for the true God is as well a God of justice as of
mercy. Here then we see what notorious sinners we are, though we had no
outward sins: Eccles. 10.20. If a man curse the King in his privy chamber,
the fowls shall devour him: how much more horrible is it to curse the King of
kings, the God of Gods? therefore every one must labor to know, see, and
discern this wretched thought in his heart, which we may do by Gods grace,
not only the damnable actions of our times, but the inward thoughts of the
spirit within us.

A second thought touching God is, that the word of God is foolishness: this
must especially be understood of the Gospel: 1. Cor. 1.21. Paul calls it
foolishness, according to the opinion of the world; not because it is so in it
self, but in the judgment and imagination of the Grecian: and 2.14. that a man
should be saved, justified, and sanctified by Christ, is foolishnes to the
natural man; this also in part is to be understood of the law: Deuteronomy. 29.19.
Moses bids the people, take heed least when they hear the curses, etc. where
he intimates that this evil thought is in men's minds, to think that the
law is foolishness, and therefore not to hearken unto the curses thereof.

Now this is a dangerous thought, as appears by the fruit: 1. Hence rises
that deuillish opinion, that religion is but a policy to keep men in awe from
treasons and rebellions. Secondly, hence springs all apostasy, and all
departing from the faith: Gal. 1. the Galatians were a worthy Church of God
planted by Paul, yet there he says, that some of them were departed from the
truth; the reason is, because they thought the word of God to be foolishnes.
Many in the East countries, and in Asia, where the Gospel was planted by the
Apostles, by this damnable thought, fell first into the herefie of Arrius, and
many 600. years after Arrius, departed to the religion of Mahomet. In the West
church, in Europe and Italio, the Gospel was planted by the Apostles, and yet
afterward fell to Papistry: and about 600. years after Arrius death, Papisme
ouerspread all Europe, except in some little parts of Greece; and so has
reigned till this day: the reason is plain, in every man's heart lies this
corruption, to think the word of God foolishness, and hereupon men by nature
can embrace any religion, but the truth. And so in England, let a man broach an
herefie, it shall not only at the first, but afterward have strong and stout
patrones. When the family took shipping, and came out of Germany into England,
(though it were but a very brutish herefie) yet it was much broached, and had
been more, had it not been repressed by the preaching of the word, and good
order of godly Magistrates. The cause why men are so ready to entertain a
schism or heresy is, because man's heart by nature is full of blindness and
error, and thinks the Gospel foolishness and madness.

Examination of our hearts touching this thought, being seriously performed,
we shall find it to reign in high degree: for we are all content to come to
the assemblies where Gods name is worshipped, and submit bur selves to be
taught: we are content to hear the preaching of the word, and herein our
personal sins displayed, the terrible curses of the law denounced against
them, viz. judgments in this life, in death, and at the day of judgment; and
yet we tremble not at all this, our hearts are not amassed and affrighted at
these thunderbolts of Gods curses due to our sins. If a man in the streets
cry fire, our hearts will be astonished; but when the fire of heaven, kindled
by the breath of the living God, is cried against our sins, we are not
moved: and why? surely our hearts are forestalled with a false imagination,
that the word of God is foolishnes, and therefore that his plagues, and
threatenings, and curses, are nothing. Again, when we hear in the Gospel of
the pardon of our sins by Christ, and life everlasting, repentance, the
kingdom of God; few learn this doctrine, repent, and enter into it; because
their mind is forestalled, and wholly possessed with this false imagination:
Psa. 126. the Israelites deliverance was a dream, much more then is our
spiritual deliverance from Satan: and no marvel; for the Gospel is as far
contrary to man's reason, as light to darkness: for that Christ by bearing
death, and the curse of God for sin, should thereby free men from death and the
curse, is quite contrary to natural reason.

Use. 2. If this be so, that all men naturally imagine the word to be
foolishness, then must we follow Paul's rule. 1. Cor. 3.18. If any man will be
wise, let him become a fool: first, we must renounce our own natural reason,
deny our selves our own judgment, put out the eyes of our natural
understanding, and suffer our selves wholly to be guided by the doctrine of
the Gospel of Christ. Secondly, we must all pray with David, that God would
open our eyes that we may see his will, and understand the words of his law:
because our reason and imagination is flat contrary to the Gospel.

From this second thought arises an other, viz. that if the word be
foolishnes, then I will perform no obedience to the word of God: That this is
man's thought naturally, I prove it thus; Job 21.14. he brings in the sinner,
saying, depart, etc. there is none so wicked to say so in word, but it is their
hearts imagination and affection; and he that purposes to walk after his own
ways, he it is that says, who is the Lord that we should worship him? It is
a disgrace for me to be the servant of God, I will not do it, therefore
depart from me, O God, Ier. 6.16. they say so in the purpose of their hearts:
Luke 19.14. which place as it is meant of the Jews, so of all other men in the
world by nature, that are impenitent sinners: for so long as a man goes on
without repentance, he carries a purpose in heart to live in his sins, and
so says in heart, I will not bear the yoke of Christ, I will be none of his
subjects, he shall not reign over me. Come to an adultreer, drunkard, etc.
tell him of his sin, he will straight swell like a toade, and show the
malice of his heart to him that reprooues him: reason, because he means to
live in his sins, etc.

Examination of our hearts touching this thought. Most will say, they defy and
abhor all such wicked thoughts of not serving God: but after examination had,
it will be found that it reigns in our hearts. We can be content to hear the
word, receive the Sacraments, which are the pledges of Gods savor, and mercy
in Christ; and we are content to look for salvation in Christ: but what is
the cause why after all this, there is so little obedience, so little knowledge
and conscience, so little mercy and compassion, so little justice and love in
our callings? surely this, because our hearts are wicked, deceitful, full of
guile: and what is this guile? I will not obey the ways of God.

Use. If this be the well wished thought of men's hearts, then we may see what a
wonderful hard thing it is to convert a sinner: a man may be a long hearer of
the word, and by hearing, his mind may be furnished with knowledge, with a good
conceit, with very good utterance, so that he may teach and publish the
Gospel, and conceive prayer, and that very well, and yet this damnable
imagination may lurk in his heart; and therefore he may not only hereby
deceive others, but even his own soul: for so long as this thought is in his
soul, he is void of true repentance: for where true repentance is, there is
a resolution to please God in all things.

Third thought touching God: It is a vain thing to worship God, Job. 21.15. he
speaks it not with the mouth, but in the heart: Matthew. 3.14. Nay, David, Psalm.
73.13. had this thought in his heart; now I see I am deceived, In vain have I
worshipped God: but yet this thought comes not into man's heart at all times,
but upon occasion, as when the godly sees the wicked flourish.

Examination. This thought takes great place in our hearts: for go to the
poor man's family, he works and toils all day to get riches, but never
worshippeth God, or calls upon his name: why so? because the heart says, so I
may have wealth it is no matter whether I serve God, or no. Come to the rich
man's house, there is nothing but eating, drinking, sleeping, gaming, and the
like: why so? because his heart says, all is well, so I may have my pleasure:
it is enough for me, it is no matter for Gods worship. The ordinary man says,
he will do as his ancestors have done; he has as good a faith as the best, he
will not come to sermons, for they that haunt sermons most, are usually the
worst disposed persons, and none so bad as they. If a man profess Christ in
sincerity, he is a byword, and a mock to men. Nay almost all men betake
themselves to will worship, not only the Papist, Jew, and Turk, but the
common Protestant; he comes to Church, and serves God by mumbling over the
Creed, the Lords prayer, and the ten Commandments; thereby thinking to
serve God as well as the best: the cause is, because this imagination taking
place in the heart, hinders all good things in us.

Fourth thought, is the thought of distrust, and it runs much in the mind of
man: God does not regard me, God will not help me, God will not be merciful
unto me. This made an entrance to the fall of our first parents: for first, Eve
looks upon the fruit, and sees it to be very beautiful. 2. There enters into
her heart a thought of distrust, viz. It may be there is no such danger in
eating this fruit as the Lord faith there is, and it may be God does not regard
us. When the Israclites murmured at the waters of strife, Numb. 20.12. Moses
was barred the Land of Canaan for this distrust: for when he smote the rock,
(as God had commanded him) he thought in his heart, God will not give water
though I strike the rock: David, Psa. 31.23. and Psalm. 78.2. is full of
spiritual confidence: but in an other place says, I thought all men were
liars; Samuel the Lords Prophet has deceived me; now I see that Samuel spoke
not by the spirit of God as aprophet, but by his own sense lyingly, when he
said that I should come unto the kingdom of Israel: Thus David did not openly
distrust God, but Samuel; as if he had not known Gods will, but had passed
beyond the bonds of his calling. Matthew. 14. why did Peter sink when Christ bad
him come to him on the water? because his mind was troubled with the thought
of distrust; it may be God will not help me now walking upon the sea: Christ
reprooues this, why did thou doubt?

Touching this thought two points: 1. the time when it was in man's thought: 2.
the danger of it: For the first, it takes place in the time of danger,
temptation, adversity, sickness, and death: it troubled Job in his
affliction, Job 16. when he said, God hates me, he is mine enemy, he makes
me a but: Psalm. 77.9. It may be God will no more have mercy upon me. In peace
Satan tempts by presumption. The dangers hereof, 1. horrors of conscience, and
all fears and astonishments of the heart, which come when the mind
distrusteth. 2. Desperation, whereby men confidently avouch, that God has
forsaken them, and that he has cut them off, and that nothing remains but
death: this is often in the heart of repentant sinners. 3. It weakens the
foundation of our salvation, which stands in the certentie of Gods promises;
and thus it does by weakening faith, for by faith we believe that God is our
Savior, and that Christ shed his blood for us in particular: now this thought
is clean contrary to faith, as fire to water; and where distrust preuailes,
there shall be no faith: hence appears the great danger.

We must take heed of it, Remedy.
and use all means in the days of our peace, that it reigns not in our
hearts in the days of trouble. The means are three: 1. the preaching of the
Gospel: this is the especial means to apply Gods mercy truly to our souls
and consciences: therefore a sovereign remedy against this thought: for the
speech of the minister, is as though God himself spoke, by virtue of the very
ordinance of God: if God should say to me in his own voice, my mercy belongs
to the believer, I would surely believe and not doubt: now when the minister
says, believe in God, and his mercy belongs to thee, it is by the power of
this ordinance of God, as if God himself had said it. 2. Baptism: if a Prince
shall give a man a pardon, and put his name and seal to it, he will never
doubt, but assure himself of pardon: now when a man is baptized, God puts the
parties name in the pardon, and his own seal to the pardon of his sins in
Christ. 3. The Lords Supper, wherein the bread and wine are particular pledges
of Gods particular mercy, to every particular receiver: and therefore it is,
that every particular man receives for himself in special.

II. Point,
Of evil thoughts, touching our neighbor. To find out what these be, we must
have recourse to the commandments, especially to the second Table. These
being spiritual, condemn not only wicked actions, words, and affections,
but also the wicked thoughts of man against man. And they are of two sorts in
the second table. First, thoughts without consent. Secondly, with consent.
Without consent, has the first motions and inclinations in the mind, forbidden
in the tenth commandment; Thoughts with consent, are those wherein the will
consents with the first motions: these as they are conceived, so are they
practiced: and are forbidden in the 6.7.8.9. Commandments. 1. Thought, is of
dishonor, against the 5. commandment: the 2. of murder, against the 6. the
3. of Adultery, against the 7. the 4. of theft, against the 8. the 5. of
disgrace, against the 9.

1. Is any thought that tends to the contempt and dishonor of the person of
our neighbor; and that is a base estimation of the persons of our inferiors
in respect of our selves: Luke 18.11. the learned and zealous Pharisie thinks
basely of the Publican: this thought is like to Adonibezek, who sitting in his
royalty, had diverse kings with their thombs cut off receiving meat of him
under the table, as dogs. Pride makes a man destitute of all friends: he has
neither God, nor his neighbor, nor himself: he that has not God, what
happiness can he have? he that has not his neighbor, what society can he
have? and not to have himself, is to be a slave, when he thinks he domineers
over all. Therefore with Job learn to say, Lord I am vile: when we can say this
and see it, it will be a means to repress this thought. Job 39.

2. Thought of murder, is any intent of murdering his neighbor, or any thing
tending to murder: Deuter. 15.9. where two signs are laid down of it; first
an evil eye, to look upon the poor without compassion: secondly, unmerciful
dealing. A second, is the thought to do some hurt to them, that worship God
truly, Psalm. 74.8. the Babylonian speaks against the Jew, Let us destroy them
altogether: Christ says, Ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake: this
has bin since the time of righteous Abel. This thought proceeds from an other,
set down 1. Pet. 4.4. the wicked marvel that others will not do as they do.

Ob. Nebuchadnezzar a wicked man, favored Daniel. Ans. Dan. 1.9. it was Gods
providence that disposed the Kings heart to do good.

3. Murdering thought, is when a man thinks the Minister ripps up his sin in
malice.

3. Thought, of adultery, as all unchaste thoughts. 4. thought, theft, Psalm.
50.18. when thou see a thief, thou runnest with him: this seeing makes him
run in thought and deed. 5. thought disgrace, to think a thing well done
ill done, or ill done well done, 1. Sam. 1.13. and v. 17.28. Matthew. 19.4. Act.
2.13. yet love thinks no evil, which being wanting amongst men, makes them
think all evil. Men's hearts are like dry wood, which burn not alone, but
put the least cole to them and they will burn; so the least occasion offered,
will set all on fire. This thought of dishonor, is as the table of Adonibezek:
in respect of murder, it is a mere slaughterhouse; in respect of the thought
of adultery, a mere stew; in respect of theft, a den of thieves; and in
respect of the thought of disgrace, a very fountain of all backbiting,
slaundering, reuiling, etc.

3. Point, evil thoughts touching our selves, four.
1. The thought of pride, thinking himself most excellent: Isa. 14.13. Zeph.
2.15. Luke 18.11. Reu. 18.7. Genesis 3. our first parents learned this lesson of
the devil, You shall be as gods: and the less we see it, the more it reigns
in us. Pride in outward apparel, is a most damnable pride, but none above
spiritual pride: from hence sprung many sins, and therefore to be abhorred.
As 1. ambition, whereby men are not content with their own estate, but seek
to be advanced. 2. presumption, in daring things above his calling. 3.
boasting. 4. hypocrisy. 5. obstinacy. 6. contention. 7. affectation of
novelties. Secondly, when this thought reigns in us, Gods spirit cannot dwell
in us, Luke 1.51, 52. Iam. 4.6. Isa. 66.2. Thirdly, when all other sins die
in us, this thought dies not: nay, when the graces of God come, this thought
reuiues, because he makes them matter of his pride.

2. The highest degree of this is, when a man thinks himself check-mate with
God, Isa. 14.14. two ways: first, when he thinks he may have power to prevail
with, or against God, Dan. 3.15. Exodus 5.2. Secondly, taking honor due unto
God unto themselves, Act. 12.22, 23. 2 Thessalonians. 2. Antichrist sits in the Temple
of God as God. Object. But he is servus servorum. Ans. It is not in word, but
in the thought of his heart; in that he thinks he has power to make laws
binding conscience, to dispense with the moral law, and Apostolical
constitutions, and to forgive sins; hereby he thinks himself to be equal
with God.

2. Thought; I am righteous, and need no repentance, Deuteronomy. 9.4. two things:
first, that a man thinks himself by nature righteous: secondly, that the Lord
gives them all that they have for their righteousness, Ier. 2.25. Revel. 3.17.
Christ came not to call these righteous, because their imagination was such,
that they were incapable of his grace. The angels rejoice more for one penitent
sinner, then for nintie nine that need no repentance. Come to an ignorant man,
ask him, can you keep the law? yea: and that he looks to be saved by this
righteousness, and by the works of the law. Hence we see how every man by nature
is a Papist. Secondly, this shows us that it is a very difficult point, to
bring a man to true humiliation. Thirdly, we see why men neglect the preaching
of the Gospel, because it teaches a strange doctrine unto corrupt reason.

3. Thought of security; I prosper, and am free from all Gods judgments: I am
not in danger of hell, death, and damnation: Psalm. 10.6. Isa. 28.15. Psalm.
30.7. This makes the Ministers labor in vain, Zeph. 3.5. Noe an hundredth and
twenty years.

Fourth thought in misery, to think my crosses to be worse then indeed they
are: Job. 6.3. come to comfort them, Oh never man was vexed as I am. The cause
of these is, Genesis 6.5. and v. 21. the heart, which sometimes signifies the
fleshie part of man, which is the beginning of vital blood placed in the
middle of the body. 2. the soul. 3. the faculties. 4. the middle of any thing
Psalm. 46.2. but here is meant the understanding, will, and affections: Ephesians.
4.23. imaginations: this word shows the frame of the heart: first, for his
corruption. 2. for his fruits. 3. termed man's heart, not evil men alone, or
those before the flood; but all men naturally. 4. word evil, that is against
Gods law. 5. from his childhood; as soon as he begins to use reason, he
frames evil in his heart. Hence the cause plainly rises; want of all good
thoughts, or want of all consideration: this is the mother sin; we must keep
all the moral law, even in thought, Luke 10.27. the want of this may be seen
in matters earthly. 2. in matters spiritually: in matters earthly, Eccles. 4.8.
in regard of their natures, ends, and uses: but in spiritual things, there is
an absolute want. 1. Is want of the consideration of Gods presence, and
providence in regard of our sins, Hos. 7.2. 2. In regard of Gods judgments;
for men never think of judgment in this life, nor in the life to come. An
120. years Noah preached, yet no consideration; Luke 12. the rich man never
thought that his soul was in danger. 3. Is in respect of a man's own sins:
for we cannot turn our eyes into our own bosoms, Ier. 8.6. 4. Is want of
thinking of this duty toward God, Ierem. 5.24. so the foolish virgins contented
themselves with their lamps unprepared, never thinking of the oil, till the
time of grace was past; thus hardness of heart and security, bring forth
these wicked thoughts. Hence observe the strange opinion of the world: men have
good hearts, meanings, intents, and purposes, howsoever the actions of their
lives be faulty. Hence learn, that the Scriptures are no policies of men; for
nothing could reveal these wicked thoughts, but the divine truth: Angels and
men know not the thoughts. Secondly, learn that thoughts are not free, though
they never come into consent or action: therefore repentance of thoughts is
necessary, Joel 2.12. Act. 8.22. 1 Thessalonians. 5. Paul requires that they be
sanctified in body, soul, and spirit.

Reas. 1. Because a man is cursed for his thought, Pro. 5.26. 2. Because
actual sins proceed of evil thoughts: 1. the thought thinks it. 2. after
thought, comes delight. 3. after delight, consent of will. 4. after consent, an
execution or practice of the sin. 5. after practice, comes custom in
practice. 6. after custom and practice, death and damnation: for thoughts the
old world was destroyed, Genesis 7.21.

For repentance of evil thoughts, Remedies of evil thoughts.
use 1. examination. 2. prayer. 3. reformation. In examination, first we must
remember, that all thoughts are in every man's mind by nature; therefore the
least occasion turns the mind to think them: secondly, we must hear the word
of God attentively, we must lay open all our senses to the hearing thereof, and
let it go thorough them all, 1. Cor. 4.25.

2. Point, Prayer. A man must pray for the pardon of his thoughts. Act. 8.22.
3. Point. Reformation of the mind for wicked thoughts, Ephe. 4. be renewed in
the spirit of your minds: wherein thoughts and imaginations are conceived and
framed. Rule. 1. All thoughts must be in obedience toward God, Prou. 20.18. and
15.22. he must not conceive a thought in his mind, before he have consulted
with the word, 1. Cor. 10.4, 5. Phil. 4.8. 2. Rule. Prou. 4.24. to keep and
counter-guard our hearts above all watch and ward: men dovsually guard their
cities, houses, and their treasures; now Solomon teaches, that the heart must
be guarded more then any city, house, or treasures, because from it proceed
the actions of life. 1. Therefore make a covenant with thy senses, that they be
no occasion or provocation to any manner of sin; this did Job, cap. 31. and
David, Psalm. 119. Turn mine eyes from beholding covetousness: the senses are
the windows of the soul, and if God enter not, satan will creep in at them
into our hearts. 2. At the beginning, check an evil thought: for the thought
being checked, the affections will be quiet. 3. Labor with all care to
cherish every good motion of Gods spirit: 1. all good cogitations by the
ministry of the word, or good counsel; hence quench not the spirit. 3. Rule.
We must often use elevation of the heart and mind unto heaven, where Christ
sits at the right hand of the Father, Psalm. 25.1. Paul bids the Philippians,
have their conversation in heaven: Iam. 4. draw near to God. Hence the Lords
Supper is a principal means of the elevation of the heart and mind unto God:
this elevation must be continually practiced: such as are appointed to keep
clockes, do often every day pull up the waights, because they are always
going downward. Pray continually, 1 Thessalonians. 5. There be three special times;
the beginning of the day; the first good thought and affection every day must
be the Lords: The 2. time the end of the day, commend our souls unto God: The
3. time, receiving of blessings, or feeling the want of them; to praise God for
the one, and call upon him for the supply of the other.

4. Rule. The meditation of some special matters, whereby salvation may be
furthered: which is either concerning God, or our selves; concerning God, his
presence; this made David to draw near unto God, Psalm. 139. Psalm. 19. his
heart is purified by seeing God in his law, Psalm. 23. in the shadow of death
he will not fear. 2. Consideration of Gods judgments; not old, but late, and
particular upon persons, cities, towns: we should lay these to the heart, Ier.
12.11. Here we must practice three things; 1. we must observe, and carefully
mark and remember Gods judgments. 2. we must apply them to our own persons
in particular, that they may make us afraid. Thus Habacuk when he heard of Gods
judgment, his knees beat one against another, Hab. 3. If in a family one
child be beaten, others will take heed. 3. We must make use of them, Luke 13.3.
Third consideration, is of Gods word; Psalm. 1. It is the property of the
righteous man to meditate in Gods law, day and night: Luke 2. Marie hid all
those things in her heart. 1. we must consider the sense of the Scriptures. 2.
what experience we have had of the truth of the word of God in our own lives
and consciences. 3. how far forth we have swarued in the practice of the
word; or how far forth we have practiced it. Fourth consideration, is of Gods
works in us, and upon us, this will make us consider the works of creation,
preservation, providence: Isa. 5.12. he pronounces a woe to them that forget
this. 1. Consider the work of creation: God has made us men, when we might
have been beasts: that of nothing he made us to be something. 2. for
preservation and providence, we must consider how he has preserved us from
time to time from all dangers, and has given us all things necessary for this
life, and the life to come. 3. for his patience, that he has not cast us into
hell, but has given us a long, and large time of repentance. 4. that we are
not borne among the heathen, but in the bosom of the church, where he has
given us his word, reformed our judgments, mollified our hearts, and provoked
us to every good work, Eccles. 7.13. Psalm. 77.12.13.

Second consideration of our selves: 1. of our own particular sins, whether
they be corruptions of the heart, or sins of our lives, Psalm. 119.59. Lam. 3.
Come, let us search and try our ways. 1. In what manner we have sinned against
God, whether of ignorance or knowledge, of presumption or weakness, of
constraint or wilfulness. 2. The greatness of every sin, yea of the least
sin, how the infinite majesty of God is offended, and his justice violated.
3. The number of them: and here we shall find them with David, more then the
hairs of our head, or the sands of the sea. Must a man consider them when he
is sure they are pardoned? yes, so did David, Psalm. 25. He prayed for the
pardon of the sins of his youth.

That this may take the deeper impression, let us consider of the degrees of
our misery. 1. A separation from all fellowship with God, Isa. 59.2. 2. a
society and fellowship with the devil and his angels; which stands in this,
that a man by nature bears the image of Satan, and performs homage unto him
in the practice of all sin. 3. all manner of calamities; in this life sickness
of body, damages and losses, in name, in goods, and in friends. 4. the horror
of a guilty conscience, which is even a beginning of hell fire: for first it
is a man's accuser, accusing him for his sins. 2. his judge in the room of
God, giving sentence against him in his life. 3. the hangman, because it
condemns eternanally. 4. the second death, which is an apprehension of the
wrath of God eternally in body and soul.

3. Of our particular temptations, wherewith Satan daily assaults us, 1. Pet.
5.8. If enemies should invade the land, we would consider what place of the
land is weakest, and lay all hold to that: so Satan laboring against us
daily, we must examine what is the weakest part of our hearts, and by what
sin he is most able to make breach into them; and then by Gods grace we shall
use some strength against them.

4. Consideration, of our particular ends, Exodus 32.29. 1. the time of our end,
that is most uncertain. 2. the place likewise uncertain: Ahab repented when
he heard of his end; so did Nineueh; and so must we all.

5. Consideration, of our reckoning in the last judgment. A travel er comes to
an inn, having but one penny in his purse, yet he calls for the best meat,
and spends most sumptuously: will not every man judge him to be void of all
consideration? Thus deal men in the world; spend all that God has given them,
never thinking of the day of reckoning: yet Paul Acts, 24. considering this,
kept a good conscience before God and man.

6. Of our estate, whether we be members of the kingdom of darkness, or of
grace. A man may live in the Church, and yet belong to Satan's kingdom.

5. Rule. We must labor in our hearts to be assured of our particular
reconciliation to God in Christ: this assurance or certificate of the spirit,
is commonly called faith: Now when this particular assurance is settled in them,
it will purify them: for faith purifies the heart, affections, and thoughts:
for a man being thus assured, will resolve never to offend God any more, but
to honor and obey him even in his thoughts. 3. Observe from hence, that men's
best thoughts, are grievous sins against God. 4. Use. All Readers or students
in Divinity ought to humble themselves before God, and pray that he would open
their eyes, and teach them the wonders of his law, before they attempt to
study and read the Scriptures; because the imaginatio^s of man by nature are
wicked: yea whatsoever his heart studieth, frames, or inventeth. Psalm. 119.
David at least ten times prays to God, that he would reveal to him the
statutes and wonders of his law. This example ought to be a pattern and
president to all students of divinity, never to read or meditate in the
Scriptures, before they have prayed to God to open the eyes of their
understanding, that they may rightly discern of that which they read.

Obs. The doctrine is clear and evident, that an hypocrit or any wicked man
cannot think a good thought: for he looks through his own corruption, and
therefore as he is disposed, so must all be that comes to his understanding,
will, or affections. Again, his practice is lewd, therefore his thoughts must
be answerable: for he cannot do otherwise then he thinks. Thirdly, the heart,
which is the fountain, is framing thoughts which are evil; in their kind,
all, in their extent, only, continually, and from his infancy. Fourthly,
there is no confideration of Gods presence, of Gods judgments, of his own
sins, or the duties he owes unto God. Fifthly, when he thinks of God, he is
profane; when of his neighbor, unrighteous; when of himself, proud, hautie,
and insolent. Let God be good unto him in temporal favors, be silent at his
sins, use compassion toward him; offending, gentleness; in his justice
remembering mercy; patience, most gently suffering him in his sins, and
deferring the punishment: longanimitie, a long time exspecting his repentance:
and lastly bountifullnesse, being rich in goodness, and pouring forth his
good gifts upon him: yet for all these, he has not one good thought to bestow
upon God.

Let his neighbors live quietly by him, offer him no wrong, do him the best
kindness he can, advise him by good counsel; yet can he not so much as afford
him a good thought: lastly, let his conscience check him, and cause some hot
stirs within him; yet he will check his conscience again, and put it to
silence with a wicked thought, against himself and his own souls salvation.
Where then is his free will of doing good, if he cannot think a good thought
to do himself good? will he, think you, busy his brain, and set his temples
a working to please God? no assuredly: for judgment, will, and affections,
which are the principles of our actions, are wholly taken away: Romans 3. There
is none that understands; therefore no judgment in spiritual matters.
Secondly, none that seeks God; their will and affections are estranged.
Thirdly, all have declined, and are made unprofitable; there the power and
endeavor are wanting, 1. Cor. 2.14. The natural man perceives not the things
of God; there is want of judgment. Romans 8.5. they that live after the flesh,
savor the things of the flesh; there the will is merely carnal. Phil. 2. God
works both will and deed. Ezekiel. 36.26. God gives the heart. Romans 7.14. man is
carnal, the law spiritual; how should that which is carnal, affect that
which is spiritual? Ioh. 15.5. Without me ye can do nothing. Again, the
counselors, 1. domestical, 2. external, internal and domestical. 1. flesh.
Romans 8.6. 2. the concupisence of the flesh, Romans 6.12. 3. carnis, (...), the
wisdom of flesh, is enmity with God. 4. the will of the flesh, as a queen:
external, 1. devil, 2. world, Ephesians. 2.2. Man therefore having no principles
of good thoughts, and that which is to be thought upon being spiritual, and
he carnal, and having six most woeful counselors, four at home with him in
his own breast; as the flesh, which can no ways savor the things of God, and
therefore does always entreat for obedience to his own Iusts: secondly
concupiscence, whereby the flesh is made more strong and effectual to command:
thirdly, a carnal discourse against Gods wisdom: fourthly, a Queen, or
rather an usurping Iezable, to set up her throne in the soul, to inform and
command what shall be done: and lastly, two outward enemies that creep near
unto the walls of the soul, as the devil, and the world, full of polices and
great in strength: how should it be possible that the soul should resist? nay
alas, the watch and ward is wholly neglected: and therefore full possession is
given unto the enemies. This doctrine then does fully ouerturne all free will.
This doctrine has two branches, the first, that all the thoughts of wicked men
are corrupt and wicked; the second, that a good thing by accident, may be the
cause of evil: for, Thou thoughtest, in this place, is brought in as a
consequent of Gods silence.

1. Doct. All men's thoughts by nature are sinnfull: this doctrine is already
cleared, for these reasons have been formerly enlarged.

1. The fountain is altogether unclean, and who can bring that which is pure
out of corruption? not one of a thousand: surely none but God.

2. Man is deprived of all good consideration, and therefore nothing is in his
heart, but the consideration how to do evil.

3. The understanding is altogether blind, the will and affections never seek
after God, the whole man is declined from good to evil, and all that he does
is unprofitable.

4. Nothing can extend it self beyond his nature; therefore man being
carnal, and sold under sin, cannot get up so high in his meditations, as the
law of God which is spiritual.

5. He who takes counsel with his own flesh, yields to his own lusts,
discourses against Gods wisdom; lets his own will reign, is captiuated by
the devil, and allured by the world, cannot but think of that which is evil
against God and man.

Use. 1. reprehension. 1. Confutation of Papists, that magnify free will. 2.
the world, that say thoughts are free, they have good meanings, etc. Secondly,
correction of the godly, for judging the policies of the wicked as strong
castles of defense.

Use. 2. instruction. 1. Admonition to the wicked, not to boast too much of
their plots and devices; for all their imaginations and thoughts are sure to
come to naught. Secondly, direction unto the godly, always to have God in
their thoughts.

Use. 3. consolation. First, in adversity to consider, that all the plots of
wicked men are not only vanity, but also impiety; and therefore as they
cannot stand, so shall they be severely punished. Secondly, in prosperity, to
consider how God is the vpholder of their heads, their lot, portion, and
inheritance, and therein to repose the sweetness of their thoughts.

2. Doct. A good thing, by accident may be the cause of evil; as silence the
cause of this thought: Hos. 7.1. When I would have healed Israel, then the
impiety of Ephraim was discovered, etc. God here put on the person of a
Physician, who while he goes about to heal the malady makes it worse, and
finds the evil to be more gricuous. 1. Because he finds the patient more
perverse, and to use all ill diet. 2. the disease being stirred, and so
sturdie in his own nature, that it rebels against the remedy. Romans 7.8.
sin is dead without the law, but the law makes it to live: hence we see that
God would heal us, but we turn our disease into putrefaction and rottenness,
and so become incurable: and no marvel; for though all men be made of one
metal, yet they be not cast all in one mould: there is framed of the self
same clay, as well the tile to keep out water, as the pot to contain licour:
the brickie nature of man will not be washed by Gods rain from heaven: it
shall have no entrance into his soul. The Sun does harden the dirt, and melt
the wax; so the wicked being the filth of the world, cannot be stamped with
the beams of Gods wisdom, but are hardened: Fire makes the gold to shine,
and the straw to smother; perfumes refresh the doves, but kill the beetles: so
the fire of Gods word smothereth in the wicked, and the very sweetness of it
kills them. The vine will spread by nature, and the more we seek by art to
alter it, the more in the end we shall augement it: It is proper for the palm
tree to mount; the heavier we load it, the higher it sprouteth: although iron
be made soft with fire, it turns to his hardness: the silly mouse will by no
manner of means be tamed: the subtle fox may well be beaten, but never broken
from stealing his pray: season the wood never so well, the wine will taste of
the caske: translate the crabbe-tree, where and whenever you please, and it
will never bear sweet apple: the black will take no other color: the stone
Abeston being once made hot, never will be made cold: can the Ethiopian change
or alter his skin? the Leopard his hew? it is impossible to gather grapes on
thrones, or figs on thistles; this cannot be brought to pass by any art: the
stone in Scicilia, the more it is beaten, the harder it is; so the more God
handles the wicked, the worse they are. He that stops the stream, causes
it to swell higher: he that casts water on the fire in the smiths forge,
makes it to flame fiercer: so is it with the wicked, touch them and they
sparkle in your face. But alas, they know not how the wound that bleedeth
inwardly is most dangerous; that the fire kept most close, burns most
furiously: that the oven dammed up, baketh soonest; that sores having no vent
fester secretly: Thus they swallow the bait which will breed their bane; they
swill the drink that will expire their date: the Scorpion can feed on the
earth; the quail can be fat with poison: but alas, their food be it never so
good, yet they will sat up themselves with it against the day of slaughter. Thus
then good things are perverted to the wicked to their ruin: The fire is an
eleme^t most necessary, yet the wicked householder may as well make it burn his
house, as burn in it: tryacle does as well poison as help, if it be taken out
of time: wine immoderately taken kills the stomach, enflames the liver, and
mischeifes the drunkard: Physic destroys if it be not well tempered: Law
accuses if it be not well interpreted: poison is taken out of the hunnysuckle
by the spyder, venom out of the rose by a canker, dung out of the maple tree
by the scorpion: so the greatest wickedness, out of the greatest good if it be
abused. O therefore I entreat you that have been deceived by your own fancies,
the glass of pestilence; or deluded by your own thoughts, the gates of
perdition; be as earnest to seek a medicine, as you were eager to run into a
mischief: God has left as well endive to delight and cure, as hemlocke to
endanger; the rose to distill, as well as the nettle to sting, the be to give
honey as the spider to yield poison: so for the soul, as well a word to save, as
to destroy. Indeed, by accident we make it to be so: and if hitherto we
have wounded our selves by it, let us now leave the point of this sword, and
catch it by the handle. The Poets affirmed that Achilles spear could as well
heal, as hurt: I am sure this can a great deal better heal then hurt: the
Scorpion though he stings, yet he stints the pain: though the herb Nerius
poison some beasts, yet is it a remedy to man against poison: therefore if we
have made the word of God a Scorpion to sting us, yet let us now make it a
lenitiue to cease the pain; if we like beasts have poisoned our selves, yet
now like men created for God, let us recover our selves again by this word of
life. But to proceed: Thou thoughtest, this is the consequent of Gods silence,
not proper, but by accident forced, and befide the scope of it: therefore this
wicked thought of an hypocrite, argues strange corruption of heart; that can
frame no object unto it self, that shall make good thoughts. Surely,
affections have gotten the masterie over the mind, so that now it must become a
slave to serve them; and dispose it self, that all his judgments may aim at
their satisfaction: and thus the good word of God, by accident becomes the
cause of sin. Genesis 3. has God said, Ye shall not eat of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil? the Lord by this law debars you of great good; for
it is certain, when ye cate, ye shall beas gods, knowing good and evil:
therefore the law is too strict, and rather an hinderer then furtherer of your
good. Men we see are very quiet, until they be provoked by the preaching of the
law: Steven Act. 7. shall be stoned for his good sermon; Christ shall be an
enemy to church and commonwealth, because he speaks against the Scribes and
Pharisees; Moses and Aaron shall be hated of Pharaoh, for preaching a
deliverance; John Baptist for telling Herod his sin: Elias shall be Ahabs
enemy for telling him the truth: and Paul shall become an enemy to the
Galatians, for telling them of their apostacy from Christ: thus law, and
Gospel: mercy, and judgment; are abused of the wicked: yet for all this, the
law is holy and just: as for example, a man that holds a glass in his hands,
as long as it ^ests there, is safe; but if they throw it against the wall, the
wall will break it, but the sault will rest in the hands: so when we take our
selves and dash our selves against Gods law, the law breaks us, but the fault
is in our selves: the banks are no cause of the fury and rage of the waters,
but the waters themselves: so the law of God that banks in our corruption, is
no cause why it rages, but the nature of it, which can endure no limits.

Reasons. 1. Because sin will endure no law. There be three effects of the
law, that sin cannot away withal; First, it stops corruption; hence the
irritation of the law. Secondly, it terrisieth the conscience, and that cannot
be endured; they that live like gallie-slaues, and are whipped every day, will
do nothing but by force, and are glad any ways to rid themselves of such a
burden. Thirdly, it exacts perfect obedience, which our nature can not away
withal: to love God with all our hearts, with all our souls, with all our
mind, and our whole strength, is a lesson that will never be learned or
practiced.

Reas. 2. A misconceit: as a medicine against which the stomach arises, will
not be endured: a plaster which stings at the heart must be thrown off: and a
glass that shows us an ugly face cannot be looked into: so the misconceiuing
of Gods silence, makes it that it can neither become meat, or medicine to our
souls.

Thirdly, the diversity of subjects: the self same seed is sown in all the
four grounds, yet takes but root in one: the hammar beats upon all, but it
makes not all pliable to Gods work: the axe hewes at all, but it timbers but
some for building, the rest it hewes down for firing: the fire burns all, but
only the the gold loses his dross: the light shines to all, but only they
that have eyes behold it: the salt seasons all, but in some it cannot enter to
the bone, and therefore they putrify and rotte away: food would feed all,
but some want stomachs, appetite, and digestion: therefore they pine away with
the best nourishment: the goad prickles all, but some are hardened that it
cannot enter, and therefore no marvel that the mercies and filence of God
should work no good effects in the wicked.

Fourthly, the curse of God is upon them: therefore they shall eat, but not be
satisfied; drink, but not to quench their thirst; sleep, but not to take
their rest: for God alone gives rest unto his well-beloved: nay, let them do
what they will, all shall be naught, pray or not pray, sacrifice or not
sacrifice, come to church or not come to the church: for they cannot lay aside
their wicked thoughts: and therefore according to our proverb, all is marred in
the making. Deuteronomy. 28.16. cursed shall they be in the town, and cursed shall
they be in the field: they shall make no good markets of that which god has
given them in the field: cursed shall they be in the basket, and in their
dough: bad provision shall be in their houses, when the Lord will not become
both the master and the steward: cursed shall be the fruit of his body, and
the fruits of his land, the increase of his kine, and the flocks of his sheep:
extreme poverty in the mids of all his wealth: cursed shall he be when he
comes in, and cursed also when he goes out: ill success in his interprises:
neither will the Lord here make an end. These be four great curses. First, he
shall make no good market in buying and selling. Secondly, from this shall
follow, he shall have no good provision in his house. Thirdly, from this shall
rise the next, that he shall have no true riches. Fourthly, to make that good,
fortune shall always cross him. Fifthly, to proceed yet further, God will
make him crack his credit: for trouble and shame shall be upon all that he
sets his hand to do: every man shall call him banke-rout, neither shall he have
any law against the^: for with God he has lost his credit, and therefore shall
he perish quickly. Sixthly, that he may make his word good in all these, the
pestilence, consumption, fever, burning ague, sword, blasting, mildew; the
heavens above shall be brass, and the earth under iron: for rain dust: and
therefore no stay but perish thou must in body, goods, and good name.
Seventhly, to make the final vp-shotte of his body, he shall fall before his
enemies, and his carkeis shall be without all burial, the fowls of the air,
and the beasts of the field shall have him for their pray, and none shall
rescue him: if the enemies spare him, God will smite him with the botch of
Egypt, with the Emorods, with the scab, and with the itch, even worse then he
has done Egypt, for he shall not be healed: neither will God be defective in
his method, for from these more sensible torments upon the body, he will
proceed to greater judgments upon the soul, which though least felt, yet
more fearful; madness, blindness, astonying of heart, with all their ill
consequents; to grope at noone day, to be oppressed, powled, and without all
succor: neither here shall the Lord rest upon body and soul, but strike him
in his nearest friends, his wife, etc. Neither may we marvel at this: for in
nature we see how some corn is sown, but never rises, some springs, and
yet shortly withers, some grows up to an ear, and yet then is stricken or
blasted; other at Gods good pleasure comes to ripeness: some trees are
planted, yet never take root, some root yet never blossom, some blossom,
yet never bring forth fruit, and others through Gods blessing, bring forth
fruit in due season: if God so deal with the plant and herb of the field,
why may he not deal in like manner with man, which is as well in the hands of
his creator, as the smallest creature upon the face of the earth?

1. Use reprehension: first confutation of all wicked men, which reproach
religion for the idle profession of it. If they see one that makes a great
flourish in religion fall away, As wicked men have evil conceits of God, so
have they of religion, and the true professors thereof.
then presently see what religion these professors have: Alas, do they not
see Satan falling from heaven like lightning, and with his tail sweep down
many a glorious (though wandering) star: if any thing be amiss, presently it
must be laid upon God and his word: these wicked thoughts of the hypocrite fix
upon Gods silence. But he that takes the four corners of the earth in his
hands, as the lap of a garment, shall shake the world together, and cast out
these wicked ones as his refuse, and then shall be seen what sandy
foundations they built upon. Nay alas, this uncharitable world, is so full of
spite against God and his Saints, that if a godly man's beast make but a small
trespass, presently shall it be laid upon them as a great disgrace of their
profession: that which they account as nothing in others, shall be very
heinous in them. If Ligarius trip but a little, then swelling Tubero will call
it nefandum scelus, intolerable mischeife: but as Cicero answered for
Ligarius, scelus tu illud vocas Tubero? cur? isto enim nomine illa adhuc causa
caruit: do thou call it wickedness, O boisterous Tubero? wherefore I pray
thee? surely for that name there is no reason: be a little persuaded by thy
neighbors: alij enim errorem appellant, alij timorem; qui durius, spem,
cupiditatem, odium, pertinaciam; qui gravissime, temeritatem: scelus praeter te
adhuc nemo: thy neighbors round about thee call it, some mistake, or a little
base fear; they which are a little more uncharitable, some hope, or desire of
gain, or foam mislike, or overmuch malepertnes; they which say the worst of
it, are content that it be called rashness: but for wickedness, thou have not any
other witness beside thy self: and therefore be entreated for Ligarius; for he
shall come to thee with an ignosce pater, erravi, lapsus sum, non putavi, si
vnquam posthac: and paulo post, temere feci, paenitet, ad clementiam tuam
confugio, delicti veniam peto, vt ignoscas oro. Suppose then in the like case,
a kind hearted David, come to a churlish Nabal in the name of Christ, making
him his Orator to plead for him: why challenge you religion for this small
trespass? I am persuaded you have no show of reason for it; all your
neighbors do make a favorable construction of it: I pray you therefore be
pacified, I am sorry I have given you this offense, think more favorably of
me; I will be ready to put up the like injury at your hands: well David, send
thy servants to Nabal to ask him in thy name how he does: let this be their
salutation, both thou and thy house, and all that thou have, be in peace,
wealth, and prosperity; thy shepherds were with us, and we did them no hurt,
neither did they miss any thing all the while they were in Carmel: ask thy
servants, and they shall testify the same; wherefore let these young men find
favor in thine eyes: (for we come in a good season) neither shall they be
chargeable unto thee: give, I pray thee, whatsoever comes to thine hand, unto
thy servants, and to thy son David. David thou have played the Orator most
excellently, passions in thy self, and strong arguments to Nabal, especially
one drawn from profit. Let us see what welcome Nabal will give them; Who is
David? and who is the son of Ishai? there be many servants now a days, that
break away every man from his master: shall I take my bread, and my water, and
my flesh that I have killed for my shearers, and give it unto men, whom I know
not whence they be? the dogs shall have it before them. Well, David is a
Mars, as well as a Mercury, as good at his sword, as at his words: therefore
Nabal shall smart for it. What shall withhold David? surely the servants of
Nabal had respect unto themselves, and their mistress; therefore Abigail shall
know, that David was as a wall both by night and by day to them, and their
masters sheep: therefore take heed, for our master is so wicked, that a man
cannot speak unto him: good Abigail, will give David good contentment, that he
shall bless her counsel; and when Nabal hears what his wife has done, his
heart shall die within him, and become like a stone: after this the Lord shall
smite him, and he shall die. Even thus stands it betwixt the godly and the
world: Wicked men live and prosper, because the godly are among them: but alas,
they shall receive hard measure at their hands: they had rather feed the
dogs, then any poor Lazarus at their doors full of sores. Hang him, he is a
stinking Puritan, an enemy to the King, and the whole commonwealth; a breaker
away from all masters; can endure no yoke: when alas, if it were known, they
are the best subjects the King has: and as they never cease to pray for him,
so if once they should come to venture their lives for him, and the good of the
Church and commonwealth, they should be found with the eagerest: but alas, by
disgraceful terms they abuse many good Christians, not esteeming those
puritans which the King has detected in his book, but every one that is not of
their fantasy.

There be three kinds of Puritans, and he that proves not one of them shall
never be saved. First, is the Papisticall puritan, that dare plead with God for
his justification; and this is a damnable puritan. The second, is a
schismatic puritan, that rends himself from every Church that will not
agree with his fantasy; and this is likewise a wretched puritan. A third, is
the Christian Puritan, such an one as I am sure the word of God approoues of,
and only pronounces them blessed that are pure in heart: and these are
defended by the book of common prayer, wherein we call upon God that we might
lead a godly, sober, and pure life: and he that is not this puritan, shall never
see God: and let them know, that the servants of God are of the blood royal, to
wit, Christ Jesus, and therefore have David's heroical spirit; durst meet them
on the field, and show as good courage for a good cause as the best of them.
But the servants of the Lord, his faithful ministers, have told it to the
Church, that her faithful friends have been abused by many a Churl, unto
whom they have stood as walls of defense, and therefore their affections are up
in arms against them. But the Church will find cakes, bottles of wine, sheep
ready dressed, measures of corn, clusters of raisins, and abundance of figs,
to meet all that love her, to give them kind intertainement. Bid them not
regard these Nabals; for as their names are, so are their natures: Nabals they
are, and folly is with them, and so shall they perish: for the Lord will not
suffer one of them to live that pisseth against the wall: But your souls shall
be bound in the bundle of life with the Lord; and the souls of these your
enemies shall God cast out as out of the middle of asling. Thus shall every
faithful soul praise God, that he is preserved by the Church: and therefore
when they shall see that the Lord has dealt well with them, they shall be
moved to remember the Church, as David remembered Abigail with the best bond of
love. Secondly, correction of the godly, that learn not to think basely of
the thoughts of wicked men: they dishonor God by them, and therefore into
their secrets let our souls never enter.

Use 2. Instruction: First, an admonition of the wicked, to show them that
they have always false reasons for their thoughts. Indeed it is true, that we
can no sooner have sin in our heads, but the devil will find a reason for
it; but alas, when we bring it to our question, it makes us presently make a
fallacian against our souls. Silence beats upon the minds of these hypocrites;
but alas, the image in the glass shall not look to him from whom it was
reflected: Moses face shines, but he sees it not: so these men have Gods sun
to shine upon them, his rain to fall upon them, but they perceive neither.
Thus they become like wine vessels, that sends out all the wine again, but
keeps in the dregs: God does much good unto them, but they never think
rightly of it: for as infants newborn are kept from fire and water, laid to
sleep, shifted in their scapes, but they know not who does all this for them:
so God, brightness it self, shuts in heaven and earth; yet our eye cannot
look against it, no more then the bat^e or owl at the bright beams in the
firmament: and therefore no marvel, if wicked men after all Gods silence, look
amiss: therefore as the fountain, and all the water that springs out of it,
have the same qualities; so the heart, and the thoughts, words, and deeds, are
all of the same nature: if one filthy, all filthy; and purge one, and purge
all. Now the fountain in a wicked man being corrupt, no marvel that these
thoughts issue out of it: Eccles. 8.11. Because sentence against an evil work
is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the children of men, is fully
set in them to do evil: here is the very selfsame conclusion; God defers,
therefore they are fully purposed to sin against God. Let them therefore be
admonished, to look better to their thoughts; for they are in a miserable
estate that makes every thing turn unto their hurt. Secondly, a direction to
Gods children, that they learn not to think their own thoughts, speak their
own words, or do their own actions, but only that which shall be approved
by God and his word; and then shall their praise not be of men, but of God.

Use. 3. Consolation. First, in all good ways: when I can say, I have served
God with a good conscience: for that shall be the misery of the wicked, when
the Lord shall say, who required these things at your hands. Secondly, in their
trouble to say with Hezekias, Remember Lord how I have walked before thee: this
is better then all the riches in the world, or the vanities wherein he has
placed all his thoughts: this shall stand by him in this world to justify him,
because God speaks for him; in the end of this world, to free him from hell,
death, and damnation, because he has built upon the rock, and has in his
thoughts highly valued, the blood of Christ, to purge him from all sin, when
all the rest of the world shall be accursed, for that they have put their trust
in the arm of flesh. 2. Tim. 4.6, 7. Paul's ground of comfort, when he is
ready to be offered is this, I have fought the good fight of faith, finished
my course, I have kept the faith: therefore he expects a crown of
righteousness; this is no fancy, but a grounded persuasion from his practice.

Sect. 4. Of awicked man's conceit of God.
Like thee:] The fourth thing, is in the form and manner of their thoughts;
and that is by drawing a pattern of God out of themselves, to limit him by
their own limits, and measure him by their own measure. First, for quality
and condition, the only patron and favorer of their courses, one that did
esteem and approve most highly of all their ways. Where we may see that
hypocrites, as proud Pharisees, think themselves not like other men; and
therefore needs must they be like God himself; not knowing that a third may
be given, to wit, that they are so like themselves, that a man cannot parallel
them with any other: They have looked into the fountain of Gods silence; and
surely like Narcissus, they are fallen in love with their own shadow; or like
children, they are so delighted with their image, that they must needs kiss
the glass, and think no babie like to that which they have seen of
themselves: and thus like apes, are gotten so far in love with their own
brood, that with overmuch embracing of themselves, they kill all they touch:
and thus while they will set as Queens and ladies, bragging they shall never be
widows, presently the Lord brings upon them both poverty, and widow-hood;
because they themselves have pressed every thing they were in love of unto
death: so that being wise in their own conceit, we may be assured, that there
is more hope of fools then of them: and that drunkards, and vile persons shall
sooner inherit the kingdom of heaven, then any proud person of them all: the
Publicans and gross sinners, shall sooner go into heaven then these Scribes
and Pharisees. Secondly, this must yet be strained higher, even to the very
being and essence of God: God must be altogether as they are: extraordinary
near fellowship. It was one of the greatest prerogatives that was ever given
to Abraham, to be called the friend of God: but what shall these be called?
surely, if all were true, they should be the very natural sons of God.
Thirdly, this great acquaintance must be perpetual.

Aristotle makes three bonds of freindship: 1. pleasure, 2. riches; and both
these are soon ended: because in laughter the heart is heavy, for such
pleasures as are but of things transitory: and for riches, they take their
wings and fly away: but the third bond, which is virtue and honesty, is of
long continuance; and I know no freindship that hypocrites profess with God,
that savors of honesty and virtue. Indeed the other two, are in high account
with them; for they will seem to do any thing for pleasure and profit. Saul
loved God, but it was for a kingdom; Ahithophel, because he was advanced
counselor; Iud^s, because an Apostle, and bare the bag: yet Saul a little
afflicted, forsakes God; Ahithophel crossed, hangs himself; Judas for gain,
betraies Christ. Jobs wife seemed to go far, as long as she could wash her
paths with butter; but when affliction is upon her husband, curse god, and die.
Many hypocrites are like Rebecca, Genesis 25.22. who wished to have children, but
when they strove in her womb, then she brast forth into words of impacience: so
God gives a desire to some to be borne again, who when they see their
conception to be painful, and the spirit and flesh strive together, desire to
be in their old estate again: they seek the kingdom of heaven, but not the
righteousness thereof: and therefore it will appear very easily, how like they
are unto God: for Saul and Pharaoh had some good motions by fittes, and upon
occasion could play fast and loose, being of a strange complexion, and very
aguish, hot and cold in a moment. Sea faring men who when the seas do rage,
and the tempest begins, feel themselves sea-sicke, and have a desire to cast;
but when they are gotten to the land, and have smelt the clear coast, are as
merry and joyful as heart can wish: the reason is, because now being without
hope, sense, and feeling of the sweet joys to come, do die thus by their
flesh pots of Egypt: so they show in affliction, that their flesh pots, and
their health, though in bondage, does more please them, then the goodness and
loving countenance of the Lord. Want of bread makes some despise their great
and wonderful deliverance out of Egypt: the want of riches, is greater trouble
the^ the want of grace; and the possession of riches greater joy, then the
fruition of Gods countenance: The reason is plain, because in temporal
things, our joy is greater then the cause; but in spiritual, the cause is
greater then our joy. Again, they love not God for himself, but for his
blessing; and therefore all the similitude that wicked men have of God, is more
in the love of the creatures then of God himself: and when the Lord shall
bring his fan and make clean his floare, you shall see him send away this
chafe, but still keep his corn: for the natural children of God, love their
father naturally; do he what he will, they will still love him: though thou
kill me, yet still will I trust in thee, says Job. Thus shall the Lord try
his own image, and see who will endure the fire; which shall be known by
these four properties: first, as fire burns straw, stubole, sticks, to
ashes, and makes them as though they had not been; so shall the fire of Gods
affliction wast all those things which are of this weak nature. Secondly, as
fire purges that which can abide him, and makes it purer and finer; so shall
the trial of the spirit wast all the dross in Gods children, and purify the
rest, as a temple for the holy Ghost. Thirdly, as fire gives light in the most
dim and darkest place; so shall the fire of Gods spirit become a shining
lamp, burning continually. Fourthly, as heat puts life into those things
which are capable of life, though frozen and starued for cold, and as they were
without life, yet touching them makes them revive, become nimble and active;
so the spirit of God heating and inflaming our hearts, kindles our zeal,
quickneth our deadnes, puts life into us, makes us nimble and active, in a
care of our duty, love of all mankind, and the glory of God: this alone will
prove whether we bear the image and stamp of God in us, or no: when all the
rest is no better then that conceit which the Devil put into the heads of our
parents, Genesis 3. Ye shall be like God: surely it proved like the god of this
world: for even that conceit took away the image of God, and brought in a
worse, even the image of the devil.

Observe. It is the nature of every wicked man, especially of an hypocrite, to
have an high conceit of himself, and in this high conceit to think God like
unto him.

1. Reas. First, blindness of understanding: Romans 1.21, 22, 23. Vain
imaginations, and folly of heart: full of darkness, makes professors of
wisdom become stark fools, and so turn the glory of the incorruptible God
to the similitude of the image of a corruptible man, and of birds, and four
footed beasts, and of creeping things.

2. Reas. Is the evil disposition of nature, which turns all things into his
own temper: and therefore it can not be but the silence of the Lord should be
abused by our thoughts.

3. Reas. Selfe-pleasing our selves: Herod will part with all, before he will
part with his brothers wife: the young man will leave Christ, before he forsake
his riches: and therefore before the silence of the Lord shall cross our
natures, we must either cross it, or else restrain it unto our selves, and
give it that limitation which shall best agree with our pleasures.

1. Use reprehension. A confutation of the wicked, for the abuse of their
reason, in that they will become absolute Judges of Gods wisdom: it is enough
for the servant to become as the master: Gods truth will have no controller,
and therefore must he command, or else he will testify against us and accuse
us, for the breach of his prerogative royal. Secondly, a correction of the
godly, that any ways subject themselves to the judgment of wicked men: their
fountain is naught, and therefore their streams can not be sweet.

2. Use instruction. First, an admonition of the wicked, to be more careful
for their thoughts. Indeed we say, thoughts are free, but yet let them know,
that there is a word which is a discerner of the thoughts, and the intents of
the heart: and therefore what they have spoken in the theeuish corners of their
hearts, shall be plainly detected even upon the house tops. Secondly, a
direction to the godly; and that is a denial of themselves, and of their own
thoughts, and wholly yiedling themselves unto Gods truth.

3. Use, Consolation to all them that see the want of Gods image, and desire it
more, then they presume they have it. This will take away our own conceits,
and breed in us the clear insight of the mercies of God in his Christ, which
are the only joy and confidence of our souls. And thus much of Gods mercy.

CHAP. VI. Of Gods Justice in general.
THe second part of Gods holiness, Justice.
is his Justice, contained in the consequent part of the sentence, and is
distributed into two adjuncts; Power, and Order. Power, in that God will be
sure to judge: and Order, in that he will take no hasty courses, whereby all
should be done in confusion. Excellent is our God; for first being a God
almighty, he is able to do what he pleases with his creature: but secondly
observe his order, and every one shall confess that he is a God of excellent
wisdom: for things done in good method, stop the mouths of all. Two men
that put on armor, and like bulls of Basan, push the one at the other, are not
discommended for their power and strength; but that being men, they wanted
wisdom to use their strength aright; and that is, that they kept no good
order: and therefore such execution of justice as this, is condemned: so that
if our gracious King had no more arguments but this one, in forbidding all
Duells, it were sufficient: for grant the exercise, the power of justice; yet
where is this order and good method, that the Lord would have observed of all
his servants.

Aristotle has unfolded unto us in his Ethics, five intellectual virtues,
which if they concur not in all our actions, they will prove exceedingly
defective. First intelligence, which gives information of the cause, and the
reasons of it: secondly science, which disposes of every necessary truth in
those reasons, so that thereby he shall judge his cause to be good or bad: for,
vt intellectus habet se ad verum and ad falsum, sic voluntas ad bonum vel
malum: the understanding goes before and judges of truth and falsehood, and the
will follows after, and embraces good or evil: the third virtue, is sapience,
seeing how he may diduct and draw out of the truths of science, other
necessary truths which could not appear but by the discourse of this third
virtue: the fourth prudence, which is the fourth perfection of our actions,
when we do all the former in good and comely order: the fifth Art, the highest
degree of perfection, when I do all nimbly and very skilfully in knowing, in
judging, discoursing, and applying. These men may have the three first virtues,
but they are altogether destitute of the two last: they may know that their
cause is good, and that both of them has reason to complain of injury: for
brave spirits can not rest without mutual prouocations: secondly, they may
know that disgrace of their persons is their shame, and the loss of their good
name (which they esteem better then the most precious ointment that they enjoy)
to be such an injury, that it can deserve no less then some kind of trial:
and so in the third place, discourse of it, and conclude that therefore they
will have justice executed, that they may be revenged for their wrongs: but
alas, when they come to apply all this their former knowledge, they want
prudence, and so leap over the lists of justice, and breaking good order,
spoil the exercise of all arts. For first, they break the rule of divinity,
in sinning against God by murder: the rule of ethickes, for fortitude and
manhood is abused: the rule of politickes, for the commonwealth is injured by
loss of such persons as might have been his pillars: the rule of nature
complains, that would have himself preserved in all his subjects. Indeed
special nature, for the good of general nature, will seem to cross himself:
the fire will descend, and the water will ascend, before they will suffer such
a stranger as vacuitie to possess any place among them: So indeed nature would
neuerbe offended, if they would shed their blood for their country: Nature
will make the hand to offer it self to be cut off, before the head receive the
blow: because nature is wise in order, knowing that the head is to be
preferred before any other member, because it has in it the greatest part of
life. The people can tell David, thou art better then ten thousand of us; and
therefore no matter if we be all cut off to save thy life.

Blessed is that kingdom, that is not only powerful in justice, but that
keeps good order in the execution. Indeed many may say, I will reprove thee;
but alas, how few say, I will set thine offenses in order before thee. Many lie
in prison for a sic volo, sic iubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas: authority
urged by violence of passion, spoils all Magistrates. Aristotle says, that
the law ought to be like the primum sensorium, which is (...); so the law must
savor of no quality, but his own; for then would it never judge aright. And
as the law is, so ought the Magistrate to be; void of all his own passions:
let the law rule him, as he means to rule the people, and then should all be
done in good order; and we should not hear these lamentable complaints; I am
in prison, but I know not for what cause; and the Magistrate says, I shall
lie there until my bones rotte. For the mercies of God, let us be moved
betimes, as well to set men's sins in order, as use our power in reproouing of
them, lest the Lord come and handle us most roughly, in the power of his
justice, for this most heinous offense committed in dividing justice against it
self. So then the distribution lets us see, that the power of God is never
without his wisdom; but that the Lord works in all things, intelligenter,
scienter, sapienter, prudenter, artificiose; plainly, truly, wisely,
prudently, and skilfully.

The power of Gods justice is laid down in these words, I will reprove thee:
first, the cause, I, the Lord, which in the first verse styled my self, the
God of Gods, even the Lord from heaven; in comparison above all, and in
dominion over all, without comparison: therefore a mighty justice that has so
great a cause. Secondly, from the species or kind of it, a reproof; therefore
vindicatiue, and revenging justice, stronger then remuneratiue or rewarding
justice; for here appears ira, furor, excandescentia; anger, a displeasure of
short continuance; fury, a short madness; the third an inueterate hatred,
that always smoakes against sin, that kindles hot coals, hinc ira ex
candore, fierinesse full of brightness. Thirdly, the object (thee;) the sin
and the person, I am out of love with both: and therefore will I discover thy
sin, which I know thou above all men may not endure to hear of. Secondly,
what thou thy self art both in deceiving and being deceived, shall plainly be
known: therefore most powerful justice, whose cause is Jehovah; nature,
vengeance; object, the most secret sin, and most deceitful person, free from
all the judgment seats of men.

Sect. 1. Of the cause.
Observe. 1. The great God of heaven and earth: and in earth, the God of gods:
and over men, the only Lord, is become the reproouer of sin; and therefore a
most fearful hand shall fall upon the wicked. The finger upon the wall made an
unpeaceable house in Belshazzars soul: what a jolly fellow was he until this
came into his eye? the time of Gods silence he regarded not; neither to his
father, how God gave him a kingdom, majesty, honor, and glory, at which all
nations trembled, and feared before him: he smote and put to death whom he
would; set up and put down whom he would: neither to himself, misapplying
what was done unto his father, both in justice and mercy, but abused Gods
vessels, with his Princes, wives, concubines; praised the gods of gold, silver,
of brass, iron, wood, and stone; which neither see, hear, nor understand: but
the God in whose hand his breath was, and all his ways, him would he not
glorify: therefore now see his Judge, and tell me if the power of his justice
make him not afraid. Hence it is plain, that wicked men scant God in his
mercies, as a niggard, or pinching giver; when in their sins they are both
large and bold, and think Gods arms bound up in a cloth; yet let them know,
that this (I, will reprove) will prove no small matter: for the very weakness
of God, is stronger then any thing in man, 1. Cor. 1. In man we count that
weakness, which his little finger hardly can touch: now Gods little finger will
make all smart. The Magicians of Egypt in the plague of lice, confess it was
Gods finger, because that brought mighty things to pass: Jobs afflictions,
loss of goods, cattle, children; the devil makes it but the touch of Gods
finger, and yet this spent all. Man's breath but a weak thing, Isa. 40.17. yet
the breath of the Lord, Psalm. 18.8. smoke went out of his nostrhills, and a
consuming fire out of his mouth; coals were kindled thereat: great is the
power of his very nostrhills, and mighty is the very weakness, and infirmity
of his wrath: if his weakness be this, what is his strength, compared to a
Giant, or Lion; to a Giant, of all men the greatest; to a Lion, of all beasts
the strongest? If so mighty when he touches but with his finger, how terrible
if he strike with his arm? but what will he be when he comes armed with his
sword, and his bow bent? if we be far off, his arrowe shall reach us; if near,
his sword shall strike us. But alas, what shall be done, when he shall come
with whole armies of creatures against us; fire, hail, thunder: so if the
sword find us not, the thunder shall meet with us; if the hail make not an
end, the fire shall consume us; if the fire can not burn, then his mallet
shall bruise us. Furthermore, he has his charets, even a thousand charets in
the whirlwind, and his pillars of fire to terrify us; yea, his thousand and
ten thousand of Angels to make a spoil of all at his beck. Therefore we
shall be sooner weary of suffering, then he of afflicting; of flying, then he
of following. We are but potters vessels: if he hit but one against another we
break; yea if he lay his iron rod upon us we shall be beaten all to powder. The
lion when he roareth is terrible, and Behemoth is strong: what can thou do?
yet the lion comes before this God, Behemoth is taken by his sword; Leuiathan
can not stand before him: therefore a most fearful thing to fall into the
hands of this God: for he is a consuming fire, and cannot touch, or be touched
without burning. The wrath of a king is the messenger of death: what is then
the wrath of the king of kings? if one man trespass against another, there may a
third be found to make up the matter; but if one sin against God, says old
Eli to his sons, who shall plead for him? Therefore do no more so ye sons of
men, tremble and sin not; examine your own hearts, and be still; serve the
Lord in fear, and rejoice in trembling: kiss the son, least he be angry,
and ye perish in the way: when his wrath shall suddenly burn, blessed are all
that trust in him. Neither is this all Gods reproouing: for this is but the
pain of sense; but they also shall have a more fearful plague, the plague of
plagues, and the only thing that shall make them miserable; and that the
learned have called, the punishment of the damned, as though it were all, and
gave the whole denomination: and that is Gods farewell unto his creature: Oh
my creature, I made thee in my own image; but thou have found out many
inventions: therefore must I thy life, and length of days; the fountain of
living waters, he in whom thou lives, mooues, and have thy being, bid thee be
gone: I must never look on thee more, as I have done: thy loving wife shall
say, farewell my husband: thy children, friends, and all thy pleasures, in
which thou have song a long loath to depart, yet must ye needs depart: or if
you go together to hell, yet shall it but augement thy sorrow, to remember
what sweet delight you once took together: and how now there can be no
comfortable fellowship; but one stabbing another at the heart: Thou again
shall say, farewell God, farewell wise, children, and all my pleasures; I must
shake hands with you for ever: Oh heart, that I could give the some deadly
stabbe, that thou might never stir again! Oh would to God that I had
never been! you that pass by, will you take no pity on me? Oh God, I was thy
child, and the devil whippes me, and hell fire scorcheth me; yet if thou
would but look upon me, how would that refresh me? Well, that I lie not,
see both these put together: for I assure you, that hell fire is no painted
fire; for the want of Gods presence shall be no dream, or idle oblivion of the
departure of a kind friend; but the very sting of conscience, and the worm
that shall never leave gnawing. See both punishment of sense, and the damned:
2 Thessalonians. 1.9. Which shall be punished with everlasting perdition from the
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power. And that the Lord will
do all this, it is plain, Eccles. 12. last. Reu. 20.12. Daniel saw the
ancient of days upon his throne: he has been dealing with men in particular
from the beginning of the world: he reproved our first parents, the old
world, Sodom and Gomorrha, Pharaoh, Saul, Judas: and he will have a general
conclusion of this whole tragedy. And therefore the point is clear, that God
will reprove.

Reas. 1. From his justice, that cannot go unsatisfied: for the Lord has
spoken, and will be proved true and righteous in all his ways.

2 The glory he must constrain out of wicked men: for wicked men would never
glorify God except it were because God will reprove them.

Reas. 3. The injury they do unto God: for if God should never reprove, the
wicked would boast and triumph notoriously.

4. The consolation of the godly: when should their heads be lift up, if it
were not to see their enemies trampled under their feet?

Use 1. reprehension. First, confutation of the ungodly, that think the Lord
will condemn no person; he that made all, will save all; and a pitiful thing
it is, to imagine that God should have made any man to damn him: well, they
see God will reprove. Secondly, correction of the godly, that they take heed
of security, and labor to please God with reverence and fear: Romans 12.29.
For even our God is a consuming fire.

2. Use instruction: first admonition to the ungodly: Oh consider this, ye that
forget God, least he tear you in pieces. Secondly, a direction to the godly,
to walk before the Lord as he is their father and master: Mal. 1.6. A son
honors his father, and a servant his master: if then I be a father, where is
mine honor? and if I be a master, where is my fear?

3. Use consolation: first, in trouble to consider God will reprove. Iehoshua
stands before Christ Jesus, Zach. 3. and Satan stands at his right hand to
resist him: but here is comfort, v. 2. for Christ says unto Satan, The Lord
reprove thee, O Satan: even the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem, reprove
thee. Secondly, in well-doing; because the Lord will never reprove for that,
but approve it, and commend it for ever.

2. Sect. Of the form of this Justice.
Reprooue] Reproof is a second argument, to set forth the instice of God.
Vindicatiue justice is more violent, then correction; for that is always in
mercy, and the end of it is the quiet fruit of righteousness: but the nature
of this is to be a curse, and the end thereof, the death and destruction of the
creature. Also it is more forcibly felt of the creature, then Gods remuncratiue
justice; because this strikes at the very heart, touches his very conscience,
with the extremity of horror and fear, and leaves neither body nor soul
without most exquisite torments, such as were never invented of men: the rack
in England, the Strappado in Spain, nor any torture invented by the wit of
man, shall ever come near this; no not the strange torments of Tyrants.
Children are scared with harmless bul-begger, but dread less the fire, and
water: so men in this world, fear them that can kill the body, but never fear
at all, for him that can kill both body and soul: we tremble to hear a great
man speak, and the young men hide themselves at the voice of Job; and yet
alas, who trembles at a verbal reproof of the Lord? they think him a simple
person, that can not endure a word. And therefore Christians that are so much
cast down, at the threatenings of the Lord, are with the wicked but fools and
faint hearted persons: nay, more then this, let the hand of the Lord light upon
their fellow-companions, and that shall be no prognostication to them. When
divination was by lightnings, those lightnings which fell in the sea, or tops
of mountains, were never brought into observation, but were called bruta
fulmina; so the indgments of God that light upon others, are far enough
removed from them, and therefore they never call them into question: nay, alas
they make lighter account of them, as long as they are threatened in Gods word,
or executed upon others, then Morbizan the Turk, did of the Bull of Pius the
second, or of his indulgences to the people to take arms against him, that by
a letter to the Pope, he required that he would call in his Epigrammes again:
so men think, that when the Lord threatens the seizure both of soul and
body, the attaching of our spirits, the confiscation of our consciences, the
banishing of us from heaven, the hanging of us in hell, the suspending of our
salvation, the adiudging of us to condemnation, to be nothing but witty
Epigrammes, invented of men, to exercise men withal. One calls the
excommunication of Paulus quintus against the Venetians, dirum carmen; and
Bellarmine says of Prudentius, when he appoints certain holy days in hell,
Paenarum celebres, sub styge feriae. Even so the world deals with God: his
threatening are but idle Tragedies, and the punishments in hell may have their
holy days, wherein men may take their recreations. So that now God shall be as
well beholding to jesting Lucian, or any inuenter of fables, or tragedies of
hell, to make one old woman weep, or tremble, as to his own Prophets, or
Apostles: but let them be assured, that hell is no painted fire, for they shall
find that God has fire and sagot, sword and bow, spear and iron rods, to
dash in pieces every one, although as hard hearted as Pharaoh himself: then
shall they tremble most, that feared least, when Gods judgments were threatened.

Observe. The Justice of God shall be manifested, as well in plagues and curses,
as in promises and mercies: Do this, and thou shall live; there is rewarding
justice: but the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the death; there
is justice punishing, which a long time is kept under the cloud of Gods
silence, but at length breaks forth, and by that means is made to shine the
brighter. Even as in a dark night, one star breaking out of a thick cloud,
delivers a far more splendent and glorious light, then if it shone with
many in a clear evening: so this justice has the more grace and beauty from
the Lord in the wicked, insomuch as almost all other planets had a long time
been eclipsed, or quite fallen out of their spheres, to the great discomfort
of all such as travailed with the wicked (though not in their ways) yet in the
self same night, and busied themselves at the lamps of Gods word, being
careful to uphold the society of mankind by learning and instruction. Jonah
the Prophet, was content to enter into the city a days journey, and preached,
and so continued walking with the men in the city, until they put on
sackcloth, fasted, and humbled themselves: this might exceedingly have
comforted Jonah, to see so cheerful and comfortable a light break forth as
repentance: but alas Jonah is displeased, and that exceedingly, that he should
prognosticate of a flaming fire from heaven within forty days to destroy
Nineueh, and yet nothing appear according to his word; this made him angry,
impudent with God: now again to defend his fleeing into Tarshish, although the
Lord had appeared unto him in the fearful tempest, prepared a fish, heard his
prayer, brought him to dry land; yet now because God will not come from heaven
according to his word, he wishes that he might die, and that God would show
his justice on him. One would have thought Jonah might have bin well cooled in
the sea, from raging so hotly against God. Well Jonah, get thee under the Lords
gourd, that it may be a shadow for thy head, and deliver thee from thy grief,
and make thee exceeding glad; and expect patiently, and doubt not but thy words
shall come to pass. For first, thou prophesied to Israel a long time, and they
have profited nothing; this could not but vex thee exceedingly: now I have but
sent thee three days into the city of Nineueh, the chief city of the
Assyrians, all of them are the heathen, that never heard tell of my name,
without my Christ, aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, strangers from the
covenants of promise, and had no hope, and were without God in the world: yet
thou sees what a wonderful effect it has wrought in Nineueh; the King is off
his throne, has laid his robe from him, covered himself with sackcloth, and
sits in the ashes: further, he makes proclamation for a general fast of man
and beast, all to cry mightily unto God; turn from their wickedness with this
persuasion, that the Lord would repent and turn from his fierce wrath, that so
they might not perish: Oh happy Jonah, that it pleased God to let thee see
this glorious work of thy ministry: surely thou may well be glad, under the
gourd to sing Psalms unto the Lord for such a deliverance: and if the Angels
in heaven be so joyful for one sinner, how might thou triumph for such a
multitude, as the whole city of Nineveh, wherein were sixescore
thousandinfants, that could not discern betwixt the right hand, or the left:
Or if thou had been moved toward thine own countri-men, have made as much
have, as the woman of Samaria did unto her neighbors, to tell them she had
found the Messiah: so might thou have done unto Israel: O Israel, I pray you
run with me to Nineuch, and see the stra^gest wonder that ever was done; a
whole city for three days preaching, repenting in sackcloth and ashes. But
alas Jonah, thou art of an other temper; thou have made thee a booth, and art
set under the shadow of it, to see what may be done to the city: Alas, would
thou with Nero, laugh to see all the city on fire? have thou never a spark of
old father Abraham's spirit in thee? this city is far better then Sodom and
Gomorrha, and yet thou know how vehemently Abraham pleaded for them. Nay
alas, thou should have been like good Samuel, 1. Sam. 12. Oh Nineueh, whose ox
have I taken, or whose ass have I taken? or whom have I hurt? or of whose hand
have I recieued any bribe, to blind mine eyes therewith? Surely, I have pleaded
against you as the ambassador of the Lord, and his whole counsel have I
revealed: If ye will therefore fear the Lord, and serve him, and hear his
voice, and not disobey the word of the Lord; both you, and the King that
reigns over you, shall follow the Lord your God: but if ye will not obey the
voice of the Lord, but disobey the Lords mouth, then shall the hand of the Lord
be upon you, and on your fathers. Moreover. God forbid, that I should sin
against the Lord, and cease praying for you; but I will show you the good and
right way: Fear the Lord, serve him in the truth with all your hearts, and
consider how great things he has done for you: but if ye do wickedly, ye
shall perish, both ye and your king. Surely Jonah, if this had been thy
conclusion, thou should have seen the Lord fully have satisfied thy
prophecy: for this was but a formal humiliation, and therefore forty years
after, the Lord destroyed them, according to thy word: therefore Jonah,
observe, that God has as well prepared a worm to smite thy gourd, and make it
wither by the sun, as he made it grow by the same; and by the same sun,
and a fervent East Wind, make thee faint, and wish to die: neither have thou
any cause to be angry, for thou never labouredst for these mercies; and
therefore what have thou to do, to grieve at my mercies unto Nineueh? I bad
thee reprove them, and surely, what I commanded shall be done: for Nineueh
shall be reproved. And therefore all faithful laborers of the Lord, stick
to your callings, and let the Lord bless and curse, when it shall please him.

Reas. 1. From the perfection of Gods nature, that can no way run into any
excess, or come short in any defect; therefore die and live, shall be sure to
follow the breaking or keeping of his law: therefore vindicatiue justice is as
necessary, as remuneratiue.

Reas. 2. From the nature of distributive justice, which is, suum cuique
tribuere, give every man his own. How should wicked men be rewarded for their
evil deeds, if the Lord were not a God of vengeance? Plato could dispute thus
for God; bonis male, malis been: if it fall well with the wicked, and evil
with the good, then surely there must be another world for torment. For there
is a God; and if a God, then he is just; if he be just, then must he needs do
justly; if justly, then shall not the wicked go unpunished, or the just
unrewarded. Therefore that justice may stand in his proportion; if the wicked
have the best, where the best is not; and the just have the worst where the
worst is not; then shall the wicked to answer justice, have the worst where the
best is not; nay, no good thing at all: and the just have again the best,
where the worst is not; nay, no misery at all, but perfect happiness. Hence
natural men have dreamed of the Elysian fields, and of the fire of hell.

Reas. 3. The manifestation of Gods perfection, he made man for his glory,
and his glory is the concurrence of all his glorious attributes; therefore
shall vindicatiue justice see the face of the sun, as well as remuneratiue;
God will have the praise of both.

1. Use reprehension. First, confutation of the wicked, that think the Lord is
all lead, heavy footed to judgment; and that his hands shall always be in a
clout: or if he pull them out, he is so tender of them, that he may not endure
to lay them upon their hard hearts, least by the blow, he should complain of
the stiff resistance of the stroke. Well, they shall know, that he has hands
of brass, and rods of iron in them, to crush them in pieces. Secondly,
correction of the godly, that think the Lord is too tender over the wicked:
Jonah was too blame in this, therefore lay it aside: for it is Gods truth, that
he will reprove with small tenderness.

2. Use instruction. First, an admonition of the wicked, that they beware: for
the arrows of the Lord fly among them. If a strong archer missing his aim,
let his arrow fly among them that are beholding his shooting, will he not cry
aloud, look to your selves? and the crier of aim shout with a mighty voice,
to the right hand or to the left, take heed the arrow is among you: But alas,
the people are so amazed, that they may as well run under it, as escape it, so
that all are in danger, but it lights but upon the pate of one of them, and he
falls to the ground wounded, and yields up the ghost; all the rest quake, and
tremble at the sight, and are speechless: So the Lord is daily shooting forth
his arrows, he never misseth his aim; the watchmen of the city tell the
people, the arrowe of God is among them, and for all this no man is afraid; it
strikes down some of the stoutest of them: but alas, all is given to some
surfeit or weakness in the man, which they finding themselves free from,
think it is impossible for them to die as he did, because they have not his
disease; as though there were no more diseases to cut off life, then that one.
If a messenger knock at the door, and answer be given him presently, he is
gone without delay: so beloved, Gods plagues would not still rage at our
doors, if we gave God his answer; yet still the Lord rings the bell at our
door.

Secondly, a direction to the godly, to watch continually, that so they may
escape the judgments of the Lord, and mourn for his judgments upon others;
for these April dewes, will bring forth in them the May flowers of Gods spirit:
and in weeping, still respect our selves more the^ other: for that alone makes
God carry handkerchifes to wipe away our tears: and this sowing in tears,
will bring us a speedy harvest: and when the rod is upon others, let us take
it to our selves: for is it not better to take the rod into our own hands, and
beat our selves gently, then the Lord, who is a consuming fire, should wast us
with it? Bones out of joint, the longer they go, they prove more painful,
betimes they are set more easily: therefore let us betimes set our selves in
the ways of the Lord, least he rebuke us sharply. We physic, purge, sweat,
and all for the body: can we endure nothing for the soul? the vomit of the
soul is the grief of repentance: and tell me I pray you, who ever repented
him of repentant sorrow? In these reproves we are worse afraid then hurt:
rising out of a soft bed is exceeding tedious to a sluggard; yet our up, does
not dare us at all: so is the awaking from the sleep of sin, and slumbering
in the relics of sin, which still have dwelling in the best of us. To see a
soldier wounded is no news, but to go with it, is desperate folly: so our
sighting in this world, is no news if it bring knocks and maimes unto us: yet
to let them go and ranckle, and fester, is forlorn negligence; therefore let
this direction take his impression in our souls, that we may make excellent
use of all Gods reproves.

Use 3. Consolation in trouble, because the Lord will reward us, but punish
them that cause us affliction: 2 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7. For it is a righteous thing
with God, to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you; and to you which
are troubled, rest with us. Secondly in prosperity, to rejoice that we can
sorrow that the Lord reprooues any of our brethren; to be grieved for the
afflictions of Joseph. Daniel could find no comfort in his private prosperity
and great authority, because he knew that the Church of God was in great
misery: the like affection was in good Nehemiah: so likewise on the contrary,
to rejoice when we be reproved to see Gods church to flourish: so Paul being
in prison, was not so much grieved at his own bonds, as he rejoiced at the
liberty of the Gospel of Christ.

Sect. 3. Of the object.
Thee] God in his own children, loves the person, and accepts of them in
Christ, and only hates their sin, and reprooues that: but in an hypocrite,
he hates both the person and the sin; for if he should only be offended
with the sin, then should there be no difference betwixt the godly and the
wicked; for he hates sin equally in them both, and yet they are not both
equally hated: and therefore some thing more in an hypocrite is the object of
hatred, then his very sin. But it may be objected, that nothing can be
hated, but that which is evil: The object of Gods hatred.
now the persons of wicked men are good, the sin is only evil, therefore
only hated. Answ. Evil is considered two ways; First, in the abstract, as
being not considered with the subject in which it is; and so it is equally
hated of God every where. Secondly, in the concrete, when the evil and the
subject are put together: evil absolutely taken, and an evil man are diverse
considerations; the same cause of hatred in both, but not the same manner: for
a godly man is of an other condition; seeing sin in him, is but a tyrant, and
he is none of his lawful subjects, and therefore though sin fights to subdue
him unto his kingdom, yet the spirit of God resists and will be the ruler.
Therefore as the love of the subjects stand toward their king, so does the king
love them. Now the love of sin and wicked men is natural, and so is the love
of God and his children spiritually natural: and therefore must he needs love
his own subjects, and hate all his enemies: for if an enemy should captiuate
a loyal subject, the king would presently require him again, when he is
content to let his enemies have their own liberty over their own slaves.
Therefore the children of God, lose not the name of righteous persons, because
they sin: for it is rather sin in themselves, then themselves that offend
God: Romans 7. Paul says, It is no more I, but sin that dwells in me.
Therefore in a wicked man, there be three considerations: first, of his evil;
2. of his sinful person; 3. of his personal being: the two first are
hated, the third is loved of God: so a godly man, first his evil, secondly his
righteous person, thirdly his personal being: the first is hated, the two
last are loved of the Lord.

Observe. 1. A Reproof must be passed upon sin. Every thing that is secret
must be brought into light: Ephesians. 5.13. All things when they are reproved of
the light, are manifest: for it is the light that makes all things manifest.
Ioh. 16.8. And when he is come, he will reprove the world of sin, and of
righteousness, and of judgment. So that this point is general to the sins of
all men, especially to the wicked: for they have never desired by hearty
repentance to bring their sins unto the light; and therefore because they
would not judge themselves by it, it shall judge them to their woe. Indeed to
behold the light, is a comfotable thing, but for sore eyes it is very
troublesome: and therefore those that do evil, hate the light, because their
works are evil: and so the Lord must needs araigne them even in the clear
sunshine, to the view of all men, even of their very consciences, Ioh. 3.

Reas. 1. Because sin is the violation of Gods law: and therefore must not
go unreproved.

Secondly, because it opposes the light: and therefore cannot long stand in
opposition by clouding of the light, but the light will break out. The clouds
in the air can not always shade the sun from the eyes of the world, nor the
darkness of the night always shut up the morning brightness: so shall not
sin always fill the world with his mysts and clouds, and always shut up the
day of the Lords appearance to judgment, but the Lord will break the heavens,
and make the glory of his Son appear, at which heaven and earth shall flee
away; and then shall the thoughts of all hearts be made manifest.

Thirdly, because God must be glorified: for except the Lord do it himself, he
shall never have any glory in the sins of the wicked: for they dishonor him
as much as possibly they can. Isa. 59 4. No man calls for justice: no man
contendeth for truth: v. 14. Judgment goes backward, justice stands far off:
truth is fallen in the street, and equity can not enter. The Lord sees it,
it displeases him, and he wonders that no man will offer himself for his
defense: therefore his arm did save it, and his righteousness it self did
sustain it: he put on righteousness, as an habergeon, and an helmet of
salvation upon his head: and he put on the garments of vengeance for clothing,
and was clad with zeal as with a cloak. Then shall sin surely have his
reproof, and a recompense shall be given for evil doing: he will fully repay
the Islands of the world.

1. Use reprehension: first, confutation of the wicked, that make so much of
their sins, that are not ashamed to boast of them. Well, let them go too,
these are the very things that the Lord will reprove to their shame and
confusion. Secondly, correction to the godly, that are so meale-mouthed at
sin, that have not a word to say for the Lord of hosts. We are too often in
the extremes; when God is silent, we would be speaking; and when the Lord is
speaking, we would be silent: especially Ministers, that dare not speak when
the Lord has bidden them speak boldly, and not fear the faces of the
proudest.

2. Use instruction. First, an admonition to the wicked, to beware of sinning:
know they not, that every time they sin, they hold up their hands to heaven
to pray unto God for vengeance? Secondly, a direction to Gods children, to
mitigate the bitterness of their sins: Exodus 15. for sins may be compared to
the waters of Marah; and Gods reproof to the bitterness of those waters: and
Isreal's murmuring may set forth the discontednesse of the soul, in tasting of
those waters: the cry of the people, what shall we drink? to set forth the
thirsty desire of the soul to be satisfied with some sweet water. Moses cry
unto the Lord, sets forth the grace of prayer unto God, for some sweet comfort
in the bitter conflicts with sin. Lastly, the Lord showing Moses a tree to
cast into the waters, which does make them sweet, and so gives them a pleasant
relish unto the soul, may set forth the action of God the father, giving of
Christ the tree of life to every distressed soul; which being received by
faith into his soul, will make rivers of water flow out of him to eternal
life, and keep him from ever languishing again under the burden of his sin:
therefore let this be our direction in all Gods reproves for sin, to sweeten
them in Christ, and so bear them patiently.

3. Use. Consolation to all that are in Christ; for God has already reproved
their sins in his son; and therefore shall they be free from his wrath.
Suppose that a malefactor were condemned to die, and the day of his execution
were at hand, how would this affect him in his soul? how would he labor to
escape it; try all his friends, his goods, wife, children, kinsfolks, and the
dearest of his acquaintance? his wealth can serve him no better but to provide
for him while he lives, see him honorably buried when he is dead: his wife
and children and the rest, tell him they will weep for him; all these are but
cold comforts to the man that must die: But if one should step out and say, my
life for yours, if that will free you: he offers himself to the king, the
king accepts of him, delivers the pardon, brings it to the malefactor: now he
is at ease, and hardly can a man imagine the greatness of his joy: surely, if
that be true that a man may die laughing, he might as soon loose his life in
this passion of joy, as he might have done in the passion of his sorrow. Even
the self same cause is paralelled in a man on his deathbed; I am reproved of
the Lord, and adjudged to eternal death for my sins: alas, how shall I
escape? my goods are nothing unto thee, O Lord, thou will not take them for the
redemption of my soul: my wife, and children, and good friends standing about
my bed, cut me at the very heart: no worldly comfort can refresh my soul: Oh
my God, take thy Christ for the redemption of my soul, he is able to stand
betwixt thy wrath and my sin; in him lift upon me the light of thy
countenance: for therein stands my exceeding joy, far above the increase of
oil, corn, wine, or any worldly thing.

Obser. 2. Hypocrites shall not go undiscovered, it shall be known what they
are: they shall see what a sandy foundation they have laid, and how all their
hopes are no better then the spiders web: Isa. 29.13. because this people come
near unto me with their mouth, and honor me with their lips, but have
removed their hearts far from me, and their fear toward me was taught by
the precept of men: therefore to discover them, I will do a marvelous thing:
the wisdom of the wisest of them shall perish, and the understanding of the
most prudent shall be hid. Woe shall be unto their deepes, and their works of
darkness; and they shall meet with him that sees them, and knows them;
their devises cause them most foolishly to stand up with the pot against his
maker, and with the thing formed against him that fashioned him, to say thou
have no understanding: Well, your Lebanon shall become Carmel, and your Carmel
a forest: the best you have shall become worse; and that which is next shall
become a barren wilderness: yet Jacob shall not be confounded, neither shall
his face be pale: for he shall see his children, because the work of mine
hands is in the middst of him; they shall still sanctify my name, even the
holy one of Israel, and shall fear him: then they that erred in spirit, shall
have understanding; and they that murmured, shall learn this doctrine; even the
hypocrites themselves whose spirit made them err, shall know that all their
profession was nothing: and they that murmured often against God, for not
respecting them as they deserved, shall learn this doctrine, that the
sacrifices of the Lord are a contrite spirit, and broken heart: not burnt
offerings, not calves of a year old, not thousands of rams, or ten thousand
rivers of oil; not the first borne or fruit of the body. He has showed thee,
O man, another lesson, and that which is good, and which the Lord requires of
thee: surely to do justly, and to love mercy, and to humble thy self to
walk with thy God. Go too then, we have fasted, and thou see it not; we
have punished our selves, and thou regardest it not. I tell you, It is to seek
your own wills, and require your own debts: and therefore you have your
reward: therefore Isa. 48.1. Hear ye this, O house of Jacob, which are but
called by the name of Israel, and are naturally come out of the waters of
Judah; which swear by the name of the Lord, and make mention of the God of
Israel; but not in truth, or in righteousness: You are indeed called the holy
city, and stay your selves upon the God of Israel; but his name is the Lord of
hosts; he has an army against you. First, a just cause is given him of war;
for he declared these things of old, made the^ plain, and brought them to
pass: therefore of what can you accuse him? Well, thou art obstinate, thy neck
is an iron sinew, and thy browe brass: I have done much for thee: the old I
have made known unto thee, that thou might not bless thine idol for it,
nor say it was his command: new things again have been made for thee; and
not reueiled, lest thou should be arrogant; in saying, I know them: for I
knew thou would grievously transgress: therefore have I called thee a
transgressor from the womb: therefore if I forbear thee a while, it shall be
for my names sake, and for my praise. Indeed I kindled a fire against thee,
and fined thee, but not as silver: for I found no pureness in thee; all was
dross: I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction, to save thee from
consuming: for surely, except I that appeared to Moses in the bush, Exodus 3. to
keep it from burning when it was all on fire, had been in thee (which were but
as a bush in Egypt) thou had been consumed, and perished for ever: but alas,
thou will consume thy self, by thy hypocrisy and dissembling lips.

Reas. 1. Gods truth; Romans 3.4. Let God be true, and every man a liar; as it is
written, that thou might be justified in thy words, and overcome when thou
art judged: therefore except the Lord should put forth himself, hypocrites
would prove God a notorious liar; for they belie him most: and if they should
so leave him, he should be thought an Idol god; therefore will he make their
secrets appear.

2. Because Gods word, which is a light in it self, by them is put under a
bushel; therefore will the Lord set it upon a candlestick, that it may give
light to descry all the corners of their hearts.

3. The last judgment, Eccles. 12. v. last. God will bring every secret thing
unto judgment: but hypocrisy is a secret, and therefore shall God judge it.

Reas. 4. From hypocrites themselves: and it has many branches: first, because
pure in their own conceit, Prou. 13.12. this generation must be known, that
they are not washed from their sins. Secondly, to answer their murmuring,
Isa. 58. for if God should not speak unto that which they have said of him, he
should be thought to be a God that regarded not fasting, and calling upon his
name. Thirdly, to detect their sanctification, Isa. 66.3. which is no better
then the blessing of an Idol, killing a man, or offering swines blood.
Fourthly, to detect their repentance; 1. Sam. 15.13. I have, says Saul,
fulfilled the commandment of the Lord: but the bleating of the sheep, and
lowing of the oxen, show his infidelity. Fifthly, to detect their fair
pretexts, Ezra. 4.2. Gods enemies come to Gods people, and say, we will build
with you, for we seek the lord your God, as ye do, etc. Sixthly, to detect
their slanders, Neh. 6. yea they speak in his praise before me, and told him
my words; and Tobiah sent letters to put me in fear. Seventhly, because they
lean on God to hurt others, Micah. 3.11. Lastly, that they may see truly
whither all their worship tended.

Reas. 5. That the godly may not stagger: Psalm. 139. David proves himself
faithful, by a special living in Gods presence.

1. Use reprehension. First, confutation of all those that may not endure to
have their sins detected, or think themselves so pure, that they have
nothing to be discovered. Hypocrites are the only Puritans of the world: for
such persons as can not endure the ministers reprehensions, are shroudly to be
suspected of hypocrisy. Secondly, correction of the godly, that make not a
distinction of their love, betwixt formal professors, and true hearted
Christians: David is only a companion of all them that fear the Lord, and are
approved of God; but for the wicked and hypocrites that will not confess that
excellent presence of the Lord as he does, Psalm. 139. He hates them earnestly
with an unfeigned hatred, as though they were also his utter enemies.

2. Use instruction. First, admonition of the wicked, that they be better
advised of their presumptions: for surely they are sarre out of Gods love: and
therefore that they may a little try themselves, I will help them a little to
examine their estates. Luke 12.1. take heed to your selves of the leaven of the
Pharisees, which is hypocrisic: for there is nothing covered, that shall not be
revealed; neither hid, that shall not be known. The Scripture lays down
plainly what hypocrites are, and what they are not: both of them are laid
together, Prou. 30.12. first what they are, to wit, a generation for multitude,
pure for quality, in their own conceit for the best ground of all their
religion: a generation, borne of themselves; pure in outward profession, to
deceive the world; and in their own conceit, to deceive themselves. Let us
therefore see their building, that they raise out of their own conceit: Maskes
once served men to play and sport in jest, but now they are used in good
earnest; and the hypocrite is the most excellent at this game: these men would
be kings, have all at command, and scorn to abase themselves in comparison
with any: but let them know, that as at the chest play the king commands all,
until the mate be given without redress, and then he is but like the rest: so
when death shall check these kingly hypocrites, it shall be known that they are
no better then the common sort of people, that must every mothers son of
them to hell. Indeed the Cupresse tree, is straight and tall; in color fresh
and green; yet on the same no wholesome fruit does grow, which is fit for
nourishment: so that by the taste we may epsy the goodness of the tree:
therefore says Christ, by their fruit ye shall know them. In Phaenicia the
people raised a figure on hie, that all men might observe it, and on the top
painted a Serpent in a circle, to show that in the world there is no greater
art, then man to know himself in every part. Let us then a little enter this
consideration, and see what grounds he lays of these his conceits.

First, he considers his perfections, as the perfections of nature; a nimble
wit, good memory, full of civility, and fair conversation. Secondly, being
within the bounds of Gods church, he may obtain certain graces of Gods
spirit: as first, from the word in general, understanding, consent to the
truth, submission, affection, delight in the messengers, and to be a companion
with the Saints and all frequenters of Gods church. For the law, he may see his
sins, the wrath of God due for them, horror of conscience, reluctation
against sin, sorrow, and a certain change, Mat. 12.43. 2. Pet. 2.20. Mar.
6.20. For the Gospel, knowledge of the covenant, that God is faithful, that
Christ's merits are of infinite value; and tears may flow from his eyes, either
in hearing or reading the passion of our Savior Christ. Degrees of his
perfections, Heb. 6. 1, illumination: 2. participation of the heavenly gift,
holy Ghost, Gods word, and of the powers to come: these are his perfections.

Now let us see what reasons may persuade him to this conceit. First, when he
looks upon himself, he sees his heart to be quiet within him, and not boil
with the foul and ugly sins of the world. Secondly, he sees his estate to
be very good in the world, and full of prosperity. Thirdly, he thinks his
profession is with the best; he is as good a churchman as any other. Again, he
looks up unto God, and is very lavish of Gods mercy; he cares not to set it
upon the tenters, and makes it rise as high as the mountains: but for his
justice, he scants that, and makes it like a molehill. When he thinks of the
devil, he finds himself nothing at all to be troubled with him: with a void
Satan, he can scare him from him at any time: when he sets himself upon the
stage with other men, he sees how the wicked cannot come near him; and yet
they have often a fair life, and an easy death; and therefore shall it be
far better with him: And for precise persons, he cannot tell what to say of
them; sometime they are too proud for his company; another time they are too
full of hypocrisy, he dares not trust them; sometimes they are a company of
fools, and therefore he will not run gadding about with fools; sometime men
full of melancholy and sadness, fit for no society; or else singular fellows,
that think none so good as themselves; or else will have a life by themselves:
and therefore they will not live in society with them: but alas, they are the
men of pride, that think that God dwells with them alone. Bucephalus was then
in chiefest pride, when rich armor was set upon his back, and none might ride
him but Alexander: so these hypocrites being in honor in the world, will
suffer none to accompany with them, but God himself; for in comparison, he
excludes all. And furely question with him of his estate, and for the most you
shall find them very resolute, like unto the Giant of Gath; they have fingers
and thumbes enough to apprehend mercy. Ask them, mean you to be saved? they
answer resolutly, God forbid they should ever think otherwise: when alas poor
Christians, lie wrestling with many a temptation. Ask them again, do you
believe? believe! he that would not believe God, were a wretch indeed. Ask
him in the third place, have you any doubtings with your faith? doubtings! why
should I doubt? the Lord is most certain in his promises: when in both these,
the child of God is much perplexed. Ask him in the last place, when did you
believe? surely, ever since I was borne: yet alas, many a good servant of God
will say, once I was as black as a coal in sin, but it has pleased God to
put on me a whiter garment: I know the very day when hell did gape upon me,
and at such a sermon it pleased God to strike me to the ground, and raise me up
again in his mercy: or at least, they that have been sanctified from their
mothers womb, will cry and say, Oh wretched men that we are, who shall
deliver us from this body of death? This fight of the members, and of the
spirit, is an excellent persuasion of true grace; but alas, these wretches,
when in the time of necessity, they come to make use of their faith; what do
they I pray you? truly they are become like Adonibezek, they have lost all
their fingers, and must famish for want of laying hold of their meat; so that
all their beauty perishes. For beloved, as green fruits and flowers do
ripen by the sun, whose rays bring forth their budds, and their smells; so
by the son of righteousness alone, must all the flowers of Gods garden mend
their smells and savors. And therefore let us proceed to see what they are
not, for want of this sun; and that consists in the second part of the verse,
yet they are not washed from their filthiness.

A Labyrinth is framed with such art, that the entrance is both plain and
wide; but being entered, you shall find such turnings, that you can not come
out again without your guide: so this conceit of purity, has made such a
large entrance into the hearts of hypocrites, that they can not be brought out
of their turnings without the guide of Gods spirit. Therefore let us view these
two threeds, that are here laid down to help us. First, they are not washed:
secondly, they are in their filthiness. Ianus had two faces; and in the one hand
he had a key, in the other the sun: from Ianus comes January, that looks at
both parts of the year: his two faces makes him look forward and backward: by
his key, he is able to open the day, and shut in the night: by the sun in the
hand, he is able to discover all things. Formalitie in religion may be
expressed in Ianus, until we come to the key and the sun: the hypocrites can
look at both parts of the year, winter and summer; but they will have their
back upon winter, and their face upon summer: for when winter comes again,
and looks them in the face, they hide their heads, and will not be seen: like
unto snailes, that are abroad while the dew is upon the earth, but creep into
their houses when they find the dew to be dried up by the sun. Again, they
have two faces, they can look backward and forward, serve all times, please
all persons, and keep themselves out of danger: but when we come unto the
key, whereby heaven is opened, and shut in, they have none at all: they lost
their key of righteousness in Adam, and as yet they have it not restored in
Christ, who alone has the keys of David, which opens and no man shuts,
which shuts and no man opens. And for the sun in the other hand, they
have none: for how can they hold out the Son of righteousness, that never had
him in their hearts by faith? they shine indeed, but it is like unto a blazing
star, which seems to move as though it came from a true star indeed, but
alas it is in the fall, and presently comes to the earth; and then what is it
but a lump of very crude matter, and as cold as a stone: or like glow-wormes,
which in the night time, make a show of fire, but when a man takes them in his
hands and bruiseth them, they are nothing but a deal of crude, rough, black
blood. So these hypocrites, they come from heaven like lightning by the tail
of the devil, and fall to the ground, and then their glory appears no more:
they were always cold at the heart, and therefore their shining vanishes,
when the true Son of righteousness appears to try them. Let us then examine
the hypocrite, and we shall find, (that although his sword, and all the
weapons of his profession be ouerspread with honey,) yet a be shall sting him
at the last, and make him know, that all that honey was none of his own, but
that he had stolen it from Gods bees; and therefore being but the waspe,
must be cast out of Gods hiue. The fisher oftentimes when he bragges of store
of fishes, pulls up a scorpion in his net, which becomes his death: so these
hypocrites, they fish for heaven, but the scorpion is already in their bosoms
which will sting them to death: they hatch cockatrice eggs: whatsoever comes
from them, is poison and death: they weaue the spiders web, all their
religion comes to no proof: he that eats of their eggs dies, and that
which is troad upon, breaks out into a serpent. For it is impossible that all
mankind, being the seed of coruption; and secondly, the most of them, the seed
of the serpent, should bring forth any other thing but corruption, and young
serpents. And therefore hypocrites, remaning in their former estate, must needs
be far from God, and all true holiness. They are not washed, therefore not
in Christ. Secondly, they are in their filthiness; therefore in themselves.
Not in Christ, because they know not the father, by the Son, through the holy
Ghost. They are most busy with the father; but alas, for Christ, and the
spirit, they cast them both off. God will have mercy, and God forbid, that any
man should think that God meant to damn his creature: but alas, they are
silent of his justice; and Christ is little in their mouths, for the
satisfaction of Gods justice, and the only foundation of Gods mercy to come
unto them: and the spirit is far estranged from them, as appears by their
sanctification. But let them know, that Gods saithfull ones make an other kind
of demonstration, then to begin with the father first: Romans 8.1. There is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ; but how shall that be known? surely,
by that which follows; which walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit:
but how shall this be known? why look into the Gal. 5.19. to v. 24.

That this may the better appear, let us see how hypocrites pull down the old
building, and rear up the new: for until that be gone, there is no hope of a
better. That they would have the old building stand, it shall evidently appear
in the 7. of the Romans: first, if you look unto their marriage, you shall see
they will stick to their old husband the law; yet will they have Christ too,
and therefore commit adultery; for God will but permit them one husband:
therefore either Law or Gospel; doing, or believing; Christ, or Moses: both can
not stand together to make us the spouse of Christ. Secondly, let us see their
service and obedience, that they yield unto their husbands. It is not in the
newness of the spirit, but in the oldnesse of the letter: surely an hypocrite
is all in the letter, no jot of inward sanctification is in him: but Law and
Gospel speaks unto him as a deaf man: and so for power, both of them are but
dead and dumb unto him. Thirdly, they love no innouations: they would have the
old ordination to stand, to do, and live; but now to be slain by the law, and
to have sin made sin indeed, and have their hearts even bleed to the
death by it, that can not be endured: for men naturally love life better then
death: but now it is come to pass by our fall, that except the Law kill, it
can not save. Fourthly, they have no discorning spirit, to see how the Law is
spiritual, and they carnal, fold under sin: for they always allow that
which they do; their will and doing go together, their hatred is not their
doing: when Paul says, he wills one thing by Gods good spirit, and by his
flesh does the clean contrary; he hates sin by the spirit, and yet often
is made to do it by his own corruption: thus does he justify the law, and
and makes it good and substantial, but himself evil and naught: when
hypocrites take the law to make them good, for they are iustifiers of
themselves. Paul by this means came to see, that it was not he the new man,
that did these things, but sin that dwelt in him; and therefore he only
iustifies not Gods law to condemn himself, but also he makes a glorious
confession, that all power may be taken from himself, and ascribed unto the
holy Ghost, for his sanctification: for I know, that in me, setting the spirit
aside, and therefore I mean in my flesh and corruption, dwells no good
thing: for to will is present with me, but I find no means to perform that
which is good. And surely reasons of this I have many. First, the strength of
my corruption: secondly, it is yoked with me, and therefore being the
stronger, draws me unto evil: thirdly, I am a double person, or a double man,
the inner and outward man, which is so rebellious, that I never live at peace
with my self: fourthly, these two have their laws, and the outward man does
often captiuate me, and make me a slave unto sin: and I am so sore oppressed,
that I must needs cry out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from
this body of death? yet thanks be to God, through Jesus Christ our Lord, that
my mind is so good unto God, and his law, though my flesh will not as yet
shake hands with sin. But hypocrites are of another mind; they will neither
justify law nor gospel, which shall condemn themselves: they will not
ascribe all unto Gods spirit that is good, and the rest unto themselves: they
have means enough to do well, they are Papists, they can supererrogate, they
feel not the strength of sin: they are not yoaked to draw contrary ways;
like oxen they can draw together, not as Samsons foxes by the tails, every
one to draw sundry ways: they sustain no double persons, single will they
be in all their ways: they are troubled with no contrary laws, they can make
all agree well enough, and therefore when cry they in the very desperation of
their souls; who shall deliver us? they give thanks to God, not for Christ,
but for themselves, that they are not like other men: Therefore the spirit
having not pulled down the old building, how shall it be possible to set up
the new, which is plainly to be seen in the chap. following, Romans 8.

First, where is their freedom from the law of sin, and of death? neither
Christ nor the spirit has purchased it for them: and I doubt that their own
payment will not stand good in Gods court. Secondly, if things may be known by
their savors, surely every man may see they savor of the things of the
flesh. Thirdly, if the wisdom of the spirit, and the wisdom of the flesh be
enemies; I admire what peace and life can be in hypocrites, when they will not
deny their own wisdom: for as yet the body is not dead, and quickened again
by the spirit: still are they debtors to the flesh, and will live after him.
How will they prove themselves to be the sons of God? if the spirit of
bondage be gone, and the spirit of adoption be entered into their hearts, let us
hear the cry of Abba, father? let them prove the witness of the spirit, if
they be heirs of God, even annexed with Christ: let us see how they can
suffer with him; how they esteem of afflictions in comparison of their glory:
does the creature groan for them? nay alas, I fear against them, because they
subject him unto vanity. Let us hear how they with patience look for their
redemption: Is their hope for things not seen? nay alas, all for the present.
How does the spirit assist them in their infirmities; how is he with them in
their prayers; what requests does he bring out of their souls? where be their
deep sighs that cannot be expressed; can they search the meaning of the
spirit according to the will of God? surely nothing less: for all is but lip
labor. Again, have they assurance that all works together for their good? can
they tell it from their predestination, vocation, justification, and
glorification? can they from hence conclude, that God is for them, and no man
can be against them? that there is no charges for them to pay? that there is no
condemnation, no separation from the love of God in Christ? all afflictions
cannot do it, no death, no angels, no principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come; no place, not heaven above is too high for them;
nor hell below, is able to make them sink into his depth: yea, in breife, not
any creature is able to do it: therefore no hypocrite is in Christ, and
therefore impossible that he should be washed from his filthiness; being not
washed, he must remain in it. And that will appear, if we mark his life and
death: life, prosperity, adversity. In prosperity, for his profession he is
all courage, and very full of brags; like the coward that before he come in
the field, is fire and towe; but when he comes to the trial, is the first that
flees the field; when the courageous champion is very silent, but when there is
need of him, will show, that he has more tried sortitude in him, then a
thousand cowards: So hypocrites make all the world ring with their Master;
though all the world forsake thee, yet will I not forsake thee; I will lay
down my life for thee: yet when Christ shall come with (a this night shall ye
be put unto it) then will they flee with the first: and if Christ have no
better champions then they, he shall be left all alone. Secondly, come to the
hearing of the word, all promises they will make their own; all judgments
threatened, they will put upon others: and for application of both, it shall be
as in this place, God is like them, he favors them above all with his mercies;
and his judgments pass over their houses. Thirdly for his life, no
reformation: For adversity, if God be gone, he is gone; no more stout words,
no coming to Church, no more outward reformation; but labor to make the best
of all, Gal. 6.12. they will seek to please to the face, and labor to
constrain to their profession, that they may suffer no persecution for the
cross of Christ. In special for their sins; when they are in misery, it
may be they will let a word come out against some known actual sin: but
with David, Psalm. 51. they never strike at the root, to wit, their original
sin: for the punishment, Mic. 6.6. they will part with any thing they have,
to be freed from the strokes of Gods rod, but the thing required shall not once
come near them. And for the thoughts of death, many a Balaams wish; but that
is all, for their life is nothing. And lastly, for death it self, they either
die like stocks and stones; or else like bulls and bears, roaring and bellowing
out their shame and confusion. Secondly, this may be a direction to Gods
children to approve their sincerity unto God, by always setting themselves
in the presence of the Lord.

3. Use consolation. First in trouble, to rejoice when it shall please God to
try us in the furnace of affliction, that so we may come forth as tried gold
refined, and made the more fit for Gods kindome. Secondly, in our welfare to
trust more in God then in our selves, and to count the lifting up of Gods
countenance upon us in the face of his anointed, more joy of heart, then when
the corn, wine, oil, and all the pleasures and profits of this world are
increased. And thus much of the first part of Gods justice, to wit, the power
of it, from the efficient, in the form, and execution of it upon the sin,
and person of an hypocrite. Now follows the orderly proceeding of this justice.

Of the order of Gods justice.
First, in the cause.
Order] In the handling of the method used by the Lord in this place; we are
to consider of the arguments. Order is described, first from the cause, (I thee
Lord:) secondly, from the effect; which is to set or place things: thirdly,
from the object; in that word them, that is thy sins: 4. from a testimony
drawn from the notice of the conscience, which shall sufficiently witness of
the worth of Gods method.

For the cause of this order, it is the Lord. Surely Gods wisdom is to be
seen in nothing more then in method and order: for order is not from any
brutish nature, but the best and wisest: so that the changes and multitude of
alterations in this world are no casual matters, left in the hands of blind
fortune. If indeed we look into Gods Church, and see the variety of colors,
and the instabilitie of them, we shall either think that there is no
providence, or else so strange a providence, that it should contradict it
self: Yet surely after due consideration, we shall see all colors to paint
out this excellent glory, and ravish us with the beauty of it. For as the
skillful painter is able to dispose of infinite variety of colors in his
curious work, to set forth the excellency of his skill, and produce the
greatest praise; which perhaps to the eyes of ignorant beholders in the
beginning were nothing but the pictures of deformity; yet he himself knew
full well that the chiefest of his art was in the limming forth of that
creature which afterward he meant with boldness to commend unto the eyes of the
beholders: so the Lord (which in the creation replenished the world with all
beautiful colors, from whence all painters have learned their art, the very
imitation of Gods work in nature) shall be able to dispose of all the variety
of colors in his Church, to show that that piece of work which he limmed forth
in his decree, (which men make a monster) and since the beginning of the world,
has set it forth in his lively colors, to be most admirable and full of
beauty: or as an exquisite Musician, which is able to make a most sweet
harmony of the greatest multitude of strings, and in nature dissonant, to
sound forth his skillful and most excellent art, which at his pleasure can
extend, or let fall, as well the trebble as the tenor, and the tenor as the
base, and mix them with the counter-tenors, the small bases, or what soever
seems good unto his will; to join extremes with middles, and middles with
themselves and all their extremes; so that in all his music is neither heard
harshnesse of stroke, or unpleasantness of sound: so the Lord the best and
most sweet singer in all Israel, is able to put down all arts, because if
they should strive with him, they should but stand up against their maker: for
he is the inuenter of them all, and men and angels are but the obseruers of his
wisdom: and therefore all in heaven and earth shall meet together to sound
forth the praise of the Lord: and therefore the Lord can not but keep good
order in all his ways; and if he will take sin into his own hands, it shall
not be spoiled for want of good handling.

Obs. Sin shall be an excellent means to glorify God: surely except it had
bin for this cause, I should have utterly despaired any good that ever could
have bin brought out of sin; but seeing my text informs me that God will
have the handling of it; I dare boldly say that sin is decreed, made good of
God, and for no other end but that he may be glorified by it: for God handles
nothing that he wills not; and what he wills he wills from all eternity. And
therefore he deals not with sin, as men deal with inevitable accidents, to
make a virtue of necessity; to take in hand to dispose of sin when he could
not mend it: but the Lord had this work in his hands long before it came to
pass: and now it is sufficient for us to admire at it, and have it in
exceeding account. Surely God has ordered with himself, and now he will order
it with his creature: it was in Gods eyes from eternity, and now shall it be
in man's eyes according to Gods time alloted unto him.

Reason. 1. Because God is the God of order, and therefore must he needs judge
as well of confusion as of order it self; for that which approoues the one,
does always disprooue the contrary.

Reas. 2. Because God will have his works seen: as long as all did lie in the
first chaos, nothing was seen in his distinction; but when the Lord had
brought light out of it, and made it separate the evening and the morning, and
brought every creature into his place, then became the work of the Lord to be
glorious: Psalm. 19. the heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament
shows forth the work of his hand. So when the Lord has brought the light of
his decree out of the confusion of sin, then shall all flesh see the glory of
our God.

Reason 3. From the wicked, which have set themselves to cross God: and
therefore if he will be glorified by them, he must have it by his own arm, for
they scorn to give it him.

Reason 4. The consolation of his Saints: for this puts them out of all heart
to see things fall out a cross. Psalm. 37. is wholly spent upon this subject,
that the flourishing estate of the wicked is but transitory, and destruction is
their end: but the misery of the godly in this world ends in peace and
quietness, because they are in the favor of God; therefore must they not fret
or be envious for the evil doers; for they are soon cut down like grass,
and wither away as the green herb; but trust in the Lord, and do good, dwell
in the land, and they shall be fed assuredly. Psalm. 73. yet God is good unto
Israel, even unto the pure in heart: there is the dispute about Gods order or
providence in governing of the world. The question is, whether God be good unto
the faithful. The disputants are the flesh and the spirit: the arguments are
brought on both sides, and by the arguments the cause is determined. First, the
old man brings his arguments, and proves the negative part that God is not good
unto Israel: first, he pulls two arguments out of his own bosom, want of
wisdom, and discontentednes of mind, which were the fountain of his error:
he that can not guide his feet, nor keep his steps from slipping, may
easily say God is not good unto Israel: but I the old man ca^ do neither of
these, and therefore must I needs think, that God is not good unto Israel.
Secondly, he that can not endure the prosperity of the wicked, and the misery
of his own soul, may easily judge God not to be good unto Israel: but thus
were my affections guided: and therefore from mind and heart, from blindness
and affection, I conclude that God is not good unto Israel. But the discerning
spirit may easily answer these objections, with a nego consequentiam: for they
are but the witnesses of a lying spirit: it is no good consequence to say, that
the sun shines not, because I am blind and see it not: no good consequence
to say, Gods hates me, because he prospers the wicked.

Leave these inartificiall arguments, and dispute more solidly from some
artificial thing. I will therefore begin with their death; and thus I
dispute; He that is not drawn unto his death as a malefactor, neither has
sickness on him as the messenger of death, but is without all bonds, lusty and
strong, must needs prove that God is better unto him then his Israel: and
therefore not good unto them: the assumption I prove; They are not in trouble,
with other men, neither are they plagued with them; but pride is as a chain
unto them, and cruelty covers them as a garment. What then can be answered
for God? surely still the consequence is not good: bruit beasts may go to the
slaughterhouse without all baiting, and it were questionless the part of a mad
man, to disturb them that go as heart would wish; neither would the devil
for a thousand worlds, that these men should once be disquieted to turn back
again: and therefore yet you stick in the question. What then will you answer
to an argument drawn from their life; their eyes stand out with fatness, they
have more then heart can wish, they have their tongues at liberty: power to
oppress, boast of it, and yet presume the^y shall not be controlled: for they
dare speak against heaven, and suffer their tongues to walk thorough the
earth: therefore God neither does, neither can he do any good to Israel: Let
Moses come to Pharaoh, with let my people go: he shall be answered, not as the
devils answered the Exorcists, Act. 19.15. Jesus we acknowledge, and Paul we
know, but who are ye? It had been well if he had but said, Aaron and Moses;
God I acknowledge, and his p eople I know; but who are ye that are so impudent
with your king? this is not his voice; but who is God? and Exodus 10.10. Let the
Lord so be with you, as I will let you go, and your children: behold, for
evil is before your face: Here is blasphemy and execration of Gods people; he
imagines evil against them, the Lord shall not prevent it; and he desires that
the Lord had no better affection to them, then he was minded to let them go.
What shall be answered to this proud argument that brings all into it? they
have the controlment of heaven and earth, and therefore how shall the Lord be
good to Israel? Well, O flesh, yet is God good to Israel: this is but a small
matter, for neither heaven nor earth are in their hands; it is an easy matter
to turn their own swords into their own bowels: for they have fed indeed,
but it is become a surfeit; and therefore if presently they be not like oxen
knocked in the head, they will pine away, and neither God nor man shall have
profit by them: they have been licentious but soon may they be cooled; they
have spoken wickedly of their oppression, but a small matter will gravel them,
and bring them unto an non plus; they have presumed, but soon may they
despair; they have set their mouths against heaven, but suddenly while they
are about their mischief, there may shine a most fearful light, yea
lightning and thunder from heaven strike them to the ground, make every joint
break a sunder, the whole body tremble, and the heart astonished: neither shall
they hear any voice from heaven, Send for Ananias to put his hands upon them,
that they may recover their sight, and have their hearts comforted: yet shall
they hear a voice from heaven, Why have you persecuted me; it is hard for you
to kick against my pricks; I will make your consciences prick you to the
death, the sting shall never out of it: there shall not be a Moses nor an Aaron
to pray for you, though you confess with Pharaoh, we have sinned: the Lord is
righteous, but I and my people are wicked.

Surely, the spirit of God is strong, my own testimony is answered; the death
and life of the wicked cannot euince the cause: therefore I bring a third sort
of reasons even from the godly themselves; v. 10. his people turn hither: for
waters of a full cup are wrung out to them: Hence even they say, how does God
know it? or is there knowledge in the most high? we dare boldly say, the
wicked prosper, and increase in riches: we have cleansed our hearts in vain,
and washed our hands in innocence to no purpose: for daily have we been
punished, and chastened every morning. What may be said to this argument?
surely the testimony of my brethren does press me sore: that they should be
so discouraged: yet I hope when they shall have considered my arguments
propounded for the defense of their cause, they shall recant their error, and
say, If I judge thus, behold the generation of thy children are up against me,
I have therefore trespassed: the reason was, because I thought to find out the
discourse by my natural reason, but I confess it was too painful for me:
therefore (O Spirit) the comforter of thy Church, let me hear the arguments
that will bear weight in the balance of Gods sanctuary. First, therefore I
will begin with an artificial argument, which all men may gather out of the
works of God: even of his justice; They are set in slipperie places, they
stand but upon the ye, and therefore God may soon cast them into desolation:
which all the world may see to be done: for how suddenly are they destroyed,
perished, and horribly consumed? all is but a dream of their prosperity; but
when I am awaked to see it, and they to feel it; then shall I consider my
heavenly felicity, contemn all their vain pomp, and know assuredly that God
makes all their image to be despised: therefore I ingeniously confess, that
the vexing of my heart, and the pricking in my reins, was because I was too
foolish, even as a beast before God: yet was I happy in all this: for by faith
I was always with God; and that my faith might not fall, he has holden me by
his right hand. Secondly, for my self, I have taken this arguemnt, that God
will guide me by his counsel, and afterward receive me to his glory.
Thirdly, I dare appeal unto mine own soul from both these arguments, unto a
third, whom have I in heaven but God? and I have desired none in earth before
him. Fourthly, I draw an arguments, from mine own weakness, and the daily
experience I have had of Gods goodness; my flesh fails, and my heart also:
but God is the strength of mine heart, and my portion for ever: Therefore now I
come to the determination of the question, and thus I determine it: for the
wicked, Lo, they that withdraw themselves from God shall perish: thou
destroyest all them that go a whoring from thee: and for my self, I have
found that the deepest disputations, do always bring forth the best
conclusions, and safest determinations: therefore thus I resolve, That as for
me, it is good for me to draw near to God: therefore I have put my trust in
the Lord God, that I may declare all his works.

See but one place more, Psalm. 77. When I entered the consideration of the days
of old, and the years of ancient time, called to remembrance my song of
thankesginug in the night, which usually I sung in my prosperity: and now
thinking upon God am troubled, and when I pray my spirit is full of auguish:
Thou keep mine eyes awaking all the long night; it is time therefore to
commune with my heart, and for my spirit to search diligently: will the Lord
absent himself for ever? and will he show no more favor? is his mercy
clean gone for ever? does his promise fail for evermore? has God forgotten
to be merciful? has he shut up his tender mercy in displeasure? what will
this do unto my soul? surely it will prove my death. Yet I remembered thy
works, meditated in them, devised with my self what should be the end of
them, and I found thy way in the Sanctuary, whither I must ascend by faith, if
I mean to declare thy power among the people, to wit, thy redemption: The
waters of the red sea seeing thy power were afraid, the depths trembled, thou
rainedst upon Egypt, and made thy thunders to be heard, the lightning
lightened the world, the earth trembled and shook: thus thou did lead thy
people like sheep by the hands of Moses and Aaron: so that they wanted no
comfort in the midst of many waters; and all because God did dispose of all
their troubles.

Surely that God orders all things, is a most admirable comfort of the
faithful, and a reason that I cannot leave vnpressed. Thy little finger shall
not ache, a hair of thy head shall not fall to the ground without Gods
disposition: Psalm. 121.4. behold a note of admiration both to good and bad; of
demonstration to all that expect the mercies of the Lord; and of attention to
those that are too negligent: and what may they all behold? even this, that the
keeper of Israel will neither slumber nor sleep: A keeper, what is that?
surely to be set in some office: and therefore too base for the great God of
heaven to become Isreal's servant; if David had not styled him so in the next
verse, I should have been unwilling to have thought it, but now I dare say
it, the Lord is thy keeper, and therefore O Israel, thou art but as a child
under tuition, as a sheep under a pastor: but happy that thou art put into
the hands of no governor, save into his that gouernes the whole world; not a
sheep left upon the mountains without a shepherd; but even unto him that
against the fond conceit of the Aramites, is the God both of the mountains and
valleys: the keeper of Israel. First, he had Jacob in his keeping, the younger
brother, who when he feared the strength of his brother Esau, became Israel,
one that prevailed with God, and therefore sure to prevail with man. He had
stood before the lion of the tribe of Judah, and therefore needs not blush at
the face of Esau. Again, all the twelve Patriarks have gone into Egypt, and
their whole progeny taking the name of their father, and therefore were
preserved in Egypt, brought out with joy, lead through the red sea, protected
in the wilderness, and most safely conducted into the land of Canaan: and
since that all spiritual Israel has bin lead by Christ Jesus, out of
spiritual Egypt, through the red sea of his baptism, to pass through the
wilderness of this world, unto the celestial Canaan, where they shall appear
in Sion. Now beloved, what is this keeper unto Israel? not only no sleeper,
but also free from all slumber: he never lays his eyes together, as though he
were weary with watching: Psalm. 34.15. The eyes of the Lord are upon the
righteous, and his ears are open to their cries: neither has he any need to
close them up; for it is only proper unto the creatures, that are wearied with
laboring and watching; but the Lord is no more weary in his care for the
whole world, then he is for one of the heirs of thy head. See it in his
Saints: he preserved Noe in the great deluge, Abraham and Lot in all their
dangers, Jacob could not be hurt of Esau, nor Joseph in prison, Moses cannot
perish in the river, nor Israel in the iron furnace: and therefore the heathen
by the light of nature, could paint out providence in Argos with an hundred
eyes; so that if one were at rest, yet another might be waking: but the Lord is
totus oculus, nothing but eye, and therefore all comfort to them, for whom he
watches for good and not for evil.

Use 1. Reprehension: first, the confutation of the wicked, that think by
their disorder to confound the Lord: indeed man is confounded in many law
causes, and knows not to what heads to bring some crimes, that so they may be
judged, but the Lord will not miss his scope for all their confusion. Secondly,
a correction of the godly, that depend no more upon God; is God thus excellent?
Oh then I will never be from his elbowe; I will keep me to my station, that so
when my God shall call, I may be in readiness.

Use 2. Instruction: first, admonition to the wicked, that for shame they set
something in order, and leave not all in heaps, seeing the God of heaven means
to visit their houses. Secondly, let the^ be admonished to deal better with
their neighbors, and bandle them more gently, for that must come on their
skore. The other use, is a direction to the godly, concerning the faithful
carriage of themselves in this world. Let them have as little to do with the
wicked as they can; for every secret of them shall be brought to light. How
would a man tremble, when he knows that any person is detected for villainies
with whom he had to do? be none of their receivers, for they are thieves, and
they will endanger every one of the law that has any thing to do with them.

Use 3. Consolation unspeakable, that the Lord will have the handling of all
matters: first in thy necessities: have thou any wrongs offered thee? be of
good comfort, for the Judge is for thee; have thou any trialls? be exceeding
joyful, the matter shall be carried on thy side, against the face of all thy
adversaries: have thou lost any thing by thieves and wicked oppressors of the
world? if they now be unknown unto thee, thou shall have them then detected;
if thou know them, but can get no redress here upon earth, rest quiet thine
heart, the matter shall be amended; and for deferring of the payment, thou
shall receive the whole with all the forfeits. Secondly, in thy plenty, rejoice
in the Lord; for he orders all things to increase thy store, and to give thee
thy fill of joy.

Sect. 2. Of the placing of sin.
Set] The second argument, is the setting or placing of sin: Hos. 2.10.
from whence it is plain, that sin has wholly put man out of joint; and
alas, when this setting shall come, he shall be so forlorn, that it shall be
impossible to bring his joints into any good frame. It shall then be past time
for turning the wheel of the understanding, for disposing the will to run in
her created course; to bring the affections to good order, and place every
member of the body to become a weapon of righteousness to serve uhe Lord: and
yet there shall be a setting; even as a false piece of latin is set to the eye
of the boy from the master by the rule, and both of them corrected; the boy by
rods, the latin by pulling it in pieces, because it is so far wanting that
nothing can be made of it, that will bear good construction. Indeed the godly
are set again into the image of their creation by Christ Jesus, which has
turned man wholly again unto his creator: and these have their faults daily
corrected, and become good proficients in the school of Christ: and therefore
one day shall celebrate the happy day of their commencing, where every one
shall be made an absolute Doctor, free of all professions; not to teach, but
read a continual lecture of the praise of God, to ravish his heart with joy.

Obs. Gods justice is able to place all sin in his order and rank, that so
it may be easily seen and judged of all men. If I came into a room, and faw
all the plate set forth to the view, every dish on the table in his due place,
all the furniture for the chamber in answerable proportion, and every guest in
his due order and place set down to meat, I could easily judge of the
excellency of the feast. So surely the wicked, (alas they must expect no
feast) when God shall have mustered up all their sins, and ranked them under
their several heads, according to his law and Gospel, shall be able
sufficiently to judge what they have done amiss, to the great disquiet of
their souls. First, therefore they shall see their apostacy from God, that
kept them from pleasing of him, and made them displease him continually: from
this, will the Lord descend to let him see the transgression in this apostacy,
with the propagation of it to all posterity: he will show him that the
trangression in eating of the forbidden fruit, was an offense of an exceeding
great majesty, because it was a sacrament of the covenant of love betwixt God
the creator, and man his creature: and God forbad him as he would love him, not
to eat thereof. The love on Gods part was extraordinary, because man being by
nature changeable, had this sacrament as a seal of his constant estate of
goodness: and therefore was it called the tree of the knowledge of good. Again
on man's part, it was required that he should love constantly; or if he should
leave to serve the Lord, then was affured unto him by the same sacrament, under
Gods broad seal, his change from good to evil: and therefore was it also
called the tree of the knowledge of evil. From this tra^sgression, will the Lord
lead him by the hand to take notice of the causes, and the effects that
followed upon those causes. In the causes, he shall understand that one sort
were blameable, an other holy and good: the blameable causes both principal
and isntrumental: principal the devil, which through pride against God, and
malice against man, became liars and murderers of man, by bringing him into
sin. Man the second principal cause, by his free receiving of the devils
temptation, and harkening thereunto, contrary to the commandment of god, when
he might have resisted the same, became a joint rebel with the devil. The
isntrumental causes: first the serpent, the instrument of the devil abused,
to the seducing of the woman: the second instrument was the woman, deceived of
the devil by the serpent, became an instrument to deceive man. Then shall he
be brought to the unblameable cause, to wit, the law and commandment of God;
for had not this bin, their had bin no sin, as the Apostle says: therefore
the law, which in it self is the savor of life unto life, through the default
of man, became the savor of death unto death: and that most justly: for as an
earthen pitcher dashed by the hand against a stone wall, is truly broken of
the wall, yet no fault in the wall, but in the hand that threw it against the
wall, contrary to the command of his superior: so man like this earthen
pitcher being dashed by the devil, his own free will, the serpent, and the
woman, upon the law of God, and so broken in pieces, is no fault in the law,
but theirs that dashed him against the law. Therefore the law is no faulty
cause, but a just and holy cause of man's fall: and as the law did it, so God
did it. Now the law was no bare permitting cause, or a forsaking cause; but a
working cause even in that fall of man. Who sees not the wall to have an hand
in the breaking of the pitcher? and therefore it is idle to say, that the Lord
was but only a looker on, gave man leave to transgress, or did forsake him in
the act; for all these are false: therefore, that which he did, he was able to
do; that which he was able to do, he decreed unto his own glory, and so it
seemed good unto his wisdom; and therefore might absolutely will that as good
and just. But God commits no sin: true, as he did all this, you see there
was no fault: for what fault was there in the wall that brake the pitcher? what
fault is there in the water, that drownes a man, if he cast himself into it?
in the fire, if it burn him? surely none: therefore that which God did was
just and holy; but that which man did was a heinous sin: For God made them
the fountains and beginnings of their own actions, because they were endued
with free will to do well, that thereby they might deserve both praise and
price, I mean, ratione pacti, non absolute meriti, of bargain, and not of
simple merit: for that which the law would have given them, that we may say was
justly deserved: and on the contrary, by paritie of consequence, for ill doing
they deserved both dispraise and punishment. If then you say, God might will
sin, and not will it, which is to defend contradictions in his will: very true
is the antecedent; God did will, and not will; yet the consequent is false: for
contradictions must be of the same thing in the same respect: I may say, Appius
est coecus, and non est coecus, Appius is blind and not blind; which are no
contradictions, for they are not ad idem; there is not the same thing affirmed
and denied, but diverse: he is blind in body, but not in soul: so of the Lord;
that which he does in sin, he wills, because so sin has a respect of good,
and he wills it justly: but that which man does in sin, he wills not, but
is sore displeased with it.

Thus when the Lord has let many see their transgressions, he will carry them
on a long unto the effects that flow from these causes, as the streams from
the fountain: and these are in number three, blame, guilt, and punishment:
blame, the fault of his action in breaking Gods law: guilt, whereby he is
tied to undergo his punishment: and punishment, which is the just anger of God
upon him. Where by the way, he shall take notice of his holiness, whereby he is
so pure a God from all sin, that he cannot away with it: so likewise of his
justice, whereby he is so exactly just in himself, that he cannot but execute
justice remuneratiue and rewarding for weldoing, and inflict punishment, or
justice vindicatiue for evil doing: yet least he should complain, that summum
ius, is summa iniuria, he shall see that which Aristotle called the moderator
of justice, to wit, equity; remitting of the full extent of justice: for if
the Lord had dealt so with man, he should never had his hand off him: for
either should his justice have burnt more remissely against sin, which is
called anger; or more sharply, which is called wrath; or fully executed, which
is called revenge: for as sins be inaequalia, so should the punishment have
been in all these. Now because his justice may admit of these degrees, ratione
obiecti, you shall see the Lords (...), bringing in mercy, whereby he uses
compassion toward his creatures offending: First, his gentleness, whereby in
his justice he remembers mercy; patience, whereby he most gently suffers
sinners, and deferreth their punishment; longanimity, whereby a long time he
expects their repentance: lastly, bountifulnes, whereby he being rich in
goodness, powers forth his good gifts upon them, notwithstanding their
sins. And this they may observe by the way, in Gods setting of fin in order.

The infliction of the punishment follows by the causes. They may assure
themselves, that every one that had their hand in sin as the authors of it,
shall be punished most severely. Neither shall the instrument escape; the
devil shall have his head crushed, and all his devises brought to naught: he
shall be hardened in his sin, that he cannot repent and find mercy: and
lastly, he shall be utterly banished from heaven into the elements, which are
reserved, 2. Pet. 3.7. unto fire against the day of condemnation, and of the
destruction of them, and all ungodly men. The serpent shall not go without his
judgment: a curse shall be upon him above all the beasts of the field; enmity
betwixt him and the woman; and sensible feeling of pain in creeping on his
belly, and eating the dust of the earth. The woman, beside her common misery
with man, she shall be in subjection to her husband, full of griefs in her
conception, going with child, and travail. But for the man, his punishment
shall in special manner be ordered, wherein all his progeny may take notice
of it: his punishment shall be with sin and death: sin original, the
exorbitation of the whole man both inward in himself, and outward in the
government of the creature. Hence plainly appears, that man's wit and will
are set the wrong way; their faces clean turned from God, and therefore no
free will to do any good that may please God, but understanding and will
enough to do evil, and that continually: Again, in the neck of this,
follows actual sin, as the stream from the fountain, the branches from
the root; and this is a continual iarring of man upon outward objects: for
original sin having turned all the wrong way, it is necessary, that as
often as any wheel in man moves, it should meet a cross with every good
thing, and therefore jar upon him: yet God limits this iarring that it can
go no further then he shall direct it, to wit, unto his own glory, and some
particular good end in his Church. This sin receives degrees, (indeed the
other is equal in all, because the same measure metes it out unto all) but
this is a greater or lesser sin in respect of whom, or against whom it is
committed: likewise in respect of the matter and manner of working it, whether
it be done of knowledge, or ignorance; of infirmitis, or stubbornness, or with
an high mind: and all these stand upon two heads, sins of commission, in
doing that evil we should not do; and of omission, the not doing of good that
should be done: And all this will the Lord do in setting in order, which
shall be a just punishment upon all malefactors.

The rest of Gods method is more fearful, and better felt of man, and that
is death; the method whereof consists in the beginning and ending of it, wherein
shall be a continual loss of life, and subjection to the misery thereof,
which shall make us worse then if we had never been. This death brancheth it
self into two parts, the first and the second death: the first death, is a
subjection to the misery of this world; the inchoation and beginning whereof,
is the misery which comes by the loss of the good things of the body, as of
health; whence comes sickness, deformity, sense of nakedness, wearines,
and subjection to dangers. Secondly, subjection to the misery which comes by
the loss of external things, as of friendship, honor, rule and dominion over
the creatures: of things necessary for this life, as meat, drink, apparel,
etc. now the perfection of this death, is the going of the spirits out of the
body, whereby the soul departs from the body, and the body afterward is
resolved into the elements, especially the earth, which did bear the greatest
part in his making. The second death has this order: first, it subjects a man
to the miseries of the world to come; the beginnings whereof are in this life,
the forerunners of the extremity of woe that are to come in the next world:
the forerunners are emptiness of mind in regard of all good, ignorance of God,
terror of conscience, fleeing and hiding himself from the presence of God; or
else a deep security, and senslesnesse of misery: despair and a fearful
expectation of judgment: the perfection and consummation whereof, shall be an
eiection from the face of God, and iniection of the soul, immediately after
the first death into hell; a reservation of the body in the grave as in a
dungeon, against the day of judgment, when after the resurrection both soul
and body shall be cast into the same place, which is prepared of God for the
eternal punishment of the wicked, both angels and men; where is nothing but
weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth: there shall be found no Limbus
puerorum, or purgatory, but either heaven or hell must be their resting place.

Neither will the Lord break his method, or leave them any cauil for some
defect: with what reason can the Lord so deal with men, seeing all that we
have heard is concerning Adam? must the children smarte for the fathers sin?
I hope that God is more just. Well, consider that the Lord will not leave this
without his order: for all the posterity proceeding from Adam and Euah by
ordinary propagation, as they should have had happiness, if they had stood;
Propagation of sin.
so are they obnoxious to all these miseries, hefalling. And this is done
justly by all kind of laws: first of nations; for Adam was a prince of all his
posterity, who couenanted with God for us, as well as for himself, for
performance of obedience: therefore he breaking, we break: likewise by the law
of inheritance; he was our father, and we his heirs; he was the root of all
mankind, and we were in his loins: the manner is by imputation of the
transgression, and so consequently of blame, guilt, and punishment. Original
sin is conceived in us by our next parents, and so goes a long to all
posterity: body and soul are the excellent work of God: as if a skillful
workman should make all the wheels of a clock very artificially, but being
put into the hands of an unskillful prentice, is so disorderly set together,
that one wheel cannot go aright: so God the maker both of body and soul,
has left them to our first parents, and so consequently to our next parents to
put them together; who having lost their first standing with God, are become
not only unskillful, but also incapable of any virtue, to put together a man
brought forth in the image of God; for as this was only Gods creation, so must
it again be the new creation of God: so that man and woman being not the
causes of body and soul, but of the procreation of a third thing riing from
both, may truly be said to beget a man according to their own image and
similitude. Lastly, it is true that every man shall bear his burden; for
actual sin is not conveyed in special, but in general; so that every one
shall answer for his own actual sins, without he follow his forefathers
steps, and then shall he be punished for both, because he will needs have both
imputed unto him; the first by nature, the second by imitation. Therefore if
man may see in this world thus much of Gods placing of sin, (for this is but
our observation:) what shall then this God of all order do, when he shall not
only set it forth, but apply it to our hearts and consciences? then shall we
experimentally know the causes of all our mischeife; the consequents in the
guilt of conscience, and the punishments both upon soul and body: so that
that which is in this world both sin and punishment, shall be felt of us in
hell, in no other regard but as punishment. In this world we have had some
pleasure in sin, but in hell all shall be only in torment: the miseries of
the body in this world have vexed us, and the soul has been senseless of
punishment; but in hell, both body and soul shall have exquisite sense of
Gods anger, wrath, and vengeance; and the soul shall then exceed in feeling.
And this is the setting of sin in his place and order.

Reas. 1. Because things must be separated: Now method alone is the true
diuider of things, and makes every one to rainne and hasten to his home: we
see how every creature makes have, until he be come to the place in which
alone he can rest: sin therefore which is frozen with many things, that it
ought never to have touched, and will not out of them, because then he knows
not where to have rest; must needs be^ disioyned, else would all lie together in
a confusion. You see how cold congeales together water, earth, sticks, stones,
and many disagreeing natures: but when the fire comes, it dissolueth and
parts them, and makes every one appear in his nature: So method finding
men and their sins all on heaps, disioynes them, lets them see what is Gods,
what is their own. But because men are blind, and will see nothing; God has
prepared hell fire, to dissolve these frozen souls, that they may see what a
strange confusion they have made of the works of Gods hands by their own.

Reas. 2. Is perspicuitie and clear knowledge. The only rule of perspicuitie,
is method; and therefore sin being fullest of darkness, had need of the
best help to make all clear, and evident; especially seeing that sin is one
of the haters of light. The darkness of the night opposes the day; and
likewise the day the night; we see the morning expells the darkness, and the
appearance of the Sun makes the shadows of the night part away: they that
have gotten themselves into holes and rocks, must be pulled out off their dens
by violence. A theife or murderer that has gotten a hole, fights like a
bear, and roares, before men can draw him into the open view of the world:
and he comes to Gods judgment seat as bears unto a stake. They that have
seen villains pulled out of their holes, may mark them to look like fiends
coming out of hell: therefore great need of method that must clear so hard
causes as these are, and bring all things unto the light.

Reason 3. Judgment, which can not begiuen before evidence have bin brought
in; and therefore must method needs clear all the bills and inditments that
are to be brought in against wicked and evil doers, that so judgment may be
truly and substantially delivered.

Reason 4. Because of the consciences of wicked men, which have bin so long
accustomed to sin, that they are so confufed, that they can give no evidence
against the sinner; therefore must the Lord needs use his method, before
conscience can any way assist the Lord in his judgment.

Reason 5. Gods glory, which must shine brightly out of all works, even out of
the works of darkness; which cannot be imagined without method: the glory
of a stately building is not seen in the confused mass of it lying upon the
earth, but when it is reared up to the view of the whole world.

Reason 6. Multitude of offenses: now we can do nothing with multitudes,
unless we bring them unto some heads. How should a just account be taken of
all sin, if the Lord should not sum them up into some general? and how
should the general be proved, except the order of the specials might be seen
how they were contained in the general?

Reason 7. Quick dispatch. If truths were to be tried by Syllogismes with the
Lord, it would be a long time before all arguments should be brought in, and
every conclusion inferred. Again, much time would be spent, in proving of every
doubtful proposition, and great dispute might be held on this side and on
that: therefore the Lord will speedily finish all in an exact method, which is
always full of brevity and perspicuitie.

Reason 8. Remembrance: neither God nor man should be able to carry in mind the
sins of the world but for method: we might wonder how the Lord should tell us
all that ever we have done, except it were for this rule of method: and man
could never make any good account out of his broken and crafie memory, except
the Lord by his own method should help him. Methodus matter memoriae.

Use 1. Reprehension: first a confutation of the wicked, that think as they
have done all in the darkness, so the darkness shall cover them for ever: but
Psalm. 139.12. the darkness hides not from thee, but the night shines as the
day, the darkness and light are both a like. Secondly, correction of the
godly, that are troubled about this point more then any thing in the world.
Psalm. 37. and Psalm. 73. and Psalm. 77

Use 2. Instruction: first admonition of the godly, to consider what is the
cause of all disorder, and the true rule of all reformation: he ought to
correct his heart, in judging so hardly of religion; for that often is made of
him the cause of all trouble. Again, to reform that general cry; the poor
they cry against the rich, and the rich against the poor; the prodigal person
against the covetous, and the covetous against the spend-thrift; the man of
pleasure against the stupid person, and the stupid person against the man of
pleasure: all cry out against sin, and if every man's cry were true, then no
man should prove a sinner: but the cry plainly shows, that totus mundus
positus est in maligno, the whole world is overflowed with sin, but no man
will see it in himself. Well, a good method would remedy all this. Thirdly,
this may admonish the wicked, that they have variety of sins, because method
is a disposition of variety: for what order can be seen in one thing?
Fourthly, that sins are linked together: for method is of one thing under
another, and so draws in another: and therefore it were good they would
consider of that drawing of sin as with cart ropes. Fifthly, to take notice
that God can make his light shine upon their dunghills, even to reveal them,
and set them in open view: therefore let them be more wary, for the least of
their secrets shall not escape this light. Sixthly, let them know that they
shall have their sins propounded to their own view, and to the view of the
whole world: for method propounds every thing to be veiwed. Seventhly, that
this shall open the whole mystery of sin: for there is one word more that
sets forth the very form of method, and that is an orderly placing of all
things: for a man may be a long time setting on the score, but never in any
good order: for our frequenters of Alehouses set on a pace, but never in any
good order; so sinners set on a pace: they draw many a score for future
payment: but their lines are so confused, that if they would at any time cast
up their accounts, it would be impossible for th^^^ therefore has the Lord
well put in those words, in order; so that now they may he assured that the
reckoning shall come to some issue: surely setting much on the score among men
often times makes broken reckonings, and so they fall together to quarrelling,
and spend much more at the law: but this shall be removed by the Lord; for
this placing in order shall be done presently; for the Lord in a brief table
will bring unto remembrance all his sins. I said in my law, thou shall have
none other gods before me: now know that before me were all things, and mine
eyes saw all things in a moment; and therefore from this law I show that thou
have had many thousand gods before me, which now I set before thee. Secondly, I
commanded thee to take heed of making any image or similitude of me; but thou
have made as many of me, as thou have thought thoughts; for every thought of
thee was to make me like thy self; and therefore if in an hour thou can
think multitudes of thoughts; then conceive that in thy whole life thou have
had a world of idolatrous thoughts. Thirdly I said, that my name was a glorious
name; and therefore bad thee be exceeding careful of it; yet many ways have
thou taken it in vain, in thought, word, and deed: In thought thou have
tashly conceived of me; how often have thou advisedly, and with great
deliberation, prepared thy self to speak of me? nay alas, how often has
there started out out of thy mouth, O God, O Lord, O Jesus, O Christ, etc. if
thy mouth when thou wast an infant can testify of this, that thou never shed a
tear, without, O Lord, in thy mouth: then wast thou unwise, and knew not the
value of this name: and since thy infancy, thou have turned thy faculty and
ability in this thing to an exquisite habit, and ready promptness; so that
without either s^utting or stammering, thou can at every word fling out, a
Lord have mercy upon us; but with what aduisednesse, all that hear thee may
easily judge. Secondly, how often have thou set thy thoughts above Gods? and
given more honor unto thy own name, then unto Gods? surely thy trust and
confidence in thy self, will be a plain argument for this. For words: first,
for idle words; what swarms of them have thou brought forth: secondly, profane
speeches, blasphemous oaths, cursing of Gods providence, in wishing
mischeifes, and plagues upon thy poor creatures, whether men or beasts: and
many rotten words which this my law will presently reckon unto thee. For my
Sabbaths, how have thou sanctified them in thy self, and all that belong unto
thee? have thou not profaned them thy self, and set all thy servants to do the
same? well, in a word, there was never a Sabbath spent in the whole course of
thy life, that I had any glory at all by, and look thou not for any jot of
glory with me. Fifthly, for thy father and mother, and all thy superiors; how
have thou honored them? let thy conscience tell thee how often thou have
cursed the King in thy privy chamber? how often thou have contemned my
Magistrates? how often rebelled against father and mother? For murder, my law
is but a word, thou shall no^ kill: yet how often have thou murdered thy
brother in thought, word, and deed? Thou shall not commit adultery: but often
have thou run in consent with adulterers; and when thou could accomplish thy
desire, thou wast not wanting in the practice. For stealing, how often has thy
neighbor suffered wrong by thee? For false witness, thou have not ceased to
slander, and falsely to accuse thine own mothers son. For coveting that
which is not thine own, thou have not ceased night nor day from this offense:
And therefore think of this order, and thou shall have a volume of sins come
into thy mind. For I may term thy conscience nothing, but lex applicata: for
when these things shall be applied unto thy conscience, thou shall sufficiently
be resolved of this setting sin in order. Many admonitions more might be
given, but these shall suffice.

The second instruction is for the godly, that they walk circumspectly, not as
fools, but as wife, redeeming the time, because the days are evil: and so
much the rather, because by this means God shall be more glorified in the
condemnation of the wicked: for it is natural unto men to excuse themselves by
others: Why are you so strict in our accounts with us? you can wink at others
that have been as backward as we have been, and therefore in equity you
might have considered our estate with others, and though we have deserved all
you propound against us, yet we plead the law of nature against you: this you
have stamped in every one of us, quod tibi non vis, alterine feceris, ergo
quod alijs non vis, nobis ne feceris: if this be seemly to others and praise
worthy, I pray you let the same praise redound unto you by us. Beloved in the
Lord, let us stop the mouths of the wicked in this plea: Know you not that
the Saints shall judge the world? therefore keep your selves blameless and
unspotted of the world. Romans 2.21. thou which teach another, teach thou
not thy self? thou that preachest a man should not steal, do thou steal?
thou that say a man should not commit adultery, do thou commit
adultery? thou that abhorrest Idols, commitest thou sacrilege? thou that
gloriest in the law, through breaking the law, dishonourest thou God? for the
name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles, through you: so beloved, will it
be said when we shall come to judge the wicked; Sit you to judge me according
to the law, when you your selves have done against the law? They may well turn
it off, as the drab did in the Commedie, nam si ego digna hac contumelia sum
maxim, at tu indignus qui faceres tamen: well may I grant the fault, but that
thou should charge me with it, that I utterly renounce. Seeing therefore God
will honor us, in making us accompany him in his judging of the world, let us
purge our selves from all evil, while we accompany the wicked in this world
by necessity of cohabitation; that so we may even truly detect that colored
pretended holiness of the wicked, 1. Pet. 2.1. malice, guile, hypocrisy. Malice
is the root, guile is the means of performance, and hypocrisy is the cloak
to cover all. Therefore let us take willingly the Apostles exhortation, laying
aside all maliciousnes, and all guile, and dissimulation, and envy, and evil
speaking, as newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that we may
grow thereby, and so gather sufficient strength to glorify God, and stand out
against the wicked.

Use 3. Consolation: first to all distressed souls, that they shall see all
redressed, which has grieved them in this life. Secondly, in all prosperity to
be as wise as the wicked in their generations: the unjust steward knowing that
his master would put him out of his office, prouides before the time for
himself: so surely the things of this world, which through our abuse are
become our masters, and we the unjust disposers of them, will one day turn us
out of our office: and therefore let us make some good use of them while we have
them. Two men walking together, and having a dog to follow them, as long as
they go together, no man can justly tell who is the owner, but when they part,
the dog will follow his master: even so in the world, while we walk in it, no
man knows who ownes the goods of the world; yet when the world and we part, it
shall plainly appear that they were the goods of the world, and so they return
unto the owner: therefore happy is he that has made him friends of them, that
so God may receive him into his tabernacle. That nation that for the space of
three years would allot unto their prince all that he could wish, but when his
three years were expired, then was he to be banished for ever into the worst
place they could imagine, and there to live in misery the rest of his life: one
prince among all the rest is commended, for that the whole time of his glory, he
gathered together and fent over beforehand, into the Isle whether he should
be banished all necessaries: so that after he was removed from his throne of
dignity, he lived a more comfortable life then all the time of his pomp in
the world. So surely every Christian laboring in this world to use all good
blessings of God to his glory, shall be sure to find store of heavenly
blessings when they shall part with this world: he were a fool that travailing
by the high way, and being exceeding thirsty, and meeting with a pleasant
river, could not be content to satisfy the thirst of his soul, and so let the
river run on, but he would divert the course of the river another way: so
every man that lives in this world, and can not be content to use the things
of this world, for all his necessities they can supply unto him; but he will
change the course of them, and think that they shall for ever bless him; and
give his soul rest, not for many years, but for ever. Alas, he is deceived
with them, and therefore Paul, 1. Tim. 6.17. Charge them that are rich in this
world, that they be not hie minded, and that they trust not in uncertain riches,
but in the living God, which gives us abundantly all things to enjoy: that
they do good, and be rich in good works, and ready to distribute and
communicate, laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the
time to come, that they may obtain eternal life: therefore may they be a way
unto our happiness, if God give us grace to use them a right. Now I come to
the object, which is disorder.

Sect. 3. Concerning the object of this order.
Them] The object of Gods disposing justice, are the sins of the hypocrit,
which are indeed nothing but disorder and confusion; and therefore in reason
rather an opposite to order, then any object: but the excellency of all rules
is such, that they are not only able to judge themselves, but also the
contrary. This disorder we may plainly see in the first of Romans from the 21.
ver. to the end: First, of the mind, vanity and blindness; vanity in strange
purposes, blindness in the performance of them, and disorder which runs with
them both, and suffers nothing to be carried unto his end: and therefore
makes all the purposes of wicked men to end in vanity. Disorder is the high
way to vanity; and blindness is the only guide to disorder: so that blindness,
disorder, and vanity, are three inseparable companions. This blindness is of
the best eye, and therefore how great is that darkness? Secondly, from the mind
this disorder runs a long to the will and affections; and these are the more
strong, because the devil helps to drive them: and as we say in our common
proverb, he will run fast whom the devil drives: and therefore the Apostle
shows how disorderedly they gave themselves to all sin: therefore Job 11.12.
tells us that vain man would be wise, though man newborn is like a wildasse
colt. Hence the Apostle calls their mind reprobate; (...).
which word may be understood either actiuely, or passiuely: actiuely, that
they disprooue all good courses: passiuely, that they are disprooued and
disallowed of God. Thirdly, from understanding, will, and affections, they
proceed to strange disorder in life and conversation: and therefore v. 28.
they are said to do^ those things which are not convenient: which in particular
are expressed in the 29, 30, and 31. v. The word in the Original, is (...),
which includes two things, (...), neither duty, nor decorum; so that they
miss every action in the substance, and in the circumstance. Duty is wanting,
therefore the form of the action is spoiled: decency is also unperformed, and
therefore no good manner is observed by the wicked. Therefore wicked men are
like to themselves within and without; for knowledge, will, and affection, they
are disordered at home; for life and conversation abroad.

Observe. Hence then it follows, that Sin is nothing but disorder and
confusion, and that sinners are the only disordered and confused persons in
the world. First, for the confusion of sin: see it in regard of all times.
God has from the beginning of the world, made the times of his mercy and
Justice appear; and yet sin has so obscured them, that a man can not
discern, whether men were more holy in the time of the Law, or now in the
Gospel. Indeed in the 2. of Tit. v. 11. it is said, that the grace of God that
brings salvation unto all men has appeared, and teaches us that we should
deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts: and that we should live soberly, and
righteously, and holily in this present world: but alas, ungodliness and worldly
lusts put forth themselves, as evidently as they did when the Lord kept back
his glorious appearance of grace. Some Christians celebrate a Christmas day
indeed, which if the name only were changed, a man might judge it to be a day
of Bacchus, the feast of Epicures, rather then the feast of Saints. Again, it
has made a confusion of all places: for how shall Christians distinguish
betwixt the heathen gentiles that never knew the Lord, and them that have made
a profession of his name? surely if it were not the work of the Lord, many of
their works would testify, that Gentilisme, Iudaisme, Atheism, and
Christianisme, were all one. Thirdly, it has made a confusion of all Callings,
insomuch that no man can distinguish by the lives of men, betwixt a calling,
and a recreation: for if recreations be not callings, then many a gentleman
will prove himself to have no calling. Fourthly, in actions, good or bad;
neceffarie, or indifferent; seasonable, or unseasonable, sin makes all one.
Fifthly, of persons, old or young; prince or people, magistrate or mean
persons, superior or inferior, Pastor or flock, all is one: for sin, will
set the boy against the aged; people, Prince; inferiors, superiors, and all
shall be of the same profession. And God tells Israel, Ose. 4.9. there shall be
like people, like priosts; which bears the same sense in all the rest. And
therefore if we look into court and country, city and town, village and
house, we shall see sin will be the quartermaster. Hence ambition will order
all in the court; covetousness in the country, pride in the city, deceit in
the town, drunkenness, theft, and swilling in villages; contentions and
brawling in families, the wife against the husband, and the husband against the
wife, father against the son, and servant against master; so that he that
would epsy out any order in the world, may not with Diogenes, take a candle at
noone day, go up and down the market to spy out an honest man; but if he were
compassed about with all the stars in heaven, and had all the light in the
world, he were not able to spy out any order in any corner of the world,
except that which the Lord himself has done, and will perfectly accomplish
hereafter. And as sin is in all these, so are sinners; the ox knows his
owner, and the ass his masters crib; the crane, turtle, and swallow their
appointed times; but even Israel has not known, Gods people has not
understood. For place, if God shall say unto man, as he did unto Moses, Exodus
3.5. Moses, Moses, put thy shoes off thy feet, for the place whereon thou
stand is holy ground; Christ may say, my house shall be called a house of
prayer; and the Preacher may say to every one, take heed unto your feet, when
ye come into the house of God; yet none shall with Moses, put off his shoes,
hide his face, be afraid to look upon God: for they will stare him in the
face, even standing in all their filthiness: they will make the house of God, a
den of thieves: and for all that the Preacher has said, be so far from
hearing, that they will offer without all controlment the sacrifice of fools.
For Callings, it is as easy to pull the stars from heaven, as to make some
gentlemen leave their pleasures, or they that are given to a wandering life, to
set themselves to some honest calling, whereby they may glorify God, profit
Church and Commonwealth, and live honestly among their neighbors. For
actions, men neither care for honesty, nor dishonestie, but rush into sin,
as the horse does into the battle; and drink in iniquity, as the fish does
water. As for persons, what care and conscience make men of their company?
they can shake hands with every body, be most at ease with the wicked, and
solace themselves with those that hate God. And therefore the point is clear,
that the world is full of disorder, and confusion. The reasons whereof are
these;

Reas. 1. Because that sin and sinners, break all Gods limits, and will be
kept within no compass, until the Lord take sin and sinners, and chain
them up for ever, with the devil in hell.

Reas. 2. Because sin confounds all men's memories: for take a sinner, either
in Church or Commonwealth, to give accounts either to God or man, of that
which they trusted him withal, and you shall find him so confounded with the
spending of his masters goods, that he cannot tell justly how any penie is put
forth for his masters profit: therefore at the day of judgment, when the Lord
shall call for his talents, wicked men shall be so confounded, that they have
nothing to say, but away with me wretch into the place of my torments.

Reas. 3. Is from the nature of sin, which accepts of all without
distinction: it cares not how it comes by any thing, whether by hook or by
crook (as we say:) and therefore sin being a great gatherer, and keeping no
book, either of receipts or expenses, must needs make confusion when it comes
to the reckoning: and therefore neither the giver, nor the spender, shall have
any profit by it.

1. Use reprehension: First, confutation of the wicked, that make no account of
the day of Gods reckoning with them: but let them be assured, that Gods book
is neither crossed, nor made up in this world: and therefore must they look to
answer hereafter. Secondly, correction to the godly, that can not be content to
let God be crossing his book in this world, by afflicting and punishing of
them: let them know, that God is just, and sin must have smart: therefore
either in this world, or in the world to come: and blessed is he that has it
in this world.

2. Use instruction: First, admonition to the wicked, to show them plainly,
that if they will have their fill of sin in this world, they shall have their
payment of it hereafter: and therefore if they will stand to their task, they
shall be sure to stand to their peril. Secondly, direction to the godly, that
they awake, and strengthen the things which remain; remember what they have
received and heard, concerning the Lord Jesus, and hold it fast, and repent of
their wants; least he come on them as a thief, and they know not what hour
shall be the time of his approach.

3. Use consolation, in all estates to him that disposes his way aright;
because the Lord will show unto him, the salvation of his soul. Psalm. 50.23.

And thus much concerning the Order of Gods Justice in the Cause, Form, and
Effect.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Sir JOHN CROFTS, a true lover of learning, Grace and
Peace.
BEING well persuaded (right Worsh.) both of your good knowledge in Gods holy
truth, and of your unfeigned affection thereunto, I could not but in love and
duty, present you with some: part of my labors. I have reserved unto you the
last part of my book, but not the least part of my love: the last is sometimes
the best, and I doubt not but the experience of Gods love toward you, will
constrain you to confess this last to be the best, seeing I am fully
persuaded, that you know that there is nothing like unto the feast of a good
conscience. The reason why I would withold the Reader a little in suspense,
is for that I have wearied him with a large discourse, and as yet have given
him no refreshment: therefore being (...) in the last period of my text, which
is the placing of sin before the conscience, a torment most lamentable,
woeful, and miserable, I should utterly break his heart, if I should give him
no breathing. No strappade, rack, wheel, or any exquisite torture ever
invented by the wit of man is comparable to this. The Poets have ma^ked this
under the furies of hell, whose hayres on their heads they have, compared to
snakes, their eyes to sparkling fire, their faces grim and griesly, their hands
full of burning torches, etc. The mask being taken off, the moral will
prove no fable, but a plain expression of the greatest horror and distress
of mind, that possibly can be imagined: no physickeeither by purgation can
dispatch this humor; or cordialls by their sweetest spirits, drine these
spirits from the trembling heart: No surgerie either by corrasiue, can eat it
out; lenitiue, mitigate and assuage the pain; oils mollify, or salues cure.
Friendship by love, labor, entreaty, gifts, ransomes, pledges, etc. may
deliver a man out of prison: but who can unlock the prison doors of the
conscience, knock off the bolts, heal up the wounds, refresh the decayed
spirits of a sorrowful mind? if there were but one of a thousand, he were
better then millions of gold and silver: but alas, there is but one in all the
world, and he seems to be so far remote, that the conscience dare never once
imagine, that if he were sent for he would make any have to come in time. Power
and commaundmay recover a man from banishment, but what command shall prevail
with the powers of darkness, and the gates of hell? Authority and timecan we
are out reproach: but eternity it self cannot out-last this sorrow: no
countenance can bear it out, or favor releive it: this dies not when we die,
but makes us live, when with all our hearts we would be dead. Therefore (right
Worsh.) patronage a few verses of a bad Poet: I have desired to make them
sauourie meat: if they taste harshly, excuse the cook for his good will, as
ready to make amends in the next service: if they want art, or be dressed
without their sugared sauce, I hope a good appetite will serve instead of that
service. And the rather I offer them unto your self, because I have made bold
to dress them with some of your fire, and I doubt not but in regard thereof,
they will be a little the warmer: and though I would not wish that any man
should scald himself with ouer-hasty tasting; yet do I wish with all my
heart, that the fire of your zeal against the sacrilegious patrones of our
days, might a little dissolve the cold and frozen hearts of these robbers of
Churches, to work in them a better respect unto Gods people, and the good of
their own souls. And so praying the Lord to make your heart stable and
unblameable in holiness, I commit you to his grace in Christ Jesus.

August. 10. 1615. Yours in all good affection, JOHN YATES.

(...). The commodity which no man may neglect to buy, or dare to sell.
GRace more then grace, and virtue then her pay,
He pays not well, that loves her but a day:
The day is yours, and virtue is the prize,
The gain is great, if that no more arise.
The world does buy to sell, and sell to buy,
But few there be that trade the truth to try.
The precious truth is bought, but not to sell,
And he that gains so much does trade full well.
But many sell that never care to buy,
Profane like Esau of their birthright cry:
Alas, that cry is great, when they with grief
Shall seek with tears, and go without releife.
Worlds praise to spend, but pity to be spent,
And loose lifes-lease for payment of Gods rent.
To spinne the thread of thraldom is man's ill,
And weaue the web of woe is all his will:
But he that wears the garment shall complain,
Which cannot hide him for disgrace and pain.
Lets leave this trash, in others feeke due praise,
Which I confess is rare in these our days:
Where be the learned Patron of our age,
That sooner give, then take, and spare to rage?
Presume who dare their gifts without his gifts,
Or undertake to strive at these dead lifts.
To win to wear, is under, over, take,
And less then this to thee no friends can make.
Will a book make a man, part with his best --
-- Living (I mean) for everliving rest?
This is right Macenas, that learning knows,
Rewards the man before his gifts he shows:
Rare to be sound, and less the greater shame,
No shame to speak, if any bear this name.
Who fault can find when deeds examples make,
And teach what others ought to undertake?
To undertake is for to match him right,
In virtue, good, but money is too light.
A living White, the center of your love,
Though dead, from White the center cannot move.
Oh worthy White, name, nature do contend,
And nature more, then can thy name pretend.
Thy learning, life, and name were all one white,
Let Papists shoot, they will never hit this white.
Once living White, now dead, yet living more
And walks in white, where heart was long before.
Who loved thy gifts, and yet of gifts would none,
But he that cared for thee, and thine, now gone.
Though rich in grace, yet poorer in estate,
For crosses thick befell thee now of late.
Thy Patron which in love did thee advance.
Now pity takes of thine in their hard chance.
To living and the dead, this is great love,
And may compassion much in others move.
To Lancashier thy pains much good did bring,
And from thy words their welfare long may sing.
Thou changed thy charge, and still did pains discharge,
Yet in a church where grace had small enlarge.
Change of pasture (in proverb) make fat calfes,
But nature says to sheep often rot'nes falls.
Greenham had pasture green, but sheep full lean,
Yet change of charge made pasture far more mean.
Whites flock both green and white for har^est made,
And wonder was, what good success he had.
But Barnham was to him more barren soil,
Small fruit did spring from labor and his toil.
Oh cursed crew, that will your sins pursue,
And never cease till hell be for your due.
I call, as he did often cry, Repent
Before your time, for mercy all be spent.
Judge this your sad affliction springs from sin,
To whip out folly, and let wise dome in.
Arraigned must you be before your judge,
For many crimes: that never here you grudge.
These things have thou done,]
The more these things are known the less the care,
And less the care, the more these things you dare.
The sincere Judge, no work, nor persons spares,
Done, thou, and these, to every man he shares.
I held my tongue,]
Soon may be speak in wrath that holds his tongue,
And recompense your sins for all this wrong.
Thou thoughtest I was like thee,]
A thought as far from good, as Gods from ill,
To think and judge a like, is all your will.
I will reprove thee]
I will reprove, is not a word in vain,
For God will strike, and vengeance is the pain.
Set them in order before thee.]
Confusion great in sin, and sinners stays,
But God that knows, can order all their ways.
To order sin, before the sinners face,
Is woeful pay for running of that race.
Conclusion.
It is your crown and honor, to maintain
Gods precious Church, though others it disdain.
Well have you run, run on with speed apace,
Your gain, no doubt, shall glory be and grace.
Grace here on earth, and glory far above,
This life well spent, a better life shall prove.
CHAP. VII. Concerning the fearful apprehension of the Conscience, in these
words, before thee.
THe Original has it, in thine eyes, that is, in the eyes of the conscience,
which is the best judge in the world, and the hardest to be corrupted; it is
no receiver of bribes, but the true applyer of the law to every fact, whether
good or evil; it deals with man either by absoluing or condemning; Nature of
conscience.
before God it either accuses, or excuses. Hence conscientia, quasi scientia
qualis quisquis sit: a true knowledge what manner of person every man is. 1.
Ioh. 3.20. If our heart condemn us, God is greater then our heart, and knows
all things: if our heart condemn us not, then have we boldness toward God:
this Paul found in himself, 1. Cor. 4.4. but he would not justify himself
by it. This on the contrary, made the accusers of the woman taken in
adultery, creep out one after another, Ioh. 8.9. In all men this bears
witness of the law of God written in their hearts, Romans 2.15. It calls old
sins to remembrace, and makes men afraid of the punishment of the^, Genesis
50.15. It is a grievous wound for sin committed, and always cries vengeance,
Genesis 4.14. By custom of sin, the conscience is become fleshie, (not soft,
but hardened:) First, that it loses all feeling of sin, Ephesians. 4.19. and
secondly, incurable by any ordinary surgerie, for as a Schirrous place in the
body, or that which is become to have a Canker in it; oils will not mollify
it, plasters and salues cannot heal it up, only a hot iron must burn it out,
and so bring the place again to feeling: so many a man's conscience is so
hardened, that nothing will cure it, but hell fire, and the worm that never
dies, 1. Timoth. 4.2. I have showed how many ways the conscience is brought
to feeling: the hot yrons that God uses, are in number three: The first is
some general amazement or astonishing of the heart, by some sudden, fearful,
and extraordinary judgment, Dan. 5.9. The second, is made hot by some
particular acknowledgement of some particular sin, Matthew. 27.3. Lastly, by
the last judgment, Reu. 20 12.

Conscience quiet and not good, Kinds of conscience.
is of the secure and careless liver; good but not quiet, is of the broken and
contrite spirit, which the Lord will never despise: the conscience neither
quiet nor good, is of the desperate sinner: quiet and good, is of the Christian
come from under the storm and tempest of temptation, and resting in the sweet
sense and feeling of the mercies of his God in Christ Jesus, sealed unto him by
the testimony of the spirit of God. The conscience meant in this place, is the
quiet, but not good conscience, awaked by the fearful judgments of God to
tremble and fear: Zecha. 5. until the flying book came forth, which is the
curse of God, the woman (which is wickedness,) sitting in the midst of the
Ephah, is pressed with a weight of lead, and stirs not: but now the Lord,
even by a weak means of two women, having the wind in their wings, lifts up
the Ephah between the earth and the heaven, and then the whole earth which
sits at quiet, shall be moved and established for ever in the land of
darkness and oblivion. Therefore because the Lord knows that he shall find
the whole world asleep when he comes to judgment, bids them that love him
watch, and take heed of security.

Observe. Of all miseries that can befall man, none like to the setting of sin
before the eyes of the conscience. The Lord in this Psalm is extraordinarily
offended with the hypocrite: and for his plague he puts this one for all, I
will set thy sins before thee. Alas, The children of God often wrestle with
horror of conscience.
the children of God often feel the wrath of God kindled against their souls,
and anguish of conscience most intolerable, and can find (notwithstanding
continual prayers, and incessant supplication made unto the Lord) no release,
but in their own judgment stand reprobate from Gods covenant, and void of all
hope of his inheritance, expecting the consummation of their misery, and
fearful sentence of eternal condemnation; when perhaps these are but
temptations rising from their own nature; or else without them, by the
malicious enemy Satan; or from such allurements or terrors which the world
tosseth us with all: in these Satan is a worker, beside his own peculiar
manner of tempting, which is possession, or a more liberty and freedom to the
tempted of sorrow and despair, and quick dispatch of themselves. For comfort
of the godly I will instance a little in these lesser temptations, and then I
will enlarge them to the wicked whose cause is desperate.

Of our own natures spring the temptations which rise of the root of
original sin, The spring and fountain of all temptations.
without any foreign instigation from the world, whatsoever is either a bait
of pleasure, or fright of terror, which increase the actual sins springing
from the original root, and lay as it were compass, and powers on water to
that ungracious stock, to make it grow the faster: Now all these temptations
are not of that dangerous nature that this is of: here must we attend with
patience the issue, which not only is certain, but also shall come in the best
time. The corporal inhabiting of Satan, is the greatest, fullest of terror
and despair, that can befall the godly: yet the history of the deeds and
sayings of Christ, the writing of the Evangelists, do testify of whole legions
dispossessed of that habitation, by the power of Christ mercifully extended
upon such miserable captives: which examples serve against like times of
affliction, that we give not over hope, though millions of devils should
possess us within, and enuiron us without: but know his power to be above all
force of the enemy, and his mercy far surmounting Satan's malice: therefore
Gods children have no cause in this sort to fear, nor have any shadow of
ground, whereon they should resolve against themselves upon the point of
reprobation: but that all these molestations and terrors which they now
endure, are temptations rather of their father for good and profit, then
grounded resolutions of such lamentable issue.

Again, The order of the devil in drawing Gods elect into Atheism, and so on
concerning his soul, religion, or faith.
for more praticular examination, I find by daily experience, that these are as
well the operations of fancy from melancholy, as of conscience for sin:
that method of which temptation, I find for the most part to run in this
order: First to call into question, whether there be any God or no; for
melancholy is a disputing humor. Secondly, when reason has mastered that,
then the second question is about the immortality of the soul. When that
again is conquered, there enters a third question, whether we profess the true
religion, or no. When that is expelled, the fourth question, that makes the
greatest tumult in the soul, is whether we have any part or portion in that
which it promises. Here the devil is exceeding busy; for if this be resolved
on, he is wholly cast out, and has nothing further to trouble us withal. Any
of the former doubts would have sunk our souls: for if no God, then why
should I abstain from my sinful pleasures? If again no refurrection, then
why should I vex my self in this world? If my religion be false, then must I
have a new; and twenty to one but I change amiss, and therefore I will be of no
religion: but when I shall begin to think I have no faith in Gods promises;
Whether melancholy be the affliction of conscience.
then alas, what shall comfort me? Therefore consider these questions: first,
whether the conscience of sin, and the afflictions thereof, be melancholy or
not: secondly, what is the difference: thirdly, the afflictions of mind, to
what persons they befall, and by what means: fourthly, what may be the
consolation. And so from this setting before the eyes of the conscience only in
appearance, I will proceed to the real, and that which the Lord will do to the
hypocrite in this place.

For the first, Difference betwixt them.
the affliction of conscience is quite another thing then melancholy; as may
appear out of the second question by the differences: First, in the causes: 1.
Causes.
the one is a mere fancy, without all true and just ground, and is only
raised upon disorder, or humor in the fancy, and rashly delivered to the
heart, which upon natural credulity fares in passion, as if it were indeed,
whereof the fancy gives a false alarm: But the other is a sorrow and fear
upon cause, and that the greatest cause that works misery unto man.
Secondly, 2. Effects
in the effects: In that of conscience, the body is ofttimes in firm state of
health, perfect in complexion, and perfect in shape, and all symmetrie of his
parts, the humors in quantity and quality, not exceeding nor wanting their
natural proportion: but in the other, the complexion is depraved; obstructions
spoil the course of humor and spirit, whereby the blood becomes ouer-grosse,
thick, and impure, and nature so disordered, that diverse melancholic
persons, have judged themselves strange creatures, as history will plainly
record. Thirdly, 3. Subject.
in the subject: The senses in the other both inward and outward are ofttimes
perfect, the imagination sound, the heart well compact, and resolute, and this
excepted, want no courage: but in the other, both inward sense and outward are
too feebled; the fancy overtaken with ghastly fumes of melancholy, and the
whole force of the spirit closed up in the dungeon of melancholy: darkness
imagines all dark, black and full of fear, their hearts are either
ouertender and rear, and so easily admit the passion; or over close of nature,
serve more easily to imprison the cheerful spirit, the causes of comfort to
the rest of the body. Hence they are faint hearted without occasion, only
driven with the tide of that humor to fear even in the midst of security.
4 From the original.
Fourthly, they differ in the fountain and original of them; the one begins
in the minds apprehension; the other in the distempered humor, which deluding
the organicall actions, abuses the mind, and draws it into erroneous
judgment, 5 Cure.
through false testimony of the outward report. Fifthly, in the means of cure;
the one is helped by no medicine, no purgation, no cordial, or balm, except
the balm of Gilead, are able to assure the afflicted soul and trembling
heart, panting under the terrors of God, hell, death, and damnation: But in
melancholy passions, the vain opened, neesing powder or Bearefoot ministered to
expel the fumes in the brain; cordialls of pearl, sapphires, and rubies, with
such like, recomfort the heart thrown down, and appaled with fantastical
fear. 6. End.
Sixthly, they differ in the end: in the one the peril is not of body, and
corporal actions; but of foul and body, to be cut off from the life of God,
and from the sweet influence of his favor, the fountain of all happiness,
and eternal felicity. Here then the cause, is the severity of Gods
judgment, summoning the guilty conscience: the subject, is the sinful soul,
apprehending the terror thereof, which is for ever and ever: the issue, is
eternal punishment, satisfactorie to the justice of the eternal God, which is
endless, and whose severity admits no mediation: and this extends not to
one joint, sinew, or vanie, but to all; neither that of the body only, but of
the soul, whose nature as it is impatible of all other things, in greatest
peace, assurance, and tranquillity; so being once shaken by the terrors of
Gods wrath, and blasted with the whirlewind of his displeasure, it fails, and
with it drives the whole frame of nature into extreme misery and utter
confusion. The other has for his cause a dry and cold humor, whose subject
especially is the spleen swollen up with windines and hardness under the left
ribs: the consequents are, the hemeroydes not flowing, blackness and
grossness of blood, fearful dreams, solitariness, sadness. And therefore
those are to be condemned, which make the terrors of conscience nothing but
melancholy, and thereby labor to benumme the sense of that sting, which sin
ever carries in the tail, and turn men to their usual pleasures; and so
delude the fool and simple in his ways, skillful to do evil, sottish in the
paths of righteousness, and utterly ignorant of her rule; and wherein nature
gives some spark of light, more distinctly to discern: yet they turn them
out of the way, and make them like to stubborn and unbroken horses, shaking off
reason, despising her manage, and lays the noble rider in the dust: these be
Salomons fools, that follow wickedness, Like an ox that goes to the
slaughter, and as a fool that goes to the stocks for correction, and as a
bird hastes to the snare, not knowing that he is in danger. But beside these,
another sort are justly taxed, even the Physicians themselves, who when their
patients come unto them for physic, and they spy out their disease to be
melancholy, ask them under what minister they live, and if they mention some
conscionable man that deals truly with men's souls, give the parties counsel
not to hear them, but get from them as far as they can: Alas, are not these
distinct diseases, and therefore what wretched persons are those, that labor
to turn a disease that is not unto death, into one that is both the death of
body and soul.

For more particular differences, consider: That whenever the mind, according
to these engraven laws of nature, which no man is void of be he never so
barbarous, raises any molestation directly, it is no fancy but a case of
conscience. The very testominie of the heathen does sufficiently witness this
point: whose Poets according to their received opinions, have fained Hecates,
Eumenides, and the infernal furies; whose force Seneca in his tragedy of
Hercules furens, has most lively expressed. These indeed are but fained
persons, yet the matter under this mask is serious, true, and of woeful
experience. This was Cains mark; the spirit that possessed Saul; Judas the
traitor by this wound, took the revenge of betraying the innocent upon
himself with his own hands: such was the anguish that Esau felt when he found
no repentance, after he had sold his birthright for a mess of pottage: and
such is the state of all defiled consciences with heinous crimes; whose hearts
are never free from the worm, but with deadly bite thereof are driven to
despair. This may the more plainly appear, if we consider how the soul may
suffer of the body in life, sense, and motion: The body is a great troubler of
the soul, not in his being, but in his actions: hence may he cause madness,
strange imaginations, sudden fears, doleful apparitions, feebleness of
body, and want of heart in the performance of any action: but the mind and
will of man, are of such excellency and perfection, that they are not directly
patible of any thing, but of God alone that made them: so stands both mind
and will in awe of none but of him: neither admit they any other violence, then
from him into whose hands it is most terrible to fall. No calamity comparable
to the distress of conscience.
All diseases of the body may have some medicine, either to cure them, or to
mitigate and assuage their pain: for all sores Chirurgie has a salve: friends
help poverty: there is no imprisonment, but there is hope of liberty: suite
and favor recover a man from banishment: authority and time wear out
reproach. But what physic cures? what chirurgerie salueth? what riches
ransom? what countenance bears out? what authority asswageth? what favor
releeueth these troubles? yea if all should band themselves together in league,
though they would conspire a confederacy, yet could they not prevail. If our
assistance were an host of armed men; if our friends were princes and
governors of the world; if our possessions were as large as East and West; if
our meat were manna from heaven; if every day like the day of Christ's
resurrection; if our apparel as costly as Aarons Ephod; yet al these would
little comfort us. This causes such distress unto those that feel the
torment hereof, that they would redeem it gladly, if it were possible, with
the very loss of their lives, which often they assay to do: that this might
off their stomach, they would be content, if it were possible, to suffer all
other kinds of misery at the very self same time. This gives no warning, as
the diseases of the body do; for in them we find the head begin to ache, or
stomach trouble us, lassitude of body, remoov^d of sleep, want of appetite to
our meat: but this takes of a sudden like lightning, and gives no warning.
Here the purity of the blood, and the sincerity and liuelines of the spirits
avail nothing to mitigate the pain: it dries up the blood, wastes the
marow, pineth the flesh, consumes the bones, makes pleasure painful,
shortens life; no wisdom can counsel it, no counsel can advise it, no
aduisment assuage it, no asswagement cure it, no eloquence persuade it, no
power overcome it, no scepter affray it, no inchanter charm it. A man
languishing in sickness, as long as he is heart-whole, he has hope of recovery:
he that is in reproach among men, and yet can remember that he is in favor
with God, will not much care for the shame of the world: he that is banished
out of his own country, and yet remembers that he is a citizen of the kingdom
of heaven, will not be overmuch grieved: but the wound of conscience is so
deadly, that he dare not sue unto him that should be the only physician of it,
because he thinks that he is his only enemy. Alas, who dare meet with the
Lord of hosts? who can put to silence the voice of desperation? who will make
an agreement with the hells of conscience? what compact with the devil? In all
other afflictions, there is some comfort against sin: but this is always
accompanied with the accusation of sin: this breeds hurliburlies in men, that
when it is day, he wishes for night, when night, for day: his meat does not
nourish him, his dreams terrify him, his sleep forsakes him; when he speaks
he is little bettes, when he keeps silence, he boyles in disquietnes, the light
does not comfort him, and the darkness does terrify him. All other afflictions
are tolerable, because temporal, and pursue but to death: yet this being not
^u^ed, ends not in death. Men's laws transgressed, may be helped by bribing
of the magistrate, or if the offense be capital, that there can be no pleading
for him; yet he may fly his country, and so escape: but God will not be
bribed, neither is there any flying from his presence, Psalm. 139. nay, alas, we
shall need no seeking out, we shall need no apparitor to summon us, no
bayl^ffe to fetch us, no accuser to give in evidence against us; sin it self
will arrest us, for he lies at the door: our conscience will impanell a quest
against us; our hearts will give in sufficient evidence to convict us, and our
own iniquities will plead guilty to our faces. This made the heathen to kill
themselves, thinking death to be an end of all misery: and thus like fond
fishes, they leap out of the pan into the fire, out of the hell of their
consciences into hell it self. Let them do the best they can, get them to
merry company, laugh their sins out of countenance; yet let them know, that
with Nero, they may change their chamber, but their chamber-fellow shall never
leave them. They may sacrifice unto the Lord, humble themselves, weep with
Esau, confess with Judas, lay hold on the horns of the altar to mitigate
their pain; but only the expiatorie sacrifice of the immaculate lamb, is able
to give them rest and quietness of soul.

Indeed this distress of conscience soon becomes melancholic, vile, and
base, turns reason into foolishnes, and disgraceth the beauty of the
countenance, How conscience may disigu^e the body.
and transformeth the stoutest. Nebuchadnezzer becomes a beast; so easily is
the body subject to alteration of mind, and soon loses with anguish and
distraction thereof, all the support of his excellency. In melancholy the
heart is troubled with vain seares, upon every small object: the very eye by a
false apparition, may strike him; the ears with the imagination of every voice
sounding, may dolefully appale him; a very touch may make him startle, and many
such like troubles, which are whelps of that melancholy litter, bred of that
corrupted state of body, altered in spirit, in blood, in substance, and
complexion. This may increase the terror of the afflicted mind, double the
fear and discouragement, How distemper of body may increase this wound, and
hinder all cure by counsel and advise.
and shut up all means of consolation: for it must enter by the senses to the
mind. Now the instruments of sense being altered by the humor, and their
sincerity stained with the obscure and dark spots of melancholy, receive not
indifferently the medicine of consolation. As the brain, the original and
fountain of all sense and motion, is thus euilly disposed; so the heart, the
cherisher and refresher of our nature, being in no better case, and acquainted
with terror, and overthrown with that searefull passion, imptisoneth the
spirits, contracts it self, and hardly yields to persuasion of comfort
whatsoever it brings of assurance. For though the grief strike down at the
first, respecting no time, place, person, condition, or opportunity of
working, but breaks through all such considerations, and bears down all
resistance; yet the comfort requires them all: and the missing of one, makes
the affliction to be long and hard in the cure. The Comforters person, his
manner of handling the patient, the time, and place of performance, with the
brain and heart, which are as the gates and entrance unto the soul, may
hinder or aid the consolation. No distemper can hinder the inward comfort of
Gods grace.
But all this is to be understood of outward means: for the inward means, to
wit, the grace of God, and his mercy, his comfortable spirit and gracious
favor in like swiftnes without means, may restore the mind thus distressed;
which lies open equally to the kind of cure, even as it lay to the wound.
Therefore seeing the body works nothing upon the mind, altogether impatible of
every being, saving of God alone: and secondly, that the efficient can do it
without help of the body; and thirdly, that the comfort is not procured by
any corporal instrument, nor the discomfort directly procured by the same; and
lastly, because all is done by causes in subjects, nothing corporal and
producing effects of an other nature then corporal, it must needs be
concluded, that there is great difference betwixt these two troubles. The
punishment of bodily racking, is not the passion of the heart, but a cause of
it: so that racking of the soul by sin, is not a melancholy passion, but
yet may it cause it, and therefore makes the distinction not so clear: for
oftentimes the symptom of a disease, is taken for the disease it self.

The affliction of mind, The persons which are hable to this sorrow.
to what persons it falls, and by what means, is thus to be resolved: All
men are subject to this by reason of our fall, the breach of Gods law, and the
wrath of God that follows thereupon: yet of all sorts of men, melancholy
persons are most subject unto it: not from the humor, but because he is most
doubtful and jealous of his estate, for life temporal and life spiritual.
For temporal, physicians and apothecaries shops will bear sufficient witness;
for if they be able to walk, we find them for the most part in these places:
And I would to God they were as ready for their spiritual life to be with
Gods spiritual physicians, and in the shops of the true balm of Gilead. By
experience we find, that when they begin to examine how their actions answer
the natural and written line of righteousness, and wanting the arch-pillar of
faith, and assurance in Christ Jesus our hope, presently feel the very anguish
due unto sinners, and in that most miserable condition fall into flat despair.

The manner how this is done is, when the curious melancholy person, carries
his mind into the senses of such mysteries, How it befalls them.
as exceed humane capacity; and is desirous to know more then is revealed in
the word of truth: and yet being ignorant of that which is revealed, he
suddenly falls into the gulf of Gods secret counsels, which swalloweth up all
conceit of man or angel; and measuring the truth of such depths by the shallow
model of his own wit, is caught and devoured of that, which his presumptuous
curiosity moved him to attempt to apprehend. Of this we have a memorable
example of a virtuous gentlewoman in this land, who was carried along in this
course, doubting very often of her salvation, and making her case known unto a
worthy minister of God; he often cou^felled her, to take heed of inquiries
further then Gods word, and trust assuredly that she might conclude her
salvation out of Gods word, without any further revelations: yet still did the
temptation grew upon her, insomuch that having a venice glass in her hands,
and the selfsame minister setting by her, presently breaks forth into
lamentable words; You have often told me, that I must seek no further then
Gods word, but I have been long without comfort, and can endure no longer;
therefore if I must be saved, let this glass be kept from breaking; and so she
threw it against the walls: Here might the Lords hand for this tempting of his
majesty, have left her to the everlasting woes of her distrustful heart: yet
the Lord that is rich in mercy, having stamped her with the seal of his
election, was content to satisfy the languishing soul with a miracle: the
glass rebounds again, and comes safe unto the ground; which the minister
having gotten into his hands, says, Oh repent of this sin, bless God for
his mercy, and never distrust him more of his promise: for now you have his
voice from heaven in a miracle, telling you plainly of your estate. This was
curiosity, and might have brought despair; yet it was the Lords mercy to
remit the fault, and grant an extraordinary confirmation of her faith.

But to proceed: melan cholie persons that are given to contemplation, if they
be not well grounded in the word of God, and have resolved in all their
speculations, not to remove one hair from the same, are easily overtaken, and
plunged in misery: and especially all such as have their vocation consisting
in such studies as philosophy, etc. which if they carry not a low sail, and
sometime to strike, and lie at the anchor of the Scriptures of God, but hoist up
sail, and leave it to the tempest of presumption, are presently carried into
the whirle-poole of Gods infinite secrets, and are in danger (without the
special grace of Gods mercy) never to deliver themselves: for these men being
not balanced with knowledge of Gods scriptures, and assurance of his spirit,
are never able to abide the vglines of their sins, when they shall once be
unfolded, and that narrow point of reprobation and election, propounded unto
their melancholy brains and hearts, and most miserable polluted souls.
Others which have but some little knowledge of Gods word, and practice
answerable, for want of the true apprehending of Gods revealed will touching
election and reprobation, and the right method of learning and conceiving the
doctrine, causes them to stumble and fall at this stone: for a sword taken at
the wrong end, is ready to wound the hand of the taker, yet held by the
handle, is a fit weapon of defense: so Predestination preposterously conceived,
may through fault of the conceiuer, procure hurt; whereas in it self, it is
the most strong rock of assurance, in all storms of temptations that can befall
unto body or soul; because predestination is Gods immutable will, the cause
and rule of all justice, and uttermost of all reason in his works. Now if
reason ascending to this supreme cause, descend not again to the means, then
when our sins shall meet with Gods justice, and we have no eye to look upon
his mercy in his son Christ, we shall find nothing but the assurance of our
own destruction. Again, if with the world, we eye alone his mercy, and
consider not his justice, then miserable man, who melts as snow, and
vanishes like a vapor before his justice, must needs perish eternally, in
that his careless presumption. Again, as the melancholy person in general,
and secondly in special: 1. of giving himself to contemplation, 2. knowing
Gods word vngroundedly; so in the 3. place, this makes the melancholy nature
subject to this passion, when with a passionate humor he reads G^ds word, and
does as melancholy persons do, in regard of their body: for if they read, or
hear of any disease, presently they conceicue they have it: so deal they with
the Scriptures, they are guilty of all judgments, and no sin or judgment,
but they either have it, or presently expect it: and especially they resemble
the one the other in this; that they have the strongest conceit of the most
deadly diseases, as consumptions, and sicknesses incurable; so the other of
nothing but the sin against the holy Ghost: So that as ignorance before was
their guide, here ignorance and infidelity linked together.

A fourth special manner in this melancholic subject, is the good and
christian heart, the weight of whose sins exceeding for a time the strength
of their faith, see not so clearly as they desire; but even as in a stormy
tempest, the ship seems at every blast, and sourge of the sea, to be in
danger of wrack; and as the young ash, bending to every blast of wind,
seems in peril of breaking, and rooting up, when notwithstanding both the
ship keeps her constant course, and the tree yet has the rooting. In winter,
we think the trees are dead, and in a tempest we think we have lost the
brightness of heaven; yet summer proves the contrary, and the space of an
hour may show the clear heavens again. So when this tempest of Gods anger
is ouer-blowne, and his gracious countenance begins to shine on us again,
then the says which was as it were hid for a time, takes life, and shows
forth it self, and plainly proves, that as the trees when they bud in the
spring time, and bring forth fruit, were not dead in the winter as they
seemed; so the faith of Gods children springs afresh, after the stormy
winter of temptation, and therefore no dead faith. The diseases of the body,
make us sometime seem little better then dead corpses, and yet the hidden life
is after recovered and raised up again. Thus says by reason of our own
weakness, and thorough Satan's tempestuous malice, bends, seems feeble, and
yields to the force; while notwithstanding it is built on the rock, and
planted with the hand of God in the Eden of his gracious election, and does
remain a plant for ever in his Paradise of everlasting felicity.

Thus the lilly of God, and every member of it, though among many thorns, is
preserved; because they are planted by the good husbandman, watered with the
dewes of heaven, hedged and preserved by his continual care: for this
husbandman is night and day in his field, and yet he never sleeps, no not so
much as slumbereth, by his watchful care for Israel his flock, Psalm. 121. In
deed we had need of a good shepherd; for we are extraordinary wandering
sheep: we had need of good governors; for we are but punies in our ways: we
had need of a good guide on the seas of this world; for we are but like
unexperienced trauailers by sea, fearing every weauing of the ship, and ^^ying
with the disciples, help us, Master, or else we perish. we imagine every puff
of temptation, to be nothing but the gate of destruction; when indeed it is
the way of Gods dearest children, and appointed of the Lord to bring us unto
heaven. His counsels are not to be measured by our infirmities, nor by that we
cast, forecast, or doubt; but as he himself has pronounced of his ways, and
many have proved true, to their everlasting happiness.

But Sir I pray you, Whether a Christian may draw upon him this pitiful wound
of a desparing conscience.
may we not draw this fearful sentence on our selves, that as God has said,
he will set our sins before us; so now he has truly done it, and we
sensibly feel it? yea verily, if Gods only mercy be not our stay: for as our
first parents voluntarily gave their necks, and in them all their posterity,
under the yoke of Satan; and as the vengeance of Gods justice always burns
against the wicked, and his sword continually employed, which nothing can
quench but the w^ter of his grace flowing from the sides of his Son, and that
complete armor whereof S. Paul speaks, Ephesians. 6. so should all of us in this
life taste of the heat, and seele the dint of that sword, if his mercy in his
Son, and for his Saints cause on the earth, he stayed not the jealousy of
his wrath: his anger our sins pull on, but his mercy is only for himself.
So then, all men are subject to afflictions of conscience, melancholy persons
especially. First, such as are exercised either in natural philofophic,
without the light of Gods word; or else with the light of Gods word, but diue
too deep into Gods secrets. Secondly, such as are negligent in reading, and
practicing. Thirdly, such as are humorous. Fourthly, such as are weak in
faith. The means that brings all this upon us, is ignorance and infidelity:
now least Gods children should unadvisedly dishonor God in this kind of
sorrow, who is the God of peace and comfort; we will show that this setting of
sin before their eyes, is greater matter of comfort then sorrow; and so
having saved Gods children out of this fire, by yielding them that comfort
which the Lord promises to every broken and contrite heart, setting his sins
before his eyes, that so he may escape the judgment of God, which shall be
sure to fall upon all hypocrites, when no comfort shall be found for them,
either in beauen or earth.

For the godly, let them resolve, that sin must have smart: therefore the
Lords sending affliction unto his children is, because he would not have them
freeze with the wicked world in their dregs. If God punish not in this world,
either God is unjust, or else there is a hell to punish them in everlastingly:
but his children, if they profit not by one, he sends another to condemn them
in the world, that they may escape in the world to come. Secondly, as that is
Gods end, so they shall find that this is Gods ordinary way to do them
good: Iam. 1.12. Blessed is the man that is tried, for when he is tried, he
shall receive the crown of life. Luke 24.26. it is reprehended of our Savior
Christ, as a matter arguing great ignorance and infidelity, not to know and
believe that this was his portion, and so consequently a thing to fall upon all
them that would live godlily in him: 2. Tim. 3.12. Yea, and all that will live
godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution: therefore said Christ unto
them, O fools, and slow of heart to believe all that the Prophets have spoken!
ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory?
Now this being proved, as Christ does in that place, beginning at Moses and
all the Prophets, must needs follow that the servants being no better then
the master, and the members as subject to misery as the head, that this must
be their portion: for in plain reason, it were a shame to see the head crowned
with thorns, and all the rest of the body clothed with rich attire and costly
raiment, such as are in Kings houses: but it is well, if Christians may be
lodged in Innes (for strangers they are in this world,) nay well if they may
but obtain the stable and the manger for their chamber and their bed, for they
are hated of the world: and therefore the worst room is too good for them in
the conceit of the world. Act. 14.22. Confirming the Disciples hearts, and
exhorting them to continue in the faith, affirming that we must through many
afflictions enter into the kingdom of heaven.

Admirable is the first chapt. of James, v. 1. the twelve Tribes are fratter^d
abroad, s^^re from Jerusalem, and that among the heathen; Jerusalem is utterly
destroyed, the Temple brought unto the ground, not one stone left upon an
other, and all those woes that our Savior Christ spoke of, Matthew. 24. were
accomplished: now might they well hang their instruments on the willows, wholly
forget Jerusalem, and let their tongues fooner cleave unto the rooses of their
mouths, then that they should once sing the fongs of Syon: yet James the
servant of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ, is bold to write unto them the
salutation of joy and comfort: and well may he be entertained of the faithful
among the Jews, because of his flyle; a servant of God, might have put life
unto them all; but, and of the Lord Jesus Christ, shall make him odious to the
multitude. Well, be knows unto whom to tender hsi service, to wit, to those
whom God loves: therefore he respects the believing Jews that now might be
swallowed up with greise: therefore v. 2. he calls them his brethren. But he
begins with cold comfort, Count it, my brethren, exceeding joy when ye fall
into temptation: but the Apostle knows the best what shall be for their
present consolation, and therefore he respects that before all other, and so
begins with it; not leaving his exhortation as a bare affirmation, but adding
in the rest of the chapter, a strong confirmation of his exhortation.

Mark therefore the arguments, as grounds to be laid in all our afflictions:
they are in number five. The first is drawn from the blessed fruit that shall
spring from this tree, and that is patieace, even the whole worship of God in
distress, whereby being neady to loose our souls, we possess them: and the
excellency of patience he commends unto us, v. 4. from his perfection, first in
himself; secondly, in his work; thirdly, in the subject: giving us to
distinguish betwixt this pationce, and all other: fained patience is but for a
time, has in it self no perfection: it works nothing, because it is a mere
patient, ye and to suffer constrained: but this a stirring patience, for he
must have his work: and he is neither idle nor a vain workman for he has a
perfection of his work. Thirdly, the subject of all other patience is but like
unto a stone, that being stricken with the hammer and cloven in pieces lies
still, never unites his parts again; but this patience, when his subject is
even beaten to powder, and is scattered abroad, is able to bring all together
again, join soul and body together, even almost disioyned for lack of
spirit and courage: and so to animate body and soul, that even Christians
shall say, I never found body and soul in better temper then now. Many Martyrs
which have been troubled with the swelling of the spleen, which all the time
of their liberty was a kind of hell unto them, have admired that beside the
exraordinarie consolations of the soul, they have felt those pains ceased
that did disquiet them on the day time following of their ordinary vocations,
and in the night with breaking off their sleep, when now they find that all
the day they could toil in writing and praying, singing and comforting their
poor brethren, and when night comes, sleep soundly without either bed or
covering; when before, though upon a bed of Ivorie, and wrapped in silk, they
could take no rest this is Gods blessing filling the heart with the grace of
patience, which makes us perfect, entire, and lacking nothing: therefore where
patience is, what discomfort can trouble us?

This is the first argument, mark the method to the second. It might well be
objected; I could be patient, but I want wisdom to carry mine affliction, and
make the right use of it. To this he answers, and his answer does not only
take away the objection, but give a second confirmation of his exhortation, v.
5. If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask it of God, and ye shall be assured
that the Lord will answer you: for he gives to all men liberally, and
reproacheth no man: therefore you his children shall be sure to speed. Yet
would I prevent all rashness, for if it may be had for asking, then all men
shall have it: for who is he but he prays the Lords prayer, Creed, ten
Commandments? true: it is he says prayers, but I give the requisite: let him
ask in faith, and waver not: for he that wauereth, incurreth, first the shame
of inconstancy, becoming like the sea tossed of every wind, and never
resting. Secondly, they loose all expectation ever to receive any thing of the
Lord; nay, let him not so much as think of it, or presume that the Lord will
answer his prayers. Thirdly, the detection of an hypocrite, that he is a double
minded man; and therefore unstable in all his ways, not able to lie at the
anchor of any of Gods promises. Now then both arguments being rightly
understood, and applied unto the soul, see how forcibly they will be able to
infer the conclusion. He that has such a patience that is perfect in it
self, and is able to work perfection in others, and that in such sort, that
they shall be made perfect, entire, lacking nothing; and secondly for
direction, shall have the blessed grace of spiritual wisdom, may be moved to
count it exceeding joy, when he falls into diverse tentations: but every
faithful soul shall have both these graces: and therefore must he needs
intertaine my loving exhortation. Patience and wisdom going hand in hand, will
carry affliction without trouble: for suppose that two persons were to carry
a long staff through a strait passage, the one wants patience, and therefore
he makes have; now for want of wisdom, his staff falls a cross, he is still
discontented, labors to break through by violence, but the staff being too
strong for him, and the passage too narrow to let him go on, except he take
his staff with him is set at a stay to add cross unto cross, until he
perish in his folly: now a man of patience, when he is to come that way, is
content by patience to go softly, at his leisure, and by his wisdom espies
where he may have a thrust back, except he order his staff, by letting one
end go before the other; and thus by patience and wisdom goes further in the
straits of this world toward the kingdom of heaven in one hour, then fools,
wise in their own conceit, go all the time of their life.

But let me lead you on in the Apostles sweet consolation, and bring you to
the third ground, and that is true contentation in all estates, v. 9, 10, 11.
explained by an example in adversity, and another in prosperity; proouing
that neither prosperity can further the joys of Christians, nor aduersirie
hinder it: and therefore whether prosperity or adversity befall them, their
estate is all one with God. For adversity, he brings for instance an example
drawn from poverty, ver. 9. Let the brother of low degree rejoice in that he
is exalted: his low degree is no hinderer of his exaltation in Christ, and
therefore can it not take away his rejoicing: for what cares a man for the
loss of a penny, that is so rich that he knows no end of his wealth: for
better is it to be made rich by the creator of the world, then to have the
creature without the creator. For prosperity, he exemplifies in riches, v. 10.
It is good for him that is rich, to see that he be made low, else shall he
with his riches become as the flower of the grass, which by the sun
withering the grass, makes his flower fall away, and then the goodly shape of
it perishes; even so shall the rich man wither away in all his ways. And
therefore seeing the best in prosperity is to be made low, and the worst is
to be made rich without humiliation; and on the contrary, the worst in
adversity makes us the best in Christ; who can deny but that our joy may
exceed in afflictions?

The fourth argument beside his strength and power is very alluring, for Psalm.
4. who will show us any good? well, if in this case any believing Jew shall
make the question in this anguish of his soul, and say, who will show us any
good? he shall not only have the Apostle, with David, to show them that God
will lift upon them the light of his countenance; but even the blessed end of
all their trials: v. 12. Blessed is the man that indureth tentation: for when
he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, etc. But if there be such
strong arguments for tentations, then surely God is the cause of them: No
beloved, I would not have you say God tempts any man, v. 15. but the true cause
is his own heart, v. 14.15. therefore err not my dear brethren, v. 16. but
take notice of every good gift, and say that is the Lords work, v. 17.
therefore this good that comes out of evil, is the work of the Lord: for
afflictions in their own nature are evil, and it is my power to make them
good unto my children, yet not to make them in my children. Therefore having
given warning, take the fifth argument of consolation and comfort; and that is
from the new birth, v. 18. A woman indeed when she trauaileth has sorr^we,
because her hour is come: but as soon as she is delinerad of the child, she
remembers no more the anguish, for joy that a man is borne into the world:
Ioh. 16.21. so Gods children are in sorrow, but when they consider, how of his
own will he has begotten them with the word of truth, that they should be as
the first fruits of his creatures; then their hearts do rejoice, and their joy
no man shall take from them. Now that complete joy may be drawn out of all
these arguments, it is necessary that the word of God be specially looked unto;
for in afflictions it only gives us the lively sight of our sin, manifests
the riches of the mercies of God in Christ Jesus to deliver us from sin: and
therefore David says often, but for thy law I had perished in mine
afflictions: therefore for further comfort, he shows what is required to make
us profit in Gods word; first, qualification; secondly practice: the first, the
soul: the second, the life of the soul: the qualification, v. 19. the reason
of it, v. 20. and the conclusion out of both, ver. 21. Wherefore laying apart
all silthinesse, and superfluity of malitiousnesse, receive with meekenes the
word that is grafted into you, which is able to save your souls. After this
qualification, follows the practice, that the mercies of God might not be in
vain, which he has bestowed upon them: therefore v. 22. be ye doers of the
word, and not hearers only deceiving your selves: now because this cousening
of our selves in hearing of Gods word, is a disease incident to the most; he
plays the good Physician: first discovering the disease by a familiar
similitude, laying together these four terms, spots and a glass, sins and
the law: as spots may be seen in a glass, so sins may be seen in the law:
secondly, in their quality wherein they are laid together, and that is
beholding, considering, and immediately forgetting; as a man beholding falls to
consider something amiss in himself, yet going his way, and other matters
possessing his head, immediately forgets what manner of face-he had: So they
come to the Church, look into Gods word, consider that all is not well; yet
going their way home again to their old courses, and now all is spoiled, and
they are never better. Secondly, having discovered the disease by the most
familiar fymptomes, applies the remedy, and tells them what must be their
receipt, ver. 15. the perfect law of liberty must be carefully looked into.
Thirdly, he gives them the manner how it must be received; first, what must be
abstained from, as deadly poison to the nature of a Christian, and secondly,
the only hinderer of the work of all good physic. First, therefore v. 26.
If any man seem religious, and refraineth not his tongue, but deceives his
own heart, that man's religion is in vain. Secondly, thus must it be taken
according to pure religion, and undefiled before God, in visiting the
fatherles, and widows in their necessity, and to keep himself unspotted of
the world. Seeing then that God has so many comforts; patience to possess the
soul, when it is at a loffe; wisdom, to make i^ find it self in the
greatest night of trouble; contentation to quiet it, as well in adversity as
prosperity; a crown of glory, to recompense it after all combats; and such a
word, as may be a light to direct, a sword to defend, and teach the true watch
word of a Christian, when he is ready to be swallowed up of his enemies; it
cannot be but that we should always rest in the haven of happiness.

A recaptulation of all the former heads in a brief and perspicuous table, for
the further impression of Christian comfort in the memories of the faithful.
Comfort in affliction, donation of grace, informing, the action, present,
patience, working, v. 4. perfecting, v. 4.
wifedom, given freely and liberally. received by prayer and faith.

future, true contentation in all things, v. 9
the end of the action, blessedness in the crown of life, v. 12.
sanctifying, causes, principal, the will of God, v. 18. isntrumental, the
word of truth, v. 18.
effect, first fruits a holy kind of offering taken out of the residue of men,
v. 18.

true application in the qualification, manifested, v. 19. proved: in clearing
the point, v. 20. in concluding, v. 21.

in the practice, honest and good hearing and doing, v. 22. dishonest and
unprofitable illustrated, 23. 24. by terms, spots and a glass sin and the law
quality, beholding. forgetting.

applied first, in the prescript, v. 25. in the use unlawful, v. 26. lawful,
v. 27.







Seeing then that this is the course that the Lord will take, let no man think
to be Dives all his life time in this world, and Lazarus after death: If God
promise riches, the way thereunto is poverty; before love, correction; before
exaltation, deiection; whom he saves, first he damneth; he brings not to
heaven, but by hell; if he promise life, he slaieth first. Joseph saw the
sun, moon, and stars, worshipping him, nevertheless yet that could come to
pass, God laid him where he could see neither sun, nor moon, nor any star
of the sky, and all that many years, and also undeserved: yet all this while
to nurture him up against the time of honor: God promised Israel a land of
milk and honey, yet for the space of forty years they went through a land,
not only where there were no rivers of milk and honey, but not so much as a
drop of water to refresh them withal: yet all this was done of God to do
them good at the latter end: God promised David a kingdom, yet immediately he
stirred up Saul against him to hunt him, and ferret him out of every hole, and
that many years. Thus he that will wear the crown of glory, must wear the
crown of thorns: he that will have all tears wiped from his eyes, must first
shed them: Reu. 15.3. the children of God before they can sing the song of
Moses the servant of God, and the song of the lamb Christ Jesus, must first
swim through the glassie sea, mingled with fire and brimstone. It is not the
way to heaven, to live in this world in perpetual ease, rest, and quietness in
body, soul, goods, and good name: therefore as the end of all afflictions is
full of joy and comfort, so is the way, seeing it is appointed of the Lord most
comfortable, because every step brings us toward Gods kingdom: and I may
term afflictions, marks in the way, to tell us we are to keep on that way
they lead us. A man inquiring his way, and is told he has no plain way but by
desolate woods, hills, and mountains, very stony and troublsome to pass by:
when the trauailer seeeth these marks, he says, undoubtedly I am right; but if
he find all to be plain, presently stands still, looks about and says, I see
never a one of my directio^s; therefore I am assuredly wrong, this way will
never bring me to the end of my journey. So the Lord has told us that this is
the way to heaven, to pass by many crosses; we run a long and find no such
matter, well may we suspect that we are out of the way: and then assuredly that
our pleasant way did not affoard us so much comfort, but the want of the signs
will as much discomfort us: and therefore affliction may more comfort us, then
all worldly pleasure, because the Lord has made the one a sign we are going
toward heaven, Heb. 12.6.
but the other none at all, save only of our iourneying toward hell. But you
may object, that every cross is not a mark: for first, the sin against the
holy Ghost is a mark of reprobation: secondly, impenitencie: and therefore when
he has these sins in the eyes of his conscience, how shall he be persuaded,
that he can ever be brought into the way to heaven? For the answer of this
point, let us consider a threefold fountain of this persuasion. First, for
that open and wilful apostasy from God, is a voluntary willingness and
malicious hatred against the profession of a known truth: now the fruits will
judge the cause: Is there in you the renouncing of Gods truth, which before you
have professed and heartily embraced? perceive you this malice prosecuting this
mischief? what persecution do you remember in word or deed you ever raised
against the truth? what sword have you ever drawn against it? or what volumes
have you either written or approved against found doctrine, with purposed
opposition against your own conscience, neither that of frailty, but of mere
will, and obstinacy? of this, examples are rare, as Iulianus the Emperor
called Apostata. Of the second, impenitencie, there is the same fountain, but
not in the same degree; and that is extremity of hardness of heart: of which
kind was Cain, Esau, Saul, Judas, and many of the profane people of the world,
that know not Christ: and such as know him only in vain profession
outwardly, and so continue, are partners of the sin, and shall be examples of
Gods vengeance. This fountain cannot be in them that sin only against their
conscience: for then should every man be guilty of it: when the sin was
committed, we may remember that the illumination of our understanding, and the
regeneration of our wills did oppose it; but both being weak and imperfect,
we were drawn unto the evil. And here before I come to the second fountain, I
propound a brief distinction of temptations; some touch our faith, whether we
believe or not; othersome the fruits of faith, either of profession of the
truth, or else of obedience suitable and kindly to our profession: the former is
tried by persecutions, fear, favor, etc. the second concerning persons,
possessions, and good name, is known by charity in keeping of the second
table. Now these are not the things that exclude Christ's propitiatory
sacrifice, except incredulity, bringing forth impenitencie, and utter
renunciation of the faith, be joined with them. But here we often hear the
cries of Gods children; alas, I believe not, and therefore draw upon me the
pain due to the unfaithful. Here I would entreat every one to weigh with
circumspection, and due consideration, his own estate in so weighty a point
as this. And therefore let him be advised, that there be other two fountains
that may scare our souls with these fears. The first, is corporal
infirmity, deluding the heart and brain, whereby strange imaginations are
wrought in our heads, and doleful passions in our hearts: these things always
urge terror and distrust, and deludeth us with opinion of want of that, whereof
we have no lack: as others often are carried with opinion and confidence of
those things whereof they have no part. Aetius reports that Phylotimus was
feign to put a cap of lead upon a Melancholickes head, that could not be
persuaded he had any head at all, until at the length feeling the weight to
oppress him cried out, my head aches: why the^ says his friends, you have a
head. Artemidorus the Grammarian, did imagine that he wanted both an hand and a
leg, when every man else could judge it was but a fancy, from which he could
not be recalled to his dying day. So often deals the devil with us, by
deluding of our phancies, that we want both head and heart to Godward, and
that we have disposed both to him-ward. But many a bleeding soul may go
further: what tell you me of melancholy, it is a disease that I am free from?
well, let that be granted (yet rare it is to find persons without it, that are
touched with this kind of grief,) yet we find a third fountain, that may
without all delusion stream this water of bitterness, as the sense of our
sins may prick us, especially such as most hunger and thirst after
righteousness, and are poor in spirit, and broken in heart: yet this is an
infallible token of grace, that they long after the living God, and their
souls pant for him: Oh when shall I enter into his presence? Oh men of God,
what shall I do to be faued? The rest of the world (except some vengeance of
God lay hold upon them, or some horrible fact gnaw their wounded consciences)
pass their time in blind security, careless of God, and empty of all sense
and hope of a better life: these pass their days, and finish their courses,
as the calfe passes to the shambles, not kowing his end to be slaughter by
the butchers knife. You therefore that truly groan under the burden of your
sin, consider the ground of your error: you judge your faith by inward
feeling, and your actions proceeding therefrom, by your thirst of
righteousness and presence of your wants. Here you judge by the quantity of
faith, and not by his virtue; when a very grain of mustard seed, a little
smoking flax, or a broken reed may suffice with God to bring forth a tree, a
burning fire, and a stable plant of righteousness: for both the sense of
faith, the sincerity of the fruits, and increase of the measure, are all the
gifts and graces of God dispensed unto us, according to his own wisdom,
making most for his glory and our good. If we consider but the extemity of our
misery, the lest spark of faith may give us a world of comfort; and the
smallest work of obedience performed in sincerity, though not in perfection,
may persuade us of the same love of God, as though we were as strong as our
father Abraham, or any resolve martyr that has sealed his religion with his
blood.

But the Christian says, I have no feeling of Gods grace, and therefore no
faith: I answer, true faith may be without feeling, and therefore it is
dangerous to judge the want of faith, Faith without feeling.
by the want of feeling. That this is the truth, let these be the grounds of
it: First, a man may rest upon God, and yet want the feeling of the love of
God; as Job. David, the woman of Canaan, etc. Job: 13.15. God is mine enemy,
the arrows of the Almighty drink up my blood, he makes me as a butte to
shoot at: here Job has none of the feeling of Gods love toward himself, but
he has not lost his love and fath toward God: for he says, though the Lord
should kill me, yet would I trust in him. David, Psalm. 22. Oh my God, I cry by
day, but thou hear not; by night, but thou give no audience: neither night
nor day had he any feeling that God did hear his prayers, or granted his
requests; but yet he was not without faith, for he made this prayer in faith,
and that with special application (my God.) The Canaanitish woman had four
repulses; 1. silence. 2. denial; I am not come but unto the lost sheep of the
house of Israel. 3. the Apostles to speak against her, send her away, for she
cries after us. 4. a woeful remembrance of her miserable estate, Woman, it is
not good to take the childrens bread, and cast it unto dogs: in all these,
Christ shows her small comfort, yet she has not lost the feeling of her
says: for still she cries, Truth Lord, yet the dogs may eat the crummes
that fall from their masters table. And surely all that can thus hang on the
breasts of Gods mercies, are children of hope that never miscarrie; but at
length after many scourges, shall hear the admirable voice of commendation, I
have not found such faith in any, go away in peace, and be it to every one of
you according to your faith.

Reas. 2. He that will rest upon the means of his salvation, though he find
not any sweetness in the performance of them, is a true believer, though he
feel not his wished joy. Will thou go to bear Gods word, and frequent the
places of his worship? will thou pray, read, confer, meditate, etc. and
perform all these in obedience unto God, though thou feel no sweetness in
them? then assure thy self, that resting upon Gods means for comfort, thou
have true faith, and that cannot but at length make thy joy to break forth.

Reas. 3. He that with all his heart can wish the salvation of any member of
Christ, is a true member of Christ, and ingrafted into Christ by a lively
faith; now these diffressed souls can wish with all their hearts the salvation
of others; and therefore it cannot be, but they should be of Christ's body, and
have in them the true life of that body for a member of the world can never in
upright sincerity, wish the welfare of Christ's body.

Reas. 4. They that most complain of their corruption from the true sense and
feeling thereof, are sanctified by the spirit of grace: for corruption cannot
complain of corruption, neither one sin become an enemy to another; but
grace alone complains of corruption; and the law of the spirit, opposes the
law of the flesh: now it is proved by experience, that none complain more of
sin, then the poor Christian afflicted in conscience: neither is this their
complaint that of the wicked; for they cry out of the sense and feeling of the
pupunishment, but these for that they should so displease God: O therefore lift
up your hearts, and cry with David, Psalm. 51. Lord restore unto us the joy of
thy salvation.

Again, let us consider with whom we fight, and for what crown, and how both
heaven and earth moved at our redemption; and the same power concurred thereto
as in our first creation; and therefore the work being so great, no marvel
if we undergo many an heavy burden, be put to many a dangerous lift, yet the
foundation is so surely laid, that it must up in spite of all opposing power:
For as the great and mighty oaks are slower in attaining their full growth,
then the shrubs and weeds; whose enduring is for many years, and for time out
of mind, (as we say,) when the other in short time wither and fade away; so
must Christians esteem their increase of heavenly graces, slow, but sure, and
everlasting as immortality, that they may be as a beam, or a pillar in the
temple of God for ever and ever: for the life of grace is no natural life, but
spiritual, therefore no way corruptible: for if it were so, contradictions
would be true, that spiritual life should be natural life, incoruptible
corruptible, and immortal mortal. Neither here let us be deceived in judging
according to our sense, or mere shows of things; for then the most fruitful
trees, in winter shall be taken for barren, and the lusty soil, dry and
unfruitful, while it is shut up with the hard frost: but reason and experience
proves the contrary; faith the spiritual shield in this our spiritual
war-fare, endures much battering, and many brunts, and receives the forefront
of the encounter, and oftentimes fares as if it were peirced through, and
worn unfit for battle, whereupon we lay it aside: yet even for all this it
proves invincible, and repelleth whatsoever engine the enemy inforceth against
us, and stands firm rooted, whatsoever storm Satan raises for the
displacing thereof: therefore when the sense of faith is dulled in us, and the
fruits minister coffeehouse; remember that the graces and mercies of God are
without repentance, and Christ Jesus whom he loves he loves unto the end.
Suppose that fire were extraordinarily fixed in the cold water, so that you
would say there can be no coldness at all in the water; yet consider that cold
is so natural to the water, that secretly he will drive out the heat, and
make it apparent that the fire had no place there but by usurpation: so faith
in the soul of man assisted by patience, when man in the very fire of
affliction, will by little and little bring out sin, and with sin the
punishment of the same: so that it shall clearly appear that faith does but
esteem of them both, as tenants at will.

Oh consider this, that our goodness did not move God to bestow his mercy
upon us, neither shall our sin cause him to remove it: for he saw them
before be gave us his mercy: why did he not then withhold his mercy? surely
as he knew us when we were strangers from him, and loved us when we hated him,
and had nothing which might provoke his mercy but our misery: so is his
goodness continued upon us still for his own sake, and not at all for our
deserving, but for that righteousness sake which is in his Son, and that
oblation of his offered up; not for himself, but for others: and therefore
with whom he was well pleased for that sacrifice, with them shall he still be
well pleased: otherwise both these absurdities should follow, that this
sacrifice might be in vain, and this wel-pleasing might be changed: from whose
righteousness so much is detracted, as we attribute either unto change, or
unto our selves, or think to attain unto, in respect of our own satisfying:
and again, so much of Gods mercy is impaired, as we shall rest upon any power
or virtue in our selves, whereby to avoid his vengeance and justice. Election
is only the Lords, therefore committed to no hazard: if on us, who are like
the wind in inconstancy, and as frail as the tender herbs, how soon should
all become nothing, therefore Gods decree being laid the first corner stone, we
may assure our selves that the building shall stand for ever: therefore every
one in his conflicts with the devil, has full assurance of the conquest: for
this root is laid in him, whose fruit and branches stormy tempests may nippe
and shake, yet the sap shall never be dried up in the root, neither shall any
evil wind of Satan so blast, that the immortal seed be at any time quite
withered: yea, though all fiery darts bend thereto, with all might and maine
employed: yet the storm being blown over by the spirit of grace, and the
comfortable sun of consolation shining upon our gloomy hearts, it will budde
forth again, into blossom, fruit, and branch, as a most beautiful tree in
the paradise of God.

Let the comparison of bodily sickness, and the consideration of the kind of
frailty move us: we have experience how diverse times the disease prevails
over the sick persons, that actions fail, and the faculties seem quite to be
spent; neither hand nor foot is able to do their duties; the eye is dim,
the hearing dull, the taste altered, and the tongue distasteth all things, even
of most pleasant relish; and the weak and feeble patient, seems to attend
the time of dissolution, when as yet notwithstanding there remains a secret
power of nature, and a forcible spark of life, that ouercometh all these
infirmities, and consumes them like dross, and renders to the body a greater
purity, and firmness of health, then before the sickness it did enjoy: even so
ought every one to esteem of the spiritual case, and consider that their
soul is sick but not dead, faith assailed but not overcome: therefore let
patience attend the finishing of this secret work: and so shall they see these
burning seauers of temptations, to be slaked and cooled by the mercy and grace
of Christ, and that spark of faith which did he hid, and overwhelmed with
heaps of temptations, to break forth again, consume the causes of the
disease. And as nature after a perfect crise discharges her self either by
stool, vomit, sweat, bleeding, or such like euacuations, to the recovery of
the former health: even so shall the faithful soul find in himself strange
ease after these temptations, by reason they have caused diverse euacations of
the filthiness of sin, and therefore greater purity must needs be in the
soul. Thus the Lord preserues the very garments of his Saints, that he
suffers them not to take any smell of the flame, or the very sweat of
afflictions to stick upon them: Psalm. 68.22. The Lord has said I will bring
my people again from Bashan: I will bring them again from the depths of the
sea: Og the Giant, and all his fat bulls may push at the godly, but their
strength shall not prevail against the strong one of Israel: but even the
foot of his faithful ones shall be dipped in blood, and the tongues of the
dogs of Israel may draw out the very heart blood of all these bulls: So
that after the conquest, the triumph being given to the Lord, they may truly
celebrate it, setting the singers before, the players of instruments after: so
that the praise of God may be heard in his assemblies, even from all them that
are derived from the fountain of Israel: so that this knot betwixt God and the
faithful soul, more surely knit then that of Gordius, can never be loosed by
the devil, broken by his forces, disanulled by his stratagemes, or ever found
out by his policies. Therefore as Christ cried out, O my God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? it is impossible that Christ should be forsaken, therefore it
is a voice more for the instruction of his children, then to show his own
discomforts: if he cried out, why may not we cry out? yet as Christ was heard,
and freed from his fear; so shall every faithful soul be sure to speed with
his God, and shall again (as David was) be restored to those wonted joys,
which they sometimes felt in the sweet mercies of the Lord.

These assaults are at the first heavy and bitter; if they come in great
measure, they may cause impatience, Job 3.1. if they continue, then may the
soul begin to judge them nothing but Gods wrath: Job 6.2, 3. The arrows of
the Almighty are in me, and the venom thereof does drink up my spirit, and
the terrors of God are against me: it brings afresh his old sins into
remembrance, to trouble him in his sleep; visions, dreams, and anxietie of
spirit. Yet in this misery God supports his faith; he feeling this, gets
experience, Romans 5.4. hence hope, that grace shall never be wanting, Job 42.5,
6, Heb. 12.11. Let Pharaoh feel but a little of this, and he presently
rebels: yet the faithful, though they have more feeling of their rebellious
hearts, and the devil more strongly assailes them then any other, yea God
seems to be their enemy; yet, Job 13.15. Though he slay me, yet will I trust
in him. David, Psalm. 22.1. O my God, I cry by day, but thou hear not; by
night, but I have no audience: words almost of desperation, and as a man
without faith: yet then he says, My God; a plain argument of faith: for Gods
children can not forget their language.

Hence a man may in a manner, see contrary affections in their prayers: for
flesh and spirit struggle together: Genesis 32.18. Iaakobs wrestling is a type of
the conflicts of the faithful with Christ: he assailes them with the one hand,
and vpholds them with the other: hence Iaakob is called Israel, a preuailer
with God. The Church has both his names, Psalm. 130. and Psalm. 121. Mark.
15.22. to 27. we see a strange conflict betwixt the woman of Samaria and our
Savior Christ: four notable repulses are given her; 1. silence, 2. haish
speeches of the Disciples, Send her away; 3. cold comfort, I am come for the
house of Israel, of which thou art none; 4. extraordinary reproach, Thou art
but as a dog; therefore must thou have none of the childrens bread: yet we
find her to be more instant at every repulse, and when the most dangerous
repulse was given her, to bring an invincible argument of her faith, True Lord,
I yield all; if my place and deseruings must be considered, then no mercy for
me; but, Lord, yet account of me as thou have said, let me thy dog but taste
of the crummes of thy mercy, and it shall suffice the hunger of my soul. Thus
Gods children overwhelmed with sin, turmoiled with Satan's conflicts, and
amazed with Gods anger, can then lift up their eye lids, and give a glimps to
the brazen serpent Christ Jesus, and fling themselves into his arms, catch
hold on Gods hand buffetting them, and kiss it.

There be three grounds of temptation. First, our natural weakness, proved
by Satan and the world. Secondly, the continual buds of our original sin;
in understanding, will, affections, and all their instruments: our
understanding is turned into blindness of error, our will embraces not only
those things which corrupt judgment directs unto, but even where
understanding stands sound; there will bends to affection, and neglects
the light of reason: our affections are both rebellious to right judgment and
will; in that they rage when they should not, and where just cause is given,
are quiet and at rest. Thus from these principles in the soul, the bodily
members become weapons and instruments of all impiety and injustice, even to
the ouerturning of Church and Commonwealth, except the Lord should restrain
them: in so much that the very pillars of the world would shatter in sunder,
and the vault of heaven would fall, and all things would turn to their former
Chaos, and be consumed with the terrible fire of Gods vengeance, and perish in
his heavy displeasure. Thirdly, God puts on his children armor of proof, but
they are negligent in the buckling of it on them; and therefore the devil
often takes advantage by that to do us hurt: even the gifts and graces of God
are made grounds of the devils temptations: and therefore no marvel though
Satan and the world prevail against us, except the Lord stretch forth his
hand and uphold us. Therefore because I see the point in hand weighty, and
that which troubles the whole world to lie even upon this foundation; and the
resolution whereof cannot but administer excellent comfort to every Christian,
I will be bold to enlarge my meditations: and the more willingly, because it is
so direct with my text, not as grounded from it, but as misapplied of the weak
Christian, taking every sight of his sin, for this fearful setting of them
before the eyes of his conscience: when the Lord only threatens the hypocrites
and wicked of this world, which will not but by constraint of law and
judgment, meddle with their sins: nay on the contrary, it is their nature
to make God always a friend unto them, as before we declared. Therefore for
the godlies sake, will I not keep silence in proceeding for their comfort. The
grounds of all temptations being laid both inward and outward, essential and
accidental; we will come to the difficulty of difficulties, to see how the
devil aims at these grounds.

For distinction, he does it two ways, either mediately or immediately:
mediately either by single means, or by joining two together: all these kinds
will I manifest in the following discourse. And first, for his immediate
working; the experience of it is more lamentable and infallible, then the
manner how easy to find out: yet something dare we boldly affirm, and for
methods sake, we bring it to two heads. It is either corporal possession, or
spiritual: for the first, he may easily bring it about without any means;
because he is a most subtle nature, and full of strength; by his subtlety he
may easily enter the body; and by his strength, he may carry it at his
pleasure; he may possess the whole body, and as Master command all that
house; but surely, he can not have such access unto the soul; yet from his
nature being by creation a spirit, and therefore of the same kind of essence
with our souls, and endued with the same qualities of understanding and will,
is able by agreement of nature, and excellency of quality to ouer-reach man,
being in the self same kind his inferior: For the nature of Angels is more
excellent then man's: and therefore has he a power over them; for in nature
every inferior power is subjected to the superior, yet both of them limited
of God. Therefore I doubt not, but God permitting, the devil is able to meddle
with our spirits, without all corporal means; even as we see corporal
creatures with bodily and corporal force, to annoy one another; and as men
have fellowship one with other by corporal presence, and are delighted or
displeased with the qualities of the mind, according as they like or dislike,
uttered by speech and talk: so it is most like that spirits have their
society maintained by a spiritual conference, whereby their wills and purposes
are intercommunicated one to another, without corporal sound, whereof both the
spirits want the instrument, and the voice nothing affects the mind. Daily
experience makes this manifest in such as are possessed; whose discourses are
often rare and admirable, whose speech and phrase is often such as they never
learned. Now the devil must needs be the schoolmaster; and surely he informs
them not by voice, but by spiritual communication; and so they receive a
clear notion, of many a point they were always ignorant of, and are able to
express it in all variety of languages, and that in the phrase of eloquence:
Nay, in a lesser degree then all this, the false spirit persuades Ahab by all
his false and lying Prophets, that he should go up and prosper: surely this
spirit informed their spirits. Thus entered Satan into Judas, not by corporal
possession, but spiritual; and persuaded him to betray Christ: thus Ananias,
Acts 5. had his heart filled: and Ephesians. 2. the devil is called the spirit
that works in the children of disobedience: and that once they walked
according to the conduct of that spirit. These must needs be real operations,
carrying a force in them, more then objects do unto any faculty that is
conversant about it: for suppose the devil should hold any art before the eyes
of an ignorant man, could he possibly become a good Grammarian, Rhetorician,
Logician; whereby he would talk with a Grecian, though he were a Barbarian;
plead with Cicero, though he were one of the common sort; and dispute with
Aristotle and Plato, though he had never been in their schools, but had
followed the plough all his life? I should from reason think it impossible:
therefore he communicates his knowledge with these ignorant persons. But you
will say, this is strange, why should we then not perceive it? I answer, the
body in which the soul is, is as a veil, to hide his manner of communication
from us: yet it is no hinderance for him to enter within the veil, and speak
unto us more angelico: yet we peceiue it not, save in the effects; because for
the time of this life, we exercise all actions through the body: yet I am
persuaded, that if the soul were out of the body, we should perceive it most
plainly: if the curtain were drawn we should see the devil lying with us in
our bosoms: for the souls among themselves, and with the angels in heaven,
have sweet communication, and therefore I fear not, but the damned souls and
devils in hell, have their woeful society.

Again, for the better conceiving of this point, we stand not only subject to
Satan's annoyance, through the subtilnes of his nature, being a spirit; but
through that long experience and practice about our misery, from age to age,
is able to work more powerfully, the Lord permitting him for a time. Thus more
perfectly he knows our minds, and gathers much by the inclination of our
affections, and will, and marking the object on which we dwell. But you will
object, the Lord has reserved this property unto himself to know the heart.
Ans. It is true; but the communication of the heart, may be betwixt man and
man, and man and angels: therefore the Lord directly knows the heart, and all
the corners of it; so that we can bring no fallacian out of it to deceive God;
but the devil may be deceived, as surely often he is in the discourses of the
godly. Experience has proved, that the consultations of wicked kings, have
been revealed to the godly, 2. kin. 6.11. Will ye not show me, which of us
bewrays our counsel to the King of Israel? one of his servants makes answer,
It is Elisha the Prophet that tells the King of Israel, even the words that
thou speak in thy privy chamber: Elisha heard not these words, yet they are
communicated unto him after a spiritual manner, such as are the visions of
God: and thus Paul, deprived of all bodily instruments, saw things
inutterable. Yea, the devil being Gods ape, has detected one wicked man's
counsel to an other: but he has always bin deceived in the consultations of
the godly, and never was able to reveal them. To proceed: From this
experience he can conclude not only from our speeches, and gestures, to
conceive of our intents, and purposes; but out of our universal corruption,
whereof he has continual proof, much matter of argument to discover the
vanity of our minds, the secret thoughts of our hearts, and the very
inclinations of the same. Now these being found out, he will proceed to
suggestion, as he sees occasion, and our greatest inclination, and so by
instigation unto sin, make us disobey God, and all his holy commandments.
Again, that he does not all by suggestion unto the soul inclining it, is
plain, when our natures seem not to incline unto them, in any special
consideration, or love it before other wickedness; neither the world alluring
or enforcing us; especially Gods children abhorring the very least conceit of
such sins, as blasphemies, and laying violent hands on themselves, or others,
without all hate or malice, or any occasion of revenge. And surely of the same
nature, is despair and distrust of Gods mercies, loss of the seed of Gods
word, when we have no inclination unto them at all, but rather contrarily
affected: and these the devil puts unto us in regard of our general
corruption, without any further consideration of special inclination; and
therefore he never cease in these temptations, because he has hope to
prevail in them; and therefore shall we never be rid of the devil, until God
have wholly delivered us from our stains. Truly Gods children often admire
how ever such a thought should rise in their head, when they hate the very
appearance of it.

Now I come to the second head, which is done by means, first single, and then
mixed: but before I enter this, let us consider the devil as a fowler, whose
nature is to be a friend in show, but a foe in heart. Secondly, look upon his
snares, which all of them have three properties, sweet, dangerous, secret.
Thirdly, consider the ways of his laying: the devils way is suggestion, real
operation, and both together: the way wherein he lays them, is inward or
outward; inward, judgments and lusts; outward actions, graces, things
indifferent, and evil company as the stale: the hold that he has, is very
strong, for until grace have turned him out, he holds men at his will: a most
beastly captivity: nay worse then beastly, because beasts having once bin
snared, will come there no more; but a man is never well but when he is in the
snares of the devil. Secondly, it is a voluntary captivity, and therefore
like to be for ever, except the Lord have mercy to change his mind, and draw
him against his will. Thirdly, it is most base: for Israel in Egypt may be
accounted kings in regard of the slaves of the devil. Lastly, it is most
treacherous, because they renounce their covenant with God, and strike hands
with the devil; and therefore from these things considered, we may make full
account that the devil has many means to help him: the first is suggestio^
on the soul, accompanied with all the baits he can imagine: the second real
operation on the body, affecting humor and spirit, and so making them assist
him as means to work our woe. Humor distempered, causes diseases to the
body, and the body diseased, changes our manners and course of living: hinc
mores sequuntur humores. Again, he dulls the spirits, and so causes
drowsiness in the worship of God, and every good calling: again, he
refreshes them in evil, and therefore keeps us long waking unto it.

For the mixing of both together, both suggestion and real operation, the
devil can play his part most dangerously: for he can work the humors of our
bodies, to make notable way for suggestion upon our souls. If a man be of a
melancholy constitution, whose humor is dry and cold, the devil will make
it notably affect a man in all his members; especially in his heart and brain,
the two of the principal parts of man, and where the soul has most
residence: in the heart he will affect him with sudden fears, strange
distrusts, suspicion of infinite evils; whereby he will move the soul in
judgment, will, and affection, to set about the inuenting, willing, and
effecting of some strange exploits, to ease himself of his pains: hence often
either murder of himself, or of some other, which he falsely suspects an
instrument of his woe. Again, the brain, by altering all the senses, working
strange imaginations, by which it is almost impossible, but that the mind of
man should be set a working: and these being false grounds, hardly shall the
judgment escape uncorrupted: nay alas, whatsoever they conceit upon these
grounds, shall not be removed out of their judgment. They that think
themselves to be made of glass, will not suffer their very friends to come
near them: he that thought himself to be a cock, would never give over the
spreading of his arms, in imitation of the cock clapping his wings, and then
would endeavor to imitate the cocks crow: he that conceited himself to be
Atlas, could never be brought to sit down, lest his head that underpropped
heaven being removed, should suffer heaven to fall upon him: he that thought a
certain tyrant had cut off his head, could never be persuaded to the contrary,
until his head aked, the physician having put a cap of lead on it. The woman
that imagined that she had swallowed a Serpent, could never be at rest until
she saw one privily conveyed into her stool, which she imagined to have been
brought down by the physicians purgation. Another thinking himself dead would
eat no meat, because it was not usual for dead men to eat, until he saw one
come out of a sheet and at the table before him fall unto his meat. Now as it
fares with the body, so may the devil cause it fall out with the soul; make
men conceit strange things either by presumption, as these hypocrites, that
they were like God, that all was well with them; or by despair to discourage
themselves, that they are out of the love and favor of God, and therefore
never hope for any mercy; therefore good to make a sudden dispatch of
themselves by death: and therefore Serapio calls this humor, the very seat of
the devil: and our common speech is, that melancholy is the devils black
horse.

Again, if a man be of a choleric complexion, hot and dry, it makes him fit
for anger, contention, and brawling; the devil will augement it, and make him
forget all reason and humanity, and like beasts kill one another: if a man be
of a sanguine constitution, hot and moist, then naturally they are merry and
Iovially disposed: therefore he stirs these persons to wantonness, and
uncleanness: if of a phlegmatic constitution, which is cold and moist, then
they are heavy and sleepie, and these the devil will notably assail with all
manner of idleness, the begetter of all manner of vices. Again, he can play
his part with the spirits of the body, which are most excellent, and the very
bonds of our soul and body. First, with the natural spirits, he can help
forward to great vices: gluttony and drunkenness, make men pass all bonds of
sobriety, therefore by the natural spirits he will notably increase the
desire of all drunkards and gluttonous livers. It is an admirable thing to
consider, what many witches will devour, and yet say they have eaten nothing.
By this means the devil keeps men from all good callings, and disposes them
unto all evil. Secondly, for the vital spirits; he can make men lively,
quick, and nimble to run about his matters; and again make them dead
hearted when they would go about the works God requires: and therefore no
marvel why men are so cheerful at plays, beare-baitings, lascivious
dancing, and many wicked recreations; when at sermons, and works of their
callings, they think every hour a day, and every day a year. Thirdly, for
the animal spirits: he makes what he lift of our outward senses: he has the
eye at command to behold vanity; the ear at his beck to listen unto lies;
the tongue at will to blaspheme God; the hand at liberty to shed blood; and
the feet vnfettered to run into all excess of riot: he has the smell to
wind a commodity, though it must be gotten by oppression; he has the touch
most exquisite to finger other men's goods, but as tender as butter to receive
any injury. For the inward senses, he has the common-sense, the very sink and
puddle where all the outward senses center themselves, that a speedy
conueyance may be made to the fancy, and so to the judgment, will, and
affections, that sin may even have entertainment without all entreaty, and
quick dispatch in his business without all controlment or contradiction: the
memory in good case, to become a store house for all villainy; and the fancy
night nor day to be at rest, until they have found out a tabernacle for the
devil with all his instruments to dwell in. These spirits help forward all
motions, and surely the devil he will drive the cart and horses: and
therefore no marvel if we rush into sin as the horse does into the battle:
for he goes fast enough whom the devil drives: and therefore seeing that the
devil has so many ways to deal with us, no extraordinary matter to be
troubled with him: and as he drives us unto sin, so would he likewise drive
us into setting sins before our eyes, especially when the hand of God is upon
body or soul, to despair of his mercy, and leave off all our confidence, and
cry nothing but reprobation: let us a little see this chief adversary of our
soul, that we may the better oppose him.

Of the devils wit, will, and power to hurt the godly.
The devil for faculty of understanding, is most subtle; for habit most
nimble; and policy most expert: Strength without wit, is like a giant without
eyes, and the less to be feared; but when there is a quick eye, to discover
all advantages; and a mighty strength to strike down all before it, then there
must be strange power that can resist. The devil in the Scriptures, is as well
a serpent, as a dragon; yea, and an old serpent, which being the subtilest of
beasts, has his craft redoubled by his age and experience: Apoc. 12.9. hence
he is called (...), and (...), quasi (...), to signify unto us great
knowledge. Six thousand years, in a manner, is the time of his age, which
were able to make one wise, that were by nature simple and foolish; therefore
much more one of an exquisite knowledge by nature: he is a spiritual being,
and so is able to diue as it were into the secrets of nature, and with
incredible swiftnes to pass from plece to place, ready to intrude himself
into all companies, and learn their natures, qualities, dispositions and order
of life: so that our estate is almost unto Satan, as was that of the king of
Arams, 2. kin. 6.12. he knows all our counsels and consultations, which we
take and hold in our most secret chambers: for indeed for the most part, he is
the chief counselor in all matters of sin; and receives such intelligence
from our cogitations, affections, lusts, inclinations, and outward actions,
that he can shrewdly guess at the frame of the soul, if he keep us company
but a few days: by the abuse of simple intelligence, he can teach us how to
invent much evil: by the abuse of science, he can become a lying spirit in the
hearts of all men, to seduce them to all error and heresy: by the evil
discourse of wisdom, he can draw men from one danger to another, and
persuade them that all are true diductions; for yield to one sin, and a
thousnad will follow out of the devils discourses: by the disorder of prudence,
he can teach men that no practice is warrantable, but that which follows their
method; and by the evil handling of art, he can seem to be skillful, by
nayling men fast unto all their impieties.

Hence arise all the devils stratagems: first, against understanding; 2. the
will and affections; 3. the body. Against understanding; first, he desires
nothing more then to put out that eye, and make men like mill horses, to run
round in his service, and when he pleases may suffer them to knock out their
brains. Secondly, after he has blinded the mind with ignorance, then he
tempts them to error: and thirdly, from error he brings them to heresy, and
from heresy he leads them a long to hardness of heart; from hardness of
heart, to no sense and feeling of their wretched estate, and then follows all
wantonness, uncleanness, unto which they give themselves with greediness:
Ephesians. 4.17. vanity of mind, brings in darkness of cogitation; darkness of
cogitation, estrangeth a man from the life of God: strangers we are with God
through ignorance, especially because of the hardness of our hearts, this
draws on a senseless conscience, etc. These stratagems are most natural to
all, and upon these he builds the rest: first Atheism, that there is no God:
secondly, upon that he lays a second, that then there is no worship of God:
thirdly, that then there is no word of God: fourthly, that then a man is not to
believe that which is preached. Hence all the mystery of a man's faluation, is
to wicked men nothing but foolishnes: thus he brings men to forsake God,
renounce their baptism, and give themselves wholly to his service.

After the devil has thus hammered the understanding, and beaten it out to his
own will and bent, he sets upon the will and affections of men, and knowing
the^ to wheel in a wrong course from God, he labors against nothing more,
then that they should ever listen unto any means, that might bring the^ again
to run in the ways of God. First therfoere, he persuades them, to believe
that the word of God is not true: this he did to our first parents, Genesis 3. if
he cannot persuade this, because now it has been confirmed by so many
miracles, and shedding of so much blood, that even natural men may as well as
devils, believe it to be true, and tremble. Yet he has a second course, that
though they believe this word, yet that faith is either merely historical, or
else indeed mere presumption; in which faith millions of souls go to hell.
But if he see that the soul will not presume, then he persuades the
difficulty of faith, that it is a very hard matter to believe, and thousands
that strive for it go without; therefore as good sit still, as strive and be
never the better. Others again are persuaded, that such a do for faith is a
needless thing; they can content themselves with an ordinary persuasion of
Gods mercy, and to look for higher mysteries belongs to their teachers, and
not to them; these will never try whether they believe or no, but will be
content with such as God sends them. Another fort are tempted to think, that
the name of a believer is a discredit unto them, and therefore they will never
be pointed at as singular. A sixth kind are tempted with their unworthiness: how
can the Lord bestow such an excellent grace upon me that am so unworthy? A
seventh sort are tempted with the unsoundness of their faith, because they see
many imperfections. Eighthly, others that they have no faith, because no
feeling. Ninth, that their faith may fall as Judas faith did. Lastly, that they
can never withstand all these tempests, that break in upon them: By all these
means the devil labors to draw the will to infidelity; after this he
allures the will by large propromises to believe in him, and so brings a
miserable slavery upon the will.

The affections are moved and tempted of the devil by the baits of
prosperity, or else disquieted with adversity to curse Gods providence, etc.
The body in spirit, humor, temperature, quality, instrument, and substance,
is notably tempted, and wrought upon by the devil. Many points might here be
cleared, and examples for the illustration of them; I will give one that I have
seen by late experience, who inclining to inflammation of his brain, and so
unto aphrensie, was tempted to murder himself; and that with this strong
persuasion of his fancy, that except he did it speedily, a thousand deaths
worse then that would befall him; which thing being falsely apprehended of him,
made him presently yield; and having hung up himself by both his garters upon
a tree, his garters presently broke; a woman that was weeding in a garden
being not far from him, the devil persuaded him that she had cut his
garters; and without all question, if he had not been prevented, when he was
come complaining unto the woman what an injury she had done him, would
presently for that injury, have been tempted to kill the woman: His frenzy
growing upon him, and making him so unruly, that they were feign to bind him
with ropes, and two or three men watch him, and then his fancy apprehending,
that every man he saw, or any creature that came in his sight, was come to
kill him, he would always cry, If I had been hanged, I should never have
been thus misused. The like has been in many others, that when they have
been about to make away themselves for some distempered humor, have also
plotted to kill wife and children, not for that they hated them, but that they
should not live in disagrace after their death. All this and much more can the
devil do by his great wit and understanding.

But perhaps you will say, he is not so malciously bent for his will. I answer,
that as he has understanding to do evil, so he has a will to do more then
he can invent or imagine with his mind. See then the degrees of his malicious
will against mankind: First, if we could find in our cowardly hearts to sue
for a dishourable peace with the devil, Gods and our enemy, there should be
no hope of truce or reconciliation with him: for his malice is not newly
conceived, but inueterate; and as ancient within a few days, as the world it
self, and for time to come, it is endless and will outlast the world. He was
almost burst with envy against Adam in Paradise, and so is he in like manner
against all that are raised up again in the second Adam, and have gotten the
fee simple of everlasting glory: Gods proclamation of open wars, Genesis 3.15.
is not yet come to an end, but is to last for ever. Thus then you see malice
without all reconciliation, ancient and endless; but yet a fourth degree
follows, and that is, that his malice is mortal and deadly, not to a man's
goods and possessions, or body or bodily life, but to body and soul, whose
destruction is a paradise of joy unto him: therefore is he called Satan, Zac.
3.1. an enemy: Matthew. 13.39. a malicious one. Neither is the nature of this
enemy to be satisfied with some small revenge, for he is called a murderer,
and a manslayer, as though it were his only occupation: neither is he of late
fallen to this trade, for he has professed it from the beginning, like an old
hangman, he is flesht in blood and cruelty.

But it may be a savage man may have in him some relics of humanity, and
therefore the devil having reason as well as man, may sometimes recall
himself by reason, and take some pity: but the Scriptures drives us from this
conceit, comparing him unto the most cruel beasts; first a lion, yea a roaring
lion after his pray, who being so hungry and ravenous, that he desires nothing
more then to seize upon that which he pursues, 1. Pet. 5.8. Secondly, that yet
we may a little the more conceive of his brutish cruelitie, he is compared,
Reu. 12.3. to a red dragon, whose fiercenes we find in history to exceed all
lions: for a lion if he be not hungry, and see one not oppose him, but fall
down before him, will not hurt him: but a dragon will devour man's flesh for
sport.

This malice is open, and so less dangerous; but if he see that we are
strongly fortified with Gods grace, and at all points armed with complete
armor of a Christian; if fenced and hedged on all sides, as Job was, Job 1.10.
then leaving his raging violence, he strives with us by fawning and alluring us
to sin: thus with our first parents, to taste of that pleasant fruit, which
deprived them of the breast plate of righteousness, and vncocouered them of Gods
protection, so that ever since that time he has had full blows without all
resistance: hence he is called a tempter, and (...), that tempter, the tempter
of tempters: after temptation, he falls to accusation; hence he is called
(...), the devil: after accusation, he is very glad that God will any where
make him an executioner and hangman: his will then can be no less then
maliciousness it self, Ephesians. 6.12.

But you will say, though his will be maliciously bent, yet he wants strength:
but let me tell you, that the devil is very strong, both in himself and in
his aides. In himself, he can raise great tempests, both by sea and by land:
he is compared to the great Leuiathan that makes the sea to boil with his
motion: as strong upon earth as a lion, a dragon with seven heads, and ten
horns, and with his very tail he throws to the ground the third part of the
stars of heaven. Luke 11.21. a strong armed man, who keeps in peace all
that he possesses: nay, a mighty prince, not of one country or land; but a
monarch of the whole world, Ioh. 12.31. and by his authority, can command
infinite multitudes to go for him: neither is this all, but they be called
princes, powers, worldly governors, Ephesians. 6.12. and that these may not be one
against another, they have a head under which they all conspired; Math. 25.41.
fire prepared for the devil and his angels: in this sense he is called
Beelzebub, the prince of devils: the word signifies a prince of flies, not for
their weakness, but mulitudes; even as though they were swarms conjoined
together to do mischeife; one spirit takes seven more, Mat. 12.45. nay a
legion of devils are spoken of, Luke 8.30. so that they are a sufficient
number, to beset us all, on all sides, and in all places.

Lastly, to set forth the advantage he has of us poor men, they are said to
be princes of darkness; and that is lamentable, to fight with an enemy that
can see us, but not be seen again. Secondly, they are not enemies of flesh,
but spiritual wickednesses; most dangerous, because spirits; and pestelent,
because no less then wickedness it self; they will be with us, because they
are so swift, and they never come without the plague and pestelence of sin
hanging about them. Thirdly, they have gotten the upper ground, and fight from
higher places then we can reach unto, being poor silly worms crawling upon
the earth: and the Scriptures truly laying open his strength, call him no
less then a god of this world, 2. Cor. 4.4. as though he were omnipotent upon
earth. But perhaps you will say, he wants courage to his strength: but let me
tell you, I find him in the scriptures to be no less then exceeding desperate,
and audacious: there was never man that lived, but he had some thing to say
with him: Adam in paradise; yea our savior Christ; nay, Reu. 12.7. there is
mention of a battle in heaven; Michael and his angels fought against the
dragon, and the dragon and his angels, etc. But if I should proceed, I should
utterly dis-hearten the poor Christian, and make him despair of any
encounter, and hope of victory; yet dare I boldly give the devil his aids,
and yet bid the weakest Christian offer the devil his challenge: his aids are
two; first the world, secondly his own flesh; the one plays on both hands,
with prosperity and adversity; and the other a traitor, always ready to
betray him into the hands of his enemies.

Having described the devil in his wit, will, and power; let us see if there
be any wisdom to oppose him; any will that exceeds as much in goodness unto
man, as the devil does in malice; and any power that can master the devils.
For the first, the good angels have more wit then the bad, and yet their
wisdom is nothing unto Gods: now the eye of the Lord is on the righteous, and
all the holy angels pitch their tents about them: and therefore this counsel
shall stand against all the policies of the devil, and the gates of hell shall
never prevail. And for the virtues of understanding, God has intelligence, to
cross all the inventions of the devil; science, to preserve his own truth
from the lies of the devil; sapience, to draw more good out of evil, then
the devil can evil out of good; and for prudence, God can order all that,
which he has labored to bring to confusion; and for art, the Lord has more
skill to tie his own unto himself, then the devil has to draw them from him:
and for all those stratagems wrought upon the understanding, the Lord can take
away the veil of ignorance; preserve from error, hardness of heart, or any
thing that might rise out of that head. And for will, and affection, and the
whole body, the Lord has promised and will perform, that his holy ones shall
be sanctified throughout, both in body and soul.

For the malice of the devils will, we ought to lay to heart the good will and
pleasure of our God, which has said, he will not forsake us: and for power, we
may be assured that the devil has no power, but that which God shall permit
unto him: he cannot touch Job, until God give him leave; he cannot be a means
of Ahabs ruin, until it please God to yield him that liberty, that he may be
a lying spirit in the mouth of all his false prophets: nay, he cannot enter so
much as into such creatures as swine, until Christ have given him so much
refreshment, before the time of his woeful torture. Secondly, we may fight
with courage; for the devil is already chained, and reserved to more strong
chains hereafter: Iud. v. 6. Thirdly, God has left us such store of armor of
proof, as the devil can never strike through; he may as easily wound God, as
wound us being covered with it: he can never loose our girdle of verity,
strike through our breast plate of righteousness, uncover our feet being shod
with the preparation of the Gospel of peace; his blows can never enter the
shield of faith, nor fiery darts pierce the soul, or dry up the waters of
the spirit; but faith has such a river flowing up and down the soul to
eternal life, that every dart, be it never so red and scalding hot, is
presently quenched. The helmet of salvation will be sure to save the head, for
which the hand would be content to be cut off, before it should receive the
least blow; therefore the head being free, we need less to fear the danger:
and for our hands, we have the sword of the spirit, which is the only weapon
that the devil may not endure: buckle on this armor by prayer and
watchfulnes, and still look the devil in the face, and we shall never receive
hurt by him: but if we turn back, then shall we have not any piece of armor
to save us from danger. They are princes, but we have the Prince of peace, and
angels their superiors, and I doubt not but as many in number as they to fight
for us; and these have gotten the upper ground of the devils: and for
spiritual wickedness, we have gotten the spirit of grace and goodness, that
can move swifter then the devils, to stand by us, and assist us in all our
infirmities: let them all make up a god in this world, yet he that rules heaven
and earth will laugh them to scorn: trust therefore in Gods power, and his
aids, and be quiet a little, and these enemies that you see and feel in this
world; ye shall never see them, or have cause to seele them hereafter. The
three children, Dan. 3. tell the King, they care not for his command: and why?
because they know that the God whom they-serue, can deliver them; and if he
will not, death shall be as good to them. Christ says, his sheep hear his
voice, and follow him, and none shall take them out of his hands; the reason is,
because God that gave them him, is stronger then all: Be of good comfort little
children, ye have overcome the world: because he that is in you, is stronger
then he that is in the world, 1. Ioh. 4.4. The leper cries, if thou willt, thou
can make me clean: many be our leprosies, and happy are we that we have so
good a remedy. We pray for many strange things, but if we observe but the
conclusion of the Lords prayer, we may soon gather up our spirits; seeing we
know that power belongs unto God, thine is the kingdom, power, and glory. We
believe a resurrection, and many other strange things; but our faith needs not
to fall, seeing we say and believe that God is almighty, I believe in God the
Father almighty: this made Paul to challenge principalities and powers, height
and depth, etc. Romans 8. never had he the least fear, that they should ever be
able to separate him from the love of God in Christ Jesus.

Let us see what comforts in special, may be given to Gods children in
affliction: for surely every soul shall find with Elijah, 1. kin. 19. fleeing
from Iezebel, comfort from the very angels of God: yea when they are brought
to stand upon the mount before the Lord, they shall see the Lord pass by, and
a mighty strong wind rend the mountains, and break the rocks before the
Lord, but the Lord was not in the winds: and after the wind came an earthquake,
but the Lord was not in the earthquake: after the earthquake came fire, but the
Lord was not in the fire: and after the fire, came a still and foft voice; and
in that was the Lord found: Oh the goodness of the Lord, that in all the
winds, earthquakes, and fires, that he makes to pass before his children, will
not be seen in them! for then should every one of us be consumed, and utterly
confounded; yet will he be found in the still and soft voice. It is an usual
custom, before great Potentates come unto their palaces, to have a peale of
ordinance to be shot off before their approach: so the Lord by this fear makes
way, that the King of glory may come in, and dwell with the soul. God has
diverse means to bring up his children, law and gospel, judgment and mercy:
in the giving of the law, there was thunder, lightning, and earth quakes; yet
the Lord was heard in a still voice to deliver his law. Gods scholars must
stand as well at the foot of mount Ebor, to hear the curse, as at mount
Gerison, to hear the blessings: the one prepares, the other enters more
easily, to give the heart her due comfort; Moses, Deuter. 28. is full of curses
and blessings: God has many a good David to rule over his people, as well as
hard hearted Pharaoh to school them; he has more good Prophets to bless
them, then wicked Balaams to curse them; he has an evangelical Isaiah, to
lift them up with promises of the Gospel, as a lamenting Jeremiah, to cast them
down with woes and lamentations: he has an Hosea and Zechariah to teach them
in Enigmaes, and dark sentences, and many other to be as plain as heart can
wish: he has many a Paul, I beseech you brethren; as well as sons of thunder,
to make us quake and tremble: yea, and always this is the end of all
afflictions, a gracious sufficit: 2. Sam. 24.16. it is sufficient, hold now thy
hand. Now what the Lord does either in prosperity or adversity, often we see
not; and therefore we loose the comfort of it. The birth of an infant, borne
and increasing, is not apprehended presently: even so is it with us in our
heavenly birth, and spiritual regeneration; the spirit works without our
leave, and acquainteth us not with his maruailous working more then is
expedient at his pleasure, when and in what measure for our comfort. Therefore
let us take heed that God say not unto us as he did unto Job, cap. 38.2. who is
this that darkeneth the counsel by words without knowledge? who are you that
interrupt the ways of God, and labor to prevent his counsels? be sober and
patient, and you shall in the end receive the cup of salvation, instead of
these bottles of vinegar and tears; and in stead of the bread of affliction,
the heavenly manna, and the bread of life from the table of God, and of Christ.

In the mean time I commend unto every soul in affliction these heads of
comfort, which I will show unto him in all the causes: First, in the efficient
causes; principal, less principal: Principal; first the promise of God, 1.
Cor. 10.13. God is faithful, therefore will he suffer no temptation to be
above our ability, but will even give the issue with the temptation, that we
may be able to bear it. Secondly, his promise is grounded upon his power: Col.
1.11. Strengthened with all might, through his glorious power, unto all
patience and long-suffering with ioyfulnesse: which power is manifested in
those two things, which grounds the confidence of al in the world, and that is,
that the promiser be a man of sufficiency, and will also effect that which he
has promised: the first makes it possible in the thing; the second makes it to
exist in me: now we shall find both these in the Lord; which indeed grounds
our faith in all particulars. But here is need of particular application, and
therefore we shall find them both applied unto affliction: I may well believe
God with ease in prosperity; but hoc opus, hic labor est, this is pain and
toil to believe in affliction: mark then these two places; first, for Gods
sufficiency, 2. Cor. 12.9. my grace is sufficient for thee: secondly, for Gods
efficiencie, Isa. 43.2. when thou passest through the waters, I will be with
thee; and through the floods, that they do not ouerflowe thee: when thou
walk thorough the very fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the
flame kindle upon thee. This is more manifested in the manner of working;
first, in the Father, because of his relation; a father can do nothing which
shall not be for the good of his sons: Heb. 12.5. in affliction he speaks as
unto children, my son despise not the chastening of the Lord, neither faint
when thou art rebuked of him. Hence all is in love, Heb. 12.6. Whom he loves
he chasteneth, and scourges every son that he receives: secondly, this
love must purge us, Ioh. 15.2. Every one that bears fruit, he purges that
it may bring forth more fruit: for when we begin to grow wild, he corrects
our haughtiness, and cooles our courage by some affliction or other, to cut
short our horns, least we like bulls of Bashan, should push at the godly: the
Lord sends fire, thieves, oppression, to let us blood in our riches, least we
should be too rank, and grow into a surfeit. Hence we may gather, that the Lord
has means to save us, and give us consolation in his good time, 2. Cor. 1.4.
so that this cannot be in wrath, Psalm. 39.5. and therefore the Father doing
this, it must needs return unto our good, Heb. 12.10.

The second manner of working, is in regard of Christ Jesus: for afflictions
are indeed curses, but Christ became a curse for us; and so as by sin
blessings became curses, so by Christ curses became blessings: therefore the
Apostle calls it, a gift, a matter of Gods liberality to become a sufferer:
Phil. 1.29. for unto you it is given for Christ, that not only ye should
believe in him, but also suffer for his sake: as though it were a greater
matter of commendation to suffer, then believe: hence Paul can be content in
all estates, Phil. 4.13. The third manner of working is, in regard of the holy
Ghost, who is the comfortet of the faithful, and therefore shall they be sure
to want no comfort; this makes the bodily absence of Christ, better then his
presence, Ioh. 16.7.

These are the principal causes, able to support the soul without any more:
yet God is rich in comfort; for the less principal causes are weighty, and
more ready at hand; as first the word of God, with the ministry thereof:
Afflictions work best in men when they come with the word; Iehosaphat was more
humbled by the speech of Iehu the seer, then he was being compassed about with
an host of enemies. Add we unto these the graces of Gods spirit in the hearts
of the faithful: we must overcome grief with patience, and eat out and burn
out the temptation by faith, and purge distrust in Gods promises by
perseverance in prayer: Grief naturally is heavy, and lies as lead at the
heart, and consequently presses us downward, so that faith and prayer, must
keep the heart and hands, the voice and eyes upward: if we can call, it shows
we are children of hope, hanging at the breast; for grace is like the stone
that Aaron and Hur put under Moses, that he might sit upon it; and the exercise
of it is as Aaron and Hur, holding up Moses weak hands; which while they are
steadie, make Israel prevail against the Amalakites: but when they shrink
down, Amalek preuailes: Even so is it with Christians, they sit upon the
corner stone Christ Jesus, but their hands and knees fainting in the exercises
of prayer, and other graces of Gods spirit, makes the devil our cursed Amalek
prevail against us: but the Lord will never leave us without good Aarons and
Hurs, to help to stay up our hands, until the going down of the sun, and
then shall Amalck utterly be discomfited.

More specially I bring a threefold combination of grace, with one single, to
run through every one of them. The first combination is of knowledge and
conscience: knowledge, 2. Tim. 1.12. I am not ashamed, because I know who^ I
have believed: secondly conscience, which is a continual feast; and therefore
he that has a good conscience, may always keep a good house, and be a
cheerful man all the days of his life. The second combination is prayer and
faith; prayer as a watchword stirs up in the soul, and musters up together an
army of heavenly soldiers; yea and God the chief general to send present aid
to beat back all the force of the enemy, and all of them fall backward; even
as the great multitude that came to take our Savior Christ. Again, faith
stays the hand of God continually: it is a most sure stancher of blood; so
that if any affliction lie upon us, it is for want of faith. Moses was rebuked
of the Lord for the not circumcising of his son, his faith was weak, and his
wife in performing that duty was almost without faith: yet the Lord departed
away, and spared both.

Third combination is patience and wisdom: Patience, Luke 21.19. by your
patience possess your souls: the service and worship of God in affliction, is
patience: now wisdom is most excellent, for it teaches us to descend down
into our own souls, and plead guilty; but there it leaves us not, as foolish
persons, to lie pleading with the iaylor or hangman for a pardon; but presently
brings us up again, and makes us ascend unto the Judge in heaven, with a
pardon received at the hands of his Son to entreat for mercy, and that with
full assurance, because in the pardon the grant is specified which the Lord
will never forget: This makes us see the true cause of our misery: 2. Sam.
6.16. what have I to do with you ye sons of Seruia; he curses even
because the Lord has bidden him curse David; who dare then say, wherefore have
thou done it? thus our wisdom teaches us to see the cause, and then look to
his mercy, and consider that his hand is not a destroying hand, but a saving. A
man that falls into sickness, if it come whilst he is in his calling, he is
then less greiued, then if he should have brought it upon him by surfeting,
and have hatched it by his ill courfes: even so it comes to pass in the
sicknesses of the soul; If I was using the means of godliness in sincerity of
heart, then shall I be assured that all this is either to free me from some
sin, or else confirm me in some good work begun in me. Secondly, if in
wisdom we would so provide, that afflictions might not quail us when they
come; then let us in the time of prosperity and quietness of soul, cut off
all head strong affections, as grief, sorrow, and such like, and then shall
they not in our trouble prevail against us. Lastly, learn to deny our
selves, and all our own reason: Luke 9.23. if any man will come after me, let
him deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me.

The last thing requisite in all these, is the keeping of a good memory; yea,
though our trouble be past, yet still with fear to remember the hand of the
Lord. The deliverance of the children of Israel is often repeated in the
Scriptures, and surely for good ends, because naturally we forget the works
of God, and his noble acts of ancient time: which if they were faithfully
treasured up, would do us much good in our times of need: for either we must
think that God is not able to help us, or if he be able, yet we are
unworthy of his help: if we doubt of his power; see what he did for Israel
in Egypt, in the red sea, the wilderness, and among all their enemies: If we
think we are unworthy, then still think on Israel, the worst people on the
face of the earth: for they were always provoking the holy one of Israel.
Psalm. 34.5.6. Ye shall look unto him, and run unto him, and their faces
shall not be ashamed, this poor man cried and the Lord heard him, and saved
him out of all his troubles.

And thus much of the efficient causes; the matter follows out of which we are
to draw some special comfort. The matter of affliction is punishment and
action: Punishment therefore a moral good, action therefore a positive good.
The moral good, first it corrects sin past, by opening our eyes to see it,
by humbling of us, and bringing of us to meditation of heaven and heavenly
things. Secondly, it cures sin present, by crossing of our nature. Thirdly,
it preue^ts sin to come. Fourthly, it tries what is in our hearts. All this
does a wicked man no good: for the punishment is nothing but an execution of
gods vengeance upon them: but to the godly it is a schoolmasters to bring them
unto Christ. For the second, the work of affliction, though in it self a
positive good, because an action; yet it works but woefully in the ungodly, but
most comfortably in the children of God: Heb. 12.11. it brings forth the sweet
and quiet fruit of righteousness unto all them that are exercised: for it is a
most certain thing in Gods children, that the more their afflictions grow,
the more their faith grows; the more Satan strives to draw them from God,
the more they draw near unto God, although in feeling they see not so much.

The third cause is the form, making an essential difference betwixt the
afflictions of the godly, and of the wicked. They are in the godly corrections
of love for their good, but in the wicked the vengeance of God to their
everlasting perishing.

The fourth and last, is the end: first in regard of Christ, Phil. 1.20. to
magnify him, and therefore an honor unto his Saints. Secondly, in regard of
our selves, 2. Cor. 1.9. not to trust in our selves: good to lay aside vain
confidence. Thirdly, for our vocation, 1. Pet. 2.21. good to accomplish the end
of our vocation. Fourthly, good in their own use: all his well that ends well:
Ioh. 16.20. Your sorrow shall be turned into joy.

To proceed to another demonstration; that afflictions are good and
comfortable, may appear in the fruits of it: which are either within us, or
without us. The first, is called the mortification of the flesh, or the
crucifying of the lusts thereof. The second, is called the mortification of the
outward man by manifold afflictions. To this is required a good cause.
Secondly, patience voluntary, not perforce; not mercinarie, but to show our
obedience. Thirdly, constant, not for a brunt. Fourthly, for a good end. Now
their is nothing in these afflictions but joy: these will never gall the
conscience, but make it stout and courageous: therefore let us see the effects
of the other. First, it opens the ear: Job. 33.16. then he opens the ears
of men even by their corrections which he has sealed. Secondly, it brings
forth grief, and is very necessary to bring on other effects. Grief we know
would feign have ease whereof it is, and it labors always to lay it self
open, and to move pity, it seareth nothing more then to be hidden: for which
cause nature has given more helps to bewray this affection then any other; as
heaviness of countenance, hanging down of the forehead, moving of the eyes,
tears, sighs, and groans: it teaches eloquence, and makes us to change our
speeches, and so we learn to amplify the causes of our woe: so that falling
on any object of our grief, we are loath to depart from speaking of it: we
double our speeches on that theme: we know the matter of Ezekias grief forced
his tongue to touch it twice, my tongue, my tongue shall praise thee.

When our Savior Christ spoke of doctrine, he never doubles his words, but is
content to utter it in a word: but when he came to the rebellion of Jerusalem,
it touched him so nearly that he cries, Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem: and David
when he lights upon his son Absolon, O Absolon, Absolon, O my son Absolon.
Thirdly, after grief it makes us loath and detest our selves: Job. 42.6.
therefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes. Fourthly, to seek
unto God: Hos. 5.15. Psalm. 78.34. when he slew them, they sought him, and they
returned and sought the Lord early. Ier. 31.18. I have heard Ephraim lamenting
thus, Thou have corrected me, and I was chastised as an untamed calfe: convert
thou me, and I shall be converted: after that I converted, I repented, and
after that I was instructed I smote upon my thigh: I was ashamed, yea even
confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth.

Lastly, from the subject: Colos. 1.24. I full^ill the rest of the afflictions
of Christ in my body: an excellent subject that may be annexed unto Christ: 1.
Pet. 4.13. rejoice, in so much that ye are made partakers of Christ's
sufferings, that when he shall appear ye may be glad and rejoice. Phil. 1.29.
a high privilege to be a sufferer, for it is given unto us as a special
donation: and therefore their be heads enough of yiedling comfort to every
afflicted soul.

I know none to be tossed and turmoiled more in soul then the godly, and yet
none more free from danger then they: Psa. 88. David has all Gods waves go
over him, v. 17. They came round about him daily like water, and compassed him
together. A seafaring man labors for nothing more, when he is under a
dangerous storm, then to thrust in his ship at any cricke for a shelter,
until the storm be ouer-blowne: and a man plunged in the water will catch at
any rope, and having gotten hold, will part with his life before he will part
with his handfast: so a Christian being tumbled up and down in the waters of
affliction, labors the more for his shelter, and what he lays hold of, he
will not part with it: now whom have they in heaven and earth to rest upon
beside God? and if all the world should counsel them, curse God and die; they
would answer, you speak like fools, shall we receive good of God, and not be
content to bear evil, seeing we have descrued it? When I usually come unto
these distressed souls, and find them floating up and down, and crying, we
are drowned in the deep ocean of our sins, and God has not only forgotten
his mercies unto us, but remembers that we were made for his wrath: Well, if it
be so, then forsake God, renounce your faith; yet let me hear, if you dare
open your mouths to speak against God, or ever suffer a cogitation of such
blasphemy to enter your souls: yea if God himself should rap you on the
fingers, and say, what have you to do with my mercies? yet you will not part
with your hold; and therefore never resolve of this fearful apprehension,
until you can resolve to curse God, and die for ever; but this you neither
can, shall, nor will do. But yield that a passion has broken out in in your
hot fits: Why Lord, thou art not my father: do you think that God will be as
rash again, to say, Away, you are not my children. Suppose one of your own
children should fall into a burning fever, and in the extremity of the heat
should cry out against his father, nay strike him with his fists; would the
father be as hasty as the child? no, no: but with passion cry and weep, al^^,
my child is distempered with heat, I know how he loved me in health, and now
is it my part to love him the more, and do any thing for him; passions ought
not to be the rule of my love, but the dutiful obedience of my child: So God
may even suffer hard words of his children, but not to distaste them for any
such matter, but love them, and care the more to do them good. 1. Kin. 20.
Benhadad the King of Aram is lusty against the King of Israel, v. 3. thy
silver and thy gold are mine, also thy women, and thy fair children are mine:
non victoriam, sed insignia victoriae reportauit: his hot words are soon
cooled, v. 31. and he sees his folly: yet mark the counsel of his servants;
We have heard that the Kings of the house of Israel are merciful Kings, we
pray thee let us put sackecloth about our loins, and ropes about our necks,
and go out to the King of Israel: it may be that he will save thy life: this
is granted, and they come to the king, and say, Thy servant Benhadad says, I
pray thee let me live: and the king said, is he yet alive? he is my brother:
now it is said they had resolved to take diligent heed, if they could catch
any thing of him: here they have enough, and they make the echo to ring, thy
brother Benhadad. In like manner, if you conceit you have spoken presumptuous
words against the great God of heaven, and he has met with you, and now by his
hand has driven you into a secret chamber, remember that God was the King of
the kings of Israel, and therefore far more merciful then Ahab, or any king
that ever was borne among them; put on sackecloth, and thrust your necks into
a rope, (but not as these villains do that dispatch themselves) and come in
all humble manner, yet resolve that your faith shall catch hold, and that you
will take diligent heed to what the Lord shall answer; and as soon as you hear
the Lord say, believe, and you shall be saved; make a present echo, Lord, I
believe, help mine unbelief. I have continued the longer upon this point,
because I see poor Christians monstrously perplexed with this sentence of
placing sin before the conscience, God grant it may take place, and yield
them comfort to their hearts desire.

And thus having freed the godly from the application of this fearful
sentence, I bring it to the wicked, and assure them, that whatsoever fearful
thing they have heard in all this discourse, it of right belongs unto them, and
whatsoever else can be said of the terrors of conscience: Oh therefore consider
this, ye that forget God, for this shall tear you in pieces, and there shall
be none that can deliver you. Alas, of all kinds of misery that can befall unto
man, none is so lamentable as this, because it rises of the sense of Gods
wrath, and revenging hand against the guilty soul of a sinner. Other
calamities afflict the body, and part only of our nature: this the soul
which carries the whole into society of the same misery. Such as are of the
body (though they approach nigher the quick then poverty, or want of
necessaries for maintenance of this life) yet they fail in degree of misery,
and come short of that which this forces upon the soul: the other touch those
parts where the soul commands, poverty, nakedness, sickness, and other
of that kind are mitigated with a mind resolute in patience, or endued with
wisdom to ease that which greiueth, by supply of remedy: this seazeth upon
the seat of wisdom it self, and charge upon all the excellency of
understanding, and grindeth into powder all that stands firm, and melts
like the dew before the sun whatsoever we reckon of as support of our
defects, and subdueth that wherewith all things else are of us subdued: The
cause, the guilt, the punishment, the revenge, and the ministers of the wrath,
all concurring together in more forcible sort (and that against the universal
estate of our nature, not for a time but for ever) then in any other calamity
whatsoever. Here the cause is neither wound or surfeit, shipwreck or spoil,
infamy or disgrace; but all kind of misery joined together, with a troubled
spirit, feeling the beginnings, and expecting with desperate fear, the
eternal consummation of the indignation and fierce wrath of Gods vengeance
against the violation of his holy commandments; which although it take not
away in this life the use of outward benefits, yet does the internal anguish
bereaues us of all delight of them; and better without them, then in such sort
to enjoy them. This is not liable to humane laws, and to come under the
censure of earthly judges but to the divine laws of God, and the censure
executed with her own hands; which censure is a separation from Gods favor,
the creator and blesser of all things, the fountain of all peace and comfort.
Now what creature being the work of his own hands, dare comfort and cheer
us with any consolation? or what assurance of escape if we would flee? the
punishment has no misery to compare with it, the sense of it passes the
capacity of man: for as blessedness with God, is above all conceit of man's
beart, and report of tongue: so the contrary estate exceeds all
understanding of the mind, and utterance of speech; and is such as is above
measure unhappy and most miserable, inflicted by Gods revenge, who is himself
a consuming fire, and whose wrath once kindled, burns to the bottom of hell.
Again, the minister of revenge is without all compassion: he will not be
content with Jobs riches and possessions, but he urges skin for skin; would
have God permit him to streatch out his hand to touch his bones and flesh:
neither there would he satisfy himself, but even against Gods express
commandment, if it were possible, bring his life into the dust: neither there
would he rest, until he had brought him to damn both body and soul. Now if
God would but look on, as he did while the devil was beating Job, it would
wonderfully refresh the wicked, though the Lord meant never to help them: but
alas, he will not vouchsafe them the lest countenance, but suffer the devil to
torment and rack them to the uttermost of his power. Therefore as he has
mourthered the souls of infinite men, he shall be praying on them for ever: Oh
woeful estate! I know not what to say of it; our life and length of days will
forsake us, the devil worse then all tyrants, savage beasts, harpies,
vultures, yea then all the creatures of God, shall seize upon us: our
consciences, with a worm that never dies shall gnaw upon us; surely for want
of words I must leave it: therefore every one as he loves the good of his own
soul, let him be admonished, to think of this fearful sentence; I will set
thy sins in order before thee.

Reasons. First, because the conscience is made of God a little judge and
witness of all our deeds and actions; and therefore must be join with the Lord
against his own subject.

Reas. 2. Because wicked men should be happy, if it were not for their
consciences; therefore must the Lord needs awake them to see their misery.

Reas. 3. That his law may have his effect, and that the power of him may be
made manifest: whereby God may be glorified, the wicked ashamed for putting out
so good a light, and fret and gnash with their teeth, that they regarded not so
good admonitors as the law of God, and their own conscience did continually set
before their eyes.

Reas. 4. That their misery might be perpetual, and dispossess them of all
joy, it is necessary that the Lord should make their sins ever to stand
before the eyes of their conscience.

Use 1. Reprehension: confutation of the wicked, that they would never consider
of their sins, but still did forget God and his law, putting them far from
them: but now shall they be sure to have both sin and punishment; God and his
law, to draw so near them, that they could wish themselves to be nothing, or
at least that the very mountains and rocks might fall upon them: a burden
more easy to bear, then the least touch of their conscience, seeing their
sin, feeling their punishment, from the law accusing, and God himself
revenging the violation of the same. Secondly, a correction of the godly, that
they be not too cruel unto their own souls, conceiving that the Lord has
done unto them, as he has done unto the wicked; when indeed it is rather their
own fancy assisted by their corruption, that makes them judge so miserably
of themselves, as though they were reprobates, and with Cain cast out of the
presence of God for ever: yet let them know that is but the tenderness of the
conscience, and not that violent haling of them to the stake, which is in the
wicked; whose consciences strike against the law, as stones and hammers, that
would rather have the law broken, then themselves to be broken and hammered
by it.

Use 2. Instruction: first, admonition to the wicked, that they be not so
cruel unto themselves; but consider that every sin they commit, is the
stabbing and wounding of their consciences; and he that stabbes often the
selfsame place, will be sure to bring out his heart blood, and make a most
fearful end: for though the wounds of the conscience bleeding fresh, are not
so sensible; yet being festered, and full of corruption, having no oil of
grace powered into them, shall be extraordinary sores, and so miserably felt
of the patient, that when the Lord shall touch them, they shall roar, and
gnash with their teeth, for the extremity of the pain. Secondly, direction to
the godly, to be most tender for the eye of their conscience: We use the eye
of the body most tenderly, and great is our care to safeguard it, much more
ought we to tender the eye of our soul, being far more excellent then the
eye of the body.

Use 3. Consolation: first, in all distress to know that it is a happy thing
to bear the yoke in our youths, to know our diseases betimes, and have our
sins discovered; for then is there hope of cure: but if they continue until
old age, then will they be in greater danger. Secondly, in all our welfare to
labor for the assurance of a good conscience, which is our best felicity.

Application of the whole sentence in the two last verses.
Want of consideration makes men forget God, and both these are forerunners of
Gods vengeance, and everlasting destruction: therefore the admonition is to all
wicked and godless men, that betimes they arraigne themselves, call a Jury,
try their ways, and examine their own hearts how they stand with God: for it
seems their estate is very lamentable. First, in that they are styled
forgetters of God, and he that forgets God, cannot but forsake God: Ier. 2.12.
Oh ye heavens, be astonished at this; be afraid and utterly confounded, for my
people have committed two evils: they have forsaken me, the fountain of living
waters, to dig them pits, even broken pits that can hold no water. Oh
generation, take heed to the word of the Lord, consider in your minds, ponder
in your hearts, and observe in your ways, whether the Lord has bin as a
wilderness unto you; or as a land of darkness? Oh consider what a mischeife
you have procured unto your selves, in that you have forsaken the Lord your
God, which has lead you by the way, and has bin as a familiar friend unto
you; nay as a prince to command heaven and earth to give you safe conduct
through all the dangers and perils that might befall you: Can a maid forget
her ornament, or a bride her attire? yet you for whom I have done all this,
have forgotten me days without number. But if you will not consider, then
assure you selves, that your own wickedness shall correct you, and your
turnings back shall reprove you: know therefore and behold, that it is an
evil thing, and bitter, that you have forgotten the Lord your God, and that
his fear is not in you: and if you will not know and behold, then assure your
selves that I will tear you in pieces, and there shall be none to deliver you:
though you should wash your selves with nitre, and take much soap, yet your
iniquity shall be marked before me; so that I will never forget your
transgression, but will visit them upon you for ever and ever in the place of
easlesse and endless torments.

For my Saints in whom I delight, come let us reason together: Though your
sins were as crimsin, they shall be as white as snow: though they were red as
scarlet, yet shall they be as wool: wash you therefore, make you clean; take
away the evil of your works from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn
to do well, etc. consent and obey, that ye may eat the good things of the
land: for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it: he that offers praise shall
glorify me, and to him that disposes his way aright, will I show my
salvation. Neither let the slanders, reproaches, and disgraces of the world
withdraw you from your honest conversation: for the world is but as a beggar,
that while the trauailer seems to look upon him, cries nothing but good your
worship; but as soon as his back his turned, and the hope of his gain is gone,
conuerts his reverence into railing, his blessings into curses, and good
prayers into damnable execrations; but I hope the honest man is never the
worse: so the world as long as we can smile on it, we shall have many good
words and kind salutations; but when we give over to run into the selfsame
excess of riot with them, then shall we have them speak all manner of evil
of us: when the town is on fire, the bells ring out and make a strange and an
unaccustomed iangling, and every one cries out to his neighbor for a paile of
water to quench the fire withal: so if any Christian be fired with a love of
God, and make his household burn in the feruencie of the spirit; the flame of
this fire does so trouble his next neighbor, that every time he hears them at
their accustomed prayers, or singing of psalms, he is so troubled in mind, and
afraid of his own house, that he cannot be quiet until he rings all his bells
backward-way, and gather together as many as he can with their pailes of water
to quench this fire: for alas, as long as he sees or hears of this fire, he is
afraid least the fire of hell should kindle in his conscience, and so deprive
him of all his peace and quietness that he labors to maintain by his
profaneness and wretched living: but whosoever thou art that have gotten this
fire of Gods grace into thine own house, let it burn outward; if it burn thy
neighbors house, God shall forgive thee, and I know no law against thee: this
I am sure of, that if to convert one to righteousness, shall cause a godly man to
shine as the sun in the firmament, much more if thou convert a whole household:
these fires are no dangerous fires, and I am afraid, for want of these fires,
the Lord has kindled many fires in our land within these few years: This fire
I tell you would not only quench these fires among us, but the fire of sin
within us; yea, and that most fearful fire of all the rest, even the fire of
hell. Christians must reserve the top of their affections for God: in other
objects fear exceeds, here no extrasie is high enough: a man of spirit, cannot
brook a sluggard in his work; and a sloth full messenger is as vinegan to
the teeth, and smoke to the eyes: sharpness of wit counts dullness,
tediousnes; now the Lord is all spirit, and means thou to serve, and yet not
in spirit and truth: the angels his swift messengers are flow and cold enough;
and therefore thinks thou that God will take pleasure in thy drowsieand heavy
service? men choose the forwardest dear for the game, and the liueliest colt
for the rod: and therefore think not but God delights in the quickest and
cheerfullest seruitors at his table: Christ says to Judas, that which thou
do, do quickly: and God commanded that the neck of the consecrated ass
should be broken, rather then offered up in sacrifice: it was rather a curse
then a blessing, that Issachar should be a strong ass: now an ass is the
Hierogliphick of heaviness; and therefore their service was unfit for Gods
house: Judah must be as a lion, that never comes without spoil; and so must
all the people be that Shiloh has gathered together, since that scepter of
power and dignity departed from Judah. Elisha the Prophet of the Lord, is
called the horsemen and chariots of Israel; and so must good Christians be as a
fiery chariot, and a ready horseman; nay, in the plural number, horsemen and
chariots; too strong and swift for all those that shall follow them. The
sluggard, he cries a lion is in the way; but tell Sampson and David so, and
they will out to meet him: Tell a timorous magistrate of some dangerous
opposite, and he will seek to please; yet let Nehemiah hear but of a
Samballat, and he will presently cry for shame, shall such a man as I fear?
Tell Caleb of Anakims, and he will be so hasty as that nothing should hold
him, let us go up at once: Let Agabus bind Paul, or let him hear that in
every city bands await him, and he will not long delay their expectation; nay,
he is not only ready for bands, but death too: Tell Inbentius he must lay
down his life, and before you have spoken, he has laid down his clothes:
Tell Luther of enemies in Worms, and he will go, though all the tiles of their
houses were devils to pull him in pieces. Prou. 30. Agar speaks of four
things stately in their kind: Job. 39.40.41. hears God set forth his
majesty, by the horse, and Leuiathan, etc. to the four first, I add a fifth,
comprehending and excelling them all: namely, the true Christian, strong and
bold as a lion: swift as the greyhound in the ways of Gods commandments: as
nimble as the goat, to climb the steep and craggie rocks in this world;
like Jonathan and his armor bearer that crept upon their hands and feet the
sharp rocks to fight against the Philistims. Lastly, victorious Kings to
overcome the world, and his lusts: Leuiathan laughes at the spear, and the
horse neight at the trumpet: so these valiant champions, to take the kingdom
of heaven, fear neither the noise of the world, nor the glittering of the
spear; but through fire and water, carry their lives in their hands, embrace
stake and faggot; say to father and mother, I know you not: to carnal
counselors and friendly enemies, get you behind me Satan: surely if Christians
were not some admirable persons, the devil and the world would not so hate
them; and except they were extremely wise, they should never be counted for
such madmen, 2. Cor. 5.13. Festus makes a mad objection, as though much
learning should make a man loose his wit; but Paul makes a sober answer, Oh
noble Festus, I speak the words of truth and sobernes. Truly a Christian can
never be in his right wits, till he seem to the world to be beside himself.
But you will say, it were well if you could keep a mean, for that is the
golden rule wherein virtue consists: but I answer you, it is a mean betwixt
two kinds, but not degrees; for virtue is an extreme to vice; and he that
cannot be as hot for virtue, as men are for their vices, is not worthy of her:
Take heed I beseech you, of this philosophy; for Aristotle never knew any so
mean virtue, as most professors count it now a days. But you will say again,
some discretion would do well: I answer, such discretion as the world likes of,
I am sure will eat up all zeal; of the two extremes we should most fear
luke-warmenesse; and as one has said wittily, rather let your milk boil
over, then be raw.

But alas, now the world has left off reasoning with Gods people, and are
directly fallen to scoffing, young Saints will prove but old devils; these
hot-spurres will soon run themselves out of breath, these singular follows
are so odd and puritane-like, that they are fit to live in no society: yet
for all this, may a good Christian say, with that which most call puritanisme,
I desire to worship God; for what is the fault in these men? is it because they
have a delight to hear Gods word, use prayer, conference, and other good
means of their salvation? no, all these they confess are good; but because
they are hypocrites: alas God knows the heart, and therefore go on; for if
your hearts be good, even these scoffers will they nill they, speak well of
you: I am sure, Christ calls for singularity, and presses and urges it; what
singular thing do ye, or what odd thing do ye? shall Gods peculiar people
do nothing peculiar? I believe none shall ever please Christ, till they
appear at odds with the world; strange and precise, and yet for all this need
not be over just: God has bidden us dispose our ways aright; and the Lord
grant we may do it, and then we shall not need to doubt, but the Lord in
his good time will show unto us the perfection of our salvation. Amen.

(...).
News to the world of Gods arraignement-day,
And yet no man, what have I done will say?
The evidence is clear, Gods patience past,
Expect no less then judgment at the last.
Worlds pomp soon past, that pastime turns to pain,
And pain, past-time, makes sorrows to remain.
That rod is good, in Gods appointed time,
Which to our good, his praise, conuerts each crime.
Learn by the rod, in heart to kiss the hand,
This makes a fathers love, fast ever stand.
A Table of the general contents handled in this Book.
Chap. I.
1. Religion. 1, 2, 3. 2. Coherence, from the 6. to 17. 3. Means of practice.
12, 13.
Chap. II.
1. Trial of hypocrites. 18. to 27. 2. Gods wisdom how learned. 27 3.
Explication of the words. 29 4. Actions no subject of sin. 30 5. Of Gods
decree of sin. 47. to 160 6. Sins order in Gods law. 160 to 168. 7. Sins
order in the conscience. 168.
Chap. III.
1. God just and merciful. 173 2. Against passive obedience. 175 3. Reproof
necessary. 179 4. Gods visitation. 181 5. Order. 138 6. Wicked men's
conclusions. 184 to 217 7. Against blessing-witches. 192 8. Of sin and
silence. 217
Chap. IIII.
1. Of Gods knowledge. 220 2. Of Gods integrity. 227 3. Of Gods equity. 231
Chap. V.
1. Of Gods silence. 233 2. Misery, the object. 243 3. Of wicked thoughts. 247
4. The conceit of hypocrites 282
Chap. VI.
1. Of reproouing sin. 286 2. Of the ordering of it. 316
Chap. VII.
1. Of the nature of conscience. 346 2. Of the kinds. 347 3. Of the misery.
347 4. How in a Christian. 347 5. The fountain. 348 6. How in melancholy. 349
7. Whether that be of conscience. 349 8. Differences. 349 9. Swaggerers
persuasions, or Physicians to distressed consciences. 351 10. When no fancy.
352 11. A wound unmatchable. 352 to 354 12. Distemper cannot hinder inward
comfort. 355 13. Whom they befall. 356 14. Means to produce them. 356 15.
Whether a Christian may truly despair. 360 16. Graunds of comfort. 361 17.
Faith may be without feeling. 372 18. Grounds of temptation. 379 19. How the
devil tempts. 380 20. Of his will, wit, and power. 387 21. Of greater will,
wit, and power. 393 22. The special comforts. 395 23. The greatest torment of
the wicked. 405 24. The general use. 408
Faults escaped.
Read, page 8. line. 10. adulterers. p. 23. l. 22. pierce. p. 24. l. 21. for no
husbandman, a husbandman. p. 26. l. 3. foot. p. 35. l. 36. hear. p. 51. l. 18.
out. p. 61. l. 23. determines. p. 72. l. 35. God. p. 83. l. 31. leave out, this
is contingent. p. 107. l. 13. down. p. 112. l. 34. act. p. 131. l. 35.
produced. p. 151. l. 20. virtues. p. 162. l. 15. put off. p. 163. l. 9. book.
p. 186. l. 33. to what. p. 188. l. 19. yet let them. p. 204. l. 9. world. p.
223. l. 29. direction. p. 228. l. 16. morning. p. 256. l. 6. declare. p. 157.
l. 25. hell. p. 280. l. 22. and though as meek as lambs. p. 325. l. 32. serve
the Lord. page 372. l. 29. resolute. p. 373. l. 3. faith.

FINIS.

