THE DOVE: OR PASSAGES OF Cosmography.

BY RICHARD ZOVCHE Ciuillian, of New College in OXFORD.

Sicut Columbae.

LONDON: Printed for George Norton, and are to besould at his shop under the
black Bell, near Temple-barre. 1613.

TO THE TRVELY Noble, and worthily Honored, Edward Lord Zouche, St. Maur and
Cantelupe, of his Majesty's Priuie-Councell.
Right Honorable:
MY resolved assurance, that the mouths of Infants may reveal a truth, makes
me who have not attained that perfection of speech, which is reputed worthy to
be openly heard, yet hopefully ambitious to be believed. And truly, I desire
no more, but that this simple Intelligencer, who has brought in a relation of
the WORLD to me, may report me again to the world, one who wish the good of
all who are studiously affected, and Honor of those who have put life into my
poor endeavors. How much I am bound both in my self, and those whom I
esteem as near, to your Lordships favors, I should blush in this idle manner
to make profession, did I not think that those noble ends, which have given
beginning to all your actions, have enabled you to entertain with constancy,
the slender acknowledgements of great deseruings. But what your Honor did
never expect in the great unthankful, and cannot meet in this little imperfect
world of mine, may you find eternally remembered, in that more glorious and
incorruptible to come.

Your Lordships kinsman obliged in duty RICHARD ZOVCHE.

Ad Autorem.
ISte tripartitae liber est Descriptio terrae,
Et simul ingenij Mappa, typusque tui.
Consimili versu pingatur America, su tu
Ipse, Columba velut Musa, Columbus eris.
THO. LAKE.

TAm paucis, tot, tanta? quis O, si deforet orbis,
Non velit in Libro, Zouche, habitare tuo?
JOAN: HARRIS, N.C.

To my dearly affectionate friend Mr. RICHARD ZOVCHE.
THy work has tongue, for us t'admire thy worth,
Silence, the voice of an admiring mind
Should then best fit my pen; but Love breaks forth
And will needs speak what in thy book I find,
And wrestingly, out of my wonted lines
It makes me shuffle in these hobling rymes.
Though it were not thine, it is good, but having birth
From thee, it is excellent; who in an hour
Flyest over the forest of the spacious earth,
And of each Eden do cull out some flowers,
And leau'st out nothing, (this is admirable)
Which to a settled eye can be remarkable,
And in so narrow lines could be discovered
Of so much World;) but thy pen has vtterr'd,
And for this Truth, which men best-bred do know
Did but into the Muses garden go.
Who fearing danger dares not cross the Sea,
And of the Earth desires to know the frame,
Let him but read thy work, and he shall see
The worlds fair Symstry by distinguished names,
And by thy Art, his ignorance may know
For which most men by Land and Sea do row:
And let him bless thy wit, and praises sing
that thus with ease do him such knowledge bring.
Ingenious ZOVCHE, live thy Verses long,
Fly fair, and far thy Dove, with her smooth song:
Of thy all-Noble name for Arms long known,
These Lettred times have thee designed their own.
Your Lover and friend, Richard Young.

To the Author.
BEhold, a miracle, a singing Dove,
Which sweetly sings, yet sings not sweets of Love.
Each study be her Doue-house, and each breast,
Which harbors studious thoughts, her gentle neast.
Nic. Stoughton, Int. Temp.

ASpice; non veneri est deuota Columba; mouetur
Illius, auspicijs, penna, Minerua, tuis.
Ergo Deae noctis studiosae Noctua cedat,
Dum tu gaudentem luce tueris auem.
Car. Herbert, N.C.

The Dove.
TAke wing my Muse, and like that silver DOVE
Which over the world new-bath'd, did hou't^^ fly
The low-coucht Seas, and high-plac't Land above,
Discern with faithful, though with fearful eye,
That what both Land and Sea resounding ring
We may to this All-makers praises sing.
He who directs the Sparrowes tender flight,
And sees him safely reach the hurtlesse ground,
Guide thee in all thy PASSAGES aright
And grant thy Course be sure, they Restin^ found
From Mount of Olives, as from Hill of ^^yes,
Blessed with the Branch of Peace though not of Praise.
And you whose Care our Floating house yet saues
From sinking in the Deluge of Despair,
Whilst with poor feathered oars she pass the waves
Of this all-vulgar-breath'd, storme-threatning Air:
Dear LORD vouchsafe with patient look to attend
Her flights both trembling rise, and humble end.
The World.
TO our small Isle of Man, some well compare
The WORLD, that greater Continents huge frame
Nor much unlike eythers Perfections are
Their Matter, and their Mixture both the same:
Whence M^ns Affection it so much allures,
Since greatest Likeness greatest Love procures.
But if their outward Forms we look upon,
We shall their Figures diverse plainly see:
For man's erected tall Proportion
To his heau'n-hoping Soul does best agree:
Whereas the World each way being framed round,
The aptest form for turning Change has found.
Like Natures rarest workmanship, the Eye,
The well contrived instrument of seeing,
Which by exact and apt Rotunditie,
Performs his duty, and preserues his being,
Of many curious circling Spheres composed,
And Orbs, within the Orbs without enclosed.
The Earth.
IN midst of which by rarer Engeny,
Then Mars and Venus hang in Lemnian net:
The Land and Sea embracing lovingly,
Making one perfect Globe, in the air were set.
Whose interveyning qualities agree
To breed and bear what move, or resting be.
Thrice happy Union when these Greater things
Accord in perfect Love and Amity:
Whose peace an universal blessing brings,
Causing in lesser states sweet harmony:
And ever blessed be his powerful hand,
By whom this Order does supported stand.
Now Rose-cheek't Morning, kindest Friend of Arts,
Learnings best Mistress, my presuming Muse
Of all the Earths diffused, sundry parts
Thy Neighbor confine Kingdoms first does choose,
That when her faulty boldness she does see,
If blush she do not she may learn of thee.
Asia.
THe worlds true Mother-Land, man's Nurcery,
Great ASIA, object of diuiner view,
Saluted first by Heavens all-seeing eye,
Soonest by it departing, bid t'adiew.
The West yet wrapped in Darkness shined in Light,
That since enlightened, lies inwrapt in Night.
CHINA her farthest Region in the East,
By Portugals to us discovered late,
Is with much Pleasure, and rich Plenty blessed,
With People, and with Princes fortunate:
Yet most procuring wonder do excel
The Cities where her Prince and People dwell.
The skill of Printing and Artillery,
Rarest inventions which these days have seen,
(If we believe the Fame which thence does fly)
Here in the ancient'st times have practiced been:
And sure that People is or should be wise,
Which say We see with one, They with both eyes*
Bord'ring on China Northward lies CATHAY,
Ruled by her Emperor, the mighty Cham,
To whom great TARTARIE does tribute pay:
Great Tartary whose far distended name,
Twixt ancient India, and the Icy Sea,
Possesses all to Western Muscouy.
The Nation sprung from Sires of Scythian race,
Not satisfi'ed with Ob, nor Volga's flood,
People anew some new unpeopled place,
In gilded sculs carowsing lukewarm blood,
More happy yet in spoiling States well built,
Then in erecting where their force has spilt.
As those hayle vollies which the VVhirle-winds cast
Of leaden drops, from some dark molten showers,
Beat down the fruit, and all the fields lay wast:
Led by great Tamberlaine those storming Powers
Forced Asia's Tyrant, with his prostrate troop,
Under their fearful Arms to bend and stoop.
Southward from China, do confining lie
The Eastern INDIES whose rich golden sands
Under conduct of greedy tyranny,
Often felt the violence of warlike bands,
Which hoping to prove rich with forreyne spoil,
Forsook the sweetness of their native soil.
First Bacchus did this Country overrun,
And set up trophies in the conquered East:
Oh would he had gone on as he begun,
And never turned to subdue the West!
Might Indus bancks have bore his branching Vines,
Nor Europes streams bin stained with sweeter wines.
Great Alexander next wtth powerful might,
Without resistance, did these parts subdue,
Whilst the Inhabitants not used to fight
Away before his Army trembling flew.
Since subject unto him, whose spacious mind
Not Gange, nor once farthest Gades confinde.
Their state most slavish, Fortune miserable,
Their life is painful, and unpleasing to them,
They others making strong, are made unable,
And wealth which blesses few, did first undo them,
Which is no more then has been seen of old,
They most unhappy who have heapt most gold.
Their neighbor PERSIA tried this long before,
Greatly presuming on her mighty treasure:
But filled with much, and ever craving more,
Did surfeit, and grow sick with too-much pleasure:
For whose disease the Fates did think it good
The Prince of Macedon should let her blood.
Cyrus, with Natures rarest graces blessed,
The type of virtue, paragon of Honor,
Plucked from Assyria's proud Imperial crest
A Monarchs Diadem, and placed it on her:
Which they who followed, but with ill success,
Unhappy soon did lose, or leave much less.
Yet since those losses, somewhat have regained
These sometimes only expert carpet Knights,
That late in Champion Field their virtue trained,
Countries far of remote, now often affrights:
Their mighty Sophy to that strength is grown,
That feared of others, he yet fears none.
The west of Asia, once Earths Paradise,
Since subject to the TVRKS most slavish yoke,
Has seen her Cedars reaching to the Skies,
Laid low by his fierce sacrilegious stroke:
Her glorious Kingdoms of illustrous fame,
Being swallowed in the deluge of that name.
Down from ARMENIA'S ruder Mountain tops,
This violent impetuous Torrent fell,
Whose stronger source impatient of stops,
Orewhelmed all The Inhabitants that dwell
Betwixt the greater Sea, nere Trebizond,
And that which washes rich Arabians strond.
The CASPIAN Sea which seems on Ocean,
Within his Circuits is restraind and bound:
But this outrageous race of Ottoman
Which has no end, nor limits ever found:
Scorning with bancks or borders to be held,
Has over Euphrates, and broad Tygris sweld.
Great Babylon sometimes ASSYRIA'S pride,
By their prevailing armies overthrown,
Their fury, and their fierceness having tried,
Now feels by dear experience of her own,
What grief Iudaea captive then sustained,
When by her Rivers weeping she complained,
Yet now no comfort can IVDAEA take
In this her Neighbor nations ^uster woe,
Her fellowship in misery may make
Her like distressed mind like passion show,
Yet not bewail it, since her loss more near,
May borrow many, but not lend a tear.
This Country by the Midland Sea confined.
Was once a happy, and a HOLY LAND:
To Gods own peoples heritage assigned,
Manured only by his royal hand,
Then Scaene of heavenly favor, since the Stage
Of most inhumane, furious, hellish rage.
Here HE, who has the highest Heaven his Throne,
The Earth his footstool, did vouchsafe to make
His regal Presence, that thrice-sacred-ONE,
Whose mighty virtue Diu'lish forces brake,
In humane nature borne to undergo
Our most inhumane sinne-reuenging woe.
O blessed Love, of Iuda's blessed King!
O happy Mercy of that blessed Love!
Let Quires of Angels to his glory sing,
Let Earth beneath, let highest Heavens above
Assist poor Man his souls best thoughts to raise,
To his distressed souls Redeemers praise.
Jerusalem, thou Iuda's choysest City,
Beholding all his wonderful effects,
Were chiefest object of his tender pity,
But yet his kindness cruelly neglects:
Which foul offense deserving thy decay,
Jordan may witness but never wash away.
Thy glory since to desolation changed,
Thy Bulwarks, and fair Buildings are defaced,
All favors of the Heavens, are quite estranged,
Thy people fleeing thee, elsewhere disgraced:
And Sion which did Silver drops distill.
Thy Vallyes with salt tears of grief does fill.
Above Iudaea, bord'ring on the West,
Of great Armenia, lesser ASIA lies;
Which on three sides, three famous Seas inuest,
Once known so many Kingdoms to comprise,
Now his entire, whose Tyranny so far,
Sworn foe to peace, has rauaged in war.
His burden stiffe-neckt Taurus undergoes,
And slye Moeander by his winding shelfe,
Snake-like enwreathed, which so doubtful flows,
Deludes obseruers, and does loose himself,
Unwilling his strange cruelty to see,
Does ever seek, but finds no corner free.
Betwixt the red Sea, and the Persian bay,
From Palaestina to the Southern Maine,
Famous ARABIA does at large display
Her triple-folded thrice-illustrous train,
Whose riches into diverse Countries brought,
Are with great travel, and much danger sought.
To those fair parts which being farthest placed,
Do serve as Spicery to other Lands,
A tedious fearful journey must be pac't,
Through Rocky deserts, and Wind-driuen Sands,
Where many Merchants trading often have bin,
Lost in the spacious Wilderness of Sin.
Of Baulmes and Spices well this soil may boast,
Whilst Mahomet from hence first issued forth:
We envy not the fruit of this fair coast,
Nor ought that to despise the colder North,
Which so great distance from those parts removed,
Have been no less by bount'ous Heaven beloved.
Afrique.
AFRIQVE removed to the Southern parts,
In form resembling some well-shapen shield,
Would ill resist the Suns more piercing darts,
But that her uncouth monster-bearing field,
To Phoebus angry fury most exposed,
Within great Neptunes Bauldrick rests enclosed:
Betwixt the Midland Sea, and Sanguine bay,
Divided by a little tract of ground,
Hither from out of Asia, a way
As over a straight, but strong-built Bridge is found,
Where Nilus streams, like many branching veins
Do feed with plenty AEGYPTS fruitful plains.
Nature disposed her self to recreate,
As in her fittest worke-house, here does use,
(Which Art may wonder at, not imitate)
Life into new created shapes t'infuse,
The Sunbeams serve as fire, the work to make,
The slymy soil as apt each form to take.
Industrious Art, less potent, not less proud,
Envying Natures vncompared power,
Has there vprais'd outreaching every cloud,
Many a gallant, and starre-threatning Tower:
Whose strange, sky-piercing, flame-resembling spires
This age distrusts, Antiquity admires.
Next, near those Cynthia's-kisse-aspiring Hills,
Where profuse Nilus hides his Bankrupt-head:
Those tawny troops whose fame all Afrike fills.
Under great PRAESTER JOHN'S conduct are led,
By whom the Christian ensigns are retained,
But with some blots of error fowly stained.
And least some corner more divinely blessed,
From strange Prodigious monsters should be free,
A late usurped Kingdom's here possessed
By that rude AMAZONIAN Anarchy,
Where they, who should a distaff, scepters sway,
And Men their Wives imperious rules obey.
In ZANZIBAR, near to that Southern Cape,
Which lately from GOOD-HOPE deriu' his name,
If not by Nature, many an ugly shape
Have been brought forth by M^^ster-ma^ing Fame,
Such Creatures hardly could produced be,
But by the assistance of her Midwifry.
There headless some are framed, as Momus would,
With eyes and mouth, like windows, in their breast;
Others as cast in Polyphemus mould,
Of one Light in their forehead stand possessed:
Some Pygmyes, Men Diminutiues* maintain
Like Pawnes tall squadrons ^n a chesse-boord plain
Hence turning Northward that great Kingdom lies
Now by the name of MANICONGO known:
And ri^h GVYNAEA, whose commodities
The English to their Country often have shown.
Then NVBIA Eastward, whose warm sands enfold
Heaps of the purest, best refined gold.
The La^^ of NEGROES is not far from thence
Nearer exended to th'Atlanticke Maine:
VVherei^ the Blacke-Prince keeps his residence,
Attended ^y his ietty, colored train:
Who in their native beauty most delight,
And in contempt do print the Devil white.
With wild Arabia, LYBIA may contend,
A field of dangers, and unheard of fears,
Her sands want number, and her Deserts end.
Inhabited by Lions, Panthers, Bears:
Such rough possessors of so rude a soil,
That none, of either, either would despoyle.
Next these the Pastures of NVMIDIA lie;
Where, with their easily-remouing tents,
The Princes of that wandering Policy
Do follow still their Grazing Regiments:
And sure those Troops are worser taught then fed,
Where Rulers by the Multitude are led.
From Skye-prop Atlas to that watery Plain,
Which does twixt Africa and fair Europe run,
Opposed to Italy, to France, and Spain,
BARBARIA next, enioyes a milder Sun;
Whose borders sundry kingdoms do confine,
Fez, with Marocco, Tunes, Telesine.
FEZ, long since famous for her fruitful Vines;
And rich MAROCCO, which with Sugared Reeds
Sweetens the relish of those sharper wines,
Which the other Countries bruised cluster bleedes,
Lie next those Island in the Western maine,
Where Fortunes first, since dwelt Actaeons train,
From Carthage ruins, whose yet infant State,
Bathed in poor Queen Didoes wronged blood,
Her most strange Love turning to stronger Hate,
With Rome in long-fixt opposition stood:
TVNIS and TESELINE derived, do grow
In fast-bound Friendship with great Europes foe.
Europe.
THe Complement of this inferior Globe,
Fair Amphitrite, Natures chiefest pride,
Thrice glorious with her siluer-waued robe,
With Islands, as with Jewels beautified:
Within her Arms enfolded, sets apart
EVROPE, the Earths sure Head, the Worlds sound Heart.
Where swift Iberus with true lowliness,
Performs his duty to the Midland main,
The great and lesser BALEARIDES,
First in the Streights do guard the coasts of Spain,
Whose expert Youth, were wont, the smallest thing
To strike far distant with their well-rul'd sling.
Then as the Holmes, two sturdy vmpires met
Betwixt the quar'ling Welsh, and English tides,
In equal distance each from other set,
As both removed from fair Seuernes sides:
SARDINIA next with CORSICA does stand
Twixt the fierce Roman and fell Punick Land.
Triangl'd SICILY, some Authors say,
Was once one with The Italian Continent,
Till working Neptune twixt them dig'd a way
With force of his three forked Instrument:
Rebel to Heaven here Aetna upward casts,
To daunt the Lightning, Sulphure-fuming blasts.
Little MELITA which Paul's innocence,
Scaping the water, at the fire did try.
More to the South-coast situate from hence,
Has been renowned for their Chiualry,
Who driu'n from Rhodes near Caria, here withstood
The profuse wasters of poor Christians blood.
Next, CANDY, Cradle of reputed Jove,
With Nectar-dropping Vines is ouer-spread:
Whence Eastward sacred to the Nymph of Love,
CYPRVS erects her Myrtle-crowned head.
Well twixt these two has Neptue put some space,
Whose fruits once met in one, mar any place.
The ARCH-SEA rolling from th'vnruly North,
Does seem to threaten Candyes ouer-throw;
But that the troops of CYCLADES stand forth
To break the fierceness of his furious blow,
Like Xerxes fearful Army, Asia's wonder,
Cutting in broken streams his strength asunder.
Above that are those STREIGHTS so much renowned,
Which Europe scarce from Asia separate,
Where Hell first, Leander since was drowned,
By them made famous, though unfortunate,
Yet (so from smalnesse things to Greatness rise:)
The GREATER-Sea beyond this passage lies.
Such is that Channel, by whose slender sides,
As through her Sluice, the vast MAEOTIS Pond
Charged with full fraught Greatness, hardly slides
From out her round shores close in circling bond:
Which TANAIS falling from the frozen Hills,
With his cold, almost Crystal current fills.
Near Tanais with Tartary confined,
Along the Northern Ocean, does lie
With wast Liuonia in the West conioyn'd
The spacious Empire of vast MVSCOVY,
Whose Duke like Boreas in his big-built Hall,
Does foes at hand affright, far off appall.
SWEDEN and NORVVAY in the same degree,
Save what a narrow Isthmus does retain,
Quite from the Earth almost divided be,
Pulled by the strong Arm of the Baltic Main,
Which wrong peace making Winter does prevent,
And them congealed binds to the Continent.
Next POLAND, Southward, does her bounds extend
Down from Muscouia toward Hungary,
Which diverse other Countries comprehend,
Whose confines round about her confines lie,
Pleasant Massouia, rich and fruitful Russia,
Cold Pomerania, and much colder Prussia.
Within the compass of two goodly Rivers,
Sav^s and Teissa, plowd with many a flood,
Which up to Ister all his store delivers:
Ister disperseth to the Countries good,
Unhappy HUNGARY by Nature's blessed.
Much good possessing by much ill possessed.
Eastward enuirond round about with Hills,
As with the strongest Rampires of defense,
In peace her Valleys TRANSYLVANIA tils
Somewhat secured from Turkish violence:
So he who to that Empire has given way,
Has also means and power to make it stay.
Beyond Danubius many branching streams,
Which through the East of Europe stately run,
Revived by the more relieuing beams,
Of a directer, and more Southern Sun:
Illyricum, Dalmatia, and Thrace,
Changing their names, retain their ancient place.
THRACE on three sides is washed with Neptunes waves,
Yet is no fruitful, nor delightsome soil,
Her old Inhabitants were old Romes slaves,
Her new Rome now made new inuaders spoil,
Where th'Orient Empires Seat, by him 's aspired,
Whose rule like Phaetons, the world has fired,
In equal parallel to Thrace confines
Ancient DALMATIA, through well temp'red veins
Which once diffusing her rich golden Mines,
Now equal bondage, with poor Thrace sustaines,
Her low-layd Temples sleeping in the dust,
And brightest glory quite ore-grown with rust,
Below it GREECE the dismal Sepulcher
Of Learning, Virtue, Valor, Policy,
Which once were flourishing and famous there,
Since in rude Barbarism do buried lie,
Seems what she has been now unapt to show,
Object of Fury, Image of strange woe.
Had Helen in her vndissembling glass,
Viewing the wrinckles which her age had wrought,
Foreseen what misery should come to pass,
To her disfigured Country, her sad thought
(So scarce fair Dames beholding foul are pleased,
Had not she much been ioyd, had much been eased.
Olympus, unto whom the Clouds gave way,
To vpstart Tyranny submits, and bows:
Parnassus once Crowned with the verdant Bay,
With saddest Cyprus shrowdes his mourning brows,
And Tempe, robbed of all her pleasing weeds,
With spiteful furrows wounded weeps and bleeds.
Athens, Miuerua's Chapel, Phoebus Quire,
Within whose Cloisters, those pure vestall Maids
The Muses, kept their euer-burning fire
Whose light, our cold, dark ignorance vpbraids,
From broken ruins, and her vaults scarce found
No voice, but voice of horror's used to sound.
The School of Virtue, stately Theater,
Of brauest, men-beseeming action,
Whose Laws excelling far, exceeded were,
By Customs easily, and truly done:
Like feeble Miloes arms eneru'd, and dead*
Old Lacedaemons virtuous strength is fled.
And Theban walls, raised by the powerful sound
Of rare Amphions sweet well-fingerd Lute,
Humbly saluting the debased ground,
Lie razed with noise of Trumpets, Drums, and Flute
Which Instruments, if any, may be said
Here to have true, and quick Division played.
Where like a second Midland Sea the pride
Of swelling ADRIA, does distend her shoares,
Opposed to Italy, whose armed sides
Often fear the approaching of Slauonian oars:
ILLYRICVM whilst Turcisme it ore-flowes,
Feels not her billows nor respects her blows.
Some rather curious how the Earth should stand,
Then careful how similitudes do run,
Have likend to a Leg, The Italian Land:
But since it has so many conquests won,
It far more fitly might compared be
Unto an Arm, the limb of Chiualry.
Her Wealth, her sinews, and her Rivers veins,
Her Buildings were her Bones, her People Marrow,
Yet whilst she Mars his warlike Spear sustaines,
At length was wounded with young Cupids arrow,
Since of Bellona'es ensigns dispossessed,
On Venus pillow long has layn at rest.
The pleasant Land of labor, Naples seat,
Where first appeared that contagious sore,
Which since contracted by the Frenchmens heat,
They farther Westward over the Alps have bore,
By female luxury impaird, was feign
To seek her physic in the Fields of Spain.
Life-feeding humors drawn from every part,
Tyber engrossing, has that Ulcer bred
Impostem'd Rome, which quite confounding Art,
Has over the Bosom of all Europe spread.
O! may some Royal Heau'n-grac'd hand assuage
This swelling Evils Kings-stroke-asking rage!
Florence by Arno almost compast round,
The perfect Beauty of the Tuscan plains,
If well disposed it continuing sound
Infectious anguish not so much sustaines
To her great Medici, who have withstood
The common danger, owes her chiefest good.
The Gate of Italy transporting far,
The sundry plenties of her fair increase,
Long foe to Venice in the fiercest war,
Corriuall in the softst delights of Peace,
With strong-mand Gallyes Genua scours the seas,
With well-rigd Pinnaces seeks Rodes of ease.
Like hundred armed Briareus, the Po,
Stretched forth on Lumbardyes delightful bed,
With dropsy humors makes her ouerflow,
By which surcharged not discreetly fed,
Often times her Spunges (Millaines Duke put by)
Suck her abundance, and do soke her dry.)
Bathed in the Adriatiques farther wave,
As some fair Sea-nymph, famous Venice sits,
Whom all the praise which fiction freely gave
To Sea-borne Venus, far more truly fits
Earths richest Jewel, Beauties brightest Star,
Mother of Love, Love of the God of War.
The Eagle, badge of Sovereign Majesty,
Upon one breast dividing many heads,
The sundry parts of scu'red GERMANY,
At large displayed, shadowing ouer-spreads,
Whence much distracted, that fair body stays,
Whose chiefest parts are bent so diverse ways.
Where it on Italy does next confine,
Closing with Hungary, does AVSTRICH rest:
Renowned Austrich, whose Prince-branching Line
Stretched through the yielding, and declining West,
With various windings has attaind of late,
Many a far and near encompast state.
Like great Danubius unresisted source,
Their fame extended to the larger maine,
By sundry conquered Islands takes his course,
Observed of Italy obeyed of Spain,
Thence through the streights close passage having pierced
By the Ocean, to both Indies is dispersed.
Iser, and Oenus which from TYROLL flows,
Having their homage to Bauaria done,
With Licus which the bounds of Suevia shows,
And many highborn streams which down-ward run:
Against the Turks encroaching power combined,
To Austria's Current have their forces joined.
Mora which to Morauia lends her name,
Her tribute duly vncompell'd does bring:
And great Odera Slesia's chiefest fame,
With younger Albis, hold him for their King.
The Waser, Rhine, the Maze, the Sceld though free,
Yet to Danubius all inferior be.
The Oder having Slesia's bounds out-gone,
Does Brandenbourghs fair Marqui^ate salute,
Whose double Marches now both ranged in one,
Among German Princedomes bears a choice repute;
Thence in the Baltic Ocean up resigned
Her freezing streams cold entertainment find.
Near to BOHEMIA'S farthest Eastern skyrt,
As from the Earth's breast, yet small Albis crawles,
Where, with th'Hercinian Forests Pale begyrt,
And stately Mountains strong surrounding walls,
Till with Multauia joined she breaks the bay,
From out her Country hardly finds a way.
From thence through Saxony she takes her course,
Where meeting Sala, (whose fair streams divide
Turinge from Misnia) with more strengthened force,
She goes t'encounter with the Northern tide:
Over which prevailing near to Iuitlands Coasts,
In triumph toward Denmarkes Court she posts.
Hail DENMARKES Court, seat of a faithful King,
Sweet nurcery of Britains Sovereign QVEENE,
Fountain of all our joy, from whom do spring
The Hope of Thames, and Happiness of Rhene;
Latona like which makes the Albion Land,
Her Childrens Well-rockt Cradle firmer stand.
The Hassian confines quickly passing by,
Waser upon Westphalia longer stays,
Whence Em to Freeslands Embden seems to fly,
VVing'd with affection, which detests delays:
Where in the watery region both do meet,
And each embracing other kindly greet.
Down from the Alps-spring Cloud-despising heads,
Europes perpetual well-fill'd Conduits, flow
(Whose farre-dispersed moisture all o'er-spreads)
The Rhene, the Rhosne, the Danow and the Po,
Po and Danow toward the rising Sun,
Sothward the Rhosne, the Rhene does Northward run.
Rhene through the fighting Switzers Cantons past,
Down from those Countries lofty verge descends
Through Basell, and by Strasbourg; then with have
Meets Neccar, which fair Heidelberg commends:
Whose lesser streams which Wittenberg confine,
Grown big do honor Rhenes Count Palatine.
Now stay you gentle streams, and let that air
Which sweetens your pure waves, refresh my Muse,
Never may my Silence passing by that Pair,
Which make Earth happy, courteous Heaven abuse.
What Loue-taught Turtles only best express,
Less may my Dove adorn, admire no less.
Here the fair SHEVVER of The Imperial Court,
Prince of those Princes which do Caesar's make:
In Honors Palace, joined to Virtues Fort,
Where equal pleasure Love and Beauty take,
Reside (o worthy of immortal breath!)
Fair FREDERICK, and fairest ELIZABETH.
He as another Mercury on Earth,
Deputed faithful Arbiter of Right:
She like clear Cynthia of Caelestiall birth,
From Britain SVNNE deriuing heavenly Light:
In sweet Conjunction matched, do truly show,
What happy States to high-plac't Virtues owe.
Thence Rhene and Neccar friendly take their way
To Mentz, where Maenus from Franeouia rose,
Does for their coming with attendance stay,
And kindly with them down to Collen goes:
Mosella passing Triers them first o'er-takes,
And entertained once, no more forsakes.
So would these Mitred Cities once profess,
Truths worth apparent, which they conscious see,
Albis and Oder might consent no less,
The Duke and Marquisse both conioyn'd agree:
That German Diadem designed to bare,
Rhenus with swelling Isther might compare.
From Collen passing down along by Cleue,
Then thorough Gelders reaching Holland, all
Together of the Continent take leave,
And in among the Zeland Islands fall.
Where Noble ^^sle does keep with English bands,
Flushing, the key of all the Nether-lands.
The Mase confining Lutzenbourg, descends,
Meeting with Sambre at Namur, to Liege:
Then Brabants halfe-encompast coast defends
From neighboring Gulick, and near Gelders Siege:
And passing well-man'd Huisden, ioynes at length
To Rhenes more worthy force, his wel-met strength.
To them the Sceld, rising near Cambray speeds,
Which leaving Artois borders on the West;
Through Henault comes to Tourney, then proceeds
To Gaunt in Flanders, where not finding rest,
It makes to Antwerpe, by whose safe conuoy
It does at length a long-wisht end enjoy.
Belge's fair Daughters midst these floods remain.
Of which with low obeisance some do bow,
Bearing up Isabel the Infanta's train,
For whose dear Love oblieg'd in Nuptial vow,
Her coosen Austrich from the Church estranged,
His scarlet Bonnet for steel Beauer changed.
The rest to Faiths allegiance firm adhere,
Freed by the Christian Faiths Defendres aid,
Her Champions having them secured from fear,
And Superstitions strong encroaching staid:
All virtuous Captains, most praiseworthy all,
Brave Norris, Sydney, Vere, and Vuedall.
And may not Envy here my Love debar
Or Zouches name be in my name deprest,
Both William and Allan Zouche.
you who yet attend the charge of war,
And Henry and Francis Zouche
you whose happy Souls in Peace do rest,
Dear, Loue-deseruing Brothers, ought to be,
By them remembered, not forgot by me.
FRANCE, Europes Eden, Western Paradise,
Part pal'd with Mountains, moated part with Seas
The famous Seed-plot of the Flower de Lyce,
Wants nothing which the curious sense muy please,
Except the easy Arbor of Repose,
Under the shadow of the Sovereign Rose.
The more then earthly once reputed Powers,
Driu'n from the troubled and distempered East,
There placing since their fancy-pleasing Bowers,
Where they more freely might disport and feast:
Choysest delights of them esteemed most dear,
Seem to have planted and disposed here.
Jove's Oak, whose root he makes his conscious pillow,
And thicke-leau'd boughs his shady Canopy:
Si^ke-thoughted Juno's pale forsaken Willow,
Crown of contempt-conceiuing Jealousy,
That on the ayrie Mountains, this does grow
Where Crystal Rivers through cool Vallyes flow
Under the Laurels, worth adorning wreaths,
Mars* and Apollo joined in friendship rest;
Yet Mars short-winded angry accents breaths,
Late basely of great HENRY dispossessed,
And f^arce Apollo has lamenting left,
Of his divine Du Bartas quite bereft.
Amongst the Olives fruite-concealing leaves,
Pallas and all the Virgin Muses sing,
To cheerful CERES, well-growne ripened sheaues,
The rural Nymphs as rarest posyes bring,
Venus and Cupid midst the myrtels sport,
The Elms do Bacchus and his Vines support.
Great Britains Ocean with his conquering tide,
Passing the entrance of their yielding shore,
Has proved their plenty, and represt their pride,
Has tried their virtue not impaird their store,
And much admiring most himself admired,
His right reserved, has his force retired.
The fairest offspring of the floudy Peers,
With due observance to his Crystal Throne,
Do pay the tribute of their silver tears:
Rich Seyne, sweet Loyre, and great Garond, the Rhone
Hasting his banke-disdaining course t'enlarge,
Does in the streighter Seas his stream discharge.
Thorough Geneua's clear and constant Lake
He comes to Lions, having left Sauoy,
Where meeting Soane from Burgundy, they take
By Daulphny to Auignion, thence with joy,
Passing by Prouence, they at Arles attain
A spacious entrance to the Midland Main.
Well-planted Champaigne Seyne first watring falls
On Paris, situate in the Isle of France,
About whose stately Cities goodly walls,
Many of Amphitrites daughters dance,
Till all conioyning Norman Vales give place,
They reach the Harbor of the Hau'n of grace.
Hence did that worthy Duke first hoyse his Sail.
Whom Right conducted, Conquest seemed to attend,
Fortune assisted with a prosperous gale,
The flower of Virtue France along did send,
Which unto English fields removed, and set,
Prepared a room for great Plantaginet.
Amongst them, not the meanest of the flock,
Allan, the Earl of less Britain came,
Deriuing from the stemmes of ancient Stock,
That sometimes flourishing, now fading name:
Which though it little to earths moisture owe,
Blessed by the deaw of Heaven again may grow.
The silver Crescent, in the sable sky
Seems to resemble Loyres cornuted streams,
But farther followed with attending eye:
It looks like full-fac'd Phaebe's scattring Beams,
She midst the lesser Stars great luster shows,
This among the Minor floods abundant flows.
Rising in Auergne it descends to Neuers,
Then passing Orleans, turns down to Tours,
Whence bending unto Nants, it Poictou seuers
From Britain, where this horn of plenty powers
Her much increased scarce contained store,
Over the surface of the Western shore.
So when the second Henry first set forth,
Simply attended with the strength of Main:
Proceeding forward his attractiue worth,
Adding brave spirits to his spreading train,
Whilst to a larger state his Hopes aspire,
His late-got-greatnes all the Land admire.
From out the Frontier Hills, through Gascony,
Garond to Toulouse less observed goes,
Then entertaining from all parts supply,
Passes to Bordeaux, and by passing grows,
That ere at Blay it reach the watery realm,
Her Sea-beseeming-waues the Land ore-whelme.
How did the Sovereign of St. George his Knights,
His new enobled Garter here advance,
Whilst his admired Order's worth incites
The states succeeding of amazed France,
To follow after, though preceded far,
With Badge of Golden Fleece, and sparkling Star?
Crecy and Poitiers saw the Princely Bands,
Ecclips with feathr'y Clouds the lowering day:
And Agincourt in danger, trembling stands,
Whilst Henryes valor ore it towering lay:
Each place but passable by searching fame,
Gave way to Neuils, and great Talbots name.
NExt France the Pirenean Hills descry,
SPAIN, as the Orchard of th'Hesperides,
Whose golden fruit, observed with wary eye
A stern and watchful Guardian did possess;
Now blessed the wealth and happy is that soil
Whose keepers care 's not feared, nor strangers spoil.
Under those stately Mountains shady side,
Entrencht by great Iberus, lies Nauar,
Whence nearer to that Sea which Spain deuides
From parched Afric, Southward seated are
Hot Arragon, and those choyce-hearbed-fields
Of good Valenc'a, which such plenty yields.
These, and those Seigneuries which here, erewhile
No great Superiors, free controulement brookt,
Are by the lofty Turrets of Castile,
Upon t'Herculian Pillars raised, ore-lookt,
Her mounted Ordinance commanding all,
Betwixt Nauar, and farthest Portugal.
The Western Ocean does confine the shore
Of wealthy Portugal, where Tagus sands
Mixed with abundance of Gold-yeelding ore,
Was sifted by some Guilt-approuing hands,
Wohse Mettall-minded hard affection would
Turn with refining all they touched to gold.
Now on poor Protestants such Art they use,
Whom they with all pursuit do first enquire,
And having found, do sift, and sifted bruise,
At last their soundnes they explore with fire:
And though they never will their stamp admit,
To pass with Angels they do make them sit.
Fair Andaluzia which had once repute,
For giving weary Phoebus welcome rest,
Feeds her Siuilians with Gold-seeming fruit:
Oh! would they were with us indeed so blessed
Who far more truly entertain the Light,
Repelling errors wrong-protecting Night.
There Boetis which does fall near Cadis bay,
Seeing the English ensigns fair displayed,
Stopping her troubled course, began to stay,
And feeling her vaste body much dismayed:
Up ^oward Corduba where first she bred,
Her blood contracting back retired and fled.
The winged Charriots, which out-sayld the wind,
Led by great Essex, with much ease did pass
Beyond Plus vltra, and have left behind
Trophies above the Monuments of Brass,
Of which may yet these peaceful times relate,
Loving our own, though theirs we leave to hate.
Thence as that Navy, where the flower of Greece
Returned from Colchos, whilst they come from Spain,
Bravely enriched with the Golden Fleece,
And ride triumphing ore the Sea-greene-plaine:
Great Britain Glories Capitol dilates,
The close-bard entrance of her Crystal gates.
GReat BRITAIN shadow of the starry Spears
Selfe-viewing Beauties true presented Grace
In Thetis Myrrhour, on this Orb appears,
In Worth excelling, as extolled in Place:
Like the rich Croisade on The Imperial Ball,
As much adorning as surmounting all.
Bounded within the watery Firmament,
Whose euer-mouing streams about it role,
She measures forth her length in fair extent,
Toward the Southern, from the Northern Pole:
Betwixt her Rivers Zone-diuiding Lines,
Each City like a Constellation shines.
Auon and Twede her Tropicks, Zodiack-wise
Pass Trent and Seuern: to the springing Morn
Trent goes declining, Seuerne bending lies
Down by the Western, freez-cloath'd Capricorn.
Thames, as th'Equator, does more eeuen run,
Proud with the Mansions of her biding Sun
Maiesticke SVNNE, long may thy kind aspect
Shed down sweet influence upon this Clime,
Beyond all Envy, as without Defect,
Ruling but never altering our Time,
Till passing from our teare-bedewed eyes,
Thy Glory in another Heaven shall rise.
T^^^ soon our IVLIAN-STARRE late Prince of Light,
The sparkling luster of whose virtuous ray
To Britain hearts content with shortest Night,
Promised the comfort of eternal day:
Too soon expired, o worthy long to prove
The worlds great Wonder, and his Countries Love.
And fair ELISA midst the glistering Crew,
Which as our glorious Cynthia seems renewed,
Lately removing from our fainting view,
Her presence with all graces bright endew'd,
For Latmus shade, does spend her precious hours
On Rhenus Banks amidst the Myrtle Bowres.
Yet like those glistring Emblems near the Pole,
Still above Earths Horizon el^uate.
May our Heroicke Princes name control
The Starry Orders of this well-rul'd State,
And Britains Chariot as the Northern VVayne,
With great Arcturus join her CHARLEMAIGNE.
A stately Burs, built in the VVestern Strand,
Renowned Exeter far off does seem:
But London, Exchange-Royall of the Land,
Is object of the Peoples best esteem:
So whilst the glorious Day Star shines more bright,
Clear Hesperus obscured does give no light.
Sweet-seated Sals-bry, VVilshyres ornament,
Neighb'red with Plains, graced with goodly Valleys,
Like some delightful Garden of Content,
Watring with silver streams her well-squar'd allies,
But that it does more firm and surely stand,
Does seem another Venice in our Land.
Bathe, fairely-built, throughout the World is known
For her most wholesome strength-repayring Springs,
But she which has so strange effects often shown,
With ill success did lend her Founder wings:
Poor worme-like creeping men she might restore,
Never make them borne to go, like Birds to soar.
Bristow, the Merchants Magazin, enclosed
With Rocky Hills, by Auons stream embraced,
Fair by industrious workmanship composed
As by great Natures wisdom firmly placed,
Viewing her verdant Marsh, may well disdain
Romes somtimes-glory, Mars his Champian plain.
Old Winchester, the ancient seat of Kings,
For virtue, and for valor much renowned,
So subject unto change are earthly things,
In stead of Diadem with Bays is crowned.
Where worthy Wicchams children now mainetaine
The fame once known by great king Arthurs train.
Oxford by Isis Crystal streams confined,
And well-discerning Cambridge, Learnings Pair,
Excel those Lamps which once on Ida shined:
Bright Juno showed, clear Pallas, Venus fair;
But either of these thrice illustrious eyes,
Does Brightness, Clearness, Fairness all comprise.
As that true Ensign of The Almighty's Love,
Lively displayed in the Cloudy Sky,
The gazers eye astonished does move
To wonder at such strange variety:
Rain-bow-resembling London, Englands Bliss,
The Heavens great Mercy, and Earths Marvel is.
To the Reader.
READER:
IF thy Patience be not too much discouraged, adventure on the little
Commonweal of my poor thoughts. I ever rather admired then professed Poetry,
the necessity of my Studies, to which a higher direction then mine own choice
has appointed me, forbidding the one, and that delight, which beyond ordinary
content received in all sorts of Learning, has been presented to me in this,
occasioning the other: yet have I, as my leisure gave me leave, taken to my
self in this idleness that relief, which in other variety most do think
they may justly use. I know some whose credit has challenged respect exceeding
strong in prejudice against the composing and reading such trifles, yet the
excellency of diverse in this kind, commended by others, whom I have no warrant
to distrust, makes my small experience think, that some Muses, like
Silke-wormes, spinne a fine thread for necessary use, as many like Spiders
curious webs for unprofitable admiration. His censure who affirmed the reading
of Amadis du Gaul as dangerous to youth, as of Macciauel pernicious to old
men, was, as the Author, truly generous; yet I presume it extends not to all
which without proclaiming title to wisdom and judgment, seem raised or
fashioned by imagination. There is, who has undertaken to illustrate by places
of the Arcadia, all the points of the Art of speaking: I will add (which is as
much as Achilles his Father desired Chiron should teach his Son) he is rude
that cannot discern, or exceeding austere that scorns to observe therein,
worthy behavior and carriage both in private and common business: And one as
understanding in the Policy of Letters and Peace, as La Noue was experienced
in the Discipline of Arms, and a troubled State, by exquisite unfolding of
some fabulous Stories, makes it plain, that the Cesternes of these times,
derive the fulness of their wisdom, by no other conueyance then such
narrations, from the purer springs of all antiquity. To whom he had yielded
his assent; who, employing his faithful labors in teaching to believe, I know
had care he might not be disprou'd, and farther graceth Poetry, with the choice
appellation of the Souls vvoing-Suite; in which diverse (their excellency
carrying them higher) have showed their thoughts not unfit for solemn, yea
Sabbath devotions. And truly, they who will be pleased to credit our own
tongue, and age, may find our present, and later Poets, capable of that
commendation, which was given the antienst among the Greeks: That if their
writings were preserved, no part of Learning should wholly perish. Spencer,
having as well delivered Moral, and Heroical matter for use and action, as Du
Bartas (now ours) Natural and Divine, for study and meditation. I would not
diminish the worthy reputation of other Volumnes; for mine own part, it being
known to some, I have spent time in them, I should be loath to be thought
ignorant of that, which I am persuaded all that know do well allow. But as the
plain way affects most, the nearest many, so I am sure there are some, who,
had they been showed that which was pleasing, would have proved successful,
when they have returned exceeding empty from Systems and Commentaries.

What I have attempted in this subject, was long since excellently performed by
Dionysius in Greek, and diverse in Latin, whose example has given me some
encouragement, but no more direction then Magellan to Sir Francis Drake,
showing the Straights might be past, not instructing how. Some places may seem
obscure, but I intend it to those who understand, or desire to know something
in this Argument: I have not touched all, because I would be short, and have
used shortness, as unwilling to sweat, and make a labor of my sport, as any
fastidious lookers on are quickly apt to distaste satietie. As it is, Reader, I
indifferently leave it to thy discretion: what esteem thou will be pleased to
put on it, is in thy power, how I may value thy esteem remains in mine.

FINIS.

