SOVEREIGN COMFORTS FOR A troubled Conscience. WHEREIN THE SVBTILTIES OF SATAN
are discovered, his Reasons and Objections fully answered. AND FVRTHER, The
truth laid open and manifested, to the great Consolation and strengthening of
such as are distressed and afflicted in Mind.

Written by the late faithful Servant of the Lord Mr. Robert Yarrow.

And now published for the benefit of such as groaning under the burden of an
afflicted Conscience desire Comfort.

MATH. 11.28. Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest.

LONDON, Printed for RALPH ROVNTHVVAITE: and are to be sold at his shop in
Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the Golden Lion. 1619.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR FRANCIS BARRINGTON Knight and Baronet, my much
honored and worthy friend: And to the no less virtuous then religious Lady,
the Lady BARRINGTON his Wife, continuance with increase of happiness here,
and eternal happiness hereafter.
WOrthy Sr. and good Madam, though not as I would, yet as I can, I shall ever be
ready to testify my respect and thankfulness for your love and kind favors
toward me; whereof till the Lord shall be pleased to give further means,
accept (I pray you) this, which as it is a public, so my desire is, it may be
a perpetual acknowledgement.

I present you here with the labors of another, which coming to my hands some
few years since, gave me then so good content, that when I restored the
original to the owner, it left another same behind it: That not long since,
being required at my hands to be sent abroad to the public view, after some
consideration thereof had, and the owner to whom it more properly belonged made
acquainted therewith: and the original of the Authors own handwriting
commended and committed unto me to that end and purpose, I condiscended: And
that as for their sakes who groaning under the burden of a troubled spirit, may
by the blessing of GOD receive benefit hereby: So likewise and much the rather
for yours, to whom I did destinate the same, from the very instant that the
request was made.

Vouchsafe therefore (I pray you) to let it pass into the world, under the
TITLE of your NAME, which as it will be a shelter to defend it against the
detraction of ill disposed persons; so will it be likewise as an ointment
powered out, Cant. 1.^.
yielding a sweet savor to make it pleasing, not so much to the nostrils, as
the hearts and minds of the well affected, and more godly sort of Christians.

And thus commending you to that our good God, Act. 20.32.
and to the Word of his Grace, Heb. 6.10.
that is not unrighteous to forget your work and labor of love, which ye
have showed toward his Name, in that ye have been so far from being ashamed
of the Gospel of his Christ, that to the good example of the godly, Romans 1.16.
and the shame of others, ye have professed the same in truth and sincerity,
Phil. 2.15.
and been blameless and harmless, the Children of God without rebuke, in
the mids of a crooked and perverse Nation, among whom ye shine as lights in
the world: I take my leave.

Yours in all due, and Christian respect, John Maunsell.

To the Christian Reader.
ALBEIT, good Reader, Eccles. 12.12.
the words of Solomon, There is no end of making many books, might never more
justly be turned into a complaint, in that the Press did never surfeit so much
in that kind, as in these days of ours, yet have I presumed so far upon thy
patience, as (in this Scribbling Age) to send forth unto thy view, and
consequently of all men, the ensuing Treatise.

And yet I trust there is so little cause of just exception, either to me, or
it, as that thou will much rather afford it acceptance, and me thy
approbation.

And that first in regard of the Subject, whereupon though it be true that
some others have formerly written, yet were they many more, they might all well
be borne: for were they three for one, I should advise the man or woman
afflicted in spirit, to provide to have, and to use them all; for the ground of
that rule that the Wiseman prescribes in another case, Eccles. 11.6.
holds as well in this: In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening
withold not thy hand: for thou know not (says he) whether shall prosper,
either this, or that; or whether both shall be alike good: So I to thee; read
others and spare not, yet withold not thy self from reading this: for thou
know not whether may yield more comfort to thy distressed soul, either they
or this.

Besides, Greenham. Perkins.
for the chiefest of those others that I have observed in that kind, they are
annexed to other larger Works, which together are of higher price, then that
the purse of every one that is troubled in conscience can reach unto them.

And next, in regard of the Work it self, which when thou have perused, I
trust thou shall find, not to be done rawly and slightly, but for the points
therein handled, and the matters that it drives at, substantially and soundly.

And now, good Reader, since I know, that it satisfies thee not to see the
work, but thou desire withal to hear what he was that wrote it; not to
trouble thee with any tedious discourse, I will acquaint thee with so much as
is requisite for thee to know, and that in few words.

He was a man for years but young, The Author.
cropped off even in the flower of his age, as more fit for heaven then the
earth. Whilst he lived, he was generally noted to be a man of very great hope,
and to be endued with many excellent parts, as well of grace as nature; whereof
to give thee only a taste, he was of a meek spirit, a sober carriage, a
discreet behavior, a sound judgment, and of such incessant and indefatigable
pains as promised (if the Lord had been pleased to spare him life) much good
and benefit to the Church of God: And which was the chiefest, and set the
crown upon all the rest, he was of a truly sincere, and a right gracious
heart; Ioh. 1.17.
A true Nathaniel, an Israelite indeed in whom was no guile.

Besides (which may in no hand be omitted) he was, The Authors own inward
afflictions, the first occasion of this Treatise.
and that for a good space, greatly perplexed and troubled in mind with inward
afflictions, which (the Lord so disposing it) was the first occasion that
moved him to frame this discourse: Of which his conflicts, and the pangs and
torments that his poor tender heart endured therein, more sharp and terrible
unto him then death, I, and Thou good Reader, and such Others, as being in any
measure distressed, as he was, shall make use of these his labors, receive
the benefit: for as the Spirit of God makes mention of our blessed Savior,
Heb. 2.18.
In that he himself did suffer and was tempted, he is able to succor those
that are tempted: So this our Author, in that he was himself afflicted in
spirit, and troubled in conscience, through the suggestions of Satan, and the
temptations of the Devil, doubtless he was enabled thereby, as well out of
his more vigilant and careful observation of Satan's practices, as the sense
and feeling of his own extremities, the better to discern and discover his
Wiles and Stratagemes; neither so alone, but withal to apply unto himself,
and to prescribe to others, such comforts and remedies, as out of his own
experience he found to yield most ease and help.

And thus, good Reader, to detain thee no longer from the perusal of the
same, beseeching the Lord to bless it unto thee, I cease, and shall ever rest:

Thine in the Lord Jesus. I. M.

The Contents of the several CHAPTERS.
CHAP. I. OF the extremities and griefs of a troubled conscience. FOL. 1 CHAP.
II. Wherein is contained the principal causes of a troubled conscience. FOL.
12 CHAP. III. Of the second, or Assistant causes of a troubled conscience. FOL.
23 CHAP. IIII. A Cordial against the assault of sin. FOL. 28 CHAP. V.
Sovereign remedies against the wound of sin. FOL. 41 CHAP. VI. Against the
assault of the weakness and want of faith. FOL. 60 CHAP. VII. Of special
things in man's conversion. FOL. 81 CHAP. VIII. Of another person troubled with
the doubt of faith. FOL. 101 CHAP. IX. Against the assault of the weakness of
repentance. FOL. 123 CHAP. X. Of the marks of true Repentance. FOL. 127 CHAP.
XI. An Admonition to the sorrowful soul. FOL. 141 CHAP. XII. Of loathing of
sin, the second mark of repentance. FOL. 145 CHAP. XIII. Of the application of
the former things to the comfort of the sorrowful soul. FOL. 153 CHAP. XIIII.
How the man disquieted in conscience, should in the same behave himself. FOL.
168 CHAP. XV. Against afflictions and outward events. FOL. 188 CHAP. XVI. Of
the first Position, and the Objections against the same. FOL. 119 CHAP. XVII.
Satan's objection against the former doctrine answered. FOL. 204 CHAP. XVIII. Of
the second Position, and the Objections against the doctrine thereof. FOL. 214
CHAP. XIX. Satan's Objection against necessity of afflictions overthrown. FOL.
128 CHAP. XX. Other Objections of Satan against the former doctrine confuted.
FOL. 243 CHAP. XXI. Of the third Position. FOL. 251 CHAP. XXII. Of the fourth
Position. FOL. 269 CHAP. XXIII. Of the fifth Position. FOL. 292 CHAP. XXIIII.
Against the fear of death, and unwillingness to die. FOL. 301 CHAP. XXV. Of
the first part of the preparation unto death. FOL. 316 CHAP. XXVI. Of the
second part of the preparation unto death. FOL. 326 CHAP. XXVII. Of the
preparation concerning the time of sickness and death. FOL. 343 CHAP. XXVIII.
That the Elect in time be assured of their Election, and how. FOL. 352 CHAP.
XXIX. Of the second Argument whereby the certainety of a man's election is
proved. FOL. 359 CHAP. XXX. Of the third Argument whereby the certainty of man's
Election is proved. FOL. 366 CHAP. XXXI. Of the Objections against this
doctrine of Assurance and knowledge of our Election. FOL. 370 CHAP. XXXII. Of
the essects whereby the truth of faith may be known. FOL. 379 CHAP. XXXIII.
How the faithful shall know that they have the Spirit of Adoption. FOL. 397
CHAP. XXXIIII. Of the true marks whereby the Spirit of Adoption may be known.
FOL. 405 CHAP. XXXV. Of the outward fruits of Regeneration. FOL. 415 CHAP.
XXXVI. Of the second Objection. FOL. 423
A SOVEREIGN COMFORT FOR A TROVBLED Conscience.
CHAP. I.
Of the extremities and griefs of a troubled conscience.

INfinite and intolerable for the time, seem the extremities of a troubled and
distressed mind, that is thoroughly humbled and abased, by reason of sin: In
so much, that were it possible, that all temporal griefs whatsoever, and
pains arising from bodily diseases, No temporal griefs, like the distresses
of a troubled conscience.
might or could be heaped upon one and the self same person, yet would they
be found too light to weigh in the balance with these perplexed agonies. For
as all rivers run into the sea, and as the man that is indebted, if once he
fall into poverty, is so far from comfort, that he has all his creditors
ready to tread and press him down, never ceasing until they have brought him
to the Jail and prison: So likewise is the troubled mind, A troubled mind is
a receptacle for all griefs.
a receptacle for all griefs, the enemies thereof, viz. Sin, Satan, Death
and Hell, are continually rushing in upon it, and triumphing over it, writ upon
writ, to attach this silly troubled conscience, and by force and violence to
draw it to the seat of Judgment. The multitude of sins do amaze it, and the
intolerable weight of judgment, and of the anger of God, do continually
affright it. Within, nothing but a most infinite mass and confused Chaos of
despairing thoughts, and without, every object is so terrible and full of
fears, that all things seem to have joined hands, and given consent to
increase his griefs, and add unto his woes and miseries. Great (no doubt) was
the grief of the wife of Phineas, who hearing that the Ark of God was taken,
1. Sam. 4.
Ely her father in law was dead, and Phineas her husband slain, with extremity
of anguish fell in travel, and in her pains deceased. And how was David
perplexed, when hearing of the death of Absolon, 2. Sam. 18.33.
he withdrew himself into his chamber, howling out, weeping and saying, O my
son Absolon, my son, my son Absolon, would to God I had died for thee, O
Absolon, my son, my son? But alas, what is the wife of Phineas? and who is
David, that they should be set forth as patterns to express this agony and
distress of a troubled soul? The losses from whence these sorrows of Phineas
his wife, and King David did rise, are far inferior: and how is it then
possible that their dolors should be equal? It is not the loss of the Ark of God, that troubles them; but the loss of heaven, and of all the joys
prepared for Gods elect children: Not the death of Ely, but the departure of
God himself, in whose presence is the fullness of joy, Psalm. 16.11.
and at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore. They see him frown, which
was sometime favorable, him terrible, from whom they received comfort, and him
a Judge, who sometime was a loving Father. It is not the death of Phineas an
earthly husband, but the loss of Christ the Spiritual Spouse, even that Jesus
which saves his people from their sins, and is the only Mediator betwixt
God and Man. Neither is it the death of Absolon a son, but of a soul, then
the which, what can be to a man more precious? No marvel then if it sometime
fare with these, as it does with persons lunatike. For what is it, that the
terror of Gods eternal wrath and judgment (except Gods Spirit do assist)
cannot put out of frame and order? 1. Reg. 21.
How was Ahab humbled, when he heard the judgments of God denounced by the
Prophet Eliah? Dan. 5.6.
How did Belshazzar quake and tremble, when he saw the handwriting on the
wall? his countenance was changed, his thoughts troubled him, so that the
joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against another. How
was Foelix terrified, Act. 24.26.
even with the hearing of Paul disputing of righteousness, and temperance, and
the judgment to come? And how was Judas the traitor also distressed in mind,
when in despair most desperately he hanged himself? Let it not seem
marvelous unto you, that I thus couple the disquieted soul, with those, who
in the Scriptures have been accounted castawaies. For during these
extremities, it does no better judge and esteem of it self. For the time, it
seems to be in his own conceit and judgment, no better then a reprobate,
one alienated and exiled from grace, a firebrand of Hell, and fuel appointed
to destruction. Insomuch that oftentimes he cries out in most lamentable and
woeful manner, that he is nothing else but a damned creature: Nay with some,
and that full of this malady, does grow so extreme and terrible, that their
soul chooses rather to be strangled, Job 7.15.
then to be in their bones: whose grief seems by so much the more desperate
and fearful, by how much more for the time they seem to be deprived of
comfort. One troubled with the consideration of his sin, compared to a sick
man.
For as it is with the sick man, that is even at deaths door, and brought (as
it were) to the edge of the grave, his weak stomach is neither able to receive
nor retain the food ministered unto him, but either it rises at the sight
thereof, as ready to refuse it: or else having received it, casts it up
again, as altogether unable to digest it: Even so it is with the soul that is
sick with sin, set before it out of the Word of God, the Food of eternal
life, either his stomach rises at it, and will not receive it, saying that
these things appertain not to him; Or else if he hear thee, for a time as
seeming to have received it into the bowels of his soul, yet not long, but the
stomach of his soul begins again to wamble in him, and the courses of his
despairing thoughts returning unto their sit again, he is oftentimes more
distressed then before, and in fine vomiteth it up again, and falls to his
wonted agonies. So that as it is with the man that is wounded, And to one that
has some wound or impostume, etc.
or has a sore impostume (though he be in great extremity) is so fearful to
have his malady to be touched, that if the Chyrurgeon do but move his hand
unto it, though with intent to ease and cure him: yet he draws back and
cries out, Mat. 8.28.
choosing rather to continue in his grief, then to let his sore be launced;
And, And to the two possessed with Devils that our Savior cured.
as it was with the two possessed with Devils, of whom we read in the Gospel,
that when Jesus came near unto them, they cried out, not tolerating that he
should approach unto them: So he that thus is wounded and infected with the
botch of sin, if a man go about to apply some thing to heal his sores, and
cure his corrupted maladies, will cry out, Oh he cannot bear it, he flees
from it. Offer Christ unto him, and present unto him Jesus ready to deliver
him, and rid him from the hands of sin and Satan, he cannot tolerate to look
upon him, then he cries out as one possessed, Who art thou? and, Verse 29.
What have I to do with thee. O Jesus, the Son of the living God? art thou
come to torment me before the time? Speak unto him of mercy, He is not for
the time capable of comfort.
and tell him of the sweet balsamum and oil of grace, lay before him the
covenants of compassion, and preach unto him of that sweet confection and
sovereign medicine of the blood of Christ, to heal the sting, and close up
the festered wounds of sin; this is to trouble the sore, and to renew the
grief. Out of this flower he sucketh poison: this makes his Byle to run,
and this forces his wounds to gape more wide. For his despairing heart, not
tolerating to apply these comforts to it self, makes them an occasion of
further torments. Oh (says he) indeed these and these are the joys that
appertain to the righteous; thus and thus should I have had ease, and found
comfort unto my soul, had I been one of Gods Elect, and had my portion been
amongst his chosen: but I, alas, a miserable, sinful, and condemned creature,
am cast from the comfortable presence of my God, and deprived of all his
mercies. Tell him of judgment; this is intolerable, it makes his soul that
is already weak and wearisome, to shudder and shake in pieces, it stretches
him upon the rack of all extremities, it pierces as a sword, into his
distressed heart, and as a violent fire, it vehemently burns in his bowels.
Then sighing out his sorrow, and roaring out the extremities of his grief and
miseries, as though already he felt the horror of the hand of God, and the
dreggs of wrath and anger to have begun to drop upon him, he seems to
himself as one abased unto hell, and past all recovery. Hereupon often also
he breaks out into these and such like outcries, His outcries and woeful
complaints.
and woeful complaints and groanings: How sinful a wretch, and cursed a
caytiff am I? How carelessly have I lived? and how dissolutely have I spent my
time? Had I been but a beast of the field, then had my case been better; for
then together with my life, my miseries should have had an end: then should I
have perished and been at rest; then should my days of trouble have had a
dated time, and the years of grief would soon have been expired. Then should
I not thus have been a mark for God to shoot at, and a butt wherein to stick
his arrows of displeasure. Then should I not have been terrified with the
fear of Judgment, nor have felt the burden of my sins irremissable, thus
pressing me down to the pit of hell. Cursed be the time wherein I first was
borne, and the hour wherein first I saw the light; let darkness cover it as a
curtain, let the sun withdraw his light; fill it with abundance of terrors,
and let the shadow of death rest upon it. Woe, woe is me that ever I was borne!
why was I brought out of the womb? and why perished I not, that no eye had
seen me? why was I not so as though I had not been? And why was I not brought
from the womb to the grave? Cursed ever and before I was, ordained unto wrath,
borne in iniquity, living in hypocrisy, dying in misery, and damned for ever.

But why do I thus strive to open and unfold the greatness of these
extremities? For were their grief weighed, and their miseries laid together in
the balance, it would be heavier then the sand of the sea.

Were I able to conceive them, as others sometime feel them, and to think
them, as others often find them in themselves, yet could I never sufficiently
describe them. Well I may in some sort touch them, but they only can sound the
depth, and reach the bottom of these extremities, which have sometimes tasted,
and in some measure felt the bitterness of this gall and wormwood.

Notwithstanding, as by the outward appearance of the wound, the inward pains
may be coniectured, and by the external strugglings, we may guess the
internal conflicts: The greatness of these extremities discerned in part by
the effects
so likewise by the effects that come from the sorrow of sin appearing
outwardly in the body, we may in some sort learn how great that grief and
anguish is, that possesses the heart within. For besides the plaints before
set down, he oftentimes bedeweth his face with tears and weeping: The body
also oftentimes waxes lean and wan, fretteth away and wastes, as pained with
some grievous and consuming sickness; not unlike (as touching the outward
appearance) to those pangs which David, a man after Gods own heart, did feel
in himself, crying out and saying, Psalm. 6.6. Psalm. 38.3.
I fainted in my mourning, Psalm. 6.6. There is nothing sound in my flesh,
because of thine anger, neither is there rest in my bones, by reason of my
sins. My reins are full of burning, and there is nothing sound in my flesh;
I am weakened and sore broken, I rear for the very grief of mine heart. My
heart pants, my strength fails me, and the light of mine eyes, even they
are not mine own.

CHAP. II.
The principal causes of a troubled conscience.

THe causes of these griefs, 1 Cause,
some inconsiderately have referred unto melancholy: Is the sight of sin.
whereas indeed it is nothing else but sin. For experience teaches, that this
is a passion happening oftentimes to those, which by the disposition of their
bodies, are for the most part free from melancholy, though many times, I also
grant, that melancholy pastions are joined and do concur with it. Was it
melancholy, think you, Mat. 26.75.
that made Peter so suddenly to single out himself from the rabble of the high
Priests servants, and sobbing full of heaviness, to utter out the bitterness
of his grief with tears? Shall we think of David, that when he was taken
and troubled with like perplexities, that the same did proceed and come of
melancholy? Nay, the Prophet confesses and tells us plainly, that it was
sin, Psalm. 38.3. Psalm. 51.3. And therefore prays earnestly unto the Lord,
Psalm. 38.3. Psalm. 51.9.
to hide his face from his sins, and to put away all the iniquities of him,
the same Prophet David, Psalm. 51.9. This, I mean this sin, is it that makes
the heart to mourn, and the inward parts to fret and burn with grief. This
is it that causes the broken soul to breathe out so many sighing plaints, and
to be ready to swound and burst in sunder with so many fearful and despairing
thoughts. For while he sits so severe a Judge upon himself, and while he
prieth so narrowly, nay, too too narrowly into the disordered course and manner
of his life, laying the trial of his deeds to the touchstone of the Law of
God, and weighing altogether in the balance with God, his denounced judgments:
he thinks every word a sentence, every threat a thraue of judgments, and
every period to contain in it an exceeding mass and hell of miseries and
woes. This pricketh his heart in such sort, that he knows not what to do,
and makes him to cry with Paul (though not with the like hope) O wretched man
that I am, Romans 7.24.
who shall deliver me from this body of sin and death?

Unto this sight of sin is added the weakness, 2. The second cause is the
weakness or want of faith.
and many times the want of faith. For when they see and remember the sweet and
comfortable promises of grace and mercy, contained in the Gospel, when they
call to mind that precious medicine, and sovereign confection of the blood of
Christ, able to heal up the most pestilent sores, and to cure the most
contagious and deadly wounds of sin: And withal looking into themselves, and
finding there a defect and want to receive, and apply the same unto themselves,
be they never so sweet and precious, because they have not faith, which is the
only hand to retain and hold them; they are more distressed, and affrighted,
then if they never heard or thought upon them. Insomuch, that as Satan is
ready, always to cast something in their way, thereby to further them in the
way of desperation: so are they as ready, so soon as it shall be offered, to
catch it, and accept it at his hands. And therefore, never thinking of Gods
order and course of calling, which is in some sooner, in some later, and not
alike in all, because they feel not the present working of the Spirit within
them, and the pulse of faith, to move and beat in their hearts; they stick not
peremptorily, and without exception to conclude upon themselves, saying, I have
no faith, I cannot believe, and therefore I cannot be saved, my sins cannot be
pardoned, I am but a reprobate and a damned castaway. So that this motion is
not only found in such as have an utter defect and want of faith: but also
oftentimes in those which have a faith, who although (as I have said) they have
a faith in deed, yet it is but a weak and a faint faith, and such an one, as
for infirmity is not able to move and stir it self.

For as the man that is in a swound, Such whose faith is weak, compared to a
man in a swound.
or he whose parts are benumbed with some extreme cold, or sudden stroke,
though there be a life still remaining in them: yet such is their infirmity,
that they seem as dead, and are unable to perform the functions that belong
unto a living body: even so this faith, though in truth it be a faith, and has
a life in it, yet it is so benumbed with the chilling cold of sin, and
astonished with the stroke of our natural imperfections, that it seems to be
dead, and utterly void of vital motion. So that sin, unto this weak and
wavering soul, is even as meat is oftentimes to him that surfeteth. He eats
it with delight, and takes pleasure in it: yet when his stomach comes to
digest and work upon it, the strength of nature, being not able to overcome
the abundance of unconcocted humors, the whole body is sick and weakened in
every part and faculty: So the soul that is glutted and somewhat ouerlaid
with sin, though concerning the outward man, he took delight and pleasure
in it, yet when it comes to be received into the inward man and stomach of
his soul, (that is) when by due meditation he begins to work and chewe
upon it; such is the want of spiritual heat, and such is the weakness of his
faith, that being not able to suppress the surcharging terrors of wrath and
judgment that proceed therefrom, by reason of the Law of God, he begins
many times to be sick with sorrow, then the heart is troubled, and every part
begins to droope and faint, by reason of this despayring cruditie and
sinful sickness of the soul.

For proof hereof, we have diverse examples in the Book of God. Faith not at
al times alike strong in the worthiest of the Saints. Psalm. 38.
David, no doubt, had a faith, yet such sometimes was the weakness of it, that
when he came to the ruminating and remembrance of his sins, he fell into
great extremities, as it appears in the thirty eight Psalm. Peter also had
a faith, and yet when by weakness and frailetie, he had so lied, sworn and
forsworn himself, against his Master, how bitterly was he perplexed within
himself? And Paul, a sanctified and selected vessel, when he considered the
doubtful conflict betwixt the law of his members and of his mind, and seeing
how he was led captive unto sin, his faith so much relented, that standing
as one amazed, not knowing what to do, he cried out, Romans 7.24.
Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
Now if the case were thus with these persons, and many other such, which were
so highly in the favor of God, so famous in the Church, and endued with such
an extraordinary measure and gift of faith, (as otherwise by their doings
appears) that sometime the exceeding surges of their faith, did fall unto so
low an ebb in the sight of sin: How can the weakeling choose but be greatly
cumbred and distressed, through the weakness and imperfection of his faith?

The which sort of men, Strong Christians do seldom grow to so great
extremities as weak, but their minds are much disordered and disquicted.
though they do not always grow to such extremities, as did the former, which
through want of faith would peremptorily conclude their own damnation: yet is
their mind for the most part disordered and out of frame, having continually
some wavering thoughts within them, which continually vex and wring their
souls. For though when they see, and know their sins, the fumes of their
smoking faith not utterly extinct, ascending up, will not seffer them to say,
without exception, that they are castawaies: yet can they not, on the other
side, for the time be certified and assured of their life and safety, but stand
as doubtful and in suspense betwixt them both. Which their wavering
doubtfulnesse, by how much they consider it to be contrary and repugnant unto
Faith; by so much they are the more in mind troubled and distressed. Insomuch
that many times, they are the rather given to judge the worst of themselves:
And the suspicion of death and condemnaetion seems utterly to quell and
overcome the hope of life and salvation. In which estate, if happily, at any
time they fall to exact censuring and judging of their lives, according to the
precise rule and Justice of the Law of God: it is a matter of no great
difficulty to lead them on, from step to step, to the furthest point of
Christian extremities. I call them Christian extremities, not for that it does
beseem the profession of a Christian thus to doubt, which is only stayed in
truth of Faith: But I therefore call them Christian, because they are such as
may be had, without the loss of Christ, and finally fall from grace, far in
very deed differing from the unrecoverable estates of reprobates: because that
these extremities notwithstanding, a man may still be a vessel of mercy, the
chosen servant of God, and an undoubted Christian.

The third thing which thus fretteth and disturbeth the broken Conscience, 3
The third cause is, the want and weakness of repentance.
is the want and weakness of repentance, when as either it finds not in it
self, such a lothing and detestation of sin as is required: or such a
readiness and willingness unto virtue and godliness as he would and
wishes. For whiles such an one looks upon the weakness of his nature, that
is inclined to sin, Romans 7.23.
while he sees the Law of his members, much rebelling, and oftentimes
prevailing against the Law of his mind: And while he considers himself to
be backward unto Prayer, and other such godly exercises, as may tend to the
service and honor of God: Or, at least, not to have so great delight and
pleasure in them as is required, and as oftentimes he finds and sees to have
been in other the true servants of God: then not only in regard of his sins,
and sinful life already passed, but also in consideration of this his present
state, he grows to a great mislike, and severe censuring of himself.

And thus, or in some such like sort he reasons within himself, saying; If I
were the Child of God, The weak Christians manner of accusing and condemning
himself.
if I were one of his servants, had I tasted of his Spirit, which is the
earnest penny of salutation; then surely I should find my self more affected
and better minded unto goodness, I should then be repentant for my sins, and
loathe and detest my former wickedness, I should then more delight in goodness and
godliness then I do. But now (alas) I see I am a silly and sinful castaway,
in whom abides no goodness, and therefore I am an enemy to God, and reprobated
from grace and mercy. Thus whether they consider their life past, or present,
view and behold themselves either within or without, still Satan, that subtle
Serpent and roaring Lion, is ready to trumpe something in their way, whereby to
make them stumble and fall. Weak Christians resembled to little children, or
men weakened by sickness.
By which his doings, no marvel though many times he much prevails.

Now these weak Christians are like the little child that has learned but of
late to go, or resemble those, that have been greatly weakened with some
continual and excessive sickness, who being newly come abroad, by reason of
their great infirmity are not able to make a steadfast step, but are ready to
stumble in the plainest path: So these either babes in faith, and such as are
but newly entered to walk in Christ, or else weakened greatly with the
continual and dangerous assaults of sin and Satan, are not able to
ouerstryde these stumbling blocks of temptations, which by the enemy are
continually cast in their way.

CHAP. III.
Of the second or assistant causes of a troubled Conscience.

BEsides the aforesaid principal and inherent causes, Other means whereby the
extremities of a troubled Conscience are increased.
there are also some outward and assistant motives, to the furtherance of these
extremities, as poverty, misery, bodily sickness, enemies, loss of friends,
evil success in matters and affairs pertaining to the world and such like.
For as he that has a grievous sore or swelling, is pained with every touch and
external handling, yet the principal cause of both are the corrupted humors
that are within: Even so these outward accidents in the world, that come unto
them, may make this inward grief of conference to throb and byte the more, and
yet the former causes are, as it were, the rcot and fountain from whence it
chiefly comes. For let the sight and horror of their sins be removed
from them, let them have a lively faith to work within them, and let them see
and feel the work of true repentance, and fruits of regeneration to have
settled and taken root within them, and then be their poverty never so great,
their miseries never so many, their extremities never so insinite: yet they can
brook them all with patience, and pass them over in peace of conscience,
sleeping even in quietness and safety, as it were with Jonas in the sides of
the ship, in the midst of most turbulent and raging tempests. But if these
be wanting, then every one of the aforenamed accidents, is as a River
continually streaming in, to the increase and furtherance of their grief and
miseries: And that after a double sort. For either they are precedent and going
before the sight of sin: or else subsequent and following after it.

first manner, that is, as they be forerunners and precedent, Precedent
accidents causing grief.
they be as motive means to the breeding and bringing forth of the former
extremities. For as when we feel any part about us, in our bodies, to be sick
and out of order, we straightway have recourse and run to the help of physic,
that thereby we may see and know, what the state and constitution of our body
is: so likewise, if at any time we find our selves afflicted and crossed with
any sinister events, that is, either infirmity of body, loss of friends,
loss of goods, or any such like; it makes us to look and pry into our
selves, and presents our sins, and mustereth them, as it were in our sight
and memory, which while the weakeling in faith does too intentiuely weigh and
think upon, he is pressed down, being utterly broken and amazed under the
heavy and intolerable burden of his transgressions. 2. Chron. 33.12.
Example hereof we have in Manasses, who by afflictions and miseries was
brought to the sight and knowledgement of his sins and wickednesses. In like
manner David also, sometimes by bodily sickness and infirmity; sometimes by
molestation of his Adversaries, and sometime by the treachery of his dissembling
Friends, was brought to the consideration and inward mourning under the horror
of his sins, as may be easily gathered out of the sixth, the thirty one, and
the thirty eight Psalms at large.

Secondly, these external accidents attend upon the troubled conscience,
Subsequent accidents increasing grief.
as sequents following upon the same. And in this sort they concur and come
as helps and furtherances to to the increase and setting forwards of the
inward grief already begun and hatched in the breast of the brokenhearted
Christian. For as the Spyder, out of what flower so cuer he sucketh
nourishment, be it never so sweet and precious, conuerteth all to poison: So
he which thus despaireth under sin, what things soever come unto him,
although in themselves never so great Arguments of the love of God, if they
were rightly construed; yet he turns all another way, and applies them to
the worst that may be.

And hereupon it is, They turn all to the worst against themselves.
that they can read or hear of no place of Scripture, wherein the flourishing
estate of Gods children is described, but straightway they begin to gather
upon it. Lo, say they, thus and thus the Lord has promised, that it shall be
with the righteous, thus they shall prosper and flourish which are his servants
and beloved of him: and therefore I see and know that I am none of his. If
contrariwise they hear of any of the ungodly, that have been punished and
afflicted for their sins, or of any threatenings denounced against the wicked,
they are ready straightway to thrust themselves into the number of such
ungodly ones, and bold to affirm those denounced plagues to be due unto them.
Thus (alas) these poor souls are dim-sighted, as was Father Isaac; and
therefore they think, if Jacob be but only clad with Esau's garment, that
surely and out of all question he must be Esau. And because that God makes
them, in some measure, to taste of his correcting hand, and that sometimes even
in those things, which he threateneth and denounces against the wicked, that
therefore out of question, they are in the number of those that are reprobated
and rejected of him. A slender reason (doubtless) to persuade (as by God his
grace shall after appear) but a far more subtle Satan, that by such wyly
practices seeks to subvert and overthrow the simple.

CHAP. IIII.
A cordial against the assault of sin.

AS we have hitherto found the agonies to be so great, and the causes to be
so diverse and different, from whence proceeds the grief and anguish of a
distressed soul: so let us now likewise see what simples we can find in the
Garden of our God, which is the Scriptures, and what suppling and sweet
confection is to be had in the storehouse and treasury of his eternal grace
and mercy, to heal the sores, and to close up the gasping wounds of these
festered and corrupted maladies.

Wherein first we must consider, Disquiet of conscience arising from sin,
before it be committed.
that the disquiet of conscience, arising from sin, falls out either before
or after the sin committed. Before, as when Satan tempts and persuades
unto any great and notorious sin, whereat the very conscience does shake and
tremble, as Adultery, Fornitation, Murder of our selves, or of some other our
dearest and nearest friends. For these temptations have befalne many, but yet
in diverse sorts.

For to some they have fallen mediately, Temptations befalling some mediately.
by the interposing some things before, whereby a man may be allured to
committing of such sin. As unto Adultery and Fornication, there is many times
the sight of some thing that may allure unto lust.

In murder the consideration of some precedent injury, etc. And sometime they
fall immediately, Others, immediately.
when Satan without these things uses an immediate temptation to the very act
it self, and therefore oftentimes he deals with many (as I have found by
experience) to murder and make away themselves, their dearest and nearest
friends, having no cause at all of injury to move and incite them unto it.
Which later sort is the more terrible and full of fear and quaking agonies; by
how much it finds nothing but only the terror and ugly shape of sin to
contemplate, and for the strangenes thereof might seem a thing impossible to
befall any, were it not, that the age and time wherein we live, had ministered
unto us many fearful and lamentable experiences hereof. In the first it is
not so: For they for the most part, looking upon the mediate incitements,
whiles the violence of their corrupted nature does carry and drive them on, as
a mighty tempest, and like a raging stream, they seem for the present to
feel no touch at all of the terror of their sin and wickedness. And yet in
this kind of temptation, I must needs grant, that there are many that find no
little horror and disquiet in themselves. These are such, as for the most part
have striuen and labored heretofore against the same sin: but now finding
the same corruption more stirring in them, and little or nothing qualified,
(against which notwithstanding they have often labored through long and
earnest suits) it breeds no small disquietnesse in their doubtful souls.
Against these two sorts of assaults, being so like of nature, as being only
differing in the manner of the temptation, and measure of their grief and
trouble, one and the selfsame remedy will serve indifferently to be applied:
Intending withal by the way, for further satisfaction of either part, to
interpose such several exceptions as either of them may allege, in respect of
some proper and peculiar circumstance arising in the manner, time, course, and
measure of the assaults.

First therefore, The afflicted are to consider, with whom they have to deal,
to wit, Satan.
whosoever thou art, that art thus afflicted, thou must remember, with whom
thou have to deal, and that is Satan. Secondly, where; and that is in the
World. As for Satan that thus does solicit and tempt thee unto sin, it
cannot seem strange unto thee, if thou well consider it; for he was never,
either negligent or shamefaced in his business, were it never so bad and
impious, which he takes in hand. He does know his time is but short, and
therefore he bestirreth himself the more. He sees that virtue and godliness
stand not with his gain: but wickedness and sin is that which is most
suitable to his profession. He is, and always was, and shall be enemy to Christ
and his Kingdom; knowing that where Christ has the soucraintie, he must
suffer exile. And therefore as he tendereth his state and kingdom, so he will be
ever careful to erect and set up that shall be most advantage for the same.

Again, And likewise where they are, to wit, in the world.
thou must remember that thou art in the world, the very black and bloody
field, where Satan fights his combats, and lays his continual trains and
Canuasadoes: and therefore do not think that thou shall be freed, and escape
clear away without any encounters. It is impossible that thou should. He
assaulted Eve in Paradise: Genesis 3. Math 4. Luke 4.
He found out and tempted Christ in the Wilderness: and think thou that he
cannot easily find thee also out in the world?

Ob. But why (say thou) does God suffer me in so great a measure to be
assaulted? were ever any of the servants of God so tempted, to commit so great
and so grievous a sin as I?

Answ. Yea, no doubt, infinite and exceeding many; some to Adultery, some to
Gluttony and Drunkenness, some to perjury, some to theft, and yet no doubt, they
continued still the elect and chosen of the Lord. Nay, not only this, but
mark it well, and thou shall find, even in thine own temptation: a sure
argument of the exceeding mercy of thy God, which has not been so far
extended unto many his dear and chosen children, as unto thee. He suffered
Eve first, Genesis 3. Genesis 19.
and then Adam in Paradise not only to be tempted, but to yield also unto the
temptation. 2. Sam. 11.
Lot and David were not only assaulted, but also overcome: Acts 9.
Paul not only egged on, but actually performed villainies against the Children
of God: Math. 26.
Peter was brought to commit the very act in flat denial of his Master: Many
Christians by the frailety of nature, not only tempted and persuaded, but have
often yielded so far therein, that they have fallen many times from
profession of Christ, unto Paganism and open Idolatry. Now God, though he
might, yet he has not dealt so with thee. But notwithstanding thy great and
many temptations, wherewith thou have been assaulted, yet he continues his
grace and mercy toward thee, in not giving thee up so far, as that thou
should, as yet yield unto these allurements of the subtle Serpent, that
ancient enemy of man. Yea, and if thou could look with as quick an eye,
and as sharp a sight, into the mercies of God, as thou can into thine own
and present miseries: I doubt not, but thou would be even forced to
confess his exceeding Love and Favor toward thee, which he has for a time
denied and not imparted unto others. See thou not, how he suffers many to
lie wallowing in sin without remorse or feeling; having even feared
consciences, hearts brawned, and as hard as the adamant, taking pleasure and
delight in sin? See thou not how they suck up sin like water, and how
wantonly they sport and pastime themselves, in swallowing the poisonfull
Hen-bane of their own confusion? Do thou not see how many, most wickedly do
pastime themselves, in Gluttony, Drunkenness, Witchcrafts, Sorceries,
Adulteries, Periuries, Murders, Rapines, Thefts, and such like filthy and
damnable abominations, without any sense or feeling of the horror of so great
a sin? How far more happy then is thine estate, to whom God has given a
fear and dread of sin, a sorrowing heart even beforehand, to consider, that
thou should be thus intised to such a grievous wickedness. Thou tremblest
to commit it, thou quakest to think upon it, and art even amazed, at the very
motion of such an horrible and fearful fact. Thou art pressed and ready to
pray, and wishest with all thine heart to be delivered from it. Thou striuest,
and yet feeling thine own infirmities, thou beginnest to doubt thy fall; and
therefore cryest and crauest for help, at the hand of God, sorrowing and
mourning within thy self, to think that he should so far forsake thee, as
in this assault to suffer Satan, to have and make his prey upon thee. Oh
blessed co^bate! that thus does strive in subduing sin. Oh happy soul! that
is thus disquieted at the ugly shape of such an hideous Monster, namely sin.

kill himself, as I am?

fear, might have given thee a desperate and hardy resolution, as he did to
Pharaoh, to yield to such temptations. He might, in stead of sorrow, have given
thee a pleasure in thy wickedness; as unto Nero, Julian and others. For this
cogitation of the horror of sin, he might have blinded thine eyes, and
suddenly have given thee up to lay violent and bloody hands upon thy self, as
he did to Saul, Judas, and Achitophel. He might have suffered Satan to have
sugared over his bait of sin, with some sweet allurements, to make thee the
sooner to accept, and the better to like it: But he has rather presented it
before thee, in such a ghastly look, that thou might be the more terrified,
and tremble to commit it.

Wherefore thou must needs think and persuade thy self, that God has a
watchful care over thee, in that he has thus put his hook into Satan's
nosthrils; has so brideled and restrained him, that he could not prevail
against thee so far as he desired. Remember that Satan is not called an old
and subtle Serpent for naught.

And if this were the worst and most dangerous temptation of all others, as
thou supposest: Do thou think, that Satan would so seldom use it? It were
no policy in the Devil, to neglect this course so much, and to take a quite
contrary, if he saw that this were most behoouefull for his state and kingdom.
He knows by long practice and daily experience, that it more avails him,
(especially with those which have some touch and feel of sin) to present
vice: not as a vice, but as a virtue: not as hurting, but as helping: not
horrible and ougly to breed a terror, but sweet and pleasant to bring delight
to men. And therefore he does as did Judith, Judith 10.3, 4.
when she went to deceive Holophernes, he trimmeth up and decketh himself, as
though he came in courtesy to counsel, not in cruelty to murder and kill.
Then he will not be a Devil, but a Saint; not a fiend of hell and darkness,
but an Angel of light. He will say (as sometime he taught his Scholar Judas)
All Hayle with Kisses, as though he meant least harm; when indeed he
intends the greatest hurt and mischief Perhaps if Satan had cunningly crept
in upon thee; as he did upon Lot, David, and many others, thou would not so
soon have disliked it, thou would never have been so quickly terrified and
appaled with it. It would have been an easy matter, for this subtle tempter
to have brought thee to his lure, and to have won thee to follow the vanity
of his inticements. But it is not so with thee. Which if thou do well consider,
thou have no cause to be dismayed in heart for the grieuousnes of such a
temptation; neither yet to fear or misdoubt the favor of thy God, but thou
have rather cause to be thankful, to fall down, adore, and wonder at the
mighty power and exceeding grace and mercy of thy heavenly Father, that has
not given thee up unto the will of Satan, nor suffered him to use and practice
his subtle and deceitful trains against thee: but viewing and considering
thy frailty and infirmity, that wast to encounter with so great, so mighty,
and so strong an Adversary, has chained him up, and as it were tied his
hands, and cut him short of his purpose, permitting him none other kind of
fight against thee, but such as through Gods working should be most for thine
advantage. But thou stand upon examples. Who is it, say thou, that was
ever tempted in this manner, to kill himself? Although besides some already
showed, many examples may be brought in this case: yet for breuities cause let
one suffice, which for the worthiness and excellency of the person against
whom Satan used this manner of temptation, may very well serve for all. Recall
to mind, I pray thee, how Satan tempted even our Savior Jesus Christ, and
tell, me what is meant by this, Math. 4.6.
that he would have Christ wilfully to cast himself down headlong from the
pynacle of the Temple. Howsoever he smeared his temptation over, with the
Scriptures falsely alleged and applied: yet the drift of Satan, no doubt, was,
that Christ should have killed and wilfully cast away himself. Seeing then
that He which was most holy, most perfect, and pure, unto whom all things in
heaven, in earth, and in places under the earth do bend and bow the knees, was
in this manner, and with such a temptation assaulted and set upon by the
Adversary: Let it not seem strange unto thee, a creature so weak, so sinful,
so unholy, imperfect and impure, to taste of the same cup, whereof thy Master
Jesus Christ has before tasted: But rather apply and endeavor thy self, by
such means as Christ has used in his own person, and left unto thee and all
his in such causes to be followed, to withstand Satan in his devilish
purpose, and that is, by the power and force of the Scriptures.

CHAP. V.
Sovereign remedy against the wound of sin.

TO come now again to that which in the beginning of the last chapter I
preposed and promised, and to turn my speech to the wounded soul, and to
apply my self to the ease and comfort of this distressed conscience; it is to
be noted, that the first and principal mean to stint the blood, and to stay
the course of these distilling wounds of the afflicted soul, is the
sufficiency of that eternal mercy, and everlasting grace of God our Savior.
For maugre the continual influence of thy doubting and despairing thoughts, in
despite of sin and conquest of the Devil, that seeks continually to cross
out mercy with the black and fearful coal of judgment, thou art to be
persuaded and fully assured, that although thy sins, in number be as the
stars of heaven, and the sands upon the seashore, which are innumerable,
although they be in quality like to crimson, and as red as scarlet; Esaias 1.18.
yet can they not ouer-reach the compass of Gods exceeding mercy and
compassion: Godsmercy is greater then the vilest sin.
The tide whereof is continually so fluent and abundant of such virtue and
power, that it not only ouerrunneth all, but also rinseth, purisieth and
purges all and every the filthy and contagious stains thereof, and that in
such perfection, that it makes us to be clean and white as wool, and as
white, nay whiter then the snow.

Thou therefore that obiectest and say, thy sins are so excessive and out
of measure grievous, that there is for thee no hope nor means of mercy to be
looked for; tell me I pray thee, art thou so notorious and great a sinner, that
none of all the Elect and chosen of God could ever match or equal thee? Art
thou worse then Noah, Genesis 9.29.
which was drunken and lay uncovered in his Tent? Art thou worse then Abraham,
Josh. 24.2.
which had been an Idolater for the space of many years? Worse then David, 2.
Sam. 11.
which was culpable and guilty both of murder and adultery? Art thou worse
then Manasses, whose unwonted Paganism and beastly abominations, are registered
and recorded to the view of all posterities? Have thou committed greater sins
then Peter, who most falsely did swear, forswear, curse and banne himself in
denial of his Master? Can thou match with Paul, which was a cruel
persecutor of the Church of God? Or with Mary Magdalen, which was possessed
with seven devils, who for her filthy and outrageous living, was notoriously
marked for a sinner? And yet all these, no doubt, their grievous sins
notwithstanding, were elected vessels, ordained unto life, and received unto
mercy. Call to mind, to thy consolation and comfort, the tender bowels and
bleeding heart of mercy, which shined in our Savior Jesus Christ, unto those
graceless and hard-hearted Jews, which having preferred Barrabas a murderer,
shamefully handled, condemned and most villainously crucified the very King of
life, and Lord of glory: Who, while the wound was but fresh and bleeding, and
when as yet the spear was scarsly washed, wherewith his body was pierced:
began to bleed again afresh within himself, even with tears of love, and to
rinse away the stains of blood, with the distilling drops of mercy, being
ready to receive them into the reach of his compassion, to cast their sins
behind him, and to bury them in the grave of darkness and oblivion, that thus
of late had so disgraced him with such exceeding contumelies. O graceless
Jews, that thus became ungrateful unto their true Messiah! but O thrice more
loving Jesus, that was so ready to forgive so heinous an offense! The slandrous
periuries of false suborned witnesses, his being spitefully spitted on, the
reproachful reed put into his hand as a scornful scepter, the purple robe,
in disgrace of royalty, the crown of thorns, in contumely of his state and
dignity, the fists that buffeted him, the whip wherewith he was scourged, the
clamorous tongues crying to have him crucified, the cursed cross whereon he
was hanged, the nails wherewith he was fastened, the spear wherewith he was
pierced, nor a thousand more indignities could force him to forget his mercy. O
love of loves, and mercy beyond the reach of all conceits! Who ever crossed with
greater injuries? and yet who more frank and ready in pardoning? And how can
then thy thrice-despairing and distrustful soul misdoubt his mercy? Who
hears not that gracious cry and call of pity; Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you? Who
can donbt of his will, that of his own accord thus lovingly does will us to
come unto him. Remember what was said to Bartimaeus the blind man, sitting by
the way side at Jericho: Mar. 10.49
Be of good comfort, arise, he calls thee. Cheer up then thy heavy heart,
with this sweet balsamum and oil of mercy; lift up thy hands, which hang
down, and thy weak knees, and make straight steps unto thy feet unto the
Throne of grace. Behold, he calls: Cast then aside, with Bartimaus, the
garment of despair, the cloak of sorrow, and weeds of mourning. Assure thy
self of this, that thou art not so fearful in misdoubt of mercy, for the
greatness of thy sins, to come before him, as thou shall find him forward
to receive and entertain thee with the arms of grace and favor, when thou
come; so earnest to knock, but he will he more ready to open. For mark
and see, and let it not in any wise grieve thee, to wade on a little further
with me, in the unfolding of this so sweet a sentence, and so comfortable a
call. First then here is to be considered, who it is that calls: Then, whom
he calls: And thirdly, why he calls. Every of these does contain in it,
in great abundance, the wine of comfort and oil of grace, to glad the heart,
and to cheer up the heavy countenance of the sorrowful and sobbing soul.

As touching the person that thus voluntarily, Who it is that calls grieved
sinners unto him. Genesis 3.15.
of his own mere mercy and goodness, provoke thee to come unto him; Is it
not that woman's Seed, appointed to crush and bruize the serpents head? Is it
not that Root of Iesse, that Son of David, that sweet Emmanuel, that meek
Messiah, that merciful Jesus, promised by our God, shadowed out in the Law,
prophesied of by the Prophets, and in the appointed time exhibited? Is it not,
I pray thee, the subject of our sorrows, the ransom of our sins, the
Redeemer of the world, and the sole and only Mediator, which in his own
person has concluded a peace, and made a full atonement between the Lord and
Man? 1. Cor. 1.30.
Is it not that Jesus Christ, which of God is made unto us, wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification cation, and redemption. He it is, without
doubt, and none other that calls: unto whom do thou resort, and thou shall
find a most plentiful Treasury and abounding Storehouse of sovereign and
comfortable refection: Art thou distressed? he can comfort thee: Art thou in
miseric? he can relieve thee: Art thou in thraldom? he can redeem thee: If
thou art in troubles, he can deliver thee: If thou be brokenhearted, he can
bind thee: If thou be thrown down, he can raise thee: If thou be wandering,
he can reduce thee: If thou be wounded, he can cure and heal thee: If thou be
sick, he can recover thee: And though thou be dead, Iub. 11.39.
yea stinking dead with Lazarus, yet he can revive thee. What can thou sue or
seek for, to thy good, whereof in him thou can not find sufficient, seeing
(as the Apostle testifies) he is all and in all things, Col. 3.10 Col. 1.19.
and in him all fullness dwells? For mercy, he is so compassionate, that he
casts none away that come unto him. In his suits so gracious, Mat. 3.17.
that in him the Father promises to be well pleased with us. By his office so
powerful and so effectual, that by him the Father has appointed to reconcile
all things to himself, and to set at peace, Col. 1.20.
through the blood of his Cross, both the things in earth, and the things in
heaven. And yet, if all this cannot perfwade thee, consider further, that he
is called Jesus, that is, a Savior, Mat. 1.21.
even to save his people from their sins; be they never so great, never so
many, never so silthy, his blood is of such virtue, that it takes away,
purges and purifieth them all. If all this cannot move thee, consider further
that he is a Christ, even the sovereign and sole Anointed of his Father, to be
our King, our Priest and our Prophet. O blessed Name! Christ is a Prophet.
Is Christ a Prophet? and why is this? but only to instruct and teach me?
hear thy cares, and thou shall hear my comforts, against all the assaults and
bitter drifts of sin. I know that in the first sight of sin, thou will
exclaim and say, that thou art inwrapped in an endless Labyrinth of woes and
miseries, and to find out remedy therefore, thou perceiuest that it is not in
thy power, nature knows it not, riches have it not, man cannot atchieue it,
nay, the very Angels in heaven cannot perform it. Oh then, say thou, where
is that unsearchable wisdom that can attain it? And where is the endless
reach of that exceeding skill and policy, that can instruct me how to do it?
thy self this be admirable, to nature a thing incomprehensible, to man
unsearchable, and even to the Angels impossible: yet do thou not fear,
neither be thou any whit dismayed: But remember always, that though these
things, both all and every one, and a thousand more beside should fail thee,
yet thou have a Christ, even an anointed Prophet, that can and will help thee,
can and will instruct thee, how thou may be saved. In him dwells all
knowledge and wisdom in her full perfection. Nay, he is wisdom it self, even
that eternal and everlasting Wisdom of his Father. He is the Angel of the
great counsel, that proceeded out of the hidden closet of his Fathers bosom.
And what is then so abstruse and intricate, which he is not able to attain
unto? Seek therefore and sue unto him, and he will tell thee.

Hearken unto him, he will teach thee to thy eternal comfort. But thou will
say, All this I know: but what is that to the purpose? when Christ has taught
and told me, am I then able to perform it? I have sinned and offended a
thousand fold: and on the other side, God is just, and justice must be
satisfied. And which way is it ever possible that such a wretched, sinful and
weak a creature as I should do it?

thou art of thy self unable: but now look back again to Christ: and again
consider, that as he is an anointed Prophet, as I told thee before, Christ is
a Priest.
to teach thee: so he is also made a Priest unto us, to offer up and present
unto his heavenly Father that all-sufficient and euer-pleasing sacrifice to God
his Father, by virtue whereof (be our sins innumerable) yet with that one and
only payment, he rests himself fully satisfied and contented.

And the more to assure thee hereof, it shall not be amiss, to produce unto
thee the testimony and witness of the Holy Ghost, and of God the Father,
witnesses both ancient and authentical enough, to content in this, or any
other such like case. The Spirit speaking by the pen of his Apostle Paul,
tells us, That it pleased the Father, Col. 1.19.
that in him should all fullness dwell, and by him to reconcile unto himself,
and to set at peace, through the blood of his Cross, both the things in earth,
and the things in heaven. And the Father plainly has given this testimony of
him: Mat. 3.17. and 17.5.
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. To these you may add the
saying of the Son himself, who plainly affirms of himself, that he came
to give his life, and to be made a ransom for many. And to notify unto us
That all-sufficiencie of this ransom, being ready to yield up the Ghost, Ioh.
19.30.
he affirmed that all was finished. A great number of such like places, to the
same effect might be produced out of the Book of God, but I hope these few
will suffice to stop the mouths of the gaine-sayers of this so comfortable
doctrine. Such as were stinged with serpents in the wilderness, Numb. 21.
so long as they looked downward upon themselves, and upon their wounds, could
find no comfort, to the curing of their grief; but casting their eyes upon
the brazen Serpent, at the commandment of God erected by Moses, they quickly
had and found recovery: So we, so long as (being wounded by that sinful
Serpent the Devil) we cast our eyes and look upon our selves, and upon our
sins only, we can never find any release. But if we lift up the eyes of
our faith, and look upon Christ Jesus, that was lifted up in sacrifice upon
the Cross, as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness, we shall (out of
doubt) find therein a present and a sovereign remedy against all the
infections of our sins. For as it fared with the Jews, before the time of
Christ; that although they often sinned, yet it was not permitted to
themselves, but the Priest must offer sacrisice to make the atonement: so
neither is it in our power to satisfy God, against whom we have offended: but
Christ alone is only our Priest, to offer up the sacrifice of satisfaction, to
put away his Fathers wrath. Genesis 27.23.
And therefore also as Jacob in getting the blessing from his Brother Esau, was
content to follow his mothers counsel, and to remit the mitigating of his
fathers wrath (if happily he were displeased) unto her careful policy: so we in
treading the path and way to life and blessedness, must be content, not only
to insist in that that Christ enioyneth us; but also, for the satisfying of the
wrath of GOD, for our sin committed (which is not in our selves to do) we
must still depend on Christ, who is a thousand parts more skillful and
auailable to do the same, then ever was Rebecca to content the humor of her
husband Isaac. Insomuch as he did not only by his death once offer up
himself unto God, a sweet smelling oblation to do away our sins; but also
by virtue of this his Priesthood, he continually remains an earnest
intercessor for us; insomuch that he no sooner sees, as it were, a frown of
dis-fauour, appearing in the countenance of his Father toward us, but
straightway he is ready to interpose himself, to appease the same, and to
make a peace betwixt his Father and us.

As touching the third office whereunto our Savior is anointed, Christ is a
King.
which is his Kingly Office, there is no small comfort to be found therein
also. For although our enemies, so many, so great and mighty, do continually
and every day bend and set themselves against us, and like ravening Wolves,
ramping and roaring Lions, most greedily gape and thirst after our destruction;
yet has he (I mean our Savior Christ Jesus) such a Kingly, conquering and
subduing power given unto him, that all our enemies, Sin, Satan, Death and
Hell, will they, nill they, must of necessity stoop and be obedient
thereunto. And therefore, what further scruple is there remaining, for which
thou can not find a sovereign medicine in this comfortable Kingdom, and
royal souerainty of Christ our Savior?

Does Satan make claim unto thee, or does he plead a right and interest unto
thy soul? Have recourse to Christ. For though in thy self thou findess the
evidence of Satan to be written with the sinful letters of thine own
transgressions: yet in Christ, and in his death and bloodshed, thou shall find
them razed and cancelled, and unto him alone, to be signed and sealed from his
Father, a sure and sufficient deed of gift as it were of thy self, and of thy
soul, with sufficient warrant against Satan, and all his accomplices. In that
our heavenly Father has delivered into this our Saviors hands, such an
absolute and powerful authority, as that no power either in earth or hell is
able to withstand: does sin incumber thee? art thou inwrap ped in the chains
thereof, and bound with the gables of th^ne own iniquities? Fly then to Christ,
for he it is that is able alone and only to break these bands in sunder, and
to set thy soul at liberty. For being a Michael, as a mighty Captain to
subdue our enemies; he has power also to redeem us home, and to reduce us
from the fear of bondage. And as for death and hell, the fearfullest fears
that ever were unto the sinful soul, there is no cause at all to fear them;
seeing that sin, the sting of both, is by Christ so conquered and taken away.

say, These things I find indeed to be so as is said; but yet to me it is not
so. For these graces which you have spoken of, belong to to the righteous; as
for me, my sins as a mighty flood, have ouerrunne my soul, testifying as a
thousand witnesses, that these things do not appertain to me; but rather all
those curses, threats and judgments that are denounced in the Law.

I answer, that you are altogether in one song, being, as it appears,
intentive wholly and only on your sins, and nothing else. Was Physic ever
ordained, I pray you, for him that is in health? Is Surgery appointed for
him that has no sores or wounds? Howsoever you judge in this case; Christ, I
am sure, is of another judgment, and tells you otherwise; that they which
are whole, have no need of the Physician, but they that are sick: And that he
came not to call the righteous, Mat. 9.13. Luke 19.10
but sinners to repentance. And that the Son of man is come to seek and save
that which was lost. And do you not remember that sweet compellation, lately
mentioned, Come unto me, all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will
ease you? Who are these weary? and who are the heavy laden? are they not (which
was the third part I observed in that call made by Christ) such as are tired
and ouerburthened with the heavy load and burden of their sins? Yes no
doubt. You see then, that it is not of any force or moment which you have
objected to the contrary. Again, consider I pray you, what was the cause that
our heavenly Father did lay those three several offices before touched on the
person of his Son. Was it not for sin, and that of us that are his sinful
creatures? And was it not in the wisdom of God devised as a remedy and
recovery against our sins? If Adam had persisted and continued still in that
purity and innocence, in the which he was first created, what needed Christ
so to have abased himself, and to have suffered so many shameful and cruel
things as he did?

It appears therefore, that whatsoever Christ is unto us, it is all to take
away our sin, to reconcile us into the favor of God, and to make us with him
inheritors of his everlasting Kingdom. If sin had never entered, no doubt,
the greatest part of Christ's office had been frustrate and to no purpose.
There is no cause then to allege our sins as a cause to make his grace to be
ineffectual in us, which was the first thing whereunto it was appointed,
entered and took effect. And therefore we should rather thus reason and
dispute to the contrary: I am a sinful and a great transgressor; Christ on the
other side is a Savior, to save his people from their sins, and therefore I
know and am assured, that the fruit and effect of his precious bloudshedding
does appertain and belong unto me.

To that which has been heretofore said in this behalf, I may add the saying
of the Apostle, 1. Tim. 1.15
This is a true saying, and worthy of all men to be received, that Christ came
into the world to save sinners. Of the Prophet Esaias, affirming that he was
wounded for our transgressions, Esaias 53.5.
and broken for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and
with his stripes we are heal: and many such like places to that same effect:
but I hope these shall suffice.

CHAP. VI.
Against the assault of the weakness and want of Faith.

objected by the person thus disquieted and troubled in mind: Indeed these
things I do know and confess to be so: but yet I remember what is also
written, that is, that although Christ came to be a Savior and a Redeemer unto
sinners, and was indeed sent to preach good tidings unto the poor, Esaias 61.1.
to bind up the broken hearted, to preach liberty unto the captives, and to
them that are bound the opening of the prison, to comfort all that mourn, to
cloth them with the garments of salvation, and to cover them with the robe of
righteousness, yet in them only shall this his coming and death be effectual,
which by a true and a lively faith take hold and depend upon him. For it is
written: So God loved the world, Job. 3.16.
that he gave his only begotten Son, to the end that all that believe in
him, should not perish, but have everlasting life: but as for those which have
not faith, it after follows, that they are so far from grace, that they are
condemned already, Job. 3.18.
because they believe not in the only begotten Son of God.

This assault, 2. Sorts of men assaulted with the want of Faith.
although for the most part it never ensues after the assault of sin before
touched; yet it is diversely disposed, in respect of the diverse subjects wherein
it works. For some are such as are but newly begun to be regenerate and
renewed, in whom faith does but begin to take root, and to be sowed and
ingrafted, and these having lain always beforetime, as it were dead in sin,
have never felt to their knowledge, the lively pulse of faith at any time to
beat within them.

And again, 1. The newly regenerate.
others there be, that being before called, and being endued with the gift of
faith; yet the flesh resisting against the Spirit and the spiritual graces, 2.
More ancient Christians.
remaining for the time both dull and weak in them, they seem to have clean
lost that which they had before, and thereupon fall to doubting and distrust
within themselves, as though their faith were but a dead faith, which seems
for the time, to be so quickly wasted and decayed. Against these two several
estates of men, we are to apply several medicines, as is most convenient.

First, touching him that is but young and very tender in the womb of
regeneration, and not fully formed and become a renewed creature in Christ: No
marvel if he think strange of this distrust within himself: or if that he
complain of the weakness and want of faith in himself. For you must
understand, that he that will go to heaven, for the most part must pass by
Hell gates: that is, through the gulf of deep despair. The conversion of
some is much more quiet and free from struggling then others.
For though some, I grant, may seem to have a quiet conversion, and an easy
travel in their regeneration: yet others, no doubt, with much struggling and
greater difficulty do attain the same. So that as the woman, that with great
pain, and much ado, has deliverance of the burden of her womb, seems to
hazard both her self and the fruit of her womb also: so he that thus
trauelleth and labors in his new birth, till faith be fully framed in him,
in struggling against sin, is oftentimes cumbred with such bitter and sharp
combat, that he thinks himself to be in extreme danger, and judges his
tender yongling faith, to be dead indeed, and to be, as you would say, none at
all, because he finds and feels not a present and evident motion of life
appearing in it.

In this sort of men so distrustful of themselves, The cause is a suspicion of
the want of faith, etc.
the cause (as I have often found it) of this distrust and suspicion of the
want of faith, is the lack of the knowledge of the course and order, that God
takes and uses in our regeneration, which is, first to humble us, that he may
exalt us, and to abase us in the sight of our infirmities, that afterward,
step by step, in his time appointed, he might raise us up again unto an
undoubted trust, and assured hope in him. Wherefore, that the remedy against
this distrustful wound of despair, may be the better prepared; let us first
consider the course and order of Gods vocation, in singling out those from the
world, in his time, whom he before all times, in his eternal purpose has
ordained and appointed unto life.

In this course and order of Gods vocation, The course and order of Gods call
to be considered 1. The time wherein.
we are first to mark and consider well the time, wherein he does vouchsafe to
call. For we must observe, that he calls not all at once, and at one instant
together: but he calls some sooner, some later; some in the morning, even in
their infancy and prime of years; some about the third hour and in their
youthful days; some at the sixth hour, even in their strength and manhood:
But others again at the sunne-set, as it were, and declining of the day, even
when they grow near to their end, and approach to their grave. 1. Sa. 1.2.
God as it appears called Samuel, when he was but young. Josiah also that good
Prince seemed to be reclaimed from the world, 2. King. 22.
and singled out unto the Lord, when as yet he was but eight years old. Luke
1.
John Baptist was a sanctified vessel, even from his mothers womb. Act. 9.
But Paul, as is evidently to be proved, was reclaimed, being grown to greater
years: Luke 19.
So was Zacheus, and infinite other recorded in the Scriptures. But the thief
on the Cross, Luke 23.
though by the course of nature he might have continued a longer time, yet had
his calling, when as the Sun of Life was almost set, and night of death
began to arise upon him. This manner and order GOD has and still does use,
not that he is not of power to alter and change the same; but because it is his
own will. And in this doing (we must mark) he does not so much respect what
he can do, but rather what is most convenient for the better manifestation of
his mercy, and the advancement of his glory in the Vocation and Calling of his
Elect and chosen. And therefore some he quickly preuenteth with his grace;
some again he suffers to run a long time in the race of wickedness, and
to wallow and soil themselves in the beastly sink of sin, and yet
afterward reclaimeth them home unto himself, that so in both, he might
declare and show forth the bottomless depth of his exceeding love and favor
toward those which are his.

From the which difference of times in Gods calling, and regeneration of his
chosen children, arises this general doctrine of exceeding comfort, that no
man, No man can certainly conclude against himself, that he is a Castaway.
of what estate so ever he be, can at any time, in regard of his supposed
defect of faith, peremptorily conclude against himself, his own damnation,
and say of a certainty, that he is surely a Castaway and a Reprobate for ever:
No, though for the time, he seems to himself to be as it were, not only to
be newly entered, but even to have some long time continued in the state of
reprobation. For it is one thing, to be in man's judgment in the state of
Reprobation, and another by Gods Decree of Predestination to be a Reprobate,
and one that is for ever castaway. For the very Elect and chosen children of
God, if we respect only the outward appearance and will, be ready to give out
our sentence and judgment thereby, until such time as they be regenerate,
effectually called, and borne again by the Spirit of God, may be said to be in
the state of Reprobation: that is, to be such, as for the present have gone
further, nor made any further progress in the ways of life, then has he
which is a Reprobate indeed. And for this cause, they may be said to be in the
kingdom of darkness, and to be aliants, strangers, yea enemies to God. But
on the other side, if we have respect unto the certainty and truth of Gods
decree, which stands firm and sure for ever: they can in no wise be said to
be so reprobated, and quite cast away from the hope of grace; because that in
respect of the said Decree, they are chosen and elected vessels unto life, and
such as shall be partakers of mercy, though as yet, the fruit thereof in the
grace of their regeneration, does not begin to work and be effectual within
them. So that, though in the secrecy of Gods Decree there is a distinction and
difference made, and some are vessels of mercy prepared unto honor; some
vessels of wrath, appointed unto dis-honour; some are to be partakers of life
eternal; some contrariwise to be partakers of death everlasting: yet to the
judgment of man, within himself, until such time as he is regenerate, and
has the testimony of the Spirit, to testify and avouch unto his heart and
conscience, though he be in the secret purpose elected; yet for the time, I
say, he shall find small or no difference betwixt himself, and those that are
Reprobates indeed, even in the foreknowledge and counsel of God. Which
indifferency of the estate of the Elect and Reprobate, (before the time of
regeneration) joined with the uncertain and unknown time of the Lords
calling, is a great reason, why that, though the man regenerate and renewed, may
be assured of his salvation: yet may he not in defect of faith, and other
graces of regeneration, conclude his own condemnation, and say that he is for
ever reprobated and castaway. For that, he having yet a time and space to
live, be it never so short a moment, the Lord may therein call him home, and
gather him unto himself. The child cannot say that he is condemned, because
he has not faith: because that when he comes to man's estate, the gift of
Faith may be imparted unto him. Neither he that is at man's estate, because
that in his old age he may be received. Neither yet he, whom old age has
wearied: because that, if in health he find it not, yet in the last hour,
and upon his deathbed, the Lord may bestow the same upon him, and supply his
want.

Wherefore, seeing that our vocation and effectual calling (though in secret
knowledge of God it be certainly dated) in respect of us is most uncertain,
whether it shall be when we are young, or when we are old; whether this day or
the next; this month, or the next year: surely the state of the present time,
wherein we find and feel our selves, can be no sufficient Argument to reason
and conclude of that, which we can tie or limit unto no certain time at all.

For what reason, I pray you, were it for a man to say, I have lived these
twelve or fourteen years, and yet am not called, and therefore I am a
Castaway? Or I have lived twenty, thirty or forty years, and yet I find no
faith, and therefore I am condemned? Or I am old, weary, weak, sick and
feeble, I do look every hour to dye, I am uncertain of my life for an
hour, or a minute of an hour, such is mine infirmity: and yet I find no
comfort of my Calling: and therefore I shall not be called at all? As though
God were bound of duty, to order things according to our prescription: or that
either he were not able; or else were unwilling at the last gasp, to give unto
thee greater mercy, and more evident testimony of his grace and favor
toward thee, then he did all thy life before. Let not any man presume to
prescribe unto the Lord what he should do, or in what time and manner he
should do any thing; his own wisdom, and his own will and power are
sufficient in this behalf. Neither let any man whartle at, and why out the
case with God; saying, Why does he thus defer the time, and put off the
comfort of his elect and chosen? It is not meet, that the servant should pry so
far into the closet of his Masters secrets. And who can reach, or who is able
or meet to search out the depth of his eternal counsels? Rather lay thine hand
upon thy mouth with modesty, and be it soon, or be it late, do thou still
obediently depend upon the Lords good will and pleasure, which then shall take
effect, when as it seems to his wisdom most convenient.

Were it therefore granted, which is so much presumed, in the wavering and
doubting soul, that it were for the present utterly destitute, and had no
faith at all: yet this is no reason for a man to prove himself a Reprobate:
because that no man in such a case can in this life peremptorily conclude, that
he is a castaway, as has been before showed: though on the contrary, the man
regenerate may be certainly assured of his salvation, even while he continues
in this life.

Secondly, the manner of our vocation, both in respect of Gods working, The
manner of our Calling.
and our feeling, must be next considered. For the ignorance hereof, makes
many, even in the very working and spring of life, most of all to dread and
stand in fear of death: and in the very breeding of Faith, to call in
question, and stand in doubt of the want of Faith. We must therefore here note
and mark, that God works herein; but not in all men alike. For though some
rather then others, have and find more quick and cheerful conversion, in
that they find not such troublesome conflicts within themselves, by reason of
the shortness of the time: yet others he leads on softly, and step by step,
as it were in the work of their conversion. So that they may seem to put a
greater difference and a longer pawse betwixt the two several and general
points in their regeneration, that is, their humiliation in regard of sin,
and of the Law: and their exaltation in regard of faith, and feeling of the
grace of God in Christ. This humiliation therefore resting a longer time in the
sinful soul, Humiliation.
does breed the greater conflict, and brings forth a far stronger combat,
because the time and space is greater, wherein he has to consider of the
fearful and dangerous condition of his own estate, being thus (as is said)
humbled in regard of Sin and the Law.

And the reasons are: First, because that the man so humbled, does not
remember, 1. Reason.
that God thus works in his servants by degrees, and not all at one time and
in one instant. Law, by reason of my great wickednesses, and my soul is
humbled and abased even unto the hell, and yet I find or feel no comfort, and
therefore surely my case is hard and dangerous, and I can be none other but a
Castaway.

reason, or rather objection, were of some force indeed, if it could be
certainly proved, that God effects all at once, and that he never puts
any time and distance betwixt these two points of man's conversion, namely, his
humbling and his exaltation. But seeing that it is evident, that there is a
time betwixt his wounding and curing, his striking and healing, his abasing and
raising up again, it may very well be answered, to the cheering and
refreshing of the broken and contrite soul, that this reason cannot be in any
part sufficient, to breed in any, despair, though Satan set never so fair and
goodly a gloss upon it. And therefore, whenever Satan begins to assault
and set upon any man in this manner, let the person so assaulted, cast up the
eyes of his mind, and fix his meditations upon this course of God, which he
uses in man's conversion, and learn withal to put in practice, the rule of
David, a man after Gods own heart: Hope in the Lord, Psalm. 27.14.
expect his leisure, and he shall comfort thine heart.

despair and faith, terror of wrath and peace of conscience, fear of
judgment and hope of mercy agree together, being in nature and in effect so
contrary and repugnant the one to the other? this appears to be a thing
impossible. For as these three latter (that is) faith, peace and hope, are
incident indeed to the Elect and chosen of God: so on the contrary, the three
former, despair, disquiet of conscience and fear, do appertain to the
Reprobates: And these I do find within my self; and how can it then any
otherwise be, but that I am a Castaway?

I answer: If thou were (I say) skillful and acquainted (whoeuer thou be) with
the order used by God in man's conversion, thou would never thus have
reasoned. For God, as is evidently by sundry examples to be proved, first
humbles, and then exalts; first maimeth, and then heals; first breaks,
and then binds. Peter's auditors, as we read, were first pricked, and then
were cured. Mary Magdalen was first humbled, and then obtained mercy. And
Manasses was first terrified, and then restored. So the children of God, in
respect of their humiliation, by reason of their sin, and the curse by the
Law denounced against sin, may have in them these three, despair, disquiet
of conscience, and fear: But on the other side, in respect of their
exaltation, by the feeling of the grace and favor of God in Christ, they may
have in them the other three, faith, peace of conscience, and hope. And (all
this notwithstanding) the same person, no doubt, the true servant of the Lord,
and a chosen vessel of God. So that as thou see, this thy reason may very
well be retorted upon thine own head, and that to thine exceeding great
consolation and comfort. If therefore thou be broken, if thou be afflicted, if
thou be humbled, be not dismayed, but be of good comfort, the Lord will bind
thee, he will comfort thee, he will raise thee. God (says the Prophet. David)
is near unto them that be of a contrite heart, Psalm. 34.18.
and will save such as be afflicted in Spirit. And again, A contrite and a
broken heart, Psalm. 51.
O Lord, thou will not despise. Again, Cast down your selves before the Lord,
Jam. 4.10.
and he will lift you up. For comfort is appointed unto them that mourn in
Zion: Esaias 61.3.
To give them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of
gladness for the spirit of heaviness, that they might be called the trees of
righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified: Comfort
therefore your self with these promises, which (as Peter teaches) in due time
shall be performed.

Another reason arises from ignorance of the end of Gods working in this sort
as has been saydi, 2. Reason.
joined with the consideration of his mercies promised to his Elect and chosen.
For thus the despairing conscience reasons:

roughly, and in such rigorous and extreme manner with his servants? Or would
he ever thus have wounded me with the fearful arrows of despair and dread,
had I not been indeed a Reprobate?

If Gods rough dealing (to use thine own manner of speeches) in the handling
of his servants, had none other end then despair; and, if this were the only
mark, whereat God in this doing does aim, the reason surely had some force.
But this is not the end which God respects in this manner of his doings. For
in this point, he is affected, as the Surgeon and Physician are affected
toward their Patients. The one launceth, cutteth and opens the wound or sore
more wide, not with intent to enlarge, but in fine to lessen, heal and close
up the same. The other gives unto his Patient a purgation so strong, as for
the time it makes him more sick and diseased then he was before, but yet with
this good purpose, thereby to recover his health: So in like manner God makes
the wounds of our sinful souls, for a time, to gape wider, and gives us such
a strong compound of the consideration of sin, the Law and Judgment, that
(for the time) we are driven into greater agonies, yet all to this end, that
he might hereby fully heal us, and wholly recover us to a perfect health in
Christ.

And here let not any man demand the question (seeing this is so apparent) why
God deals (as you term it) so ronghly and extremely with some, and more
mildly with others. For it is not because he less loves some, then he loves
others, or less pitieth some, then he pitieth others; as though in this
dealing he were more favorable to some, then he is to others. For the
Physician may be equally and like affected unto the good estate and health of
all, though in curing all, he uses not the same medicines, and measure of
medicines in their recovery. And so it is with Gods dealing toward us.
Therefore though we find that God does deal with us more roughly and sharply
then he has done, or does with others in their conversion: yet let no man take
this unto his heart, as a cause of distrust of the love and favor of God,
which works all according to his own will and pleasure, and in such manner,
as to his wisdom appears best and most behoouefull for his servants, and for
the advancement of his own glory. Experience teaches us, that although the
Chyrurgeon heals some wounds with a gentle plaster, yet he thinks good to
deal with some more sharply, that they may be soundly cured. So God, in
curing sin, though all the wounds thereof are deadly, yet some are more open
then others, some more inward and infectious then others, and must therefore of
necessity be searched deeper, that our conversion may be the perfecter. In this
cafe therefore let us be contented to subject our selves to the will of God, who
(as I have said) doubtless disposes all to the furtherance of his glory, and
benefit of his children, and that after one sort with one, and otherwise with
another, and not alike with all in their conversion, and yet so with every one,
as in his wisdom, he sees to be best and most effectual for the
accomplishment of their salvation. But this in general.

CHAP. VII.
Of special things in man's conversion.

2 IN more special, in the course and case of man's conversion, is matter so
hard and difficult to be discerned and judged, and faith in such sort grows
and creeps on in the heart of man, that though the truth thereof be in the
heart, yet because it does not lively manifest it self by plain effects, we
are not able to discern and know it. For as the corn chitteth, and
continually grows in the earth, and we see not how, neither are we able, at
the first show, to make a difference betwixt the good corn and grass, and yet
notwithstanding, the corn is in it self come indeed: So faith, when it is
first hatched and begun in our hearts, comes forth in such sort, that it
cannot easily be descried and discerned of us, whether it be true faith or no,
until such time, as it be so grown to a head, and has taken such root in us,
as that it begins openly to show forth some undoubted fruits and effects
thereof. Whereupon it comes to pass, that the distressed conscience,
unacquainted with the several effects and fruits of faith, and with the nature
thereof, before it comes unto full perfection, stammereth and staggereth in
doubt thereof, as though he had no faith at all. Wherefore I think it
necessary, that we further consider of certain particulars, worthy observation
in the course and order of man's conversion.

effectual conversion, that as man by the fall of Adam is utterly blind and
ignorant of his own estate (for his foolish heart is full of darkness:) His
ignorance is expelled, and knowledge increased.
so the holy Ghost, by his inward operation, joined with the outward ministry
of the Word, expels the mists of ignorance, and in stead thereof he places
the light of knowledge: And this either in respect of man himself, fetting
before him the danger of his own condition; or in respect and regard of God,
and this in a double manner: For as there are two parts of the Word, viz. the
Law and the Gospel: so by the one, God is made known unto us, as a Judge, full
of wrath and anger against such as have sinned and transgressed against his
Law: And by the other, that is, the Gospel, he is revealed unto us as a most
loving Father, full of grace and mercy in Christ Jesus. And thus far the
Elect and Reprobate may go both together: For the very Castawayes have a kind
of knowledge of the Law of God and of his Gospel. They hear and know what
curses God has threatened in his Law, and thereby perceive what is the
fearful and dangerous estate of sinners, to whom the same curses, by the
sentence of the Law, are due: And therefore oftentimes they are found to quake
and tremble thereat, as appears by diverse examples in the Scriptures. Yea,
they know the Gospel also, how that Christ came into the world for a
redemption for sin: Insomuch that oftentimes, with the bare and naked
knowledge of it, they seem to have some joy, though it be but momentany, Mat.
13.20.
which in the parable of the seed, is called the receiving of the Word with
joy, Heb. 6.4, 5.
and by the Apostle to the Hebrews, the tasting of the heavenly gift, and of
the Word of God, and of the powers of the world to come. But herein they may
very well be compared to a man that abounds with melancholy, who ioyeth and
delights himself in the very thought of those things, which are unlikely,
and which he never looks should come to pass, and so his joy vanishes. So
these men in a bare conceit and a naked knowledge for the time, do seem to
joy and solace themselves, in the Word and promises of life, which
notwithstanding do not concern them, and so their joy quickly vanishes and
falls away, as though it had never been.

knowledge in some measurable sort effected, as shall be thought in the wisdom
of God convenient, His application and use of his knowledge.
then grows the application and use of the same knowledge, according to the
two parts thereof, the Law and the Gospel.

First, when a man finds, in the Law, the anger and curse of God against sin,
and conferreth the things forbidden in the Law, with his own life and actions,
he concludes straightway, either the safety, or the danger of his own
estate. And this I may rightly term a legal conscience, whereby through this
examination, so made of his actions, and assuming the same, either by
affirmation, or negation, upon the general sentence of the Law before
discerned, a man in himself is either acquit or condemned, in regard of his
deeds before the sight of God.

Upon this examination ensues also the prick of conscience, The prick of
conscience.
which is a continual and fearful remembrance of their sins, and of their
dangerous estate through sin, troubling and disquieting the mind with often
fear and horror of Judgment: and both these are found to be incident both to
the Elect and Reprobate, though in both, they be not accompanied with the like
effects. And this prick and sting of conscience, is the thing which disarmeth
the weak Christian, that is not to the full renewed, of all hope and comfort,
while he is too much bent upon it, and intentive in it. And so much the more,
because that finding this to be a thing, whereby heeis assimilate and made so
like unto one that is indeed a reprobate, he is not able to find out the
odds, nor to make the difference that is betwixt them.

sorrow and fearful mourning for sin; but not so much in regard of the
nature and filthiness of the sin it self, Sorrow and mourning for sin.
that is committed; Or of that gracious God, whose majesty he has through
sin so grievously offended; as in respect of the fearful curse and
Judgment which he sees to be annexed as a penalty and punishment due unto
his sin. And thus far the Law.

Being thus trained by the Law (which is indeed a Schoolmasters to lead us
unto Christ) we then come to the Gospel, Gal. 3.24.
containing in it the most comfortable promises of mercy and life in Christ
Jesus. In the which Gospel, as all the promises therein contained, are only
made and indented with those, Ioh. 17.20.
for whom Christ poured out his earnest prayer and supplication before the time
of his Passion, that is, his Elect and Chosen: So the true use and application
of the same, is only proper and peculiar unto them. Our knowledge therefore,
by the working of Gods Spirit in us, finding in the said Gospel, the mercy and
grace of God in Christ, to be all-sufficient to the curing of the deadly wounds
of sin, in those which with a true and a lively faith, do stay and rest
themselves upon his death and Passion, and the merits, virtue, and power
thereof, it begins thus to make the use, and to apply the same. A weak
application of the promises of the Gospel.


general knowledge, the conscience begins again in more particular, to
conclude upon it self, though at first I grant somewhat weakly and doubtingly,
with condition in this manner: Seeing God has promised thus to be merciful
unto all in Christ, that have faith, yea, and that without exception, that he
therefore, (though in hunselfe a sinful creature, and a breaker of the Law)
finds that he should be partaker of this grace, if he could attain to the
gift of faith. This then, as appears, is first found and accepted in the
Gospel, by the sinful and abased soul, for his consolation and comfort, that
as there is by the Law a curse and beauy Judgment due for sin: so there is a
help and remedy to be found in the Gospel, whereby he may be perfectly cured
and restored, if he were able to attain unto it.

remedy, revealed by the Gospel to be in it self so full and all-sufficient, A
godly sorrow.
and considers well thereof, both in the original, that is, the mercy and
love of God, and also in the manner of it, which was the death and bloodshed
of the best-beloued and only Son of God: then he begins again, through
this glass: to behold sin in the ugly visage thereof, and thereby is
constrained to mourn and sigh afresh, for committing of that, which could not
by any means be purified and cleansed; but by the precious blood of that
immaculate Lamb of God, 2. Cor. 7.9.
Christ Jesus. And this mourning the Apostle justly calls a godly sorrow.
Which though indeed it be a part of true repentance, in the truth and nature of
it, and therefore an effect of it: yet because Faith is as yet but young and
weak, and cannot be so easily discerned in the fullness of her motion, it has
so many sparks of doubting and distrust in the grievous appearance of sin,
that the brokenhearted Christian, being thus pricked and perplexed, has
nothing more common and usual in his mouth, then condemnation. Yea withal,
sometimes he grows so extreme and outrageous in these distrustful passions,
that no reason can satisfy and persuade him for a time, but that he wants
Faith; though indeed, he have the truth of faith showing it self in the
fruits thereof within him.

Thirdly, Faith now (as I have said) having brought forth this godly sorrow to
this end, A hatred and lothing of sin.
that so we might be truly humbled: though for her weakness (being but lately
sprung) it is not able to keep it under measure, yet by little and little it
grows to some ripenes: And therefore next upon, or rather jointly with this
mourning, it breeds a hatred and lothing of sin, A desire and longing after
the righteousness of Christ Jesus.
that is so filthy and odious in the sight of God, and so pernicious and
dangerous unto man, and planteth a desire and longing after the righteousness
of Christ Jesus: And therefore is greatly encouraged to approach and draw near
unto the Throne of Grace, and to call and cry unto God for mercy. And all these
are the notable and undoubted fruits of Faith, and most certain arguments and
evident tokens, that true faith (although not in her full perfection) is surely
seated in the heart of him that has them. A taste and comfortable feeling of
the grace of God.


Fourthly, after all these, they grow by little and little to have some taste
and comfortable feeling of the grace of God, imparted to them by the inward
working of Gods Spirit: Insomuch that every day more and more they grow to
conquer and subdue the despairing thoughts of the flesh, and the motions
thereof: And the comfortable influence of the Spirit, seems every day more
then other, to have a larger and freer passage in the chamber of their hearts,
in testifying unto them, the grace of God, in the free remission of sin, and
the performance of the work of their Adoption.

Fifthly, after all these, ensues that full assurance and most notable effect
of Faith, Peace of conscience.
even the very peace of conscience: For that now they are assuredly and fully
resolved, Weak Christians doubt they have faith; because they find it not to
be so strong in themselves, as they perceive it to be in others.
that all their sins are washed away in the blood of Christ; that by his
death, the wrath of God is appeased, their ransom paid, the righteousness of
Christ, by imputation made theirs, the fear of death and hell abolished, and
life eternal purchased.

After this doctrine, in the course and manner of man's conversion thus
delivered; let us now return again unto the broken and afflicted soul, which
doubts of the want of faith. And withal let us see, and sift the reason, why
he thus despayreth of his faith, and thinks and persuades himself that he
has no faith at all. His reason is this: Because he does not find within
himself as yet, that certainty and full assurance of salvation, which he
sees and perceives to be in others.

This reason, although it seem to him very strong, yet in it self it is but
weak, and being thoroughly examined, cannot hold nor stand for good. For this
full assurance, whereupon he groundeth his reason, is not Faith, as some have
defined faith (saying, Faith is a full assurance:) but rather one notable and
undoubted effect of faith: And yet not always so atttending upon faith, as
though it should continually be there evidently seen, where faith is seated.
For a man may have true faith, and yet not feel this full assurance. And my
reason is, because this assurance is not the first effect, that faith ever
brings forth in the heart of man, when it is begun to be ingrafted in him:
But it has many other excellent effects precedent and going before it: As the
true and hearty mourning for sin, that earnest lothing and hatred of sin,
and a thirsting and longing after righteousness, etc. which are often found in
the Elect of God, before such time as they receive this caline and peace of
conscience and joy in the Holy Ghost, by the full assurance of their salvation.

Now to prove these to be the fruits and attendants of true faith, the rather
to qualify and allay the sharp and bitter combat of the troubled soul; let
us diligently consider

cause and worker of this sorrow and mourning which I spoke of, is the Spirit
of Regeneration and Adoption. For this cause, the Apostle calls it a sorrow
that is of God, 2. Cor. 7.9, 10. Romans 8.26.
2. Cor. 7. And the Spirit is said, Romans 8. to pray in us with sighs, that
cannot be expressed. This Spirit is only had and retained of us by the means
of Faith, Gal. 3.2.
For it is received, and dwells in cur hearts by faith, Gal. 3.2. Whereupon it
also follows, that of necessity, it can none otherwise be, but where this
earnest sorrow, and earnest lothing and detestation of sin is found, there
also faith should be ingraffed: Because otherwise, this Spirit of Adoption
which effects these in us, could not be entertained in our hearts.

sorrow, Psalm. 51.
which otherwise in regard of the subject is called a contrite and broken
heart, is said to be a sacrifice of God, and such an one as he will not
despise. And how could this be, that it should be a thing so acceptable in the
sight of God, and so well accepted of him, if it did not proceed, and come of
Faith, seeing that (as the Apostle restifieth) without Faith it is impossible
to please God? Heb. 11.6. Romans 14.23
And, Whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin.

affection, which is the longing after righteousness; Christ tells us, Math.
5.6.
that he is blessed, that hungreth and thirsts after righteonsnesse. And how
is it possible, that any should be blessed that have not faith? For it is of
faith, Gal. 3.9.
that we are blessed with faithful Abraham.

Let us therefore now return this reason of the distressed person back again
upon himself with advantage, and greatly to his comfort. Thou say thou art
broken with the sight of sin, thou hate it, and thou desire to be freed
and unburdened of it, and longest to feel the comfort of the Spirit, to seal
up unto thee thy salvation: And yet thou can grow to no certainty within thy
self, but remainest still doubtful of thine estate. Will thou therefore say
thou have no faith? Nay, I rather infer, that thou have a faith, and that the
Spirit of Adoption has already laid the claim, and given the earnest penny
unto thy heart: Not because thou art not assured (for be it far, that I
should so reason) but because that though thou have not this; yet I find the
other tokens and arguments of faith to be seated in thy soul: In that thou art
found thus heartily to mourn under sin, that thou lothest and detestest thy
wickedness, and do so earnestly desire to be clothed and invested with the
garments of Christ's righteousness; whereby thou may appear righteous in the
sight of thy heavenly Father.

For further proof of this mine assertion, and for our better instruction; let
us use an instance or two even in common reason. The graft that is newly and of
late planted, it has so far increased, that it has brought forth buddes and
leaves, but as yet no fruit: If now the question be demanded, whether the graft
be dead or not; every one which has but common sense, will answer, that it is
not dead, but has a life, though as yet it has no fruit, but only a show of
leaves and blossoms. If again it be demanded, how it can be, that it should
effect these two, and not the fruit: the answer will be, that it is not
necessary; because these by the course of nature are precedent, and go before
the other. And therefore these, that is, the leaves and blossoms may be, and
the plant by them may be surely known to have life; though the other, that is,
the fruit, be not yet effected. So say I of the plant of faith: Although it
has not as yet the fruit of full assurance, showing forth it self: yet it
has the blossoms (that is) the sorrowing for sin, the hearty de testation
of sin, and the earnest love of righteousness. Is this faith now dead? or is
it not at all, because it has not yet brought forth this notable effect of
certainty and assurance? God forbid. But seeing it has these other effects, so
manifestly appearing; we may assure our selves, that we have a faith already
engendered in us, which will bring forth that other excellent fruit of assurance
in time convenient.

The child that is conceived in the womb, though it has a life and motion,
yet it is not at the first discerned by the motion so apparently, as when it
grows to more strength, and more perfection: and yet the infant being but young
and weak, the woman coniectureth by some extraordinary accidents in her
self, that she is with child. So faith that is engendered as a young Babe, in
the womb of the heart and soul, though by such apparent motion, thou can
not descry it to be within thy self: yet in that alteration, that thou shall
find with thy self, thou may easily conjecture, that there is such a thing
conceived. For look unto thy self, and consider thoroughly of thine estate,
what thou have been beforetime, and what an one thou now art: and thou shall
easily see and perceive a great alteration and change in thy self, and that
thou art far unlike unto that which thou wast before. For before, thou
did delight and take a pleasure in sin, and wast quick and ready to
commit sin, even with greediness. No wickedness so vile, but thou could
easily be brought to the working thereof. But now, as one burdened in thy
self, thou mournest and sighest at it, thou do greatly loath and detest it.
Before, thou tookest no pleasure in the comfortable promises of God; Christ and
the merits of his precious death and Passion were odious unto thee: but now
thou art so sick with longing, like a woman with child, that thou most
earnestly do hunger and thirst after them. Before, thou could not abide
to hear of the benefits of Christ, thou made none account of them. But now
thou art so affected toward them, that at the very sight thereof thou art
sick; yea, so sick, that thou art ready to swound, because thou can not be
put presently in possession, and immediately enjoy the full fruition of the
same. Every mi nute seems a month, every day a hundred years, until thy
longing be satisfied, and that thou may take thy fill, and have thy full
repast upon them. O blessed change, that is so full and plenteous with these so
excellent fruits and effects of faith! I may justly call it a blessed change,
in respect of those comfortable promises, most comfortably uttered by the
Spirit of God, to the great consolation of all those in whom this change is
found.

First, that there is the oil of gladness appointed for them that mourn in
Zion. They that hunger and thirst after righteousness, shall be filled and
satisfied. Mat. 5.6. Ioh. 7.37, 38.
And to him that thirsts, Christ promises to give of the Water of Life, that
shall make him never thirst again, but shall be in him a Well of water
springing up unto everlasting life. Wherefore finding in thy self these
things, which are attended upon, with these so certain and comfortable
promises; cheer up thy self herein, and refresh thy soul with the Flagons of
Gods eternal consolations and comforts. And whenever either the weakness of
the flesh, or wiliness of Satan shall set upon thee, either with this, or any
such like assault, put them off with this common word, grounded upon the former
Reasons; that the Argument to conclude the want of Faith is naught, and the
reason will not hold. And yet, I know, there are certain other doubts
troubling and disquieting the distressed conscience.

first, seeing the Reprobates are found to have a sorrow also; whether his
sorrow (I mean of the Elect) be not the very same sorrow, and of the same
nature whereof the Castawayes may be partakers.

Secondly, seeing that there is in him an inclination unto sin, and he
finds himself given to commit sin; whether vvithall he can be rightly
said to loath and hate his sins.

Thirdly, because he finds his nature so much drawing and haling him back
from goodness and godliness; whether he can be justly said to have a longing
after righteousness. For these and such like imperfections, that he finds in
himself, do so violently rush upon him oftentimes, that they do, as it were
altogether frustrate and make void the former doctrine concerning the several
effects of Faith: Into the handling of the which particulars, I would now have
entered, but that a more full and further handling thereof appertains more
properly unto the next general assault, which is the weakness of Repentance;
unto which place I am purposed to reserve them.

CHAP. VIII.
Of another person troubled with the doubt of Faith.

THe next Person troubled with the doubt of faith, A Regenerate person troubled
with the doubt of Faith.
is he that is already renewed, passed the womb of his new birth, and has
already received at one time or other, some evident witness and good assurance
of the Spirit, that he is the Child of God, and one of the number of Gods
elected, but the force and influences of his flesh, having recourse back again
with him, the same assurance for the time, seems to be cancelled and clean
razed out: And he feels not the joy and comfort of the Spirit so far and in
such measure, as at other former times: and therefore he begins greatly to
doubt of his estate; not so much whether he had a faith or not, as whether his
faith was a true faith, or only temporary, and for a time, and such an one as
is incident to the very Reprobates and Castawayes. Upon which doubtfulnesse,
there does arise oftentimes in him, many strong and grievous conflicts; and
that so much the rather, because that the sorrowful soul, being not well
instructed, or at the least not well remembering the nature of faith, and the
difference of true faith, from that which is only fained, temporary, dead and
hypocritical. And withal, being too too ready and inclined to suspect ever
the worst that may be of it self: turns every motion of the flesh, and
infirmity of nature, to be so many Reasons to drive him forward to despair.
Against this evil therefore, we are to use these remedies:

faith, Means of comfort.
and the truth thereof, is to consider and call to mind to his comfort, this
one property, which is incident unto true faith, that it is not ever in the
full tide: but sometimes it ebbs and falls, yea, and that full low: neither
does that full assurance and inward witness speak so plainly to the pacifying
of the heart and conscience: but sometime more then other, it seems to give a
more cold and weak testimony, and sometime none at all. For though this
testimony of assurance, be an effect of faith, as has been said; yet it is
not always discerned of them, which are endued with it: no, though it has
been sometime felt and perceived before. Example hereof we may have in David, a
man before Regenerate, and such an one as had often felt in himself, this
inward testimony of the Holy Ghost, to assure his heart that he was the child
of GOD, and yet faith grew in him so weak sometime, and the flesh so mightily
prevailed, that as one utterly destitute of this joy and comfort of the Spirit;
as though the Spirit had utterly given him up, he prays carnestly to have the
same restored.

For it is with faith, as it is with the Moon, which sometime gives her full
light, and sometime is ecclipsed. And as it is with the Sun, which sometime
does shine in his full strength, and sometime is shaddowed and hid under
clouds: Like the trees that sometime flourish, being fresh and green, and
sometime fade again, seem dry and dead as blasted. Or like the child within
the womb, that sometime moves strongly, and sometime again rests a long
time quiet and void of sensible and apparent motion.

Now, as it is against reason to fay, the Moon is darkened and eclipsed, and
the Sun is hid and shadowed under a cloud, therefore there is no Moon, no
Sun at all. The tree is dry and naked, and therefore is decayed. The child
does not show a continual and apparent motion, and therefore it is dead within
the womb: So it is very absurd also to say, that because thy faith is eclipsed
and darkened by the clouds of our imperfections, bitten and beaten with the
outragiousnesse of the flesh, lies still and quiet without her wonted motion,
that therefore it is ceased to be a faith, or is no faith at all. And therefore
this reason can be no reason at all, to prove the nullity of faith, unless it
first be proved, that faith does always increase and never decrease, and that
having once brought forth the full assurance aforesaid, it does always keep
and retain the same inviolable.

The second means of comfort in this case, is to know persectly, Means (...)
comfo^^.
and to retain surely, the true differences of true faith and fained. For this
being a second doubt, rising from the defect of the aforesaid assurance,
whether their faith be true or no, I think it necessary, in the next place to
consider, how this true faith may be descried from that which is counterfeit,
false and temporary.

It is therefore to be understood, that true faith may be discerned and known
by these marks. First, in that it yields at one time or other, though not
always, this sure persuasion, that all our sins are remitted and forgiven,
and that not for any merits or deserts of ours, but by and through the merits
and precious bloud-shedding of our Savior Jesus Christ.

a boldness and confidence to approach unto the Throne of grace and mercy, Romans
5. with an assurance in our hearts and consciences, that we shall obtain
remission of all our sins, and be freely justified in the sight of God.

outward effects of faith will also appear and show themselves in our works,
in that we shall find in our affections, a loathing and a detestation of
sin, a love of God, a reverent fear to offend him, being to us so gracious
and loving a Father; a zeal of his glory, and an earnest care and desire to
live according to his will, with many other such like.

These effects (if our faith were a true faith indeed) did then show forth
themselves in some measure, when as our faith was at that full tide, though
faith being somewhat weakened, they seem to be afterward lessened and rebated
in us. But as for that famed faith, it cannot make this application of the
promises of God, neither can it come with such full assurance, to crave and
obtain remission at Gods hands. For though it seems to bring forth a certain
joy in the heart of him that has it, and thereupon does flatter himself in a
bare conceit of forgiveness: yet because he does not thoroughly enter into
examination of himself, it is but like a dream, and he which has this faith,
is but as one that is asleep, who dreaming, persuades himself that he is
increased mightily, and grown to a great and goodly estate, whereas indeed his
condition is none other, but the very same still and all one with that it was
before. But of this in place more convenient hereafter.

Now to remove this doubt of the truth of faith, we are not to look so
intentiuely upon our present state, but rather we are to cast our eyes, and to
look back unto that which went before. Whether when we found the former peace
and quiet of conscience in assurance of our forgiveness, we had not also
those effects in some measure, though not in the highest perfection, waiting
and attending on it. For if they were, then we may assure our selves, that we
had and have true faith indeed, and that we are blessed, and for us assuredly
salvation is reserved.

For proof and confirmation hereof, 3. Means of comfort.
take this for the third means of comfort, viz. that true faith being once
ingraffed, can never utterly decay and fall away again, though for a time it
may be rebated, weakened, and decreased. For whom God loves, in them he
planteth this faith: and as he loves unto the end, and with an everlasting
love, so his graces flowing from this love, are permanent for ever in his
beloved children. And look what good work he has begun, he will surely
finish and perform unto the coming of Christ. And therefore if once we have
found in us the testimony of the Spirit, and effect of faith, to show it self
(though it does not still and always so) yet let us not despair, knowing that
faith may be dimmed, but never extinguished, it may be weakened, made faint
and feeble, but cannot be utterly quelled and killed in us. All this,
notwithstanding, which I have said, it is found by due and good experience,
that by reason of this faintness and feebleness, whereunto faith is often
subject, there comes unto the distressed and doubting Christian, great grief
and sorrow of heart. For when he finds in himself a longing and desire
always to be joined with his head Christ, and to enjoy the sweet and
comfortable presence of the Spirit of God, proceeding of faith: he cannot
tolerate nor bear the absence thereof, without great sorrow and mourning,
which does evidently appear by the example of the Church, which being deprived
for the tune, of this inward joy of the presence and effectual working of the
Spirit, as though Christ were departed from her, is said to rise out of her
bed, Cant. 3.2.
and to go about the City by the streets and open places, to seek him that
her soul did love.

And yet this mourning and sorrow is so far off from being a cause of such
distrust, 4. Means of comfort.
that if the matter be well considered, the broken soul shall rather find it
a reason to employ the contrary. For tell me, I pray thee, what is the cause
that thou do so mourn and sigh? Is it not because thou do think that
Christ is departed from thee, because the comfort of the Spirit is not present
with thee, because thou find not the same joy and solace in the promises of
God, as heretofore thou have done, and because thou have an earnest longing and
desire to entertain and harbor again this Spirit of comfort in thy mourning
soul, but can not, as thou think, attain to the same? Why, pluck up thy
heart, be not dismayed nor troubled herewith: but rather be thou assured, that
these are motions and affections, so far unmeet for any man to ground
despair upon, that every sigh and tear that is spent therein, is so many
reasons and arguments to strengthen and confirm thy heart, that thou art a
chosen Vessel, and an elected Child of God. Is it likely, think thou, that
he that is unregenerate, and abides still in the corruption of his flesh, and
takes a pleasure to walk in the filthy lusts thereof, should take such joy
and solace in the Spirit, as that he could not tolerate or abide to have the
same absent from him? Would he mourn and sigh, because he withdraws
himself from him? Or would he long after the Spirit, and wish and desire to
find and feel it work within him? I assure thee no: These affections are not
of the Flesh, but of the Spirit. And therefore see how much thou art deceived,
that whilst the Spirit works thus effectually within thine heart; yet thou
complainest of the want thereof, and say thou feel it not, thou find it
not. And the reason whereby thou art led to think and judge thus of thy self,
is, because that thou being so intentive upon one only fruit, forgettest that
these also are notable effects of faith.

5. 5. Means of comfort.
Another thing whereof we must take good heed, and whereof we must beware in
this case, is, that in viewing and considering the faith of other the servants
of God, we be not overmuch intentive, in comparison of it with our own
estate. For hecreby oftentimes it comes to pass, that whiles we too much
gaze upon their perfection, and then look down again upon our own
infirmities, we fall not only to a dislike, but oftentimes to a marvelous
distrust and despair of our own estate: Much like to him, that gazing too
much upon the Sun, has his eyes dazzled with the brightness thereof, that
when he looks down again upon the earth, he hardly sees any thing at all,
or at the least, not so lively a resemblance as he did before. In this point,
therefore, we must remember: First, that it is not the perfection, but the
truth of faith that is required: For if thy faith be true and unfeigned, though
it be in thine eyes weak and feeble, it is sufficient. The hand and arm that
is not dead indeed, but only taken with a shaking palsy, is able to receive a
reward that shall be given, as effeclually, though not so steadily, as is the
hand and arm, being strong and sound without such imperfections: So faith,
though faint and feeble in thy sight, and cumbred with many doubting
cogitations, as it were with a shaking palsy, yet seeing it is not dead, but
lively, assure thy self that it is sufficient to receive at Gods hands, the
penny and reward of eternal life.

Secondly, thou art to consider, that God bestows his graces in such measure,
as he thinks good in his own wisdom; to some he gives more, to some less,
and not to all in like and equal proportion, and yet to every one of his Elect
sufficient unto salvation. One, Mat. 25.21 23.
as we read in the Jospell, had five talents committed unto him, and another
but two, and yet he that has but two, shall enter into his Masters joy. Mat.
8.
The Centurions faith (as we also read) was strong; for there was not found the
like in Israel, by the testimony of Christ himself. Iairus faith was weaker,
and not so strong, as appears by the Scriptures. And the faith of him that
cried for help against his unbelief, more weak then that of Iairus; and yet
because it was a true and living faith, he that had the weakest, had
notwithstanding sufficient to obtain the things he sued for. So that it is with
the Elect of God in regard of faith, as it was sometime with the Israelites in
gathering Manna in the wilderness, he that gathered much, had nothing over, and
he that gathered less, had no want: So the Chosen of God, they that are endued
with the greatest measure and gift of faith, are but well, and have nothing to
spare, and they that have the least and skantiest portion, yet have sufficient
to feed on Christ unto eternal life. And hereupon it is, that the Apostle
affirms, that to every one is given grace, according to the measure of the
gift of Christ. And that God has dealt to every one the measure of faith. And
again, Ephesians. 4.7.
that the Spirit distributeth to every man severally, Romans 12.3.
as he will. So that faith then, and the other gifts and graces of God, are
given, but not at the appointment of man, but of God, and not in a quantity to
all alike, but in such manner and measure to every one, as unto God seems
best, and as he in his wisdom shall judge to be for every one most convenient.
Neither are weto think, that this is any strange manner of dealing in God. For
we see plainly, that God disposes not of al persons after a like sort. For
some he appoints to endure longer, sharper and greater combats, and in them a
greater gift of faith he sees to be requisite: Some again he ordains to
lesser, shorter, and more easy conflicts, and in them a lesser measure serves.

And further, I pray thee mark, how in judging of the measure and quantity of
thy faith, and comparing it with the faith of others, thou may st be deceived:

For thus thou use to reason and dispute, and that against thy self: I read
and see also by experience of diverse the servants of God, which even in the
first encounter against temptations, through the great strength of their faith,
have prevailed and gotten the victory, and that in a short time: But I
contrariwise have struggled and striuen, and that a long time; but as it
appears, all in vain, for still I am foiled, and always go away with the
worst, and therefore I know, that in comparison of theirs, my faith is most
faint and weak.

To this thy reason I answer, First, that the providence of God; is here to
be considered, who at his own pleasure disposes all things; and since he
has appointed thee to a longer and a more dangerous conflict, persuade thy
self also, that he vouchafeth to minister strength unto thee, that thou may
be able to endure the fame: and this he does to this end, that in thy
weakness his power might be showed forth, and that thy victory over thy great
and grievous enemies, might be the more famous, and that he, I mean God
himself in thee, should be the more glorified. And of this be thou bold,
that although the temptations wherewith thou art assaulted, be great and of
long continuance, yet he will not suffer thee to be tempted above thy
strength; nor longer then the time which he has limited and appointed; but in
his time will prepare a way for thee to escape.

reason is not good. For all this while thou do compare together the events,
but not the assaults of thy self and others. For the assaults being different,
it may and does often come to pass, that the weak and feeble faith may get
and obtain a quicker and a more speedy conquest, then that which is strong and
mighty. As for example. There are two persons diseased, the one a man of middle
age, the other a child young and tender: the disease of them both is grievous;
yet we see it oftentimes so to fall out, that the child sooner recouereth and
attaineth unto health, then the man: and the man to be a longer time disquieted
with sickness then the child. Shall we now say, that the child is stronger
then the man, because he first recovered? Or will you not rather say, that the
diseases were not in like measure in both, but in the child in a lesser
quantity, in that by so little strength, he is so quickly recovered: and in
the other in greater measure, in that, the greater strength notwithstanding,
he could not in longer time be cured? The reason is like. Is therefore the
assault less and of shorter continuance? Thy faith then may with more case,
and in shorter time overcome it, though it be but weak. And on the other
side, is the assault strong, and of longer time continued? Shrink not at the
matter, neither be thou any whit dismayed or discouraged therefore. For,
albeit thy faith is constrained, to continue longer in fight before it can
prevail: yet be sure, that thou shall at last obtain the victory, and triumph
over thine enemies most gloriously.

As the Be oftentimes, out of the bitterrest Flower, sucketh or gathers
Honey: so out of these fierce assaults, whereby thy soul is troubled, thou
may to thy comfort gather a Reason and Argument, to prove the greatness and
strength of thy Faith, whereof thou do stand so much in doubt. Thou think
that incountring with great assaults, and not able at the first to overcome
them, that therefore thy faith is weak and feeble. But the case is otherwise.
For great temptations, do import a great measure of the gift of Faith. For
God, says the Apostle, as is before alleged, tempts none above measure, and
above that which he is able to bear. And therefore as God measures our
temptations, according to the measure of our faith, chaining and muzzling up
the Tempter, that he should not have his full swindge against us, and
ministering strength unto us, that we should be able to resist the same: So we
again, by the measure of our temptations and assaults, may learn the measure
of the gift of faith that is bestowed upon us. For faith is never so well tried
in her strength, as in the time of temptations: for which cause also they are
called the trial of faith. Thus then a man may reason with thee: Are thy
temptations great? Thy faith then is also great. For otherwise God would never
have laid so great a trial on thee; unless he had known thee by his grace,
to be enabled to endure it.

And again, on the contrary, thy temptations are small: shall I therefore
infer, and say, thy faith is also weak? I dare not so reason, because I know
the case is otherwise. For the greatest faith many times shall find small, as
well as great temptations: and yet is not therefore to be accounted weak, but
rather strong still, and able to bear away the triumph in a greater combat.
For the care of God, in measuring of temptations, is not in respect of the
smalnesse of the quantity, that it should not be too little, but always fit
and equal, and never inferior to the strength of faith: But in the
greatness, that they be not overmuch, for our ability to sustain. And
therefore, it is not said, that God tempts not under, but that he tempts
not over and above that we are able to bear. Wherefore thou may here see
and mark again, how this doctrine scrueth still, to increase and further thy
comfort, but not to breed or bring despair at all. For he that has the
greatest temptations, though he have a stronger and a longer combat, and some
great trouble therewith: yet he has an assured Argument of the strength of
Faith, which in time convenient shall get the upper hand. And on the other
side, he that has but small assaults, and such as he can easily master;
besides, the comfort he is to have, in that he can so soon subdue his
trials: let not the weakness of his assaults, be any reason unto him, to
conclude thereupon the weakness of his faith, and thereby take a discomfort in
himself. And let both these sorts of men hold themselves contented with the
measure of faith, which God has vouchsafed to impart unto them, and always
show themselves thankful unto God for the same.

CHAP. IX.
Against the assaults of the weakness of Repentance.

THe next assault wherewith the conscience of many is greatly troubled, is, the
weakness and suspected want of repentance. For the man that is truly
regenerate, is oftentimes affected unto goodness, as the covetous man is
affected unto riches. He thinks he has never enough; he is so greedy, that
he can never be satisfied: the more he has, the more he coueteth: every light
loss, is thought of him to be an exceeding hinderance; and every slender
want, makes him sad and heavy: So the true Christian has such an inward
longing after the fruits of his regeneration, that have he never so much, yet
is he never satisfied, but still coueteth and crveth out for more. If he
find any defect within himself, he is straightway so grieved and perplexed
therewith, that he thinks still all too little for him.

Whereupon, comparing his deeds, which are imperfect, with the perfect duty
that the Law of God requires at his hands, and finding so great odds and
difference betwixt them, he then falls into many doubtful and distrustful
suspicions of his own estate. Which suspicions are in him the more increased
and augmented, when he again considers, that the doctrine of the Gospel
also requires at our hands such purity and integrity of life and
conversation, and so straightly linketh and coupleth together true faith, and
good works, as inseperable companions, and such as can not be justly severed
or parted asunder. Unto this there is also annexed, the unequal comparison of
himself with others, the Saints and servants of the Lord; whose virtues, and
godliness of life is registered and recorded in the Book of God: And finding
so great inequality betwixt them and him, he then calls to mind, the
fearful punishments, that are denounced and threatened in the Scripture,
against such sins and imperfections, as he finds within himself.

And hereupon it falls out, that having his heart by this means possessed
with such a sinister judgment of his own estate, that is ready to writhe and
convert all to the worst that may be; he grows to many gricuous passions in
himself. And unto all these inconveniences, he is led as it were step by step,
and by degrees, for want of due remembrance of the state of Christians, after
the time of their Regeneration. Wherefore, let us see, what comforts may be
had, for the helping and curing of this cuill also.

Now because the question is not only of the weakness: but herewithall also of
the truth of repentance; whether it be repentance indeed or not, I think it
very expedient and necessary, by way of preparation: First, to search out what
true repentance is: and secondly, how and by what marks it may be known and
discerned, from that which is fained and hypocritical.

Repentance in Scripture has two special names, to express and declare the
nature thereof. One in the Prophets, where it is called a turning or returning
unto God. And the other in the Gospel, where it is called (...), which
signifies a change or alteration of the mind. So that as turning or
returning, implies a leaving, and an acceptance; a leaning of that evil way,
which before we followed, and an accepting of that good and right path, which
before we shunned: And as changing imports two things; the corruption of the
former form, and the induction of a new: So repentance has in it two parts; a
for saking of sin, and a following after righteousness; a conversion from
evil, and a change and alteration, unto that which is good. For if we will be
accounted in the number of those which are truly repentant, we must of
necessity, be cast as it were in a new mould. Our old stamp must be utterly
razed and defaced, and a new must be imprinted: and this is that which the
Scripture means, when it says, We must be borne again.

These two parts, in Scriptures are called in other terms; mortification, and
vinification. Mortification, whereby the deeds and corruptions of the flesh are
mortified, stricken dead and quelled in us; and therefore is called the
mortification of the flesh. Vinification, whereby we are quickened, encouraged
and pricked forward unto righteousness, the Spirit getting the mastery and
preeminence above the flesh; and therefore is called the quickening or
vinification of the Spirit.

Repentance then, Repentance described.
having these two essential parts, may in this manner be described: That it
is a grace and work of the holy Ghost, whereby our hearts and minds are
altered and changed, from following of that which is evil and wicked, to
embracing of that which is good and godly. Now if this change and alteration be
found in us, we may then say and assure our selves, that we have true
repentance indeed. But because the truth hereof is not quickly known, nor
easily discerned, and for that we may soon through Satan's craft be deceived
in this matter, as it falls out with the Reprobates, which oftentimes, or
rather always account their fained and hypocritical conversion, to be a true
conversion, when as in deed (if it be thoroughly tried) it is nothing less: We
are next to consider how, and by what marks true Repentance is to be discerned
and known, and so we may be brought to judge rightly of our own.

CHAP. X.
Of the Marks of true Repentance.

mark therefore, to know true Repentance by, 1. Inward and hearty sorrow for
sin.
is that inward and hearty sorrow for sin, as an efficient cause whereby it
is effected in us: For they that are truly repentant, shall soon find in
themselves, first, this inward compunction and contrition of heart for the
sins which they have committed; whereupon will ensue and follow this earnest
care to shun and avoid the same, and a studious desire and endeavor to walk
in righteousness. But now, lest that in giving sentence and judgment upon
this sorrow, we should be deceived. It is here again to be called to mind,
which has before been somewhat touched, viz. that sorowing for sin, is
proved to be of two sorts: One proper to the Elect of God, and the other to the
Reprobate. For it is manifest, that even these, I mean such as have been
evidently proved Reprobates, have been found to have had a certain sorrow,
sighing, and mourning in them, as does appear by the examples of Cain, Saul,
Ahab and Judas; and yet nothing partakers, but clean void of that true
repentance which has been found in the godly sort, and chosen people of the
Lord. And this sorrow of such wicked ones, is the same which before is
mentioned to have his original only from the Law of God, without any taste or
touch of the Gospel. But that other sorrow which we use in this place, as a
mark of true repentance, and which I account as the forerunner of repentance,
is only incident, and does properly appertain to the Elect and Chosen of the
Lord, and is found to have a far further step, then had the former. And
therefore, lest we deceive our selves herein, as hypocrites often do, let us
in a word or two, as briefly as we may, observe the difference betwixt these
two kinds of sorrow.

This counterfeit and hypocritical sorrow, Counterf it and hypocritical
sorrow.
which (as I said) is found in hypocrites, arises from the Law, and that only
in consideration of the heavy and terrible judgments, in the same denounced
against the transgressors thereof. And hereupon it is that they mourn and sigh
only, for that they see and perceive themselves, by reason of their great
sin and wiekednesses, by force and by the sentence of the Law, to be brought
into a dangerous or a damnable estate; But as for the sin it self, which by
them is committed day by day, although it be, in the proper nature thereof,
never so filthy or abominable, yet do they not mourn for it, but remain still
in them, with as great love, and take as great pleasure therein, and have as
great a desire to commit the same still, as ever they had at any time before;
so small an alteration is found to follow in them, upon this their sorrow, and
so far off are they from having, even this first mark of true repentance.

But it is far otherwise with the man regenerate; Difference betwixt the
sorrow of the unregenerate and regenerate.
for although his sorrow begin in deed in the Law, for that thereby he comes
to the knowledge, first, of his sin, and secondly, of the heavy judgments by
the Law due unto the same: yet does not his sorrow there stay and make an end,
but ends indeed in the Gospel: And therefore it is that he is found to be
sad and heavy, not only in respect or regard of the danger whereinto, by sin,
he is brought, but also in respect of the sin it self, which he now
utterly hates and detesteth, for that he sees and finds it to be so
odious and loathsome in the sight of God; not only, because he is a severe
Judge, ready to take revenge for the breach of his Law, as do the Reprobates;
but also, because they find and feel him to be so good, so gracious, so
loving, and so merciful a Father, against whom he so ungraciously and
unnaturally, like a rebellious child, has transgressed. And although that
this his sorrow in these respects, be found and proved to be great; yet is he
not therein left comfortless, but in the midst of sorrow finds comfort, as
shall appear hereafter.

Again, this sorrow proceeding of the fear of punishment of sin, by the Law
brings forth desperation in the Reprobates, as appears in Cain and Judas,
and others; if it stay only in the Law, and have no regard unto the Gospel:
For the Law brings nothing else but terror and judgment. The Law indeed
would justify, and upon instification minister unto man, great consolation,
but it must in all points, according to the purity thereof be fulfilled, which
we through our weakness are not able to do: and therefore instead of
justifying, we reap a curse, and instead of consolation, do gain sorrow:
Which sorrow is wrought and effected in the heart, by the Spirit indeed, but it
is by that spirit which the Apostle calls the spirit of bondage, Romans 8.
which brings forth naught but fear: and therefore it is by the same Apostle
called not simply a sorrow, but a sorrow unto death. 2. Cor. 7.
But that sorrow which is found in the Elect, has another quality, quite
contrary, waiting and attendant upon it, and that is, an assured hope of free
remission and forgiveness of their sins; which hope is not to be found in
the other personsbeforenamed. And so, though there be a sorrow for sin in
the Elect, yet it is not, because they are out of hope of pardon for the same,
but for the causes before mentioned; having always the hope of remission, and
forgiveness of the same, joined therewith. For they see and plainly perceive,
that God shows himself to them-wards, as a kind and loving Father: And
therefore if at any time he afflict and chastise them, they do, and are bold
to confess the same also, that he does it for their good, that they should
not perish with the world: And that these his chastisements notwithstanding,
upon their repentance, he will be ever ready to remit and forgive their
sins, and willing to receive them into his favor again, as may easily be
proved by very many, both places and also examples in the Scriptures: And so
it comes to pass, to the endless consolation of the godly, that sorrow and
joy do as it were triumph together in one and the selfsame person. Sorrow,
that so good a God should be offended; and Joy, that all their sins are
notwithstanding pardoned. And all this is doubtless effected by one and the
same Spirit, not the spirit of bondage, but of Adoption: For this full
assurance, proceeding of Faith, makes us to call Abba Father, without any
doubt of Gods love and favor toward us; and yet withal breeds in our
hearts such sighs and groans as cannot be expressed.

For the further manifestation hereof, amongst many other examples of the
Scriptures, which to this purpose may be produced, I will use but one only,
and that is the example of the Prodigal son, Luke 15.
of whom it is written:

First, that he would needs have his portion of goods delivered unto him; he
would shake off the yoke of his fathers government; he would be a Traveler,
and take his journey into a far Country, where he is said to waste and consume
his goods and Patrimony with licentious and ryotous living. Hereby is his sin
manifested.

Secondly, after his goods were in this manner wasted and consumed, there fell
a plague of famine and dearth upon the Land; he began to be pinched with
famine, and that in such great and extreme manner, that for his relief in this
his great necessity, he would feign have filled his hungry belly, with the
husks appointed for the Swines meat, which his Master appointed him to keep,
but none was found so pitiful to give them unto him: wherein we see the
justice of the Law executed upon him: and hereupon grew his first sorrow, void
of comfort, when he saw himself, by his wilful disobedience, and looseness
of life, to be brought to such a miserable case.

Thirdly, He being in this manner plagued, and by that plague driven into
sorrow, he is said to come unto himself, and then calls to mind the good
estate even of his fathers servants, in that they had bread and victuals enough
to sustain their hungry bodies, and he as one like to perish with hunger. He
then resolves with himself again to return, and to go to his father, with
an humble confession and acknowledgement of his fault, and humble submission to
his fathers order, and a full assurance that he shall find favor at his
Fathers hands: and all these (as it were) bedewed with the tears of his
sorrowful heart, that he had so grievously offended so kind and so loving a
father. And in all these points do appear unto us, the comfortable promises
and doctrine of the Gospel: so that unto this second mourning, begun thus
upon the due consideration of the lewdness of his life on the one part, and
the goodness of the person against whom he had offended on the other part, it
appears that there was annexed an assured hope to obtain remission of his
fault at his fathers hands, a receiving again into favor, and a comfort and
help unto him in these his miseries: otherwise surely he would never thus have
reasoned with himself, as he did, bringing his reason from the good estate of
his fathers servants, to confirm in himself the hope of his own; neither
would he have been so resolute to have returned to his fathers house, and in
such manner to have humbled himself, and confessed his fault, had there not
been in him a great confidence that he should be again received.

I might hereunto add the example of Mary Magdalen, who (no doubt) mourned,
and yet had a hope of remission, and therewithal a joy, and therefore was bold
to come unto Christ; but for breuities cause I will not stand hereupon. Here I
would not have the sorrowful soul to be ouer-captious, and to take all
things in the worst part. For when, I say, that there is a joy, a peace, and a
faith, attending upon this godly sorrow; I would not have him therefore think,
that it is always felt, in manifest and open motion: And therefore because he
finds it not so cheerful in himself, that therefore his sorrow is but
hypocritical and counterfeit.

For you must understand, that this joy, peace and faith, as it oftentimes
falls out, are not, at the first, easily perceived; and that because the eyes
of our minds are often so dimmed and dazzled, with the excess of sorrow and
mourning, that we cannot see and perceive them, as otherwise we might; and
yet for all this, the truth of the same is still abiding and remaining in us,
as may very well be gathered, even by those weak and feeble motions, which
proceed therefrom. Feeble, I say, in our sight and judgment, but otherwise in
themselves strong and mighty. This is proved unto us, by the example of Peter,
who (no doubt) by the inward testimony of the Spirit, did indeed know assuredly
that his sin committed in denying his Master, should be remitted and forgiven
him; and yet he is said to have sorrowed very greatly, Math. 26.
(for he departed from amongst the High Priests servants) and to weep bitterly.

But it is more plainly proved in David, who having received before, a warrant
from God himself, by the mouth of the Prophet Nathan, that his sin was
pardoned, yet he afterward grew to such excessive mourning in regard of his
sin, as appears, Psalm. 51.
So that it seemed he had almost forgotten this promise of forgiveness; and
therefore he very earnestly cries out, and prays unto God, that he would
wash away his sins: Not that Dduid wanted faith, or were utterly in this his
sorrowing, deprived of that peace and joy I spoke of; but because his mourning
being so excessive, and the evidence of faith for the time, was so feeble in
regard of his sin, whereupon he continually fixed his eyes, that he felt not
these things, in such measure and perfection as he desired, or rather seemed
to feel them not at all: And therefore he desires God, that he would
restore the Spirit of comfort; as though all comfort had forsaken him, and as
though he had felt no joy and peace in regard of pardon and remission. And
yet, no doubt, all this while he had a faith, he had a joy included in him,
as it appears after in the same Psalm: For he could scarce utter five
verses more, but it burst out in open confession of his mouth. A contrite and a
broken heart thou will not despise: as who would say, I am broken, sad and
sorrowful, but yet I have a steadfast hope, and a full assurance of thy favor;
for such broken and mourning hearts, thou will not despise and cast away, but
wilt be gracious and good unto them: yea, and though he seemed not to feel it
before, yet he was not able now to conceal it any longer, no not when he was
in the greatest combat and struggling and contending with his sins. For it
plainly appears, that he had access to GOD, and to the Throne of Grace,
which the Apostle, Romans 5. makes to be the effect of faith. Secondly, he was
withal persuaded both of GODS power and willingness, to forgive and pardon
him; for he looked upon the multitude of his compassions.

These things, as we see, are found to be in the godly, in their sorrowing for
sin; but it is not so with the wicked: for they in their sorrow, in stead of
coming to God, do flee from him; in stead of hope, and assurance of mercy and
forgiveness, have still judgment, fear, and dread before their eyes,
persuading themselves that their sins are so great and many, that God cannot,
and so filthy, that he will not remit and forgive them.

CHAP. XI.
An admonition to the sorrowful soul.

THese things being rightly considered: I would wish the sorrowful soul not
to be so rash and peremptory in his conceit, as though every thing is no sooner
borne, but is straightway of necessity brought to perfection: But learn to
qualify and allay these his hasty censures, at the doings of the Husbandman,
and use him as his Schoolmasters in this case, to teach him a profitable
lesson. The Husbandman, when he has toyled greatly in dressing his land, in
casting his seed into the ground, does not see his corn presently eared; yet
does he nothing mis-doubt the increase thereof: For if he see it but chitted
in the ground, he rests patiently for the time contented, expecting and
looking for a happy and a plentiful harvest, in due time to follow upon his
labors: So thou, although at the first thou find such a small growth of
these graces of God in thee, yet despair not. For if they be as yet but
chitted, and do appear in thine eyes very small, stay the time with patience,
and assure thy self that the Lord in his time will give a further blessing.
And what if thy peace, thy joy and comfort be not grown to such perfection?
yet if thou find in thy self in these extremities, that thou can but
look so upon the graces and mercies of God, as such as may be bestowed upon
thee hereafter; though as yet thou can not resolve thy self, by reason of
thy frailty, that they are imparted to thee; and withal do find a boldness
in thy self, to appear before his presence, and to approach and draw near
unto the Throne of Grace, to cry and call for them, though it be with
shamefastnes, as confounded in thy self: yet this little show of faith, that
so quickly voideth and vanishes out of thy sight as a thing of nothing, is a
certain argument, that That thy sorrow and mourning was not altogether void of
faith, in expectation of the remission and forgiveness of thy sins.

Reprobates also come to God, and are bold to crave remission and forgiveness of
their sins, as often as they say but the Lords Prayer, which with many of
them is full often and every day.

Esaias 29.13.
that this is not to come and approach to God: for though with their mouth they
draw near, and honor God with their lips; yet their hearts are far away.
Neither do their prayers (howsoever they make an outward show) proceed from
any good affection of the heart, as having a desire and longing to obtain the
thing, which they pray for; but only are hypocritically used for a show and
fashions sake, and therefore does not in truth deserve the name of Prayer,
since it is only outwardlabour of the lips. For he that draws near to God,
as he ought to do, must do it with a true heart, Heb. 10.22.
as witnesses the Apostle, Heb. 10.22. In which sort all they do, which are
thoroughly broken under sin, in their heart do loath it, are weary of it,
desire to be released and freed from it; and therefore do earnestly pray to
have it pardoned, thinking nothing to them so joyful, as to be delivered from
the bondage thereof. As for the other, concerning whom this objection is made,
although they can make a great show of sorrow for their sins, and that they
pray to God for forgiveness of the same, and that for the same cause they do
present themselves before the Majesty of God: yet for that they do not come
with a true heart, do not in heart detest their sin, but take a delight and
pleasure therein, and still covet to frequent and use that evil, which in
their words and mouth they make a show to be delivered from; it cannot be said
that they come to the Lord, neither that they can obtain any thing by this
their lip-laboured prayers, sauouring only of hypocrisy, and not of truth.

CHAP. XII.
Of lothing of sin: the second Mark of Repentance.

THe second thing, Mark 2.
which I set for a mark of true Repentance, is an hearty and inward hatred and
lothing of sin; not only in that it is simply a cause of judgment; but
especially in that it is an offense against God, that is so gracious and so
loving a Father. This hatred is not to be numbered amongst the works and fruits
of the flesh, and so prohibited and forbidden unto man: but it is to be justly
accounted among the fruits of the Spirit, and given in charge and commandment
unto men, and may very well be called a godly hatred: for that hereby our love
to God is to be showed forth and proved, according to the saying; Ye that love
the Lord, hate evil. Example of this hatred we may have in the Prophet David,
Psa. 119.113. affirming that he hated vain inventions, Psalm. 119.113.
but loved the Law of the Lord: and again 163. I hate fals-hood, and abhor
it. And to prove that this hatred ought to be in us, both in regard of the
filthiness of the sin which we have committed; and also in respect and
regard of God, against whom we have sinned, Psalm. 51.
look to the doings of the same David, Psalm. 51. who in that mournful Psalm,
and song of true Repentance, of all other things makes least mention of
judgment; but to show how he was affected in his mourning, and what it was
that he principally respected in his suit, he cries out unto the Lord, that
he would wash him thoroughly from his iniquities, and cleanse him from his
sin, etc. So that it was not so much now the Judgment against sin, as the
very filthiness thereof, and the majesty of the Person against whom he had
transgressed, that did drive David into this sadness and heaviness expressed in
the same Psalm, as evidently appears by his earnest iteration therein used.

With this hatred and detestation of sin, is joined a desire and longing to
be delivered and released from the burden and bondage thereof, as appears by
the fervent, hearty and earnest prayers, and the deep sighs and gronings which
the repentant sinner often makes, and powers out in regard thereof. Of this
we have also example in the same King David, Mary Magdalen, yea, and the poor
Publicane, Luke 18. Luke 18.
unto whom we may in mine opinion, very well ioyn for examples cause, Peter's
auditors, Act. 2. who hearing Peter's Apology, Act 2.
and besides, by what strong Reasons brought out of the Scriptures, he had
proned that Jesus whom they had crucified, to be the true promised Messiah,
appointed of his heavenly Father to be the Deliverer and Savior of his people,
cried out unto Peter and his fellow Apostles, saying, Men and Brethren, what
shall we do? By this their Petition in pitiful manner powered forth, giving
an evident Testimony, that they were so desirous, and had such an earnest
longing to be delivered, as that they were ready and willing to take any
lawful course, were it never so painful, so that they might obtain their
desire: yea, they seemed to think it very long, before they heard it. This is
proved unto us also, even by the example of the Apostle Paul, who most
earnestly prayed and besought the Lord against his imperfections, and prick of
his flesh.

Moreover, with this hatred is also to be joined a shame and confusion in the
persons repentant, because of sin; and that not only in respect of Man (for
so the very Hypocrites are ashamed of their sins, and therefore seek by all
means possible to hide and keep them from the sight and knowledge of men) but
in regard of God, and in consideration of the filthiness of the sin it self:
and so become as men daunted in themselves, that ever they were so ungracious
to commit such filthiness and iniquity, whereby their so gracious a GOD should
be offended. And with this also a free confession and acknowledgement of the
same their sin unto God, nothing diminishing or abating, but truly
confessing the hainousnes thereof.

The third Mark following upon this, Mark 3.
is that great fear to offend, which is also to be found in such as be truly
penitent. Of the which fear we may read in the Apostles second Epistle to
the Corinthians, Chap. 7. 2. Cor. 7.
This godly sorrow, says the Apostle, what fear has it brought forth? So
that he that is truly repentant, shall easily find in himself this fear and
dread to sin again, as he had done before-time. And this fear is most seen
and discerned by that godly care, that still attends upon it: Which is an
intentive respect and watchfulness over our ways, lest at any time we should
offend.

Hereupon it is, that David affirms of himself, saying: Psalm. 119.
I have considered my ways, and turned my feet unto thy Testimonies. And
again: I thought I will take heed unto my ways, Psalm. 39.
that I sin not with my tongue. And Job, to note this care to be in him,
says, that he made a covenant with his eyes. Ioh 31.
And therefore it is that the Apostle counsels, that we should walk
circumspectly, that is, carefully in all our ways, lest we do offend.

But yet here is to be observed: first, that this care to live uprightly, in
him that is now in the work of Regeneration, is not in execution in respect of
the time passed, but in intention, in respect of the time to come, in that he
has in him a resolute intent, even from the heart, hereafter to have a care
and respect unto himself, lest at any time he should offend; howsoever
heretofore he has used and demeaned himself.

Secondly, that even in him also that has had in him manifest fruits of
Repentance, and is thoroughly called and regenerated, this care is often
smothered and decayed; sometime for a shorter, and sometime for a longer
season, as hereafter shall appear.

The fourth sign and Mark, Mark 4.
is a love and affection unto righteousness, wherein we are to note, that as
that godly hatred whereof we have before entreated, is said to be because of
sin; and because that sin was an offense to God: So the love of
righteousness is partly, for that it is true righteousness indeed; and partly,
because they know assuredly, that it is a thing both pleasant and acceptable in
the sight of God. Wherein we may note a difference also betwixt the true
repentant person and the hypocrite. For the hypocrites have also a certain
show of love and affection unto righteousness (but far unlike the former)
insomuch as we shall often see them very hotly to contend and strive in defense
of godliness: and oftentimes they will appear to be so zealous in behalf of
godliness, that they will be ready to sustain dangers for it. If sin be to be
punished, they will be therein very forward, as appears in the Jews, and
amongst them chiefly in the Pharisees; men appearing outwardly very hot and
zealous; not only for the Ceremonial, but also for the Moral Law of Moses. In
giving alms, they are bountiful; In praying, very devout; in fasting, very
religious and holy: There is no godly exercise of Christians to be used;
wherein they would be found inferior to any. Yea, even Judas that Traitor,
pretended a care to the good of the poor, accounting that precious ointment
when it was powered on his Master to be spent in waste, and would that it had
been sold and given to the poor. John 12.
But as John the Apostle testiiieth of Judas, that he spoke that, not that he
cared for the poor; but because he was a Thief and bare the bag: So may I
say of these men, they love virtue, not because it is virtue; they love
godliness, not because it is godliness; they love godly exercises, not
because they are godly exercises, and such as God has commanded and approved:
but their love is grounded upon some other external causes; as worldly profits,
pleasures, friends, fear of danger, respect to please some person, care to
purchase and get the praise and commendation of men, rather then of God, and
such like; or else, because they see, that thus a mean is as it were
purchased, whereby they may the better cover and conceal their sins, and
hide from men, their unjust and wicked life. And thus they loving not
godliness for it self, but for these respects, may justly be said to love
these things, rather then to have any love and affection unto goodness. But it
is far, nay clean contrary in the true servant of the Lord, as has been
(though somewhat briefly) touched before.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the application of the former things, to the comfont of the sorrowful
soul.

NOw, to the end that some fruit may grow to the distressed parties, of these
things thus uttered, I think it expedient to make some nearer and more special
application thereof, and in that doing, by the way to meet with and remove such
objections as are pretended against the former doctrine, that so the sorrowful
soul may receive the greater and the speedier consolation and comfort. Many
and subtle also are the shifts which Satan uses to disgrace and discredit the
Truth of the Gospel, and if it did lie in his power, by that means utterly to
hinder the course and proceedings of the same. As he has in all ages, even
from the beginning, showed himself a Serpent of great subtilty in this
behalf: so not forgetful of his own nature, he is bold even here to show
himself accordingly, and so works oftentimes, nay, too too often, and that in
many, that although the doctrine uttered be never so plain, never so
profitable, yet he so handles the matter, that either none or very small
prdfit shall be taken thereof, nay, he so compasses the matter, that of that
whereof man should reap profit to his consolation, be causes them to gather
poison to their utter desolation. And to the furtherance of this his purpose
against this doctrine, he here frames a dangerous objection in manner as
follows. faith, and concerning repentance, is true indeed, your discourse
thereof is good and godly: But yet you your self do know, I need not to
declare it unto you, that this your discourse of these two points is a further
and greater breach unto my soul: for by all this which you have at large so
delivered, I do perceive and find in my self a great and a marvelous defect;
I see that I am not truly and indeed repentant: and therefore howsoever others
may gather fruit of your godly sayings, yet you may by this surely know, that
no gain does thereby grow unto me.

Lord, who knows the secrets of all men's hearts, and the examination of every
man's conscience is in him, whose the conscience is, and in none other man. Yet
that we may the better come to the discovery of Satan's subtle policy, and that
even thou also, as well as others, may gather fruit of that which has been
before delinered in true, in good and godly manner, as thou confessest; Let me
(I pray thee) by the way, demand one question of thee, that art thus distressed
in soul still, the former doctrine notwithstanding. Tell me, I pray thee: Why
do thou thus sigh? Why do thou thus lament and mourn? Why is thy
countenance so thrown down? Is it not for sin committed? I am persuaded,
that thou will not deny, but affirm that it is so. For else, why do thou cry
out so much against thy sin, and so complain of thy former wickednesses?

Thus far now I take that we do agree, both in thy mourning state, and also
in the original cause thereof.

But yet thou will happily say, Reply of the soul distressed.
I confess it is for sin indeed; but in such manner, as was the mourning of
Judas, who is said to mourn and lament for his sin committed, in betraying
his Master; but it was without hope, it was with despair, and in hypocrisy.

two things, whereby thou art led, as it were, violently to this desperate
judgment. One is the consideration of the time past, for that of long time
before, thou have led thy life in very loose and licentious manner, wholly
giving thy self to the fulfilling of the damnable works of the flesh, never
acquainting thy self with the excellent works of the Spirit, and so never
had any feel of sin, nor touch of conscience, as thou supposest, at all.
The other is the state present: Because thou fee-lest not these former good
things, as yet to be entered into thy heart, and to have any place therein.

first, thou will say, that surely such lewdness and careless kind of
living, could never befall the called of God, that so long, so lewdly, and so
carelessly they should pass away their time, and spend all their days, without
all remorse and feeling, as hitherto thou have done.

answer, that the position stands on a weak and feeble ground, sauoureth
only of Satan's sophistry, and nothing of the Truth; and therefore is no better
to be deemed, then a false and deceitful principle, whereby the Devil goes
about to deceive thee, as he has done many others, as shall anon appear. One
of these two things must needs be found in thee, that either thou have had some
tokens of faith, and of the effectual working of the Spirit of God, at one
time or other apparent in thee, or else thou have not had them at all. Tell me
now: Did thou never find, as yet, any tokens of the Spirit, and of faith,
nor any signs of thy regeneration to show forth themselves in thee? If not, I
say then, that it is no marvel to see the man of God, that is as yet
unregenerate, to drench himself so deep in sin. For until he feel these
tokens, in some part appearing in him, it is manifest, that in wicked and
disordred course of life, there is little or no difference at all to be found
betwixt him and the reprobate. And yet since the time, and also the manner of
Gods calling is (as I have said) to us so uncertain and unknown, I affirm,
that all this notwithstanding, a man may in time be called, and therefore he
is not so desperately to judge of himself. And again, if it so be that thou
have selt faith in her fruit more or less, already working in thee, and have
perceived some signs of true Repentance, heretofore to have showed forth
themselves in thee, and yet thou art thus far, as appears by thy speeches,
fallen back and relapsed: yet can this thy fall be no sufficient reason, to
draw thee to give such a dreadful doom of thine estate.

My reason is, The gifts and graces of God not always alike seen.
because these gifts and graces of God, are not always seen in such an high
and flourishing manner, as men do dream after. But, as I have said of faith,
that it does sometimes ebb, and sometimes flow: So I assirme of the fruits of
faith also, that they are sometimes more, and sometimes less. And as faith it
self sometime grows to be so weak and feeble, that it shows not it self
at all, but seems to be, as you would say, even dead, and yet has a hidden
life still remaining in it: So it is also with the fruits of faith. And
hereupon it is, that we read of diverse the servants of God, as Noah, Lot,
David, Peter, and others, whose faith was sometime brought to so low an ebb,
and the flesh and the powers thereof, sometime in them prevailed so much, and
so mightily, that if we respect their doings for the time, they seemed to have
little or no sense and feeling of sin at all, but as men no whit regenerate,
did give themselves over to committing of sin, and those most odious and
abominable, and without any respect, did show and behave themselves, as men
secure and careless for the time. Which time of their secure, loose and
sinful manner of life, I may justly call the time of Gods desertion, for that
he did, as it were, withdraw from them the lively and effectual working and
operation of his Spirit, permitting Satan and the Flesh, for a time, to have
the sovereignty and dominion over them. And for that the time also of this
desertion, as experience teaches, is not alike to all, but in some is of
shorter, and in others of a longer continuance, as the Lord in his wisdom
shall appoint, I therefore conclude, that this said time of desertion may not
be any cause, so hardly to judge of the state of any.

Now whereas this decrease in some is so small, Some misdoubt themselves
without cause, there being a continual motion of the Spirit in them, though
they perceive it not.
that there is a continual motion of the Spirit to be found in them, though
by want of due regard, they often see it not, but doubt and mistrust themselves
in regard of their lives, and in respect of some sin, that daily they find
within them, and yet after many years they cannot be delivered from it: To
these I grant indeed, that purity in the highest perfection, which they contend
for, is a thing to be desired, if possibly it could be had. But man, so long
as he lives in this corrupted tabernacle of this polluted flesh, is to make
none other account, but to find many and great, yea, infinite and exceeding
great imperfections in himself. For although the power and force of sin to
condemnation of man, is by virtue of Christ's death abolished and taken away,
yet is not sin it self so abolished and taken from the servants of God in
this life, that neither it, nor any stains thereof should remain in them, but
that it should not reign, as a tyrant over them. And therefore Paul, a servant
of God, and a man very well acquainted with this case, finding this infirmity
in himself, and praying thrice against the prick of his flesh, received this
answer at the hands of God, to comfort him withal, 2. Cor. 12.9.
That the grace of God was sufficient for him. So that the use of these
infirmities, be they of short or long continuance, is not, as some unadvisedly,
by Satan's suggestion would gather, to drive us into despair: but that we,
seeing our selves so prone and ready to sin, might cast away all trust and
confidence in our selves, and wholly rest upon the free grace and favor of God.

repentant for my sin, and yet commit the same so often and every day, without
any amendment? Paul, might suffice in this case: yet I add further, that, as I
have said before, Sin will be found to dwell with us continually, so long as we
continue in this tabernacle of this flesh, and will be still showing forth the
fruits thereof in our words, our works and thoughts. And, Number. 33.55. Josh.
23.13.
as the Canaanites preserved, and not destroyed, were pricks in the eyes, and
thorns or whips in the sides of the Israelnes, so will our sins be
continually vexing, troubling and disquieting of us. It cleaves so falt to
this corrupted flesh of ours, that although we make great ado, and strive
never so much to be discharged thereof, yet it will not be. For, as it was with
Paul, so it is with us, The prick of his flesh, which as a messenger of Satan,
2. Cor. 12.7.
was sent to buffet him, though he struggled with it, and prayed earnestly
against it, yet we do not read, that he was quite delivered from it. So
although we strive and pray against our sin, yet will it again have a
recourse unto us. But let not us herein faint or give over the fight, but hold
on still, and fully persuade our selves, that we shall at the last obtain and
get the victory. And further it is very good, that in committing of sin, thou
would consider with thy self, how thou do commit it. For even in the
committing thereof, thou shall find many contrary and repining motions,
grudging and rising against this sin, that thou would so willingly leave
and forsake. For where thou seem to yield obedience and subjection unto
sin, yet it is (doubtless) a forced obedience, and against thy will: Much
like to one that is taken captive by his enemies, which yields himself into
the power of his enemy perforce and against his will, with a grudging and a
disdainful heart, fully in mind persuaded, (that if he did know how) to rid
himself out of his enemies hands, and ever after continuatly to resist and
fight against him.

reply, that thou, contrary to such a man taken captive, have a willingness in
thee, and take a pleasure and a delight in sin, and that therefore I do
greatly mistake the matter, and am far deceived.

answer, that I neither mistake thee, nor am in this point deceeiued at all.
For I grant, that thou have a certain delight and pleasure in sin, and yet
this lets not, but that thou may withal repine and grudge against the
same.

both like and loath, delight and take a pleasure, and also repine and grudge
against one and the selfsame thing, and that at one and the selfsame instant.

Paul, Romans 7.
whom I do know to speak by the Spirit of God. For explaining of whose words,
thou art to be put in mind of this. The man regenerate consists of two
things, and these two repugnant the one to the other: I mean, the flesh and
the Spirit. Now the flesh delights in fleshly things; and the Spirit in
things spiritual. And here mark and see how thou may like and loath,
affect and disdain. Sin to the flesh is delightsome, the flesh takes a great
pleasure therein, but to the spirit it is contrariwise burdensome, and
therefore the spirit grudgeth and repineth at it. And thus thou see, that
which appeared strange before, now to be no strange thing at all.

as it is a sin, (for that must be also added because of hypocrites) is a
most certain argument that thou have the Spirit of God within thee. For
otherwise if the flesh were only there, this conflict would never be in thee:
for most certain it is, that the flesh does not fight against it self.

As for hypocrites, Hypocrites grudging at sin.
whom even now I mentioned, although that they also find oftentimes such a
like combat and conflict, yet the difference surely is great; for they repine
and grudge at sin, but not because it is a sin, as I said before, but
because it is such a sin, that is attended upon, with certain accidents, as
that it is too open and manifest, and therefore may be some occasion to
procure unto them, the loss of their gain and profit, loss of their name
and credit, of sanctity and holiness, or such like, whereof I have before
spoken: In so much that they could be willing and content, without any
grudging, scruple or disputes at all, to commit the sin, were it not attended
with these inconveniences. The godly grudging against sin.
But with the other it is far otherwise; for in them the Spirit repineth and
grudgeth against sin, though all these inconveniences be removed, yea though
he finds it attended with many pleasures and profits, and might be done
never so closely, and without impair of credit in the sight of men; yet all
this will not allay the stomach, but it will arise against it, because it
finds it offensive unto God. And thus now you may see the difference of these
two motions, in these several estates of men, though oftentimes, I know, that
the hypocrite does flatter himself in the sight hereof, as though he had
found some goodly and precious Jewel, in the dunghill of his corrupted nature,
when as in very deed it is nothing so.

CHAP. XIIII.
How the man disquieted in conscience, should in the same behane himself.

NOW as these things hitherto have been uttered for direction: so some things
also are to be annexed, partly out of that which went before, and partly over
and besides the same, to instruct and teach the man in conscience, troubled and
disquieted with the weakness of repentance, and the manifold imperfections
which he finds in himself, how he may use and demean himself, in view
and meditation of them, and that he may do it with greater comfort and less
distrust. First therefore, I would wish and advise such a man, not to pass
over every thing lightly in a slight manner, Not rest in fear without due
trial.
without a due and deliberate consideration, as is the common use of the
sorrowful soul, but rather to grow to a through trial and examination of
himself: For oftentimes it comes to pass, that for want hereof, there arise
many great discomforts unto men, when men either utterly refusing, or else by
reason of some light causes deferring the matter, do not search so deeply
into themselves, as they should, and so through this default, they do bereave
themselves of the sight and knowledge of those good motions of faith, and the
comforts thereof coming, which other men do enjoy. And in this point it
falls out with men refusing or delaying to make this trial, as it does with
a man diseased with a sore and grievous impostume, who, if he do look only
upon the outward appearance, finds nothing but such matter as still
threatens grief and anguish: but if he pierce into it and lance it, feels
present ease: so whiles the sorrowful soul looks only upon the outward
appearance of his imperfections, he shall find nothing but matter to move and
lead him to despair; but if he pierce into himself, and into the secret
chamber of his heart, by due trial and examination of himself, and be not
too austere a Judge over himself, he shall find at one time or other, that
which may serve unto him as a cause of great and exceeding comfort.

austere, Not to be too austere a Judge upon himself.
or a corrupt and unjust Judge upon himself, ready rashly to pronounce and
give the sentence before the cause be well and thoroughly known. For this is a
usual fault, and too too common amongst men, and has been the cause of many
great inconveniences. That we may therefore be found herein the more careful
to prevent and avoid evils, it is necessary that we well consider of the cause
which we have in hand, with the circumstances thereof. The cause is a trial
of sin, whereunto is to be pleaded either guilty or not guilty; the
circumstances are the persons agents, which are the Soul accused, Satan and
sin the Accusers, and in this the conscience is as a Judge. The silly soul
now as an offender, in woeful case stands at the Bar, holding up the hand,
to be tried and found either guilty or not guilty. This (as I have said, the
silly soul) is no doubt the principal part of man, and most to be accounted
of as a most precious jewel. For although a man have never so great abundance
of earthly treasures, yet is it nothing in comparison of the soul: And to
gain and get the whole world, it profits not at all to a man, Luke 9.25.
if he lose his own soul. And therefore though our posting and hasty
judgment cannot in very deed prejudice or forestall the final sentence of the
everlasting Judge, yet it is not to be posted over and passed upon, so lightly
as men commonly do suppose: but with good and deep deliberation, as in such a
weighty cause is requisite.

The accusers (as I have said) are Satan and Sin, Satan and sin his
Accusers.
and these are found oftentimes, not only false Euidencers, but also envious
Witnesses, and such, as indeed do not wish any good, but harm, yea utter
destruction unto man both in body and soul. And therefore since it is manifest
to be true which I have said of them, we may see that there is no hope at all
of any favor to be had at these accusants hands, but that rather it is most
assuredly to be looked for, that they will spew out their poison against the
true servants of the Lord, so far as they can, to the utter destruction of the
children of God.

Against these so malicious and envious Accusers, Faith his Advocate.
still urging the haynousnesse of thine iniquities, Faith as a wise and prudent
Advocate, stands to plead the cause, who although she always tells the
truth, and speaks with great comfort, yet is she oftentimes so shouldred out
and suppressed with the clamorous out cries of these malicious Accusants, that
she can hardly be suffered to speak in such free manner as she would: And if
she be suffered, yet she is so interrupted, that her speech is found to be but
faint and feeble; So that if she be not well attended upon, she can scantly be
heard. And hereupon it comes to pass, that the conscience of man, giving
care most to the evidence of the Accusers, and not attendant to that which
Faith pleads in defense, is ready to give sentence and judgment against the
soul, to the condemnation thereof. But I would advertise every man in this
Session of trial upon himself, still to have a care, that he be not
ouer-hasty, to pronounce the doom before the cause thoroughly heard: And let him
consider with himself, that as in worldly causes, he being appointed as an
Arbitrator or a Judge, in equity ought as well to lend one of his ears to the
Defendant, as he does the other to the Plantiffe, and so not to hear only
what is objected, but also what in truth is to the same answered. So in this
case also of the soul, let not any man attend only and give ear to that with
these accusers shall object against the soul, but rather hearken to that which
faith utters in defense, for that she pleads still in fauorem vitae, for
life's cause. And herein this is worthy to be remembered also, that one motion,
and whispering word of Faith and of the Spirit, is and ought to be accepted
and accounted for a greater and sorer testimony tending unto life, then are
all the earnest cries of these accusants tending unto death, appear they never
so fair, and be they colored over with never so great likelihood and
probability.

Thirdly, we must consider also, 3. He must not so much consider the greatness
of the measure, as the truth of his repentance.
and that with good advice, what the thing is whereat we do aim, and which we
labor especially to search after, and to find out in this trial and
examination: for even in this point also, there is oftentimes error found; by
reason whereof, amongst men, there arises no small inconvenience. The thing
therefore that herein we are to have a special eye unto, is not the great
measure and quantity; but rather the truth of repentance. For although it be
never so slender and weak in our conceit; yet if it be true and from the
heart, we shall thereby find, even in the midst of sorrow, sufficient cause
of great and exceeding comfort. It may be that the Spirit sometime may appear
unto us, to be, as ye would say, but very weak in working: And faith also may
seem to be faint and feeble, in showing forth the fruits of true repentance,
in such abundant and plentiful manner, as thou happily do dream of; yet
does not this let any thing at all, but that both thy faith, and thy repentance
may be true: and therefore such, whereupon thou may settle and ground thy
self, and whereby thou may assure thy self that thou art the child of God:
And if his child, then surely freed from condemnation, and made an heir, even
a coheyre with Christ our head of everlasting glory. For GOD is so far from
rejecting, and casting off such small and slender beginnings, that he is rather
given to nourish and increase the same in his children. Esaias 42.3.
The bruised Reed he will not break, Mat. 12.20.
and the smoking Flax he will not quench. And therefore, if thou find never
so great imperfections, in this thy repentance, so that it seems to be crazed
like a broken Reed, and almost extinguished, as the Flax that does but
sinoke, yet herein is there no cause of discomfort. First, for that as faith,
so likewise true repentance is the gift of God, who is not to be prescribed
and appointed, in what mcasure he should give the same to every one: and
secondly, for that it pleases him, to be so gracious and favorable, as to
accept these imperfections in good part at thy hands: for the which thou art
not only to be thankful to him at all times; He must consider what he is by
nature, and know that he shall never be free from imperfections whilst he
lives here.
to move thee continually to pray to God for the good increase of these his
gifts in thee.

Fourthly, thou art to consider diligently with thy self, and to look well
upon thine own estate; I mean, what thou art of thy self and by nature, which
if thou do, thou shall surely find, that thou art one of Adams brood, one
that have sucked corruptions, Psalm. 51.5.
and that in great measure, from the breasts of thy first Parents, as well as
other. For not only thy life, Psalm. 51.1.
but also thy Conception and Birth will be found and proved to be in sin.
Since then that thou art a man, and therefore by nature subject to all kind of
infirmities as well as others, during the time of thy continuance in this
corrupted Tabernacle, do not deceive thy self; but be thou assured that thy
flesh will never give over, but still will be found to be a flesh, that is, a
rebellious and a grievous enemy, continually rebelling, contending and striving
against the Spirit, until such time as it shall, by Gods appointment, either
receive the stroke of death to subdue it, and put an end to the rebellions
thereof: Or that wonderful and sudden change be made at the last day, 1. Cor.
15.53.
When this corruptible shall put on incorruption, this vile body shall be
changed, that it may be fashioned like unto the glorious body of Christ. Since
now the state stands so with thee, thou art to make none other reckoning, but
that thou must, and shall of necessity find (although it be to thy great
grief) many infirmities and imperfections in thy flesh, so long as thou shall
have thine abode here on earth, as well as others. Yet can it not therefore be
thereupon inferred and concluded, that the same imperfections should exclude
thee from the covenant of grace, and shut thee out from the number of Gods
elected children. Nay, it is so far off from working or compassing this evil
unto thee, that I may say unto thee with the Apostle, Romans 5.20.
Where sin abounded, there grace abounded much more. So that (as no doubt
upon thy true repentance thou shall easily find) the further that thy sin
extends it self, as thou supposest to thy condemnation; the further also
this mercy and grace of God does stretch forth it self in giving remission of
thy sin to thy salvation. But here beware and take heed of Satan, lest he
deceive thee, by bringing thee into this vain and wicked conceit, as though
this remistion were due unto thee by merit of thy works, when as it is only
of Grace. For of this be thou assured, that if thou had never so great a
measure of vprightnes and integrity, if thou liuedst never so holily; if thou
leadest as pure a life as ever did any of the faithful servants of God, that
have been since the fall of Adam ( Christ Jesus only excepted) yet as those
faithful servants could never find salvation in their own deeds, but did
clean forsake themselves, and cleave fast to the grace and mercy of God: So
thou also, although thou seek it, shall never find salvation in thine own
works and merits thereof, but must be content with the godly to renounce thy
self, and lean fast to the grace of God in Christ, in whom surely thou must
seek it; in seeking thou shall find it; and finding thou shall doubtless
possess it.





no matter how I line, and how I do here behave my self.

God forbid, that any such motion should ever creep into the hearts of Gods
Elect; or that any man should hereby take occasion to become secure and
careless, to show forth his Christian duty. For though in our selves we
cannot indeed find any possibility to deserve life; but possibility too
much to merit death: yet are we bound to exercise our selves in these fruits,
for these causes following.

First, The first cause of showing godly lise.
for that God himself commands it, in wonderful many places of the
Scriptures. Secondly, that thereby his glory might be manifested, Mat. 5.16.
Thirdly, 2.3. Causes.
for that by them man is in his conscience assured of his Election and
Vocation, 4. Cause.
2. Pet. 1. Fourthly, For that thereby our faith is not only exercised, but also
nourished and strengthened. 5. Cause.
Fifthly, for that by such good fruits appearing in us, others are also stirred
up to follow our good examples, 6. Cause.
2. Cor. 9.13. Heb. 10. Sixthly, for that by these there is help ministered unto
the necossities of the poor and needy. 7. Cause.
And seventhly, for that they are unto us testimonies of the truth of our faith
and Regeneration, and seal and confirm unto our hearts, that the Spirit of
God is surely dwelling in us. And all this with this caution, that hope of
merit be utterly excluded, not once dreamed upon, whatsoever the Papist will
prattle and prate to the contrary.

To return now, and come again to my former doctrine which I had in hand:
this is the thing which I labored at this present to persuade unto, that
although the aforesaid gifts of the Spirit, and fruits of faith seem to fail,
to be covered and hid, and do not shine forth and show themselves, in so
bright and open manner, as we expect and desire; yet we are not thereby to
grow to immoderate grief and mourning, as though the interest of life were
utterly taken away and lost. If the Prince had passed to any a Deed of Gift of
any thing, causing it to being rossed and put in writing signed and ratified by
his public Seal, with a full intent and purpose to perform the same in all
points effectually; and also to renew again the Seal, if at any time it fall
out to be defaced: If now it so come to pass, that hurt do come either to
the writing or Seal, would the party, for whose benefit this act was thus
passed by the Prince, doubt of the performance of his promise: or would he not
rather repose his hope in the grace of the Prince, and these defaults
notwithstanding assure (as it were) himself, that all should be accomplished
and performed thoroughly? The case is like betwixt God and us. For God by his
promises and covenants engrossed and put in writing, and that in our hearts,
has passed, as it were, a Deed of Gift unto us, of eternal life, and has
sealed it for our confirmation, with the Seal of his Spirit, with intent and
promise to renew the same, whenever it should seem in any part to be defaced
in us. Shall we now think, that if at any time either this writing of God be
dimmed, or the seal thereof be found not to have so deep an impression, as at
other times it was found to have; that therefore the performance of Gods
promises, is to be accounted uncertain? Howsoever earthly Princes are
sometimes drawn by sinister means to falsify their promise; yet God is, and
will be ever found just, and also true of his word. And therefore let us assure
our selves, and be fully settled and persuaded in this, concerning God and his
promises, that he is so far from every touch of untruth, that he will renew
that which is decayed in us, and never cease, till he have perfected the good
work which he has begun in his. He is not like the rigorous and cruel
Landlord, which upon every light occasion, is ready to break covenants and
promise, and to cast his Tenant utterly out of his Tenure: but God is proved
rather to be so gracious, that where any breach through sin is found in us,
he will be ready continually upon our earnest and hearty repentance, to make
up the same again with mercy, He must meditate upon the exceeding mercy of God
unto his servants in all ages.
as is most plentifully in the Scriptures, for our consolation and confirmation
herein sufficiently recorded.

meditation of this great and exceeding mercy and compassion of God unto his
servants and children in all ages Let it never slip out of thy mind, but
ruminate and think upon the same day and night even continually: and let this
serve as a comfort of great soueraintie, against all thy sorrows, and other
imperfections whatsoever, that he looks upon thee, not as the straitness of
his Law exacteth, but as thine infirmity is able to bear, even like the
Father that is tenderly affected to his young and tender infant, accepting
proffers, oftentimes for performance, and our endeavors, though small and
slender, Psalm. 130.3.
for perfection in our duty. If he should deal with us as we deserve, who then
should live? but he knows whereof we be made, Psa. 103.14.
and he remebreth that we are but dust, and therefore weaklings, not able of
our selves to walk and go on, in the way of godliness, further th^e he does
vouchsafe to put forth his h^ad to lead us

He must remember the state of the Saint: 1. Before their conuerso. 2. Chrc. 33.
unto these add also the remembrance of the servants and Saints of God: how
that first before their conversion, many of them were indeed most notorious
sinners, and great malefactors. Manasses had been a most beastly Idolater: the
Thief upon the Cross an open Malefactor: Mary Magdalen possessed with seven
Devils: Paul a Rlasphemer, Act. 8.
and a cruel persecuter: the converted Jews, enemies to grace and murderers
of the King of glory. Acts 2.
The Gentiles sunk in most filthy and devilish Idolatry. Romans 1.2. After their
Calling.
Secondly, after their calling also, how that many and those not meanest in the
Church, have found great and many imperfections in themselves. Noah was drunk,
and uncovered in his Tent. Lot, Genesis 9.21. Genesis 19.33. etc.
besides his drunkenness, committed Incest night after night with his two
Daughters. David committed Murder and Adultery; 2. Sa. 11.17. Mat. 26.
and Peter cursed and banned himself with an oath in denial of his Master.
All which are in the Scriptures recorded, not to an idle purpose; but for the
comfort of us, that were to succeed and come after: That we, seeing such great
imperfections, or rather such gross sins to have been in these so great and
notable servants of God, so renowned in the Book of God, for the great measure
of gifts of the Spirit, wherewith they are endued, might not despair of our
selves, or be too much abased and humbled, in the sight and feeling of our
imperfections, but contrariwise be raised up in hope and comfort; assuredly
belecuing, that he which showed forth pity and compassion toward those, and
many others, is the same God that he was then, and that in him there is no
change, Iam. 1.17.
nor yet shadow of change at all: but he is one and the same for cuer.

the end of our falls and imperfections, would not any time, nor in any hand be
forgotten. He must not forget the end for which God suffers him to fall, which
i^, to humble him.
I speak not of that end hereof, which thou oftentimes do forge unto thy
self, for the increase of thy grief and sorrow, but of that end amongst all
other ends, whereunto God appoints them in his wisdom, and that is, that by
them we might be humbled, and also taught to distrust our own power and
ability, and driven from al trust and confidence in our selves, and in our
merits, and to force us wholly and altogether to rely and rest our selves upon
the grace and mercy of God promised in Christ Jesus. So that whenever Satan
goes about by reason of them, to persuade us unto despair, we see how he
strives to subvert and ouerturne all, and teaches us to abuse these things to
a contrary purpose, and to gather despair of that, which God uses in some
sort to teach us faith, viz. that failing in our selves, we might have faith
in Christ: And finding our selves so unable to perform the Law, and purchase
life, we might the more earnestly have recourse unto that sure Anchor of our
hope, which is Christ Jesus, 1. Cor. 1.30.
whom the Father has made to be unto us, wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption.

add and annex, as a daily and continual companion, He must pray continually
against these tentations.
fervent and earnest prayer, against these tentations of Satan, the World, and
the Flesh, that it would please the Lord, in his good pleasure, to rebate the
measure of these so dangerous tentations, make thee strong to withstand them,
and to restore thee again unto that inward comfort, and comfortable feeling of
his Spirit working in thee.

He must wait the Lords leisure.
to expect his leisure, and stay the time, till he shall think it most
convenient to grant and perform thy suits, assuring thy self, that (as I have
said before) whatsoever shall be most behoouefull for his glory first, and
then for the help and case of thy necessity, in due time shall be accomplished
and fulfilled.

CHAP. XV.
Against afflictions and outward events.

AS the outward things, which happen unto us, both in our bodies, name and
goods, and other external accidents in this present life, are infinite, if we
should grow into particulars: so the comforts also provided against the same in
Scriptures, are exceeding great and many: Insomuch, that it is an hard matter
to know where to begin to recount the same, and yet casier by much to begin,
then to make an end.

But in those things whereof we are to entreat, that they may be fit and
appliable for our present purpose and cause we have in hand, it is very
necessary to consider, how the broken and afflicted conscience uses these
afflictions as a matter of great discomfort, and upon what ground especially
his despairing conclusions do take their force. And that I find to be in
these two things:

first is from the original of these afflictions, which this person afflicted,
falsely thinks and indgeth to be the anger and wrath of God, conceived
against him, upon this false ground, inferring, and that very peremptorily,
that he is without the love and favor of God, and therefore none of his
elected children.

second is brought from the misconsiruction of the nature and properties of
these afflictions, thinking them to be judgments and punishments, only
incident and befalling to the wicked; whereas they are very commonly found, to
be rather corrections and chastizements, inflicted and laid, oftentimes, even
upon Gods best and dearest children, and that not for their evil in any
respect, but only for their good.

Now, to help them forward in these two points, through Satan's subtilty, there
do concur also, the continuance, and exceeding measure of the afflictions,
which he uses as a violent stream to drive him forward in the former
misconceits. The reason is, because as he supposes, or as he can see, there
is none of Gods children, that do equal and match him in the extremities of
these his miseries: Or else, because he judges and takes this, (which indeed
is not) to be a difference betwixt the troubles of the Righteous, and
judgments of the Reprobate, I mean, the greatness and the long continuance
of the afftictions. For the better satisfying of such persons, and for the
reformation of this their corrupted opinions and judgments, I purpose to
observe and keep this course and order:

original of the afflictions laid upon Gods children, is not hatred in God,
but his love toward those that are afflicted.

afflictions are such, as both do, and of necessity must befall the children
of God.

afflictions, wherein we have not some of Gods children in former times, that
have tasted as deepo thereof as we do now.

greatness and continuance of miseries, is not a difference betwixt the
judgments of Reprobates in this life, and the corrections of God inflicted on
his Chosen.

several comforts, out of the book of God, against this so dangerous a
temptation.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the first position, and the objections aagainst the same.

COncerning the first, I affirm, 1. God afflicts not his children in hatred,
but in love, as appears 1. By his moderating the same.
that if the witness of the word of truth, were utterly wanting in this respect,
yet the very considerations of afflictions, if they be duly made, would infer
no less, then I have already set down, viz. that it is not of hatred, but
love, that moves God especially thus, and in this sort to deal with his
dcarest children. For first, see and consider, I pray you, is there stay in
wrath and hatred, especially where lustice may take place and bear it out?
Would God thus moderate afflictions as he does, and in such gentle measure on
us as he does, if he did hate us? Would he be thus chary and careful as he is,
not to quench the small beginnings, and spring of our faith and confidence, and
of our hope in him? Or, if it were in hatred, and not in love and favor
toward us, might he, or would he not rather cut and break asunder the very
cable of our trust and affiance, that so we might utterly perish, and be
consumed with Cain, Iedas, Inlian, and such others? How soever you do judge,
yet surely I suppose and think, that if Hatred were Mother atrix in
afflictions, which God lays upon his servants, that this would then be the
fruit that should follow thereon, even utter desolation and destruction, and
that of Gods children; which to think of God, God grant to be far from us.

By his afflicting them on his deareft servants.
shall we think, that he would ever have inflicted the same upon his dear and
faithful servants, whom he so entirely loved, as is in the Scriptures
sufficiently recorded? I believe surely that he would not. For, doubtless,
whom God has once loved, he can never be said to hate, in what manner soever
in this earthly mansion he does deal with them. His love being once begun,
which is even from all eternity, never alters or changes, it is an
everlasting love, which never shall have end.

Now then answer me, I pray thee, thou that in this sinister manner do
judge hatred to be in God toward his children, and art greatly troubled and
disquieted in mind, with this evil and wicked cogitation. Was not David, a
man after Gods own heart, afflicted? Was not lob, a man blessed of the Lord,
greatly afflicted? Were not Daniel, and all the Propbets of the Lord afflicted?
Were not the Apostles, yea, and all the fauhfull Martyrs and Witnesses of the
Lord, afflicted? Nay, did not our Savior Jesus Christ himself taste deeply
of this cup in his own person? And did he not in many places, and many times
foreshew unto his Disciples, that this must be the state of his servants in
this world, to bear the Cross, and to suffer afflictions? Surely this is so
plain, that it cannot be denied. The Scriptures are in this cose very
plentiful and apparent. And were not (I pray you) all these, the beloved of
God? This also is so manifest, that none can doubt thereof, which is led by
Gods Spirit. And can thou then say, that the afflictions, whereof these holy
men, yea, and the Son of God himself also were partakers, came of hatred,
which God had conceived against them? It is possible that the Deusll may put
into the heart of some so to think, but it is impossible that ever this should
be found in God, who is love, 1. Job. 4 8.
and whose love toward his servants is everlasting.

considerations of all ages, By compating his dealing with his faithful
servants, and those that were his enemies in all ages.
from the first Abel, even unto this time wherein we now live, will approve no
less, but that the miseries and afflictions of this life, infer no hatred,
or want of love in God unto his children. For if it were so, that they did make
such inference, then see and consider well, what monstrous and deuilish
consequents would follow upon the same. Has not always the Church of God
been thrown unto the walls? Has it not been from age to age, and from time
to time cruelly persecuted? And is not that certain which the Prophet David
affirms, Psalm. 73.4,5
that the wicked have no bands in their death, but are lusty and strong, they
are not in trouble as others, neither are they plagued as other men? Iud. 5.7,
8 etc.
Do thou not consider that the Israelites were in bondage and slavery, when
the Egyptians enjoyed liberty? The people of God afflicted, when the Moabites,
Iud. 3.6, 13.
Midinnites, Philistims, and other their enemies were in prosperity? Was not
David persecuted, when Saul was honored as a King? Luke 16.19, 20, etc. Ioh.
18.40.
Lazarus hunger-starued, when the rich Glutton was choicely Tabled? Christ
arraigned, when Pilate was Judge? and murdering Barrabas was acquitted and
delivered? The Christiant most cruelly massacred, when the Heathenish and
Idolatrous people lived in peace and quietness? To the which effect might be
brought infinite examples more, besides the testimony of the Scriptures. Where
now, wiltthou say, was the hatred of God? In Israel his chosen people? In
David? In Lazarus? In Jesus? and in his faithful Martyrs, which suffered these
things at the hands of the wicked? And where (I pray you) was love? in the
Egyptians, the Moabites, Midianites, Philistims, Saul, the rich Glutton,
Pillate, and Barrabas, which lived in prosperity, and at liberty? I hope thou will not so affirm. Such a conclusion, inferring such horrible absurdities,
thou see to be both loose and dangerous.

the fruit and end of these afflictions, By considering the end, etc. which is
for correction, and to stir up the graces of God in him. Psalm. 119.
is likewise to be considered. The end hereof is, the correction and amendment
of his servants, and the increase and stirring up of his graces and gifts in
them, which otherwise would be decayed and smothered. It is good (says David)
that I have been afflicted that I may learn thy Statutes. Now then, what is a
greater argument unto us of Gods love, then to see him use those means and
ways upon us, though sharp and sour unto our nature (for unto our flesh no
affliction seems joyous, but grievous) whereby his graces may be furthered,
increased, and multiplied in us, to his glory and our endless comfort, good
and benefit?

the danger which usually ensues upon the absence of these things, Men are
then most apt to fall into great sins when they are most free from trouble.
does prove sufficiently also, that Gods love, especially shines forth most
clearly in the presence of them, and that his hatred most appears, when they
are furthest removed from us; for even then especially, above all other times,
have the servants of God fallen into the committing of the greatest sins and
mischieses, when they have had no afflictions, no troubles to occupy and
exercise themselves withal.

Noah, Noah.
so long as he had the scorning world, to molest him, continued to walk
uprightly with God, but when they by the Flood were taken away, and there were
none to trouble him, and that he lived in peace in his private family, he was
ouer-taken with drunkenness, and was in his drunkenness uncovered in his Tent.

Lot, Lot.
so long as he had the Sodomites to vex his righteous soul, lived well and
carefully, but when by fire and brimstone from heaven they were destroyed, and
he at rest with his two-daughters, without any disquiet or molestation, he
was likewise overtaken with drunkenness, and committed incest with his two
daughters.

Whiles David continued under the dread of Saul, David.
and was cumbred with enemies, he lived uprightly, and gave himself wholly to
serve the Lord; but being freed from these dangers, having gotten peace and
quietness, he became secure, gave himself to the contrary; his eyes and
heart fell on lusting, and never ceased, until he had committed both Adultery
and Murder.

Many examples to the like effect might be brought, but these (I trust) may
suffice, in this so plain and evident a matter. And this the rather, for that
every one of us (if we will judge uprightly) does find in himself, that he
never seeks less after God, or less has him in his mind, then in the time
of prosperity; and contrariwise, never prays, and sueth unto him more
earnestly, then when he is pressed with adversity. Shall any man now think
that God bateth him, and has clean cast him off, because he has laid this
cross upon him to be borne? Nay rather, let him herein boldly acknowledge the
great love and favor of God toward him, in that her labors in this so
fauour^ble and Fatherly a manner to call him home, and will not suffer him by
any means to grow into security, and so to sin against him, but will have
him exercised, sometimes in greater troubles, sometimes in less; sometime
touching and vexing him with sickness of body, sometime with death of friends,
sometime with loss of goods and cattle, sometime after one sort, and
sometimes after another; but all to this end, that so he might make him more
mindful of him, and more careful to show forth his loving obedience toward
him.

This also by a Similitude, may very well be confirmed unto us. Shall the
Physician be said to hate his patient, when as he gives and ministers unto
him a strong and sharp Purgation, to recover him? Or shall the father be said
to hate his son, when he does chastise and correct him with the rod, that
he may reform him? So neither can God justly be said to hate us, but rather
to love us, when in this manner he launceth our sores, that he may heal us;
and thus father-like, corrects and chasteneth us, with his Fatherly hand,
that he may amend us.

by the testimony of the Spirit of God in plain texts of Scripture. Ioh. 16.13.
to that which has been said, let us adioyne the plain evidence of the
Spirit of God, which is the Spirit of Truth, and leads us into all Truth, and
witnesses as much as I have said; namely, that All those things proceed and
come, not of hatred, but of love. Reu. 3.19.
As many as I love (says Christ unto the Church of Laodicea) I rebuke and
chasten: Unto which agreeeth also the saying of Salomen: Pro. 3.11.
The Lord corrects him whom he loves, even as the father does the child in
whom he delights. Whereunto consents also the testimony of the Spirit,
Heb. 12. saying, Heb. 12.5. etc.
Have ree forgotten the consolation, that speaks unto you, as unto children?
My son, despise not the chastening of the Lord, neither faint when thou art
rebuked of him: for whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth, and he scourges
every son that he receives. Hereupon now I conclude, that if the former
reasons had not been at all, yet this three-sold evidence of the Spirit of
God, whose Office is, as I have said, to lead us into all truth, Joh. 16.13.
may serve sufficiently, to the quieting of any Christian conscience, if it be
thoroughly weighed and considered. And therefore whereas Satan, to the
derogation of this healthful doctrine, and the increase of thy sorrow and
discomfort, does forge this subtle reason: Satan's reason.
Those whom God does thus afflict, he does not love, but hate; But thou art
afflicted so and so by God; Ergo thou art not beloved, but hated of him.

This reason (I say) is easily overthrown, for that it is forged: By whom? by
Satan, which has been a liar and a murderer from the beginning, and
therefore his argument is not to be received. But we are rather to hearken
unto the doctrine of the Holy Ghost, which tells us a contrary tale, that it
is not hatred at all, but love; not anger alone, but the Fatherly care and
tender affection of God toward his children, that makes keth him thus to
correct and chastise them. And this, not that they should perish, as Satan
would infer, but that they should be preserved, and not perish with the
world. So that if we endure this his chastisement, he is so far from
casting us off, that as he has witnessed, he offers himself unto us as
unto sons; But if we be without it, we are so far from love, that we
are not sons, Heb. 12.7.3
but Bastards.

And now see how thou may very effectually turn this Argument of Satan's back
again upon himself, to his confusion, but to thy exceeding comfort. God has
afflicted thee with many crosses and miseries; art thou therefore cast out of
the love and favor of God? Nay rather, thou art hereby assured, that thou art
no Bastard, but in the number of those, that in deed and truth are become the
Sons and Children of God.

CHAP. XVII.
Satan's Objection against the former doctrine answered.

BEfore that I enter into the Answer to Satan's usual Objection, made against
the former doctrine, I am to counsel thee to take heed unto thy self, and to
beware of his policy betimes. For if thou will be ready to accept at his
hands, whatsoever he will adventure to profer unto thee; he will soon bring
thee to take at his hands, Copper, nay, dross, for Gold, deadly poison, for a
sovereign Potion, and that to thy confusion. Try therefore and examine his
objections thoroughly, mark from whom they come, and to what evil end and
purpose they are made; so shall thou the more easily withstand him in his
temptations, and with more speed prevail against him.

Although this doctrine concerning my first position, be (as I hope) so
plain, that even the simplest may understand it; and with such reasons
confirmed, as it has pleased the Holy Ghost to minister unto me in that
respect; yet is the enemy of God and all godly men, bold to take exceptions
against the same, and in this manner frames his Objection:

afflictions, are indeed judgments, and Gods vengeance denounced and executed
on Gods enemies, and those against whom his wrath and anger is incensed. And
for confirmation hereof, we may produce many examples, even out of the
Scriptures, but in a matter so apparent, I think it needless. By this
Objection thus framed and uttered, it evidently appears, that the Forger
thereof ( Satan by name) will be a Serpent still of great subtilty, still
inuenting and forging new devices, to effect his deuilish purposes. And
therefore it is not to be marvelled at, if he thus begin to make assault upon
thee in this manner, by force of this Objection, to raze out of thy mind, the
truth and certainety of all that before has been, by so many Arguments
confirmed; which his malicious craft, that it may the rather appear, Ict us
examine and try his Objection thoroughly, and discover the falsehood and
insufficiency thereof, so far forth as by the holy Spirit of God, we shall
be thereunto enabled.

The Proposition is this, Object. That afflictions are effects of Gods anger.
that such like afflictions as thou endurest, are threatened in Scriptures, as
judgments and effects of Gods haired, wrath, and anger upon the wicked.

A subtili temptation, whereby this enemy deceives very many: But let us a
little dwell and stay thereupon, syft and examine it thoroughly, and so the fraud
thereof shall more easily appear. Whereas it is said in the Objection, that
God does threaten such like things, as judgments, and vengeance for sin, to
be executed on the wicked: It cannot be denied, the Scripture to this end is
indeed plentiful. But what of this? Not any thing in truth can hereout be
gathered for Satan's purpose. But herein his craft does the more appear: in
that upon so good a ground, he goes about to erect such a deformed building,
and to set up his subtilties. For by how much the foundation is more true, by
so much, his in consequent conclusions will seem to be more strong and
forcible. And then especially it lies us upon, to be more circumspect and
wary to cut him short, and to prevent him in so malicious a purpose.

Let us now come to the view of Satan's Sophistry. The question is of the hatred
of God. The Proposition proposed is true indeed: But yet too weak and
altogether unable to conclude the question. For thus he reasons: These
miseries and afflictions are sometimes the effects of Gods hatred: And
therefore they are so in thee too.

Answ. This Argument cannot hold. For that which is sometime so, will neither
bear a general inference; nor yet a particular or a special conclusion. If a
man should thus reason: The Sun does sometime harden the thing it shines upon;
therefore it hardens Wax also: Every petit Logician would be ready to
scoff and lest at the baldnes of his Argument. But to insist even in Satan's
own example: These troubles and miseries proceed sometimes from the love of
God, and therefore they do so to the very Reprobates and Castawayes. Although
the antecedent be true, yet the conclusion can never be made good: and such is
the conclusion of Satan. For what reason, I pray you, is in this? It is
sometime so, and therefore so at all times: It is so in some, and therefore so
in all: Or it is so in Judas the Traitor: Ergo, it is so in Peter, or some one
other of the Apostles. As though that which is affirmed truly of the one, must
of necessity without exception be verified of another. Let Satan therefore
first prove this his proposition to be generally true, that is, that these
afflictions do always come from the hatred of God: Or else this; and such
like particular conclusions, will stand him in no stead. But this proof he
can never be able to make. Hold him therefore at this pinch, and thou shall,
to thy great comfort, have a notable victory against him.

Thus thou may now see one piece of Satan's malicious craftiness discovered,
which he uses in this reason, to deceive men afflicted withal. But yet this
is not all the poison that lurketh under the fair show of words in this the
Serpents reason, as shall anon appear. He is indeed very pregnant in his
proofs; so is he also as painful and plentiful in his misconstructions,
wresting all to his own purpose, that has but only a very little show or
likelihood to favor the cause he has in hand, and strives to prove.
Whereupon, it comes to pass, that as in many other, so even in this reason
also, he very slightly passes over the matter, by the crafty confusion of
words of diverse significations, as though they signified and imported one and
the self same thing: And therefore the rather and sooner to deceive either
thee or any other, he thus subtly reasons: Satan his reason.


God (says the Scripture) is angry with those whom he punishes: And therefore
it cannot be, but thou art hated of him, and so out of the tale and number of
his children.

wind stir and move, but it must needs be a tempest? Cannot the Sun be
dimmed with a Cloud, but it must utterly lose his light? And cannot God he
angry and displeased, but he must needs hate and finally cast away for ever?
Is there no mean to be had? None easier way to be found? must all of mere
necessity and of force be stretched on the rack of extremities? Indeed Satan
would have it so, and thereunto goes about by this his subtle reason to
persuade: But yet Gods Spirit does teach us far otherwise, that God shows
himself to be angry and displeased with many of his servants, and dear
children, whom notwithstanding he hated not, but most dearly loved; that he
oftentimes has not only threatened; but also actually executed punishments
upon them, from whom he also promises that he will not take away his mercy for
ever.

This doctrine of the Spirit of God, by the example of David, Hezechiah, and
many others in the Scriptures, is proved to be as certain, as that which is
most certain: and therefore even in this point, as in all his others, Satan is
found to be a liar, and his reason to be of no force, for that so subtly he
makes no distinction and difference, betwixt the hatred and anger of God: As
though they were indifferent times, of one nature, and of one signification.
And therefore if in any place, he finds these afflictions to proceed of
anger: he straitway infers, that it is of hatred: As though God hated all
those with whom, and that most justly, he is displeased. Which is not so, as
has been showed. God (in some sort) may be said to be angry with his
children, and in anger to afflict and punish them: But he can never be said
to have them: For these two are things different in God.

God is said to hate those, whom either in his Decree he has excluded from
mercy, though he grant them life and prosperity here on the earth for a while:
or in his punishments, he does in anger consume, that is, in Justice, seek
only and intend their condemnation: But it is not so to his Elect and Chosen.
For if in them he hates any thing, surely it is nothing but sin alone; he
hates not their persons, as he is said to hate the persons of the Reprobate.
But yet God may be said to be angry with his Elect: that is, he may have a will
to punish sin in them in what manner it pleases him; and he may lay his
temporal punishments upon them, as being displeased with their sins and
offenses, and yet be still in love affected toward them; as the Father that is
incensed to anger against his Son that has done amiss, and therefore also
takes the Rod and punishes him, and yet still he loves his child, neither
can, for this anger, be said to hate him.

And it is well to be observed that there is a difference too, betwixt this
anger of God toward his Children and the Cast-awayes, unto the Elect and the
Reprobate. Unto the Elect it is temporal, short and for a time: For he will
not always chide, neither keep his anger for ever. Psalm. 103.9.
But unto the Reprobate it is perpetual and eternal. In the Elect with such
measure, 1. Cor. 10.3.
that they may sustain and bear it: but in the other beyond their strength,
unto their everlasting confusion. In the Elect, to work amendment unto life:
Romans 8.20.
In the Reprobate, to obdurate and harden them unto eternal condemnation. As
in the Elect, all things turn to their good: So in the other, both this and
all other things turn to their evil. Thus much to show and prove that which
is promised, or rather affirmed in my first Position: viz. that the original
of affliction, laid upon Gods children, is not of hatred in God; but of his
love toward those that are afflicted.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the second Position, and the Objections against the doctrine thereof.

ALthough the Doctrine before delivered, be in it self most certain and
true; and although in the delivery thereof, the Serpents subtlety has been
laid open, not so much as it deserves, or as the case and matter in hand
requires: yet I trust so, that every man may have thereby a taste of his
malicious mind, so craftily going about to circumuent them, and so to compass
and effect their destruction: yet will not this our mortal enemy give over,
but with this new and fresh encounter begins again to make his assault.

Has not God (says he) promised unto his servants prosperity, An assault of
Satan.
peace, and good and happy success? and has he not made his covenant with
them, to deliver and save them out of these extremities?

Answ. No doubt, he has thus promised, and he has thus couenanted indeed.
But yet his promise and covenant are not so made, as that afflictions should
not touch the servants of God at all: but rather in this sense, that they shall
not hurt or overcome them. For he will acquit and free his faithful servants,
from that tyrannous power of sin and death. What is this which you say? Do
you think then, that death and sin shall never befall unto them? This is
absurd indeed, being so void of truth. We see the contrary proved by
experience. Nay rather, this is proved, even by experience, that neither sin
nor death, (although they be enemies of great power) shall ever have the
strength to prevail so far against them, as to subdue and conquer them.

For the explanation of the which Doctrine, 2. Position. That afflictions are
incident, and must befall the children of God.
you see the consideration of the second Position to be necessary: which was,
that these miseries and afflictions, in this life are incident, and must befall
unto the children of God; that so we may the better see the slender hold, and
so with the more ease avoid the danger of this temptation.

This Position, as it evidently appears, stands on these two branches:
First, that these afflictions do befall the children of God: and secondly,
that it is of necessity, that it should be so. For proof of the first, I
might produce the examples of a great number of the servants of God: as Noah,
Lot, Moses, Job, David, Daniel, the Prophets, Apostles, and the faithful
Martyrs and witnesses of our Savior Christ. But for so much as the same has
been touched before, I will not stay hereupon. The second, having a necessity
joined thereunto, (that of necessity it must be so) does require a more large
discourse, and further proofs: which by Gods assistance shall be done, and
that (I hope) in such manner, as that the truth shall easily appear, to stand
fully and altogether against Satan, and his wicked policies.

In this pains taking, I might urge that excellent saying of the Apostle Paul,
2. Tim. 3.12.
That whosoever will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution. But I
know, that the Adversary will be very carnest to cavil against me, and take
exception against this Doctrine, and place of Paul, saying, that it is not to
be understood of any punishment for sin, as those afflictions which are laid
upon him, but for well-doing. But I insist with this Interrogation, Is it not
more unlikely, that the servants of Christ should suffer for well-doing, then
for evil? And if God suffers them to be evil entreated and persecuted of
the world, and that even then, when they do well: how much more shall he do
it, when they shall sin and off^nd against him?

Hereunto thou will happily answer, that this is likely indeed: but yet thou
find most commonly, the examples of the greatest miseries in Gods servants,
to have come, not so much of sin, as in the furtherance of his cause and
Gospel; as the examples of the Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs do prove: But
thine estate is otherwise. For thou see no such matter of goodness in thy
self, wherefore these afflictions should be imposed upon thee.

To this, I again on the contrary part, do here plainly affirm, and say,
that I stand not to dispute, or to make any search and inquiry, whether thou
find in thy self any such matter of goodness or not. It is far from my
purpose, and I leave that to the judgment of God first, and then to the trial
of thine own conscience. But I come to the principal point, which is this:
That GOD for sin does oftentimes in this sort chasten; yea, and that there is
also a necessity in this included, that he should thus correct and chastise
those that are his children, either more or less, as shall seem good unto
him, in his will and pleasure.

For proof of this which I have said, viz. that sin in the Elect of God, is
cause of corrections and afflictions laid upon them: I think not amiss to
refer thee to these examples, recorded unto us in the Book of God. Moses and
Aaron for back wardnes in belief, Numb. 20.12, 13.
were punished with exclusion from the Land of Promise. 1. Sam. 3.27, 28.
Heli, for his too much lenity, and remiss cockering of his graceless
children, was plagued with a fearful visitation. The Kingdom was rent from
Salomons posterity, because he transgressed against the Lord. 2. King. 11.11.
David, in plain terms confesses, Psalm. 38.
that the cause of his afflictions was in his sin.

And therefore it is also, that God so oftentimes in the Scriptures threatens
punishments and afflictions, not only to Reprobates, but also to his Elect and
Chosen. Jeremy affirms, Ier. 25.
that God begins to plague the City where his name was called upon. And
Peter plainly tells us, 1. Pet. 4.17.
that Judgment must begin even at the house of God. Whereunto may be very well
added, that promise of God unto David, in regard of his son, which should
succeed him in his kingdom: That if he sinned, 2. Sam. 7.14
God would chasten him with the rod of men, and with the plagues of the
children of men, but yet he would not take his mercy utterly from him. So that
hereby it is manifest, that a chastening there should be, and that for sin,
but yet such as should be attended with his mercy. Heereunto I might add also
the examples of Hezechiah, Daniel, the godly Kings and Prophets, which are all
in this very resolute: But in so plain a matter, I trust, these few
testimonies shall suffice.

objected: Why is it necessary, that these things should, for sin, befall
unto the righteous, and why is it needful that it should be so, seeing that
Christ has already fully satisfied for the sins of all those that are his
Elect and Chosen?

answer, that although Christ has indeed paid the ransom, and made this full
satisfaction, as is objected, yet the causes are great, and of great moment and
force, why it should be, as I have before affirmed.

first, the afflictions, of necessity, are to be laid on the servants of the
Lord, Afflictions are necessary, to make men the more wary.
in regard of their corrupt nature, which is so prone and apt of it self, to
like and accept of sin, and marvelous dull and slow, to rake any delight to
walk in the ways of godliness. Sin that is so agreeable to this our
nature, seems to us pleasant and delightsome, whereby we are drawn the
rather to commit it; but when men do wisely mark and perceive indeed, that it
is attended upon with these fatherly corrections, which seem so sour and
bitter unto our flesh, and that besides these temporal afflictions, there are
eternal punishments incident unto the same: Such in whom the fear of God has
taken any root, are made the more circumspect and wary in avoiding of sin,
and more watchful to conform their lives, according to the prescript of
godliness. Yea, they are so far from sorrowing under the heavy burden of
these afflictions, that they do take thereof great cause of joy, that their
rebellious nature is in this manner suppressed and bridled, and themselves
brought to live in godly obedience, as it becomes the servants of Christ.

benefits both corporal and spiritual, To stir them up to thankfulness.
which we have received at the hands of our God, and that by the means of our
Savior Jesus Christ are past recount, yet are we found and proved, to be of
our selves very ungrateful and unthankful for the same. Therefore it is
necessary, in this respect also, that we should taste of this cup of
afflictions: That we being brought by these small and easy corrections, to
the knowledge of greater punishments, we may be the more stirred up, and
provoked unto thankfulness.

nature, To put them in mind of their own frailty and make the depend on God.
to cocker our selves, to advance and extol to the skies our own acts and
doings, if they have but a very little show of goodness pinned upon them, and
we are very ready, lightly to pass over our own infirmities and imperfections,
be they never so great, and deserve never so great punishment at the hands of
GOD, and thus Pharise-like are puffed up with a vain conceit of our own
worthiness. That we may therefore the sooner and the better come to the
knowledge of our own frailty, and shake off clean all hope and considence in
our selves, and depend and trust wholly and altogether upon the grace and mercy
of our God: these corrections and chastizements, being as it were remembrances,
to admonish us of our weakness and frailty, are very expedient and necessary.

all maruellously inclined unto the love of this world, To make them affect
this world less and that to come more.
and have not indeed such a longing and desire unto the exceeding joys of the
life to come, as of right we should and ought to have. To the end therefore
that this our hot love of this world might the rather be cooled and rebated in
us, and a more earnest longing after the future happiness in the world to
come, might be kindled and increased in us, it is necessary that God should lay
these chastizements and corrections on us, in this present life, that by this
means we might be brought the less to like and affect it, and the more
desirous of the life to come.

virtues in Gods servants, To manifest their patience.
ought to show forth themselves effectually: so amongst the rest, patience is
to be made known. And for that the same never appears better, then in the
time of affliction, even for this cause also I affirm, that it is necessary
that the children of God, for a trial of their patience, should suffer
affliction.

It is the good will and pleasure of God, that his servants shall suffer
afflictions.
to prove this mine allegation, although many other may be brought, yet
letting all other pass for a time, I will only add one, and that of such
force and power, that it cannot abide or suffer any exception, and against
which, no creature, either Man or Angel, may dispute: And that is, the good
will and pleasure of God. That for so much as it has pleased him in his
wisdom, and for the declaration of his love toward his servants, thus to
determine the matter in this fatherly manner, to correct and chastize his
children in this life, and has thought this to be the best and most
convenient course, both for their good and his own glory; let every man
afflicted, not murmr or grudge against God, but patiently and thankefully
bear the same, and assure himself that the Lord (as has been sufficiently
alleged) in his time will put an end, and ease him of this heavy burden.

question will be moved: Do you not hereby now seek to stablish again
that erroneous point of Popish doctrine, concerning satisfaction; in that,
though Christ has suffered for us, and redeemed us, yet we must
notwithstanding, of necessity endure and sustain these temporary pains and
punishments for sin? Since there is, as you say, such a necesity heerin, it
is likely that some such matter should be intended.

answer, that in no wise I mind or purpose to establish that deuillish
doctrine of Popery, whatsoever some indiscreetly may, or rather will conjecture.
That I assure you, both now is, and so, I hope in the Lord, still shall be
far from me. But I rather hold and maintain the contrary. For though God,
from sin, does often take an occasion to inflict these things upon his
children, and that justly; yet he does not lay them upon his servants, as any
satisfactory punishments, whereby they should make any recompense or
satisfaction unto God, for the faults which they have committed. God forbid
that we should so think, and detract so much from the perfection, and
all sufficiency of the satisfactory sacrifice of our Savior Christ Jesus. But
God inflicting these things, does it, to the intent that he himself might the
more be glorified, and they his children might be bettered. And for this cause
also, they are called, not satisfactions, but castizements and corrections in
the Book of God. For they make us the more to be humbled and abased in the
sight and feeling of our sins. They provoke and stir us up unto repentance.
They are means to make us fervent in prayer. They are as a bridle unto our
lusts and concupiscences. By them our faith and patience are tried. They do so
school us in the School of Christianity, that whereas we were before in
their absence, earnestly given over to sin, we now become weary thereof, and
are made heedfull to shun and eschew sin, and are made very careful
hereafter, to walk in the right and straight path of righteousness.

Now for the Papists, maintaining their satisfactions, for that these such
excellent fruits do come of afflictions, and many other besides, which for
breuities cause I omit, we do agree with the Papists in this, that sin, in
some sort, may be said to be the cause of these corrections, and that for sin
they are inflicted: yet in the end hereof, which is the maine point whereupon
their position stands, we do utterly dissent from them. For they will
needs have the end to be satisfaction and recompense unto God for sin
committed: And we contrariwise affirm, that they are not to procure, or make
satisfaction at all, but are for correction and amendment of our selves, and
besides that, they might be fruitful warnings unto other the children and
Saints of God; that they, seeing these fatherly rods of God to be laid upon us
for our sins, and considering that they by weakness, may likewise fall into
the same, or some other as grievous a kind of sin, and so be made partakers
of the same, or such like kind of punishment, might thereby take occasion to
adore the mercy of God, and take good heed unto their steps, that they do not
offend the Majesty of God.

Now that we have (as I trust) thus proved this necessity which I spoke of, let
us return again to the further discovery of Satan's subtilty, but yet very
loose Conclusions: who comes now in with a new forged reason, and in this
manner obiecteth against the former doctrine concerning afflictions, and the
necessity thereof.

CHAP. XIX.
Satan's Objections against necessity of afflictions, overthrown.

GOD (says Satan) has promised prosperity unto his children: And therefore it
cannot be, that they which are so afflicted, should be accounted in the
number of his servants, or such as appertain unto his Kingdom. And so this
necessity also, as appears, falls to the ground.

Satan's shameless doings are evidently known, and his drift is very well
understood, it would seem a thing to be wondered at, that ever such
blasphemous Objections should be made, to daunt the hope, and rebate the
confidence of GODS Elect and Chosen. For this (as clearly appears) is the
mark whereat this subtle enemy aymeth: And that his malicious craftiness may
the rather, to GODS glory, our comfort, and the shame and confusion of the
same our adversary appear, I purpose (by Gods assistance) in this his
Objection, to pursue him thoroughly.

That God has promised prosperity unto his servants, is not to be denied, but
may safely, and with sufficient warrant easily be granted: Nothing by the
grant hereof will be gotten to strengthen Satan's cause, but much will be found
thereby to increase the comfort of GODS children. GOD has promised prosperity
and a flourishing estate unto his Servants: shall they never therefore taste of
adversity? Shall they therefore never be afflicted? Though Satan do bend all
his force and beat his wits never so much, yet shall he never be able to make
this his Conclusion good. The contrary has been before, by very many examples
sufficiently proved, and might here also by many more be confirmed, but that in
so plain a case I think it needless, and the rather for that the plain
testimony of the Scripture does teach us another manner of doctrine then Satan's
Conclusion does pretend.

Our Savior Christ pronounces them blessed, Mat. 5.10.
which suffer persecution for righteousness sake, and adds also a reason:
for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Is not persecution, affliction? And is
not this blessedness, prosperity? And are not then these persecuted, in the
number of Gods children? I think that none, but shameless Satan, will for
shame deny it. To what purpose should the same our Savior, so often put his
Disciples in mind of the Cross, if the taking up of that, and the bearing it
after him, should be a mean to exclude them out of the number of Gods
children? Why does his Apostle Paul so confidently tell us, that by much
tribulation we must enter into the Kingdom of heaven? And why does the same
Apostle so confidently also tell us, that Tribulation, or anguish, Romans 8.35.
or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword, shall not
separate us from the love of Christ? etc. David plainly affirms, Psalm. 34.19.
that the troubles of the righteous are great and many. And are not these
righteous still the children of God, although they endure such troubles?
Howsoever Satan labors to persuade the contrary, yet seeing the Spirit of
God teaches us so to our comfort, we are bound to believe it, and to assure
our selves of the same. What though God has promised prosperity and a
flourishing estate, (as I have said) unto his children sometimes, will he
therefore never send unto them adversity? Because he sometimes afflicteth^,
and by afflicting corrects, will he therefore never receive again into
favor, but reject and cast off for ever? In the book of Judges is plentifully
recorded, that God many times afflicted his people, giving them over into the
hands of their enemies, which tyrannized over them with intolerable cruelty;
yet when they cried unto him, he received them again into morcy. Hosh. 6.1.
By which it plainly appears, that to spoil, and heal; to wound, and bind
up; to kill, and to revive and raise up again, are in the hands and power of
the Lord; and that the one of these is not any thing prejudicial to the other,
in whatsoever manner it pleases the Lord to lay them on his children. And this
did the Prophet David very well see and perceive, and therefore even in the
midst of all his troubles and afflictions confesses, that though he should
walk through the valley of the shadow of death, Psalm. 23.4.
yet he would fear no evil, for that God was with him, and his Rod and his
Staff did comfort him.

sometime? What do you tell me of sometime? This satissieth not my desire and
expectation, neither does it any thing at all allay and abate the force of
Satan's reason. For it is not a temporary, but a continual and a durable
prosperity that is promised to the righteous. It is said of them, that they
shall flourish like a green Bay Tree, Psalm. 91.12. Psalm. 1.3. Esaias 40.31.
and that their leaf shall never fade, and whatsoever they do, it shall
prosper: They shall renew their strength, and lift up their wings like an
Eagle, they shall run and not be weary, they shall not faint. Satan's
subtilty whereby he deceives the weak Christian, in evil application of the
promises in Scriptures concerning prosperity.
You see, here is a plain promise made; not for a day, but always; not
temporary, and for a time only, but for ever: The one estate not sometime,
but still excluded, and the other perpetually, and without any limitation and
date of time is promised.

In this reason thus alleged, Satan and sinful flesh deceive the simple soul
many ways. First, in the evil application of the promises of God in the
Scriptures, making no difference or distinction at all therein, in respect of
the matter thereof, or things that are promised by him unto his children. In
respect of the matter.
For when at any time God promises internal prosperity, in spiritual and
inward graces of the soul, Satan subtly applies the promise, unto things
external, and such as do concern the body, as riches, health, good success
in affairs, and business of this present life, and such like. Of this his
practice we have an example in the people of the Jews, whom he has of long
time deluded and bewitched, and as yet does delude and bewitch in this manner
of application. Many promises were made in the Prophets, concerning the Temple,
the City of Jerusalem, the people of God to be gathered out of all Nations,
to return again unto the holy City and Mount Sion. All which, the Jews
applied unto themselves only, and would have them to be understood of
themselves to be the only people of God, of the material City and Temple of
Jerusalem, and of some external and outward face of the Church again, there
to be as in times past, crected by the Messiah: Whereas in deed, they rather
touch and intend, the spiritual collection, and inward beauty of Gods Elect,
which out of all Nations shall be gathered unto his Church, which is
spiritually meant by the names of the Temple, Mount Sion and Jerusalem,
according to the use and manner of the Scriptures. This must not seem strange
unto us, that this erroneous manner of application was in the Jews, since that
the very Apostles of our Savior Jesus Christ, both before and after the time
of Christ's Death and Passion, were overtaken with the like. For of them it is
recorded, that when our Savior made any mention of a Kingdom; yea, sometime
when there was no mention made thereof at all, they carnally dreamed of an
earthly Kingdom. And by this means, Satan labored covertly to plant both in
the Apostles, and also the other Jews, this damnable heresy, That unless
Christ did erect and set up such a Kingdom in this people, he could not be
the promised Messiah. In like sort it is, that he deceives many, by wresting
the words of the Prophet David to a wrong sense: For whereas it is said in the
first Psalm, Psalm. 1.3, etc.
that the Righteous shall be like a Tree planted by the Rivers of waters, shall
bring forth his fruit in due season, that his leaf shall not fade, and
whatsoever he shall do, shall prosper. Satan (like a wyly Serpent) wresteth
all this unto an external and outward estate, and prosperity in things
appertaining to the world, when the Prophets words are to be understood of the
spiritual prosperity, and inward good estate of the soul.

time also, In respect of the time
Satan does in like manner deceive the simple, by mis-applying the aforesaid
promises: For whereas God, in making his promises of such flourishing estate
unto his servants, respects principally, and most of all the life to come,
wherein they shall all in full perfection be established and performed; This
heavy adversary of mankind, goes about very carnestly in his Conclusions, to
bind and tie all unto the life present: As though the case were such, that if
the same promises were not in this life performed, then they could not be
performed at all. But the truth is otherwise in very deed; for if they be in
any wise to be tied unto this life, yet it is but imperfectly, or as the
saying is, inchoatiuely, that is, in their beginning only; but in fullness and
perfection, the most of them appertain, and are to be referred unto the life
to come. This world, if it be rightly considered, is no perpetual thing, but
as a strange Country, wherein as strangers and Pilgrims we wayfare still, in
expectation of another and a far better home: So that in this world, none are
to expect and look for any better things, then the common accidents, which are
incident and befalling unto strangers. As for other comforts, we must stay the
time, until we shall attain unto that longed for home and place of
happiness, which is heaven, In respect of the ambiguity of the phrase.
where we shall be put in full fruition of them.

ambiguity also of the phrase of Scripture, Satan often in these and such like
kinds of reasonings does deceive the broken and afflicted soul. As when the
promise (respecting both this life, and things appertaining hereunto) Satan
makes that to be a general negation, in respect of the time, which is most
especially to be attributed only to the continuance and perperuity of the
time.

As for example, Psalm. 55.22.
Psalm. 55.22. it is said, God will not suffer the righteous to fall for ever.
Psalm. 112.6.
And again, Psalm 112.6. He shall not be moved for ever. For ever, that is,
says Satan, never, as some Translations also have it, as though these things,
that is, the fall and moving of the righteous, should never come. Whereas in
very deed the meaning is not so; But for ever they shall not fall or be moved;
that is, they shall not be so abased, as that it should last for ever, but for
a time only, and then again they shall recover and be restored: Agreeable
with that of the Psalmist elsewhere: Psalm. 34.19.
Great are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of
all. Wherefore I would wish the wavering soul, neither in this, or any other
point of doctrine to be hasty in trusting Satan with these his general
terms, but rather to syft and try all by the Scriptures, and as they be
agreeable or dissenting, to and from the same, so to accept or to reject the
same.

And because I find that many of our English Translations, through the
ambiguity of the Hebrew, that indifferently bears both senses, have erred
herein, translating (never) in stead of (for ever) if that his Book shall
herein fail him, and seem to make against him, yet not to be too credulous,
but rather to seek and crave help of such learned, as are able out of the
Original Text to instruct him further, if otherwise, either by the
circumstances of the place, or conferring it with other sentences of the
Scriptures, he cannot be sufficiently resolved.

In the word, Prosperity.
in this word (prosperity) Satan has such subtle tricks of Sophistry, that
if thou be not wise, and take good heed unto thy self, he will soon deceive
thee: For he accounts (and so, I fear me, thou do account it also) that
to be prosperity, which is void of all trouble and disquiet; so that no
longer then peace and quietness continue, no longer he accounts it to be
prosperity: Whereas God would not have thee to consider so much the very
instant and time present, but the issue and end of all. The Scriptures do
testify unto us; yea, and experience also does teach us, that the wicked are
seen to be in this worldly peace, and to be without troubles; when as on the
other side, the godly are in great troubles: yet cannot the wicked ones be
justly said to enjoy prosperity, nor the godly to be out of prosperity,
until the end of the one and the other be manifestly known, and then that
will sufficiently prove, that the wicked (this peace notwithstanding) is void
of prosperity, and the godly (their troubles notwithstanding) are yet
prosperous. And therefore the Prophet David in the 37. Psalm. having discoursed
at large of the flourishing estate and prosperity of the Righteous in the end,
to show how we may truly judge and determine of it, refers us not to the
beginning or iniddle, but unto the end thereof, saying, Mark the upright man,
Psalm. 37.37.
and consider the just; for the end of that man is peace. The good Soldier
does not determine of his good success, by the heat of the skirmish, or by
the strokes and wounds given and received betwixt him and his enemy, but by the
ssue and event of the battle. For if then he put his foes to foil, he
thinks the victory to be his, and his fight to have been good and
prosperous. The Merchantventurer does not judge of the good success of his
Adventures, by the present tempests and storms beating upon him, and whereby
he is tossed to and fro, and often in danger of losing all: but if in the end
he arrive safely at home, without disparagement of his life and substance, he
then thinks all to be well, and his voyage to be worthily accounted
prosperous. So, that which God speaks of thy life, and whole life considered
altogether; do not thou thus minsingly with Satan divide and part asunder by
piece-meale; for so thou may be soon deceived: but join the beginning with
the proceeding, and consider both these with the issue and end thereof, and
thou shall find, that whatsoever Satan shall reason to the contrary, yet the
godly man's life, even in the midst of all Adversity, is a most happy and
blessed life, and full of all prosperity, because that the end thereof
assuredly is blessed and prosperous. Here perhaps you will marvel and demand
how it can be, that these so contrary things should possibly concur and meet
together at one time, and in the same subject. To remove this marvel, and to
satisfy this demand, not I, but the Apostle Paul shall come in place, who is
bold to utter as marvelous doctrine as this. As dying (says he) and yet
behold, 2. Cor. 6.9, 10.
we live; as chastened, and yet not killed; as sorrowing, and yet always
rejoicing; as poor, and yet making many rich; as having nothing, and yet
possessing all things. And what now are these; in death, life: in afflictions,
comforts: in sorrowing, abundance of rejoicing: in poverty, plenty: and in
exceeding penury, the possession of all things: but even in adversity, the
greatest gale of all prosperity?

CHAP. XX.
Other Objections of Satan, against the former doctrine confuted.

IF this which I have somewhat largely discoursed, be thought to be too little
and insufficient for confirmation of mine assertion, neither will content your
mind; take, I pray you, a little pain, and wade on with me a little further in
this matter, and I trust, by the assistance of the Spirit of God, even by a
very familiar example, to make the case so plain, that you shall even as it
were of force be brought to confess my Position to be true, whatsoever the
enemy of mankind will seem to blatter out to the contrary. It is not to be
denied, but that Satan, the better to overthrow the servants of God, is busy
to take many exceptions against the Truth proposed, and uses many reasons for
confirmation of his doings. But when all are thoroughly skanned, they will
evidently appear to be more presumptuously uttered, then duly proved, as now
shall be easily seen. Let it be granted (for disputations cause, but not that
it is true indeed) that the promises of God do concern this present life
only, (I mean the promises of prosperity) and that they shall be here
performed also; Say that the righteous shall not fall for ever, that is, shall
never fall, but shall ever flourish: Let Satan, upon these two grounds, begin
to settle his main conclusions: yet I doubt not, but that upon the examination
of his reason, it will clearly appear, that his conclusions are but vain,
light, and of no weight or importance. This is Satan's reason:

The righteous men and children of God do in this life enjoy continual
prosperity: Satan's Reason.
For so God has said and promised, who is true in his word, and faithful of
his promise, and therefore surely will perform it. But thou have not this
prosperity: For thou continually live in trouble and adversity: And
therefore questionless thou art none of Gods children.

first Proposition, with the reason, I grant to be true; but the second, and
the reason of the same, I affirm to be most absurd, if it be well considered.
Art thou therefore excluded from prosperity, because thou indurest troubles in
this life? Nay rather, thou may with safety deny the consequence of this
connection: For troubles and molestations are no undoubted mark, whereby to
conjecture the absence of true prosperity; because that both these may very
well concur and come together, as by this familiar example plainly does
appear: Merchant, the Husbandman, and the Artificer do all take great pains;
one by Sea, the others by Land, they toil and labor, and are greatly for the
time disquieted, as men ouerwearied with excessive toil; yet in all this,
their pains are turned to a good event; they prosper, for their wealth is
thereby increased; their labors and toil are recompensed with great profit
and advantage. Will you now say, because these men have such pains and
troubles, that therefore they do not prosper? I persuade my self, thou will
not say it. And why? Surely for this cause only: for that these their pains
(as is said) are turned and converted to their gain. Even so it is with the
children of God; they are in afflictions and troubles, they are pressed with
miseries in this life, and yet still they prosper, still they flourish; because
that all and every one of these their troubles, afflictions and miseries, be
they never so great, and never so many, are still converted, and turned to
their good. For all things work for the best, and greatest commodity and
benefit to them that are elect of GOD. So that gain is gain to them, how, and
wherein soever it be found. Do thou not see, that a Jewel, and that of
great price and value, may sometime be scraped out of dung and mire? And does
not experience teach thee, that the finest metals are fetched from the grosest
element? What if other make their greatest gain of wheat? Why should thou
repine and grudge, if thy gain be also like, though it be gathered from the
Chafe? My meaning is, that though others, by peace and plenty have walked in
the paths of righteousness; yet if thou on the contrary, in trouble and
disquiet have attained to it, in as great a measure as they: and that which
they have gleaned in Prosperity, thou have also gathered in Adversity, in thy
afflictions and misery, think not otherwise, but that God has had as great a
care to make thee prosper, as he had to make them.

So then, to conclude and shut up this point: Conclusion.
whenever Satan thus begins to dispute and reason with thee, to bring thee
into some evil conceit of thy self: Do thou enter straightway, as into a
most sure place of refuge and security, into the consideration of that
merciful course, that God takes with his children, in the midst of all
extremities: which is, even as the Physician does with the poisons, that out of
them he makes a sovereign medicine, to cure a sore and grievous sickness: Or
as the Goldsmith, which out of the earthy Mine, tries and proves Gold: So
God, out of these extremities and troubles, gathers many profits unto his
children: in regard whereof, they may rightly be accounted to be prosperities:
for that in all these, the children of God, do more then prosper. And then in
this, or such like sort, thou may answer or reply against thy flesh and
Satan, thy professed enemies, and say:

Thou vile and corrupt flesh; thou subtle and envious Serpent, why do ye
reason thus against me, and that without all sense and reason? Do I not
therefore prosper and flourish, because I am afflicted and am in miseries? Is
the pruned Tree past recoueric? and does the Herb dye, because it is cropped?
Ye are very busy and earnest to tell me still of miseries and afflictions;
but ye make no mention of the excellent fruit of them at all, these ye keep
secret, and hide them from me. And why? because ye see them as they are
indeed, to be full of all prosperity. What if they seem in themselves so
bitter as ye pretend? Do not ye see and find, how the children of God have
always prospered, even in the very lowest ebb of all Adversity? Was Joseph
then alone prosperous, when as he lived with his Father Jacob: or when he was
accepted as a Steward in the house of Potyphar, and had the oversight and
charge of all the Egyptians substance? Was Daniel only flourishing, when as
he was made a Ruler in Darius Kingdom? No, no, it is far otherwise: for
Joseph even in prison, and Daniel in the Lions den did prosper. For I find,
that even in these stinking and dangerous places, God was present with them,
did get them favor, and with honor delivered them out of their distress. Ye
beat much upon the present pains, but ye never consider how God does temper
them, and qualify his servants in enduring and sustaining of them. In this
case it is with the servants of God, as it was with Israel in Egypt, the more
oppressed, the more he prospered and increased. These miseries and afflictions
are not axes to cut up by the roots, but only the Lords pruning knives,
whereby he cutteth away the dead and rotten branches, that his grafts may grow
the better, and their inward virtues may increase and sprout the sooner. Ye
never consider the end and issue of these afflictions, that repayeth all with
profit, as appears by the examples of these and such like. Were not, think
ye, the miseries and afflictions of Joseph, good and profitable, whereby he was
advanced to so high a place of the Kingdom, as to have all at his command? Was
not the fiery furnace as great advantage to Shadrach and his fellows, being
unto them a step unto great honor? And are not these most prosperous things,
whereby we are fitted for a far better Kingdom then that of Egypt, and
prepared for far greater honor, then any, yea all in Nebuchadnezzars
Kingdoms and Provinces? For we are prepared for him, in whose presence is the
fulness of joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for euermoe.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the third Position.

THese Meditations, though they seem to be a fast and a sure footing, whereby
the afflicted and distressed soul may be stayed; yet the broken soul cannot
hereby stay it self any long time: For that Satan going about, as affirms
Peter, 1. Pet. 5.8.
like a roaring Lion, and seeking whom he may devour, has his new inventions,
new motions, and new temptations, wherewith he does assault the silly weak
conscience. For if thus, as has been related, in the matter of a man's miseries
and afflictions, he fail and be disappointed of his purpose; he then falls
from the matter, and with something brought from the manner and measure of
them, begins on fresh to set upon the broken soul.

By which his doings, he the sooner persuades, and by persuading prevails;
because that all men, for the most part, carrying an envious eye, are given and
inclined to think and judge, both for the time present, and the extremity
which they endure, no grief to be like or worthy to be compared unto their
own. Yea, their judgment by Satan's policy is so corrupted in this respect;
that although, even in themselves, they have sustained far greater and more
grievous afflictions; yet because they are past and ouergone, and this now
present and working on them, they can hardly be so persuaded: Thus therefore,
or in some such manner begins Satan to set upon them:

Thou speak of miseries and afflictions of others: Another assault of Satan.
and I see how that indeed, as thou say, the servants of God have been
delivered and rid from them, and have gotten the upper hand with advantage: but
what of this? what is this to thee? Do thou think to thrust thy self into
the company, and to be accounted in the number of these servants of thy God?
No, no, thou art greatly deceived herein. Indeed they suffered afflictions, they
had many troubles, but never any like to these of thine: they had troubles
indeed, but none so extreme, so intolerable as these which thou do endure:
Theirs, in respect of thine, were but as fly-bitings: Thine are the very
messengers of wrath; nay, they are very brand-markes of eternal Judgment.
Thus, or in such like manner, Satan reasons, and oftentimes greatly
prevails in his doings, whiles the broken conscience is too intentive upon
his own private extremities, and too too credulous to hearken to Satan's
persuasions, and to yield faith unto his subtle enchantments, having small or
no regard at all unto the end whereunto he directs his practices. Howsoever
the matter be colored, and in what manner soever he works, the end is the
destruction of man. And to attain unto this end, with the more facility, he
will show himself (as he is indeed) a wyly Serpent; yea, a busy Adversary
too, letting nothing lightly slip and oucrpasse him, whereby he may obtain his
purpose. And that doing of his, as in his objections before, so here likewise
it does appear. 2. Sleights of Satan.
For in this his reason two especial sleights of Satan do evidently appear.
one, in that he presents before thee, thy miseries and afflictions, in the
most grievous manner that may be, still exaggerating and amplifying them even
to the highest: And all to this end, that so he may the rather appale and
affright thee. As though God would never thus, and in such sort deal with
those that are his Chosen, as it is proved he deals with thee. other he uses
very cunning shifts, and crafty conueyance, in setting before thee the miseries
of Gods afflicted children: which said miseries, although they were never so
grievous, never so intolerable, and sauouring of never so great and savage
cruelty; yet he does extenuate them to the uttermost of his power, that so
they may appear but light and slender. If it so fall out, that he lack a
shift in this manner to lessen them, then will he bend his power, and apply
his wits, utterly to smother the remembrance of them, that thou should never
think upon them to thy comfort: And therefore will be continually in this
case, to set before thee as a daily dish to feed upon, the examples of some
such of Gods servants, as have been but lightly and easily afflicted, by this
means knowing, (or at least hoping so) that he shall add a greater edge to
this temptation.

Wherefore, that we may the better prevent Satan of his purpose, as well in
this temptation, as we have done before in the other: The third position. Some
of Gods children in former time have been as sore afflicted.
Let the third position be remembered as an everlasting Truth; which is, that,
be thy miseries and afflictions never so extreme and dangerous, yet thou have,
in bearing of them, suffered in no such grievous manner, but it will easily be
proved, that some of the servants of God, at one time or other, and in some
one sort or other, have tasted and drunk as deep of that cup, as thou do
judge thy self to have done. And therefore Satan in this his reason, enlarging
thine, and extenuating the miseries of others, does prove himself to be still
as he has always been from the beginning, both a Lier and a Murderer. That
this may the rather appear unto thee, search and look (but with a single eye)
into these thy troubles, miseries and afflictions, which thou endurest:
ransacke every corner of them, call them all to remembrance, leave not the
least and lightest mite of them unnumbered, that so thy reckoning and gross
sin may grow to the greatest; yet I doubt not, when all this is done, that I
can easily produce examples of those, whom I know assuredly thou dare not
deny to be the children and chosen servants of the Lord, and yet have suffered
and endured (if the matter be weighed in just and equal balance) a great
deal more then ever thou have done. Thou have read, or I am sure thou have
heard of that notable spectacle of all extremities, I mean the patient Job,
who being a man crowned with happiness, and maruelously blessed with abundance
of worldly goods, suddenly, and in a very short time, was deprived of them all:
his servants were slain, his goods and chattels taken away, his children
killed, his body stricken with so loathsome ulcers and byles, that it was
irksome to any to behold: His friends, which should have been as helps and
comforts unto him, became as continual corrosiues unto his sorrowful heart;
yea, his wife, in the judgment of some, which should have been a special
comfort unto him in this his most lamentable case, was not behind, in bitter
and scorning manner, to the increase of his grief, to bid him Blaspheme God
and die. Do but read, and thoroughly peruse the history, and that book of this
servant of the Lord, and I doubt not but that thou shall there find miseries
inflicted upon this one person, in such store, that they are rather to be
admired and wondered at, then by any means to be equalled. Insomuch that his
three friends, which came of purpose to visit and see him, with intent also to
comfort him, calling to mind the prosperous estate wherein he before had
lived; and beholding the great misery whereunto he was now cast, are said to
sit all mute and amazed in seven days silence, not knowing what to speak, or
where to begin.

Unto this of Job we may annex the afflicted state of David, who in the book
of Psalms sets down the greatness of his miseries, by many significant
and woeful terms, while he complains of the agonies and pains of his
distressed body, the want of safety, dread of death, distrust of life, violence
of foes, and treachery of those whom he esteemed to be his most trusty and
faithful friends. But leaving these, and many other such like examples of the
Patriarks, Prophets, and Apostles of the Lord, somewhat touched before; if I
should descend and come down to the lower times, and make relation of the
great miseries of those faithful Martyrs, which suffered for the testimony of
Christ, most cruel torments in the primitive age of the Church, after the
times of the Apostles, it would (I think) force any heart, though it were as
hard as the Adamant, to relent and melt with grief: when as without all regard
of Sex, care of age, or regard of estate, the virgin and the valiant man at
arms, the infant and the age, the wife and the husband, the father with his
son, and the mother with her tender and guiltless babes, were condemned
without all remorse and pity, to the suffering of most brutish and cruel
torments: Some leaving all, and forsaking their houses, goods and substance,
were forced to fly into Deserts, holes, and caves of the earth, for succor
and relief: Others, not so escaping the Tyrants hands, deprived of all their
riches and estate, were grievously tormented: Some whipped, some buffeted, some
ratked, some torn in pieces, some having hands, legs, and other members cut
away, their flesh lanced and gashed with knives and razors, their faces
mangled, their eyes, some pricked with sharp quills, and some quite pulled out,
some hanged, some drowned, some burnt to ashes at stakes, others broyled on
gredirons, and roasted on spits, some torn and rent with wild horses, and
others thrown to most savage and cruel beasts, to be devoured. So that it
cannot be, but that the Christian heart must needs be greatly grieved, to read
in several the things that are recorded of them.

But lest these things mentioned thus in general, should seem to you of
little importance, and smally pertaining to the purpose I have in hand: Out of
such an infinite number, which have in this sort endured such cruelty, I think
it good to make recital of a few particulars, whereby (I trust my) position
will be sufficiently confirmed. And yet before, giving you thus much to
understand, and generally to observe, That during the heavy times of these
persecutions, besides the particular torments which every one endured, all and
every one, that did but take upon him to profess himself, and say he was a
Christian, had the whole State and Kingdom, wherein he lived, bent against
him, his goods (by the laws) in danger to be confiscate, in stead of a
rightful Judge, he had not only a Miscreant, but also a most cruel Tyrant
to decide his cause, who rather busied his head to devise torments, then how to
set down the doom with equity. His friends and worldly comforts would forsake
him, being such as no whit favored, but most poisonfully maligned the cause of
Christ. Life could not be had, but bailed with many miseries; and death, though
wished for, yet could not be attained unto, but through the troublesome and
outrageous tempests of most extreme calamities. So that if thou respect now,
the loss and want of these worldly comforts, I persuade my self, they can in
no case be inferior unto thee. But these are but light in respect of the
particular tortures, most woeful and lamentable, which in the cause of Christ
they endured, whereof now, God so permitting, thou shall have a taste. Romanus,
a Martyr. Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 20.


It is storied of Romanus a constant Martyr, how that he being condemned unto
the fire, and being brought to the place of execution, standing bound to the
stake, and in most cheerful manner calling for fire to be put unto him, as
one most ready and willing, with so slight a torment, to put an end to his
life, fraught with so many miseries: the President caused him again to be
loosed, adjudged him to the enduring of another torment, namely, that the
tongue of Romanus, wherewith he had so stoutly defended the cause of Christ,
should be cut out: whereunto Romanus yielding patiently, he held out his
tongue, as one most willing and ready to abide this new devised torture: which
cruel sentence being performed, he was again clapped fast in prison, where
he was a long time cruelly tormented. And when, by the Emperors pardon, all
the other prisoners were set at liberty and delivered, he alone was left still
as a lamentable spectacle of woe and misery; and judged as one altogether
unworthy of such a benefit, had his feet stretched (as the story notes) five
spaces asunder, and in fine, with a cord or halter put about his neck, was
stifeled unto death.

Apphianus, Apphianus, a Martyr. Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 22.
a like constant and faithful Martyr, in no respect inferior to the other,
being first apprehended and clapped into prison, for his profession of Christ,
was in the same prison, in pitiful manner tormented a whole day and a night,
with both his feet in the stocks, stretched far asunder; on the third day
he was brought forth before the Judge, and utterly refusing to do sacrifice
as he was enjoined, had straightway his sides rent by the Executioners or
Hang-men, with the lash of the whip, yea, and that not once or twice, but
oftentimes, even unto the bone and inward bowels. His face and neck also were
so vehemently lashed, that his face was swollen so exceedingly with the print
of the stripes, that they, which beforetime had known him well, and could have
discerned him from another by his countenance, thenceforth missed of their
mark, and knew him not at all. When his cruel enemies did see and perceive,
that for all these manifold and grievous torments, he would not yield unto
their idolatrous, and wicked religion: For a further increase of his pains,
they wrapped his feet in flax, oyled all over, and set the same on fire;
whereof (to use mine Authors words) what great and grievous pains he
suffered, I am not able to express. It ran over his flesh, wasted and
consumed the same, and pierced even unto the marrow bred within the bones: So
that his whole body was therewith larded and distilled, much like unto dropping
and distilling wax. The Martyr having yet some breath left, after all these
exceeding torments, was brought back again the second time to prison. On the
third day was presented again before the Judge; and although, by reason of his
grievous wounds, he was past all hope of life, yet by the sentence of the
merciless and cruel Judge, he was condemned to be cast into the raging sea,
and to be drowned. Porphyrius, a Martyr. Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 29.


To these, if I add the lamentable story of Porphyrius, it shall not be
amiss, who being apprehended, and confessing boldly himself to be a
Christian; it was first commanded, that he should be whipped and scourged to
the very bones and bowels, wherewith he was so pitifully rent and mangled,
that (as the Story notes) he seemed to be, not a man covered in flesh, and
compast in a skin, but a picture made of stone, or wood, or some senseless
metal. In which plight, when he bad continued a long time, and yet the Judge
perceiving him to utter no words of impatiencie, but to continue still as one
that suffered no great pain; not as a man, but as a beast, without any
compassion, and void of all humanity, made this direful Decree, that in a
slack and slow fire, his body by little and little, should be consumed and
burnt to ashes.

Infinite are the like examples, which the Stories do afford us; but I had
rather, for a further search hereof, to refer thee unto those, who have
faithfully recorded the same in our English tongue, as they be set down in
ancient Writers, then to trouble this small Treatise, with any further
discourse of the same: Hoping that these few are sufficient to set before thee,
and to give some little taste, what great and grievous afflictions the Saints
and servants of God have suffered, and been partakers of in this life. Which
if thou think that thou can possibly equal and match, yet I am assuredly
persuaded, thou can not surpass and go beyond them.

Let Satan's reason now be tried by the Touchstone of these and such like
examples, and I trust, it will manifestly appear, how little truth there is in
his allegation, when he would make the greatness, and excessive measure of
afflictions, to be an argument and a sign of Gods reiection. Dare any
affirm, that these were Castawaies, which are so highly renowned for Gods
faithful Servants, Saints and Martyrs; which by their bloud-sheading, sealed
their Christian Profession? Who ever (I pray you) suffered more extreme pains
and torments in their bodies then these? Insomuch, that if by the outward
accidents, we might judge of the final estate of the soul, you may judge
these, of all other, to have been smitten of GOD and plagued, and even in
earth to have received the very sentence of eternal death upon themselves. But
this manner of judgment must be suspended; for notwithstanding these
external and outward accidents befalling their bodies, they rested, and
continued still the Elect and Chosen of the Lord, even unto the death; the cup
whereof, in defense of their Masters cause, they most gladly tasted of, how
grievous soever the torments and afflictions were, which their bodies suffered
and endured.

And again, if thou do vouchsafe with an upright heart, and void of all
blind affection, to compare together thine and their afflictions, I doubt not,
but that both for the cause, and also for the matter and manner of them, even
in thine own judgment, thou will be found and proved, nothing comparable but
far inferior unto them. For they were afflicted for the testimony of
Christ, but thou for sin; they at the hands of Satan's instruments in most
cruel manner, and thou at the hands of God, after a Fatherly way: They unto
death, and the same most extreme; but in thee, thy life is preserved, a time of
repentance is granted, which is surely a great Argument of Gods great love and
favor toward thee. So that now thou may see this my Position to be true,
and that to thy great comfort; that others have tasted and drunk as deep of
the cup of afflictions, nay, much deeper then thou have done. So insatiable a
Serpent is Satan, and so obstinate in his perverse opinion, that nothing, be
it never so truly uttered, can satisfy him and content him: For although this
which has been said concerning this Position, and the overthrow of Satan's
colored reasons, do greatly qualify and allay the matter, yet through Satan's
suggestions, the broken soul is not with all this contented: For the enemy
has now found out another muse and starting-hole, to avoid the danger of this
sound doctrine, and to entrap the weak conscience (whose death he greedily
thirsts after) within the compass of his subtilty, as by this his reason
does appear.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the fourth Position.

LET it be granted (says this our cruel Enemy) that many of Gods Elect and
Chosen are found to have suffered these, A fresh assault of Satan.
and such like afflictions, and say they have gone beyond thee in extremities,
yet this helps not the matter, neither does it serve thy purpose at all: For
read and see, and thou shall find, and that quickly, a great difference; for
the miseries which they endure, are but short and momentany; with them there
may be trouble and heaviness for a night, Psalm. 30.5.
but toy comes in the morning: But experience tells thee, that thy troubles
contrary wise are of long continuance. Again, when they cry and call for help
and succor, God does soon release them, and puts an end unto their
troubles: for he has so promised unto those that are his Children; Call upon
me in time of trouble, and I will deliner thee. Psalm. 50.15.
And therefore we shall also find, that David, a man which was so much
experienced in afflictions, God was always ready, and at hand to save and
deliver him, as he himself does witness, saying, I cried unto the Lord, and
he heard me, etc. But with thee thou see it is not so, for thou have cried
and called a long time, and yet thou art not heard; thou pravest, but thou
can not prevail: Cease therefore to reason what grievous torments the
children of God have suffered, for it will not satisfy nor suffice thy turn:
For if thou had been one of Gods elect and chosen Children, he would surely
have heard thee long yer this: He would not have stopped his ears at so many
cries, nor passed over so many plaints, without compassion showing.

In this new and fresh assault of Satan, made upon the weak conscience, we are
to consider, how that to make his reason to carry the greater show of
probability, he does make a double amplification thereof;

Partly, by the enumeration of some examples of such persons as have been
afflicted, but yet for a short time, whose cry the Lord has quickly heard, and
granted their request, saying, Lo, and see such, and such an one, the Saints
and Servants of God indeed, that have suffered great and grievous torments: but
behold and see again, how soon and quickly they were delivered.

partly, by the recital of Gods exceeding mercy and compassion unto his
Servants, alleging that his eyes are always fixed on them, his ears are ever
open to their cries, that he is tender and careful over them, as the Hen over
her Chickens, or the Mother over her young and tender Babe; and as mindful of
them, as the Bride is of her Ornaments in the day of Marriage; and hereupon
labors to infer this Conclusion against the afflicted soul, to drive him
into despair; That it cannot be possible, that God being so pitiful, so
loving, and so compassionate, should so long, and in such sort, defer and put
off his helping hand from him, if he were reputed in the number of GODS Elect
and Chosen.

This reason of Satan, thus amplyfied, the more subtly that it is by him
couched, the more forcibly it prcuaileth with the weak and distressed soul,
to the dangerous overthrow thereof. For whereas it has been before showed,
that both the Elect and Reprobate are in deed partakers of afflictions; Satan
by this his reason would persuade, that the continuance of afflictions, in
respect of time, and the delay used of God, in showing forth his help, are
undoubted differences, and plain marks, whereby the one from the other may
very easily be discerned and known. And to further him in this his purpose, he
takes no small advantage of the imbecility and weakness which is found in
man: who so long as his wounds are but fresh and green, can the better
tolerate and abide the bearing of them, because he conceiueth some hope of
some quick and speedy deliverance: But when, after long expectation, he
perceives his hope to be frustrated, and after long trial, sees he can
find no ease, (although he has used all possible means for the same) then
he begins to despair of himself, and to make a question and doubt of his
estate: Wherein he is found to be like unto a sick man, which having tried
all the helps of Physic, and yet finding no help for the curing of his
disease, begins then to distrust of life, whereas before such trial made,
he suspected little danger of death in himself.

To prevent Satan of his purpose, and for the strengthening of the weak
Christian, it shall not be amiss; nay, I think it necessary, as before of the
other reasons of the Adversary, so of this likewise, to show the weakness
and insufficiency; that it being known, we may see and perceive the better,
how little faith is to be given to his persuasions. In which doing, as a
counter-blast against this temptation of Satan, I think it good, here to
place and set down my fourth Position, as a resolute, and an undoubted truth,
which was this:

That the greatness and continuance of miseries and afflictions, The fourth
Position.
nor the delays which it pleases God to use, in showing forth his help, are
good differences betwixt the judgments of the Elect and Reprobate, in this
life; and therefore (as may be well added) no sufficient reasons to prove, that
a man is excluded and barred from the love and favor of God. If it were so,
that God were at the appointment of any other, and that any should or might
prescribe unto him any order to be observed in his doings, then this reason of
Satan did carry some force with it: But since his power and authority are so
absolute, that he is to order all things after his own pleasure, and to be
ordered by none, Satan's reason must needs fall to the ground. As in all other
the doings of God, so in this also, the will of God must stand for a sufficient
reason, to satisfy us withal. And therefore we must observe, that God does
not measure our miseries, or his own deliverances, by the tale of days,
months, years, or any times; but the special thing that he therein
respects, as in all other his actions; is, first, his own Glory; and
secondly, the good of his Children. And therefore for the advancement and
furtherance hereof, he takes such times, as in his own Wisdom he sees,
and knows, to be most meet and convenient. So that be it sooner, or be it
later, this day, or a month, or a year hence, all is one to him, howsoever it
appears contrary to us. Now whereas Satan seems to take hold of the long
continuance of afflictions, it is to no purpose. It is easily proved, that God
uses this manner of doing for most just causes known unto himself. If it
were otherwise; to what end then serve the exhortations, so many, and so pithy,
unto patience, constancy and perseverance, as we find recorded in the Book
of God, that we should patiently stay and wait the Lords leisure, until he
vouchsafe to send deliverance?

Against the doctrine of this Position, Satan's objection.
Satan now takes exception, and in this manner obiecteth and reasons to the
contrary: God has promised to hear when men cry unto him, and to deliver them
whenever they shall call upon him for help. But thou have cried a long time,
and see thou art not delivered, and therefore it is sure thou art none of his
children. For would thy GOD promise, and not perform? That is against his
Nature.

has promised as much as is by Satan objected, and although he defer the
time, and (as we in our own judgment do suppose) does stay his helping
hand, in suffering us to continue still under the Cross; yet is he not
forgetful, or unmindful of his promise, nor does any thing against his
nature, being true in all his words and works.

There is some thing more in this point to be considered of, which Satan here
craftily concealeth:

First, that man (as I have said) is in no band presumptuously to prescribe any
time unto God, wherein he should perform his promise.

Secondly, the Lord does know what is most meet and expedient for us, and
therefore will have men to be exercised-vnder the Cross, some longer, and some
a shorter time, not as men do think, but as he in his wisdom sees to be
for every one most profitable.

And thirdly, that in all, He may principally be gloryfied.

In the judgment of man, because men obtain not their request at the first,
second, or third time, it appears that God does not hear or regard the cry
of his servants: but it is (as I have said) far otherwise. For when the time
assigned so long before, of God, is come, when he sees it to be most
commodious for us, and most for his own glory; then will he hear, then will
he grant in mercy their Petitions, and then will he show himself a powerful
God, to deliver his people out of their distress. Examples to prove this,
besides the testimonies of the Scriptures, we have many. Of the which
multitude, one or two in so plain a case shall suffice.

Great (no doubt) was the servitude and bondage of Israel in Egypt, and so
far off from ease thereof, that when Moses and Aaron were sent from the Lord
for their deliverance, their miseries were the more increased: and I think
that no man doubts of their crying unto God for help, in the long time of
continuance thereof: yet at the last, when Gods appointed time was come, that
he would be glorified in Pharaoh and the Egyptians, Israel was, by a mighty
hand and stretched out arm, delivered from the fiery furnace of Egypt, and
sent on their way toward the promised Land, and Pharaoh and his host pursuing
after them, were utterly confounded.

David is proved to have found God, sometime a very speedy help at hand, ready
to deliver him, and set him free from peril and danger: yet sometime again,
he continued a longer season under the heavy burden of afflictions, insomuch,
that with great anguish and trouble of heart, he complains as though God had
quite forgotten him, that God had cast him off and forsaken him for ever.

And hereupon it is, that in many places of his Psalms, he says, that he
called and yet he was not heard, that God did hide his countenance, and turn
away his face from him. That he cried day and night, and stretched out his his
hands all the day long, even until his throat was hoarse and dry with calling
upon God, and yet he was not eased. A plainer and more sufficient testimony
and example, for the overthrowing of Satan's subtle Objection, I think thou
can not have. And now for thy further consolation, confer thine estate with
the estate of David. What can thou find in thy self, in respect of the
continuance of miseries and afflictions, that is not easily found in David? and
what, in respect of earnest crying and calling upon God for help, can there be
found in thee, that was not in him? Nay, if not in both these points, yet in
the later, I persuade my self, thou art far inferior, and come nothing
near unto him. Yet this Prophet, and servant of the Lord, continuing so long
time under so heavy a burden of afflictions, almost wasted and consumed with
grief and woe, and crying still upon the Lord, although he found no comfort at
the first; yet was he not utterly cast off or forsaken of God, but at the last
tasted and felt the helping hand of the Lord to his great and singular comfort.
And so thou also, although thou do cry and call upon the Lord in thy
troubles, and can not obtain thy request at the first; yet do not think
that God therefore does neglect thee, or that he has cast thee off for ever:
But as thou have been taught before, submit thy self to his good will and
pleasure: Abide his time appointed, and that with patience: So shall thou at
the last find and taste of the Lords favor, to thy endless comfort.

I might add here many such examples, for the further strengthening of thee in
this point, but that as I have said, it is needless: 1. These. 5.17
we have commandment of God, to pray continually, and that we should, Luke
18.1, 2. etc.
like unto the Widow, be importunate in our prayers: to what end serve this
continuance and importunacie, if the case were so, that God had cast us off for
ever; because he does not at the first, grant us our Petititions? And let us
therefore hold this one rule continually in mind, and print it deep in our
hearts, that it is in the hands of the Lord, to afflict at his pleasure, to
continue the same upon his servants, as he will. It is our parts in this time
of our troubles (yea and out of troubles also) to cry unto God, and to call
upon him: And it is in the power and will of God only, to set down and
appoint the time of our help and deliverance: and by this Rule standing upon
these four points, we shall easily avoid the danger of this temptation of the
Enemy.

Oh, Satan's objection.
says Satan, how then stands this with the nature of God, who is said to be
merciful, loving, and compassionate unto his children. Is this love, and is
this his tender mercy, to see his children, to lie and continue thus afflicted,
to hear them thus lamentably to cry for help, and in such woeful manner to
sue for succor, and yet he to withdraw himself, and not to deliver them? This
is very hard, and a thing far unbefitting the person of God.

boldness of this our Adversary, is here evidently to be seen, together with
the maliciousnes of his heart, in that he is so bold to pry into Gods doings,
call them into question, and to dispute and reason, how and which way God
deals and disposes of his children; and also greatly to endanger the simple
by his subtilties, and to breathe out most horrible blasphemies against the
person of God, most craftily insinuating by his objection, that either God is
unwilling, or else unable to deliver his servants when they cry unto him: For
thus much does his speech, concerning the nature of God used in his objection,
import. But what art thou, thou Enemy of God and all godliness, that thou
should presume to judge of mercy, which art never to come within the
compass thereof, nor to be partaker thereof at all? Is mercy only resiant in
the speedy release of miseries and afflictions? Or is compassion tied and bound
(as thou would persuade) to the grant of every suite, though it be untimely,
that is, before Gods appointed time and season? No, no, Gods mercy and
compassion, as has been before sufficiently proved, are to be ordered after
the wisdom of God himself, both for the time, and also for the manner of
exte^ding the same, and not in such course as thou would prescribe. He that
sometimes, and in some cases, spares the Rod; does he he hate the child? God
accounts his corrections, to be Arguments and tokens of his love and mercy
toward his children, whatsoever thou do prate and babble to the contrary,
and striuest to make men believe, that his chastisements and corrections do
betoken another thing, that is, the barring and deprivation of the servants of
God, of his mercy, love and favor.

Thus we may now see, how greatly God our most loving Father, and Satan our
most deadly and pernicious enemy do differ, concerning the use and end of
afflictions: and also the right judgment concerning mercy, love, and favor of
God. So that resting our selves wholly on the promises of God, in his Son
Christ, we should stop our ears unto these persuasions of our most malicious
Enemy, and utterly abandon whatsoever he shall persuade, contrary to the
doctrine of God.

This might indeed suffice to show the insufficiency of this conclusion of
Satan, and to stablish the weaklings in the truth of the doctrine of God; but
that the troubled soul will still be moving of questions, and often fall to
the iteration and repetition of one and the same thing; not regarding what they
say, so they may be known to say somewhat. And in this mauner they move their
question:

merciful, when he thus stops his ears, and refuses to bear the cry of
his servants, when he thus winketh, and shuts up his eyes, that he will
not see and behold their woeful estate, that he may take compassion on them?
Who would ever lay these calamities, miseries, and afflictions upon those whom
he loved? And who would tolerate these extremities without release and ease,
upon those, to whom in grace and mercy he is affected as unto his dear
children?

Satan in the weak and distressed souls would have his temptation to be
strengthened, is, as ye see, all one with that which we heard before: and
therefore the very same answer may very well befit them both. It was before
proved sufficiently, that afflictions and corrections laid upon Gods children,
do proceed and come of love; yet you are not satisfied herewith, but fall
again, or rather continue still in your former mind, curiously dernanding,
how this may be. The case were easy, and the question would be satisfied with
a slender resolution, if you did but remember what was said before. But I see
and perceive, your heart and mind were otherwise occupied; and therefore your
eyes do continue still fixed and bent upon your present pangs and miseries,
but never look unto the end, which is replenished with so great joy and peace.
Does not the Apostle tell us, that God does therefore in this sort here in this
world correct and afflict his children, 1. Cor. 11.32
that they should not be condemned with the world? Luke 16.19. etc.
Lazarus lived here in great misery, when the rich Glutton fared delicately.
Yet was Lazarus beloved of God, and the rich Glutton otherwise, as the end did
evidently prove. Is it not, think you, love in the Physician toward his
Patient, when he takes the readiest way to recover him from the danger of
death, although it be by such strong medicines, which he knows, in their
operation and working will will torment his Patient for the time, and that very
sore? It is surely a great argument of Love in the Physician, that has such a
care of the good estate of his Patient. And are we not likewise to judge of our
heavenly Physician, and to be fully persuaded of his great love that he bears
unto his servants, that when he sees them ready of themselves to be plunged
into the pit of sin, and so to be made partakers of condemnation, does use
these momentany afflictions, although they appear bitter for a time unto our
frail and vveake flesh, that so he might deliver us from hell, and crown us
with an unspeakable weight of glory?

And what though we call and cry; yea and that often, and very earnestly, and
yet (as we suppose) God does not regard it for the time? are we therefore thus
to judge or think either of God, or of our selves, as Satan would have us, if
he might prevail? God forbid. It is our parts rather to rest our selves
satisfied and contented with this, that the Lord, as I have said, both knows
what is most conuement and behoouefull for us his children; and that he is
both able, and also ready and willing in his appointed time, fully to
accomplish and perform the same.

Let not this seem any strange thing unto thee. For GOD herein shows
himself no otherwise affected toward us, then even thou thy self art
affected toward thine own child whom thou most tenderly love, and in whom
thou take some great pleasure. If this thy child had some grievous sore or
wound inflicted upon him, which by none other cunning of Physic could be
cured, but by the daily applying of some sharp and biting medicine thereunto;
if the child, tormented with this Physic, should cry unto thee, make pitiful
moan and plaint, and that with abundance of tears, trickling down his tender
cheeks, craving instantly, that thou would cease and give over in this
manner to vex him, by applying unto his sore, such a biting corrosiue.
Would thou therefore cease and give over thy course? or would thou not
rather, (all the cries and tears of thy child notwithstanding) continue still
in the same? because thou see and know it to be the hest and safest way
to work recovery: yea, and yet withal also think, that therein thou
show an undoubted argument and token of thy great and fatherly love toward
him. If it may be thus betwixt thee and thy child, what reason is it, that GOD
should be abridged of his Prerogative, that it should not be in such manner
betwixt God and his Children? Why may not God continue his corrections upon his
servants, and therein, as well as thou, declare his love, and hold on still to
apply unto the sores of sin, these biting medicines of afflictions,
notwithstanding that thou continually call and cryest to have him cease, and
yet not withal (as thou unto thy child) show forth his mercy and compassion
toward thee.

Let this therefore be holden as a certain and undoubted truth, according to
the sense and meaning of this my fourth Position, that no miseries and
afflictions, in regard of their greatness, and continuance, can be any
sufficient cause, or reason, to make a difference in this life, betwixt the
Chosen of the Lord, and Castawayes, the Elect and Reprobate; Because God
powers down his corrections oftentimes upon the one, in as great a measure,
both in quantity and continuance, as he does his Judgments upon the other.
And though some differences are indeed betwixt them, as has been before
declared: yet they are such, and so hard for man to sound into, that for mine
own part, I dare not say, no not of those that have spent their lives very
dissolutely, and dying, to the outward appearance very miserably, that
therefore these were judgments proceeding of Gods hatred, and tokens of his
eternal resection of them. We may read of many, both in the older and later
times, in foraine, and also in our own country, which have tyrannously
oppressed, and cruelly persecuted the poor members and faithful servants of
our Savior Jesus Christ, which dyed strange and unwonted deaths, and suffered
in their ends most terrible and vnspeakle torments: Yet since the time and
manner of Gods Calling is so secret and unknown unto us, shall I say that
therefore they were condemned? Let others use their judgments, I dare not do
it: For mine opinion is, that extremities are no reasons, and strange torments
are no Arguments to convince so great a matter. They rest unto the judgment of
the Lord, to whom they either stand or fall.

And yet for the comfort of all Gods children, be it also added, that
oftentimes in these extremities and Agonies, even in the very suffering and
enduring of them, the Elect of God shall find many undoubted Reasous, whereupon
they may certainly, and without all doubt conclude their salvation, and that
they are in the number of Gods Elect and Chosen. And this is by the fruits and
effects of true and lively faith, working and moving in them. Which effects,
sometimes again are so suppressed and sinothered, under the violence of their
pains and miseries, that they seem oftentimes, yea and many of them also,
even in the very point of death, and being ready to yield up the Ghost, unto
the judgment of man, to have no feeling of comfort in Christ, and to savor
only of despair; and yet for all this, depart hence the Elect of God, and in
the number of his faithful servants.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the fifth Position.

THese things being thus concluded, as we have answered Satan's objections, and
in answering removed his discomforts, whereinto he seeks to cast the
Children of God: So now let us gather (as it were, into a brief sum) the
comforts before entreated of, and also further see what comforts more we can
make against this temptation, and what spiritual diet is herein fittest and
most conueuient for the afflicted and distressed soul to use for the
preservation of his souls health.

The first comfort, 1. Comfort.
is the consideration of the motive cause in God of these afflictions, and that
is love and mercy, which he bears unto these his servants, whom he does
vouchsafe thus to afflict and chasten. For this serves, (if it be well
considered) as a reyne to hold back, and restrain the violence of despayring
thoughts; When as we call to mind, and remember, that he that lays and
inflicteth these things upon us, is lovingly affected, and disposed toward us;
and therefore will surely herein proceed no further, then shall be for our good
and benefit. 2. Comfort.


Unto this let us add for the second comfort, the consideration of the sinall
cause or end wherefore God does thus correct and chasten his children: And that
is, to work in them amendment, to quicken, stir up increase his graces in
them, that they may shine and appear more bright and clear, and to deliver us
from the danger of those things, as sin and death; whereinto, by reason of
the weakness and exceeding frailty of our nature, we are ready every day to
slip and fall, if by these his Fatherly and gentle corrections, we were not
restrained.

Oftentimes also, 3. Comfort.
we must herein call to mind, the great care of God which he has for his
servants, in inflicting and laying these corrections upon them, in that at all
times, and in every several person, he has a special respect and regard,
that they exceed not measure: but still does limit and order them, according to
our ability in tolerating the same; according to that saying of the Apostle,
1. Cor. 10.13
God is faithsull, who will not suffer us to be tempted, above that we are able
to bear, but will give the issue with the temptation, that we may be able to
endure it.

The great and excellent fruits that arise and come from afflictions, 4.
Comfort.
unto the children and servants of God, are most excellent, sweet and
delectable; and therefore minister no small comforts in the time of
extremities. For by these afflictions, we are taught the more to be humbled in
the sight of God, in respect of sin: To abandon fear, and fly from sin.
They work in us a serious and earnest care, in more dutiful obedience, to
conform our selves to the will of God. They are means to stir up our faith.
They declare our hope, and bring forth in us the fruit of patience. They what
us on to earnest invocation and prayer. They teach us the contempt of worldly
pleasures: They show and set before us, the vanity and misery of this present
life, and stir us up to the earnest study, meditation and desire of the life
to come; whose joys and pleasures, are true, perfect and void of all miseries,
endless and durable without decay. All which, and many mo such excellent and
worthy fruits, so sweet and pleasant, arising out of the bitter root of
afflictions, so unsavory to our fleshly seeling, will serve (as I have said)
as most comfortable receipts, when we are pained with extremities.

The next comfort is, 5. Comfort.
to remember and always to have this in mind, that be our afflictions and
miseries never so extreme, and never so great, yet they can in no wise prevail
so far against those that are the Saints and Beloved of God, that they should
any thing weaken or impair the certainty or assuredres of their salvation, so
long before determined and decreed in the good pleasure and foreknowledge of
God; according to that of the Apostle Paul, Romans 8. I am persuaded, that
neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height nor depth, nor any other creature,
shall be able to separate us from the love of God that is in Christ lesus our
Lord. Seeing then, that nothing shall be able to hurt or annoy the Elect and
Chosen; but that all things shall turn and serve to their good, it cannot be,
but that afflictions also shall be converted to their singular comfort. Let
Satan now breathe out his terrible threats never so much against us; and admit
that he so far prevail in his wicked and malicious purpose, as to take away
our natural life, and do deprive us of this present light, yet our other
life, in obtaining whereof, all our hope, our joy and comfort rests, is hid,
laid up and kept safe in Christ our Savior, as a most sure treasury, from all
Satan's subtilties, so that he cannot once touch or trouble it, although he
make never so great attempts against the same.

The consideration and daily meditation of the afflictions and miseries of
others the Servants and Saints of God, 6. Comfort.
is (no doubt) very comfortable and profitable also in this case. For when we
find, and are assured, that such as have been the beloved Children of God,
have been partakers of the like afflictions, yea, and ostentimes, of greater
and far more grievous, and have, in the end, received a recompense of their
labors, we are encouraged the rather to enter into the same conflict, with
the more patience to bear the brunt thereof, and with the greater constancy to
endure unto the end, with full assurance, that as those our brethren, so we
also in the end, as good soldiers, shall be crowned as Victorers. And seeing
that Satan, as well in this point as in others, bends his force to the
uttermost of his power, to abate and to cool this courage in us, by the
blotting out of our memories, the remembrance of these examples of such worthy
servants of the Lord: for a most sovereign medicine in this dangerous
sickness, I would counsel the afflicted soul, in the time of his
afflictions, to spend no little time in reading and ouer-reading the lamentable
histories of Gods distressed and afflicted servants, whereof he shall have
great store and plenty, both in the sacred Scriptures, and also in the
Ecclesiastical stories of lower and later times, faithfully gathered, compiled
and published in our English tongue, by that worthy man of famous memory, Mr.
Fox, and others. These I would wish to be the afflicted man's Garden, whereinto
if he every day resort a little for recreation sake, I doubt not, but he shall
there find Flowers of so sweet and delectable savor, and Herbs of so rare and
sovereign virtue, that he shall be assuredly thereby maruellously comforted
and strengthened: when (as I have said) in reading he shall find, that others
also, highly in the favor of God, have notwithstanding tasted as deep, yea,
and far more deep, of this bitter cup of afflictions, then he himself has
done.

As a most dangerous poison, very forcible to overthrow utterly, 7. Comfort.
and to impair his good estate, I would wish the distressed soul to eschew
the narrow intentiuenesse, and fixing his mind upon the extreme rage of his
own woes and miseries, either past or present: but rather to call to his mind,
that which he has heretofore found in himself, (if at any time he has but
felt some arguments and tokens of his election) and on those of fix the eyes of
his remembrance, and withal to settle his heart upon the end of his
afflictions, which (as has been showed) is most joyful and comfortable,
tending only unto his good.

Lastly, he is to consider, that although his miseries be never so great and
many for the time, yet they are of no long continuance, but short and
momentany, even as is our life upon the earth, which is but as a vapor, that
quickly vanishes, as the brittle glass that soon breaks, as the grass that
parcheth in a day, and withers as the Post that passes by with speed: So
that although they should so long continue and cleave unto us, as our life
lasts, yet the time of our life being so short, the continuance of them must
be short also: Whereof no little comfort may grow unto the afflicted soul, and
that the rather, if he call to mind that endless and vndated time of
happiness, wherein we shall be made partakers of that endless crown of
glory, and those exceeding joys which no tongue is able to utter, nor heart of
man is able to conceive. These are the comforts, whereof I thought good here
briefly to put the afflicted person in mind, for that I have, in several
places, as occasion served, touched the same before: Others there are, which in
their places, God willing, shall in like manner for their good be delivered.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Against the fear of death, and unwillingness to die.

ALthough I have before discoursed of diverse temptations, wherewith the
afflicted soul by the Enemy is assaulted, and in discoursing, have somewhat
met with Satan's objections, and to my power used some reason, to prevent the
evil which may come thereof, and after these pains taken, am now drawing
near to an end, and conclusion of this matter, yet there is still one
temptation remaining, which in no wise is to be omitted and let pass, for that
it is many times attendant, even upon many of Gods dear children, and at that
time especially, when they approach and draw nearest unto their end: And that is
the fear of death, and the unwillingness, which they find in themselves to
die. Upon which fear and unwillingness Satan takes no small advantage, to
further his wicked purpose, and that in most earnest manner, knowing that his
time, wherein he is to show forth his malice against such a party, is but
short, and therefore it behooves him now to exercise his wits, and to use some
reasons whereby he may with the more facility, drive such distressed souls
into despair. This, he knows, may be the better and more easily effected,
because he finds men to be so terrified and appaled with the fear of death,
as that they are loath and most unwilling to taste of the cup thereof, but have
rather a desire, still to abide and continue in this vale of miseries, wherein
vexations, troubles and disquiets do greatly abound: even as though there were
none other, heaven but here, no blessedness to be looked for and found, but
in this life. Whereupon Satan seeing men in such sort affected, and having such
opportunity offered, takes occasion in this or some such like manner, to make
assault upon the distressed soul.

First, having mustred into the mind and remembrance of such fearful and
unwilling persons, all those things wherewith they have been most delighted,
and wherein they have taken some great pleasure in this life, as wife,
children, kindred, friends, acquaintance, companions, lands, goods, cattle,
and such like, Satan presents this earthly state before them, in the most
pleasant and beautiful show that may be. Again, he razing out and defacing, as
much as possibly he can, the hope of heavenly joys and comforts, brings
death before them, in as terrible and ugly shape as may be. Whereupon it
comes to pass, that men are so haled and drawn with affection on the one
side, and so appaled with fear on the other, that nothing seems more
loathsome and unsavory unto their taste, then the cup of Death. This being once
brought to pass, and the enemy finding our desire and affection to the joys
of heaven, to be so dull and weak, and knowing also how fearful the sight of
death is, even to Gods Children, especially at this last gasp, and closing up
of life, he is then most busy with them, to cast in their way all such
motions, as possibly he can, to drive them (as I have said) into despair.
Heerupon it is, that many dangerous and doubting motions, through this subtilty
of Satan, do arise in their minds, whether they be of the number of Gods
children, and members of Christ's body or not, having such unsavory fruits
proceeding from them. These thoughts sometimes, in many of them, by the crafty
working of the Enemy, become so forcible, that they are (as it were)
continually thundering out words of marvelous great extremity, assirming
indeed, that they are none of Gods servants, have no faith, no hope of
salvation, and do not appertain to the Kingdom of God. And that, because,
for a time, they find their hearts to be, as it were, benumbed and dull in the
sense and feeling of the heavenly and eternal comforts.

As in other temptations of Satan we have labored both to lay open the dangers
of the same, and to show by what means they might be avoided, and have also
set down such comforts, whereby both the parties afflicted, and others also
might be strengthened against such assaults of the Enemy: So likewise I
purpose, by the assistance of Gods Spirit, to do in this temptation also; that
so, the poison of Satan's persuasions being descryed, the dangers thereof may be
the more easily avoided. This therefore in this case, comes first to be
observed, for the comfort of the afflicted, both present, and which shall
hereafter, through the subtilty of the Enemy, fall into such danger; that
these are no strange and unwonted things, but usual and common, and such as
have and do befall the children of God. Insomuch, that although many have most
willingly shaken hands, and bidden adue to life, and as it were, embraced and
saluted death, in most cheerful and courteous manner: yet others, on the
contrary, have been greatly terrified, even with the mention of death, and have
been very loath to undergo the stroke thereof. Examples of this great
unwillingness to die, we have in King David, who being pained with sickness,
and feeling the hand of the Lord to be sore upon him, prays that the Lord
would deliver him, and save his soul from death, adding also a reason, Psalm.
6.5.
For that In death there is no remembrance of the Lord, and in the grave who
shall praise him? 2. Kin. 20.1, 2, 3, etc.
Ezekiah also that good and godly King, when news was brought unto him, by the
Lords Propher, that he should die, as one most loath and unwilling heereunto, he
prayed and sighed, and that with many sobs and tears, as the story mentions.
By the examples of these two such faithful servants of the Lord, we may see,
that it is a thing, even by nature incident unto man, to fear death, which is
so contrary to his estate, being the corruption of life, whereof he is so
desirous. For every thing is naturally given to shun and flee his contrary. And
although it be so, that very many of the Saints of God have been said, most
resolutely and willingly to have yielded themselves, and to have tasted of this
cup, by reason of certain circumstances, either attending on their lives; as
sickness, poverty, and all kinds of crosses, afflictions and miseries,
whereunto this life is subject, and from the which men are found many times to
be very desirous to be eased and released, although it be with death: or else
following and ensuing after death, as the everlasting and unspeakable joys of
heaven, to the enjoying whereof, death is as a passage. The earnest desire and
longing that these have, to the enjoying of these heavenly joys, and this
everlasting blessedness, does allay and qualify very effectually the terror
and fear of death in them: And yet if these two forts of men, both the one and
the other, should consider death in it self, without these circumstances,
being a thing so contrary to our nature, it would clearly appear, that there
would be found in them a certain fear and unwillingness to die, which fear and
unwillingness is so much the rather and the more increased in them, when as it
is in part attended with the cogitation or memory of those things, wherein men
in this life do take any delight and pleasure, and in part bereaved of the
feeling of these exceeding comforts reserved for us in the life to come.

say, Thus naturally to fear, and to be thus in some sort unwilling and loath
to die, I less marvel at: but this dullness in the feeling of heavenly joys
and comforts in Christ, being now even at the point of death, and ready to
yield up the last gasp, that is a very strange thing, and able to terrify any
Christian soul.

Satan be so busy with us at other times, even in the time of health, and when
we are strongest, that he brings our faith to many foyles, no marvel if
he show forth his malice against us, now being so near unto our end. He is
not ignorant to take opportunity fittest for his purpose. And therefore, now
above all other his desired times, he will devise, and sound into the bottom
of all his subtilties, to entrap and so to make conquest of the Christian
souls, knowing that this is the last combat that he is like to make with such
an one. If now he lose, it is lost for ever: If now he prevail and overcome,
there is no recovery to be hoped for afterward. Assure thy self therefore,
that he will prepare himself the best he can stretch every limb in this
final conflict, to see if he can, by any possible means, effect and bring to
pass this his malicious and bloody purpose. And therefore, although the state
of Gods Elect and Chosen be such, that they cannot finally and utterly fall
away, Gods decreee being so firm, sure, and immutable, that Satan with all his
policies, shall never be able to infringe and make void the same: yet eue^ they
also, if they be not well appointed, must make full account, and look to have
many foyles at Satan's hands, that shall bring their faith, even upon her knees:
which thing being once effected, no marvel if this subtle Satan, to the
greater daunting of Gods Children, do found out the triumph, before the
victory gotten, casting in their teeth their sins past, and bringing to their
remembrance their former wickedness, and withal, putting them in mind
sometime of the delights and pleasures of this world, that so by these and such
like practices, he may the rather and the sooner drive men into despair.

The case therefore of Christians being so dangerous, it is good, that we do
consider what way is best for us to take, to cut Satan short of his purpose,
and to avoid the danger and peril of this final conflict.

One thing whereby Satan takes so great advantage, and so far prevails
with a great number of men, is, for that in the time of life and health, they
never, or very little as they should, bethink themselves of death: So that
when the time and hour thereof, which is sudden and uncertain, does come
upon them, they go like men, naked and unarmed into the field, to encounter
with this strong and mighty Adversary: And then it is no matuell, if they
being so unprovided and unarmed, and lying so open, do receive many grievous
and deadly wounds.

It is therefore very expedient and needful for every man, in time of health,
to think of sickness, and in time of life, to be mindful of death, and
continually to be careful that he may be prepared for to die: for it is an
inevitable thing, it cannot be avoided, with all the power, policy, and
cunning we can use. Therefore as we are borne to die, so we should live as men
always prepared, and in a readiness to die; So that a Christian man's life
should be a continual meditation, and a daily preparation unto death. When as
I say it should be a daily preparation, I would be loath to be mistaken; I do
not mean such a kind of preparation, as many of the great and mighty men of
the world do dream of, when as either in their life time in their own
persons; or after their death, by their Executors, or others put in trust
therewith, they are careful, yea too careful, to provide that a Tombo be set
up and builded to shrowde their bodies in, and that with most costly, curious,
and cunning work; but never once think of this which is most needful; that
is, to provide a Receptacle for the soul: It may be (as it does appear) that
they think to die: so I beseech the Lord, they may be prepared to die in the
Lord: so they shall be sure, howsocuer the body speed on earth for a time,
yet at the last Day, both body and soul shall be in blessed estate with
Christ for ever, in heaven. This madness of men, in preparing such costly
Tombs or Sepulchers, may very well be accounted in the number of the
vanities, and follies, wherewith the world is at this day ouer-flowed: for the
cost that is bestowed on them, might a thousand times be better bestowed on
the poor afflicted members of Christ, whereby some great gain, by the laying
forth thereof (if it be done without hope of merit) would redound to the
soul. The cunning workmanship is (indeed) matter rather for men to gaze upon,
then for any other good. When all is done, both for charge and cunning, in
setting up, and beautifying of this thing so bravely, yet it is but a Cave for
a rotten and corrupted carkase, beautified for polluted bones, and carefully
adorned for simple Guests, even the crawling worms, there to feed and gnaw
upon their sestred and stinking flesh. The soul is the principal part of man;
let every one apply himself therefore principally to provide, that it may be
harbored, protected and defended against the violence and raging storms of
Satan's fury: Be careful to provide, that she may be armed from top to toe,
with the Christian Armor, whereof S. Paul speaks Ephe. 6. so shall thou be
in safety. Ephe. 6.13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
This ought to be our Christian care; upon this should we bestow our costs: But
this, of the most men, is least regarded, and (it is to be feared) of a great
number utterly neglected.

objected: Is it a thing utterly unlawful to provide a Sepulcher or Tomb for
the body?

use, but the abuse thereof that I aim at. I do not think it a thing
altogether unlawful, for that I do find it to be a thing of long
continuance, and used of godly persons. Joseph of Arimathea is said in the
Gospel to have provided a Tomb for himself, hewed out of a Rock, being yet
in health, wherein he laid the Corpse of Christ our Savior. If in this manner
thou prepare thee a Tomb, and herein follow Joseph's example, thou shall not do
amiss: For Joseph did it not for vain glory, and any worldly ostentation, nor
to make it a thing to be gazed on, but that it should be a memorial to put
him daily in mind of death: and therefore we read not of any ouer-costly and
curious trimming that Joseph used hereabout. If thus man could and would
provide for himself a Tomb or Sepulcher, it were a blessed thing, that it
might serve to be unto him a continual remembrance, to put him in mind of
death, and of his departing hence. But far more blessed, no doubt, and thrice
more happy should he be, if with this good Disciple of Arimathea (though not
in the same manner) he could let Christ have the first seasoning of his grave:
that is, if through faith, hope, and comfort in Christ his Death and Passion,
he could prepare himself unto his end.

But I have digressed somewhat from my matter, and yet I hope it be not much
amiss, the security and carelessenesse of our corrupted flesh being such as it
is. To return therefore again to that from the which I am digressed, I would
have promised some reasons, to persuade us of the necessity of this
preparation, before I did come to set down the manner and order how we ought
to prepare our selves to die; but that in discourse and treaty of the one, I
shall have occasion in some part to touch and include the other also.

This preparation in it self considered, is in very deed, a matter requiring a
large and long discourse: which manner of handling thereof I do leave to
others: my purpose herein is only to touch the principal points, and those
also so far only, as they shall concern my present purpose.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the first part of the preparation unto death.

THE Preparation unto death, Preparation unto death of two sorts.
is found to be of two sorts: either such as concerns our goods and
posterity; or else such as respects our souls and the salvation thereof. As
touching that which concerns our goods, household, and posterity, although it
has in it many branches, and many things worthy the discoursing, if it should
be fully handled; yet for our present purpose I mean no further to entreat
thereof, then it is proved, that the neglect thereof may be a let and
hinderance unto us in this spiritual combat at our latter end.

This kind of Preparation, we find to be of great Antiquity, and used of
diverse renowned Persons in the Scriptures.

Abraham, Genesis 25.5.
as it is recorded of him, was mindful of this; and therefore, although he
had diverse sons by Keturah, whom he took to wife after the death of Sara,
yet he gave all his goods before his death, unto Isaac his son.

Jacob also was not unmindful hereof, Genesis 48.22.
who (as it appears) did give unto his son Joseph, a special portion from
his brethren.

David also is noted, 1. Kings 1.28, 29, etc.
before his death, although he had many sons, yet to leave the Kingdom and
Scepter to none but only to Solomon, borne of Bathsheba, and to his posterity.

This was given in charge, even from God himself, 2. Kings 20.1.
unto King Hezekiah, by the Lords Prophet, commanding him to set his house in
order: for he must die. Experience in all ages, yea, and common sense also,
teaches sufficiently, how necessary this kind of preparation is, what great
commodities have grown, where the same has been daily used; and
contrariwife, what great vexations, and troubles in Law, with a great number of
other inconveniences, have followed upon the neglect thereof. So that hereby it
easily appears, that this duty cannot be neglected, without great injury
unto thy seed and family, that shall succeed after thee; yea, this also take by
the way, as a thing undoubtedly true: That as the utter neglect hereof, is thus
hurtful to thy seed and posterity; so the deferring, and putting off the same
(which is a very usual thing) is very hurtful and dangerous unto thy self.

Therefore as it is requisite, that we should have a care in our life time, to
set all things straight and in good order, both for the discharging of our
selves of that heavy burden of these worldly cares, and also for the
stablishing of peace and quietness amongst those which are dear unto us: whom
we are to leave to suruine us, So we must consider, that the principal thing
that we are to remember in it, is, that it is indeed a preparation that
belongs not so much unto the time of infirmity and sickness, as it does
unto the time of health: And that it ought then doubtless to be performed,
when the Lord does afford unto man, strength of body and good memory, and
should not be posted over unto the latter end, when sickness, the messenger
of death, shall be sent to call, or cite us unto Deaths Court. For upon this
passing and posting over the matter, from the time of health unto sickness,
and in sickness time, even unto the time almost when Death comes to seyze
upon us, it comes to pass, that either the due order for the quiet estate of
thy house, is, nor cannot be so well looked unto, and provided for as it ought;
or that thy soul (which is most to be lamented) in the time of thine agonies
and sicknesses, is little or nothing regarded.

But to eouer this usual fault, in deferring this godly action, from the time
convenient, unto the time indeed altogether inconvenient and unmeet, Satan has
ministered a cloak of excuse, where with many are wonderfully blinded, as
though indeed God were bound of duty to order things after their prescription,
and to deal with them after their own hearts lusts. Tush, say they, I hope
well, that God will give me time and space to provide for both these things;
that is, both for the setting of mine house in order, and also for the good
estate of my soul, and that he will not take me out of this world in such a
sudden manner, but that I shall have opportunity, and good time allowed me to
set all things straight, both for the orderly disposition of my goods, and also
for the careful attending upon the comforts, requisite and needful for the
benefit and good of my soul.

Beware, good Christian brother and sister, who ever thou art, that thus
deceiuest thy self, or rather yeeldest thy self to be deceived by Satan;
this is the crafty persuasion of thine utter and most malicious enemy, and
therefore is none otherwise to be esteemed and judged of, but as a most extreme
folly, and point of dotage, that I may so call it, in this manner to dally
with, and to abuse the person of God: for GOD has given unto thee a great time
for doing hereof, and thou neglectest it; it argues therefore a great folly
and madness in thee. It is in the usual, and common Proverb, While the Pig
is proffered, hold open the Poake: God does of goodness offer thee time, to
effect both these godly actions: take it when it is offered, and rest not thy
self upon uncertain hope and expectation of the like again hereafter. If
thou did well consider of the thing indeed, thou should easily find, that
thou have very small reason to move thee to hope after this time thou dream'st
of, when as if it were longer then commonly is allotted unto any, yet it would
be found little enough to be employed for the good and benefit of thy soul.
And why then should thou think, that God will be thus gracious to bestow
this thing upon thee, in a time that is most unfit, when thou so unthankfully
did put off and neglect the same, being offered unto thee so often before in
a time convenient? Do not think that thou have God at command, take his offer
with thankfulness, and use it as thou ought, to his glory and thy good, and
do not in any wise, presume to prescribe unto him a time, or a manner how he
shall deal with thee at thine end. If thou mark well without flattery of thy
self, what thou have deserved, thou have a great and a just cause also to
fear, lest for thy careless neglect of this, which in mercy he offers
thee, in justice he strike thee suddenly, and at unawares. If therefore I
might give counsel in this so dangerous a case, I would advise every child of
GOD, to lay aside this unchristian hope, and to renew his Testament yearly,
nay monthly, or oftener, that so he may be in a readiness when death comes
rather then to post off all to be performed in the time of sickness: for by
this deferring it comes oftentimes to pass (which is a lamentable thing for
every Christian heart and eye, to think upon and see) that the man pressed
with sickness, and lying (as ye would say) at the point of, death, when he
should have his heart and mind wholly set and fixed on heaven and heavenly
things, is so clogged and fettered in the cares of this life, and such as
concern his house and Family, that though his will be made according to his
meaning, his goods ordered and disposed accordingly, and all things finished
and ended, to the knowledge of men, yet with this sick man himself it is not
so fully dispatched, but that these worldly affairs, wherewith his head has
been thus of late busied, will not so be rooted out, but that a man shall hear
him often, even in his greatest agonies, to mutter and to talk of nothing else
but these, as though his head and thoughts were bent upon nothing else. And
this many do with such vehemency and earnestness, that thereby they give
occasion unto many that hear them, to judge, that not only the taste and
feeling, but also the very thought and inward meditation of heavenly joys and
comforts, seem (for the time) to be barred and excluded from having any place
of rest and harbor in his heart and soul.

Wherefore if thou will not be hindered from this taste of heavenly joys and
pleasures, at thy death and end of this thy natural life: have a care in
health, in this sort to provide for death, lest the cares of this life, be a
cause to hold and keep these endless comforts from thee. Follow the example
of Abraham, who in his life time, when he was in strength and health, disposed
of his goods. While thou art yet sound and lusty, have thy Scpulchre in a
readiness, with Joseph of Arimathea, that is, let all things be provided, and
set in such a readiness, as though always, and every hour, thou were
prepared, and ready to descend into the grave. Let neither thy youthful
years, nor yet thy strength flatter thee, (two deceitful baits to breed
security) as though thou had long to live, and might continue yet many
years, and so thou put off the time, to make this preparation: But while it is
to day, while thou have time and season, defer it not, but accept and use
well the time that God has offered, and given unto thee.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of the second part of the preparation unto death.

THE other, and as I may well call it, the Spiritual preparation unto death,
belonging unto the soul, is found to be of two sorts; that is, either such as
is to be had and used at all times, and throughout the whole course and order
of our life, or such as concerns the time of our sickness and death.

Of the first sort, Solomon warns us very wisely, (...) 1^.1.
bidding us Remember our Creator, in the days of our youth, while the evil
days come not, and the years approach wherein we shall say, I have no
pleasure in them. And our Savior Christ lesus puts us in mind hereof also,
both by diverse exhortations in the Scriptures, and also by the Parable of the
ten Virgins, Mat. 25.1, etc.
bidding us to watch and pray, that we may be always in a readiness with
Oil in our Lamps, to enter with the Bridegroom into the Wedding, whenever
he shall come.

In this Preparation, the first thing required, is always to think with our
selves, and to remember, that we must die: according to that saying, Remember
thy end, and thou shall never do amiss. This is an incuitable necessity
imposed upon all estates and conditions of men, and of all to be had in
continual remembrance. This the Prophet David calls, a numbering of our
days, saying: Psalm. 90.12.
Teach us so to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.
Where is to be noted, what a serious cogitation and remembrance this must be,
even so, and such an one, as may breed in us, a wise and a careful heart and
mind, to do the will of God; for that is it which here the Prophet means,
by applying our hearts to wisdom, or (as the Hebrew has it) by bringing a
wise heart into us. For they that live lewdly, and loosely, giving themselves
over, as slaves unto sin, howsoever they seem wise in their own conceit, or
in the judgment of men, yet in the sight and judgment of God, they are
accounted for no better then fools, and as men that walk unwisely. But this
is too general for our purpose; for this remembrance of our death, as a
preparation unto this last and final combat, must not only think of death,
and meditate thereof, but must think of it, as of such a time wherein we must
have a dangerous and fierce assault made upon us, and that by all these great
and perilous Enemies, Satan, the World, and the Flesh, joining hand in hand,
and force with force against us. If this do once sink deeply into our
hearts, it will make us to have a special care indeed, and to look well about
us, that we may be thoroughly provided, and in all parts well furnished and
appointed against this heavy Day, and time of Trial. And that so much the
rather also, if withal we consider and remember, that the time when this
assault shall be, is short and sudden, uncertain and unknown, and therefore
it lies us upon to watch continually, that we may be always and every moment
in a readiness, that the Enemies do not come upon us at unawares. The City or
Country having enemies encamped against it, and looking every day for nothing
else, but that battle shall be made against it, wherein the Citizens and
Inhabitants must show themselves valiant and courageous, for that then they are
either to win a peace, or hazard a perpetual slavery, carefully does bring
out and make ready all their furniture, muster their men, and train out all
their best and most able Soldiers, to the end it may be sufficiently prepared
for the purpose, against so great a Day: Even so the meditation of this great
and strong conflict at the time of death, with so great and mighty enemies,
(which how sudden and how soon it will be, is to us unknown) would teach us
to be provided and prepared, to train up every part and member in us, in this
spiritual kind of fight, that we may be able to withstand these our deadly
enemies at every pinch.

Now that according to that which I have said, we may be thoroughly and
strongly armed, I think it good, as the Apostle Paul has left unto us the
description of the Panoplyo and complete armor of a Christian, Ephesians. 6. to
deliver the same in the several parts, that so the use of every piece may
stand us in the better stead, and serve our turns the better in this conflict.

First therefore, 1. Coat of Constancy.
according to the Apostles counsel, thou art to put on the Coat of constancy.
For that it is which the Apostle means, Gal. 5.1. Ephesians. 6.10, 14.
when as he bids the Ephesians, and in them wills all Christians to stand
fast, or be strong. When thou art to enter into this fight, all fear, all
fainting must be utterly exiled and banished from thee: although thine enemies
will use many means, to beat a fear into thee, and to make thee to shrink
and fly away, yet thou must have a care unto this, to stand fast. But herein
thou art to look well unto the matter, and take a good view of this piece of
armor: I mean, this Coat of Constancy, lest thou be deceived. For it must be
Armor of proof, or elseit will not serve thy turn, it is so far off from
doing thee any good, that it will rather turn to thy great hurt: That thou
should not in this piece be deceived; the Apostle has put a stamp and a
mark thereupon, that thou may easily discern and know it from that which is
counterfeit, and that is (in the Lord.) Except thy constancy and courage then
be in the Lord, thou will easily be overthrown, thou art not able to stand.
Thou must, therefore, when thou come to occupy a room in this fight (which
thou must do even all thy whole life time) utterly forsake thine own wit and
policy, thine abundance and wealth, all trust and confidence in thine own
works and merits. How sure soever these things appear and be judged of some:
yet they are found mere weak, and insufficient of themselves, in the
judgment of the Holy Ghost, whose judgment thou art above all to stand to,
approve and like of. Learn therefore to be bold and resolute, against the
rage of thy furious enemies; not because thou have natural strength, or
worldly wit and policy, or the riches and goods of the world; neither for that
thou art attended upon with many Popish ceremonies, which are worse then
vanities; or because thou have some store of good works: But be thou therefore
strong, and stand it out with constancy, because the Lord is with thee. Be
bold and resolute in him, and in his power and might, for in him alone thou
shall be sure, and also able to prevail against thine enemies. 1. Sa. 17.45.
David coming to fight with the Giant Goliath, came in the Name of the Lord,
and in his name, by his power and by his might overcame the Enemy of God and
his people: So fight thou still in the Name of the Lord, and thou shall surely
triumph over all thine enemies, be they never so great, never so many, and
never so strong and mighty.

The Apostle proceeding in more particular manner, 2. Girdle of Truth.
with the description of this Christian Armor, and setting down the several
parts thereof, appoints in the second place the Girdle; willing us to put on
the girdle of Truth. Stand therefore (says he) having your loins girded with
the girdle of Truth. Ephesians. 6.14.
Many girdles, it may be, shall be offered thee, and they shall through the
craft of the Enemy, be gloriously set forth; making a show outwardly, as though
they were sure and strong: but in this take heed and beware thou be not
deceived. For it is not generally all truths, neither that which man will
presumptuously obtrude and thrust upon thee for truth, (Of which sort are
almost all the Popish points of Religion, beautified with the vain show of
many vain and idle ceremonies) But it is only the Truth and sincerity of the
Gospel, which the Apostle speaks of. The knowledge of this Gospel, having a
Christian obedience, annexed thereunto for a Buckle, serves as a girdle to
contain us and to hold us in, that we may be strong and able to resist the
Devil, binding up as it were, about us al those long and loose garments of our
natural and fleshly reason, which would otherwise greatly trouble and hinder
us in this Spiritual combat. A necessary part of Armor, no doubt, and so
needful, that without it, it booteth or avails us nothing at all to go into
the field. And although it be never so needful, yet alas, how small is the
number of those which are careful to provide themselves of it! For even in
these golden days of peace and safety from persecution, when as the Gospel by
the preaching thereof, is offered unto men in most plenteous manner, it is a
world to see, how diversely men are affected toward it, and that in the worst
manner. Some give themselves wholly unto the world: some follow the pleasures
of the flesh: some, although they have tasted and felt the great favor of God,
in delivering them from the palpable darkness of Romish superstition and
Idolatry: yet now, lothing the sweet Manna of the Gospel, like the rebellious
and murmuring Israelites, in their hearts; return back again unto the
fleshpots of Egypt. And almost generally it is to be found in men, that every
thing of light moment and weight; yet is of force sufficient, to hold them from
prepating of this girdle, whereby no small advantage is offered to our deadly
Enemy, to prevail against us.

The third piece of Armor to help to defend us in this fight, 3. Brestplate
of righteousness. Ephesians. 6.14.
and to furnish us in this preparation, is by the Apostle called, the
breast plate of righteousness. And this is that, which elsewhere in the
Scriptures is called a good conscience, which is a dutiful care and study to
walk sincerely and uprightly, according to the Spirit, to lead our life in
holiness and righteousness. Which if we do, we shall then disappoint our
Adversary of his advantage against us, and shall be well able to bear off and
to avoid the dangerous pricks and thrusts, which he will be ready continually
to cast at us, in consideration of our sins. It is a very hard thing to utter
indeed, what a biting corrosiue, the remembrance of the loosenes and lewdnes of
a man's former life is unto the afflicted soul, at the time and point of death,
and what great matter of discomfort, Satan can quickly suck from thence, to
infuse and power upon them. And it is again on the other part a lamentable
thing to see, how carelessely men are for the most part affected, and how
slack they are in preparing this piece of Armor, thinking in themselves, all
to be well and safe enough, although they have lived never so lewdly and
dissolutely, and neglected the putting on of this piece of Armor, even to the
very instant and time of death; thinking if then they can repent, there is no
more ado. But alas, all this while such men never consider, how much more
bitter their conflict with Satan is like to be.

breast plate of righteousness, and with such a good conscience, that he did not
feel some wounds of sin?

not with their heart: it is of infirmity, according to that saying of John:
1. Ioh. 3.9.
He that is borne of God, sins not. And the reason is; For that his heart
is surely and safely armed with a good conscience, with the breast plate of
Righteousness. This appears more plainly unto us by the example of David, who
is noted to have his heart thoroughly fenced with the knowledge of the Truth, and
thereupon to give himself to righteousness and the works thereof; yet he is
noted also to have taken even great and grievous wounds; he sinned most
grievously, but these wounds did not pierce to his heart, but sticked still in
his flesh only, for that he was armed with this breast plate of righteousness
Hereupon it is that he confesses; Psa. 119.48.
I have always sought after thy Law: And, I did meditate in thy Commandments.

The fourth thing to be used in this preparation unto death, 4. The Shoes of
the Preparation of the Gospel of Peace. Ephesians. 6.15.
is called of the Apostle, the shoes of the preparation of the Gospel of
Peace; even all those comfortable promises of the Gospel: wherewith if the
feet of thy soul be shooed, it will make thee more ready prepared and nimble,
to ouer-leape and stryde over all stumbling blocks, lets and hindrances,
which Satan, the World, or thy sinful Flesh shall cast in the way before thee.

The sift is, 5. Hope of salvation.
the helmet of Hope, even the hope of salvation, and expectation of eternal
life. For this hope will strengthen and encourage us, against all kind of
miseries, troubles, and afflictions; yea, and against the fear of death it
self, and that in such manner, that although these, of themselves, appear to
be very terrible, and able to daunt the courage of every one: yet through this
Helmet, the terror and fear of them is taken away; and they which are with
this piece of Armor furnished, are made strong and able to suffer and endure
them continually. It is well called of the Apostle, the helmet or headpiece of
salvation: for it will shroud and cover us, from the hurt of all assaults of
the enemies whatsoever. For then alone we yield, when as we despair and are
out of hope: but whiles hope lasts, we are ready still to fight and strive
unto the death.

In the sixth place comes the shield of faith, 6. Shield of Faith.
which has this virtue and power given unto it, that it will quench all the
fiery darts of the Devil. For having our faith and confidence set and seated
upon Christ, and upon his death and Passion, we shall be thereby so surely
kept and covered, that no assault or terror of the Devil, shall be able to
annoy or hurt us: but with ease we shall be able to withstand them, and to
avoid the danger of them all. The time when Satan most prevails against us,
is when he sees and perceives us to be destitute of this piece of Armor, to
protect and defend us. Therefore against this day and time of death, it is
expedient and needful for us, to use all good means to cheer up and increase
this faith of ours, that then especially it may be strong and flourishing, when
as we shall be thus incountred with by these extremites.

For the seventh piece of Armor, 7. Sword of the Spirit.
tak^ the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God. In this also it
behooves thee to be prepared, and to have good knowledge. For Satan, as has
been showed before, has many temptations, which in his own sense and sort he
uses to ground upon the written Word, which temptations can by no means
better be avoided, then by the same Word, used in the true and right sense
thereof. This can hardly or never be done, unless thou be skillful and expert
in the Scriptures. Wherefore let these (I mean the Scriptures) be thy daily
Garden, wherein thou may gather most sweet and comfortable simples against
this sick and heavy day. Make these thy counselors to instruct thee: and let
these be used as a sharp and two-edged sword, to strike and wound thine
enemies withal. That thou may therefore be expert and cunning in the use of
this weapon, I would advise thee to exercise thy self herein, to meditate in
this day and night, until thou have thoroughly attained to the true use of this
so needful and profitable a weapon, and that thou may be cunning, and know
perfectly how to weyld it every way, to meet with Satan's subtle and crafty
assaults.

Unto all these it is necessary that thou add and adioyne fervent Prayer; That
God would give thee grace and strength, unto these things, continually and
every day increasing all unto thy comfort: And that he would vouchsafe to
prepare and furnish thee unto this spiritual and final combat, at thine end
and death, as that when and howsoever it shall happen, thou may be always in
a readiness, to undertake it with willingness, and to continue and abide with
faith and constancy unto the end.

Now that thou art taught by the Apostle, speaking and writing by the direction
of the Spirit of God, how to arm thy self on all parts, from the top to the
toes: Let not this be wanting in thee: namely, a daily meditation of those
things, that may increase and further the former proceedings. Of this sort, are
the consideration of the flitting estate, the vanities and miseries of this
present world; the exceeding joys of heaven, and the life to come, the
momentany pains of death, and the exceeding fruits of life and joy, that do
arise and spring from death to us, together with all these several comforts,
that have been before set down, against the several assaults of Satan, made
against the Children of God. For if thus, and after this sort, thou be careful
to furnish and prepare thy self in time of health, Satan's assaults in the time
of sickness, shall soon be beaten back, the edge of his sharp and cutting
weapons shall be quickly blunted, and all his attempts and practices shall be
made frustrate and void. Hitherto of the first preparation in time of health
against this last combat; the which in the mean time also may very well, nay,
should indeed serve every Christian, in withstanding all temptations,
throughout the whole care and course of his life.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of the preparation concerning the time of sickness and death.

THe next part of Preparation, is that which is to be had at the time of
sickness, and being ready to dye, consists partly in the comfort which we are
to receive and have from others, and partly in our selves. From others, as
spiritual counsel and Prayers. And these others, are either such as have a
more special charge hereunto, as is the Pastor and Minister of the place, who
in this time of sickness should be sent for, that he might minister unto the
diseased, spiritual counsel and advice: Or such as Christian duty does bind
unto it, as kinsfolks and neighbors, and such as are about the sick parties
in the time of their sickness. For this indeed is a time, wherein the chiefest
love that thou can show unto thy brother and dearest friend, is to labor by
all means, to arm him with patience against the terrors of death, to draw
him from the love of the world, and to breed in him a love and a liking unto
heavenly things, in ministering as spiritual and heavenly comfort as thou
can, unto his soul, and not to be over- nice herein and dianty of thy pains
as many are, which are loath to make any mention of death at all unto the person
diseased, lest it should bring or breed any discomfort unto his sick friend.
And so for fear of the loss of a little worldly comfort, which is but vanity,
thou will deprive him of this spiritual comfort belonging to his soul. It is
good (I confess) to be careful for the good of his body: but it is far
better, and a greater argument and sign of true love in thee, to be careful
for the good of his soul.

Among these that thus art attendant at or in the time of sickness, the
Physician also oftentimes has his place. Of whom we might speak concerning
many points, if that our Treaty were generally respecting death; and not
particularly tied unto it, as it is attended with such a dangerous conflict,
with so great and mighty enemies. In him therefore as faithfulness, care and
skill are requisite for the body: So also it is behoouefull, that he should
be such an one, as could withal knew how to apply some medicines of comfort
unto the soul. But I leave these, and come now unto thy self, to show what is
requisite in thee in these extremities.

Thou have all thy life time been in the field (for a Christian man's life is a
continual warfare, wherein he lies in continual leager against the Devil.)
But now thou art to fight a pitched battle, wherein thine Enemy, the Devil
has mustered all his forces, and therefore has entered as it were in league
with death, that last and dreadful Enemy, to fight against thee. These with
main force and might do assault thee on the one side, and the world with her
allurements lies in ambush on the other side, with her subtilties to deceive
thee: neither will the flesh be idle, but to the power thereof, will put too
her helping hand, that so a conquest upon thee might be had, and that they
might with the more ease triumph over thee. It behooves thee therefore, to
keep a continual watch, and to look well about thee, that thou may the
better prevent the evil, and cut them short of their purpose. This therefore I
would advise thee to do:

warning piece is shot off, that is, as soon as sickness does begin to
seize upon thee, look well and take a good view of thy self, and provide in
time, that thou may be on all parts armed with that Armor of proof before
mentioned: See thou be girded with the girdle of Truth upon thy loins, having
on thee the Breast Plate of Righteousness, the Shoes of the preparation of the
Gospel of Peace; the Target of Faith in thy left hand, the sword of the Spirit
in thy right hand, and the Helmet of Hope on thy head. And over all these see
there be cast the Coat of Constancy, and withal pray continually, that the
Lord would continually assist and strengthen thee in these dangerous times, and
give thee good success against thine enemies.

meditations be fixed and settled upon heavenly things, upon those unspeakable
and incomprehensible joys and comforts of the life to come, and therewithal
also, upon that All-sufficient sacrifice of Christ our Savior, who by his
death and Passion, has washed and redeemed us from all our sins, subdued
death, and purchased for us immortal and everlasting life.

cares and cogitations of the world creep not on thee: but cast off from thy
shoulders the heavy burden thereof. For they are great and mighty hindrances
in this last conflict, as is before showed. Banish them therefore and bar
them from thy heart, as unfit to muster with thee, in this last and heavy
conflict.

pleasures and delights of this life come before thee, remember they are but
vanities. If the terrors and fears of death present themselves into thy
sight, think of them, not as they appear and seem in show, but as they be
indeed, that is, momentany and short, and rather helping then hindering. For
they are the passage unto life, and unto the joys of Heaven. Therefore set
down thy Resolution, that if these were past, then all thy miseries were come
to an end and dispatched. For though Satan tell thee, that death was ordained
as a curse and punishment for sin; yet do thou reply, that Christ has
turned it, and changed the nature of it, and of a curse has made it unto Gods
Children to be a blessing, and the entrance into joys, and the gate of life.
For by our Savior Jesus Christ his Resurrection, the force of death is taken
away; and therefore the grave and hell can make no conquest over them.

Satan the principal of all other thine Adversaries, which is the Master of
all mischief, will still be urging thee, to vex and trouble thee to the
uttermost. And therefore use continually the Armor aforesaid, and daily, nay,
hourly, or rather every minute exercise thy self therein, that thou may be
able to withstand thine enemies at all times. For if thy sins (which Satan
will be busy to lay to thy charge) be objected against thee, arm thee the^
with the Breast Plate of Righteousness, it shall be unto thee as a Brazen wall to
bear it off. If this will not fully serve, use the shoes of Preparation to
step aside, or at least the target of Faith, to break the blow. If from the
course of Gods dealing with his servants, and also with the wicked, he begin
to assault thee, (which is a very usual and common thing with Satan) take then
into thy hand the sword of the Spirit, so shall thou be sure to beat him off.
And finally, if death with his ugly terrors begin to rush upon thee, as ready
to devour and swallow thee up, be resolute in the Coat of Constancy, and
stand fast in thy station and place appointed thee of thy Chiefetaine and Head
Christ Jesus, and every piece of Armor will minister present help and
defense unto thee.

And if it so fall out, for all this, that thou see some weakness in thy
self, that thou art faint, and not able to hold thine own; but that Satan
seems to get some advantage upon thee, Death does affright and terrify thee,
and thy sins do amaze thee; insomuch that thy girdle is loose about thy
loins, thy Brestplate is bent and battered, thy Shoes ready to slip and fall
off thy feet, thy right hand weak in weilding and handling of thy Sword, and
thy Target beaten even to thy head; that is, if thou in this conflict do
suffer many discomforts, and Satan seem to prevail so greatly against thee,
that thou know not how or which way to ward or keep him back; yet let not
this make thee flee and to give over the fight, or in any wise to yield unto
thine enemies. But comfort thy self, that Christ stands as an eye- witness of
thy doings, ready to strengthen thee, and to minister power unto thee. Fly
therefore to him for refuge, with hearty and earnest Prayer, for that he is
both able and also willing to succor and deliver thee, and patiently suffer
and endure all the hard doings of the enemies against thee with the Helmet of
Hope: And at the end conclude and shut up the matter with David, and say: Into
thy hands, O Lord, Psalm. 31.6.
I commend my Spirit: For thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of Truth. Here
stay thy thoughts, and close up thine eyes, and what thou find not in thy
self, expect and look for in him; who, as I have said, is able and vvilling
to do all things for thy good. And though it appears to thy judgment, that
thou art deprived of the needful consolation and comfort in this life, yet do
thou not despair: For Christ will not, be thou sure, cast thee off, because he
finds thee cut and wounded: But, as the good Samaritane, Luke 10.33, etc.
will mercifully bind up thy wounds, and plentifully power out the oil of
everlasting joy and blessedness into thy maimed soul.

CHAP. XXVIII.
That the Elect in time be assured of their election and how.

THe proof and demonstration of this position, (namely, that the Elect and
Chosen of God in time be assured of their election) I thought convenient to be
annexed unto this treatise, because it serves not a little, to minister help
and comfort, for the allaying and qualifying of the troubles and discomforts of
the afflicted soul. And because it is of many made a doubt and question,
whether any such assurance may be at all in Gods Children, except it be only
by special revelation, I thought it good, for the better understanding of the
same, briefly to premise something of the meaning hereof, and to show how it
is to be understood.

First therefore, when I say the Elect, I do not mean some, but all, and
every one of the Elect of God, that they may, and shall have a certainty and
an assurance, that they are elect unto salvation. But for further and better
explanation of my meaning, I add to this mine assertion, (in time) for it is
not always so, but after such time only, as they are effectually called and
regenerated, and that before such time they cannot have it So that this is not
any special and particular revelation, but a thing common and incident, even
generally to all, and particularly to every one after that he is thus thoroughly
called and renewed, to know and be assured, that not only generally all that
do believe in Christ, are elect, and shall be saved, but also himself in
several and particular, to be one of the number of those whom God, in his
eternal and everlasting decree and purpose, has predestinate and appointed
unto life. The certainty of which doctrine shall plainly appear, and be
fully demonstrated, in setting down the means, how this assurance is wrought
and effected in them. For proof of this so profitable a point of doctrine, let
us see so briefly and so plainly as we can, by what reasons it may be
proved, that the man regenerate may be certified and assured of his Election.

The first argument of this assurance, 1. Argument of assurance of Election.
is drawn and brought from the evidence of their own Spirit, which the
faithful find within themselves. For that this, I mean the Spirit of every
one of the Elect of God, is a very good witness to give evidence and testimony
in this case, as the Apostle plainly teaches, To. 8. where he has these
words, that the Spirit of God bears witness with our Spirits. Romans 8.16.
So that if both do witness together, then our Spirit does witness also. And this
is that testimony, which every man by his own Spirit and conscience does derive
and draw from those general propositions, which he finds in the Gospel: for
from the Gospel, the Spirit of every one of the Elect of God does fetch his
evidence, by applying the same, and by annexing an assumption unto the general
doctrine and universal propositions there delivered. As for example, The
Gospel teaches, that every one that belieueth in Christ, shall saved. This
general proposition wants not good proof, but has very many places in the
Scriptures to confirm the same. They that have faith, and do believe, Ioh.
3.15. Romans 9 33. Ioh. 8.51. and 5.24. Ioh. 3. Ion. 3.24. Gal. 2.
shall not perish, Ioh. 3. Shall not be confounded, Romans 9. Shall not see
death, Ioh. 8. Shall not enter inter Judgment, Ioh. 5. Shall have everlasting
life, Ioh. 3. Shall be saved, be justified, and have remission of all their
sins, Romans 3. Gal. 2. and many such places, most plain and manifest to like
effect. The Gospel thus ministering this general proposition, now the spirit
of the elected child of God, begins to give his witness, by a particular
assumption, saying, But I see and know, by search within my self, that I have
faith and do believe: And therefore I am assured also, that I shall be saved.
So that the general proposition of the Gospel is most sure and certain, that
all and every one that has faith, and does believe in Christ, shall be saved,
and therefore are elected. For none can be saved, but one'y they that are
elected, predestmated, and appointed heereunto in the eternal decree and
purpose of God. Now if after a due search and sounding into thy self, thou
find that thou have this faith in Christ resting upon his grace and
promises, and that thou art resolved in thy heart, that remission of sins,
reconciliation unto God, and all the other benefits and effects of Christ's
death and passion do appertain and belong unto thee, this testimony is sure
and certain, whereon thou may build this conclusion, that thou art the son
and elected child of God.

And that the witness and testimony of these things to be within us, may be
had and derived from our own Spirit, beside that place before alleged, Romans
8. that the Spirit of God and our Spirit do witness together, the same
Apostle also seems to intimate no less, 2. Cor. 13.5. bidding us prove our
selves, whether we be in the faith, and that we should examine our selves.
Know you not, 2. Cor. 13.5.
says he, even your own selves, how that Christ is in you, except you be
reprobates? Now how should this proof, trial, examination and knowledge of
our selves, by our selves be had, but by our own Spirit? 1. Cor. 2.11.
For what man (says the same Apostle) knows the things of a man, save the
spirit of a man, which is in him?

But here (it may be) some will object against me, that these things are
spiritual and of God: For faith comes not of our selves, but is effected in
us by the Spirit of God, and therefore by the same Spirit of God only, these
must be discerned: For that it follows immediately in the same verse, that
these things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God.

Whereunto I answer, that although we cannot judge and discern of the things
of God, either concerning his excellent nature, or the mystery of his will, in
the ways of life and salvation, what and how it shall be, but by the Spirit,
revealing and manifesting the same in the sacred Scriptures, by the Ministry
of his Prophets and Apostles: yet the knowledge of these things being had, it
hinders not, but that by our own Spirit, we may judge the presence of those
things in our selves, which the Spirit has thus generally set down, as things
necessary in the Elect of God. So then, being by the Word, and out of the
Scriptures, which is the doctrine of the holy Ghost, schooled and instructed in
the nature of these gifts and effects of the Spirit, be it faith, or other
spiritual gift whatsoever; it shall be a matter within the compass of our
own spirits, being thus beforehand furnished and provided, to judge and
discern, whether these things be wrought and effected in us as yet, or not,
which is sufficient for my purpose, and all that I require. If therefore thou will know, if thou be elected, and consequently such an one as shall be saved,
enter first into thine own heart and soul, and see, whether thine own spirit
and conscience does not testify unto thee, and bear thee witness, that, that
is verified and found to be truly, and indeed within thy self, which the word
of God has set down, as a most assured and undoubted mark of the Children
and Elect of God.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of the second argument, whereby the certainty of a man's election is proved.

THe second argument for proof of a man's election, is brought from the Spirit
of God that dwells in us. For as our own Spirits do testify, so the Spirit
of God also does bear witness, together with our spirits, that we are the
sons of God, if sons, then heirs also, even the heirs of God, and heirs
annexed with Christ. Hereupon it is, that this Spirit of God, that thus gives
evidence and witness with us, is called the Spirit of Adoption, the Spirit of
Promise, and the very Earnest of our Inheritance. It is called the Spirit of
Adoption, Romans 8.15. Ephesians. 1.13, 14.
because it does approve unto us our Adoption, that we are singled out from
the world, and by grace in Christ adopted to be the sons of God. And this so
fully and effectually, that it makes us confidently and boldly to cry and call
upon God, by the name of Father. It is called the Spirit of Promise, because it
seals unto our hearts the use of all Gods promises in Christ, contained at
large in the Gospel, to be our own, and to appertain and belong unto us.
And it is called the Earnest of our Inheritance, for that it is as a Pledge and
Pawn unto us, whereby we are assured, that God will perfect and perform his
covenant of life in Christ, that he has made, and indented with us, that are
his faithful Children.

Although this testimony of the Spirit be most true, and in the due and
appointed time of God, Ephesians. 1.13.
(that is, after that they do believe) is certainly found in all the Elect of
God, Ephesians. 1.13. yet I think it not sufficient, this to affirm, but also
more at large to show what this witness and this seal is in the Elect of God,
that so every man may the better discern and judge of it in himself. For
though the Spirit it self be said to be the Earnest of our inheritance,
because that the Spirit, which thus in part works in us, being a part of our
glorification, which is here in this life begun, and that we are by this
part, as by an earnest penny assured, that God, in his time appointed, will
bring this work in us unto perfection, for that he is faithful and just of
his promise, and will not let pass this good work, which he has thus begun
in us, but will perfect and perform it, until the day of Christ: yet in that
the Spirit is said thus to witness, and to seal unto us, the very words do
sufficiently intimate a further thing then the Spirit it self. For it is
certain, that these are things even in common speech and reason distinct and
differing one from another, the testimony or witness, and the person
witnessing the sealing and impression of the seal, and the seal it self.

This testimony, and print or impression of the Spirit, I take not to be
diverse, but to be one and the self same thing, and do judge it to be nothing
else, but the reparation or a new impression of the image of God in us, which
was before cancelled and defaced in us, by reason of the fall of Adam. So that,
when the Spirit is thus said to seal, nothing else is meant thereby, but that it
does again instamp, and ingraue and set upon us, even upon our hearts and
souls, that Image of goodness, purity, holiness, wisdom, sanctity, truth
and love that is of God. For this is the very stamp of the Spirit, which
otherwise, in other places, is called our Regeneration, and this is the
testimony and witness that it gives.

Wherefore that we may now the better see and understand, how this Spirit of
God, in this sort does witness, and give testimony with our Spirits, of nor
adoption into the number and fellowship of the children of God, I think it
good, that we proceed a little further, in the Apostles similitude. This phrase
and manner of speaking, is drawn from the manner of men, used for confirmation
of contracts and bargains made, who having in speech concluded upon their
covenants, straightway cause the same to be first written and engrossed, and
after their seals to be to the same annexed, to witness and assure, both the
truth of the bargain, and also the performance thereof: So that the very print
and impression abiding still in the wax, is a sufficient witness, that those
writings are his act and deed, whose seal is there annexed, and that therefore
also he will in truth surely perform the covenants therein contained. Now for
a further explanation hereof, and to apply this, according to the several
circumstances to our present purpose, it is diligently to be observed and
noted, that the covenants or matter of the writings betwixt God and his
Children, are the promises of Grace, in Christ through faith, comprised in the
Gospel. These said promises are written and engrossed in the tables of every
faithful man's heart, according to that saying, I will write my laws in their
hearts. Ier. 31.33.
And this writing is, when as by faith we do apprehend the same. Whereupon, as
is aforesaid our heart and conscience does witness to us, that they do belong
unto us, and that we are the sons of God. Then together with this also,
comes the seal and witness of the Spirit of God, bearing witness, as I
have said, with our Spirit also, of the truth hereof, by setting his stamp and
seal upon our souls and hearts, wherein, as in tables, these covenants were
written, confirming most effectually, and assuring us, that we are indeed of
the number of those in whom these promises shall be fulfilled, that we are
elect of God, and such as are ordained unto eternal life, because this image
and impression of the Spirit is given and imparted unto none, but those only,
that are in the number of Gods adopted children. See therefore (I pray thee)
now, in what manner the Spirit of God does witness and seal unto thee, that
thou art one of Gods Elect; even by setting and ingrauing upon us such a stamp,
mark and impression, as is only proper and pecuilar unto those that shall be
saved. So that we seeing and beholding this within our selves, are thereby, to
our exceeding comfort, assured and confirmed, that we are Gods Children, and
therefore also heirs and co-heires with Christ of eternal life. Romans 8.17.
Of this testimony then, we are not in any wise to doubt, but to account it
unto us, most sure and certain, for that it has the Spirit of truth to be
the author of it, which Spirit always speaks truth and nothing but truth.
And so much the rather also should we have in us this assurance, because this
is applied even unto our hearts and Spirits, and that with such efficacy and
force, as that it cries, that is to say, it causes us in sight and feeling of
the same, to cry and call upon our God, by the loving and comfortable name of
Father. So that if the testimony of thine own Spirit cannot content or suffice
thee in this point, but that thou do desire to have a further witness of
thine election: See if in thine heart thou can find this seal and
impression, this witness of the Spirit. If thou can, this also will testify
with thy Spirit, that thou art an elected Child of God.

CHAP. XXX.
Of the third Argument, whereby the certainety of a man's election is proved.

THE third Argument for the proof of this Doctrine concerning Man's Election,
and the knowledge and assurance thereof, is brought from the notable effects
and fruits following upon our Regeneration, in the course and race of our life:
For these also do witness and approve unto us our election, as may very well
be gathered by the words of the Apostle, saying, Romans 8.1.
There is no condemnation (says he) unto them that are in Christ Jesus, that
walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. Who are they that walk not
after the flesh, but after the Spirit, but even they that show forth the fruits
of Regeneration, by newness; that is, sanctuy and righteousness of life? And
what is it, to be free from condemnation, but to be one that shall in the end
be saved? And who are those that shall be saved, but only they which before
all times were hereunto elect and ordained? This also is proved effectually by
the Apostle Peter, who exhorting us unto these fruits, wills us to join
virtue with faith, with virtue knowledge, 2. Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
with knowledge temperance, with temperance patience, and with patience
godliness, etc. And after, in the tenth verse, for a conclusion he adds:
Wherefore, brethren, give rather diligence, to make your calling and election
sure: for if ye do these things ye shall never fall. Now how is our election
made sure by our works, but because that these good works, and gifts of the
Spirit, do certify and assure us, that we are in the number of Gods Elect, in
that he vouch safeth in this sort, by his Spirit to work in us? And the
reason is, because that f we do these things, that is, seeing God has so
far communicated his Grace unto us, no doubt, he that has begun so good a
work in us, will continue and hold on still, and that in such a manner, that
we shall never fall.

To these let us add the testimony of Christ; Joh. 13.35.
By this shall all men know, that you are my Disciples, if you have love one to
another. And the Apostle John in his first Epistle, 1. Ioh. 1.7.
is pregnant to this effect. If we walk in the light, as he is in the light,
we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Christ cleanses us from
all sin. 1. Ioh. 2.3, 5.
Again, Hereby are we sure that we know him, if we keep his commandments:
1. Ioh. 3.14.
He that keeps his word, in him is the love of God perfect indeed, hereby we
know that we are in him. And again, We know that we are translated from
death to life, because we love the brethren, etc. Many such like places of
Scriptures might be brought, tending to like effect and purpose: so that as by
the fruits, the good or bad nature of the Tree is known, so by thy works, as
fruits, thy condition and estate may be discerned: For men do not gather
Grapes of Thorns, Math. 7.16.
nor Figs of Thistles: A bad Tree cannot bring forth good fruits, neither can
a good Tree bring forth bad fruit. Bad works are unsavory and unseemly for
him that is renewed by the Spiris; and good works are impossible for him that
still walloweth in the mire and filthiness of his own corruptions.

And all this which I have said notwithstanding, I do not deny, but that the
good Tree may be sometimes blasted, and Winter-bitten, that the fruits thereof
shall be neither so plentiful not so pleasant, either to the eye or to the
taste, and that in the small store of fruit that comes even from the good
Trees, many are greatly spaked and corrupt. My meaning is, that even the
persons regenerate, and the elected children of God may have: What did I say,
may have? nay have indeed, many such times during their continuance in this
earthly and corrupted Tabernacle, wherein the flesh getting something the
better, and preeminence over the Spirit, makes them to bring forth many
unsavory and loathsome fruits, as we find by the examples of Noah, Lot, David
and Peter, and others, which are recorded to fall into great and grievous
sins. And although this be so true, that it may not be gaine-said, yet
these unsavory fruits, and such like, appearing sometimes in the Elect of God,
cannot hinder any thing at all, but that these good effects and fruits I spoke
of, when they do appear and show themselves, in the upright ordering of our
life and conversation, may give their testimony and assurance, and may witness
unto us, as the Scripture teaches, that we are the Chosen and Elect of God.
And thus you see how and from whence the children of God, that are regenerate,
may fetch the testimony and assurance of their Election.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of the Objections against this doctrine of Assurance, and knowledge of our
Election.

AGainst this doctrine concerning our Election, and the knowledge and
certainety thereof, there are two special Objections made.

first is, that hypocrites also, as well as the very Elect, have such a taeste
and feeling of these things, that they also, as well as others, do think that
they have faith, that they have the Spirit of God abiding in them, and that
they have true sanctification in their life, and therefore do flatter
themselves oftentimes, in regard of their deeds; whereas in deed they have
nothing less, as has been before somewhat touched, and shall in the answer
to this Objection, by Gods grace, more at large be declared. And therefore it
is likely (say the framers of this Objection) that notwithstanding these
marks, the Elect of God may be deceived, in judging that he has them, when
as it is but in show only, and not (as it ought to be) in deed and truth.

second objection is, that though they can certainly know and assure
themselves, that they had these things in truth and deed, yet this suffices
not, because that after this, they may fall again from grace, and have no
certainety of their perseverance and continuance until the end.

Both these Objections we have in part touched before, upon occasions offered
in our discourse, and handling of the several temptations, and therefore we
shall be at this time the shorter.

Concerning the first of these two Objections, be it answered, that howsoever
the hypocrites are oftentimes deceived with counterfeit shows and shadows,
because they are given to flatter themselves with every light appearance of
things, without any further in quirie, as aiming especially at their own
glory and praise: yet with the Elect of God it is not so.

Elect in deed, that they do not thus, like hypocrites, content or please
themselves with a slight or slender show. But what of that? When they have done
all that they can, tried and examined things to the uttermost, may they not be
still deceived? When they have found, that they have a faith, may they not be
deceived, in judging whether it be the true faith or no? When they have found
the presence of the Spirit in them, can they make a lively difference, to know
whether it be that Spirit of Adoption or not? For it is apparent, that the
Reprobates also (in some sort) may be partakers of the Holy Ghost. And when
the Elect have well advised them of their works, do see their fruits, and
that to their great good liking, can they certainly tell, whether the same
their works be true effects of true sanctification, or whether they be
fained and hypocritical, seeing that hypocrites also may do thus much as well
as they?

answer, that God, who in his Word has confirmed these to be witnesses to
assure us of our Election, as is aforesaid, has also left unto us, in the same
Word, certain Marks and undoubted Differences, whereby his Elect may both
easily, and also rightly judge and discern of these things, as shall appear
by the particular discourse thereof. First therefore, of the truth of faith,
and how it may be found.

It is not denied, that the Scriptures, speaking of faith, make one kind to
be temporary, false and counterfeit, and another to be true and unfeigned.
And it is also apparent and manifest, that this feigned and timefaith (that I
may so call it) has oftentimes such a glorious and slourishing show, as that
it blinds the eyes, and deceives the judgment of many, and makes them to
esteem and take it, for true faith indeed, whereas it is nothing so. Although
as touching these two kinds of faith, I have showed before in part, what
differences and marks of distinction, the Spirit of God has made betwixt
them, yet let it not grieve thee, if now again I enter into a further and
larger discourse hereof, since so just and fit occasion is offered me thereunto.

Two ways there are, True says known.
whereby the Elect may judge and give sentence of the truth of faith: First, by
the nature of true faith: Secondly, by the effects thereof; for in both these
it is manifestly distinguished from the faith of hypocrites, which is but
feigned and temporary.

The nature of true faith is not only to know Christ, 1. The nature thereof.
and to give consent and approbation unto the doctrine of the Gospel: for thus
much the very Reprobates will do many times, and yet gain nothing to
themselves thereby: But with this knowledge of Christ, and consent unto the
doctrine of the Gospel, the nature of true faith is to apprehend and apply the
same, every man to him severally, and to the benefit and comfort of his own
soul. And this is that which the Scriptures do call the feeding on Christ,
and the sense and seeling of the power and virtue of his Death and Passion. And
this is it also which the Apostle means, Heb. 11.13. where he says, Heb.
11.13.
that they embraced, or saluted the promises, as it were retaining them by
faith into their hearts, as such as belonged and appertained to themselves.
True faith therefore has always (though not ever in the highest measure) this
applying virtue annexed with it, as an essential property. So that, as in two
members, the one being dead, the other quick and lively, thou may easily
discern which is lively, by the living and vital motion, in ministering and
serving unto the necessary use of the body: so by this lively motion wherein
the life of faith in part appears, thou may discern and know thy faith to
be quick and living, in that it does thus minister unto thy soul, by
applying the merits of Christ, and the doctrine of the Gospel, to the
consolation and comfort thereof. For which cause also, this motion of faith, is
called sometimes (Phronesis) Prudence or Understanding, because herein our
faith does show forth and manifest a skill and discretion, in making the use of
the doctrine of the Gospel, whose knowledge we had attained.

As for that other faith of hypocrites, The faith of hypecrites.
that is instly compared to the dead member, for that it wants this motion of
life, it has not this strength to apprehend, nor force and power to apply,
though otherwise he that has it, seem to be sufficiently instructed in the
knowledge of the Mysteries of the death and Passion of Christ: For this faith
indeed consists only in a bare and naked knowledge, without any further use.
And therefore Christ our Savior, speaking of this faith, says, Indeed, it
receives the seed, and the seed sprouteth and springs out again, but yet it
never bears fruit: For these kind of men, are known to be endued with the
knowledge of the Word, and of the Gospel, and seem to have profited and
proceeded therein, that they can discourse and reason of the same; and that
oftentimes very profoundly and learnedly. But yet all this is nothing at all to
the purpose: for all this while they want the principal, which is the fruit
and use of these things, in particular application thereof unto their souls.
And if it so fall out, that they find any joy within themselves in regard
hereof, as oftentimes they do, The joy of hypocrites compared to the joy of
one that has found some treasure, to which he has no good right.
yet it is but like the joy of one, that walking forth, has found a treasure
or precious Jewel that was lost: He is glad and rejoices in himself, at
such a precious accident, as though it were his own, and that he had a good
interest unto the same; and yet he can in no wise assure himself, that it is,
or shall be his goods, because being a thing lost, it is likely the owner will
make inquisition after it: and then his conscience, as good as a thousand
witnesses in this case, tells him, that if the matter be well considered of,
there is no reason or cause of joy at all, howsoever thus foolishly and rashly
he conceived of it before: so likewise the hypocrite, having attained unto this
knowledge of the Mysteries of life, and thus lighting upon this most precious
and most costly Jewel of man's Redemption, by and through the death of Christ,
seems therein to joy, and delight himself, and yet when he has thoroughly
tried and examined himself, he finds, that in very deed this Jewel does
not of right appertain unto him, but to others: And that not he, but others
may claim a right and interest unto the same.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of the effects whereby the Truth of Faith may be known.

AS by the nature, 2. True Faith known by the effects.
so by the effects also the truth of faith may be discerned and known. In
treating whereof, my purpose is, to fetch the ground of my discourse, from the
words of the Apostle, written in the beginning of the sift Chapter of the
Epistle to the Romans; Romans 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
where we read in this manner: Then being justified by Faith, we have peace
toward God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. By whom also we have access
through faith, unto his grace, wherein we stand, and rejoice under the hope of
the glory of God. Neither do we so only, but we rejoice in tribulation,
knowing that tribulation brings forth patience, etc. unto the sixth verse of
the same Chapter. In which words the Apostle Paul (as we may plainly see)
sets down six notable fruits and effects of a true and justifying faith.
For of such a Faith only, does the Apostle there speak. And this also may
very well be proved and confirmed by this: namely, that these fruits are such
as do follow those that are justified; and at that time only, when as they are
now already justified. For so do the Apostles words import. Being justified by
Faith, then we have peace, etc. So that these fruits and effects can never
befall unto a counterfeit and false faith of the hypocrites: And therefore are
good and undoubted marks and tokens, whereby we may know that faith to be a
true faith, and those to have a lively and a justifying faith, in whom they do
appear.

The first fruit and effect of this true and justifying Faith, 1. Fruit of true
faith.
is peace with God. For being justified by Faith, says the Apostle, we have
peace with God: whereby is meant, not only a reconcilement made, in that God
has remitted and forgiven our sins: but also an inward and joyful sense and
feeling of the same, in our hearts and souls. A twofold peace. 1.
There is in the Scriptures a double peace from God set set down: The one is
that reconciliation and atonement, wherewith God is pacified toward us; and
this is nothing else, but the remission of our sins, and our justification in
Christ. And in this respect Christ is said to preach peace, Ephesians. 2.17.
to them that were afar off, and to them that were nigh. And this is that
peace, which the Angel brings news of unto the Shepherds, Luke 2. saying,
Glory be to God on High, Luke 2.24.2.
and peace on earth. The other peace is that which issues and proceeds as an
effect from the former, and that is nothing else, but the feeling and inward
taste and assurance of the former peace and reconcilement: And of this it is
that the Apostle here speaks. Peace of conscience.
This peace is commonly called the peace of conscience. For the conscience,
that before was troubled and disquieted with the sight and horror of sin,
does now feel a certain peace and ease, in that it has a certain taste and
persuasion of the love of God, and of pardon and remission of the same sin in
the blood of Christ. Of this manner of peace speaks our Savior Christ in the
fourteenth of John; My peace give I unto you: Joh. 14.27. Phil. 4.7.
and likewise the Apostle Paul, Phil. 4.7. The peace of God, which passes all
understanding, shall preserve your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus. In which
last words (in Christ Jesus) this is to be noted and observed, which the
Apostle to the Romans has not pretermitted, which is, the means whereby this
peace works in us, and that is, by Christ Jesus. For in him, in his death and
Passion, it places the fruit and fruition of this our remission and
reconcilement at the hands of God. So that this does in a sort intimate a mark
of difference and distinction, whereby a man may know whether this peace be
true or not. For if it be not in Christ Jesus; that is, If in his death and
Passion, in his merits, sacrifice and satisfaction, thou have not this
affurance of remission of thy sins, and reconcilement unto God, but seek
it in some other thing; whether it be in any Ceremonies and Superstitions,
thine own works and merits, or the works and merits of any other, except
Christ only, and his death and Passion, thy peace is not true, but a
counterfeit peace, and such as will deceive thee.

The second fruit of Faith, 2. Fruit of true faith.
is that which issues and proceeds from this inward peace; and that is, a
confidence and boldness to come and approach before the Throne of the grace of
God, and to lay fast hold upon the merits of Christ, and the mercies of God in
him. Of this confidence we read, Ephesians. 2. Ephesians. 2.18.
By him we have an entrance unto the father by one Spirit. And Heb. 4.16. Let
us therefore go boldly to the Throne of Grace, that we may receive mercy, and
find grace to help in time of need. And in the tenth to the Hebrews, verse
22. Heb. 10.22.
it is called a drawing near with a true heart in assurance of faith. So that
upon the former persuasion and assurance, working peace in their conscience,
and in this sight and feeling of Gods gracious and loving countenance toward
them in their hearts and souls, they are the more encouraged to come and
approach unto the presence of God, and to crave pardon and remission of their
sins, at his hands. This the Apostle elsewhere calls a boldness and entrance
with confidence by Faith in him, that is, in Christ: For without him, no man
can come or have access unto the Father. And therefore, they that presume to
come in their own name and worthiness, with confidence in their own works and
merits, or in the works and merits of any other, either Saint or Angel, they
cannot be justly and truly said to have access and approach unto grace; but
rather to depart and to flee the further from it. 1. Tim. 2.5.
For as there is but one God: So also there is but one Mediator betwixt God
and man, and this is Christ alone. And as there is but one Throne of Grace,
whereunto we are to come, and where we are to sue for remission: So is there
but one way appointed for us to walk unto the same, and that is the same our
Savior Jesus Christ, John 14.6.
who is the Way, the Truth and the Life.

The third effect and fruit of this true Faith, 3. Effect or fruit of true
Faith.
is that standing and continuing in this grace of Christ, whereupon follows a
certain joy and rejoicing, in hope and expectation of the glory of God; even
that glory whereof all the Saints of God shall be made partakers in the life
to come. So that this Christian joy is nothing else, but an inward motion of
the Spirit, whereby the heart is exhilarate and made glad; partly, in regard of
the presence and fruition of Christ and of his grace in our hearts by faith;
and partly, in expectation, under hope of that glory, whereof all the sons of
God (as I have said) shall hereafter be partakers. For this cause the Kingdom
of God is called peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. Romans 14.17.
And of this joy speaks the Prophet Esaias, saying, They rejoiced before thee,
Esaias 9.3.
according to the joy in harvest, and as men rejoice when they divide a spoil.
And yet does not this fully express this joy; for it is not a bare joy, but
such an one, as is accompanied with a triumphant boasting and rejoicing: for so
the word in the original Text does signify. And there fore Peter the Apostle
does call it a rejoicing, 1. Pet. 1.8.
with joy unspeakable and glorious. Example hereof we have in David, to whom
the promises of grace and mercy seemed so pleasant and delight some, that he
did solace and recreate himself therein, as things replenished with exceeding
pleasure and delight; saying, that they were more precious unto him then gold;
yea, then much fine gold, sweeter also then honey and the honey comb. And in
the fourth Psalm, he is bold to allege in advancement hereof, Psalm. 4.6, 7.
Many say, Who will show us any good? But lift thou up the light of thy
countenance upon us. Thou have given me more joy of heart, then they have had
when their Wheat and Wine did abound. In this sort therefore the faithful
servants of God do solace themselves, in the sweet and comfortable promises of
grace and mercy, when as having the same to be opened and laid out before them,
their hearts do leap for joy and gladness, in regard of that exceeding
sweetness that they find therein. Insomuch, that they can find nothing in all
the world so excellent, precious and pleasurefull, wherein they can be moved
so much to triumph and boast themselves, as in this grace and mercy in Christ
Jesus. For they do account all other things, Phil. 3.8.
but mere vanities or dung for Jesus sake, and in respect of those benefits,
which by his precious death and Passion he has purchased for them, and is
always ready and willing to impart the same unto them. These are the sweet and
pleasant dainties, whereon their souls take so great pleasure to feed:
according to that in the Canticles: Under his shadow had I delight, Cant. 2 3,
4, 5.
and sat down, and his fruit was sweet unto my mouth. He brought me unto the
Wine-Cellar, and love was his banner over me: Stay me with Flagons, and
comfort me with Apples, for I am sick with love. And this they do so much the
more, for that therewithal they conceive a hope of future happiness, and
participation of ensuing glory that shall be given unto the sons of God. For
this joy, though it be often great, even unspeakable and glorious, as was said
before; yet it is not complete and perfect in this life, but shall have
fullness and consummation in the life to come, when as our hope shall cease to
be a hope, and we shall be set in full possession of that everlasting joy and
happiness, in that glorious inheritance prepared for the Elect of God.

The fourth effect, 4. Effect of Faith.
whereby true faith is known, is a second joy which proceeds and arises out
of this that went before. And this is seen in tribulations and afflictions for
Christ his sake and the Gospel. Of this speaks our Savior Christ, Mat.
5.11, 12.
saying: Blessed are ye, when men revile you, and persecute you, and say all
manner of evil against you, for my sake falsely: Rejoice and be glad for great
is your reward in Heaven. Of this is that of James to be understood, Iam. 1.2.
when he exhorts the brethren to account it an exceeding joy, when they fall
into diverse temptations. For it cannot be, but that they that are possessed
with that former joy, in the promises of grace under hope of glory, but that
they should also triumph and rejoice in afflictions that besall unto them for
Jesus sake. Hereupon it is that the Apostles being beaten and scourged, are
said to depart, Act. 5.41.
rejoicing that they were accounted worthy to suffer rebuke for the name of
Christ. Thus also the Martyrs of God are said to account it a crown of glory,
even their death and martyrdom, which they endured in the cause of Christ. To
this doing (no doubt) they were stirred and moved, because, as Paul speaks,
they did know certainly, and believe that those momentany and light afflictions
do cause a more excellent and eternal weight of glory. Or else, because they
are fully instructed and taught in the true use and fruit of their afflictions,
To. 5.3, 4, 5.
and do know that tribulations bring forth patience; and patience, experience;
and experience, hope; and hope makes not ashamed. But it is far otherwise with
the hypocrites: For their time, or rather untimely faith (in stead of
triumphing and rejoicing, as one finding fit matter whereon to work) does
waste and melt away at the heat of these tribulations, even as the snow before
the Sun. Well it may appear to flourish awhile, in time of peace, and to
shoot out the blade: but when the parching sun of afflictions does show
forth his beams, when the time of persecutions, the time of trial is come, it
then falls and withers away, as though it never had been. For howsoever
they seem to approve and like well of Religion; yet do they not delight in
this Jewel that will cost so dear, as either goods or life: and therefore do
utterly fall and shrink away from it, seeing it cannot be had and held,
without such trouble and disquiet. And that thou may the better know and
discern the true rejoicing, from the counterfeit joy of hypocrites: I would
wish thee to consider well of the Apostles words before recited out of Romans
5.3, 4, 5. To. 5.3, 4, 5.
where the Apostle does maruellously illustrate the same. First, by certain
effects, which proceed therefrom, one upon anothere by degrees: and secondly,
from the special cause thereof. The effects are: First, Patience, which
consists in quiet suffering and abiding the Lords corrections, without any
repining, murmuring, or grudging against the Lord for the same. Secondly,
experience, which is that assurance of Gods care and favor toward them in
their afflictions, who although he has laid the same upon them, yet he will
sustain and uphold them so, that they shall not shrink or fall under this
heavy burden of tribulations, and that the Lord in his good time, for a
testimony of his love, will deliver them. Thirdly, from these arises hope,
that having had experience of Gods love heretofore in delivering of them, they
are thereby also put in hope, that his loving care over them is not now ended;
but shall still be continued toward them. And fourthly, this hope brings
forth a boldness, to persist in confidence, and still to depend upon him without
shame, as knowing assuredly, that in time convenient he will not fail them.

Secondly, the cause or foundation whereupon this triumphant rejoicing,
accompanied with these effects is grounded, is the love of God, spread in their
hearts, because their hearts and souls find and feel the love of God to be
so great and exceeding toward them in Christ Jesus, that they are thereby
persuaded, that whatsoever he does permit and suffer to befall them, shall by
Gods working turn to their great good and benefit: Strengthening themselves
with this reason of the Apostle elsewhere alleged, That seeing GOD has not
spared his own Son, Romans 8.32.
but gave him for us all to death, how shall he not with him give us all
things also? For in this sort, and after this order, by this fruitful
meditation of grace in Christ, and in his death and Passion, is that same
sheading and spreading abroad of Gods love toward his children performed. And
therefore the Apostle even immediately upon the same, annexeth the remembrance
of the Passion of our Savior: Romans 5 6.
For Christ (says he) when we were of no strength, at his time dyed for the
ungodly.

The fifth effect of Faith, The fifth effect of Faith.
whereby as a mark thereof it is to be known, is love, not that love before
spoken of, for that was in regard of us a passive love, being the Love God
whereby he loves us. But this love, whereof we now speak, is active in
regard of our selves, even that love which we extend to others: Gal. 5.6.
for faith works by love: so that if thou have a living and a working Faith,
thou shall also have a love attending on it, for else it cannot work at all.

Now this love, in regard of the double object, is found to be of two sorts:
that is, the love which we owe unto God, principally and above all: and
secondly, the love which we owe and ought to bear toward our neighbor. And
these two kinds of love, although they greatly differ the one from the other;
yet they are always so linked, and inseparably coupled and tied together, that
they cannot in any wise be parted or severed the one from the other. For how
can he, says John, 1. Ioh. 4.20.
that loves not his brother whom he has seen, love God whom he has not
seen? And again, this commandment have we of him, that he which loves
God, should love his brother also. And therefore the same Apostle in the same
Epistle, makes the one to be a sign and token, whereby a man may know if
he have the other. In this we know (says John) that we love the children of
God, 1. Ioh. 5.2.
when we love God, and keep his Commandments.

Hereupon now it may be very well concluded, that if thy faith be true and
lively, thou shall easily find these two kinds of love to be in thee, the
love of GOD, and the love of thy Christian brethren. My meaning is, that thou will have a Christian care, so far forth as thou shall be enabled by the
Spirit of God, 1. Ioh. 5.3.
to perform and do the will of God. For this is the love of God (says John)
that we keep his commandments: And also, wilt be careful, ready and willing
to thy power, to perform and do the duties of love and charity unto thy
Christian brother, in helping, cherishing, counselling, and comforting of him
to thy power, in matters concerning both the good of the body, and also the
safety and salvation of the soul. This love is of that nature, that it must
show forth it self even to our enemtes, and to their good, and then much more
to those that are members of the same body with us, according to that of the
Apostle: Do good unto al men, but speciully unto the^ which are of the household
of Faith. Gal. 6.10.


Under these two kinds of Christian love (as we may see) is contained the
whole work of our sanctification, which is all in faith: I mean the true
says, which purifyeth and cleanses our hearts, and from this faith issues and
flows as from a plentiful fountain, Act. 15.9.
into all the parts and members of the body, holding and containing them
within the bounds and lists of their several duties. So that in showing forth
the fruits of this purification, in the deeds of love, both toward God, and
toward our neighbor: we are said to walk according to the Spirit, which
being once discerned and known, we have then a most sure argument of the truth
of faith. Romans 8.1.
For there is no condemnation to them that walk not after the flesh, but after
the Spirit. And who are they, that shall thus be saved, and shall not enter
into condemnation, but they that do believe. As appears by the words of
Christ himself, Joh. 5.24.
saying, He that hears my Word, and believes in him that sent me, has
everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but has passed from
death to life. And again: God so loved the world, that he has given his
only begotten Son, John 3.16.
that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.

Seeing now that the Children of God have these so many, and so excellent
fruits and effects, as marks and tokens to teach and instruct them in the
truth of faith, and as guides to lead and direct them in the judgment of their
Faith, they may very well conclude to their great comfort, both that their
faith is in very deed a true, lively, and justifying faeith, and that
therefore their election is doubtless certain an I sure, whatsoever the
enemies of this doctrine will seem to object to the contrary.

CHAP. XXXIII.
How the faithful shall know that they have the Spirit of Adoption.

THese things being in this manner set down, for the better quieting of the
troubled conscience, it now remains, that as we have occupied our selves in
poynting out the marks of a true and lively faith, so likewise we take some
pains, to syft out and try also, how the servants of God, his faithful and
elect children, may discern and know, that they have that testifying Spirit of
Adoption, whereof the Apostle speaks, Romans 8.16. that gives that plain and
evident testimony unto their spirits, that they are the sons of God. For the
wicked and reprobates, in some sort, may be partakers of the Holy Ghost, and
therefore it seems that the Elect, in this point, may be easily deceived,
and mistake this their witness.

Two things, here by the way, we must take good heed of. as it is the Spirit
of Adoption: For in this manner and in this respect it is imparted to the Elect
of God only, and to none other; For as many as are led by this Spirit, Romans
8.14.2.
they are the sons of God. Secondly, that we do not imagine this Spirit of
Adoption, to be distinct in substance and essence, from that whereof the wicked
are partakers, as though it had a diverse nature, but that the only difference
is in the manner of operation; or to speak more plainly, in the manner of
distributing, and dividing his gifts amongst men. And according to this
operation, or distribution, there are diverse names ascribed unto him in the
Scriptures, and yet the Spirit is but one and the same still. As for an
example, when this Spirit effects wisdom in any, it is called the Spirit of
Wisdom; when he does effect peace and joy, he is called the Spirit of peace
and joy. When he works this witness of Adoption in any, it is called the
Spirit of Adoption. And on the other part, when he puts fear and terror
into any, he is called the Spirit of bondage. The truth hereof is proved by
the words of the Apostle Paul, affirming that there are diner sities of gifts,
1. Cor. 12.8, etc.
but the same Spirit: For, to one is given, by the Spirit, the word of
wisdom, and to another the word of knowledge, by the same Spirit; and to
another, is given faith, by the same Spirit; and to another, the gifts of
healing, by the same Spirit, and to another, the operations of great works;
and to another Prophecy, and to another the discerning of Spirits, and to
another diversities of tongues, and to another the interpretation of tongues:
and all these things, works even the self same Spirit, distributing to every
man severally as he will. So that in nature and essence it is the same Spirit
that works in the distribution of all these gifts, both to the Elect and also
Reprobates, although the persons in whom he works, be (as I have said)
found to be diverse. Seeing then that the case stands so, that even the
Reprobates are partakers of the Holy Ghost, in that the gifts of the Holy
Ghost, in some part, are given and imparted unto them; I think it very
expedient, for the removing of all doubts which may arise, concerning this mine
assertion: First, to show, in what manner this Spirit is, and does thus
diversely work in the one, and in the other, in the Elect and in the Reprobate:
And seeondly, what are the true marks and tokens, whereby the Spirit of
Adoption may be discerned.

As touching the first, it is be considered, that the Spirit being in essence
very God, and therefore infinite, and incomprehensible, cannot be said to be
contained in any thing, but fills heaven and earth: And therefore, when it is
said, that he is in any, it is to be understood, that he is in them by his
working and operation: And this manner of his being in them, is after two
sorts, either natural or else supernatural. Natural I call that, which
exceeds not the course and reach of man's nature: And this is such as touches
and concerncth the being only; and in this sense, the Spirit may be said to
be in the very senseless creatures, and to have his working and operation in
them. For by this Spirit of God it is, that every thing is and has his being,
and by the same Spirit it is preserved and maintained. Or else it is such as
concerns things sensible, and endued with life sense and motion, and thus it
is imparted unto the very dumb and unreasonable creatures; For even unto these
it is that GOD gives life and maintenance, and that by his Spirit, effectually
working and performing all things; according to that of the Psalmist, Thou
sendest forth thy Spirit. and they were created, and thou renewest the face of
the earth. Or else it is such as concerns things endued with being, life,
sense, and reason; and thus he is in man, in a more perfect manner then in the
former, working in him the gifts of nature, as sense, reason, understanding,
and such like. And in this sense, every man living may be said to have the
Spirit of God, because he has it in one sort or other, working some one or
other of these natural gifts in him. The second way is supernatural, that is,
when the Spirit works beyond nature, and such things as are not incident unto
the common nature of man: And these are such as respect and concern the
knowledge of himself, which flesh and blood, in her ordinary reach and
capacity, could never come or attain unto; and therefore I do call this a
supernatural kind of working. Which although it be in some sort found in many
of the Reprobates, yet was it not generally in all, all were not partakers of
it: For it is manifest, that many of them have deceased, only in nature,
without any further light of this true knowledge, which is revealed in the
Scriptures, which were for a long time detained and holden from the Gentiles,
and at this day cannot be suffered in many Kingdoms of the world. This
supernatural kind of working, is of two sorts also. First, by illumination,
and inlightning of the mind with knowledge and understanding of the Mysteries
of life and salvation, whereby the mind is taught and instructed, and thereby
endued with a knowledge of the Word of life, the Law and the Gospel, and the
several points therein contained. Secondly, by Regeneration and
Sanctisication, as an effectual fruit of the former knowledge and
understanding.

Now for resolution of this doubt, concerning the Reprobates having of the
Spirit of God, it is to be understood, that they have it, not only in that
natural sort, but also even in this supernatural order, working in them. For
they are often illuminated and enlightened with the knowledge of God; they are
often instructed in the knowledge of the Scriptures, both the Law and the
Gospel, insomuch, that they can Preach and Prophecy in the name of Christ,
Math. 7.22.
as we read Mat. 7. as did Judas the Traitor, and many others. This is that
which is written, Heb. 6.4, 5.
Heb. 6. That they are lightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and
have been partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted of the good Word of
God, and of the powers of the world to come. If hereupon it fall out, that any
further effect do ensue and follow in them, it is either terror and fear,
derived from the Law, which the Apostle calls the Spirit of bondage: Romans
8.15.
Or else if it be any conceit of joy, yet it is but some sudden and uncertain
flash, quickly appearing, and as quickly vanishing away again, as is before
declared. But as for the Spirit of Sanctification, and Regeneration, the
Reprobates can never be partakers of; this kind of working of the Spirit is
never found in them, it is only proper and peculiar unto the Chosen and Elect
of God. They only are regenerated, they only are in Christ adopted: And they,
and none but they, are sanctified by the Spirit of God. For the resolution of
this doubt, let this suffice. It comes next to be considered of the true
marks whereby this Spirit of Adoption may be discerned and known, how the
Elect may know this Spirit of Adoption to be in them, and that witness and
testimony that they feel in them, to be the true testimony and witness of
the Holy Ghost.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
Of the true Marks whereby the Spirit of Adoption may be known.

THere needs no long discourse, concerning these marks of this Spirit of
doption, nor how it may be known to be in us, if we have once found our faith
by the fruits and effects before showed, to be a true faith. For this is to be
holden for a Maxim or Principle in Christian Religion, that none can have this
true faith, without the inward working of this Spirit of Adoption. He is the
giver and effecter thereof. And therefore when thou have found thy faith to be
such that is true and lively, as I have said, thou may safely assure thy
self, that thou have this Spirit of Adoption, whereby thou art sealed unto the
day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4 30.
and glorious manifestation of the sons of God.

object and say, To what purpose is this? the Spirit has a testimony and
witness also; and seeing that hypocrites may flatter themselves in uncertain
hope, how shall I know, whether the testimony in my self be from this Spirit
of Adoption, or no?

question is well moved, and I will, by the help and assistance of this same
Spirit of God, do what I can to satissie thee herein. First, thou must know,
that this Spirit being found in thee by thy faith, showing it self so lively
and effectual, and withal, if thou find any such witness of thine
election, as has been before rouched, thou art then to assure thy self, that
it is the witness of none other but of the Spirit of God. For as this Spirit
having once taken possession in us, cannot be idle and unfruitful, but is
always working in some measure more or less: So neither will Satan seek by
such godly motions to deceive those that are truly regenerate, as he does the
Hypocrites and Reprobates; but takes a far contrary course, that is, as much
as in him lies, or that he can or may, to rebate and lessen such good
motions, and to falsify this undoubted and certain witness in them, because
he sees them to be truth in deed: Otherwise he should rather confirm then
hinder the Saints of God, which is a thing clean contrary and against his
nature: for he is a a liar, and the father of lies: Ioh. 8.44.
And cannot abide to speak the truth, except it be to his own advantage. He
is a common, ancient, and a professed enemy of the Elect and Chosen of God,
always greedily seeking and gaping after their destruction. And therefore it
is in mere compulsion, and contrary to his intent and desire, if at any time
he be supposed to do any good. Now then, when thou have found thy faith, and
thereby also the presence of the Spirit, it must needs follow, that the
witness that thou feel within thee, witnessing unto thy soul, must of
necessity be the witness of this Spirit of Adoption.

print and impression of the Image of God in our hearts and souls, that was
marred and defaced so greatly by the fali of Adam. This Image or impression is
easily known and discerned, from the counterfeit and outward show of
hypocrites, whose sanctity and devotion is only outward. Glorious indeed they
appear in the outward show, like painted Sepulchers, but if they look
inwardly unto the heart, there is nothing to be found but rottenness and
corruption. So that it may easily be there seen, that the ruins of old Adam
are not yet again repaired in them. Look therefore (I would advise thee) not
unto the outward appearance, be it never so glorious and goodly, but look
into thy soul the inward part, and look so near as thou can into every
corner thereof, and see if thou can find the rubbish of Adams fall to be in
some sort swept and cast out, and the image of GOD in holiness and
righteousness, to be in some measure renewed and imprinted again upon thee:
Which if thou can see and perceive, then assure thy self, that this
Testimony is in deed the undoubted and infallible Wunesse and Testimony of
this Spirit of Adoption.

constancy and certainety of the testimony that it gives: For it is not like
the wavering and unsteadfast flash of hypocrites, which think marvelous well of
themselves, slattering and persuading themselves for a time in a blind conceit,
that they are in the number of GODS Elect, but cannot grow indeed to any
continual or certain resolution therein. But this Spirit, if it have liberty
to speak, and be attentively hearkened unto, yields forth a full, and a
settled persuasion of the truth of our Election in Christ, I say, if it have
liberty to speak, and be attentively heard; for that it oftentimes falls out
with the faithful, that though they have this certain Witness within them,
yet the Flesh sometime getting the head and mastry over the Spirit in them,
will not suffer it to speak so plainly as it would. And they also, being
thereupon troubled with this frailty which they find in themselves, do often
fall into many wavering and doubting thoughts, while they do not listen
attentively unto this witness of the Spirit, that now seems to speak more
coldly, and with a lower, and less audible voice unto their souls, then
heretofore. For certain it is, that though the Spirit does always witness,
and gives also a most certain and constant Witness, for it is the Spirit of
Truth; yet it is not always in the like measure, to the discerning of our
souls, but sometime more evidently, and sometime less; yea, and that sometime
also so obscurely, as that the children of God, whiles they are too much busied
otherways, in hearkening unto the suggestions of Satan, the World, and the
Flesh, they do seem, as though they heard it not at all. Wherefore, if thou
have once felt and found this testimony of the Spirit in thee, let it suffice
thee, and be therewith content, his testimony once given, is of great force,
for that (as I have said) he cannot lie: Therefore I say, if at any time it
has witnessed the same unto thee, seal it up for a most certain truth: For
the Spirit of God, which leads us to all truth, speaks nothing but Truth,
has spoken it. And although now it seem to wax so cold, in giving evidence,
yet if it do but whisper; nay, if it do (as you would say) but breathe within
thee, that is, give never so secret and small a Testimony, yet do not thou
misdoubt it, for even this is as sure as a thousand other clamorous and loud
witnesses, to confirm the truth of thine Election. And be further assured of
this, that thou can not in any wise reject this testimony, though it seem
in thine eyes, but simple and slender, without exceeding injury offered unto
the Spirit of Truth.

manner also of the effecting this certain Witness and Testimony, thou may
discern it to be the testimony of this Spirit of Regeneration and Adoption:
for it is wholly and fully in the Death and Passion of Christ, even by by
assuring thy soul and conscience, that Christ, with all his benefits, is
thine, and that in and through him, and him alone, thou art become the adopted
Child of God, and heir of everlasting glory. Now whereas by thy question
moved, thou seem to doubt of the truth of this testimony, whether it be of
the Holy Ghost, or not: I answer further, Is it any thing likely, that Satan
would ever persuade any man of this assurance of such incomparable benefits, as
Christ by his Death has purchased for his Elect? Would he ever persuade men,
that in Christ we are made the adopted Children of God? No, I assure you that
is far from Satan's purpose: he knows that this kind of doctrine serves
not to advance, but utterly to overthrow his kingdom; and therefore labors,
what he may, to suppress the public preaching of the Gospel, that this kind
of doctrine should be hid from the knowledge of men; so far is he off from
furthering of the inward application of the same, unto the comfort of our
souls, wherein the virtue of Christ his death consists. Therefore if at any
time the hypocrites do flatter and persuade themselves in their election, it is
not wholly, alone and principally in Christ, and from his death and Passion,
that this persuasion arises, but upon some other good liking and cockering
affection, that they have unto their feigned and hypocritical devotion, while
they take such slight and slender trial and examination of themselves.

Witness may be known, by two notable and excellent effects attendant and
waiting upon the same: First, that the Spirit does hereby shead abroad in our
hearts, Romans 5.5.
the love of God toward us in Christ Jesus; for it makes us to have a
certain sense and feeling of the love and favor of God toward us. Secondly,
upon this follows another effect, and that is, that upon this sense of love,
and sheading of his tender mercy in our hearts, to the taste and feeling of our
souls, it causes us withal to cry and call upon him, by the name of Father;
for now when we thus feel his love and mercy, whether we cast our eyes
downward, upon our selves, or upward, upon the face of God in Christ, we see
and behold him still, as a gracious, loving, merciful, and compassionate
Father, reconciled to us by and through Christ, and our selves to be his
adopted sons and children, whom he in his eternal purpose, in grace and
mercy, has selected and ordained unto life, and that by and through the same
our Savior Jesus Christ, his dear Son. Hitherto of the witness of the
Spirit. Let us now come to the outward fruits of our Regeneration.

CHAP. XXXV.
Of the outward fruits of Regeneration.

HYpocrites as well as the Regenerate, have in outward show, many good deeds,
whereby they gain to themselves no small praise and commendation of devotion
and holiness, as appears by the sect of the Pharisees. And therefore it
seems, that in this reason, brought of the outward fruits of Regeneration,
and in this argument of their election, the faithful may conclude amiss. To
this I answer no, in no wise. For notwithstanding this likelihood bewixt their
works, yet there are undoubted differences, whereby the man truly renewed and
regenerate, does and may discern his deeds from those of hypocrites. For
further and better proof whereof, it is well to be observed, that there are
three things, wherein the faithful man may make and put a difference betwixt
those good works which proceed from himself, and those that are found in
hypocrites. 1. the matter. 2. the form and manner of them. And 3. the end
whereunto they are directed.

First, concerning the matter, although not all, yet many of their works by it
are distinguished. For the good works of the man regenerate, do fetch their
ground and warrant from the Word of God, and are such deeds and actions as God
has commanded: But the works of hypocrites, contrary wise, are such, for the
most part, as are invented and devised by men, having no ground nor warrant for
them in the Scriptures. Of the which sort are very many in Popery, namely,
their diriges, trentals, masses, pilgrimages, shrifts, superstitious fastings
and a great number more of the same kind, which are all the doctrines of men,
and not of God: And therefore utterly disliked or rather condemned in the sight
of God. So that although the authors and inuentors hereof flattering themselves
in their blindness, were persuaded, that they did herein a good work, in
obtruding these and such like upon the blind and ignorant people: And the
people also were in like manner persuaded in yielding obedience in this
behalf, yet both the sorts of these men are for their doings condemned in the
sight of God, for that their actions in all respects are found and proved to be
contrary to his holy will contained in his Word.

It may be that for the matter of some of their works, the hypocrites can often
fetch their warrant from God himself, and that they are such in respect of
matter, as God himself in his Word has commanded, as namely, almes-giuing,
prarer and fasting, and yet in the form and manner of working herein, they are
found always to differ from the faithful: and therefore the man regenerate,
although he cannot find this difference betwixt their works in respect of the
matter, yet no doubt, he shall and may very well find it, in respect of the
manner. And this will plainly appear in this; that always in the doings and
actions of good and true Christians, there are three things necessarily
required. Heb. 11.6.
First, faith, and that true faith indeed, for without this faith it is
impossible to please God, and unless our actions proceed from this faith,
Romans 14.23.
they are sin, for whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. Of this faith I
mean not now to make any large discourse, for that I have treated thereof
before, and showed the marks whereby it may be known, and therefore hold my
self contented concerning my present purpose at this time, for a difference
betwixt these two estates of men, the true Christian and the Hypocrite, to
affirm that the faithful and true Christian has in him this settled
persuasion touching his works, that although they be but small and slender,
and far unanswerable to his duty, being so imperfect, and such as can deserve
nothing at the hands of God: yet that in and through Christ, and for his sake,
God will accept them for good at his hands, and that not for any worthiness of
himself, but for the worthiness of Jesus Christ. Out of this faith there
spring two other principal branches amongst others, which the true Christian
shows forth in the manner of his actions and doings in Christ, namely,
humility and love. Humility, in that he always is ready to abase himself,
utterly abandoneth all trust and confidence in his works, and willingly
confesses, according to the counsel of our Savior Christ, that when he has
done all that he can, yet he is not simply a servant, Luke 17.10.
but an unprofitable servant. Love, both toward God and also toward his
neighbor: faith must work by love. If love then, whereby our works are to be
seasoned, be wanting, then all our deeds, be they never so glorious, never so
many, nay, if they were a thousand more, yet are they indeed nothing. Now if we
look into the works of the hypocrites, and try them thoroughly, we shall find,
that in the manner of the working, they are far behind, and come short of the
doings of the faithful: For by way of retrogradation, that is, beginning to
try them by the last point, and so ascending upward, we shall easily find,
that this true love is not in them, but a love only of themselves and their
own glory: they are utterly void of humility, nay, they are rather to be said
to be puffed up with pride, partly, in that they are ready always so to brag
and vaunt themselves and their works, and partly, in that they contemn and
despise others in comparison of themselves. And this true faith they cannot be
justly said to have, for that they repose their confidence in their own works
and merits, and so leave the trust and confidence which they ought to have in
Christ: and thus according to the saying of the Prophet, Ier. 2.13.
They forsake the fountain of living waters, to dig the^ pits, even broken pits
that can hold no water.

As in the manner there is a manifest difference to be found betwixt the
works of the faithful, and the works of the hypocrites: So in the end also
whereunto their works are referred, the one may be easily discerned from the
other. For the faithful man makes these to be the end and drift of his good
works: 1. And principally the glory of God. 2. The good and benefit of the
Church of Christ. And 3. the declaration and performance of his Christian duty
otherwise. But with the hypocrite it is not so. For he, in his good working,
either seeks thereby to get and purchase himself a name of holiness amongst
men, as we may read Mat. 6. doing all to be seen of men, Or else, to hide and
conceal other enormous and filthy corruptions, that would happily break out,
to the great shame of themselves, and no little offense to others; as did the
Pharisees, Mat. 23. Mat. 23.14. and 23.
which under the color of long prayers, are noted justly by our Savior Jesus
Christ, to devour widows houses, and under the color of tything a little
mint, and annise, and cummin, and being too too scrupulous and curious in
matters of small importance, did leave the weighty matters of the Law, as
Judgment, and Mercy, and Fidelity, and thus went sheere away with injustice
and violation of the Law of God. So that these three things in works being
then duly considered, we may plainly see, that it is a thing of no
difficulty, for the person regenerate, to make a true difference betwixt
himself and an hypocrite, and betwixt his own works and the works of an
hypocrite. And so in himself he may be assured, that if his works be done in
faith, in humility and love, and to those good and godly ends, as I have
declared, how near so ever they appear to the works of hypocrites in matter,
yet differing so far from them in manner, they are doubtless the true fruits
of the Spirit of sanctification, and therefore himself also undoubtedly to be
in the tale and number of Gods adopted Children.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Of the second Objection.

HItherto we have showed how the man regenerate may be assured of his adoption:
now we are come to the other objection, which was, that the righteous man and
regenerate may fall again; and therefore that all this which has been said,
is not to any purpose or effect, for that he is not assured of his continuance
and perseverance unto the end.

To this I answer, that this doctrine thus urging the final fall of the
faithful, is indeed as far from the truth, as truth it self is said to be
from falsehood. For what a dangerous point of doctrine is it (that I speak no
hardlier) that any man should once think, that they which are once renewed and
regenerate by the Spirit of sanctification, can afterward relapse and fall away
without recovery? This doctrine I may very well call dangerous, because it is a
doctrine first broached by Satan himself, the author of all mischief, and
therefore very prejudicial unto man's salvation, and not in any hand to be of
us received, or harkened unto: yea, which is more, it is found to be very
injurious, even to all the persons in the Deity, in that their eternal decree
is thereby, as far as Satan can prevail, falsified and made frustrate and
void. Nay, this rather ought to be written and registered for an undoubted and
everlasting truth in the heart, and upon the tables of every faithful and
Christian soul, that they that are once thoroughly and effectually called and
regenerate, can never fall away for ever, but shall and must continue and
persevere unto the end: Once regenerate and in the state of grace, and ever so,
whatsoever Satan and thy sinful flesh can devise and practice against thee. My
reasons to prove this my Assertion, are as follow.

The first reason is brought from the certainty and immutability of the decree
of Gods election. 1. Reason.
For this decree cannot, by any means which Satan can devise, be altered and
changed. For they that are predestinate unto life, shall never be condemned.
And contrariwise, they that are ordained unto death, shall (out of doubt) be
never saved. The reason is, because that God, who is the Author of this Decree,
does never alter or change, and therefore his decree and purpose cannot be
altered or changed. If it were so, that his counsels could be changed in this
point, these inconveniences would then follow, that either God could not
perform what he had decreed and determined: or else, that in continuance of
time, the same decrees may be bettered and amended. Both which are far from the
nature of God, either not to be able to perform his will, or not to see, even
at first and before all times, what is agreeable to his own Nature and most
behoouefull for his own Glory: This is most certain, and of all the faithful
to be received as an undoubted verity, that as God has been most wise and
prudent before all beginnings, in his counsels and decrees: So he is and shall
continue most powerful, even for all eternity, in performing and effecting of
the same. Wherefore, since the election of every one of Gods faithful Children
is a thing so certain, and so immutable, that it can never change; And since
it is also proved, that every one of the Elect, in his due time, may assure
himself that he is elect, it also follows of necessity, that he may in like
sort assure himself of his continuance and perseverance unto the end. Nay, I
add further, that he ought to do no less, because that otherwise he shall
make God to be variable and uncertain in his decrees and purposes, as one
wanting either wisdom sufficient, beforehand to decree and purpose, or power
in time appointed to perform his will, in whom the Scripture has taught us to
account both these, namely, his wisdom and power, and also all other his
essential properties, to be in the highest degree of all perfection, yea,
beyond all measure and account.

The second reason is brought from the motive cause of this election, 2 Reason.
wholly and alone in Gods love, and in his glory. For because of himself he
loved us, therefore he elected us, and because he would in this sort be
glorified in us, he so decreed of us. The causes are durable, continual, and
subject to no change: and how can then our election cease to be perpetual?
Gods love is limited with no time: but whom he loves, he loves with an
everlasting love. And when think you shall that time be ever found, wherein
God will not be most careful to perform that which he in wisdom finds to
be most convenient and behoouefull for his own glory? So that as sure as God
can never cease to love, and never leave to further his own glory and honor:
so sure also and certain it is, that they that are elect, shall never cease to
be elect for ever.

The third argument is brought from the care of Christ, 3 Reason.
unto whom we are by an effectual vocation knit and joined. For he loses
none of those whom his Father gives him: Ioh. 17.12. Ioh. 10.28.
neither shall any be ever able to take them out of his hands. Seeing now that
all the Elect are given unto him (for all that by a true and lively faith are
ingraffed in him, are also his, of which sort in time are all and every the
Elect and Chosen of God) and seeing also, that he so keeps and preserves
them, that he loses none, neither shall any be ever able to take them from
him, how can it ever be, that they which are once in Christ, should ever fall,
I mean finally fall away without recovery? Neither let any man take exception
against this mine assertion, because of Judas the Traitor, for that it
follows, Ioh. 17.12.
But that son of perdition: For this was not said, because Judas was elected in
Gods decree unto eternal life: But Christ did therefore call him his, because
he had entertained him, and received him into the number of the Apostles,
appointed him to preach the Gospel, to heal diseases and to cast out devils
in the name of Christ, as he had done the other Apostles. And in this and none
other respect it is, that Christ names him one of his: but otherwise he
calls him the son of perdition. And elsewhere Christ shows plainly, that
the same Judas, in Gods eternal decree, was not elect at all. Ioh. 13.18.
I speak not of you all (says Christ) I know whom I have chosen: but it is,
that the Scripture might be fulsilled. He that eats bread with me, has
lift up his heel against me. In which words, Christ makes a plain
distinction, betwixt Judas, and those that he had chosen and elected unto life.

The fourth reason is brought from the former witness and testimony of the
Spirit of God before declared, 4. Reason.
which is always most true and certain, which does testify and seal unto
us, not only that we are sons and Children, but heirs also and coheyres
with Christ of eternal glory. Now how can this witness of the Spirit be true,
that we are heirs and coheyres with Christ of life, if we might at any time
so fall again, as that we might be condemned unto eternal death? Wherefore
I would advise the broachers and setters forward of this objection, to beware
and take heed unto themselves betime, how they labor to uphold and maintain
this so pernicious a point of doctrine, for that in defense thereof, they shall
evidently appear to argue the holy Ghost of falsehood: which thing be far
from all Christians.

The fifth Argument is brought from that inseparable connection and dependancie
of the gifts and graces of the Holy Ghost, 5. Reason. Romans 8.30.
and of his working in the Elect and Chosen: for, whom he predestinate unto
life, them also he called; whom he called, them he justified; whom he
justified, them he glorified. So that I may then in this manner reason: Art
thou elected and predestinate unto life? Thou shall then be called, and also
justified. And art thou justified? and can thou yet fall utterly from grace
and life? No in no wise: for if thou be justified, thou shall also be
glorified. What plainer evidences then these can be brought, for the
continuance and perseverance of the Elect of God, and to warrant them against
this objected fall without recovery?

The sixth reason may be brought from the immovable estate of the Regenerate
of God, 6. Reason.
in that, that neither sin, Satan, Death nor any other their enemies can
prevail against them, to impair their hope, or do them hurt, although they
daily with all their power do attempt the same. And the reason is, because
Christ has so fully satisfied his Father, and reconciled him unto them. If
they could so fall, as by the objection is pretended, then it is likely, that
this fall must come by the suggestion of Satan, or by some other means of the
enemies aforesaid. But there is nothing at all, that can prevail so far
against them; as appears by the Testimony of the Apostle Paul: Who (says
the Apostle) shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or
anguish, Romans 8.35.
or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? Nay, in all
these things (says he) we are more then conquerours, through him that loved
us. And adds further for more manifestation of this point, that he is
persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor
Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature (and what can then endanger us?) shall be able to separate us
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Upon this we may
safely infer, to our consolation and comfort, that if Gods love do still
continue toward us, and that he be with us, and take part with us, we need
not to fear who be against us. And whereas there is indeed great force and
power in sin, to work if it were possible this separation betwixt God and
us, and to effect this fall of Gods Elect; yet even sin is found to have lost
her power in this behalf, Romans 8.33.
as does plainly appear by the words of the Apostle even a little before Who
(says the Apostle) shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Chosen? It is God
that instifieth. If none can lay to the charge, It is Christ that is dead, yea
rather, that is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God, and makes
intercession for us. An argument (no doubt) very strong and forcible, is here
brought by the Apostle. Christ (says he) is dead for sin; and how then
should sin be imputed to his Chosen; whereof Christ already has in his own
person sustained the punishment? Or if the Elect do daily sin (as they
without doubt do, so long as they continue in this corrupted Tabernacle) yet
how should this deprive and spoil them of their hope, seeing Christ stands a
continual Intercessor and Mediator in their behalf, to qualify and appease
his Fathers wrath against them for sin? Seeing then that the matter is so
plain, thou art to leave off to dispute and reason against the durable estate
of Gods Elect and Chosen unto the end, unless thou will show and prove thy
self a very injurious censurer of this sacred office of Christ our Savior.
Which, if thou do, thou can not in the sight of GOD be holden guiltless;
but art to have God to be a sharp revenger of the injury done and committed
by thee: and it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the Lord.

The seventh reason may be drawn from the promises and doctrine of life, 7.
Reason.
and of that joyful Resurrection and glorious estate of Gods Chosen in the
life to come. These promises are so firm and sure, and this doctrine is so
clear, that they cannot be gainesayed without great prejudice. For to say
that the Elect of God, having once assurance of their election, have not also
therewith an assurance of their perseverance and continuance unto the end, is
to deprive them of the special use of those promises of such blessedness in the
life to come. And then what greater comfort should the faithful and Regenerate
find in those promises then the faithless and Reprobate? And further what
benefit or comfort could grow to the faithful, by those three last Articles of
our Creed, I believe the Remission of sins, the Resurrection of the body, and
the life everlasting, if they could not also be assured that they should
hereafter be made partakers of them? For the Reprobates, yea the Devils
themselves do know that there are such blessed things prepared. But this their
knowledge nothing profits, for that they are not indeed to be partakers of
them, they do belong only to the Elect and Chosen of the Lord. And to this
end and purpose only, tended the course and order of the instructions of
Christ, the Apostles, and all the faithful Ministers of all ages, who have
diligently taught the Children of God, to view and behold these blessed things,
not as things being only, but such also, as one day assuredly they shall by
Christ be put in full possession of as their own. And therefore they have
commonly used it, as a most strong and forcible Argument, to encourage and
strengthen the faithful against the bitter storms of afflictions, that might
arise against them in this present life.

Now whereas the enemies of this perseverance of the faithful, do commonly
for their help in this their opinion, bring these places of Scripture: 1. Cor.
10.12
Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall: And again, Reu.
3.11.
Hold fast that which thou have, that no man take thy Crown, and such like;
the answer is easy: Unto the place Reu. 3.11. it is answered by some, that it
concerns the crown or dignity of the function of the ministry, which may
be taken away, but not the glory of the life to come. But unto both these, and
all the rest such like places, be it briefly answered, that the Scripture
speaking in this manner, speaks according to the extent of our ability and
power, who every day indeed are ready in our selves to fall away from grace:
(such is the imperfection and frailety of our nature) but they are not to be
understood of the purpose and Decree of God, wherein our salvation is most
surely sealed up. If we consider our selves alone, there is no doubt but that
we may fall and lose our Crown. But if we fix our eyes on God, and on his
eternal purpose, vpholden and maintained by those means of perseverance, as
he has appointed thereunto, hellgates shall not prevail against us; neither
shall any thing be able to deprive us of our hope. And therefore though the
Scriptures do speak in this manner, to warn us of our infirmity, that we
should not in any hand trust too much unto our own strength; but should wholly
and altogether put our confidence in the grace of God, who works all, in all
his Chosen: yet it does nothing prejudice the truth of this doctrine of
perseverance, which is not seated in our selves: but wholly and alone in the
continual help and assistance of the holy Ghost.

I would not now have any to think, that by this doctrine thus delivered, I
do go about to bring in the fatal necessity of the Storkes, when as I
maintain the Decree of God, in the saving of his servants, to be performed by
such a necessary consequence of second causes, in performing of his will, and
upholding of his Chosen: so that as has been proved, it is of necessity, that
they should continue, and those things that do concur as helps and second
causes hereunto, must of necessity so come to pass. For first it is to be
understood, that in all this which has been said, we do not make the
connection and order of these causes, in themselves, and in their own nature to
be eternal, as did those profane Philosophers, although in respect of Gods
purpose and foreknowledge, I do affirm them to be eternal. And secondly, I
say, that I do not attribute this necessity unto nature alone, as did the
same Philosophers, by their assertion clean excluding God: but rather both in
nature and in themselves, we place a mere contingencie; and in Gods Decree we
do only place this inevitable necessity. But to sound to the bottom of
these things, would require a large Discourse. Let this therefore suffice, to
show the falsehood of this objection. And let it now, upon this which I have
said, be concluded, to the consolation and comfort of all Gods Elect and
Chosen, that they may in time be assured both of their Regeneration present,
their Election before all times, and of their assured Glorification hereafter
without time, and for all Eternity in the Kingdom of Heaven, with the blessed
company of all the elect Angels and Saints of God.

FINIS.
Laus Deo optimo maximo.

