MORBVS ET ANTIDOTVS

THE DISEASE WITH THE ANTIDOTE OR A Declaration of Henry Yaxlee of Bouthorpe in
the County of Norfolk Esquire, wherein he shows how he was a Papist, and
how by Gods grace he as now lately converte^

Published by Authority.

Jeremy, 6.16. Thus says the Lord, stand ye in the ways and see, and ask
for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein: and ye shall find
rest for your souls.

1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good.

LONDON. Printed by W. Jones for Nicholas Bourne, and are to be sold at the
South Entry of the Royal Exchange. 1630.

To the Christian Reader.
CVrteous Reader, J crave thy favorable Censure upon what thou shall read in
this book: What J speak therein of mine own knowledge, is upon my conscience
true: and what J cite out of Authors, J have faithfully endeavored to relate
truly. If any indeed can advertise me of any error therein, J shall thank
him and reform my self. Jn one thing I carry still the same mind which I did
when I was a Papist, viz. To have mine heart (the thing which God most
desiereth) always studious to find, and ready to embrace the true Religion.
And I make no doubt, but that God in mercy has guided me unto the same, and
will therein further enlighten and establish me unto my lives end. O that my
dear kindred and countrymen would but read without prejudice, what is so
plentifully written on either side, or be content to hear indifferently what
can be pleaded. Then should they clearly see, that what ancient truth soever
the Papists do hold, the Protestants also do believe and maintain the same;
and that that is all novell, ungrounded and not Catholic, wherein the
Protestant dissenteth from the Papist. But herein is their misery, they dare
not read, nor seek any light, but from those whose chief care is to keep
them in darkness, least it should appear unto them, that the Protestant is
truly so called, for protesting against the hay, straw, and stubble of the
additions and innovations of Popery And so I rest in charity, Charitate etiam
non ficta, beseeching Almighty God that ye may all become, what in his
unspeakable mercy he has made me.

The obedient son of my dear Mother the true Church of ENGLAND, Henry Yaxlee.

A DECLARATION OF HENRY YAXLEE OF BOVTHORP IN THE COUNTY of Norfolk Esquire,
wherein he shows how he was a Papist, and how by Gods grace he is now lately
converted.
I Was a Recusant, because I was taught from my cradle to believe the
Catholic Church by my Creed. And withal I was by all our teachers then
persuaded, that Rome, being the successiue seat of St. Peter, could teach no
other, but the true Catholic Faith, though all other Churches failed.

But when I found in Bellarmines book De Rom p. lib. 4. cap. 11.
that Pope Honorius is numbered among those who were condemned by the 7.
Council for Heretics. And in Melch. Lib 6. cap. 1, et vltim.
Canus, that Celestinus 3. had decreed, that the woman whose husband falls
into heresy may marie an other. And in Alfon. Alfons a Castro co^ ra haere.
ses lib. 1 cap. 4.
de Cast. that Omnis homo errare potest in fide etiamsi Papa sit. Nam de
Liberio constat fuisse Arrianum, et Anastasium Papam fuisse Nestorianum. 1
Every man though he were the Pope himself, may err in matter of faith, for it
is manifest that Liberius was an Arrian, and that Pope Anastasius was a
Nestorian. And in the same chapter: Cum constet plures eorum esse adeo
illiteratos vt Grammaticam penitus ignorent, qui fit vt sacras literas
interpretari possent? i. When it is manifest that many of them were so
ignorant, as that they did not at all understand the Grammar, how can it be
that they should interpret the holy Scriptures?

By this I conceived, that it were safest for every Christian that fears God,
to believe the article according to the Apostles C^, Catholicam, without
addition of Romanam, (...) is the Catholic, not the Roman Church swarving
from the Catholic.

But I was further confirmed, when I found many godly learned and virtuous
Priests, as D. Bagshawe and Master John Collington, whose names I remember are
to their books, laying open in their writings, that the Jesuits specially
Father Parsons have misled the Popes to do the most Antichristian injustice
that ever was heard of to those Priests that were appellants to the Popes for
justice, as you may read in Bagshawes answer and Collingtons defense, as also
in diverse other, whereof I give you this Catalogue. viz. 1. A letter written by
A. C. 2. A relation of the faction at Wisbiche. 3. A Dialogue between a
Secula^ ^riest and a lay Gentleman. 4. Declaratio motuum ac turbationis
Angliae. 5. Doct. Elies notes. Notes upon the Apology. 6. Important
Considerations, written in the name of the Priests. 7. A sparing Discovery of
Father Parsons.

These Priests being Roman Catholics, do plainly declare in the said books,
that the Pope is guided by the violent faction of the Jesuits, to do the most
Antichristian injustice even to those Priests who took a journey to the Pope
by the consent of their brethern by appeal, to lay open the wrongs offered
unto them by the Jesuits. Yea Father Parsons caused them when they were come
to Rome to be laid in the jaole, where they might have been starved before ever
they had spoken with the Pope, if the French Kings Ambassador had not with much
difficulty procured them audience, as appears in the aforesaid book of
Important Considerations, written in the name of all the Priests distressed and
oppressed by the Jesuits.

Hereupon, Collington in his defense printed 1602. fol. 24. is bold to affirm
in capital letters, that Father Parsons was so notoriously given to practice
treason, and to bring an invasion of Forreiners upon this Realm, as that even
Pasquin in Rome speaks of him in these words: If there be any man that will
buy the Kingdom of England, let him repair to a Merchant in a square black
capp in this City, and he shall have a very good peniworth thereof.

And in another of the Priests books, you shall find, that the Jesuits guide
the Church of Rome, by murdering Kings, Popes and Cardinals: as in Quodl. p.
295.

The Jesuits and their faction, do devise and publish such a kind of
doctrine, that subjects are not bound to obey wicked Princes in their temporal
Laws and commandments, but until they be able by force of arms to resist
him, Quodl. p. 228. And the qualification being pretended, that though they
seek to kill Kings, yet it may be they will spare Popes, Cardinals and
Bishops, it is peremptorily answered: Surely no. ibid. page 24. And as there
are shrewd suspicions in Rome, concerning the death of two Popes, two Cardinals
and one Bishop already, so I make no question at all (says he) but that
hereafter, if any Pope cross their plotts and purposes, the Jesuits will have
such a fig in store for his Holiness, as no Antidote-shall prevent or long
preserve his life after it.

When I had read these things in the authors above named, I concluded that
Rome might be a part of the Catholic Church, though a member corrupted with
errors, but it could not be the Catholic. Therefore I did not much marvel,
when I saw diverse Romish Priests come openly to Paul's Cross in London and
preach, that the Mysterious working of Antichrist is now in Rome, which caused
them to come out of her as out of Babylon. As you may see in Sheldon the
Converts printed Sermon, and in Higgens his first and second Sermon lately
printed. And yet, says Sheldon, many Christians may be saved in Rome,
believing the true fundamental points of Catholic faith and not partaking
with her in her latter corrupted doctrine, authorized and Printed at Rome,
which has been burnt by the Catholic Roman Authority in France, which I
take it are these, Bellarmines books teaching, that the Pope has power
disponendi omnium temporalia, to dispose of the temporal things of all.

And no doubt but this doctrine might cause those poor deluded souls to enter
into the Powder plott, thinking the deed to be meritorious, as appeared by the
speech of Sir Everad Dighbie at his death.

An other may be Becanus his book wherein he dispuring of King-killing,
concludes in the affirmative in these words, Nihilcertius, nothing more
certain. Suarez is an other, who in his book against King James, says, That
none can kill him but those whom the Pope shall appoint. To these may be added
Mariana, whose judgment in his book is, that it is the safest way to poison
him.

These books were burnt in France, for teaching damnable and seditious
doctrine, even by the Roman Catholic authority and party there. I mean: by
such Catholics as will persist in the true fundamental points of Catholic
faith and not be deluded with their errors. No: though the Pope himself should
decree them. Much less will they forsake the Apostles Creed, Extrau. cap vnam
Sa^ctam de mayor. et obed.
Credo Ecclesiam Catholicam, I believe the Catholic Church. Though Boniface
the eight, has long since Decreed, That it is altogether necessary to to
believe the Church of Rome, See the grand impostor of the now Church of Rome,
put forth by the Bish. of Covent. and Leech field. 1628.
and to be subject to the Roman Bishop. Which thirteenth Article added by that
Pope, the wiser sort of Catholics in France, do not believe but oppose with
words, writings, Decrees, and fire; not boasting themselves to be the only
Church inerrant as ROME does, but holding themselves to be a true member of the
Catholic, protesting against these corrupted doctrines of Rome, innovated by
the Jesuits, as appears by the Priests books above recited, of whom I give
you here some taste as follows: some whereof I formerly mentioned.

Doct. Elye in his notes upon the Apology page 9. in the preface says thus:
They plunge themselves over head and ears in Ecclesiastical affairs, with
such audacitie and obstinacy as that they have turned all topsie turvie. And
in the Quodl. page 321. We find it thus of the Jesuits doctrine: Certeinely
therein is nothing else but fallacy upon fallacy, error upon error, one
contradiction encountering another. And in the book called Declar. Mot. ac
turb. in Angl. pa. 29. a Jesuit mainteineth this most atheistical and
heathenish assertion, that one who is not a Christian may be Pope of Rome. And
as it is in Anthony Copelies letter page 67. an other Jesuit openly and for
found doctrine maintained it first to his Auditors in the School, and at this
instant expressly in the Inquisition does say: Non est de fide credere hunc
Romanum Pontificem esse Christi Vicarium. It is not a matter of Faith to
believe that this present Pope is Christ's Vicar. Also in the Quodl. page 31.
Thus we read: To let pass their eronious Doctrine concerning their Generals
infallibility of truth, for deciding of matters. Their absurd paradoxes of
Aequivocation. and ibid. page 29. The Jesuits every way in Printed books, in
writings and manuscripts, and most of all in private conference, have taught
contrary to the Roman Church. And therefore says Anthony Copely page 40. It is
no marvel if in fundamental points of Catholic faith they oppose against
the Angelical Doctor, and be therefore endited before his Hol^nes at this
present by the Dominicans in Spain, for Pelagians and sundry other kinds of
heretics; as also impostors by the Sorbonites of Paris, and all other. French
Clergy, as we credibly hear. And Quodl. page 138. Never was there any
Religious order that held such extravagant exorbitant irreguler opinions as
they do. Doct. Bagshawes answer page 20. says thus. Father Weston and Archer
are charged by Doct. Norden for defending the stues, to be as lawful as the
Pope himself, as if they had as it seems, a very league with hell against
the truth.

These were not the first motives which made me mistrust the Romish doctrine,
for by my bringing up I was so prejudicate in mine opinion, as that I thought
scorn to imagine that the true Catholic faith, could infalliblie be received
from any place but Rome. In so much as when I heard of that most inhumane
barbarous and damnable Powder plott, conceived and attempted only by Romish
Catholics, I was amazed to think that from Rome and from no other place in
the world, could be received the saving faith. I then professed it to certain
famous Jesuits, to whom I was then devoted, that I thought to believe the
Roman Catholic Church was as ridiculous, as to say Christendom Kent, or the
universal particular. I was notwithstanding then easily satisfied herein, when
they told me that the meaning was not to make a particular Church to be
universal, but only to intimate that no faith is truly Catholic but that
faith which is taught in Rome, as they said they were ready to justify, and
that there was no more reason for us to forsake the Church of Rome for the
Powder plott, then for the Apostles, to have forsaken Christ for the fact of
Judas.

And thus I rested a while satisfied, Widrintons Supplic. to the Pope
until the oath of Allegiance came out. Then went I to my said Father, Widrint
ans. to Fits Herb.
and told him that diverse (e) Priests defended, that the King had made a
lawful oath, to try the Romish which of them did adheare to the true Catholic
faith of Rome, and which to the innovated treasonable doctrines thereof. And
that (d) they further defended, that those who refused to take this oath,
should not only be hanged for traitors, but loose also their souls eternally,
for wilfully denying their lawful Allegiance. Whereupon I asked him again,
whether I might read the said books to inform and satisfy my conscience,
how to carry my self between my Prince and Prelate. His answer was, they
were heretical books, and that I ought not to read them. And he further
said, that I might spend my time better in reading Iohnsons plays, which he
there offered unto me.

Then and not before I began to distrust, and reading the foresaid collections
in the Authors themselves, I perceived that all was not found that came from
Rome, though I was formerly told that the Priests had written out of malice
against the Jesuits: and not truth.

Then I considered what fundamental points the Protestant believing
Catholics, and the Papist pretending Catholics differed in. And I found in
deverse protestant writters, that they deny not any one point of real
Catholic Faith explicitly to be believed of necessity, or as necessary to
salvation, as was made evident in the disputation between Fisher and his
partner on the Romish part, and Doctor White and Doctor Feately for the
Protestants, in Sir Humphrie Linne his house in Sheerelane, where the
Protestant disputantes maintayning, that they denied no essential point of
Catholic Religion, but the innovated unjustifiable Doctrine of Rome. They
made their instance. First Doctor Feately challenged the Jesuits to show, that
for the first 500. years, any one of fifteen points of Popish belief (which
he then rehearsed had been believed by visible Congregation of Christians, or
by any one Father, or writter of note? Wherewith he drove the Jesuits to this
shameful evasion, viz. That these are Scholasticall points, not fundamental.
Whereupon Doctor White Replied, that all those poynes, had been concluded by
the Council of TRENT, and therefore were fundamental to the Papists. And
receiving no answer from the Jesuits to this Reply, Doctor White insisted in
six particular points of innovated Popish Doctrine, and challenged the
Jesuits to show if they could, any one Father, or writer of note, for the
first sixth hundred years after Christ, who held any one of the said six
points. Whereto nothing was answered, as you may see manifest in the Relation
printed, 1624.

Since which time, meeting Mr. Sweet one of the aforesaid Jesuit Disputants,
( I asked him, why he would not yeilde as well to try the succession of
doctrine as of names, whereas the succession of Doctrine, and not of names was
most material, to give satisfaction to doubtful consciences, because that by
the Doctrine, it would have appeared, who had taught according to the
Scriptures: Contrary whereunto, whosoever teaches, is accursed, Gal. 1.8. But
to all this, I could get no other answer, but this, viz. It would have taken
too long a time.

When I could receive no better answer from Master Sweet, I immagined that
he might be of the opinion of the Priests and Papists, in the first
thirteen years of Queen ELIZABETHES Reign. For the most of them did not
make then any separation from the Protestants, as believing any real
difference between them to cause them to separate. For the Laity went to
Church generally, and the Priests took benefices holding the English Leiturgie
as good as the Latin. Becanus says, Controv. Angl. If the King be an
heretic, and command us to pray at the Church with his subjects, (possumus id
praestare) we may do it. And I find some other Parsons treat. to mitigat.
cap 2. fol. 63.
Jesuits of the same opinion, that Protestants are no heretics until that
by a lawful Judge he or they be denounced, convicted and condemned by name;
which we ascribe not to the Protestants.

I demand then, by what rule of charity shall the Papists separate themselves
from the Protestants in the worship of God now contrary to the practice which
was before, 13. Elizabeth.

Moreover in the same leaf, Parsons reasons thus, out of Saint Augustine,
lib. 4. de bapt. cont. Don. c. 16. If a man should (for example) believe the
heresy of Photinus, who denied the distinction of three persons in God, and
the divinity of Christ, and should think it the true Catholic faith, Istum
nondum dico haereticum, (says Saint Augustine:) I do not think this man yet
to be an heretic, except when the doctrine of the Catholic faith (to wit
that which has been held generally by most Churches in Christendom) be made
manifest unto him.

Observe here that he does not say the Church of Rome, because that the
damnable doctrine which brought forth the Powder plot, had been all ready
broched and put in practice. And the Romish books burnt in Paris for the said
doctrine. Else he would have defended the Faith of Boniface the Eight, That it
is altogether necessary to salvation to believe the Roman Church. And so let
the Article of the APOSTLES CREED be forgotten. For it were needless to
inquire what the Universal Church has taught if (as that Decree teaches,) it
be sufficient to salvation, to believe the now particular Roman.

Therefore I believe the Romish Catholic and Protestant Catholic in
whatsoever they teach, according to the fundamental points of the universal
Faith, contained in the APOSTLES CREED. And not the corrupted doctrines of the
particular Church of Rome, which the Jesuit Disputants, were as it seems
ashamed to defend, in Sir Humphrie Lines house as is abouesayd.

Now it may be demanded how so many wise, religious, grave and learned Romish
Catholics, can be thought so ignorant, as to believe the particular Roman to
be the universal Catholic Church, which all are bound to believe by the
Apostles Creed.

It is apparent, that many of them are not naturally ignorant, or of
incapacitie. But it is as apparent that they are made so by Art. For whereas
our Savior Christ has appointed a prescribed obedience, according to the
Laws Divine, as in Deutrenom. 17.10.11. The united Priests aforenamed, with
the Divines of Venice and France, accuse the now Divines of Rome, the Jesuits;
for teaching an absolute obedience to the Pope, and their Superior, as I will
relate, and begin with the third part of the Jesuits Constitutions: Cap. 1.
Where their vow of obedience is at large described as well to the Pope as to
their Superior, in these words following. And because of the things which
belong to the vow, etc. we will speak of obedience which all must labor
strictly to observe; and not only in those things which they are bound, but
others also, though the same be not a commandment but only a sign of their
Superiors will, as if it were our Savior Christ's own voice. And let every
one persuade himself to be governed even like a dead carcass turned and
tumbled even which way soever a man will. Or like an old man's staff which
serves him that holds it in his hand for whatsoever he will use it where and
when he list. Upon this passage the Gloss has these words: Obedience,
concerning the execution of it, is then performed when that which is commanded
is done. The two which dispatched the two Henry's in France, seemed to have
learned this Obedience: And if the powder had taken fire, more had become
proficient in this doctrine.

Now it appears what this new doctrine has done in matters of fact: so it is
also too manifest how it works upon faith and belief. For hereby they are
made careless what or how they do believe. For they must not search or know
whether the Romish Church does teach the Catholic faith or no; but they must
believe it as it were by an Attorney, because the Jesuits say so, and tell
them that Boniface has decreed it: and that they must give account for their
souls: So that the people need take no further care. Whereby many Roman
Catholics take their liberty to frequent tavernes and worse matters which I
could name (but that discretion and modesty does restrain) and yet think that
upon the Satturday shrift they shall be cleared of all by the Priests
absolution. For so long as they believe as the Church of Rome believes,
(whether that belief be true or false) they are confident that the Priest must
give account for their souls. And this is the new doctrine, and holy obedience
taught by the Jesuits.

But least any one should think that I slander them, I will cite Peter Maffe a
Priest of their Society, in a book by him written of the life of Ignatius,
with the approbation of their General Aquauiua, lib. 3. cap. 7. Where he
calls the aforesaid obedience, Sapientem hanc sanctamque stultitiam caecae
obedientiae: This wise and holy folly of blind obedience.

He that will, may read more hereof, cap. 17. and 18. of the second book of
the Jesuits Catechism printed 1602 by the united Priests of France and
England, as appears in the Epistle of the English Priests prefixed with this
title: The secular Priests Preface to the English Catholics.

And that all may the more fully understand how unreasonable a thing this
blind obedience is, I will here produce some passages out of the writings of
that late famous Philosopher Charroun a Romish Priest, and a Doctor of the
Civil Law in Paris, as I am informed, (of whom I have heard high commendations
from Master Martin the Jesuit for his sanctity of life and for his learning)
who in his book of wisdom, lib. 2. cap. 2. has diverse passages of special
use in this point: as Sect. 1. To judge is to examine and weigh the reasons and
counter-reasons on all parts, the weight and merit of them, and thereby work
out the truth. And in the same page he teaches, That a man should hold
himself always ready to entertain better if it appear. Yea not to be
offended if another shall contest with him against that he thinks better if
it appear. Yea not to be offended if another shall contest with him against
that which he thinks better, but rather desire to hear what may be said. And
in the next page in the same sect. But I see and perceive a sort of people
glorious affirmative, which would rule the world, and command as it were with a
rod, and as others in former times have sworn to certain principles, and
married themselves to certain opinions, so they would that all others should
do the like, whereby they oppose themselves to this noble liberty of the
Spirit. And then in the next sect. To judge of all is the property of a wise
and spiritual man. Spiritualis omnia dijudicat, and a nemine judicatur: The
spiritual man judges all things, and is judged of none. And is not this
suitable to the Scriptures which are the unerring word of almighty God; which
says, Believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits, Because many false
Prophets are gone into the world? 1 Ioh. 4.1. Search the Scriptures, Ioh. 5 39.

But to return to the words of Master Charroune: Thus it follows, The true
office of a man, his most proper and natural exercise, his worthiest
profession is to judge. Why is a man discoursing, reasoning, understanding? Why
has he a spirit? to build castles in the air? to feed himself with fooleries
and vanities as the greatest part of the world does? Quis unquam oculos
tenebrarum causa habuit? Why have men eyes but to see withal? Doubtless to
understand, to judge of all things. And therefore is he called the governor,
the superintendent, the keeper of nature, of the world, of the works of God.
To go about to deprive him of this right is to make him no more a man but a
beast.

And a little further he proceeds thus: It is then strange that so many men
who either are or make show of understanding and sufficiency, deprive
themselves willingly of this right and authority: So natural, so just and
excellent, who without the examining or judging of any thing, receive and
approove whatsoever is presented, either because it has a fair semblance, or
because it is in authority, credit and practice. Yea they think that it is not
lawful to examine or doubt of any thing, in such sort do they debase and
degrade themselves. They are forward in other things and glorious, but in this
they are fearful and submisse, though it do justly appertain unto them, and
with so much reason. Seeing there are a thousand lies for one truth, a thousand
opinions of one and the same thing, and but one true, why should not I examine
with the instrument of reason which is the truer, the more reasonable, honest
and profitable? Go to then, the wise man shall judge of all, nothing shall
escape him which he brings not to the bar and to the balance. It is to
play the part of profane men and beasts, to suffer themselves to be led
like oxen. What can a wise man have above a profane, if he must have his
spirit, his mind, his principal and heroical part a slave? It is an hard
thing to bridle the liberty of the spirit, and if a man would do it, it is
the greatest tyranny that may be.

I can by no means believe that Captivare intellectum in re fidei, to
captivate the understanding in the matter of faith, belongs absolutely unto
any but unto God alone, and unto man conditionally, viz. Cum docuerint juxta
legem, when their doctrine is suitable unto Gods word.

But as you have seen how the learned Charoun does condemn and confute that
wicked doctrine of blind obedience; so I will also add his censure upon the
effects and practices which that Doctrine produces: For in the same book,
cap. 5. sect. 28. thus I read: What execrable wickedness has the zeal of
religion brought forth? Is there any other subject or occasion that has
yielded the like?

Tantum Relligio potuit suadere malorum,
Quae peperit saepe scelerosa atque impia facta:
Religion works so far in evil men,
As wicked deeds it acts now and then.
Not to love him, yea to look upon him with a wicked eye, as upon a monster
that believes not as he believes; To think to be polluted by speaking or
conversing with him, is one of the sweetest and most pleasing actions of these
kind of people. He that is an honest man by scruple, and a religious bridle
take heed of him, and account of him as he is and he has religion without
honesty, I will not say he is more wicked, but far more dangerous than he
that has neither the one nor the other. Who so kills you, will think that
he does an acceptable service unto God: Not because religion teaches or any
way favors wickedness, as some very foolishly and maliciously from this
place do object, (for the most absurd and falsest religion does it not,) but
the reason is, that having no taste, nor image, nor conceit of honesty but by
imitation and for the service of religion, and thinking that to be an honest
man is no other thing than to be careful to advance religion: They believe all
things whatsoever, be it treason, treachery, sedition, rebellion, or any other
offense, to be not only lawful and sufferable, being colored with zeal and
the care of religion, but also commendable, meritorious, and worthy
canonization, if it seem for the progress and advancement of religion, and
the overthrow of their adversaries.

Thus you may see what conceit that learned man had of yielding to men that
absolute obedience which is due to God alone. So that he was far from the
doctrine of the Jesuits, who in their 13 rule do teach that if the Superior
say that white is black, we must believe it and obey. And a Jesuit once avowed
to my face before sufficient witness, that this rule is orthodoxe.

He that will see more concerning this point, let him read De la Mar. against
the Jesuits, his open pleading in Parliament of Paris against Monthalon, their
chosen Advocate. He that would behold how the particular Church of Rome has
been led by particular factions to forsake the universal Catholic faith,
let him read George Carleton since Bishop of Chichester his book of
Jurisdiction Regal, Papal, Episcopal: If any man read these and see not the
universal faith there brought to particular fancy, it must be crassa
ignorantia, if he have will to please God, and capacity for to understand.

But the greatest motives yet to persuade me that Rome has corrupted the
Catholic faith, are two: The first is for that all the most religious, the
most learned, yea the very Canonized Saints of Rome have in all latter ages
cried out of the corruptions in the Church of Rome, as you may find in a book
published both in Latin and in English by JAMES MAXVVELL a Researcher of
Antiquities, which no Romish Papist ever contradicting, I presume that it
cannot be excepted against by the later years.

See what the Priests have written against the Jesuits. He that has not
means to come by the books themselves, may read the Collections made by Tho.
James, which I have found truly cited out of the said books of the Priests.
The Collections of Tho. James printed at Oxford, were sold by John Barnes near
Holborne Conduite.

The second motive is, that within this later hundred years, the Church of
Rome has usurped authority to expurge, reprint, alter or change, what they
have thought good, out of both ancient and late Writers that speak against
them, as may appear by their Indices Expurgatorij, concerning which, I refer
you to D. James his Collections printed, 1625.

But concerning the credit of the Canonized Saints, and others cited by
Maxwell, it is necessary you should hear what the greatest and learned
Doctors of Rome have thought of them. Thus may you read in Trithem: Abbas, in
his book of illustrious men, That Pope Eugenius the third, with the consent of
18 Cardinals, and a great number of Bishops assembled in the Council of
Treiur. And also Pope Boniface the ninth, did Canonize diners of the Saints
that spoke against the corruptions of Rome. Turrecremata, Bellarmine and
Baronius, with the most famous learned men of Rome, have all highly commended
the said Saints, that thus cried out of Rome, and called out loud for
reformation in their days. The like was done by the good French Cardinal,
Peter de Aliaco, in his book of Reformation of the Church, in his time
presented to the Council of Constance; And the Councels both of Constance and
Basil, did vna voce, disallow the Popes usurpation, in challenging himself to
be above a general Council, insomuch that the said Council delivered it as a
deposite of the Church by unanimous consent, in form of a Decree, that it
ought not to be so. In these words, The Pope (tenetur obedire) ought (or is
bound) to obey the Council (etiam in fide and moribus) even in matter of FAITH
and manners. Yea, where was the Popes authority above a general Council, when
all Appeals to parts beyond the Seas, were prohibited by the African Council.

They are not then the late Protestants alone that have called for Reformation
of the Romish Church, but even also these ancient. The late famous Sir Thomas
Moore, holden one of the lights of the Roman Church, and defender thereof in
his time, seems to scorn that any man should believe that he was so far
corrupted in the Faith, as to believe the Pope to be above a general Council.
Dial. l. 1. c. 26.
His words are, Never did I believe the Pope to be above a general Council.
Notwithstanding the Papalins, contrary to the Catholic faith, have accounted
the French Church to be a schismatic Church for holding the Universal or
general Council to be above the Pope, as appears at large, in the aforesaid
pleadings of De la Martilire, against the Jesuits.

Hear now what the Seminary Priests speak against the faction of the
Jesuits, that has swayed and ouer-ruled Rome, at and since the Council of
Trent. Watson, Quodl. page 82. doubts that Antichrist may be already come,
for that the Jesuits be the forerunners of Antichrist, though it appears
that Saint Bernard thought he was come before, when as he says, Ep. 127. that
Antichrist then sat in S. Peter's chair.

If then the godliest and learned of the Church of Rome, have in all Ages,
cried out of the corruptions, both of the doctrine and manners in the Church of
Rome, as you may see in the books aforesaid, then we may say there have never
wanted Professors and Protestants in all Ages, defending that Catholic Roman
Faith, which Paul commended to the Romans, resisting the tyranous, usurped,
innouated Doctrine of the Church or Court of Rome, as may be further seen in
that from time to time, even general Councels, as well as Provincial, have
refisted the innouations of Rome. The African Council, and others of that time
resisted Appeals to the Pope. The later Councels of Constance and Basil, have
concluded that the Pope is not above a General Council.

As then Saint Paul says, that God has set in the Church Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, Teachers, for the perfecting of the Faith, until all come to the
unity of the Faith, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. See Master Bernards book entitled,
look beyond Luther.
And that un till Christ's coming again, 1 Timothy 6.14. So if you look beyond
Luther, you shall find that there never wanted a visible company of Pastors
protesting against the innovated doctrines of the Church of Rome, which made,
as I suppose, the Jesuit disputants in Sir Humphrey Linds his house ashamed to
try the succession of doctrine, offering their blind buttery book of names.
For if they durst try their succession of their doctrine; Why did they not
either then undertake it, or since make supplication to his Majesty, that they
might prove the same, and so save their Credits.

And since that I had digested and set down in writing these former
inducements, I have been yet further confirmed by the reading of two books,
the one of Sir Humphrey Linds, entitled, via tuta, wherein is manifestly
proved that whatsoever the Protestants hold positiuely for matter of faith, no
learned Papists, can or ever could deny. And that whatsoever the Protestants
deny of the things held by the Papists, the same cannot be proved to be
Catholic and Apostolic, agreeing with the Apostles Creed.

The other is Doctor Favors book, entitled, Antiquity triumphing over
Novelties; wherein is as plainly proved that the Papists do speak
contemptuously and disgracefully of the Scriptures, to deter men from reading
of them. Contemn those first and best general Councels wherein they speak
against them, and for the Protestants. And in the later, they take what parts
make for them, and reject what makes against them, as reprobate; as I find
Cardinal Bellarmines distinction of them to be partim probata, partim
reprobata. L. 1. c. 4. de council. and eccl.


The like do they by the Fathers, and also by Histories, as you may see, if
you read, cap. 7, 8, 9. of the said book of D. Favor.

And all this it seems will not serve the turn, for they have set up shops
and Inquisitors of purpose, called their Indices Expurgatorij, to blot out in
the Catholic Writers, what makes against them, with a deleatur, and to add
what may serve their turn. And likewise in their citations they make use of
Bastard and counterfeit Fathers acknowledged by themselves to be such, as you
may see more plainly and particularly in Doctor James his book printed, 1612.
entitled, A Treatise of Scripture, Councels, Fathers, corrupted by the Romish
Pastors.

And as for their contempt of the Fathers: When Tertullian pleases Bellarmine,
he is with him, granissimus Author, A most grave Author, a famous Doctor, a
Catholic Writer. Bellar. de Romans pont. l. 2. c. 5. But if he speak against,
or please not Bellarmine, then he is an Heretic, and he will answer, fidem
non esse omnino adhibendam Tertulliano in hac part, that no credit at all is
to be given to Tertullian in this case, ibid. lib. 4. cap. 8.

And as for the use which the Papists do afford unto that evidence of
antiquity, which is histories; Doctor Favor proposes certain examples to
make it plain, that in this case the Romanists, either miserably or doggedly
snarle at all antiquity, or utterly reject and deny it; Cap. 9. 20.
the most expedite course they can devise to overthrow, that which in truth
would overthrow them.

His first instance is in the matter of Pope Ione. The truth of which history,
when he has confirmed by the witness of more then a double Grand-iurie of
sufficient Authors older and later, Greeks and Latins, domestical and
foreign, Divines, Lawyers, and Physicians, Philosophers, Poets, and other
humanitians, Priests, Bishops, (in their account Saints) and Cardinals, Friars,
Monks and Canons, yea, and whole Universities, not one of them an enemy: nay,
not so much as one of them not a friend to the Roman Catholic Court and
Religion, etc. At last (having named the several Authors in the Margin of his
page) he says; Yet because this story does prejudice the vaunt of their
perpetual succession, does make uncertain their pretended only sufficient
ordination, gives a shrewd shake to their counterfeit rock, etc. Five or six
and thirty Authors constantly in diverse countries, in many Ages, in Catholic
Vninersities. Citizens of Rome, and Officers in the Popes Court, secular and
religious, are all corrupted, falsified, denied, discredited, shaken off and
branded with infamy, and all must be without sap or sense, truth or honesty,
learning or credit, only to salve that frothy Sea from this filthy Queen. And
all this begun and set on foot by that one consciencelesse Onuphrius, De Romans
pon^, l. 2. c. 6.
whom Cardinal Bellarmine himself rejects as a contradictor of all
antiquity, and for auouching that for which he has no authority. Who was borne
some hundreds of years after some of the said Historians, which is strange
that any man should believe it fit, that he alone is sufficient to out-beard,
and outface all former antiquity. And (says D. Favor) I marvel how they
laugh not one at another, when they see how they gull the simple world, as the
Auruspices did among the Gentiles.

His second example is the story of Pope Silvester, the second, infeofing
Antichrist in the Sea of Rome, by liucrie and seisin, about which he shows
that they use the like dealing, as about the former story of Pope Ione.

And while I considered these foul abuses in the Church of Rome, there came to
my mind an answer which a Jesuit, Father Floyd made unto me, when I told him
that King James his answer to Cardinal Perrone his speech in the Parliament of
Paris, did charge the said Cardinal with manifold falsifications of the holy
Scriptures, to prove the Popes power to depose Princes. And that if the King
were not answered, the cause would be much scandalized. The Jesuit answered
me, that there was too much written already, and that he must be answered
another way. I was afraid then to ask him any more, fearing it might be
another Powder Plot, the rather because I heard Master Smith, my old Lady
Kneuets Priest, affirm, that he had heard a zealous Catholic say, when he
first heard how the Powder Plot had missed, that it was the only way in the
world that could have been devised to have rooted out the Protestants.

And now I am easily drawn to believe Father Floyd, that they will answer no
more with books or writings, but with force and plots, if as the Scripture
says, Ex ore tuo te iudico, a man may judge according to their own words,
specially if we consider how the secular Priests do charge the Jesuits with
ambitious usurping authority in the Church of Rome, corrupting it with their
treasonable doctrines, as is evident in the said Priests books, whereof I have
already given the Reader some taste. And I think good here to add more, the
rather because that the books are not easily to be had, for that the Jesuits
making use of a rich Spanish Ladies purse, for the buying up and burning of
heretical books, they took up as many as they could of these Priests books,
which they counted worst of all.

This Lady was by the Jesuits placed in Barbican, near to the Spanish
Ambassadors house, and being apprehended by a Purseuant, she was committed to
prison, where having continued, she thought her self therein most happy, for
that as the Papists commonly reported, she had come from Spain hither,
purposely to endure some afflictions with the English Papists for the
Catholic cause.

But to return to my purpose of relating some passages out of the Priests
books, concerning the Jesuits. Dialogue between a secular Priest and a lay
Cath. p, 86.
They are indeed Priests, but exceeding cunning politickes withal. And these
D. Bagsh. ans. p. 10.
politic Canuasers, or Machiauellian Quodl. p. 15.
politicians, have Ib. b. p. 147.
so many Machiaucllian devices, as every plot and drift seems to be an
infallible rule of falsehood, and principle in chief, whereby the Jesuits do
square their actions as, never a Prince in Christendom, nor any man living can
tell where to find, or how to trace and trust them, Quodl. p. 17. and 21.
for in all sacrilegious and temporizing platformes, Ibid p. 18.
atheall plots of perdition, Ibid.
Machiauellian, or rather Mahumetan-like faction, Ibid. p. 62.
Heathenish, tyrannical, Sathanicall and Turkish government, none Jbid. p 64.
goes beyond the Jesuits at this day. Ibid. p. 62.
And they are able to set Aretine, Lucian, Machiauell, yea, and Don Lucifer to
school, as impossible for him by all the Art he has to besot men as they do;
by reason of their blind, dead, carcass obedience, formerly expressed out of
Maffeus, and the Jesuits Constitutions.

But to proceed with some further passages of the books before mentioned.
Relation of the faction at Wisb. p. 77.
It is to be feared lest they will bring in bondage, not only Prelates, but
the very Princes and Monarchs themselves. Quodl p. 173.
They have houlstered, hearded, and borne-out, many foul matters against the
greatest and chiefest Princes on earth. Declar. mot. ac turb in Angl. p. 17.
They have plotted diverse foreign invasions. Ibid. p 83.
They set Kingdoms to sale, and talk and write of nothing but foreign
enemies that shall invade this Land; Quodl p. 186.
So that this Land by their mischievous drifts and devises, lies open to the
spoil of the first that can catch it. ibid p. 182.
They fish for a Monarchy, ibid p. 324.
and have at all Christendom, for both estate Ecclesiastical and Temporal.
But Rel. of the fact at Wish. p. 71.
specially they challenge a spiritual Monarchy over all England by Ibid p. 74.
right or wrong seeking it. So Q^odl. p. 234
that all the Jesuits aim at one mark, and one course, and conceive one and
the same general hope to have England a Iaponian Monarchy (as one termed it)
or an apish Island of Jesuits. Quodl. p. 65.
They have intelligence in all the Kings Courts in Europe, by some principal
man or woman of mark of their placing. Jbid.
And their chief agent to discover the secrets of Princes, is always a
Jesuit in re or in spe. Ibid. p. 315.
These Agents in all Princes Courts, give information to their General once a
month: So that Ibid. p. 65.
nothing is done in England, but it is known in Rome within a month after at
the least. Elies notes. pa^. 34.
They seek to have all men at their beeke and commandment. And Relation of the
faction at W^^b p. 69.
so miserable is the state of the Catholics in England, that all must depend
upon the^, Q^ p. 9.
as though the fee-simple of all men's acts, words, and thoughts, were in their
gift. And therefore of all orders, the Jbid. p. 24.
Capuchins live best with the Jesuits, because the Jesuits would willingly
have all, and the Capuchins would willingly have nothing, but even to keep
life and soul together.

If any body wanting the Authors here cited would see more to this effect, he
may be satisfied by Doctor James his book of the Downfall of Jesuits, whose
Collections I have examined, and have found to be true as I said before.

If then the Priests accuse the Jesuits (who are now the only rulers of
Popes, Princes, and Priests lips, more for fear of them, then for any
affection unto them) to be mere hypocritical Machiauelian Atheists, how can a
Christian man that fears God, believe such a particular Church guided (as
their own Priests confess, so abundantly) by such a particular faction, to be
the Catholic Church, and not rather the mystery of iniquity. Seeing the
Scripture says, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
that the^ man of sin opposes and exalts himself above all that is called
God, sitting in the Temple of God, as God. And that the mystery of iniquity
does work, and that the coming of that wicked, is after the working of Satan
with all power and signs, and lying wonders, and with all deceiueablenesse of
unrighteousness in them that perish, because they received not the love of the
truth. To whom God shall send strong delusions, that they shall believe a lie.
L. 4. ^p. 3^.
And seeing that Saint Gregory, foretelling of these times, says, The king of
pride is at hand, an army of Priests is prepared to attend him.

All which are most true of the Pope, and of the enchanting subtilties of the
Jesuits, hoodwinking the world with blindness, as is affirmed by their own
brethren and Priests.

Whereunto to we may add the judicious discourse lately made to the Polonian
Nobility, assembled in Parliament, for reformation, Vide Mercur. Gallo-Belgic.
Dantisc. Anno 1607. p. 67, and deinceps: Where it is anowed, that the greatest
enemies to that and other free estates, were Jesuits, etc. and that their
faction is a most agill sharp sword, whose blade is sheathed at pleasure in
the bowels of every Commonwealth, but the Handle reaches to Rome, and Spain.
So that the very life, death, and fortunes of all, Kings, Magistrates, and
Commonwealths, hang upon the Horoscope of the Jesuits pleasures.

I cannot be of the mind of some of my acquaintance, yet Romish Catholics,
who lately told me, that they must needs be Atheists, if they forsake the
Church of Rome, because they cannot tell forsooth, where the Protestant
succession of Priesthood and Doctrine, was before Luthers days. But I say,
that if they were not holden strongly with their dead carcass obedience of the
Jesuits, and their thirteenth rule before deciphered, they might well see that
the Protestants in England, can prove vndenyably, the lawful succession of
Priesthood, even from the Popish Doctrines and their Records, when as Luther
first sought the Reformation. If then the Popish be good, the Protestants must
be good also, as appears by Master Masons book of this argument. And that
the doctrine of the Protestants is Catholic, no Papist can be so impudent, as
to deny, if he will pull off the Popes spectacles, clouded with the mist of
the Jesuits thirteenth rule. For as I showed before, the Protestants teach no
doctrine in the affirmative, but what the Papists hold at this day, viz. the
Apostles Creed, and that according to the ancient Catholic interpretation of
the Nicen and Athanasian Creeds, and the first four general Councels.

They deny indeed the Popish addition of 12 other articles made by Pope Pius
quartus: because the Papists cannot prove any one of them Catholic and
Apostolic: And because the Apostle said, If we, Call. 1.8.
or an Angel from heaven teach otherwise, let him be accursed. Saint Augustine
says of the Apostles Creed, He that believes more, believes too much, and he
that believes less, believes too little.

The famous learned Friar Padro Paulo of Venice, in his History of the Council
of Trent, which confirmed that Creed of Pius quartus; discovers how that
Counsel was ouer-ruled by the faction of the Jesuits, and that it was there a
common byword, even among the Papists themselves, that that Council was
guided by the holy Ghost, which came every week from Rome in a Cloakebagge.

If we may not believe an Angel of light, teaching otherwise then the Apostles
Creed, then blame not the Protestants protesting against the Papists late
additions, and corruptions, but rather believe and follow them, because they
teach nothing but that which the Papists themselves cannot deny to be the
Catholic faith. And deny such a Council, such a Creed, so new, and so
branded by the Papists own best and most learned Priests.

Mine old acquaintance propounds to me yet another question, viz. How good
Christians could converse and communicate with such a Church, so corrupted
before Luther.

This is lately well answered by the Bishop of Exeter, in his book, entitled,
The old Religion, and well prosecuted by others, who make it plain that one
may communicate, as they did with the Papists, as we may communicate with the
Devil, when he said, Thou art Christ, the Son of the everliving God. Not
because the Devil spoke it, but because it is Gods truth, and consequently
ours. So we may communicate in the truth with any, in error with none. For
example, Some Priests were as vehemently earnest and zealous denyers of Romes
corrupted doctrine before Luthers time, as Master Burton and others now. And
many then resisted the Roman errors, even to death, as the Wiclifians and other
learned and religious Priests, as the Histories of the several times and ages
do testify. Others more cooley and advisedly sought the Reformation, as
Erasmus, Cassaender, Petrus de Aliaco, and others, who communicated with Rome
in her truths, and scorned her errors, as appears by their books written
to men, and to Councels, to reform the Church, even so long before Luthers
days, as the Council of Constance.

It may be objected, why then should the Reformers now protest a separation,
more then the said Reformers did before Luther? This is sufficiently answered
in the dispute between Mr Burton and his Antagonists, where Master Burton
(though accounted an ouer-zealous Separatist from the Church of Rome)
confesses that they were not bound then, and yet are bound now since the
Council of Trent to separate. Because that since, and by the Council of
Trent, men are sub anathemate, bound to believe, as well the errors as the
truths of the Church of Rome, and as well the new Creed of Pius quartus, as
the ancient Creed of the Apostles. Before the Council of Trent and publication
of these new Articles, men would ordinarily say, when this new teaching was
discovered, Let them pipe what they will, we will dance what we list;
Meaning, that they thought themselves safe if they believed the old Creed, and
left the new Romish.

And I say further in the words of a learned Divine; In his Treatise of the
Catholic Faith.
that though we could then communicate with such a Church without evident
danger of damnation (as they did then) yet in as much as we cannot communicate
with it now upon any better terms then legal servants or bondslaues do with
their Masters, we are bound in conscience and religious discretion, when
lawful occasion is offered (as now it is) to use our liberty, to seek our
freedom, rather then to live in bondage, according to the rule of the Apostle
given to servants, 1 Cor. 7.20, 21. etc. Let every man abide in the same
Calling wherein he is called. Art thou called being a servant? care not for it.
But if thou may be made free, use it rather, for he that is called in the
Lord, being a servant, is the Lords freeman. Likewise also he that is called,
being free, it Christ's servant. Ye are bought with a price, be ye not the
servants of men; that is, yield not that absolute obedience to men (as the
Jesuits teach) which is due only to God. Padr. Paul. Defense of the State of
Venice.
That obedience (as the learned Venetian says) which God commands us to
perform to our Ecclesiastical superiors, is not a foolish or ridiculous
subjection, nor is the power of the Prelate an arbitrary judgment, but both
the one and the other must be ruled by the Word of God, according to the place,
Deuteronomy. 17. before cited. Absolute obedience is due only to God, and whosoever
supposes any humane will to be infallible, utters great blasphemy in
ascribing that to the creature, which is due only to the Creator.

I once asked a learned Romish Priest within this seven years, whether praying
to Saints were a matter of Faith or not. He answered that we are not bound to
pray to Saints. So shall you find many Romish Catholics before Luthers
days, Respons. ad apologiam Card. Bell. p. 9.
and after the Council of Lateran, who would say at the Elevation, Adoro te si
tu es Christus, i.e. If thou be Christ, I do adore or worship thee. So far
were the wiser sort of the Romish Catholics then from believing that Councels
definition.

Thus you see, how, and why men did communicate without a separation then, and
why they may not now.

Likewise the Priest who answered me about praying to Saints, told me that many
things in Rome are taught, inter piecredenda, things to be religiously
believed. As the Popes power to depose Princes, which you see is denied by
Priests that daily say Mass, to this day as well learned French as English,
who call it, Nonam Catholicam fidem Iesuitarum: The Jesuits new Catholic
Faith. So that this late vp-sprung error in the Church of Rome, wants not men
visible in the same Church, to teach truth, and correct error, as in all former
ages some always have done.

So powerful is God to defend his Church from errors, even by those that are
members of that corrupt part of the Church, according to that saying, that
there should be some Doctors, some Pastors, to teach the truth, he could have
said one Pope, if he had meant so.

It is not amiss to have a little further consideration of that army of
Priests, the Jesuits which attend the Pope, according to the mouths of their
own Priests. It is observed (says one of them) Quod. p. 16.
by men, how religious orders have their periods. And again, Ibid. p. 74.
That at the rising of every new order, some are raised up to be a curb to
that Order. It being so (as Bagsh. ans. p. 8.
some of the temporal Magistrates have told the Jesuits) that Iesuitisme of a
serpigo, is become a Gangrene, it must therefore be cut off. For Quodl. p. 1.
and 75.
We are persuaded they will be drawn to such matters, as a Visum est spiritui
sanct^ and nobis, i.e. (It seems good to the holy Ghost, and to us) must
indicially pass indefinitine sentence against them. And the Pope is to be
entreated to lay the Axe to the root of the tree, and to cut off this pride of
this society, spreading it self far and near, for unless a damme be set up
against the stream thereof, the raging course will burst asunder all bonds of
honesty and modesty, and carry away headlong, many with the force thereof. It
Relat. of the faction at Wisb. p. 77.
is time to look to them, for they are become already incorrigible of any
Prince, Prelate or People, and therefore an heavy destruction is like to come to
their Society, and surely their fall without special miracle is incurable, and
they are like enough to be expelled by force. These contentions cannot end but
with blood for as they live Templar-like in all things, there will be a right
Templarian downfall. And all ought to assist to the pulling down of these
Templarian Jesuitical Sectaries, and banishing them out of the Christian
world. Otherwise they will be the means to destroy all Popes and Kings, and to
govern with their Presbytery and Superior, as you may see in the latter end of
Watsons Quodlibets.

If out of their own Priests mouths, they be thus judged, who are under the
Popes curse; What would the said Priests speak, if they were free from the
said curse, as the Protestants are: I make no doubt but that they would say (as
the Protestants prove) their separation from the Romish Church was most lawful
and just, in respect of both Prince and State, by reason that they are bound to
be both Traitors at the Popes will, as appears by their doctrines, and also
Heretics, if they command it to be believed ex Cathedra. Both which you may
find to be unanswerably proved by T.I. in his Treatise of the holy Catholic
Faith and Church specially in his 15 Chapter. I may say unanswerably proved,
because H. Floyd the Jesuit told me (as I said before) they must be answered
another way. Finding (as it seems) he thought their cause weakened by their
insufficient answers already. Otherwise what needed so many plottes and
treasons as have been acted by them, since their doctrines teach the same
ordine ad deu^ and bonu^ Spirituale, in order unto God and spiritual good, as
is discovered by their own Priests. And does not Bellarmine give this in
reason why the Christians in the primitive times resisted not Nero and
Dioclesian, viz: quia deerant vires, they wanted strength. And does not R.
Parson in his Andrew Philopater say bouldly that when Kings do deflect from
their Catholic Religion which he means to be the Romish, Liberos esse
subditos etc: That the subjects are free from their allegiance Posseque et
debere si vires habuerint, eiusmodi hominem e dominatu eijcere that they may,
and ought, if they be able, cast such a one out of his government.

If I had not found both by their Doctrine and practice that a man could not be
a Catholic after the Roman fashion but that he must needs be a traitor, in my
Conscience I had not forsaken them. For I should have been carried away as the
wisest and learned Papists are at this day tied by the Jesuits blind, dead
Carbeis obedience not to search and believe what God bids but what the Pope
and my ghostly father teach, hoodwinking and lulling a man a sleep for ever
seeing any more, with these words ipsi enim praeuigilabunt quasi
ratione^reddituri pro animabus vestris (i.e.) for they watch over you as they
that shall give account for your souls; and Obedience is better then
Sacrifice. Their meaning is obedience to the Priest or Pope, howsoever not
suffering you to see or understand those words Cum docuerint te iuxta legem
eius i.e. when they shall teach thee according unto his law, and forgetting or
not suffering you to see that it is better to obey Gods Commandments, rather
then men Councelling massacres and powder plottes.

If they were suffered to see these true bounds of obedience, they could never
have had so many, so wise and so learned men to undertake a powder plot, as
they have found. The manifold transgressions of the rule given by the Apostle
To. 13.1, 2, 5. (Into all which transgressions this Doctrine of their absolute
obedience to man does plunge them) does lead and draw them as the Philistines
did Sampson blindfoulded, after that they had put out his eyes. The Apostles
Rule is let let every man be persuaded in his own mind To: 14.5. But
assuredly those in the powder plote were not persuaded in their own mind but
in their obedience to their ghostly Fathers that teach it, ad bon^ Spirituale,
for a spiritual good. As you have had it from their own Priests mouths and
pens. So I end: praying our Lord Jesus Christ to preserve us all to his
saving Grace.

Deo soli sit Gloria.
FINIS

