THE DRUNKARD'S CHARACTER, OR, A TRUE DRUNKARD with such sins as reign in
him, viz. Pride. Enmity. Ignorance. Atheism. Idleness. Adultery. Murder.
with many the like. Lively set forth in their colors.

TOGETHER WITH COMPLETE ARMOVR AGAINST EVIL SOCIETY. The which may serve also
for a Commonplace-booke of the most usual sins.

By R. Iunius.

LONDON, Printed by R. Badger, for George Latham, at the Bishops-head in S.
Paul's Cuhrchyard. 1638.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, JOSEPH, Lord Bishop of Exceter.
Right Reverend Father,
ANd no less honored Lord. I see many make use of your lines, few
acknowledge, none return to give thanks: but no cheating, like the felony of
wit; for he which thieves that, robs the owner, and coosens all that hear
him. Why I presume to make use of your name, is not hard to divine; your
interest being so just, and great, both in the man, and matter: it is not my
respect only, but your right; and for encouragement, your own words may serve
me for a sufficient both plea, and protection. It is your Lordships, that
presents of love, fear not to be ill taken of strangers. Nor could I more
fitly dedicate this Book, which (so much crossing the stream of nature all
corruption) may happily provoke some insolent, yea, potent offenders.

I cannot so over esteem these lines, as to hold them worthy your judicious
eyes, much less your patronage: yet, as the case stands with me, it would
be no less then injurious, not to look so high; and I should offend, if I
presumed not. Benefits received, are bonds obligatory: and if so, both my duty
and thankfulness make my best services your debt, and if neither of these, my
most endeared affection: VV hither should the Riverreturn, if not to the Occan,
from whence it received it is streams? And I have not alone watered my Garden
from your Fountain; but a great part of this my Candleslight, took it is being
(next the Element of Gods word) from the shining Lamp of your Works. Many of
these are Flowers from your Garden, Sciences from your Orchard, I have taken a
great part of my Seed from your Granary: if I shall seem to saucy, in plucking
and taking them, without leave from the owner; I humbly crave, that restitution
and acknowledgment may serve for part of amends. If this Posie and new fruit
answer your sent and taste, I have obtained my desire: or if the grain of this
new Crop chance to differ, impute the fault to the Soil, and Seeds-man; though
it was not my purpose to impair the quality, by improving the quantity.

Briesly, as the Be gathers from one Flower, Wax; from another, Honey; from a
third, Bee-Glew, and brings to her Hive that which is profitable from all: so
have I (under correction) filch't from your Lordships worthy Works, and other
Authors, (both divine and humane, whether Ancients or Neotericks) what soever
elegant Phrases, pithy Sentences, curious Metaphors, witty Apo^ hegmes, sweet
Similitudes, or Rhetorical expressions I could meet withal, pertinent, whole
some, and delectable, wherewith to enamell this Tr^atise of mine: so that you
may almost say of it, as Apollodorus was wont to say of Chrysippus his Books,
That if other men's sentences were left out, the Pages would be void: and others
cannot but resemble it to Horace his Daw, which was dressed and pranked in other
Birds feathers, being otherwise naked and bare: nay, my self will acknowledge,
that to this Nosegay of strange Flowers, I have put little of mine own, but
the Thread to bind them; and that to all this Frame, I have not much more then
made the Pins, which fasten the joints together; for most of the materials were
squared and fashioned to my hand, by more judicious workmen: it is but borrowed
Metal ^ast into a new mould. Yet pardon me, ^e who has but a Cock boat to
sail in, must not go far from the shore: and such as want a stock of their
own, are forced to borrow, and trade with other men's money. Peradventure the
Magazine of my memory is better furnished with matter, then the Storehouse of
my invention; yet each are so meanly, as I am forced both to pity and disdain
my felfe.

Who knows not, that the suggestion of one new thought, is harder, and
better, then many repeated? wherein your Lordship excels some other of my
Authors, as the Sun in brightness the rest of the Planets. It is reported of
Epicurus, that in three hundred Volumes, which he left behind him, he had not
made use of one Allegation: who, in our times, does resemble him more then your
Lordship, less then my self? yet this I will avouch in mine own praise, that
I love wisdom, and honor learning, as much as they that have them. And for my
defense, if in reasons, comparisons, and arguments, I trarsplant any into my
Soil: I am no thief in it: since I either say, or am ready to acknowledge of
whom I had them. I have so made use of other men's wits, as you may see I do^
not steal, but borrow. I desire not to conceal their nam^s, as naughty women
do the right fathers of their children; though I confess, many of my Authors
names, and places, of what I have ^udled up together, are by me so absolutely
for gotten; that he which would know of me whence they are taken, and from whom
I had them, would greatly ^ut me to my shifts: yet have I not begged them but at
honor able and well known gates; they are all, or almost all, so famous that,
me thinks, they sutficie^tly name themselves* without me; for they are both
vich, and they also come from rich and worthy hands; wherein Authority does
concur with reason. But of all the rest, it is easy for any, that have been
conversant in your Lordships Books* to know by the smell of each Flower, which
has had the aspect of your Sun.

Neither (if I shall speaking enuously) had this Web ever been, but for the
Silk, which I found ready spun from your worthy breasts. I had suff^red sh
pwrack on the first shore, but that I was steered by so good a Pilot, as your
self, by whose Compass I have securely sailed, and (though sometimes
weather-beaten safely arrived at my expected Haven Yea, my Molde was so kindly
bedewed with your heavenly co^templat^o^s; when it was Sunburned; and so gently
thawed by your divine Meditations and other observations, when it was Frost
bound* that the earth it self would cause me blush, if I should not present yo^
with the first, or best fruits.

Not that my ambit on, or hope does so far transport^me as to think it worthy
your serious serveigh, whose hours are taken up with more excellent and
heavenly notions: much less able to add the least gleame, to what you know:
such a fond conceit were as absurd, as to light a Taper to the Sun, to teach an
Eagle to fly, a Dolphin to swime, or with Phormio the Philosopher, to read a
Lecture of Soldiery to Hannibal, the most expert warrier of his time, and I
might be worthily laughed at for my labor, as he was: I only offer it to your
censure and dispose, that it might therather cree^ forth, under the safe
conduct of your goodness, unto the hands and use of others; and even therein
fear also, that I have coveted too high, and intruded too much on your
Lordships more weighty affairs.

Indeed, to alter a little of what is yours, would interdict me all Apology,
since that were to use the pensile upon a picture finished by Apelles; or to
write the destruction of Troy after Homer, which with ease may be marred, but
cannot be mended. Suppose, with Epicurus, you loath to repeat any thing
again, be it never so pleasing, or profitable; as it appears by your
compositions you do: yet far be it from you, to bar others that benefit; when
the same God, by whose Spirit your Pen was guided, gave command, that his
children should lay up his words in their hearts and souls, bind them upon
their hands, and between their eyes, teach them their children, repeat them
sitting and walking, lying down, and rising up, yea, write them upon the posts
and gates of their houses.

Besides, experience shows that the oftener these Nails are hammered, the
deeper they pierce; and pierce too deep they cannot; for five words remembered
are better then a thousand forgotten; and every help to our devotion, deserves
to be precious. It was an envious humor (not befitting your Lordships worth,
whose aim is God's glory, not your own) which caused Alexander to be angry
with Aristotle, for making his Books common: and a peevish condition, which
made Aspendius, that cunning Musician, to play always so softly on his Harp,
that none conld hear but himself. Virtue is destributive, and had rather
accommodate many with selfe-injury, then bury benefits that might pleasure a
multitude; and that which is good of it self, is so much the better, by how
much the more it is communicated; yea, to conceal goodness is a vice.

I need not tell your Lordship, that gray advisements in a fine filed phrase are
like (...), Fire, Water, the more breathed, the clearer; the more extended, the
warmer; the more drawn, the sweeter; or the bright Sun, whose beams are not
the worse, for shining in every corner, but the places the better.

If then I detract not from their worth, who may not benefit by their use? in
which my care and desire was, with the Be, to (...) my self and others
without prejuaice to any one flower. Put case I have fa^otted and piled one
thing upon another independantly, and without form, or order; precious stones
willshine, though set in Lead; and linkes of Gold, have their true value and
luster, though a bungler make the chain.

Indeed, if in borrowing the matter, I impair the form, (as many times it
comes to pass, that sentences translated, or repeated, do, like silk twice
dyed, loose their gloss) if I adulterate, or sophisticate any one piece, let
the Author reward me, as Archelaus and Philoxenus did some, which sang their
^eeters illfav^uredly and undecently, who either kicked them on the shinns, or
broke their potts, using these words, you break mine, I break yours; or as
learned Musurus Candiot served Marsilius Ficinus, in correcting his translation
of Plato, all over with a Sponge, finding it to imitate the copy original, no
more then Cicero the younger did his Father, which was only in name; or take
the same course with my Book, which Philoxenus did with a Tragedy, that
Dionysius sent him to correct; who finding it not worthy to be published,
took a knife and rased it in pieces. For praise, I seek none, as I have
deserved none; and I am so far from expecting thanks, as that I humbly crave
pardon; yea, a conditional acceptance is all I ask.

Wherefore vouchsafe it your favorable aspect, and let this mean, but
faithful testimony of my humble thankfulness, be shrouded under the wings of
your learned Patrociny; as was Persius under the wings of Pallas; and Teucer
under the Shield of Ajax. And your deserved greatness, shall make it more
acceptable, and by consequence the more profitable: yea, your name, to which it
is consecrate, shall add life to it, as the Sun to a withered Plant; and your
protection will no less support it, then bones do the flesh of a man's body, or
walls the building of an house.

True, Alexander, at first, disdained the Corinthian Ambassadors, who offered
him the freedom and Burgueship of their City; but when they told him, that
Bacchus, and Hercules were likewise in their Registers; he kindly thanked them,
and accepted their offer. If there be any thing herein worthy, let it induce
your acceptance; if not, it may please you to imitate Caesar, who never
rej^yced more, then to hear how they talked of his valiant exploits, in simple
Cottages.

Diverse do dedicate their heavenly labors, according to earthly respects; and
I have often seen an heavenly Pearl, presentted to the hand of an earthly and
sensual Patron: but such incongruous, and untuneable de dications have ever
been harsh to my judgment: wherefore that I might avoid the like incongruity,
I was bold, in nuncupating my Book, to fix upon your Lordship; in whom, to
the outwa^d gifts of nature, and fortune, are conj^yned the inward endowments
of grace; as piety, humility, affability, temperance, justice, wisdom, with
maturity of judgment, and the like; which by a rare and happy combination,
have met together, as Diamonds set in a border of Gold, or Sapphirs placed in a
Cabinet of Ivory: touching which your virtues) for I will not use many words,
of your self, to your self) I shall rather praise God, and pray for the
continuance and increase of them, in the secret closet of mine own heart, than
make any public proclamation of the same, in the ears of others; knowing,
that your self affects no other the ater, for your worth, then your own
conscience. And in regard of others, it were as needless, as to lend
Spect^cles to Lynceus, an Eye to Argus, or to wast gilding on pure Gold. for
who has heard of your name, that is not driven to admiration and veneration of
your singular sufficiencies? Again, Alexander's victories and virtues, (to
which I may fitly resemble them) were not to be drawn in the compass of a
signet; neither did it become any to paint them, but Apelles; to grave them,
but Pyrgoteles; to carve them, but Lysippus. Wherefore I will pass over with a
dry Pen, that which neither befits the person to write, in regard of his
meannesse, nor the place of an Epistle to contain in regard of it is expected
briefnesse; though It is detraction to conceal due praise,
When good related, might more goodness raise.
True glasses both our deformities and favors tell: and precepts never shine
so much, as when they are set in examples; nor examples, as when they are set
in curious persons: nor is it easy to find so fit a person, so meet a
pattern for imitation, for incitation.

The which benefit that we may long enjoy, as a set Copy in the School of this
our Nation, my prayers, with many other, are hearty and fervent, that your life
may be as long, as it is beneficial; then shall you as much outlive others, as
your name you; which will be so long, as nature has an ear, or eye,
ortongu^; for though you dye, your sweet remembrance shall ever live. Oh that
these lines might live but so long, as your fame and known integrity; then I
were confident they should never meet a grave in coming ages.

Thus loving rather to say nothing, then too much; I desire your Lordship to
accept, as from an affectionate heart, and dutiful hand, in part of payment, by
way of restitution, this small Mite; which I bring you, in your own and other
men's coin, which is not more yours than the Author,

And so I commend it is success to God, it is Patronage to you, it is use to the
World, and your Lordsh^p to the protection, tuition, direct on of the mighty
Creator loving Redeemer, comfortable Preserver of all the Elect.

Your Lordships most humbly devoted, and in all service ever to be commanded R.
I^nius.

THE DRVNKARD'S CHARACTER, OR, A true Drunkard lively set forth in his colors.
HAVING found out a new Creature which GOD never made in the Creation (as once
Anah in the wilderness, The Introduction.
Genesis 36. 24.) I present him to view, first whole and entire, then cut up and
anatomized; taking liberty in method and distribution, so to place my
divisions, subdivisions, notions, as may best serve for brevity, perspicuity,
my purpose, and the Readers benefit.

1.
A Drunkard (and I take him for such that drinks more for lust, or pride,
Drunkards not to be reckoned amongst men
or covetousness, or fear, or good fellowship, or to drive away time, or to
still conscience, then for thirst) being generally considered, is one that was
borne a man, lives a beast, and consorts with beasts of his own kind; one
that through custom of sin, and a just judgment of GOD upon it, has his
heart changed from man's nature, and a beasts heart given him in the steed, as
it fared with Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4. 16. For what other can we think of him
that gives himself to this vice; does not wine rob a man of himself and lay a
beast in his room? he is not himself, he is not his own man, though a
master of others: neither are drunkards to be reckoned amongst men, but beasts,
says Seneca.

Indeed they are humane, or rather inhumane beasts, or as some more favorably
admit, reasonable beasts, or sensual men: but yield them the utmost, a
drunkard has but a bestiall heart in a case of humane flesh, and there is
little difference between him and a beast, but that he does exceed a beast in
beast^nesse, as Hermes well observes.

2.
YEa to prove them beasts in condition, Other sinners Beasts.
though men in shape, were a task so easy, that it would accrue small credit
to an opponent, for each natuall man (so long as he remains in his sins
impen^tent) is a very beast in condition as Jeremy affirms, Ier. 10. 14. and
St. Peter, 2 Pet. 2. 12. He may be so proud as to scorn the comparison; but
it is so, for the wisdom of Heaven puts it upon him, and that which the
Prophet in this place wraps up in a short Metaphor, is in other places of
Scripture, as it were, illustrated, and unfolded by a continued Allegory; the
self same spirit making good that general charge by many particular
instances, as look but in Gods Dictionary (who can give most congruous names
to natures) and you shall find, Nero termed a Lion, 2 Timothy 4. Herod, a Fox,
Luke 13. the Jewish false teachers, Dogs, Phil. 3. David's persecutors, Bulls of
Basin and Unicorns, Psalm. 22. the Egyptian enemies, Dragons, Psalm. 74. the
Scribes and Pharesies, Serpents and Vipers, Math. 23. the Babil^nian Monarch, a
Lion, with Eagles wings; the Percian, a Bearc; the Macedonian, a Leopard, Dan.
7. the enemies of the Church, wild Boares, Psalm. 80. greedy Judges, evening
Wolves, Zeph. 3. Schismatics, Foxes cubs, Canticl. 2. etc.

Or admit the Scriptures were silent herein, we may evidently see men and
women transformed into beasts of all kinds everyday, some into Epicurean Swine,
others into barking Dogs, a third sort into cruel Tigers, etc. yea no
wilderness afords so many beasts as some great City: for each covetous
Muckworme, is a blind Mole; every lust full person, a rank Goat; the
fraudulent man is a Fox; the busy body, a Squirrell, the Murmurer, a Frog; the
Flatterer, a Spaniell; the Slanderer, an Aspe; the Oppressor, a Wolf; the
Persecutor, a Tiger; the Church Robber, a wild Boar; the Seducer a Serpent,
yea a Devil; the Traitor, a Viper, etc. for the time and my breath would fail
me if I should reckon up all kinds of humane beasts, or beastiall men, beasts
in the form of men; yea its well if all these brutish conditions meet not in
one man (especially a drunkard) as rivers in the Sea, for there is not one
beastlike, or serpentine quality which every of their natures much more this
sin, would not admit if GOD restrained them not.

3.
EVen such is the power of sin, that it made God become man, Angels become
Devils, Drunkards worse then Beasts.
and men become beasts; but this sin, this vile and odious sin of
drunkenness, has a more superlative power; for it makes a man worse then any
beast which goes upon four legs. Neither can I find a sample for him amongst
beasts, he is such a beast that I know not with what beast to match him, such
a beast that no other beast will keep him company; the nearest to him is the
Ierff, a beast in the north parts of Suetia, whose property (as Gesner, out of
Olaus Magnus, relates it) is when he has killed his prey, or found
someCarkasse, to fall a devouring the same, and never leave feeding until his
belly be puffed up, and strouteth like a bag-pipe, and then not being able to
hold any more, he goes presently between two narrow trees and straineth out
backward what he has eaten, and so being made empty, returns again to the
Carcass, and fills himself as before, and then straineth it out the second
time, and so continues filling and emptying himself until he has devoured
all; which being consumed, he hunteth after more, and this is the course of his
whole life. Now if the drunkard, whose whole life is little else but a
vicissitude of devouring and von^itting, who spends all his time in drinking,
and venting, and abominable spewing, so disgorging himself when he has drunk
his fill, thereby to be able to drink the like quantity again, had but this
ill quality and not an hundred more and worse with it, I might well couple
these two beasts together; for in this particular there cannot be devised a
more expressive Hieroglyphique of his loathly condition: but alas, this is
rather one of the drunkards virtues, for which he looks to be applauded, and
is so by all that keep him company, so that this comparison falls short by
much.

4.
Wherefore in my encounter with this Monster, wherein they equal Beasts.
I will neither spend time, nor blot paper with showing wherein they are equal
with beasts; as that they are only led by sensuality, that their whole
intendment is their bellies, that like hogs they think no garden so pleasant
as the dunghill, no clear stream comparable to the mire wherein they wallow,
that seeming a heaven to them which to a sober and religious man is little
better then an hell; yea, who thinks it not less labor to plow all day, then
to pot it, that it is a task almost invicible, to make them own those words
and behaviors when they are sober, which in their pots they were authors of,
that notwithstanding drink has often made them as sick as ever was Seaman,
and exposed them to a thousand perils, yet they are never the wiser
afterward, that they have no more conscience nor fear of God, then beasts:
yea, tell them of God, their hearts will make reply, as the Cyclops in the
Tragedy did with his mouth, when Ulysses told him of God; I know no other God
but my belly: that they are as improvident and without forefight of what will
follow, as beasts; providing no refuge against the evil day, but think to
bear off the judgments of God with head and shoulders, that like brute beasts
they will believe nothing but what they are led to by sense, that they consider
no more how time passes away then a beast is able to tell the clock;
whereupon their departure is commonly so sudden, that when they look for a
pleasant peale, behold, it is their passing bell, that they are no more ashamed
of their deeds then beasts; yea less, for a very Dog, though he cannot blush,
will go away, as if he were ashamed, when he has done a shrewd turn, and is
taken in the manner; but Drunkards have a meretricious forehead, stupid, and
steeled with impudence, shame-proofe, there is not so much blood of grace in
their hearts as will serve to make half a blush in their cheeks.

If it be objected that a Drunkard can sometimes speak; I answer, that is no
more then a beast has done, even a silly Ass, Number. 22. 28.

These and many the like I will pass over, and only show you wherein they be
worse then beasts.

5.
IN which, Why so tart.
let none think me over tart, or my comparisons too homely; for they must not
look to live like beasts, yea, worse then beasts, and be slattered as if they
were men: what, shall we walk in the spirit of falsehood, and prophecy of
wine and strong drink? no, this were to be a beast for company: if men think
scorn thus to be compared, let them forbear to deserve such comparisons. What
says St. Chrysostom, shall I think thee to be a man when thou have all the
qualities of a beast; kickest like an Ass; neighest after women, like a Horse;
ragest in lust, like a Bull; ravenest like a Bear, stingest like a Scorpion,
rakest like a Wolf, as subtle as a Fox, as impudent and shameless as a Dog?
thou have nothing in thee to induce me to think so, seeing there is a greater
similitude between thee and a beast, in the disposition of thy mind, then
dissimilitude in the composition of thy body: as for thy shape, that affrights
me more when I see a beast in the likeness of a man.

But I speak not so much to them as of them, for these beasts rarely read
books, especially tending to piety: I speak to the sober, as unto men of
understanding, and let them judge what I say.

6.
Drunkards inferior to beasts in five particulars. viz.
1 In swilling to excess, whereas beasts keep within the bounds of
moderation. 2 I^ cosing the prerogative of their creation, whereas beasts keep
theirs. 3 In depriving themselves of sense and motion, wherein beasts excel
plants and stones. 4 In that they subvert reason, and prove cruel to
themselves, yea, ofttimes become their own executioners. 5 In transforming
themselves into the condition of cvill Angels, whose whole delight is to sin
and make others sin, and whose portion is in the burning lake.
1 First, it is not so bad to be a Beast, as Beasts know when they have enough
for a man (who has more noble endowments) to live like a beast, which is the
Drunkards case, who in their practice resemble beasts, saving that beasts are
therein better then they: as for example, beasts, whether Horses, Oxen, or any
other brutish creature (as knowing when they have enough, when once they have
drank sufficient to quench their thirst, and to satisfy nature) have so much
reason and good manners in them as to forbear to drink any more then they
need; yea, they cannot be forced by any violence to drink again; which
shows that excess is a most unnatural and abominable sin: whereas the
drunkard drinks double and treble, yea, ten times more then he needs, and not
only satisfies nature, but also gluts and oppresses it with superfluity, even
unto surfeit.

Yea, this even one of their own Poets have confessed; who, when his wife asked
him whether he were not ashamed to lie drunk in the streets like a beast;
replied, thou lie like a whore, for if I were a beast I would not be drunk.
I marvel how a Drunkard could give so good a reason.

Neither is this all, for as beasts know when they have enough, these brutish
Animals are so far from having command over their affections, from putting a
knife to their throat when they have taken enough, as Solomon advises, Pro.
23. 2. that they will be ready to sheath it in the Drawers belly, if he shall
but offer to set bounds to their throats; at least they will unblesse
themselves, when means, and time, and company, will not permit another
Sacrifice to their Bacchus (their belly) so that to say the truth, and give
beasts their due in this particular, it is a wrong to beasts, to call
drunkenness their sin, for generally they are sober, and these so much worse
then beasts, as they ought to be better.

7.
2 DRunkards are worse then beasts, Beasts remain the same they were crealed,
but Drunkards shame their creation.
in that beasts remain the same they were created; whereas Drunkards subvert
natures institution, cease to be what God made them, reasonable creatures, and
suffer themselves to be transformed by drink into swine, as Elpenor, one of
Ulysses companions was turned by Circe into a Hog, so sha^ing their creation:
and whereas other sins deprive a man of Gods Image, this deprives him of
man's, leaving him neither the use of reason nor speech, without which (but for
the name and dimensions of a man) he is no better then a beast, as the Fool
said of his Coulestaffe, when he rid upon it into the water; as good no horse
but for the name of a horse: yea, the Drunkards soul is made a slave to his
sense, and whilst this rebels, she that worst may must hold the Candle.

Now a man having lost the use of his soul, is worse then a beast which keeps
the use of his instinct; yea, a man that has lost his senses, is therein worse
then a beast that has them, as sure as a living Dog is better then a dead
Lion: wherefore in this regard also the Drunkard should have a name inferior
to that of beast, and not be reputed so good.

8
3 THe Drunkard deprives himfelfe, Drunkards deprive themselves of sense and
motion.
not only of the use of his reason, but also of his senses; not of his
understanding alone, but of his standing and motion also; beasts have no
reason, no more have they, but beasts can use their limms, and so cannot they:
drink not only robs him of reason and speech (which two things distinguish
beast and man) but likewise of sense and motion, wherein beasts excel stocks
and stones, yea, it so blockefies him for the present, that neither hand nor
foot can do their office, as Terence has it.

It is no rare thing in our swinish age, for men to imitate the ancient
Persians, who though they were able to carry themselves into their banqueting
rooms, yet they were always carried out of them; in which case they can
neither prevent future danger, nor feel present smart: why, he is gone,
according to the Drunkards phrase, that is gone in his senses, gone in his
standing, gone in his understanding.

Indeed, as there is a mean in drinking, which is lawful, so there be
degrees of drunkenness: the first draught f wine comfort the heart and
stomach, the second inflames the liver, the third fumeth into the head, and
makes men fools, the fourth quite takes away their senses, and makes them to
adore their god Bacchus, like beasts upon all four, or rather like blocks, as
having never a leg to stand upon; so what is feighned of Proteus, viz. that he
was transformed, first, into a Lion, then into a boar, and at last into a
tree, is really verified in many a Drunkard: as have you not known some of
them toward their latter end, in Cleomenes condition, who carrousing after the
manner of the Scythians; drank so much, that he became and continued ever
after senseless.

What shall I say of a Drunkard? that little mouth of his, has swallowed down
himself, his paunch has buried the wine, and in the wine is his wit buried,
his senses, his soul, and perhaps his last wealth; yea, he is dead as well as
buried: for you may ring a bell in his ear, he hears not, much less can he
speak, yea scoff him, rob him, spurn him if you will, he feels not, he
stirs not, much less can he quarrel.

Matheolus writing of the Asses of Thuscia, says, that when they have fed upon
Hemlockes, they sleep so soundly that they seem to be dead, in so much as the
countrymen many times more then flea off half their skins before the Asses
will awake; these Drunkards are such Asses, when they have drunk stiff, and
are fallen asleep, you may half flea them before they will awake: I have
known it so in effect by one of them, whom no violence, or pain could awake,
so that he is more like a stock or stone then a reasonable or living creature.

Or if he be not so dead as a door nail, yet at least the drink has turned
him out of doors, for whosoever would speak with him, must stay until he
come home again to himself: and hereupon, when Cyrus in his childhood was
asked by his Grandfather Astyages, why at such a feast he drank no wine? he
returned this answer, full of witty simplicity: because, said he, I took it
to be poison, for I have seen it to spoil men of their wit, sense, speech,
health, strength, and motion: neither proves it less hurtful to Drunkards
then rank poison, but far more; for it intoxicateth the brain, benummeth
the senses, enfeebleth the joints and sinews, and brings a man into a
temporary Lethargy, besides the evil that it brings to the soul, which is
far worse; so that a beast is a man to such a man: for what is he better then
a walking tankard at best, as Aurelius called Bonosus, that quaffing Emperor,
who afterward (being overcome by Probus) hanged himself, leaving this to be
spoken in his praise, that he was not borne to lead an Army, but to lift a
pot. But in case aforesaid, namely, when they have drunk themselves deaf, and
blind, and dumb, nay, dead and senseless, to what can I so firly compare
them, as to the Idols of the heathen, which have eyes, and see not; ears, and
hear not; tongues, and speak not; noses, and smell not (no not their own
vomit) hands, and handle not; feet, and walk not, being as dead men, that can
neither sit, stand, nor go, nay worse by far: for he that is dead, can do
neither good nor ill, but drunkards are dead to all goodness whatsoever; and
alive, yea, very active to all wickedness; so that their conditon is far
worse then the very beasts that pepith, Psalm. 49. 12. 20.

But admit the best, namely, that they are beasts, you cannot but grant that
these unclean beasts, which wallow in the mire of sensuality; these brutish
Drunkards, which transform themselves through excess; are even those swine,
whom the Legion carries headlong to the Sea, or pit of perdition, Mat. 8. 32.

Or will they have themselves to be men? Surely to come to drink, as to a
Sacrifice unto the belly, is a most base and brutish Idolatry; and what men are
they like, or to whom may they fitly be compared? surely unto none, except
Epicurus, who maintained, that sensual pleasure was the only Summum bonum: or
Cerinthus the Heretic, who verily believed, that the chief felicity in
Heaven, should be eating and drinking, and such like fleshly lusts.

9.
4 OR (that I may pass to the fourth They subvert reason and prove cruel to
themselves.
particular formerly propounded) that lunatic man, mentioned, Math. 17. 15.
16. whom all the Disciples could not cure, until the Master himself came; and
to that mad man they are very like. For as he being fore vexed, fell
oftentimes into the fire, and oftentimes into the water: so these being robbed
of their strength and senses by drink, are frequently subject to all fearful
accidents, and miserable mishaps, which often fall out by reason thereof. As
some being drunk, fall into the fire, and are burned; as I could instance in a
Gentleman of worth, that rising to make water, could find no fitter place to
do^ it in, then the chimney; where, being a few live embers, he fell down,
and not being able to rise again, had his belly puckerd together like a
sachell, before the Chamberlain could come to help him; whereupon, being in
great torture, he drank off twenty two double jugs of bear, and so dyed,
roaring and crying that he was damned, for breaking his vow which he had made
of reformation: some again fall into the water, and are drowned, as is
commonly seen: again, some fall and batter their faces, bruise their bodies,
break their arms, their legs, and many break their necks, in the very act of
drunkenness, whose cases are desperate: others are wounded, beaten, and many
times murdered, as often times they stab and murder others: but this is
notably described by Solomon, Proverbs, 23. 29. to 36.

Indeed drunkenness is nothing else, nor has ever been reputed amongst the
wise and learned, then a voluntary madness, a temporary forfeiture of the
wits, worse then frenzy, in that the one is violent, the other voluntary;
that, the evil of punishment; but this, the evil of sin.

The wine, which of it self is a good creature of God, and, being moderately
taken, of excellent use; becomes to them which use it to surfeir, as the water
of the river Gallus in Phrygia, which makes all those mad that drink of it:
other vices do but alter and distract the understanding, whereas this utterly
subverteth the same, and astonieth the body: even wrath makes a man a beast,
but drunkenness makes a man mad, and if so, how odious is this sin! For if
it be a hateful thing for a man to wound his own flesh, and wilfully to
maime the members of his body; how abominable is it to wound the mind it self,
and to offer violence unto our reason and understanding! If it be a crime to
offer violence against the subjects; then surely to lay violent hands upon the
King himself, and to pull him out of his Regal throne, must needs be
condemned as an outrageous wickedness.

Or lastly, suppose them men, they are but like that man spoken of, Mark: 5.
2. to 6. who being possessed of the Devil, lived amongst the graves, and cut
himself with stones; for they love none but base company, base places, and
base courses; and what other do their frequent and horrible oaths, but cut
them deeper then those stones did him? It Is true, he may seem to be in a
better condition: as first, he may have a name to live, but indeed he is dead,
as S. John speaks. Secondly, he may have the appearance of a man, but indeed
he is a beast, as Jeremy speaks. Thirdly, he may be thought a sound man, but
indeed he is Demoniacall, obsessed, or rather, possessed with a Devil, yea,
many Devils, and more miserable then such an one, because it is a Devil of
his own chosing, as Basil speaks. And certainly, if every raygning sin be a
Devil, as S. Austin holds; much more, if the heart of a Reprobate contains so
many Devils, as unchaste thoughts, as St. Gregory affirms; every true Drunkard
is posiest with more Devils then Mary Magdalen was, and good reason; for, as
our Savior intimates, the Devil can find no such rest in dry places, Math.
12. 43.

Indeed this may seem, to some ignoramusses, a big word: but let me tell you,
the corporal possession of evil Spirits is not so rare, as the spiritual is
rife, no natural man is free; one has the spirit of error, 1 Timothy 4. 1.
another the spirit of fornication, ose. 4. 12. another the spirit of blasphemy,
Revel. 2. 9. and 13. 1. 5. 6. another the spirit of falsehood, Math. 24. 11.
another the spirit of fear, 2 Timothy 1. 7. another the spirit of slumber, Romans
11. 8. another the spiof giddiness, Esaias, 29. 9. to 15. another the spirit of
pride, all have the spirit of the world, 1 Cor. 2. 12.

Yea, let me assure you from Gods word, that all ye who are not changed in the
image of your minds, Ephesians. 4. 23. 24 Romans 12. 2. who have not yet felt the power
of godliness, 2 Timothy 3. 5. are as truly, though spiritually, carried by evil
spirits into the deeps of your known wickedness, as ever the Gadarean hogs
were carried by them down the precipice into the Sea.

Alas! the Devil has more then one way to possess men: he keeps possession
in some by his Tenants, as by drunkenness, swearing, whoredom, etc. in others
actually and immediately by himself; yet he rather choseth to possess men by
these his tenants, then by himself, that so he may not carry them against
their wills as he did that man in the Gospel, into the fire and water, so
using violence to their bodies (all those forced and violent motions which they
perform, who are really possessed, being the Devils own sins) but rather
desires to carry them willingly, and drive them, as free horses, that need
only the shaking of the hand, to the Tavern, to the stews, to this or that
evil company; and therefore he desired not to possess Jobs body, because his
intent was to draw Job himself to blaspheme God.

So that wicked men, although their bodies are free usually from this posses.
five power of Satan, yet Satan has a far greater power in the voluntary
motions of their bodies and souls, even such a power, as that they shall be
agents in what they do, and as guilty of the sin as himself, when he makes
them abuse their eyes to wantonness, their mouths to filthiness, and makes
their feet swift to shed blood: so that as Paul being guided by the good
spirit of God, could say, I live not, but Christ lives in me, Gal. 2. 20. so
may they, we live not, but the Devil lives in us, for he is their god, 2 Cor.
4. 4. and their Prince, John, 14. 30. and works in them his pleasure, Ephesians. 2.
2. 2 Timothy 2. 26.

Now this possession of soul and body together, is the more fearful, and yet
the more ordinary, neither do men marvel or wonder thereat, because it is not
discerned.

10.
5 BUt fifthly, that Drunkards are possessed with as many Devils as reigning
sins, is not all; their condition being yet worse, for in effect they are
turned Devils.

In the former place you saw men transformed into beasts; prye more narrowly
into them, They transform themselves into the condition of evil Angels.
and you shall see those beasts transformed again into Devils, in the delight
they take in sin, in their mischievous tempting others to sin: for surely
if want of reason makes a beast, abuse of reason this way makes a Devil; and
admit man has some advantage above beasts, it is a miserable advantage that
only makes us apt to evil, yea, the worst of evils, and capable of an hell:
small cause have we to brag of those powers which so distinguish us from
beasts, that they make us worse then the worst of beasts.

But of their acting the Devils part and their several slights in seducing
and enforcing others to sin, in drawing others to perdition: expect more,
Section the 75. etc. Only this for the present let the Drunkard know, that
except he do repent and amend, there is not the most loathsome and despicable
creature that crawles upon the earth, which he shall not once envy, and wish to
have been, rather then what he is; which should have been my next theme: but
of this when I come to the punishment of Drunkards, Swearers, and Seducers,
Section. 30. to 34. and 44. and 119. to 143.

And so much of the person in general, and a part: now take a general view of
the sin, before I come to particulars, and see how the Learned in all ages,
both Christians and Heathens, have censured this vice, and judged of this
sin, though indeed the odiousness of it is beyond all expression: neither
have I dehortation answerable to my detestation of it, only what cannot be
spoken (your meditation supplying the defect of my speech) may be employed as
under a curtain; which was the Painters shift in deliniating the picture of
Venus, and the wont of Timanthes; who, in each picture he drew, occasioned
more to be understood, then was painted.

11.
THe Learned of all ages have concluded; what the learned say of this sin.
yea, drunkenness it self (if it could speak, as it can take away speech)
would confess, that it is a flattering Devil, a sweet poison, a voluntary
madness, an invited enemy, the author of outrages, quarrels, debates,
murders, the nurse of fury, the mistress of pride, the fountain of all vice,
the original of all diseases, and bane of the soul: that it is a fire; whose
flame, is lust; whose sparks, are oaths, and evil words; whose smoke, is
pride, and infamy; whose ashes, are diseases and poverty; and whose end, is
hell.

That it is a sin which cracks men's credits, consumes their estates,
distempers their constitutions, dulls their spirits, infatuates their senses,
intoxicateth their brains, stupefies and besots their understandings,
perverteth their wills, troubles reason, overthrows the judgment, infeebleth
the memory, corrupts all the affections, excludes counsel, and without Gods
infinite mercy, and their sound repentance, damnes the soul.

That it is a bewitching sweet in the mouth, which turns to deadly poison in
the heart, the revealer of secrets, the ship wrack of chastity, the shame of
honesty, the ruin of good manners, the thief of time, the disgrace of
mankind; a sin which makes man an abomination to the Lord, odious to the
Angels, scorned of men, abandoned of all good society, and above all, makes
men subjects and vassalls to Satan: a sin of all others the most spreading,
most infectious, most incurable, most inexcusable, a sin which makes no
difference of times, places, persons, etc.

A sin which is against the laws of God, of grace, of nature, and of all
nations, against sense and reason; a sin, which brings wrath and judgment
upon the whole land; a sin, which is a grief to friends, a ruin to
families, which separates from the society and company of Gods Saints on earth,
excludes and shuts them out of the Kingdom of Heaven, as Plutarch, Solon,
Pittacus. Boethius, St. Austin, St. Ierom, St. Chrysoftome, and others style and
define it.

That it is of sins, the queen; as the gout is of diseases, even the most
prodigal, wastfull, unthrifty, unprofitable, unnatural, unseemely,
insatiable, unreasonable sin; the most base, brutish, beastly, foul, filthy,
odious, execrable, detestable, horrible, abominable state, disturbing,
heathenish, infernal, prodigious, damnable, graceless, and shameful sin of
all others, as some of our Modern writers render it.

In fine, it is a sin odious and loathsome in any; but in us, who have so much
light, so many laws of God and man against it, most unsufferable: but as it
was once observed, that Philosophy was taught in Athens, but practiced in
Sparta: so now temperance and sobriety is taught in England, but practiced in
Spain and Turkey.

12.
ANd as it is a most grievous and Drunkenness both a matchless sin in it
self, and the cause of all other sins
matchless sin in it self; so it is the cause of all other sins, a
monster with many heads, the root of all evil, the incendiary of all vice,
the Magazine of all misery, the mother and metropolis of all mischief. As tell
me, was there ever any sin committed which wine has not been an occasion
of? for notwithstanding wine does first serve and obey the drinker, yet by
little and little mixing it self with the blood in the veins, it does rule
over him, and, like Saules evil and controlling spirit, makes him it is
vassal, whereby, like the Centurions servant, he no sooner hears the word
from Satan, do this, but instantly he does it, whether it be to the
committing of adultery, with Holofernes; inces^, with Lot; murder, with
Alexander, Cambyses, and Philopater: one of which, in his drink, slew his
dear and faithful friend Clytus, who was his chief Captain in all his
exployts (though it so troubled him being sober, that he would have made away
himself) the second, his only Son; the third, his dear father and mother:
or treason, with him that confessed to King Pyrrhus upon his arraignment, all
this we did and spoke against thee, and much more should have done, had not
the wine failed us: or blasphemy, with Belshazzar and his Princes, Dan. 5. 23.
and what not? for even to rehearse the several examples which history affords,
and experience has made known, were endless. Some examples I have given you,
and he is a very young man and unobservant, that cannot add forty out of his
own experience.

And do not our reverend Judges, in their several circuits find by
experience, that few brawles, murders, manslaughters, rapes etc. are
committed, which arise not from this root of drunkenness. And indeed as in
Justice, all virtues are couched together summarily, as Aristottle affirms: so
in drunkenness, all vices are lapt up together as it were in a bundle, for it
is a confluence or collection of all the rest: and as he said of old, prove a
man to be ungrateful, and you prove him naught all over; so prove one to be a
Drunkard, and you prove him guilty of every thing that is evil, reprobate to
all that is good: for what sin is it which a drunken man will stick to
commit, when we read that Cyrillus his Son being drunk, slew his Father,
and his Mother great with child, hurt his two Sisters, and defloured one of
them, as St. Austin affirms: when another being tempted by the Devil (as
Philip Lonicer witnesses) to commit some crime or other, putting him to his
choice either of Drunkenness, Adultery, or Murder; he chosing the first, in
his drunkenness he abused the wife of him in whose house he was, and her
husband coming in the whilst, he slew him; and so in chosing that one, he
committed all three: which being rightly considered, me thinks a man had need
to be drunk before hand, that shall admit of more wine then enough; that shall
for one hours mad mirth, hazard a whole age of grief and shame, together with
his displeasure, that is able to destroy both body and soul in Hell.

13.
BUt you have not heard all; Drunkenness disables and indisposeth men to all
good, yea, to all the means thereof.
for as others observe, it is a queller of all good notions, motions, actions;
a sin which decays all a man's good parts, and moral virtues; which disables
men from all good employments, either in Church or Commonwealth, making them
unprofitable, which otherwise might be serviceable, and indisposeth them to
grace and godliness, yea, to all the means thereof. For as by too much rain
(says St. Austin) the earth is resolved into dirt, and made unfit for tillage:
so Drunkards by excessive swilling are altogether so unfitted for the
spiritual tyllage, that they can bring forth no good fruits of holiness and
righteousness, but rather like bogs and marshes, are fit to breed nothing but
vermin, frogs, and serpents, that is, all manner of abominable sins, and
loathsome wickedness.

More particularly, it keeps them from repenting, Esa. 22. 12. 13. and all
saving knowledge, Esa. 28. 7. debarreth them from regeneration, Christ's
righteousness, and that heavenly inheritance, Romans 13. 13. 14. Gal. 5. 21. 1
Cor. 6. 10. by it the spirit is quenched, Ephesians. 5. 18. and the body of sin,
with all it is lusts, strengthened, 1 Pet. 2. 11. yea the soul by it is made
like a City broken down and without walls, Pro. 25. 28. besides, it keeps
them in final impenitencie, Esaias. 5. 11. 12. Pro. 23. 35.

Neither can that soil which brings forth this vice (like ground sown with
salt) bring forth any other thing which is good, The roo^e of all evil, the
rot of all good.
I mean, so long as a man is such; as snow can never be made hot, so long as
it is snow; yea, where drunkenness reigns or carries the raynes, there cannot
dwell the least good, that heart is empty of all grace: and indeed how should
such a worthy princess as grace is, endure such rogues for her bed-fellowes
(so many filthy lusts as are in the Drunkards heart) to lodge with her, yea, as
smoke drives Bees from their hive: so drunkenness drives all the graces from
such an heart. And how should the Holy Ghost (which delights to dwell in the
heart of an holy man) but scorn to be an inmate, where drunkenness is an
inhabitant; noisome lusts, and evil cogitations drive him away; if the Devil
comes in, the Holy Ghost will go out. And therefore the Scripture tells us,
that the spirit went from Saul when he sinned, 1 Samuel 16. 14. and so on the
contrary, when the Holy Spirit enters into the heart of a man, all sins (in
some measure) are abandoned; as, when the King comes into the Tower all the
prisoners go out.

The Drunkards heart is like Mare mortuum, The Drunkards heart a Mare Mortuum.
for as no fish will live there, so no grace will thrive here: it is the root
of all evil, the rot of all good. Much traveling makes bad way, if one go but
now and then over a Meadow, the grass will nevertheless grow, but when it is
made a common through-fare, and beaten road for all passengers, this makes
the path bare: so the frequent custom of sin in any heart, when there is a
perpetual concourse of all filthiness, hinders, yea, kills every good motion
as fast as it springs up; and this is a sin which turns a man wholly into
sin. The Drunkard resembles Vejovis that Heathen god, who could do no good,
but hurt at will: and is like Ahab, who sold himself to work wickedness; yea
worse, if worse can be, for the Drunkard wholely dedicates, resignes,
surrenders, and gives himself up to serve sin and Satan; his whole
employment is only to drink, drab, quarrel, swear, scoff, slander, and
seduce; as if to sin were his trade, and he could do nothing else; like the
Devil, who was a sinner from the beginning, a sinner to the end. To say that
sin were in him, would be improper, for he is nothing else but sin in the
abstract, as St. Austin speaks, even a very Chaos of sin bunged up, for as
when a man is overcome with anger, we say he is in heat; and when we say
such a man is in drink, we imply more then that drink is in him; yea, when we
call a man a Drunkard, we imply more then that he is drunk, or has been
drunk, for it argues frequency; and lastly, as when Simon Peter told Simon
Magus thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity, he
employed, that not only these were in him, but he in them: so both more is
employed, and it is more proper to say of a sotted and sordid Drunkard, he is
sin, then a sinner; yea, that man of sin is not fuller of sin, then such an
one: so that as Solomon says, speaking of the virtuous woman, many daughters
have done virtuously, but thou surpassest them all; so may I say of a Drunkard,
many sinners have done wickedly, but thou surpassest them all.

14.
BUt to roave no longer in generals, The Drunkard cut up and anatomized.
having given you a superficial view of this Monster, and the sum of that
which he makes his only Summum bonum in a lump, or as it were wrapped up: I
come now to strip him naked, and turn his inside outward; by acquainting you
with such special and particular observations, as best deserve our discovery
and the worlds notice. In handling whereof, it is not to be expected that I
should observe a distinct propriety in referring all particulars to their
general heads, for as much as many of them are coincident one with another.

Neither will I undertake to observe an exact order in his description, seeing
he keeps none at all in his life: my principal care being to paint him
really and historically (not poetically) every way as he is; his words, as he
speaks them; his deeds, as he acts them, even to the very life, and present
him upon the Stage such, as the Spectators may verily think they either see
him, or the Devil in his likeness; as Sr. Tho. More concluded touching
Erasmus, when he but heard him speak, having never before seen the man.

15.
The first thing I Will fall upon shall be

His body, touching which I will lay open. 1 his outward deformities. 2 HIs
inward infirmities.

1 His outward bodily deformities His outward d^^ formiti.
are many, and those odious; as if you observe it.

The Drunkard commonly has ( Vertumnus like) a brasill Nose; a swollen and
inflamed Face, beset with goodly Chowles and Rubies, as if it were both roast
and sod; swimming, running, glaring, gogle Eyes, bleared, rolling, and red; a
Mouth nasty with offensive fumes, always foaming, or driveling; a fevorish
Body; a Sick and giddy Brain; a Mind d spearst; a boy^ing stomach; rotten
Teeth; a stinking Breath; a drumming Ear; a palsied Hand; gouty, staggering
Legs, that ^aine would go, but cannot; a drawling, stammering, temulentive
Tongue, clambd to the roof and gumms; in fine (not to speak of his odious
gestures, loathsome nastinesse, or beastly behavior, his belching, hickups,
vomittings, his ridiculous postures, and how easily he is knocked down, whose
hamstrings Bacchus has already cut in two; nor of the unmeasurable grosenesse
of such, whose only element is Ale, especially your Ale-wives, who, like the
Germane Froas, are all cheeks to the belly, and all belly to the knees, whose
dugs and chins meet without any forceing of either, because you may daily see
such fustilugs walking in the streets, like so many Tons, each moving upon
two pottle pots) his essential parts are so obscured, his Sense so dulled, his
Eyes so dazeled, his Face so distorted, his Countenance so deformed, his Joints
so infeebled, and his whole body and mind so transformed, that he is become
the child of folly, and derision of the world, a laughing stock to fools, a
lothing stock to the Godly, ridiculous to all.

Yea, questionless had they a glass presented them, they could hardly be
brought again to love their own faces; much more, should they read a true
character of their conditions, would they run besides their wits, if they had
any to lose, or go and dispatch themselves; as Bupalus did, at the sight of
Hipponax his letter; or as Hoc^tratus did, upon view of a book which Reuchlin
writ against him; oras Brotheus did, who being mocked for his deformity, threw
himself into the fire, and there died: for, Thersites like, many are their
bodily deformities, but far more and worse are those of their souls. Whence it
was that the Laced and monians used to show their slaves in the time of their
drunkenness unto their children, thinking that their ugly deformity, both in
body and mind, would be an effectual argument to make them loath this vice,
which even at the first view seemed so horrid.

And indeed, how should the Drunkard be other then ugly and deformed; when
experience shows, that intemperance is a great decayer of beauty, and that
wine burns up the radical moisture, and hastens old age exceedingly.

16
2 NEither are his diseases and infirmities fewer then his deformities: His
inward infirmities.
for ^ee but his body opened, and it will appear like a stinking and rotten
sepulcher; for excessive and intemperate drinking has brought upon him a wo^ld
of diseases and infirmities, because this sin by little and little quenches
the natural heat, and drownes the vital spirits, whereby above all it
impaires the health, debilitateth all the members, turning strength into
weakness; health, into irrecoverable sickness; it being the seminary of
incurable diseases, which shorten the life; the procurer of all infirmities,
and acceleration of death; which is the reason that men are ordinarily now so
short lived, in respect of that they have been heretofore.

Neither can there be any other cause alleged, why men in this our age are so
weak, diseased, and short lived, but our excessive drunkenness and
intemperance.

It is true indeed, that the world now waxing old, and, as it were,
hoareheaded, cannot generate children of such strength and vigor as it did in
time of youth and full strength; and therefore we must needs decline, as the
world declineth: it is true also, that the mother earth is infeebled with much
bearing, and has her strength much abated with so innumerable childbirths, and
being now come to her cold melancholy age, cannot bring forth her fruits so
full of virtue and strength, and so fit for the nourishment of our bodies, as
she did in former times: but that there should be such a change, so sudden
and extraordinary, in the great difference of our health, strength, and long
life, betwixt this our age, and that which went next before it; can be imputed
unto nothing more, then that now drunkenness and intemperance is, after an
extraordinary manner, increased; whereby the natural and vital heat of men
is drowned, and extinguished, before it be near spent; like a candle cast into
the water, before it be half burned.

Indeed, drunkards pretend they drink healthes, and for health. Yea,
doubtless they think wine another kind of Panace, which is good for all
diseases; or some Moly, good against all sorcery and mischief. But to whom,
says Solomon, are all kind of diseases, infirmities, deformities, if not to
Drunkards? Who can recount the hurts that by this means come to the whole
body, especially the head, stomach, liver, and the more noble parts? Who can
recite the Crudities, Rhumes, Gowts, Dropsies, Aches, Imposthums, Apoplexes,
Inflammations, Pluresies, Consumptions (for though he devours much, yet he is
the leaner every way) with the Falling Sickness, and innumerable other
distempers hence ensuing? which Drunkards know better by experience, then I how
to reckon up. To whom are pearl faces, Palsies, Headakes, if not to Drunkards?
What so soon brings sudden old age? What so much as swilling blows up the
cheeks with wind, fills the nose and eyes with fire, loads the hands and legs
with water; and, in short, plagueth the whole man with diseases of a Horse, the
belly of a Cow, the head of an Ass etc. almost turning him into a very
walking dunghill. Believe a man in his own Art; The distempered body, the more
it is filled, the more it is spilled, says Hippocrates: and to this the
Prophet sets his seal, Hosea: 7. 5.

And indeed but for the throats indulgence; Paracelsus (for all his Mercury)
had dyed a beggar: which made Callisthenes tell Alexander, that he had rather
feed upon grains with Diogenes, in his dish; then carrouse the juice of
grapes with him, in this standing cup; for of all the gods, said he, I love
not Aesculapius.

In a word: though wine, being moderately taken, is physical; yet, if it be
taken immoderately, there is nothing more banefull, says St. Austin: for by it
the body is weakened, strength decayed, the members dissolved, the whole body
distempered, and out of order; so that the Drunkard draws death out of that
which preserves other men's lives.

That many have perished by this means we read, Eccl. 37. 30. 31, and if many
then, surely many millions now: for in former ages it was as rare, as now it is
common. For we read that the Locrians would not permit their Magistrates to
drink wine; whereas now with us, the meanest (by their good wills) will drink
nothing else. We read also that the ancient Romans would not suffer their women
to drink wine; whereas many of ours are like Cleio, who was so practiced in
drinking, that she durst challeng all men whatsoever to try masteries who
could drink most, and overcome all. And lastly, we read that they would
never drink wine before they were twenty years of age; whereas many of our
children are half killed, before they are borne, with distempered drinks: at
least, when they are borne, no day, no meal, must they be without sipping
down wine, their over indulgent parents (who like Apes, many times kill their
young with making much of them) will have it so: whereupon not a few become
Drunkards and company keepers very betime, and before any would imagine; as St.
Hierome tells of one, that swore by her love she was lewd or naught so early,
that no one so much as dreamed of it.

In a word, wine and strong drink has drowned more men, then the sea has
devoured; and more dye of surfeits, then by the sword. Yea, as drunkenness
has drowned more souls, then all the sins of Sodom: so it has drowned
more bodies, then were drowned in the general deluge of Noah's flood.

17.
Why, but says the Tipler, Wine, An objection answered.
if not received to surfeite, refreshes the spirits and cheares the heart, as
is well known; I find it, I feel it, I perceive it does me good, and I will
believe mine own eyes, and taste, before Hippocrates, or ten Salomons. Solomon
answers in effect thus much, Prove. 23. 29. to 35. Be not deceived with shows
and shadows; a man may be drunk, though his eyes be not out; and may be
deceived, though his eyes be in too. All is not gold that glisters, all is not
paid that is promised: wine promises much for the present, but it will deceive
thee in the end: it promises health, but it pays sickness; it promises
comfort, but thou shall find sorrow; it promises help, but thou shall receive
hurt; it is a poisoned potion, a flattering, but cruel Hyaena: much like that
double headed serpent Amphisbaena, or one of those Locusts, Apoc. 9. 10. that
carries a sting in the tail, though the face be smiling and flattering. Not
that wine in it self (which is a good creature of God) is any way evil, or
the use of it unlawful. Lycurgus was out, when he destroyed all the Vines to
prevent drunkenness; he had done far better, if he had made more Wells, that
so the heat of the wine might have been alayed with the coldness of the
water. For though God will not allow us to be drunk with wine, yet he does not
forbid us to drink wine: use a little wine for thy stomachs sake, and thine
often infirmites, says Paul to Timothy, 1 Timothy 5. And give strong drink to him
that is ready to perish, and wine to them that have grief of heart, are the
words of the Holy Ghost, Prove. 31. 6. But a little proof will serve the turn
to persuade men that wine is lawful; all the matter is, how to have them use
it lawfully.

And thus the drunkard is injurious to his body. First, by deforming it.
Secondly, by weakening and disabling it, whereby his life is lingringly, and by
little and little consumed. But this is not all, for

18.
THirdly, as if he scorned to go to his The Drunkard his own executioner.
grave in peace, he strives to do execution upon himself; either by drinking
until his skin and guts crack again, as how many have drunk themselves
dead; how many have even burst themselves with drinking, and so dyed, as it
were with the weapon in their belly, being taken away in Gods just wrath? etc.
Or secondly, by a frequent exposing himself to diverse miserable accidents, yea
fearful and lamentable mishaps; for, as if the proverb (A drunken man never
takes harm) were good Scripture, he cares not what way he goes in the
dark, what falls be takes, how he knocks, breaks, and maymes himself,
whereby he often batters his face, bruiseth his body, breaks his arms, legs,
and many times his neck; what bridges he passes over, whereby sometimes he
falls into the water, and is drowned; what hedges he lies under, where even
Snakes have been known to creep down drunkards throats into their bellies, as
they have layen asleep in the fields: all which the Philosopher considering,
he compared one drunk to a running Coach, without a Coachman to guide it.

Or thirdly, A^ward pot-valiant will kill and ^lay.
by running into quarrels when he is drunk: as what else but the pot breeds
so many brawles, quarrels, debates, duels, stabbs, murders, with such like
dangerous and bitter fruits; for while the wine works, they resemble those
fishes, which love to be in violent streams and floodgates, but do dye in
still waters: which the Egyptians observing, made them abhor all wine, for as
Pl^tarch reports, they did never use any (until the time of Psammeticus) so
much as in their sacrifices or drink offerings; upon conceit, that it was the
blood of those Giants, which, they had heard, did once make war against God.
And S. Augustine affirms, that the Manichees could not abide it, as being the
gall (as they foolishly thought) of the prince of darkness.

Yea, who will sooner kill and ^lay then cowards, when once they are pot
valiant? I have known ere now a very Dametas, guilty of no little courage, and
suspected of true valor: as who will not think him both a valiant and
excellent Pilot, that dares brave a whole fleet out of a simple Cockboate.

I deny not but such an ones discourse may sometimes sound big, and yet mean
nothing: cowards being most forward, both in giving charge with the tongue, and
recoyling back with the foot: yea, you shall see a man look like the four
winds in painting, as if he would blow away the enemy; and yet, at the very
first onset, suffer fear and trembling to dress themselves in his face
apparently: and commonly where is least heart, there is most tongue; swelling
words being like the report of a great Ordnance, which does only blaze, and
crack, and smoke, and stink, and vanish. And lightly if we note such an
one, he seldom unbuttons his tumored breast, but when he finds none to
oppose the bigness of his looks and tongue, but this holds not always for
sure I am, many do that in a Tavern, which they repent at Tyborne; and nothing
more common, then for drunkards to kiss when they meet, and kill when they
part.

19.
OF which there is a double reason. First, Drunkenness the cause of murder.
as they are fiery of face, so are they as choleric of condition; and how
should they choose, when they feed only upon fire, their bread, and flesh,
their first and second course, being drink, and salt meats (which turns all
their nourishment into choler, the froth of blood) yea, little else then
drink do they swallow; for, that they are no trencher-men is all their boast,
and all they have to be proud of: yea, they drink down their throats, belch
out of their mouths, and breath out of their nostrells, nothing but mere
flames: yea, that which theyvent forwards is the same, for it comes out as
sheere wine as it goes in. Now no marvel that Starchaterus did exceed other
men in strength and savagenesse; when he fed only upon Bears flesh, and
frequently drank their blood.

Secondly, another reason is, when the drink is in, the wit is out and so
having lost the stern of reason, he is apt to say or do any thing he can
stand to execute, except virtue, a mere stranger to him.

And it shall go hard but he will either give offense, or take it: for having
once fallen out with his own wits, and members (that one goes one way, and
another another way) he can agree with no body, but becomes raging mad, as a
heathen has it in Salomons words. A drunken man, you know, will make a fray
with his own shadow; suppose he but nods against some post or table (for they
will even fall a sleep as they sit) he is so stupefied, that in revenge he
will strike his opposite for the wrong, and then call for drink to make
himself friends again, which friendly cup gives occasion of a second quarrel;
for whether he laughs, or chafes, he is a like apt to quarrel; or let but a
friend admonish him, he were as good take a Bear by the tooth.

When Cambyses being drunk was admonished thereof by Prexaspes, No admonishing
a drunkard.
who was one of his council; what followed? Cambyses commandes his admonishers
son to be sent for, and bound to a post, while he shot at him; and then
having pierst his heart, vauntingly cries out; now judge whether I am drunk or
no.

This sin scorns reproof, admonition to it were like goads to them that are
mad already, or like pouring Oil down the chimney, which may set the house on
fire, but never abate the heat.

Neither can the rest better brook what he speaks, then he what they speak:
for these Pompeian spirits think it a foul disgrace either to put up the least
wrong from another, or acknowledge to have overslipt themselves in wronging of
another; whereby thousands have been murdered in their drink, it faring with
them as it did with that Pope, whom the Devil is said to have slain in the
very instant of his adultery, and carry him quick to hell. For this is the case
of drunkards (as of Soldiers and Mariners) the more need, the less devotion.

I am loath to trouble you with the multitude of examples which are recorded, of
those, that having made up the measure of their wickedness, have Ammon like dyed
and been slain in drink; God sometimes practicing martial law, and doing
present execution upon them (least fools should say in their heart, (there is
no God) though he connives at, and deferres the most, that men might expect a
Judge coming, and a solemn day of judgment to follow.

And what can be more fearful, then when their hearts are merry, and their
wits drowned with wine, to be suddenly stricken with death; as if the execution
were no less intended to the soul, then to the body? or what can be more
just, then that they which in many years impunity will find no leisure of
repentance, should at last receive a punishment without possibility of
repentance?

I know ^peed of death is not always a judgment: yet as suddennes is ever
justly suspicable; so it then certainly argues anger, when it finds us in an
act of sin. Leisure of repentance is an argument of favor; when God gives a
man law, it implies that he would not have judgment surprise him.

20.
Drunkenness the cause of adultery*
NOW as drunkenness is the cause of murder, so it is no less the cause of
adultery yea, as this sin is most shameful in it self, so it makes a man
shameless in committing any other sin; whereof lu^t is none of the last, nor
none of the least. Yea, says Ambrose, the first evil of drunkenness, is
danger of chastity; for Bacchus is but a pander to Venus: hereupon Romulus made
a law, that if any woman were found drunk, she should dye for it; taking it
for granted, that when once drunk, it was an easy matter to make her a whore.

The stomach is a Limbeck, wherein the spirit of lust is distilled; meats are
the ingredients, and wine the only fire that extracts it. For as the flame of
mount Aetna is fed only by the vapors of the adjacent sea: so this fire of
lust is both kindled and maintained by surfeiting and drunkenness. When the
belly is filled with drink, then is the heart inflamed with lust, and the eyes
so filled with adultery, that they cannot but gaze upon strange women, as
Solomon Shows, Prove. 23. 33. whereas love, says Crates, is cured with hunger.

You know when the Iron is hot, the Smith can fashion it to his pleasure: and
wine tempers the heart like wax, for the devils impression: when a man is
drunk, Satan may stamp in his heart the soules^ sin, but lust will admit no
denial. Yea, drunkenness inflames the soul, and fills that with lusts as hot
as hell; high diet is adulteries nurse. They rose up in the morning like fed
Horses, says the Prophet, (and what follows, every man neighed after his
neighbors wife) Ier. 5. 8. which is more then true with us, for drunkards like
the Horse and Mule which have no ^nderstanding, no shame, no conscience, etc.
especially your brazen brained, and flinty foreheaded clownes, can no sooner
spy a woman, or maid, chaste, or unchaste, even in the open streets, but they
will fall to imbraceing and tempting her with ribaldry, scurrility, and turning
every word she speaks to some lascivious and obscene sense, whereof they are
not a little proud, though it would make a wise and modest man, even spue to
hear them. But to go on.

When Lot is drunk, he is easily drawn to commit incest with his own
daughters; not once perceiving when they lay down, nor when they rose up, Genesis
19. 32. to 36. Raro vidi continentem, quem non vidi ^bstinentem, says St.
Austin, you shall rarely see a man continent, that is not abstinent: and it is a
true rule, for that heat which is taken at the Tavern, must be alaid at the
brothelhouse; the blood which is fired with Bacchus, must be cooled with Venus;
and so Satan takes two Pigeons with one bean. And the Devil should forget
both his office and malice, if he did not play the pander to Concupiscence,
this way for idleness, makes way for loose company; loose company, makes way
for wine; wine, makes way for lust; and lust makes work for the Devil; Venus
comes out of the froth of this Sea.

I will never believe that chastity ever slept in the Drunkards bed; for,
although I cannot say that every whormonger is given to drunkenness; yet I may
truly say, that there are no Drunkards but are either given over, or greatly
inclined to whoredom.

This sin fills the heart, and eye (both eyes) if not the whole life, with
horrible filthiness, natural, unnatural, any: this is so clear a truth,
that darkness it self saw and confessed it; even a Poet of the Heathens could
call eating and drinking the fuel that maintains the fire of Lust; for Lust,
says he, is quenched by abstinence, kindled by excess, and nothing sooner
kills this tetter then that fasting spittle of abstinence; for how should the
wieke burn without tallow, or the lamp without oil?

That Wine is an inducement to Lust, David well knew, or else he had spared
those superfluous cups: but when he would have forced Vria^ to lie with his
wife, that so she might have a color for her great belly, and the child might
appear legitimate, he first made him drunk, 2 Samuel 1 1. 13. Even as Ice is
ingendered of water: so is Lust of intemperance. The Drunkard is like a
Salamander stone, which fires at the sight of every flame: yea, if he but see
a whore, and she him, like the Weesell and Ba^iliske, they poison each other
with their sight, Pro. 7.

One Devil is ready to help another in mischief: he that tarrieth long at
the wine, says Solomon, his eyes shall look upon strange women, and his heart
shall speak lewd things, Proverbs. 23. 33. and St. Paul witnesses, that the
fruits of gluttony and drunkenness, are chambering and wantonness, Romans 13.
13.

Yea, as drunkenness is the only business of loyterers: so lewd love is the
only business of Drunkards; for while they are awake they think and speak
of it, and when they are asleep (even when other men's thoughts lie at Anchor)
they nothing but dream of it; and what is it a Drunkard loves half so well as
a whore?

Yea, Wine so inflames the Drunkard with Lust; that were his power equal to
his desire, were his dreams and wishes all true, he would not leave a Virgin
in the world; might but his acts answer the number of his desires, nature could
scarce supply him with several objects; or could his wishes, take effect,
Popery might have many Nuns, it should have no maids.

Now what decays health, and strength, and consequently shortens a man's days
more then whoredom? when so many dye of the Pox, a disease which slayes
thousands, though they will not be known of it; for, because of the whorith
woman, a man is brought to a morsel of bread, Pro. 6. 26. yea, she causes
many to fall down wounded, and all the strong men are slain by her, her house
is the way unto the grave, which leads down to the chamber of death, Pro. 7.
26. 27.

And so much of the drunkards body.

21.
SEcondly, if we dive deeper into him, Drunkenness Beastiates the soul.
and Search into his soul: what one sin more mangles and defaces Gods Image,
and man's beauty, then this? how does it damme up the head and spirits with mud?
how does it infatuate the understanding, blind the judgment, pervert the will,
and corrupt all the affections? how does it entrap the desires, surprise the
thoughts and bring all the powers and faculties of the soul out of order?
which occasioneth one to say, where drunkenness reigns as King, there reason
is banished as an exile, the understanding is dulled, counsel wandereth, and
judgment is overthrown. And with this accords Seneca, who defines
drunkenness to be a voluntary madness, or a temporary forfeiture of the wits:
yea, the Holy Ghost affirms, that the excess of wine makes men mad, foolish,
and outrageous, Pro. 20. 1. for being worse then the sting of an Aspe, it
poysoneth the very soul, and reason of man.

Yea, we find this and a great deal more by experience: for many a man
drinks himself out of his wits, and out of his wealth, and out of his credit,
and out of all grace and favor, both with God and good men.

Neither is the Scripture less express: for Solomon calls wine a mocker, and
tells us that strong drink is raging. And Hosea affirms, that wine takes away
the heart, Chap. 4. 11. And we read elsewhere, that wine makes men forget
God, and his laws, Pro. 31. 5. Yea, utterly to fall away from God, and to be
incapable of returning, for it is commonly accompanied with hardness of
heart, and final impenitence, Esa. 5. 11. 12. and 56. 12. Pro. 23. 35.

For admonish such as are bewitched and besotted with the love of wine, you
speak to men senseles, past shame, and past grace. Tell them of some better
employment, they will say as once Florus (an idle fellow) was wont, I would not
be Caesar, always marching in armor: to whom Casear replied, and I would not
be Florus, always drinking in a Tavern. Yea, being wrapped in wine, and warm
clothes, they so like their condition, that they would not change upon any
terms, no, not to be glorified Saints in Heaven: as those swine, and other
brutish creatures, which Circe transformed, would by no means be persuaded to
become men again, though they were put to their choice by the said goddess
(or forceresse rather) upon the earnest request of Ulysses. You shall never
persuade a Drunkard, that the water of life is the best wine. In a word, by
long custom they turn delight into necessity, and bring upon themselves such
an insatiable thirst, that they will as willingly leave to live, as leave
their excessive drinking: in regard whereof, St. Austin, compares drunkenness
to the pit of Hell, into which when a man is once fallen, there is no
redemption.

Yea, this vice does not only rob men of reason, but also of common sense; so
as they can neither prevent future danger, nor feel present smart.

But of this enough: having already proved them as much worse then beasts, as
beasts are better then Devils. Besides, I shall occasionallie treat more of
the souls Character, in sundry particulars which follow.

22.
5 FIfthly, as he deformes his body, Drunkenness brings poverty.
impaires his health, shortens his life, beastiates his soul, etc. so he
consumes his estate, and brings himself to poverty, and want, as, to whom is
poverty, as Solomon speaks, but to Drunkards? who think no cost too much that
is bestowed on their bellies, who consume their wealth at the wine, even while
they have swallowed down their whole estates. As let the Drunkard have but a
groate, it burns in his purse till it be drowned in drink; if he have gold,
he will change it; if plate, he will pawn it; and rather then not satisfy
his gut, away goes all to the coat on his back; yea, rather then he will
scant (as they say) his belly, had he a jewel as rich as ten Lordships, or
as Cleopatra's was, that womanlike swaggerer, his throat shall have it. O that
either wealth, or any other blessing should be cast away thus basely! Or,
suppose he be a laboring man, and must earne it before he have it, he will
drink as much in a day (says St. Ambrose) as he can get in a week, spend
twelve pence sooner, then earne two pence. And hence it comes to pass, that
the company keeper goes commonly in a ragged coat, as it is seldom seen that
they offend the Statute against excess in apparel, for rather then so, they
will go naked, and count that too a voluntary penance.

Thus the Drunkard having spent all in superfluities, in the end he wants
necessaries, and because in youth he will drink nothing but wine, in his old
age he is constrained to drink water: yea, he throws his house so long out
at windows, that at last his house throws him out at doors. And when all is
gone, glad would he be to be a Swineheard, like the Prodigallson, but knowing
himself unworthy of any man's entertainment; he grows weary of his life, and
is ready to make himself away, like Peter the Cardinal, base son to Sixtus
the fourth that monstrous Epicure, the shame of the latter times; or like
Apicius, the shame of the ancient age wherein he lived.

All which the Scriptures make good, where it is said, that the drunkard and
the glutton shall come to poverty, and the sleeper shall be clothed with
rags. Pro. 2^. 21. And again peremptorily, he that loves wine and oil shall
not be rich, Prove. 21. 17.

Now that this is so, every officer of a Parish knows to his great trouble,
and the inhabitants cost: yea, were I enjoined to take up a ragged regiment, I
should think it no hard task to muster up a thousand men, (admit but
drunkards to be men) out of the very suburbs, that in sheere drink spend all
the clothes on their beds and backs; yea, that drink the very bloods of their
wives and children, for he brings not this misery upon himself alone* but his
whole family, wife children, servants, all are impoverisht, yea, nere famished,
to satisfy his throat: in which regard he is worse than an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.
8.

The Drunkard spends all in the Alehouse; and cares not, so he fares well
abroad, though his family starve at home: he sucks so much of the juice of
barley into his own throat, that his family is either parcht with famine, or
burnt with thirst.

But mark how they are met with all; for, as if God would pay them in their
own coin, how often have I seen vermin sucking the drunkards blood, as fast as
he does that of the Grape and Malt? Neither stays he here, for the tiplers
progress is commonly from luxury, to beggary; from beggary, to thievery; from
the Tavern, to Tyburne; from the Alehouse, to the Gallows.

I might go on, and show you how this vice hinders men from performing the
works of charity and mercy, and how the Drunkard defrauds the poor of that
which he might, and ought to impart unto them, if he lived moderately: but I
hasten to show you his inwards; only this let me tell him, that he shall once
give an account for every idle penny he spends, much more for every idle
shilling, pound, etc.

23.
6 Sixthly, as the drunkard consumes his Drunkenness defames a man.
estate; so he loses his credit and good name, for drunkenness defames a man,
and takes away his reputation. What says the world of him? such a man is a
drunkard, a swillboule, a tospot, a sot, a swaggering companion, a spend good,
an unthrift, an Epicure, a belly-god, a filthy beast, etc. Yea what sin is so
disgraceful? what can discredit a man more, then to be counted a common
drunkard? yea, this sin brings such an ill name upon a man, that it will
never be done away; at least so long as he lives in this sin without
repentance.

Wherein could Noah (that was but once drunk) have so much shamed and
dishonored himself? how could he have made himself so contemptible, even to
his own children, as he did by being drunk? so, what greater shame to any man,
then to make himself a beast, yea, worse then a beast, in his gesture,
behavior, nonsense, and abominable spewing? besides his communication, his
cogitations, his lusts, and affections, are all most beastly and shameful: so
that nothing disguiseth or disgraceth a man more.

Neither need others defame him: for he either spues himself out, or gives
occasion to be spurned out of all civil company.

In brief, all that are sober minded account drunkards but the very scumme of
the Nation, and good for naught but to stand in the midst of a breach, when
the Ordnance play, and bullets fly thick about their ears. And certainly
there is nothing in the world more pitiful, an Ape-carrier is honorable,
compared with a drunkard; and hear but their wives speak, you will grant that
his, of the two, is far more happy in her choice.

Yea, it is such a sin, for which a man shall be disgraced even of his
drunken companions themselves; who murder him behind his back, by taking away
his good name; howsoever they seem to applaud him before his face.

And no man thinks him sit or worthy to bear the meanest office either in
Church or commonwealth; nay, he is not able to subject himself to, or be ruled
by, either civil or ecclesiastical Governors, (indeed he often disturbes the
officers of both) nay, he is so far from all respect, that he either is, or
should be, separated from all Christian society, and thrown out of the Church
by excommunication, 1 Cor. 5. 11.

Indeed, he thinks to get credit and popular applause by his drinking, to have
others commend him, forsooth, for a good fellow, and joviall, and so purchase a
name: but indeed he gets the name of a common drunkard, which will stick by
him to his dying day, and perhaps afterward; yea, let him be commended by one
for a notable good fellow, (which is the height of his ambition) another that
is wiser, will reply, the better the worse.

Again, who will trust a drunkard with either money or commodity? A frugall man
that is worth but little, shall be trusted with more, then a drunkard which
has ten times his estate: and good reason, for the one his diligent hand
makes him rich, while the drunkards belly makes him go in rags.

Indeed, to borrow of every man he is very importunate; but to pay he never
uses, except it be his Hostess for superfluous liquor, that when money
fails, he may drink upon credit; as he is always indebted to my Hostess,
and his belly to him, but he never to that, so long as his purse, credit, or
shame, can make even with it.

Yea, in many cases they will acknowledge themselves unworthy to be trusted;
for they have an order amongst themselves (which you may see set up in
Gurmionds hall) that all promises, Oaths, Bills, Bonds, Indentures, or any other
conveyances whatsoever, made or caused to be made in the afternoon, be
utterly void, and of none effect.

And in case they commit a villainy; there needs no better plea, (for their
excuse) then this; alas! what would you have^ I was not my self, or, I was in
drink, it was the wine, and not I

Yea Marcus Antonius, faith Plutarch, set forth a book of his drunkenness;
wherein he proved those pranks which he played (when he was overcome with wine)
to be good and lawful: though in all reason he that does evil in his drink,
should be twice punished; first, for being drunk, then, for the fact he
committed in drink, as Pittacus in his statute law enacted.

And as he disgraceth and shameth himself; so he shameth his parents, Pro.
28. 7. kinsfolks, friends, and all his acquaintance; and makes them so ashamed
of him, that they are afraid and ashamed to own him.

Yea, drunkenness disgraceth and discrediteth the Gospel, unto which it is
clean contrary; for whereas the Apostle would have our conversation such as
becomes the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST phil. 1. 27. both the Gospel and the name
of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles, through such ill livers, Romans 2. 24.

Yea, it brings a scandal upon all that profess the same Religion with him,
Revel. 2. 9.

Yea, the Apostle tells us that their works of darkness which are done of of
them in secret, are so shameful, that it is a shame even to speak of them, or
once name them, Ephesians. 5, 11. 12. Wherefore the drunkard shall be filled with
shame, and shameful spewing shall be all his glory, Hab. 2. 15, 16. until he
be trodden under feet, as the Lord threatens, Isa. 28. 3.

Thus drunkards by their drinking receive much hurt; some, in their bodies;
some, in their brains; some, intheir estates, whilst they are called from
their callings; some, in their names, whiles bucking with drink, they are laid
out to be sunned and scorned; some, in their chastity, whilst they are used as
Lots daughters did their father, etc. Which may serve to have been spoken of
his outward parts. Now of his inwards, and more odious qualities; for although
the drunkards sorrow, strife, shame, poverty, and diseases, together with his
untimely death, as one would think, were enough to make this sin odious: yet
look we further into him, as namely, into his more inward parts, his secret
abominations, which follow and are occasioned through drunkenness; that will
make it hidious, and fearful, at least if I had the skill to cut him up, and
paint him to the life.

24
IN speaking whereof, Drunke^nesse and I Would esse of each other both the cause
and effect.
I will first lay open the ground of all, which is idleness; for although, in
one sense, idleness may be called an effect of drunkenness, yet in another,
it may be called the cause, both of it, and all the residue of evils which
accompany the same; for idleness is the most corrupting Fly that can blow in
any humane mind. We learn to do ill, by doing what is next it, nothing; and
hence it is, that vice so fructifies in our Gentry and servingmen, who have
nothing to employ themselves in.

It is said of Rome, that during the time of their wars with Cart^age and
other enemies in Africa, they knew not what vices meant; but no sooner had they
got the conquest, then through idleness they came to ruin. Rust, you know,
will fret into the hardest iron, if it be not used, Moss will grow on the
smoathest stone, if it be not stirred; Mothes will consume the finest garment,
if it be not worn: so vice will infect even the best heart, if given to
idleness. Standing water is sooner frozen, then the running stream; he that
sits is more subject to sleep, then he that walks: so the idle man is
far more subject to temptation, then he that is profitably exercised: yea,
idleness (says one of the Fathers) is the Devils only opportunity; for if
he come, and finds us well busied, he leaves us for that time, as having
small hope to prevail.

An idle person is good for nothing but to propagate sin, Idleness the most
corrupting Fly that can blow in any huma^e ^inde.
to be a factor for the Devil: it faring with man, as with the earth of which
he was made; which, if it be not tilled, or trimmed, does not only remain
unf^uitfull, but also breeds and brings forth Briars, Brambles, Nettles, and
all manner of noisome and unprofitable things: so that Seneca seems to be
mistaken, in calling an idle person the image of death; for though the body be
idle, yet the soul, like a river, is always in progression, and his heart,
like a wherry, either goes forward or backward, It may be resembled to a well
with two buckets; the mind no sooner empties it self of good thoughts, but it
fills with evil cogitations. If the seed dies, the blade springs; the death
of grace, is but the birth of corruption.

Now all the Drunkard's labor, All the drunkards labor is to satisfy his
Eusts.
is to satisfy his Lusts; and all his life, naught else but a vicissitude of
devouring and venting: as how many of them make it their trade and whole
vocation to keep company. Whereas sweat, either of the Brow or of the Brain,
is the destiny of all trades, be they mental or manual; for God never allowed
any man to do nothing. Are not most populous places, by reason of this vice,
like Antiochus his army, fuller of mouths then hands? for, if you mark it,
the company keeper and good fellow (according to the vulgar) is the barronest
piece of earth in all the Orb; the Common wealth has no more use of him, then
Ier^hoham had of his withered hand; he is like the dumb Jack in a Virginal,
for he has not so much as a voice in the common wealth.

Whereas he was borne for the good of his country, friends, family, etc. well
may he disturb the common wealth, and give offense and scandal unto all that
are near or about him, Romans 14, 20, 21. as being unfit to do service, or
subject himself to be ruled by his Governors, civil and ecclesiastical; but
profitable he is to none, except Vinteners, Inkeepers, and Ale drapers, who
are the greatest loosers by him of all the rest; (though they seem to gain
much) for these are accessory to the Drunkards sin, and have a fearful
account to make, for their tolleration of such, seeing they might, and ought to
redress it, so that their gain is most unjust: as may not that be written
upon what ever they possess, which Diogenes writ under the golden Statua,
which Phryne the strumpet dedicated at Delphos (this was gotten by the
intemperance of the people) and in the end will prove as unprofitable, for
hereby they endanger themselves, and without repentance lose their souls,
Math. 16. 26.

What is recorded of Ns^grites, namely, that he never plowed, not dug, nor
did any thing all his life long that might tend to any good, is truly verified
in him, he is not more nimble tongued then gowty handed (as Julian the
Apostate confessed of himself, and yet never thinks he shall give an account
for this sin of all the rest: but surely, if we must give an account for
every idle word, much more for every idle day, nay month, nay year. But I
proceed. All the pains he takes is for the enemy of mankind: if you will
have him work, you must chain him in a celler, where are good store of
springs, and give him the option or choice, whether he will pumpe or drown:
which is the Ho^^anders way to dress an English gentleman, whose ill demeanor
has made unworthy to live.

The company keeper is like a top, which always runs round, but never goes
forward, unless it be whipped: or the Mill wheel, which turns about all day,
but at night remains in the same place: or like a blind Horse in a maltmill,
which is as far in the morning as at night, for all the day he walks round
in the same circle, over and over; and when he has done, and sl^pt a little,
is new to begin again.

Neither does he, which walks from six to six in Paul's, go more then a
coytes c^st before him, Drunkards make it their whole employment, to go from
theirs beds to the tap house, (for the true Drunkard thinks no wine good,
which is brought over two thresholds) from the taphouse to the play house,
where they make a match for the brothelhouse, and from thence to bed again: so
that they either do nothing, or that which is worse then nothing: for he is
neither a Drunkard, nor an idle person, but a civil, complete, and well
qualified Gentleman, that spends the whole day, yea every day, but in bousing,
and bowling, and taking Tobacco.

O the number of men and women in this City, that are all the day idle, yet
have not an idle hour to afford either the Church, or the study, or for the
good of the common wealth! And therefore no wonder if they afford not me the
hearing, they only sit to eat, and drink, lie down to sleep, and rise up
to play; this is all their exercise, herein lies all their worth, and no
marvel, for if the worl^ be a man's god, pleasure must needs be^ his Religion.

They are just like so many Gnats, for as Gnats do nothing but play up and
down in the warm Sun, and sing, and when they have done, sit down and
sting the next hand or face they can seize upon: so Drunkards miserably spend
their good hours in unprofitable pastime, sit down and backbite their
neighbors. For, in this case, they resemble Mo^us that carping god (as the
Heathens feign) whose manner was, never to do any thing himself, but
curiously beholding the doings of others, if anything were let pass, to carpe
at the same.

25
BUt to go on; for I may seem to have left them at the Tavern door. (...)
If you remember, their first flight was from their beds to the taphouse or
Tavern, those common quagmires of all filthiness, where too many drawing
their patrimonies through their throats, exhaust and lavish out their
substance, and (...) plots and devises how to get more: (...) hence they fall
either to open courses (...) violence, or secret mischief, till at last (...)
Jayle prepares them for the ^ibbet, (...) lightly they sing through a red
Lettise before they cry through a Grate; but this is the work of many mouths
do but follow them step by step, and you shall observe that so soon as they
are upon the Al^bench, up comes every man's pot uncalled for, upon pain of
losing their custom for a month after; which being doft, are filled again,
for it is the waiters office to see that the pots be either always full or
empty, and the Drunkards law, that if the drawer presents a pot not filled, or
one of the company leaves a snuff in it undrunke off, that both shall be
judged guilty of the breach of good fellowship.

Now what is the reason, that every morneing their first sacrifice is offered to
Bacchus; and that every day, be it Sunday, they will be in the tippling house,
before they come to Gods house? I will tell you: First, they are sick in the
morning, until they have qualified the old heat, with a new; and so they cure
sin with sin, which yet is no other, then to heal an Ulcer by deading the
flesh, which indeed does not make a man whole, but insensible of pain.
Secondly, he is an unconformitant to the rules of good fellowship, and an
unproficient in art of manchery, who observes not that rule, which T^berius
first brought up, of drinking, a cup of good liquor in the morning next the
heart.

26.
Well, by that they have doubled their mornings draught, One drunkard has
tongueenough for twenty men.
their hearts come up as easily as some of their drink; for wine is the
daughter of verity, as Plato observes; yea, let him get but a cup or two more
in his pate, his limitlesse tongue shall clatter, like a window loose in the
wind; and you may as soon persuade a stone to speak, as him to be silent;
for then it fares with his clapper, as with a sick man's pulse; which always
beats, but ever out of order.

Yea, it is so difficult a thing to be prodig^ll in drinking, and niggardly in
speaking, that Bias thought it a sufficient argument to prove his wisdom by,
in that he could join these two together, which are in nature so dissonant.
For being at a banquet taxed of folly by a vain babbler, because he said
nothing while others talked glib: he made answer, that even this was a reason
sufficient to acquit him of the imputation of folly, for that no fool could
ever be silent in the midst of his cups. And this likewise was held for a
good argument by ze^o, who when diverse Philosophers met with the Kings
Ambassadors at a feast in Athens; when every one, to commend his wisdom,
uttered some remarkable sentence which might be related to the King, he
continued silent; and when the Embasad o^ observing it, demanded of him, what
they should report from him unto the King* he answered, nothing but this, that
there is an old man at Athens, who in the abundance of wine can keep silence.

Drink doubles the drunkards eyes, and ears; he sees, and hears (in his
conceit) al things double, but multiplies his tongue beyond number: whence it
comes to pass, that his talk, like Benjamins mess, is five times his part.
Yea, one drunkard has tongue enough for twenty men; it being like that clapper
at Rhoane, which is so big, that it is said to weigh, without the Bell, more
then six hundred pounds: for let but three of them be in a room, they will
make a noise, as if all the thirty Bells in Antwerpe S^eeple were rung at once;
or do but pass by the door you would think your self in the land of
Parrats.

27
ANd what is their discourse? First, Drunkenness discovers all secre^s.
they discover all secrets. For like as when the wine purges, (says Plutarch)
that which is in the bottom, comes up to the brimme, and swimmeth aloft; or
else it breaks the vessels, and runs all abroad: even so drunkenness
discovers the secrets of the heart. Yea, if discretion and moderation be as
hoops to a vessel, how should these hogsheads keep their liquor, if you take
away those hoops?

It is the property of a dru^kard to disgorge his bosom, with his stomach; to
emty his mind, with his maw; he can ill rule his hands, but worse his tongue;
fat cups oil that so much, that it cannot stick; and makes it so laskitive,
that it cannot hold from bewraying hoth himself and others: and whatsoever is
in the heart of a sober man, is found in the tongue of a drunkard.

Drink disapparells the soul, and is the betrayer of the mind; it turns the
key of the tongue, and makes it unlocke that counsel, which before wisdom had
in keeping; even the thoughts of the heart, which God has secluded from the
very Devil, by this do suffer a search. He that would anatomize the soul, may
do it best when wine has benumbed the senses; no such rack for confession as
wine, nor could the Devil ever find a cunninger bait to angle with: even the
most benighted cogitations of the soul, in this flood do tumble from the
swelling tongue. For as steel is the glass of beauty: so wine is the glass
of the mind, says Euripides. And experience shows, that when a man is
drunk, you may thrust your hand into him, like an Ele-skin, and strip his
inside outward. And nothing more common with Statesmen and Politians, then to
make drink their Dalilah; to draw out of their enemies those secrets which
nothing else will do.

When any Ambassadors came unto Bonosus the Emperor, his manner was to make
them drunk, that so he might hear all their secrets. And Josephus speaks of
another politic Prince, who used when any Ambassador was sent unto him from
his enemies, to ply him with drink; and thereby he wrested all his secrets out
of him. Yea, this was the only sauce that Bacchus gave Ceres, when he fell in
love with Venus. And did not Noah being drunk reveal those secrets, which lay
hid above six hundred years before.

I confess, there is no general rule but admits of some exceptions; and this
rule is not always infallible: for wine makes some quick spirited, others
dull; this man talkative, another dumb; according to the disposition and
constitution of the party. Yea, I confess the complot and purpose to kill
Casar, was as faithfully committed unto Cimber, who would daily be drunk with
quaffing of wine; as unto Cassius, that drank nothing but water: neither had
Augustus any cause to be discontented with Lucius Piso that conquered Thrace,
for all he trusted him with the secretest affairs he had in hand: nor Ti^erius
with Cossus, to whom he imparted all his seriousest counsels; although both
so gave themselves to drinking, that they were often feign to be carried from
the Senate, and both reputed notable drunkards: but it is rarely seen, that
the contrary holds not.

Wherefore I will not tell a bibber what I would not hear again, lest I hear
of it again from those, to whom I dare not avouch it again. Yea, for this
cause (were there no other reason) I will beware of wine, I will not do God so
great a dishonor as to demideifie man, in making him privy to my heart and
thoughts. Yea, seeing God has given me two eyes, two ears, and but one
tongue; I will hear and see double to what I speak. And so much to show how
well the drunkard can keep counsel, if any be so mad as to trust him with a
secret, I pass on to

his Vain babbling, Surrilous jesting, Wicked talking, etc.

28.
SEcondly, suppose you urge him not the wine; His vain babbling, scnrrilo^s
je^^ing, (...) talking.
having set his tongue at liberty, it shall resemble Bacchus his Liber pater,
and go like the sail of a Windmill. For as a great gale of wind whirleth the
fails about; so abundance of wine whirleth his tongue about, and keeps it in
continual motion. Now he railes, now he scoffs, now he lies, now he slan ders,
now he seduces, talks baudie, swears, banns, somes, and cannot be quiet, till
his tongue be wormed.

And all this he sets out with the same throat, that a hired waterman cries
Cales sand: for commonly a lewd tongue, is a loud one; and a loud tongue, a
lewd one. Impudent speakers are like gaping Oysters; which being opened, either
stink, or there is nothing in them.

But to keep close to drunkards. This Caca-doemons discourse is all
quarrelling, scoffing, or scurrilous; for as he has a spiteful tongue in his
anger, so he has a beastly tongue in his mirth; as these two inseparably
attend each other.

First, a spiteful tongue in his anger: for if you mark him then, having more
rage than reason, he enterlaceth all his discourse, either with reviling the
present, or backbiting the absent: now all his prayers, are curses; and all his
relations, lies; talkative and lying, you know, are two birds, which always
she out of one nest. To be short, hear him when he is in this vein, and b^t
seriously consider his condition, you would think, that by a just judgment of
God, he were metamorphosed, like Hecuba the wife of Priamus, into a Dog, whose
chief property is to bark with open mouth, at such as he knows not: for
without question, their wits are shorter, and their tongues longer, then to
demonstrate them rational creatures.

Secondly he has a beastly tongue in his mirth: the drunkards communication is
ever filthy and beastly, full of all ribaudry and baudinesse; no filthy talk,
or rotten speech whatsoever comes amiss to a drunkard* yea, no word savours
well with them, that is not unsavory; their only music (and so fares it
with all the rude rabble) is ribaudry, modesty and sober merriment with them is
dullness.

Thus whereas he should either be silent, or his words should be b^tter worth
then silence; contrariwise, from the beginning to the end he belcheth forth
nothing, but what is as far from truth, piety, reason, modesty, as that the
Moon came down from heaven to visit Mahomet. O the beastlines which burns in
their unchaste and impure minds, that smoakes out of their polluted mouths! A
man would think, that even the Devil himself should blush, to hear his
child so talk. How does his mouth rune over with falsehoods, against both
Christians and Preachers? what speaks he less then whoredoms, adulteries,
incests, at every word? yea, hear two or three of them talk, you would change
the Lyc^^^ians language, and say, Devils are come up in the likeness of men.

Yea, it is a small matter with them to meddle with their equals, or to sit
upon their parish Priest (as those hogsheads term him) for in such a meeting
they will visit a whole Diocese, and Province; nay, the sagest Judge, and
gravest Counc^ller, and greatest Pee^^ in the land* must do service to their
Court, and be summoned before the Alebench; according to that in the P^almes,
they set the^r mouths against Heaven, and their tongues w^^ke through the
earth, Psalm. 73. 9.

Nor will they stay here; for when they have huft their smoke into the face of
these, they will have health to King Charles; and what not, for the honor of
England? O that they should (...) to make that a shooing-horne to draw on
drink, by drinking healthes to him! I cannot be in charity with the places
that permit this, with the persons that pardon it, much less, with such
Belialists as practice it.

But see greater abominations then these, for as yet we be but in the Haven;
if we launch out into the deep, we shall meet with Sea Monsters, far
fowlerevills.

29.
3 FRom wicked talking he proceeds to cursed and impious s^earing,
bl^spheming, etc. His cursed and impious swearing, blaspheming etc.
as you seldom see a Drunkard but he is a great swearer, and not of petty
oaths, but those prodigious and fearful ones, of Wo^^ds and Blood, the
damned language of ruffians, and monsters of the earth, together with, God
damn me; which words many of them use superficially, if they repent not.

Yea, the Drunkards and desperate ruffians of our days, swear and curse, as
if Heaven were deaf to their noise; yea, they have so sworn away all grace,
that they count it a grace to swear: and that not only when they are
displeased with others, will they tare the name of their Maker in pieces, which
is no better then frenzy; but in their very best moodes. Profane Drunkards
swear, even as dogs bark, not ever for curstness, but mostly out of custom:
neither know they that they swear, though they nothing but swear; as you
shall hear a man, when reproved for swearing, presently rap out oaths, that
he swore not, like men desperately diseased, their excrements and filth comes
from them at unawares. And as by much labor the hand is so hardened, that it
has no sense of labor: so their much swearing causes such a brawny skin of
senselessenesse to overspread the heart, memory, and conscience, that the
swearer swears unwittingly; and having sworn has no remembrance of his
oath, much less, repentance for his sin.

O the numberless number of oaths and blasphemies that one black mouthed
Drunkard spits out in defiance, as it were, of God, and all prohibitions to the
contrary! Yea, I dare affirm it, had some one of them three thousand pounds
per Annum, his means would hardly pay those small twelve penny multes, which
our Statute imposes upon swearers, were it duly executed. And if so, to what
number will the oaths amount, which are sworn throughout the whole land, yea,
in some one Alehouse, or Tavern? where they sit all day in troops, doing that
in earnest, which we have seen boys do in sport, stand on their heads* and
shake their heels against Heaven: where even to hear how the name of the Lord
Jesus is pierced, would make a dumb man speak, a dead man almost to quake.
Did you never hear how Caesar was used in the Senate house? if not, yet you
know how a kennell of Hounds will fall upon the poor Hare; one, catches the
head; another, the leg; a third, the throat; and amongst them she is torn in
pieces: even so these hellish miscreants, these bodily and visible Devils,
having their tongues fired and edged from Hell, fall upon the Lord lesus; one
cries, Wounds; another, Blood; a third, Hear^; a fourth, Body; a fifth, Soul;
and never leave stabbing and tearing him with their stinges, till no whole
place be left.

Thus they pierce his side with oaths, and tear all his wounds open again;
whereas the (...) did but crucify him below on the earth, when he came to
suffer; these crucify him above in Heaven, where he sits on his throne.

And (which I fear to think) it may be a question, whether there be more
oaths broken or kept; for woe is me; one, sells an oath for a bribe; another,
lends an oath for favor; another, casts it away for malice etc. but the
Drunkard, without any incitement, tumbleth out oaths at adventure, and is as
lavish of them, as of ill language. O misery! O wickedness! What shall I say,
that ever any who wears Christ's badge, and bears his name, should thus rise
up against him! that ever those tongues, which dare call God Father, should
suffer themselves thus to be moved, and possessed by that unclean Spirit! that
ever those mouths, which have received the sacred Body and Blood of the Lord
of life, should endure to swallow these odious morsells of the Devils carving!
are these Christians, dare they show their faces in the Temple* yes, they dare.

30.
BUt as the Church does Not own such wicked and profane ^retches for her
children, Drunkards deserve (like dir^ in the house of God) to be throw^e out.
so, if they had their due (like dirt in the house of God) they should be
thrown out into the street, or as excrements, and bad humors in man's body,
which is never at ease till it be thereof disburthened, as St. Augu^^ine
speaks.

Neither could they blame any (except themselves) in case they were marked with
the black cole of infamy, and their company avoided, as the Apostle advises,
Romans 16. 17. 2 These. 3. 6. 14. Ephesians. 5. 5. 7. 1. Cor. 5. 5. 11. 1 Timothy 1. 20. if
they were to us, as Lepers were among the Jews; or as men full of plague
soars are amongst us: for, as the Holy Pages before quoted warrant this, so
there are many good reasons for it, as.

First, 1 Because they bring an ill name upon the Gospel, and^ cause the enemy
to blaspheme God.
because even the Gospel, and the name of God is blasphemed among the
Gentiles, and an evil scandal raised upon the whole Church, through their
superlative wickedness, Romans 2. 24. As what else (but the unchristianlike
beha^iour of such Christians) has caused the Turks even to detest the true
Religion. And what was it that alienated the Indians from the Christian
Religion, and made them refuse the Gospel brought by the Spaniards, but this,
they saw their lives more savage then those savages. Yea, it made the poor
Indians resolve, that what religion soever the Spaniards were of, they would be
of the contrary; thinking it unpossible, that such cruel and bloody deeds
could proceed from any true Religion; or that he could be a good God, who had
such evil Sons: and the argument is of force, for, who are Scythians, if
these be Saints? who are Canniballs, if these be Catholics.

Whereas in the primitive times, more of them were won to the faith by the
holy lives of Christians, then by the doctrine which they taught: they made the
world to read in their lives, that they did believe in their hearts; and
caused the Heathen to say, this is a good God, whose servants are so good: for
thus they reasoned; these men are surely of God, and without doubt, look for a
world to come. Neither was the Gospel thus honored by some few only, but by
all that profes't it; For Tertullian witnesses, that in his time a Christian
was known from another man, only by the holiness and uprightness of his life
and conversation. But as for prime Christians, viz. the ancient Fathers, their
labors, their learning, their sincerity to men, and devotion to God, was the
wonder of the world: Whereas all the difference between these, and very
infidells, is, only this; the one are infidells in their hearts, the other are
infidells in their lives, as Augustine pithily. And sure I am, that in those
purer times the Church would have denied her blessing to such Sons of Belial
as these are, who make a trade of sin, as though there were no God to judge,
nor Hell to punish; and so live, as though they had no souls to save; such as
have shaken out of their hearts the fear of God, the shame of the world, the
love of Heaven, the dread of Hell, not caring what be thought, or spoken of
them here, or what becomes of them hereafter; yea, such a monstrous, menstruous
brood, that (like a certain mountain in Arabia) breed, and bring forth
nothing but monsters, whose deeds are too foul for my words, being such as
ought not to be once named amongst Christians, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 5.
3, 4. such as neither Moses nor Aaron, C^sar nor Paul, Minister of the word nor
Minister of the sword find reverence in their hearts, or obedience in their
lives: being like metal often fired and quenched, so churlish that it will
sooner break than bow; for they contemn all authority, as boys grown tall and
stubborn contemn the rod: yea, even such as speak ^vill of them that are in
authority, and whose mouths utter swelling and proud words against such as are
in dignity, as S. Peter and S. Jude has it: yea, they be mockers of all, that
march not under the pay of the Devil.

31
SEcondly, Because they infect almost all that come near them
whom but themselves could they blame, when they infect almost all that come
near them: as, have not little boys in the streets learned of them to wrap
out oaths almost as frequently as themselves? yea, through their frequent and
accustomary swearing, our children learn to speak English, and oaths together;
and so to blaspheme God almost as soon as he has made them. Now the good
husbandman weeds his field of hurtful plants that they may not spoil the good
corn: and when fire has taken a house, we use to pull it down, least it
should fire also the neighbors houses: yea, the good Surgeon cuts off a
rotten member betimes, that the sound may not be endangered.

Thirdly, Because the whole land fares the wo^se for their sakes.
when for their sakes, the land does mourn because of oaths; yea, when, if
the Scriptures be true, God has a controversy with all the inhabitants
thereof, and will turn our glory into shame for swearing, Hosea 4. 1, 2, 7.
And we may well wonder that the land siinketh not because of oaths: for if God
were not a God of infinite patience, he could not endure his most sacred and
glorious name to be so many thousand times blasphemed in one day, and that by
such miserable wretches as we be.

Fourthly, To make them look into themselves.
when solong as they are christened and go to Church as others do, receive the
Sacraments, and, without any difference, are reputed members of the visible
Church, they think themselves as good Christians as the best, yea, better then
the precisest: for what is their boast? they are noe Puritans, they make not
such a show of religion, nor are such hypocrites, nor dissemblers, as a great
many others are etc.

Neither indeed are they, for their words are suitable to their thoughts, their
actions to their words, all naught. And yet it is a great question (for all
they think no virtue comparable to this kind of plain dealing, I mean
boldness, and impudency in evil; for they think it no fault to live
viciously, so their profession be answerable, so they are the same in show
that they are in deed, all one in mouth and in mind) whether they, or
hypocrites are most superlative sinners, for both are humane devils, well met;
an hypocrite is a masked devil, an Athiest (as these are no better) is a
devil unmasked. Whether of the two shall, without repentance, be deeper in
hell, they shall once feel, I determine not; only let me assure them; if the
infernal Tophet be not for them, it can challenge no guests.

5, Fifthly, 5 Because they contemn all admonition
when they contemn all admo^ition, be it private, or in the public
congregation: if it be in private, these deaf Adders ( Abner like) will either
stop the ear with the tongue, by engrossing all the talk, or else they will
return blows for words: yea, a Christian-like admonition will work like
yeast in their brains, until they have requited their admonisher with a
mischief; admonition may move them to choler, never to amendment.

Or, suppose the Preacher declares unto them the heynousnesse of this sin, and
what a fearful reckoning of vengeance will come in the end: it is to no more
purpose, then if he should speak unto liveles stones, or senseless plants, or
witless beasts; for they will never fear anything, till they be in hell fire,
when it will be too late to repent. Wherefore God leaves them to be confuted
by fire and brimstone; because nothing else will do it.

Yea, look to it, and think of it you cursing swearers, whom nothing can
persuade to be civil, to be men, I say not, to be true Christians; you swear
away your salvation, curse away your blessing, and the devil, who now sets you
on work, will hereafter pay you your wages; and God, whose name now serves you
but only for swearing, shall then make you serve his justice, in gnashing and
weeping, howling and cursing shall be your chief ease in hell, to whom
blasphemy was an especial recreation on earth.

32.
NEither let any swearer bless himself in his heart, Swearing the most (...)
excusable (...).
with promises of impunity; for of all other sins in the world, this is the
most inexcusable.

If I step aside to round the drunkard in his ear about swearing; pardon it,
perhaps what is lost in the Hundred, will be got in the shiere.

First, Of which two realons.
I say of all other sins, this is the most inexcuseable, because, it is an
evil, from which, of all evils, we have most power of abstinence. As let him
that is neverso much accustomed to swearing, (admit he has habituated errors
into manners) be in place where he is afraid to offend, or sure to pay twelve
pence for every oath; he can wholly forbear, or if he do chance to forget
himself once or twice; yet he will not swear one oath for an hundred, which
he would do, in other company, and where it would cost him nothing. Now the
easier the thing commanded is, the greater guilt in the breach of it; and the
lighter the injuction, the heavier the transgression, says Saint Augustine.

Or suppose thou pretendest thou have been so long accustomed to it, that thou
can not leave it; yet this is but a witless, graceless, and shameless
excuse. For first, custom of sin is the very height of sin: and nothing
more aggravates it.

Secondly, will a thief or murderer at the Bar allege for his excuse and
defense, that it has been his use and custom of a long time? or if he do,
will not the judge so much the rather send him to the Gallows?

Secondly, because it is a sin, to which of all other sins we have the
fewest temptations: for whereas other sins have commonly some sensible profit
to midwife them into the world; as the Usurer finds an increase of wealth, who
desires to live with less faith, and more security; or pleasure, as the
Adulterer finds his stolen bread of Satan's seasoning and providing far sweeter,
then what God has given him of his own; or credit, as the Hypocrite sindes,
who like that Roman Woolfe, talks of Religion, when he means policy, and
plays the foul devil, under the shape of an Angel of light, and may be
resembled to an ugly Toade in an Ivory box, or a painted pot full of deadly
poison. These and many other sinners, which I could name, have some inducement
to provoke them, some reasons to allege; (indeed they are all taken out of the
Devils Lectures) but the swearer has nothing to provoke him, nor nothing to
say, but that he loves this sin, because it is a sin, and because God forbids
it; which is most fearful and damnable, and (as a man would think) should
make it unpardonable; I am sure, this makes it inexcusable. For what have thou
to say for thy self? this sin is neither pleasing, nor profitable, nor
laudable, but has a more pure corruption and venom in it, then any of his
fellows, and must needs issue from mere malice, and contempt of God; for all
thou can expect by it, is, the suspicion of a common liar, by being a common
swearer.

Yea, thou can but procure this fruit by thy swearing, that thou shall vex
others, and they shall hate thee: which shows that thou delightest in evil,
merely because it is evil; as sin is more stirred up and irritated by the
Law; yea, inhibition inciteth, and restraint inviteth a desperate wicked
wretch, and his nature most desires what is forbidden. As it fared with Eve,
and that Gentleman in Venice, who while it was left to his own free choice, in
ninety years together never went forth of the City; but being hereupon
confined, and that upon pain of death, was observed a while after to ride much
abroad. Sin, says the Apostle, took occasion by the commandment, Romans 7.
11. as if man's na^^re delighted in this or that evil so much the more, because
the Law forbids them. Yea, most find it here in, as in matters of books,
which being once called in, and for^idden, become more saleable and public.
The Die^^tes of the law being to ^^^full lusts in man's heart, as water to
quick lime, a means to inkindle them, and make them boil the more fiercely.

But know this thou swearer, that he is bottomlesly ill, who loves vice because
it is vice; he is a desperate, prodigious, damnable wretch, and full of the
venom of the serpent, that will (rather then not dye) anger God of set
purpose, and without profit procure his own destruction: which is thy case, if
thou usest his Name, to make up idle places of a hollow or unfilled sentence,
or to vent and utter with some more grace and force thy choler and malice.
Yea, this proves thee worse then an Ox led to the slaughter, for hereby thou
becommest thine own executioner.

Alas! thou art not of thy self worthy to serve, or to name him; how then
dare thou to make him, and his Name to serve thee, thy profane discourse,
and thy rash, and untempered anger?

33.
AGain, That of all other the swearer shall be sure of plogues.
supopse the Ministertels them that Swearing and Cursing is the language only
of h^ll. and no where frequent but amongst the damned spirits, (which shows
them to be the Divels^ best scholars upon earth, and of his highest form, with
whom the language of Hell is so familiar, that blasphemy is become their mother
tongue) and that they speak not a word of our country language, the language
of Canaan, that they are so hardened in evil that they are past grace, and
past feeling, that the swearer and blasphemer is like a mad dog, which flies
in his masters face that keeps him.

That as roaring and drinking is the horse way to Hell, whoreing and cheating
the footway, so swearing and blaspheming follows Corah, Dathan, and Abyram.

That it is a sure rule, and an undoubted sign, if any man does wear and
curse ordinarily, that he never truly feared God, as it cannot be that the true
fear of God, and ordinary swearing, should dwell together in one man; yea,
dead are they while they live, if they live in this sin.

That Satan stands ever at the swearers elbow, to take notice, reckon up, and
set on his score, every oath he sw^areth, and keeps them upon record against
the great day of reckoning; at which time he will set them all in order before
him, and lay them to his charge, and that then every oath shall prove as a
daggers point stabbing his soul to the heart; and as so many weights, pressing
him down to Hell.

And shall further tell them, that swearing is cl^athed with death, Ecclus. 23.
12. and that the swearer wounds his own soul, worse then the Baalites wounded
their own bodies; that he which uses much swearing shall be filled with
wickedness, and that the plague shall never go from his house, yea, his house
shall be full of plagues, Ecclus. 23. 11. that the curse of God shall enter
into the house of the swearer, and shall remain in the midst of it, and shall
consume it, with the timber thereof, and the stones thereof, until the owner
be destroyed, Zach. 5. 2. 3. 4. that God himself will be a swift witness
against swearers, Mail. 3. 5.

That the Almighty has spoken it (and that in thunder and lightning) how he
will not hold them g^iltlesse, which take his name in vain, and that such
mighty sinners as they be, shall be mightily punished. And go on in this
manner to show them the heynousnesse of their sin, and grievousnesse of their
punishment, it is to no purpose; for they will answer all, yea confute what
ever he can say, with this short sentence, God is merciful: yea, though the
swearer has made his soul Hell fire hot with oaths and blasphemies, yet he
presumes, that one short prayer for mercy at the last gasp shall cool him:
they will not believe, that are ordained to perish.

Yea, the Devil and sin so infatuates and besots them, that they think to
be saved by the same Wounds and Blood which they swear by, and so often swear
away; that Heaven will meet them at their last hour, when all their life long
they have galloped in the beaten road toward Hell, not considering, that the
Devil being always a liar, labors to persuade the Godly, that their estate
is damnable; and the wicked, to believe without once questioning, that they are
in favor with God: so they spend their days in mirth, says Job, and suddenly
they go down into Hell. Job. 21. 13.

34.
NEither is it strange that they should be so jocund, Drun^ards i^sensible of
their (...) and danger, because ignorant.
confident, and secure, that they should neither be sensible of their present
condition, nor afraid of future Judgments, for, for what the eye sees not, the
heart rueth not; security makes worldlings merry, and therefore are they secure
because are they ignorant.

A dunse, we know, seldom makes doubts, yea, a fool, says Solomon,
boasts, and is confident. Pro. 14. 16. and by a fool, in all his Proverbs,
he means the natural man.

As the Spyder which kills men, cures Apes: so ignorance does wonderfully
profit nature, which is the greatest bane to grace that can be, it is a veil
or curtain to hide away their sins: our knowledge, says one of the learned,
does but show us our ignorance; and wisdom, says another, is but one of man's
greatest miseries, unless it be as well able to conquer, as to decerne; the
next to being free from miseries, is not to be sensible of them. Erasmus could
spy out a great privilege in a blockish condition, Fools, says he, being
free from ambition, envy, shame, and fear, are neither troubled in conscience,
nor masserated with cares; and beasts, we see, are not ashamed of their deeds.
Where is no reason at all, there is no sin; where no use of reason, no
apprehension of sin; and where is no apprehension of sin, there can be no
shame.

Blind men never blush, neither are these men ashamed or afraid of any thing,
because for want of bringing their lives to the rule of Gods word, they
perceive not when they do well, when ill: the timber not brought to the Rule,
may easily appear straight, when yet it is not: nay, because they see not
their own souls, they are ignorant that they have any, and as little care for
them, as they know them: they bear that rich treasure in their bodies (as a
Toade does a precious stone in her head) and know it not.

What Is the reason a worldling can strut it under an unsupportable mass of
Oaths, Why they are so jocund and confident.
blasphemies, thefts, murders, drunkenness, whoredoms and other such like
sins, yea, can easily swallow these spiders, with Mithridates, and digest
them too, their stomachs being accustomed unto them, when one that is
regenerate shrinkes under the burden of wandering thoughts, and want of
proficiency* It is this, the one is in his element, the state of nature; the
other taken forth; now a fifth in the river is not afraid of drowning. Yea, let
a man dive under whole tons of water in the Sea, he feels not any weight it
has, because the water is in it is proper place; and no element does weigh
down, in it is own place; but take the same man forth, and lay but one vessel
upon his shoulders, he feels it a great burden, and very weighty: so every
small sin to a holy man, who is in the state of Regeneration, has a tender
conscience, and weighs his sin by the balance of the Sanctuary, is of
great weight; but to a natural man, who has a brawny conscience, is plunged
over head and ears in sensuallity, and weighs his sin by the balance of
his own carnal reason, it is a light thing not worth the regarding; yea, so
long as they remain in this estate they are dead in sin, Ephesians. 2. 1. Rev. 3. 1.
Now lay a mountain upon a dead man he feels not once the weight.

Well then may these do much evil to others, but small hope is there that
others should do good upon them, or reform them from this sin of swearing;
no, it is an evil which, for insolency and grouth, scorns to be slain
either by tongue or pen; but, like the Princes of Middian, it calls for Gideon
himself, even the power of the magistrate to fall thereon.

35
INdeed a course might be taken by the State to make them leave it, Three ways
to make them leave their swearing.
though nothing shall ever be able to make them fear an oath, should they see
never so many stroke dead while they are jesting with these edged tools, as
diverse have been, I will only instance three examples.

A Serving man in Lincolneshire for every trifle used to swear, Gods precious
blood, and would not be warned by his friends to leave it; at last he was
visited with a grievous sickness, in which time he could not be persuaded to
repent of it, but hearing the bell towle, in the very anguish of death he
started up in his bed, and swore by the former oath, that bell towled for him;
whereupon immediately the blood, in abundance from all the joints of his body,
as it were in streams, did issue out most fearfully, from mouth, nosthrils,
knees, heels, and toes, withal other joints, not one left free, and so died.

Earl Godwine wishing at the Kings table, that the bread he eat might choke
him, if he were guilty of Alp^red's death, whom he had before slain; was
presently choked, and fell down dead.

It was usual with John Peter, mentioned in the book of Martyrs, to say, if
it be not true, I pray God I may rot ere I dye, and God saying Amen to it, he
rotted away indeed.

For what is the use they would make of Gods judgments in the like cases ^ Even
the same that the Philistines of As^dod made of their fellows destruction, when
God so fearfully plagued them, for keeping and profaning of his Arc, which
was this: peradventure it is Gods hand that sm^t them (for so they reasoned,
and so these would half believe) yet it may be, it is but a chance that has
happened unto them, 1 Samuel 6. 9. when yet they saw, that all which were guilty
suffered in the judgment, and only they: so these would but half believe, if
they should see the like judgments executed upon their fellows.

The only way to make them leave their swearing is; let them have it upon
their carkases, and then though the belly has no ears, yet the back would
feel.

Or let them for every oath be enjoined and enforced to a months silence, as
Tibert^s the Emperor condemned a great railer, to a whole years: yea, as he
among the Indians (take it on Aelian's credit) that told a lie thrice, was
condemned to perpetual silence: so I am sure, it were happy for the Church, if
these swearers were so silenced, except they would forbear their swearing.

Or let their purses pay for it, and this would touch them to the quick, this
is a tried remedy, the land has had experience of it, when there was an act
made by King Henry the fifth, and his Parliament, that if any Duke swore an
oath, he should pay forty shillings; a Barron, twenty shillings; a Knight or
an Esquire, ten shillings; a Yeoman, three shillings four pence; a Servant,
whipped; and the same as well executed, as inacted, no man was once heard to
swear, or very rarely. And would not the like penalty now work the like effect
^ yes undoubtedly, for men stand more upon their silver, or upon their sides
smarting, then upon their souls. Have you not heard how that Host answered his
guests, when they could get no flesh at his house in Lent, yet might have it in
other places ^ alas! said he, we are bound, and they are but sworn; the tale
looks like mirth, but the meaning is in good earnest: too many fear an
Obligation, more than Religion; and are more careful of a Recognizance, then
of their Conscience.

What most men's care is, touching spiritual evils, and eternal reward, is
lively expressed by Solomon, because sentence against an evil work is not
executed speedily, therefore the heart of the children of men is fully set in
them to do evil, Eccle. 8. 11.

Ignorant worldlings think because God strikes not, he minds not, Ps. 50. 21.
but O fool, though he come softly to Judgment, yet he comes surely; and in
the end, what he wanted in swiftness, shall be supplied in severenesse.

Yea, were that good statute lately enacted by our gracious King, and his
Nobles, thoroughly, strictly, and severely put in execution, without partiallity,
we should find another manner of reformation touching oaths, then now we see;
be^ides the pore should be richly maintained, and none be in want but swearers,
whose want also were the only way to make them rich, to recover their souls,
and procure all blessings from God upon their persons and estates, so all
should be gainers: whereas now though we have good laws provided, the matter is
as well mended touching oaths, as it was once in Lions touching Stews, of
which Hugo Card nalis said, that whereas Innocentius found four at his coming
thither, he had left them but one, indeed that reached from one end of the City
to the other, urbs est jam tota lupanar; for we have not less but more
swearing since that prohibition, by reason that man's nature most lusts after
that which is most forbidden, and slights the fruit of that tree which is
easily climbed: so that for want of due execution, because of oaths the Land
does mourn, Hos. 4. 3. and threatens to spue out her inhabitants because of
drunkenness. And so much of the drunkards swearing.

36.
NOw when the pots for a while have stopped all their mouths, Their discourse and
behavior on the Alebe^^h.
(though every man had his share before) and they forgot what was formerly
spoken; you shall have one, for very pure love, and want of other expression,
weep in his fellows bosom; another sit kissing of his companion, not without
some short sentence nothing to the purpose; a third, setting his mouth on the
rack with laughter; (wise were the man that could tell at what) a 4th
swaggering and swearing because the wine was brought him no sooner; a fifth,
(for I pass him that sits there in a corner, nodding, and slavering) falls
down upon his marrowbones (in devotion to Bacchus) and up with the pot hand
smooth, after which every one that is awake sings his song, seasoning the same
with many a goodly belch; then one in stead of a harp, takes a knife and a
quart pot, with which he will make fine music in his conceit; another, in his
song commends his mistress, another, the goodness of the wine; another, being
better skilled in prose than meeter, relates all the passages betwixt him and
his wife at home, for wine descending, causes words still to ascend; another*
tells how many quarts, he, and so many more, drank at such a ing; another,
begins to argue of Religion, and matters of State; another brags of his lying
with such a woman, into whose company he could never yet be admitted; another
boasts how he jeered such a Puritan, (for the drink having bitten him, he
runs like a mad Dog up and down, snapping at every body, and many a good man
may say with David, I became a song of the drunkards) another, falls a riming
all in Satyr against the rest that are absent, and will not drink, (and
perhaps steeps his jest in his own laughter) which being liked and laughed at,
they all fall a riming; then each one, in his order, must play the Poet out of
the inspiration of Bacchus, only, (for Sibylla like) they never yield any
Oracle, except they are first possessed with a fury, and the Muses may go hang
for any room they have here; their Library is a large room, ranked full of
pots and canns of all sorts.

Now although the wisest of them cannot make two true verses in his mothers
tougue in three hours; yea although they be the veriest lack-latins, and the
most unalphabeticall raggabashaes that ever lived, (for I never heard of above
one good Poet they had, and he was starved to death, for telling truth out of
season) yet notwithstanding (for stand well they cannot) they will, one with a
cole, another with a candle, fill all the walls and ^eelings with
Epithalamiums, Elegies, and Epitaphs; which done, are expounded to the rest of
the company, if any be awake to hear it; your ears would blister to read
them, though it would do a deaf ma^s heart good to hear them, or a blind
man's to see them.

37.
ANd yet poor souls they think themselves wiser then Solomon, How wise the
drunkard is in his (...) conceil.
for being bribed with self-conceite, what can not they do, what do they not
know, what will they not say* yea, it is a wrong to their reputation to be
ignorant of any thing; and yet they know not this one thing, that they know
nothing; as it is hard to tell whether pride or ignorance bears the greatest
sway. It is incident to a weak mind to overvalue it self, the Gentiles
professed themselves to be wise even when they became fools, Romans 1. 22.
^^e Prince of Tyrus would be reputed wiser then Daniel, Ez^ch. 28. 3. when
indeed he was of all fools the greatest, v. 6 9. and S. Paul tells us, that
they which never knew what wisdom meant, yet named themselves Philosophers,
Col. 2. 8.

Yea, they hold all the world dunces besides themselves, and will swear, they
are shallow fellows that do not drink sack. Tell them that Pythagoras drank
nothing but water, that Demosthenes that great Orator never drank wine; they
will say, it cannot be, it is impossible; for they have as high an esteem of
wine about making wise, as the Stoics had of their doctrine about making holy,
who were of opinion, that whosoever received the same, if in the morning he
were wicked, in the evening he should become a very good man: and hence it is,
that according to the custom of Duchmen, and ancient Persians, they never make
bargains, nor consult of any great matters, but in the midst of their cups,
when half drunk.

Neither will any wonder at this their conceit, Of which 2. reasons.
that considers these two things. First, what the nature of Wine is, for wine,
as Plato well observes, being immoderately taken, makes them which drink it
think themselves wise, and their discourse unanswerable, and so it is, by
reason of their obstinacy; hereupon their speech is much, though little to the
purpose, and what ever the question be, the truth is on their side, all is
spoken in print that is spoken by them, though their phrase (the apparel of
their minds) has a rash outside, and fustian lynings; which would make them
hold their peace, if they but heard themselves with my ears, as Xenocrates the
Philosopher told one that was a great babbler: yea, all the Drunkards Geese are
Swanns, and all their virtues ten foot long; as for faults, they have none,
for poor souls they see neither their slips, nor wants.

Secondly, a Drunkard, with the sluggard in the Proverbs, is wiser in his own
conceit, then seven men that can render a reason, because, he speaks so much,
and hears so little. They that talk so much to others, seldom speak with
themselves enough; and then for want of acquaintance with their own bosoms,
they may well be mistaken, and present a fool to the people, while they think
themselves wise.

Alas! if they have once read but the Fayry Queen, the Arcadia, and
Montaigne his essays, (I dare not say the book of statutes, or the
Chronicles) or can but break a jest, as many of them are like Sarmantus, a
gentleman of Rome, whowas famous only for his scoffing, then they conceit of
themselves, as Menecrates the Physician did, who (though not worthy to be
Aesculapius his Apothecaries boy) would needs be Jupiter; and opinion you know
is all in all, every thing we light upon is as we apprehend it; opinion makes
women fair, and men lovely; opinion makes men wise, valiant, rich, nay any
thing.

38
BUt are they so wise, because they think themselves so* The greatest Bowzers
pr^ved the greatest Buzzards. (...) sect* 42.
No, no more then Simon Magus was great, because he called himself a great
man: for what ever they think, by the rule of Scripture every Drunkard is a
fool, Pro. 20. 1. and experience shows, that the greatest bowsers are the
greatest Buzzards in the world, that they have most leaden conceits, dull
understandings, drossie wits, gross and muddy affections; for either they are
of so mean breeding, that they are ignorant of any other entertainment; or of
such slow conceit, as they are not company one for another, without excessive
draughts to quicken them.

Or thirdly, so abundantly talkative, that they prove themselves fools the
other way; for even their much babbling, is an argument sufficient to prove them
fools. What says wise Solomon* a Fools voi^e is known by a multitude of
words, and babbling Drunkards account it not wisdom to speak few things or
words; yea, they can better aford you a sea of words, then a drop of wit; as
mark whether their discourse be not more sound, then substance; wind, then
matter.

Yea, tell me whether a talkative drunkard be not an unbraced Drum, able to
beat a wise man out of his wits, except he should stop his ears, or absent
his person, when such intrude themselves into his company.

We read that Horace was put into a sweat (almost into a fever) by the
accidental detention of a bablers tongue.

But to go on, ever where is least brain, says Socrates, there is most
tongue, and lowdest; even as a Brewers cart upon the stones makes most noise,
when his vessels are emptiest.

Indeed when a modest man gave thanks to God with a submisse and low voice, an
impudent critical gallant found fault with him, that he said Grace no louder;
but he gave him a bitter reply, make me but a fo^^e, and I shall speak as loud
as you, but that will mar the Grace quite.

A babbling tongue shows great pride, and little knowledge; but how seldom is
the tongue liberal, where the heart is full?

Spintharus gives this praise of Epaminondas, that he hardly ever met with one,
that knew more then he, or spoke less: profound knowledge says little, deep
rivers pass away in silence, but what a murmur and bubling, yea, sometimes
what a roaring do they make in the shallowes?

Yea, both the greatest knowers, and the greatest doers, are ever the least
talkers. Sampson slew a Lion, yet he made no words of it; whereas they that
have busy tongues, have commonly lazy hands, which also proves that they have
vain hearts.

The less virtue, the greater report, who can wonder to find a flood in the
tongue, when the heart is empty?

Indeed when once a Rabbi little learned, and less modest, usurped all the
discourse at table, one (not for want of ignorance) ^uch admiring him, asked
his friend in private, whether he did not take such a man for a great s^holler?
but what was the answer? he may be learned quoth he, for ought I know, but I
never heard learning make such a noise. The full vessel gives you a soft
answer, but found liquor: so the knowing and sollid man, will either be
silent, or his words shall be better then silence; whereas they that speak
much, seldom speak well.

39.
BUt to make it undeniable that Drunkards are fools: Drunkenness either
fi^des them fools or makes them fools that ^se it.
see how drunkenness either finds men fools, or makes them fools that follow
it. First, it commonly finds them fools, for excess, is a true argument of
folly, Plut^rch was wont to laugh at those, that would be counted wise as
Plato, and yet would be drunk with Alexander.

Indeed we use to say when the drink is in, the wit is out; but surely if the
wit were not first out, drink (in excess) would not be admitted in. A wise
man will moderate his appetite, master his unruly affections, gainesay all
unreasonable requests; whereas to be overcome with excess, and overswayed by
every idle solicitor, is the cognizance of a fool. Yea, who more sottish, then
he which refuses to be a Saint, that he may be a beast? who more foolish, then
those profane Esa^s, that will fell their birthright, reason, and the blessing
of grace here, and glory hereafter, for a mess of pottage, a little sensual
delight, and with Adam, part with their ^alvations for an Apple* Yea, Esau was
a fool for selling away his birthright, but in ^elling it away for a mess of
pottage, he was twice a fool. What greater folly and madness, says St.
Gregory, then for a little worldly pleasure, to loose an eternal kingdom, and
then rest in torment for evermore.

Many censure Herod's gross impotencie, and yet second it with a worse; giveing
away their precious souls for the short pleasure of sin; for what is half a
kingdom, yea, the whole world to a soul? so much therefore is there madness
greater, as their loss is more.

Yea, the Drunkard is a fool touching temporalls. I would feign know, whether
is wisest the prodigal waster, or the covetous griper; he that with a wanton
eye, a liquorish tongue, and a gamesome hand, indiscreetly, ravells out his
Auncecestors fair possessions, it may be a hundred pounds per Annum in three
years, and then leads the rest of his days in prison, there to repent at
leisure, having for his attendants, sorrow, grief, diri^ion, beggary,
contempt, etc. or he that to get a hundred pounds per Annum, and only
possess, not use the same, after he has got it, perhaps three years, is
content to be weeping, and wayling, and gnashing of teeth in the prison of Hell
for evermore? without question these two are both fools alike.

In a word, what greater folly then for a little tickling of the palate, a
kind of running banquet, to hazard the loss of eternal comfort, and expose
ones self to a devouring fire, an everlasting burning? Isay. 33. 14. surely in
this case if a man were not either foolish, or drunk before hand, he could
never yield to be made drunk.

Secondly, or in case they have wit, and other good natural parts before, and
those well improved; yet this vice makes them become fools, for drunkenness
banisheth wit.

Reason is so clowded with those fogs and mists, which ascend up out of the
kitchen of the stomach to the brain, that their wits run a wollgathering,
as the saying is.

A full belly makes an empty brain, when a mass of moisture (like the first
Chaos) is in the stomach, all the faculties of the soul are void and without
form, and darkness is upon the face of it, until there be another fiat. even
a voice from Heaven commanding a new light.

Drunkenness takes from men wit, memory, and all other their good parts; as
how many of these quagmirists have lost their souls sight by overmuch
drinking, as Dionysius the Tyrant did his bodily? How many old men through a
long custom in this vice, are grown sottish and stupid, as if their spirits
were buried in beefepots* whom we may fitly compare to the people of Pandorum,
a Country in the Indies, who (as they say) have white heads in their youth,
which turn cole black in their old age.

Yea, drunkenness besots the strongest brain, and beastiates even the bravest
spirits When the Grecians (that sage Nation) fell to this vice, they mightily
decayed in brain: and take this for a rule; while Bacchus is a man's chief
god, Apollo will never keep him company.

Neither are men robbed by it of their natural parts only; but drunkenness
darkens the light both of nature and grace, and so yields men over unto Satan,
to be led, as it were blindfold, into all manner of sin and wickedness, as
we shall see anon.

Yea, (which is most remarkable) this may seem to be the drunkards aim; for
being at it, he will never give over drinkking till he has laid reason his
keeper to sleep, and blown out that little light which is left in him, and
desperately drowned the voice and cry of conscience.

40
BUt before I go on, an objection would be answered; A^ objection answered
for me thinks I hear some impatient drunkard reply to what has been said;
that his wits (God be thanked) are as fresh as ever, and although he has
been drunk a hundred times, and so deprived himself both of reason and sense
for the present yet his wits have always returned again: which I grant in
part, for I confess it is not so with them all, at all times; every drunkard
is not wholly forsaken of his reason, wit, and memory, (though there wits at
the best be but as it were asleep) but sure I am, it is so with the best of
them at certain times.

We read that Philip King of Macedon, a Prince both wise and just, being drunk,
Many examples of dri^k bes^^ling me^
gave a wrong sentence against Machetas, and condemned him being innocent;
which he perceiving, made his appeal from King Philip drunk, to King Philip
sober; who being come to himself, and better considering of it, reverst his
former sentence. And I have my self seen sitting in a Grocers shop (for such
men I seldom meet in a Tavern) a Scholar and a witty man, being somewhat
gone in drink, take up a Sand barrel, in stead of a boule of Beer, and
(having said, here Cosen to all our friends) hold it to his mouth, until a
good part of the sand ran in between his teeth; and have been told of many
the like; as, that one being abroad late, seeing the shadow of a signe-post
cross the street, strove to lift his leg over, but gessing the matter
impossible, he fell to chafeing and cursing, that the City was no better
ordered; that another fell to cussing of a post for not giving him the wall,
and being told that it was a post, made reply, he might have blown his horn
then: that another seeing the Moon shine bright through a round hole, would
needs light his candle at it: that another being fallen down in Fleetstreete,
should reply, when some admonished him, and offered to lift him up, what can I
not be quiet in mine own room* And you have heard what Athen^us relates, how
a Tavern was, by the fancy and imagination of a drunken crew, turned into a
Gally; who having a tempest in their heads, caused by a sea of drink within,
verily thought this tap-house on Land a Pinnace at Sea, and the present storm
so vehement, that they unladed the ship, throwing the goods out at window,
instead of overbord; calling the Constable, Neptune, and the Officers, Tritons;
whereupon some got under the tables, as if they lay under hatches, another
holding a great pot for the Maste; all crying out, that so many brave Gentlemen
should be cast away.

And could this be, if drunkards were not stupendiously besotted? yea, surely
if their wits did not dwell in a fenne, they could not have such muddy
conceits: but so it is, as I have prooved by sundry, and those strong,
evidences.

I confess it is the better for them that they are fools, the case being
rightly considered: for what Owen speaks in the Epigram, may be applied to
sundry drunkards, Good Wine, they say, makes Vinegar mmost tart:
Thou the more witty, the more wicked art.
Yea, had they been born mere naturals* they had either been in no fault, or
in a great deal less fault, then they are. And so much of the drunkards wit;
now of his memory.

41.
AS touching memory, they have hardly any at all; 2. That drunkards have
shall^w memori^s.
for the abundance of wine has drowned and mudded that noble recorder. The
drunkard first speaks he knows not what, nor after can he remember what that
was he spoke; it is the funeral of all a man's good parts. A drunkards mind and
stomach are alike, neither can retain what they receive; deep drinkers have
shallow memories. Have you not heard of one drunkard, that sought all the Innes
in the Town for his Horse, when indeed he came thither on foot? of another,
that was half persuaded by the Chamberlain, that he came thither without his
breeches, having laid them over night under his mat, for the more safety of his
purse* and I can witness that one of no mean parts, being invited to a burial,
pulled out his key in the Church (being half a sleep, half awake) and knocked
on the pew crying, Drawer, what is to p^y*

By all which it appears, that drunkenness deprives men both of wit and
memory, and yet madly we pursue this vice as the kindler of them: but no
wonder, when the forbidden Tree which promised our first parents knowledge,
took their knowledge from them, the same devil having a hand in both.

I might proceed to his knowledge in the best things, As drunkards are purblind
to worldly wisdom, so they are st^rk blind t^ heavenly
and show you, that whereas some are like the Moon at full, have all their
light toward earth, none toward heaven; other, like the Moon at wane, or
change, have all their light to heaven-wards, none to the earth; drunkards are
like the Moon in Eclips, having no light in it self, net her toward earth,
nor toward heaven.

Though they are apt to think themselves Giants for wit, and Eagles for light
and judgment, even in Divinity also, which makes them so put themselves
forward, as how often have I seen a case o^ leather stuffed with wind, as he in
Marcellus D^natus thought himself a very beefe-brain'd fellow, that has had
only impudence enough to show himself a fool, thrust into discourses of
religion, thinking to get esteem; when all that he has purchased thereby,
has been only the hiss of the wise, and a just deri^ion from the abler
judgments: not unlike that Germane Clown, who undertook to be very ready in
the ten Commandments, but being asked by the Minister, which was the first? he
answered, thou shall not eat.

If you doubt of it, do but ask the drunkard a reason of his faith; and you
shall see he can no more tell you, th^n the wind can tell, which last blew
off my hat. Or only hear him relate what the Minister spoke, for seldom but
he stumbles at, and mistakes his words; for as when S. Augustine justified
free will against the Manichees, the ignorant would take him for a Pelagian;
and when he denied free will to the Pelagians, they would take him for a
Manichee, when he was neither, but disputed against both the extremes, the one
utterly denying it, the other too highly extolling it: so when the Minister
teaches, that it is impossible for a man to be justif^ed by his works, be
they never so glorions and exact performaces, these brutish drunkards will cry
out, he condemns good works; If he show them the necessity of living well,
they will think he excludes faith from justifying; let him prove it a dead
faith which is without good works, and those good works but shining sins
which are without faith, and show that both faith and works are equally
necessary to salvation, and they will understand he means them both as
meritorious causes, whereas he acknowledges neither; but faith as an
instrument, good works as a necessary concomitant, God alone the efficient,
and Christ alone the meritorious cause of salvation: for know this, that good
works cannot justify us before the severe Tribunal of Almighty God, our
works deserve nothing, it is only in Christ, that they are accepted; and
only for Christ, that they are rewarded: Neither is it faith which properly
saves us, but the righteousness of Christ, whereon it is grounded; by grace
ye are saved through faith, Ephesians 2. 8. It is the God of truth that
speaks it, and woe unto him that shall make God a liar; by grace effectually,
through faith instrumentally; we are not justified for the only act and
quality of believing, it is the justice of Jesus that justifies us, which faith
apprehends: it was the brazen Serpent that healed, not the eye that looked on
it; yet without a look^^g eye, there was no help to the wounded party by the
promised virtue. It is true, our Adversaries oppose this doctrine both with
Pens and Tongues, violently in the Schools, invectively in the Pulpets; but
come they once to their deathbeds, to argue it between God and their own
souls; then grace, and grace alone; mercy, and only mercy; Jesus, and none
but Jesus; this their great Belweather is driven to confess* yea, says
another, give us this faith, and then let our enemies do their worst, the
Devil tempt, the world afflict, sin menace, death afright, yet faith will
vanquish all, through the righteousness of Jesus Christ.

Again let a Minister speak against affectation of learning in Sermons, they
will say, he condemns learning; let him tell such as live and allow themselves
in drunkenness, adultery, swearing, deceiving, etc. that they are in a
damnable condition, and in a reprobate sense, they will say, he calls them
r^probates, and judges them damned: in all which they resemble the Sadd ces,
who took occasion to deny the Resurrection, from that wholesome doctrine
taught, that we should neither serve God for reward, nor fear of punishment,
but merely out of obedience and love: or the Jews, who when Christ spoke of
the Temple of his body, understood him to mean the material Temple, and
thereupon took great exceptions

Yea, we have a world of such amongst us, who seem ( Malchus like) to have
their right ears cut off, they hear so sinis^erly. And rather then not carpe,
if the Minister but use a similitude, for ornament and illustration sake,
borrowed from nature or history, they will say, he affirms the matter thereof
possitively to be true: like as that simple fellow thought Pontius Pilate must
needs be a Saint, because his name was put in the Creed. And so much to prove
that the Drunkard has neither wit nor memory.

42.
HAve we yet done? no, An unpardon^ble crime, not to drink as they d^e
I would we had, I would we were well rid of these filthes; but let us proceed
in speaking, as they do in drinking.

By that time these gutmongers have gulped down so many quarts, as either of
their names has letters in it, they have drawn in some fresh man; who,
perhaps after the third health, refuses to drink any more, being of Diogenes
his humor, who being urged at a banquet to drink more then he was willing,
emptied his glass upon the ground, saying, if I drink it, I not only spill
it, but it spills me; so this man's unacustomed rudeness, and monstrous
inhumanity, begins a quarrel.

For it is an unexcusable fault, or, as I may say, an unpardonable crime to
refuse an health, or not to drink eq^all with the rest, or to depart while
they are able to speak sense, and this they can almost prove, for was not
Pentheus, son to Echion and Agave, by his own Mother and Sister torn in
pieces, for contemning of Bacchus his feasts? hereupon many have lost their
lives, because they would not drink; but happily by Gods blessing, and the
parties patience in bearing their foul language, he has delivered himself of
their company, at which they are so vexed, that they gnaw their own tongues
for spite, and call him the basest names they can think of.

Now begin they a fresh to spice their cups, one while with oaths, other
whiles with words of Scripture, which sounds most ill favouredly in a Drunkards
mouth, as Solomon intimates, Pro. 26. 9. now rail they against Puritans; for
so are all abstemious men in the Epicures words, or a beasts language, who hold
sobriety, no other thing then humor and singularity, Religion and good
fellowship to be terms convertible.

Well, at length they dispute the case about his departure, The utmo^^ of a
Drunkards honesty is good fellowship.
stoutly affirming that he can be no honest man, who refuses to pledge them;
and to this they all agree, for the utmost of a Drunkards honesty is
goodfellowship, and he is of most reputation with them, that is able to drink
most, being of the Tartarians Religion, He of most reputation that can drink
most.
together with the inhabitants of Cuma^a and Guiana, who account him the
greatest and bravest man, and most complete and well accomplished gallant, who
is able to carrouse and swill down most; yea, if they can but meet with a man
that (like Diotimus surnamed Funnell) can gulpe down wine through the channel
of his throat, conveyed by a tunnell, without interspiration between gulpes,
as the Crocodile eats without moving of his nether jaw, they think him not
alone worthy to be carried to Gurmonds Hall, and there made free of the wide
throats, or large weezands company; but think he deserves some great
preferment, according to those ancient presidents read of in history. Where it
is recorded, that in the feasts of Bacchus, a crown of gold was appointed for
him that could drink more then the rest. That Alexander the great, not only
provided, but gave a Crown worth a Talent for reward to Pr^machus, when he had
swallowed down four steines or gallons of wine; which none of the company
could equal him in, though one and forty of them drank themselves dead also,
to show their willingness. That Tiberius the Emperor preferred many to honors
in his time, because they were famous whoremasters, and sturdy drinkers. That
Tiberius C^sar was preferred to a Pretorship, because of his excellency in
drinking. That amongst the drink-alians in tenterbelly, he that can drink a
certain vessel of about a gallon thrice off, and go away without indenting,
for this his good service is presently carried through the City in triumph, to
that goodly Temple dedicated to god All-paunch, and there knighted.

Yea, if they might have their wills, none should refuse to be drunk
unpunished, or be drunk unrewarded at the common charge (that I exceed not my
Last) each man that will not pledge their healthes, can bear me witness,
though I need no better evidence then their own lips; for how often shall you
hear them commend those actions, which deserve much blame; and condemn others
which merit great praise? how often does one commend or condemn me for one
thing, and another for the contrary?

Yea, the famous Alderguts, or gulpethirsts of our time, not only think
excessive drinking worthy of all honor during life, (and so ratify those
ancient presidents) but they look their associates should not cease to honor
them being dead, by m^ntioning their rare exployts herein, like Darius, who
caused it to be engraven upon his tomb for an honor, I could drink great
store of wine, and bear it well.

But O you sottish sensualists! how has the Devil bewitched you to magnify,
honor, and applaud all that are enthralled to this worse then swini^h
swilling? and on the other side, to vilify, reproach, and undervalue all that
hate, and loath it in their judgments, or else renounce it in their practice?
is it possible that the reasonable soul of man (not professedly barbarous)
should be capable of such a monster? certainly, if I did not know the truth
and probate of it, by ocular and experimental demonstrations from day to day,
I could hardly bring my understanding to believe, that men, that Christians
should be of so reprobate a judgment, as to affect, admire, adore, etc. so
foul, so base, so beastly, so unamiable, so unfruitful, unprofitable,
unpleasant, unnatural a vice as this is in most men's judgments and
experience. Nay, I cannot believe what I both see and hear in this case; for
it is not possible for the most corrupted heart to think that any should be
honored for villainy, and for honesty be contemned; but rather, that every
Drunkard, in his more serious cogitations, thinks of his fellow, dying in this
sin, a fit saint to be canonized for the Devil: for not seldom are wicked
men's judgments forced to yield unto that truth, against which their affections
maintain a rebellion.

And so we see, that what Seneca said long since, when wine was sold in
Apothecaries shops, and drank rather in time of sickness, then in health;
namely, that the time would come, when honor should be ascribed unto
drunkenness, and that to drink much wine should be reputed a virtue, is
fulfilled in our age; that very time is come, Non habet ^lterius quod nostris
potibus add^s
Posteritas, --
They drink not for strength, but lust and pride, to show how full of Satan
they be, and how near to swine, O woeful glory!

43
MEn were not so temperate in former times (as we read of Cyrus, He a rare man
now, that forbeares to drink until he be thirsty.
and many others, that did never eat but of hunger, nor drink but for thirst,
and then but a little) but they more abound in excess at this present; for he
is a rare Drunkard (yea, a rare man) in these days, that forbeares to drink
until he be thirsty; for, as if they scorned such an occasion, they drink
before they are ^ry they drink, until they become dry; so that thirst
overtakes drunkenness, as fools run into the river to avoid a shower of
rain. All drunkards, all you, who know no other calling but to visit
Tavernes, They devour whole d^luges of strong d^inke.
know that I speak true, that you drink one liquour, to draw on another; not
to quench but to increase thirst; not to qualify, but to inkindle heat: in
which their swinish swilling, they resemble so many Froggs in a puddle, or
water-Snakes in a pond, for their whole exercise, yea religion is to drink,
they even drown themselves on the dry land.

O what deluges of wine and strong drink does one true drunkard devour, (and
cause to be devoured) who never drinks but double, They devour whole deluges
of strong drink.
for he must be pledged, yea, if there be ten in company, every one must drink
as much as he, and he will drink until his eyes stare like two blazing
stars; and Drawers, or Tapsters those Sergeants of the maw, will see that the
pots shall neither be full nor empty. They drink more spirits in a night, then
their flesh and brains be worth; for, if it be possible, they will choke,
rather then confess Beer good drink.

But in the mean time, how many thousands which are hard driven with poverty,
or by the exigents of war, might be relieved with that these men spend like
beasts, whiles that is thrown out of one swines nose, and mouth, and guts,
which would refresh a whole family? O woeful calamity of mankind, says S.
Augustine, how many may we find, that do urge and compel those that be
already satisfied, to drink more then becomes them; and yet will deny even a
cup of small drink to the poor, that beg it for Gods sake, and for Christ's
sake! they pinch the hungry, to pamper the full; withhold drink from the
thirsty, to make others drunk with too great abundance.

44.
BUt: O how just a punishment were famine, It is Gods u^speakable mercy that
we have not a famine, or that the land does not spue out ber inhabitants for
this sin.
after such a satiety; and pestilence, after famine, for such as turn the
Sanctuary of life, into the shambles of death? O Lord it is thy unspeakeable
mercy, that our land, which has been so long sick of this drunken disease,
and so often surfitted of this sin, does not spue us all out which are the
inhabitants. The Lord of most glorious Majesty and infinite purity, sees all,
hears all, knows all, and yet behold we live; nay, the Lord still causes
Heaven, Earth, Sea, Land, all Creatures to wait upon us, and bring us in all
due provision; nay, he has not long since abounded even in that blessing and
grain which has been most abused to drunkenness; here is patience, here is
mercy, here is bounty. O that we could stay here, and suffer our selves to lose
our selves, in the meditation and admiration of this wonderfullnesse!

But what is the reason? God will not punish the righteous with the wicked, But
Drvn kards are reserved unto the great day.
Genesis 18. 25. he knows how to deliver the godly, and to reserve the wicked,
these brute beasts, who walk after the flesh in the lusts of uncleanness, and
count it pleasure to riot, unto the great day to be punished, 2 Peter, 2. 9.
13. whose judgment is not far off, and whose dam^ation sleeps not, ver. 3.
For as surely as the word of God pronounces many a woe unto them, as, woe to
Drunkards, says I says, that are mighty to drink wine, and un^o them that
are strong to power in strong drink, that continue drinking till the wine does
inflame them. Woe, says Habakuk, unto him that gives his neighbor drink
till he be drunken. Woe, says Solomon, to them that tarry long at the wine,
to them that go and seek mixed wine. Woe to his body, which is a temporal
woe; woe to his soul, which is a spiritual woe; woe to both body and soul,
which is an eternal woe: howl ye Drunkards, says Joel, weep ye, says St.
James, Isaiah, 5. 22. Habakuk, 2. 15. Joel. 1. 5. James, 5. 1. 5 Yea, which of
Gods Servants has not a woe in his mouth to throw at this sin? so every
tittle of this word shall be accomplished, God will one day hold the cup of
vengance to their lips, and bid them drink their fills.

Yea, The judgments of God ^pirituall, temporal, and eternal, which in
Scripture are threat ned against Drunkards.
as Drunkards are Satan's eldest Sons, so they shall have a double portion of
vengance: whereas riot in the forenoone has been merry, in the afternoon
drunk, at night gone to bed stark mad, in the morning of their resurrection
it shall rise sober into everlasting sorrow: they find not the beginning and
progress so sweet, as the farewell of i^ shall be bitter; for as sure as God
is in Heaven, if they forsake not their swilling (which they are no more able
to do, then they are able to eat a rock, the Devil has so besotted them)
they shall once pay dear for it, even in a bed of urquenchable flames.

I speak not of the many temporal judgments, which God brings upon them even
in this life, though to mention them alone were omni-sufficient, if they
thirsted not after their own ruin: as I could tell them from L^vit. the 26.
and Dent. the 28. that all curses threatened, all temporal plagues and
judgments which befall men in this life, are inflicted upon them for sin and
disobedience.

But I speak of those torments which are both into^lerable and interminable;
which can neither be endured, nor avoided, when once entered into.

If, I say, you persevere in this your brutish sensuallity, and will needs,
Dives like, drink here without thirst; you shall thirst hereafter without
drink; yea, though that fire be hot, the thirst great, and a drop of water be
but a little; yet in this hot fire, and great thirst, that little drop shall be
denied you, Luke, 16.

For know this, that without repentence, Paul will be found a true Prophet, who
says, that no Drunkard shall ever enter into the kingdom of Heaven. 1 Cor. 6.
9. 10. And Isaiab no less, who says, that Hell enlarges it self for
Drunkards, and opens her mouth without measure, that all those may descend
into it, who follow drunkenness, and prefer the pleasing of their palats,
before the saving of their souls, Isaiah, 5. 11. 14. for as they shall be
excluded and shut out of Heaven, so they shall be for evermore damned body and
soul in Hell; Christ shall say unto them at the great day of accounts, depart
from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the Devil and
his Angels. Math. 25. 41.

As they make their belly their god, and their shame their glory, so damnation
shall be their end, Phil. 3. 19. yea, their end is a damnation without end; it
is heavy and miserable, that their end is damnation; but it is worse and more
miserable, that their damnation is without end: wickedness has but a time,
but the punishment of wickedness is beyond all time.

Neither is the extremity of the pain inferior to the Perpetuity of it, for
the pains and sufferings of the damned, are ten thousand times more then can
be immagined by any heart, as deep as the Sea, and can be rather endured, then
expressed; it is a death never to be painted to the life, no pen nor pencill,
nor art, nor heart can comprehend it.

Yea, if all the land were paper, and all the water ink, every plant a pen,
and every other creature a ready writer; yet they could not set down the least
piece of the great pains of Hell fire. For should we first burn off one hand,
then another, after that each arm, and so all the parts of the body, it were
intolerable; yet it is nothing to the burning of body and soul in Hell:
should we endure ten thousand years torments in Hell, it were much; but
nothing to eternity: should we suffer one pain, it were enough; but if we come
there, our pains shall be even for number and kinds infinitely various; as
our pleasures have been here: every sense and member, every power and faculty
both of soul and body, shall have their several objects of wretchedness, and
that without intermission, or end, or ease, or patience to endure it.

45.
NEither let drunkards ever hope to escape this punishment, Yet if they can
repent and leave their si^, God is very ready to forgive.
except in due time they for sake this sin; for if every transgression,
without repentance, deserves the wages of death eternal, as a just recompense
of reward, Heb. 2. 2. Romans 6. 23. how much more this accursed and damnable
sin of drunkenness, which both causes, and is attended upon by almost all
other sins, as has been showed.

And yet if thou can, after all this, but truly repent, and lay hold upon
Christ by a lively faith, which ever manifests it self by the fruits of a
godly life and conversation; know withal, that though thy sins have been
never so many for multitude, never so great for magnitude, God is very ready to
forgive them; and this I can assure thee of, yea, I can show thee thy pardon,
from the great King of Heaven, for all that is past, the tenor whereofis, Let
the wicked for sake his way, and the unrighteous his own imaginations, and let
him return to the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for
he will abundantly pardon. Isai. 55. 7. and again, Ezec. 18. if the wicked
will turn from all his sins which he has committed, and keep all my
statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely ^ ve, and
not die; all his transgressions which he has committed they shall not be once
mentioned unto him; but in his righteousness that he has done he shall live,
because he considers and turns away from all his transgressions that he
has committed, he shall save his soul alive ver. 21. 22. 23. 27. 28. other
the like places you have, oel, 2. 12. 13. 14.

Yea, I can show thee this very case in a president 1 Cor. 6. 10. 11. where we
read of certain Corinthians that had bin given to this sin of drunkenness;
who, upon their repentance, were both washed, sanctified, and justified. And
St. Ambrose tells of one, that being a spectacle of drunkenness, proved after
his conversion, a pattern of sobriety. Yea, know this that Gods mercy is
greater than thy sin, what ever it be; thou can not be so infinite in
sinning, as he is infinite in pardoning, if thou repent; let us change our
sins God will change his sentence; God is more merciful, says Nazianzen, then
man can be sinful, if he be sorrowful; none can be so bad, as God is good;
the Seed of the woman is able to bruise this Serpents head; wherefore, if you
prefer not hell to heaven, abandon this vice.

But withal know, that if it shall come to pass, that the drunkard (when he
hears the words of this curse, namely these threatenings before rehearsed)
shall Pharaoh like, harden his heart, and bless himself in his wickedness,
saying, I shall have peace, although I walk according to the stub. bornnesse of
mine own heart, thus adding drunkenness to thirst; the Lord will not be
merciful to that man, but then his wrath and jealousy shall smoke against
him, and every curse that is written in his Law, shall light upon him; and the
Lord shall put out his name from under heaven, as himself speaks, Deutero.
29. 19, 20. which chapter, together with the former, I wish thee to read, if
thou will know thy self, and foreknow thy judgment.

46
I But will some Titormus say, (being, it may be, 4. Excuses which drunkards
usually make taken away.
stronger to drink, and taler to tipple, then Milo himself was to eat, who
devoured a whole Ox at a meal) I was never so gone yet, but I knew the way
home, I could tell what I did, what I said etc. (for if a drunkard can but put
his singer just into the flame of the candle, without playing, hit I miss I,
(which is their trial of the victory, If they can bare their drink they are no
drunkards
though he spue whole fish ponds, he is held a sober man) Yea, no man ever saw
me so much as wheel in the streets; I am therefore no drunkard, neither do
these threatenings appertain to me; as desperate is the cause which admits no
color of defense: but what answers the Prophet? woe unto them that are mighty
to drink wine, men of strength, to mingle strong drink, Isa. 5. 22. and
Solomon that divine Orator answers, (whose answer is also ours) they that tar^y
long at the wine, they that go to seek mixed wine, they are the parties, to whom
this woe belongs, they are to be ranked with drunkards. Yea, the abuse may be
committed many ways, as vice is manifold, virtue uniform; drink then is not
only abused when it turns up a man's heels, and makes the house run round;
but when it steals away the affections so far, that a man cannot make too much
have to it, take too much pains for it, spend too much time at it, and money
in it.

Believe it, if a man drink too much for his purse, too much for his calling
and occasions, too much for his health and quiet of body and mind, Solomon calls
him a drunkard.

A man has no more reason, nor warrant to drown his time, his estate, his
liver, his stomach, etc. then his wits and brains: and in cases of this
nature, things are rather measured by the intention and affection of the doer,
then by the issue and event. Why should not a man be deemed a drunkard, for his
inordinate affection to drink, as well as an adulterer, for the like affection
to his neighbors wife. Sin as sin, in it is own colors and nature, is
neither desired nor desirable; but only as it is disguised, and offers it
self to the understanding and will in the likeness and habit of goodness.

Alas if none be drunk, but such as have lost their legs, tongues, senses,
that by tumbling in their own vomit and sleeping in a guzell; what should
Solomon speak of quarrels, bablings etc. such be as dead asso many withered
plants, and do what you will to them, they lie like Jupiters logg, and neither
answer, nor stir again: it is your mannerly, sober, methodicall drunkard,
that drinks by the hour, and can tell the clock, that drinks by measure and
by rule; first, so much Ale; then such a quantity of Beer; then of Sack; then
of Rhenish; then back again from Wine to Ale, to Beer, till the reins be
cleansed, the liver cooled, the stomach set upright, and heat and moisture
brought to a just and an even temper; wherefore though it be somewhat to keep a
man's senses, yet it is not sufficient; a man may not be drunk, and yet not be
sober.

47.
A Gain secondly, for the drunkard does nothing amiss, 2. Their alleging
the examples of some ^oly men.
though the Devil himself would scarce wish him to do worse: some will excuse
themselves, yea, bear and bolster out themselves in their drunkenness, or at
least lessen their sin, by pleading presidents and examples; many holy men, say
they, some whereof are mentioned in the Scriptures, have been drunk; as namely
Noah and Lot; and therefore it is not so heinous a sin, as you would make
fair for.

But let such know, that drunkenness ventured on, by the example of a Saints
frailty, is of a more malicious nature in them, then it was in him they
allege. Any transgression thus derived, is the argument of a more ungracious
soul, then that it seeks to imitate. Yea, this is so gross a delusion, that
what indeed is an argument of fear, they make an argument of presumption in
sinning; and what they hope shall excuse them, does but more properly condemn
them, because they had that warning before them; and is so far from being an
evidence to acquit them; that nothing can more aggravate their guilt: for
certainly he is more guilty of his own death, who eats Mercury, and knows
such and such were poisoned with it; or who goes into an infected house,
seeing Lord have mercy upon us, over the door, then another, that should do
the same things ignorantly and unadvisedly.

What Pilot, that were in his right wits when he sees Sea-marks, purposely
set to give warning of Rocks, Sands, and Shelves, whereon others have made
shipwreck, will take occasion thereby to run his Ship upon them? yea, will he
not employ all his care and skill, that by avoiding them, he may escape the
danger? yes, except he be stark mad, or extremely desperate.

The Holy Ghost compares the examples of holy men, to the cloud in the
wilderness, Heb. 12. 1. which was partly light, partly dark, now if any with the
Israelites, that follow the light part of this cloud (the virtues and graces of
these Saints and holy men) it will safely conduct and carry them through the red
Sea of this troublesome world; but contrariwise, if any, with those Egyptians,
Exodus 14. shall follow the black part, (their frailties and infirmities) he is
like to be drowned in the sea of eternal destruction, as the Egyptians were in
those waters.

Wherefore imitate their virtues, but beware and take heed of their vices.
Evil was never made to be imitated, but goodness: yet alas! Lots faith and
obedience is not such a sinners object, but his drunkenness: as if Jacobs modest
look, liberal hand, truth-speaking tongue, devout knee, and humble heart,
were not worth the noting; but only his lamenesse, and haulting. Yea, their
weakness is seen tears are seen in our eyes.

Oh* sottish men, that mark none of the graces of godly men, but their skars!
But if any tender the safety of his own soul, when he sees these examples,
which are recorded for our learning, for our warning, let them be as so many
monitors, to warn him to take heed: yea, if they being so godly, had their
slips and falls, let him that thinks he stands, take heed least he fall:
let them not make us go on more securely in our sinful courses, but rather
move us, to work out our salvation with fear and trembling, as the Apostle
exhorts, Phil. 2. 12.

Again the Saints falls should serve to raise us up, when we are down; not
to cast us down, when we are up; and should serve for our consolation
afterward, not for our presumption before.

Lastly, Lots and Noah's falling into this sin were nothing in comparison of
thine, for, as for Noah, he was ignorant of the nature of wine, and knew not
the strength of the Grape: for as it was his first planting of Vines there, so
it was in all probability, the first time he had tried and experimented the
operation of wine.

And as for Lot, he drank liberally, with intent only to comfort himself, and
his daughters, in regard of the loss of their mother, and many other crosses
lately sustained, and was overtaken unawares. Neither did any of these drink
with an intent to exceed measure, and to be drunk, neither did they use it
often; the one, only once; the other, but twice; and that by the instigation of
his ungracious daughters: and so makes nothing, or very little, for the excuse
of common drunkkards, who, like so many flies, live wholly by sucking. 3 They
are not drunk with wine.
But thou art not drunk with Wine: no, peradventure thou have, no wine to be
drunk with; yet if thou be overcome with strong drink of what kind soever it
be, thou will be found a trespasser against sobriety, and consequently, against
God himself. It is notwhat you call the thing that does the hurt, but what hurt
it does, if it makes either the head heavy, or the heart outrageous, or the
eyes to stare, or the tongue to stammer, or the feet to stagger, or the
stomach to work like yeast in a barrel, thou can not excuse it. Indeed I
have heard of a mad fellow, that excused his taking of a purse; who when one
seeing him go toward the place of execution, said, how now neighbor, whether
go you, what is the matter? answered, nothing, but mistaking a word; I should
have said to such an one, good morrow, and I said, deliver; but as this would
not save him from the Gallows; so no more will these poor excuses save thee
from Gods heavy displeasure.

48.
But thou have yet to say, 4 That it is the usual custom of the place and
common practice of the people with who they are couversant and by whom they
live.
for thou will excuse thy excessive drinking by others example, and allege,
that it is the usual custom of the place, and the common practice of the
people among whom thou live, yea, whom thou live by, and art daily
conversant withal; (as for the most part, that which is patronized by
usualnesse, slips into the opinion of lawfulness) and hereupon thou art (as
thou supposest) the rather to be borne withal, if thou do like other men,
seeing singularity would make thee odious, and cause thee to be scorned and
derided of all.

I answer, indeed custom and example of the greatest number says much for
it; but that much is nothing, for it is God's express charge, Exodus 23. 2.
thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil, and St. Paul's everlasting
rule, Romans 12. 2. fashion not your selves like unto this world,

Besides, if custom of place, or multitude of people could authorize any
sin, then every sin might stand upon it is justification; yea, no fancy so
mad can fall into humane imagination, that meets not with the example of some
public custom, as I could easily prove, if it were needful: yea, I can
hardly forbear to make a list of their severalls, for there is no country
without some customs, as strange to others, as pleasing to themselves; and use
brings the fight of our judgments asleep; the barbarous Heathen are not more
strange to us, then we are to them; subjects have diverse lustres, whence the
diversity of opinions is chiefly engendered; one nation vieweth a thing with one
visage, and thereon it stays; another with another. To be brief, if custom
and example could authorize drunkenness, why could it not as well authorize
that abominable sin of Sodomy? for Sodomy it self was once the common
practice of a whole City; and so for Turcisme, Iud^isine, paganisine, and
Popery, for these take up nine parts of the world.

But tell me, were it a good plea, to commit a felony, and say that others do
so? or if never so many should leap into the Sea, or cast themselves into the
fire, or break their own necks, would this encourage any that are wise to do
the like? why then will thou leap into Hell, and cast away thy soul, because
others do so?

Alas! although custom and community commends that which is good, yet it
mightily aggravateth that which is evil: a good thing the more common it is,
the better it is; but an evil thing, the more Common, the worser: yea, custom
grounded neither upon reason, nor Religion, is the worst and most barbarous
kind of Tyranny: a common fashion dissonant from Gods word, is but a common
sin, which often brings common and universal judgment; and therefore thou
can not join with them in their sins, and be disjoined from them in their
punishments.

But seeing there is no such authority given to sin, as by example, and that
this excuse is so common in every offenders mouth, Others, or every one does so
and so, therefore why not I? or, every one is of this or that judgment, and are
you wiser then al? and considering that this is made a general plea almost in
all cases, Do not such and such the like, who are wiser, and greater, and
better men then your self? (for I have ever noted, that this one artlesse
persuasion of Others do so, prevails more with the world, then all the places
of reason) I will answer it the more largely and fully, and prove, that example
either of the greatest number, or the greatest men, or the greatest scholars,
yea, the best and holiest men, let custom and reason, (as it is now depraved)
together with good intentions, be added thereunto, are but uncertain, yea,
deceitful guides to follow, and that the best, or all these, will prove but a
poor plea another day, God having given us his Word, which is a certain and
infallible guide to direct us, and rule to walk by, and square all our
actions, together with a strait command, not to swerve therfrom either to the
right or left hand. That we ought not to follow the example either


First, we ought not to follow the example of the greatest number, 1 of the
greatest number, or
for the greatest number go the broad way to destruction, and but a few the
narrow way which leads unto life, as our Savior witnesses, Mat. 7. 13. 14.
yea, says St. John, the whole world lies in wickedness, the 1 ^oh. 5. 19.
whereas they whom Christ has chosen out of it, are but a little flock, Luke
12. 32. the number of those whom Sa than shall deceive is as the sand of the
Sea, Rev. 20. 8. whereas they that believe the Gospel are few in number, Isai.
53. 1. Romans 10. 16. the one may be compared to a little flock of Kids; but the
other, like the Arromites, fill the country: for besides Turks, Jews, and
Infidells, Herefie has one part, Hypocrisy another, Profaneness a third,
Lukewarmnesse a a fourth, etc. 2 Cor. 4. 4. so that God has the least part,
that owes all, Lord thou have but a few names in Sardy, Re. 3. 4.

And this the Scripture verifies of all ages: there could not be found eight
righteous persons in the old world, for one was an impious Cham; all Sodom
afforded not ten; Eliah, speaking of the outward visible Church in his time,
says, I only remain a Prophet of the Lord, but Baals Prophets are 450. 1
King. 18. 22. and Micha complains of the multitude of the wicked in his time,
and small number of the faithful, Micha. 7. 2. Behold (says Isai.) I, and the
children whom the Lord has given me, are for signs, and for wonders in
Israel, Esai. 8. 18. so few and rare, that they were gazed on as monsters, And
though the number of the children of Israel be as the sand of the Sea, yet but
a remnant shall be saved, says the Lord himself, Esai. 10. 22. Romans 9. 27.

Neither has it been otherwise since the Gospel; the whole City went out to
send Christ packing; not a Gadarean was found, that either dehorted his
fellows, or opposed the motion, Mat. 8. 34. when Pilate asked, what shall be
done with Jesus? all, with one consent, cried, crucify him, Math. 27. 22.
there was a general shout for Diana for two hours together, great is Diana,
of the Ephesians, not one man took Paul's part; yea, the Jews tell Paul, that
his Sect is every where spoken against, Acts, 28. 22. so that Vox populi is not
always Vox Dei, yea, for the most part, it is Vox Diaboli, for all bothsmall
and great, rich and poor, free and bond, receive the mark of the beast in
their foreheads, Revel. 13. 16.

Neither is this the vote of Scripture alone, for the very Heathens could see
the same to be a truth, even by the light of reason. Diogenes thought he should
do best, when he did least what the common people did. And Socrates ever
suspected that, which past with the most and general commendations. Yea, of
all the 288. several opinions which Philosophers held, touching the chief
good, reckoned up by S. Augustine. de civitate Dei, Lib, 19. Cap. 1. never any
was so mad, as to think the way to attain to it was by doing as the most do;
wherefore says Seneca, regard not what the multitude do, for number is but an
ill sign of a good cause, yea, it is the best note of the worst way.

Yea, this is so clear a truth, that even common sense may see it: for look we
upon the whole frame of nature, and every creature in the Universe, even from
the Angels to the least moats or atoms, and from substances to accidents, this
rule holds good, that the basest things are ever most plentiful. Then like no
vice, though followed with a throng:
for Who measures truth by voices, does it wrong.
Follow the best, not the most, and what the example bates of multitude, will
be supplied with magnitude.

Truth may not be measured by the pole; it is not number but weight that must
carry it with God; a solid verity in one mouth, is worthy to preponderate light
falsehood in a thousand: yea, therefore be more temperate and sober, that so
thou may not imitate, but rather reprove them; and be more holy, because in
the midst of a perverse generation so shining as lights in a dark place; and
follow not the worlds fashion, especially in this, for this is a fashion that
will one day be washed off with fire and brimstone.

49.
SEcondly, suppose this were the common practice of the greatest, richest, 2 Of
the greatest men, or
and noblest men in the Land; it would no way serve thee for an excuse, nor
make thy sin any whit more warrantable.

I confess, authority of greatness, does often corrupt the integrity of
goodness; yea, the evil examples of great men, do great harm, and ever have
done; and he that is most eminent, has most followers. Augustus a learned
Prince, filled Rome with Scholars; Tiberius filled it with Dissemblers;
Constantine with Christians; lulian with Atheists.

As other beasts level their looks at the countenance of the Lion and birds
make wing as the Eagle flies: so

Regis ad arbitrium totus componitur orbis: If Saul even kill himself, his
Armor-bearer will do the like; the leaders example is a law to the followers.

Yea, many (like Aesops Ass, that imitated the fawning Dog,) will do what
great ones do, though they make themselves ridiculous by it: we are led by
whom we are fed, without any respect to him that feeds both them and us. A
sick head makes a disordered body; a blind eye endangers all the other
members; a Rulers unrighteousness, like a blazing star, has a long tail, and
draws a train of mischiefs after it, and is ominous to the whole land;
whereas piety in a Prince, like Aarons ointment, runs down to the skirts of
his garments, Psalm. 133. 2. blesses all his subjects.

The bad conditions of popular persons, are like Jacobs speckled Rods, they
make the people bring forth their own party-colored actions, Genesis 30. 38.
39. the ill customs of the eminent, are drawn up like some pestilent
exhalations, and corrupts the air round about.

But should their examples be followed because they are great, or because they
are set by God to rule over us in matters civil, politic, and judiciary? no,
for God does not make every one good whom he has made great, neither makes he
difference between the Voble and the rabble, either in the dispensing of his
grace, or in the tolleration of offenders; one is no more privileged then
another, for his grace is alike free to both, and both the same law binds all
men alike to their good behavior, and the same punishment shall be inflicted
upon all that offend.

Yea, God is so far from being arespector of persons in the dispensing of his
grace, that as he has put down the mighty from their seats, and exalted them
of low degree; so he has filled the hungry with good things, and the rich he
has sent empty away, Luke 1. 52. 53. he has chosen the poor of this world to
be rich in faith, James 2. 5. yea, not many noble are called, as Paul speaks,
but God has chosen the base things of the world, and things that are despised,
to confound the mighty, 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27.

Neither is this the manner of his donation only, but of his acceptance also;
for, as our Savior chose rather to be born in the town of Bethlehem, a mean
place of Judea, then in Jerusalem, the Metropolitan, and most glorious city,
Mat. 2 1. And as David preserred the approbation of a Maid servant fearing God,
before Michols, a scoffer, though she were Queen, 2 Samuel 6. 22. So God
esteems more of virtue clad in rags, then vice in Velvet: he respects a man,
not for his greatness, but for his goodness; not for his birth, but for his
new birth; not for his honor, but for his holiness; not for his wealth, but
for his wisdom: with him Ephraim shall be preferred before Manasses, Genesis 48.
14. 19. and Ishaes little son before the rest of his brethren, 1 Samuel 16 11,
12. Adoniah may pretend his eldership, but Solomon shall enjoy the kingdom, 1
King. 2. 15. It is humility that makes us accepted both of God and man, whereas
the contrary makes us hated and abhorred of both. While Saul was little in his
own eyes, God made him head over the Tribes of Israel, and gave him his
Spirit; but when he abused his place and gifts, God took both from him, and
gave them to David, whom Saul least respected of all his subjects, 1 Samuel 15.
17. 28. and 16. 14.

The best Nobility, is the Nobility of faith; and the best Genealogy, the
Genealogy of good works. The blessed Virgin was more blessed in being the child
of her Savior, then in being his mother: the only true greatness is to be
great in the sight of the Lord, as John Baptist was, Luke. 1. 15. which if we
be, it is no great matter how the world esteems of us: and he that is
regenerate, is greater and more noble than the proudest that oppose them, for
the righteous, says Solomon, is more worthy then his neighbor, Prove. 12. 26.
and better is the poor that walks in his uprightness, then he that
perverteth his ways, though he be rich, Prove. 28. 6. The Bereans are reputed,
by the Holy Ghost, more noble men, then they of Thessalonica, because they
received the word withal readiness, and searched the Scriptures daily,
whether those things were so, which Paul preached, Act. 17. 11. Whence it is
that David thought it not so happy for him to be a King in his own house, as a
door keeper in Gods house: that Solomon in the book of his repentance, prefers
the title of Ecclesiastes, that is a soul reconciled to the Church, beforethe
title of the King of Jerusalem. That Theodosius the Emperor preferred the title
of Membrum Ecclesiae, before that of Caput Imperii; professing that he had
rather be a Saint, and no King; then a King, and no Saint. And that godly
Constantine rejoiced more in being the servant of Christ, then in being Emperor
of the whole world.

And good reason, for they were but poor C^sars, poor Alexanders, poor
Tamerlanes, that wone so many victories, and lost the best; whereas our
adoption makes us at once both great, rich, and safe: as for greatness, we are
alied so high, that we dare call God Father; our Savior, Brother, etc. for
riches, we have heaven it self, which is made sure to us for our patrimony:
and for fafety, we think it no presumption to trust to a guard of Angels; see
that yeed spise not one of these little ones, says our Savior, for, I say
unto you that in heaven their Angels always behold the face of my Father which
is in Heaven, Matthew. 18. 10.

And thus we see he is great that is good, and he noble that is all glorious
within, Psalm. 45. 13. and that it is no measuring men by the depth of the
purse, for servants are oftentimes set on horseback; while Princes walk on
foot. Wherefore our estimation of others, must be led by their inward worth,
which is not alterable by time, nor diminishable with external conditions; and
for our selves it matters not, if with Gideon, we are dreamed to be but
barley Cakes, when we know withal, that our rolling down the hill of outward
esteem shall break the tents of Midian; it matters not how base we be
thought, so we may be victorious Judge. 7. 13. 14.

But suppose God did make a difference between rich and poor, great and small,
noble and ignoble; yet still greatness, nobility, and riches would be but a
deceitful guide or rule to walk by; for the Kings of the earth band
themselves, and the Princes are assembled together, against the Lord and
against his Christ, Psalm 2. 2. and in 1 King. 20. 26. we read of no less
then 32 Kings in a cluster which were every one drunk; and elsewhere, that a
thousand of the chief Princes of Israel committed fornication, and were all
destroyed for their labor in one day, Numb. 25. 9. 1 Cor. 10. 8. Yea, of
twenty Kings of Judah, which the Scripture mentions, we read of but six that
were godly; and of eighteen Kings of Israel, all, but two, are branded by the
Holy Ghost for wicked; and yet this nation was Gods peculiar and chosen people
out of all the world. And lastly, when the Rulers sat in Council against
Christ, none spoke for him but Nichodemus, Ioh. 7. 50. 51.

All which shows, that it is neither a good, nor a safe way to imitat other
men's examples, be they never so rich, never so great. Or if we avoid not their
sins, we shall not escape their plagues: if we sin together, we shall be
sure to perish together: as when those three and twenty thousand Israelites
committed fornication, after the example of their chief Princes, they were
every one destroyed both leaders and followers, Number. 25. 9. 1 Cor. 10. 8. And
as when those other Cities followed Sodoms lust, they were all consumed with
Sodoms fire, Iud. 7.

Only there shall be this difference; as the errors of the eminent are eminent
errors, and the more noble the person, the more notorious the corruption; for
great Persons, like the great lights of Heaven, the most conspicuous planets,
if they be eclipsed, all the Almanacks of all nations write of it; whereas the
small Scarres of the Galaxy are not heeded; all the country runs to a Beakon
on fire, no body regards to see a shrub flaming in a valley; whereby sin in
them, is not only sinnne, but subornatione quae in Vulgaribus nugae, in
Magnatibus blasphemia: so these great offenders, shall meet with great
punishments; and as their fault is according to the condition of their place,
so shall the nature and proportion of their retribution be.

50.
3 BUt thirdly, 3 Of the greatest scholars.
suppose most of the Learned and greatest Shcollers in the land were given to
this vice, (which notwithstanding is a vanity to conceive) yet all were one,
this could be no excuse for thee.

For first, not many wise men after the slesh are called, but God has chosen
the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, that no flesh should
rejoice in his presence, 1 Cor. 1. 26. 27. 29. yea, the preaching of Christ
cracified was foolishness to the wise Sages of the world, 1 Cor. 1. 23.

It pleases God, for the most part* to hide the mysteries of salvation from
the wise and learned, and reveal them unto babes, Math, 11. 25. Luke 10. 21.
yea, the saving knowledge of Christ is hid to all that are lost, 2 Cor. 4. 3.
But if once men abuse their knowledge and learning to Gods dishonor, and
comply with Satan and the world against the Church; then he takes that
knowledge, which once they had, from them, as he took heat from the fire,
when it would burn his children, Dan. 3. 27. I will destroy the tokens of the
Southsayers, and make them that conjecture fools: I will turn the wisemen
backward, and make their knowledgefoolishnesse, says the Lord, Isa. 44. 25. he
takes the wise in their craftiness, and the counsel of the wicked is made
foolish, Job. 5. 13. As how many wise and learned men among the Gentiles have
turned fools, and worshipped gods that were not able to wipe off the dust from
their own faces? How many Papists, that are great clerks, and wise men,
maintain a thousand absurd and ridiculous Tenants, yea, such brainesicke
Positions, that never any old woman, or sick person doted worse.

To nominate two, of two hundred. John Baptist, with them, has so many heads,
that they cannot tell which is the right; God made him but one, Herod left him
none, they (as if he were another Hydra) have furnished him with a great many.
Christ's cross is so multiplied with them; that the same, which one ordinary
man might bear, if the pieces were gathered together, would now build a
Pinnace of a hundred Tun; yet they will tell us, that every shiver came by
revelation, and has done miracles; but this appears to me the greatest
miracle, that any man should believe them: yea, is not their folly and
blindness such, as to maintain those things for truth, which the Holy Ghost
plainly calls the Doctrine of Devils? 1 Timothy 4. 1. 2.

And justly are they forsaken of their reason, who have abandoned God: yea,
most just is it, that they who want grace, should want wit too. If Idolaters
will needs set up a false god, for the true; is it not equal, that the true
God should given them over to the false? and because they receive not the love
of the truth, that they might be saved, therefore, says the Apostle, God
sends them strong delusions, that they might believe lies; that all they
might be damned, which believe not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness, 2 These. 2. 10. 11. 12.

God gives to every man a stock of knowledge, more or less, to occupy
withal; and to him which uses the same well, viz. to his glory, and profit of
himself, and others, he gives more, as to the Servant which used his Talents
well, he doubled them; which makes the Holy Ghost frequent in these and the
like expressions; If any will do Gods will, he shall understand the Doctrine
whether it be of God or no, Ioh. 7. 17. A good understanding have all they
which keep the Commandments, Psalm. 111. 10. The Spiritual man understands
all things, 1 Cor. 2. 15. to a man that is good in his sight God gives
knowledge and wisdom, Eccles. 2. 26. wicked men understand not judgment, but
they that seek the Lord understand all things, Pro. 28. 5.

But as for him which uses it not, much more, if he abuses his knowledge to
his own hurt, and Gods dishonor, as too many do, he takes from him even
that which he had formerly given him; as he took away the odd Talent from the
servant which had but one, and did not use the same, Luke 19. 24. That this is
Gods manner of dealing, you may see Mat. 21. 43. Genesis 4. 11. Acts, 26. 18.
Isaiah, 29. 14. and 44. 25. and 6. 9. 10. Dan. 2. 19. 23. Job, 5. 13. 14. Ioh.
9. 39. and 12. 37. 40. Romans 1. 28. Ephesians. 4. 18. 19. 1 Cor. 1. 20. 2 These. 2. 10.
11. 12. He is not more the author of light in Goshen, then of black
darkness in Egypt, he does not more open the heart of Lydia, then harden
the spirit, and make obstinate the heart of Sihon King of Hesbon, Deuteronomy. 2. 30.
If there be a Mordecay, growing into favor with him; there is also an Haman,
growing out of favor. As Eliah's spirit is doubled upon Elisha; so the good
Spirit departed from Saul. As the Gentiles became believers, so the Jews
became Infidells. As Saul became an Apostle, so Judas became an Apostate. As
John grows in the spirit, so Ioash decays in the spirit, 2 Chro. 24. 17.
etc. As Zacheus turns from the world, so Demas turns to the world, and God
is no less the permitter of the one, then the cause of the other, if we
consider him as a righteous Judge, punishing one sin with another by way of
retaliation.

Hereupon, when Christ meets with good Nathaniell, a true Israelite, in whom
there was no guile, he says unto him, beleevest thou, because I saw thee under
the Fig Tree? thou shall see greater things then these, John, 1. 50. whereas
to the obstinate Jews, he says, by hearing, ye shall hear, and shall not
understand; and seeing, ye shall see, and not perceive, Math. 13. 14. Even
like Hazar, that had the Well before her, but could not see the water, Genesis 21.
19. make the heart of this people fat, make their ears heavy, and shut their
eyes, least etc. Isaiah 6. 10. which words, with the former examples, are
written for our learning and warning: for was the Talent, think we, only
taken from him in the Gospel? Did none lose the spirit, but Saul? Have none
their hearts hardened for their obstinacy, but Pharaoh? Do none grow out of
favor with him, but Haman? do none become Infidels, besides the Jews? None
prove Apostates, but Judas? Have none their eyes darkened, and their hearts
hardened for their sins, but the Gentiles? O yes, the idle servant was but a
type of many that should have their Talents taken away; Saul was but a type of
many that should lose the spirit; Sampson was but a type of many that should
lose their strength; the Gentiles were but a type of many Christians which
should have their minds darkened, and their hearts hardened, whom God should
give up to a reprobate mind, etc. It Is true, this is not meant of natural, or
speculative knowledge, wherein the wicked have as large a share as the godly;
but of spiritual, experimental, and saving knowledge, which is supernatural
and descends from above, James, 3. 17. And keeps a man from every evil
way, Pro. 2. 12. Wherein the wicked have no part with the Godly, the natural
man perceives not the things of the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2, 14.

Now God esteems none wise, that are not so in this latter sense; yea,
natural and worldly wisdom, without this, is mere foolishness in Gods
account, 1 Cor. 1. 20. and 3. 19. and no less then twelve times infatuated by
the wisdom of God in one Chapter, 1 Corinthians, 1. 2. Whence it is that the
Scribes and Pharisees, who were matchless for their knowledge and learning
(and that in the Scriptures, Gods Oracles, which will make a man wise, or
nothing) are called by our Savior, who could not be deceived, four times in
one Chapter, blind, and twice, fools, Math. 23. and Baalam (who had such a
prophetical knowledge that scarce ever any of the holiest Prophets had so
clear a Revelation of the Messiah to come) is called by the Holy Ghost, fool
2 Peter, 2. 16. and good reason, for though he was a Seer, he could not see
the way to Heaven; and the same may be said of I^das (who knew as much as the
wisest natural man) for if he had been wise, he would not have taught others
the way to Heaven, and go^ himself the direct way to Hell.

Alas! the greatest Clerks, and they that know most, are not always the
wisest men; many of the wise, and the ancient, and the learned, with Nicodemus,
are to learn this lesson, that except they be borne again, they cannot enter
into the kingdom of Heaven, John. 3. 4, 9. and they that give themselves to be
so bookish, are often times so blockish, that they forget God who made them.

Now as our Savior said to him, which thought he had done all, One thing is
behind, Luke 18. 22. so may I say to these, who think they know all, one thing
is behind, and that is the true knowledge of God, of Christ, of themselves,
and how they may be saved: and he which knows not thus much, although I
cannot say he is a stark fool, yet I may truly say he is half a fool, and
half a wise man: as Ona-Centaure was half a man, and half an Ass: for all
learning and knowledge, without this, is but as a wodden Diamond in a Lattin
ring, and others who know less, and are less learned, may be more wise.

It was a true and just reprehension, wherewith the High Priest snib'd the
Council, as they were set to condemn Christ, and a great deal better then
he meant it, Ye know nothing at al, John, 11. 49. he spoke right, for if we
know not the Lord Jesus, we know nothing at all; our knowledge is either
nothing, or nothing worth. What says Aristotle, no more then the knowledge of
goodness, makes one to be named a good man; no more does the knowledge of
wisdom, only, cause any person properly to be called a wise man; saving
knowledge of the truth, works a love of the truth known: yea, it is an
uniforme consent of knowledge and action: he only is wise, that is wise for
his own soul; he whose conscience pulls all he hears and reads to his
heart, and his heart to God, who turns his knowledge to faith, his faith to
feeling, and all to walk worthy of his Redeemer, he that subdues his sensual
desires and appetites to the more noble faculties of reason, and understanding,
and makes that understanding of his serve him, by whom it is, and does
understand, he that subdues his lusts to his will, submits his will to reason,
his reason to faith, his faith, his reason, his will, himself, to the will of
God; this is practical, experimental, and saving knowledge, to which the
other is but a bare name or title: for what is the notionall sweetness of
honey, to the experimental taste of it. It is one thing to know what riches
are, and where they be, and another thing to be master of them; it is not the
knowing, but the possessing of them that makes rich.

Faith and Holiness are the nerves and sinews, yea the soul of saving
knowledge: the best knowledge is about the best things, and the perfection of
all knowledge, to know God and our selves, as being the marrow, pith, or
kernel, of Christianity; and it is much, to know a little in this kind. What
said Aristippus to one that boasted how much he had learned? learning
consists not in the quantity, but in the quality; not in the greatness, but
in the goodness of it. We know a little gold, is of more worth then much
dross: a precious stone is a very little thing, yet it is preferred before
many other stones of greater bulk: yea, a little Diamond is more worth then a
rockie mountain: so one drop of wisdom, guided by the fear of God, is more
worth then all humane learning; one spark of spiritual, experimental, and
saving knowledge, is worth a whole flame of secular wisdom and learning; one
scruple of holiness, one drame of faith, one grain of grace, is more worth
then many pounds of natural parts.

But learning and grace do not always keep company together: yea, oh Lord how
many are there that have a depth of knowledge, yet are not soul wise! that
have a library of Divinity in their heads, and not so much as the least
catechism in their consciences! No rare thing for men to abound in
speculation, and be barren in devotion; to have full brains, and empty hearts;
clear judgment, and defiled affections; fluent tongues, but lame feet; yea,
you shall hear a flood in the tongue, when you cannot see one drop in the life.

But see how justly they are served; they might be holy, and will not;
therefore though they would be soul wise, yet they shall not; the scorner
seeks wisdom, but finds it not, Pro. 14. 6. Let them know never so much,
they are resolved to be never the better; and they which are unwilling to obey,
God thinks unworthy to know.

51.
NO wicked man is a wise man; for as God is the giver of wisdom, That no
wicked man is a wise man.
so he reveals himself savingly to none but his children the godly.

First, God only is the giver of it. For as no man can see the Sun, but by
the light of the Sun: so no man does know the secrets of God, but by the
revelation of God, Mat. 16. 16, 17. to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of
Heaven, we must have hearts, eyes, and ears, sanctified from above, Deuteronomy. 29.
2, 3, 4. Ps. 111. 10. Luke 24. 45. Ioh. 15. 15. Rom, 8. 14. 15.

No learning, nor experience will serve to know the riches of the glory of Gods
inheritance in the Saints, to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge,
Ephesians. 1. 17. 18. and 3. 19. for as mere sense is uncapeable of the rules of
reason: so reason is no less uncapeable of the things that are supernatural.
Yea, the true knowledge of the nature and state of the soul, must come by his
inspiration that gave the substance. As the soul is the lamp of the body, and
reason of the soul, and religion of reason, and faith of religion: so Christ
is the light and life of faith.

2. God reveals himself savingly to none but the godly, and such as he knows
will improve their knowledge to his glory: even as husbandmen will not cast
their seed but into fruitful ground, which will return them a good harvest;
the secrets of the Lord, says David, are revealed to them that fear him, and
his covenant is to give them understanding, Psa. 25. 14. these secrets are hid
from the wicked, neither has he made any such covenant with them: the
faithful are like Moses, to whom God showed himself, Exodus 3. like Simeon,
that embraced Christ in his arms, Lu. 2. 28 like John the beloved Disciple,
that leaned an his bosom, Ioh. 13. 25. like the three Disciples, that went
with him up the mount to see his glory, Matthew. 17. like the Apostles, whose
understandings he opened, Luk, 24. 45. and to whom he expounded all things:
whereas to unbelievers, he speaks all things, as it were, in Parables, Mar. 4.
34. see this in Abraham's example, shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I
do? says God, Genesis 18. 17. As if this were an offense in God, if he should
tell the righteous no more then he tells the wicked. They which love God,
says S. John, know God; but they which have not this love, know not God,
though they have never so much knowledge besides, 1 John 4. 7.

Yea, suppose a man be not inferior to Porcius, who never forgot any thing he
had once read; to Pythagoras, who kept all things in memory that ever he
heard, or saw; to Virgil, of whom it is reported, that if all Sciences were
lost, they might be found in him: to Bishop Tunstal, whom Erasmus called, a
world of knowledge; to Aristotle, who was called wisdom it self, in the
abstract; to that Roman Nasica, who was called Corculum, for his pregnancy of
wit; that Grecian Democritus Abderita, who was also called wisdom it self;
that Britain Guildas, called Guildas the sage; that Jew Aben Ezra, of whom it
was said, that if knowledge had put out her candle, at his brain she might
light it again, and that his head was a throne of wisdom; or that Israelitish
Achitophel, whose words were held as Oracles; to Iosophus Scaliger, who was
skilled in thirty languages: yet if he want faith, holiness, the love of God,
and the Spirit of God to be his teacher, he shall not be able, really^ and by
his own experience, to know the, chief points of Christian religion; suc^ as
are Faith, Repentance, Regeneration^ the love of God, the presence of the Spi^
rit, the Remission of sins, the effusion o^ grace, the possession of heavenly
comforts not what the peace of conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost is, nor
what the communion of Saints means; when every one of these are easy and
familiar to the meanest and simplest believer.

Now will you know the reason; the fear of the Lord, says Solomon, is the
beginning of wisdom, Prove. 1. 7. as if the first lesson to be wise, were to be
holy. For as the water ingendereth ice, and the ice ageine ingendereth water:
so knowledge begets righteousness, and righteousness again begets
knowledge. It is between science and conscience, as it is between the stomach
and the head; for as in man's body, the raw stomach makes a rheumatick head,
and the rheumaticke head makes a raw stomach: so science makes our conscience
good, and conscience makes our science good. It is not so much scientia
capitis, as conscientia cordis that knows Christ and our selves; whence
Solomon says, give thine heart to wisdom, Pro. 2. 10 and let wisdom enter
into thine heart, Proverbs 4. 4.

Again, if it be asked, why the natural man perceives not the things of the
Spirit of God? S. Paul answers, he cannot know them, because they are
spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. and indeed, if they be spiritually
discerned; how should they discern them, that have not the Spirit?

Now if it be so, that men may be exquisitely wise, and incomparably learned
in the worlds opinion; and yet very fools in the judgment of heaven: if not
many wise men after the flesh are called, but that a great number of them go
the wrong way; yea, if God turns their wisdom into foolishness, that abuse
their gifts; and reveals himself savingly to none, but such as fear and
serve him; then is their no safety, in following their example, or in building
our faiths upon their judgments.

Indeed we are too prone to imitate the learned, and to think we go safe
enough, if we tread in their steps, although they tread awry: for say we,
they know the will of God, what he requires, and practice what they think
will bring them to happiness, especially so much as is absolutely necessary to
salvation; and they do so and so, or else they speak not as they think,
because they do not as they speak; for none live worse then many of them.

But should this be, should we think ever the better of error, though a
thousand of the learned should countenance and maintain the same? no, one
Micaiah, a single Prophet, speaking from the Oracles of God, is more worthy of
credit, then 400. Baalites, 1 Kin. 22. 6, 12, 13, 14, 17 22, 23. One Luther, a
mean man, is worthy to be believed before the Pope, and so many legions of his
creatures, which were throughout Christendom; for what he wanted in abbettors,
was supplied in the cause; yea, did not Paphnuti us, a weak scholar, show more
wisdom in defending the truth, against the whole Council of Nice, then all
those great Clarks, and learned men; to his great renown, and their
everlasting shame? Did not Pharaoh find more wisdom in Joseph, a poor Hebrew
servant, and receive more solid advice from him, whereby a famine through out
the whole world was prevented, then he could in all the Wisemen and
Southsayers of Egypt, Genesis 41. 8. to 32? Did not Nebuchadnezzar find more
depth in Daniel, a poor captive Jew, then he could in all the wise men of
Babylon, Daniel 2. and 4? yes, and the reason is, one eye having sight, is
better then a thousand blind eyes; and one poor crucified thief, being
converted, had a clearer eye then all the lews Rulers, Scribes, and Pharisees,
who being natural and wicked, condemned and crucified JESUS CHRIST.

In the Council of Trent there was of 270. Prelates, 187. chose out of Italy,
and of the rest, the Pope (who was himself Moderator) and his creatures,
excluded and took in, whom themselves would, and none else; what marvel then
if they concluded what they listed? Yea, how many Scholars in all ages of the
world, have resembled Trajan, who was endued with great knowledge, and other
singular virtues, but defaced them all by hating Christianity, and opposing the
power of godliness? How many are so far from doing good, that they do great
hurt with their gifts, and not seldom the more gifts they have, the more harm
they do? For as the best soil, commonly yields the worst air: so without
grace, there is nothing more pestilent then a deep wit. Wit and learning well
used are like the golden earerings, and bracelets of the Israelites; abused,
like the same gold cast into a molten Idol, then which nothing more
abominable. No such prey for the Devil, as a good wit unsanctified: great wits
often times mislead not only the owners, but many followers besides: as how many
shall once wish they had been born dullards, when they shall find their wit
and learning to have barred them out of heaven.

And let them look to it; for as, in respect of others, their offense is
greater; for better many Israelites commit adultery, or idolatry, then one
David, or Solomon. The least moate that flies in the Sun, or between our eyes
and the light, seems a greater substance then it is: and the more learned the
person, the more notorious the corruption: as the freshest summers day will
soonest taint those things which will putrify; so in respect of themselves,
their sin is, and their punishment shall be greater: for the more glorious
the Angels excellency, the more damnable their apostacy. If the light become
darkness, how great is that darkness? If Achitophel prove a villain, how
mischievous is his villainy. Putrified Lillies smell far worse than weeds; if
virtue turn into vice; the shame is triple. For many Jews to deny Christ, was
not so much as for one Peter. Yea, if all the Cities of the world had done
filthily, it were short of this wonder, the Virgin daughter of Sion is become
an harlot, Isaiah 1. 21. If Judas become a traitor, how great is his treason?
If Absalom rebel, how unnatural is his rebellion? And so much to answer the
plea, of learned men.

52.
FOurthly, that the example of the best and holiest men, 4. The best and
holiest men, no certa^ne rule to walk by.
is no cettaine rule for us to walk by, is plain: for if every act of the
holiest persons should be our rule, we should have but crooked lives: for then
because Noah was drunk; Lot committed incest; Abraham lied; David committed
adultery, and murder; Peter forswore his Master* etc. we should do the like;
which no man with a reasonable soul can affirm; (though some infatuated and
incorrigible sinners, would feign justify their abominable wickedness, by the
falls of Gods children recorded in holy writ;) for every action that is
reported, is not straight way allowed. Yea, God has given us rules whereby we
may examine the examples of the best Saints, and as well censure the bad, as
follow the good: which made S. Augustine answer some Heretics, who alleged
for themselves, the authority of Saint Cyprian, I am not bound to S. Cyprians
authority, any further then it is Canonical.

The just Saints are to be followed, but only in their justice and sanctity:
we are not bound to be good men's Apes; let us follow such as excel in virtue,
Psalm. 16. 3. in such virtues wherein they excel, as every Saint excells in
some virtue; one, excells in knowledge; another, excells him in faithfulness;
a third, excells them both in zeal; a fourth, excells all in humility; a
fifth, excells the rest in that Christian virtue, yea, Christ's virtue,
forgiving of wrongs; and yet a poor man may out go them all in an admirable
patience, 1 Corinthians 12. 31.

Now as when Paul had propounded many rare graces, he concludes with desire
you earnestly the best gifts, 1 Cor. 12. 31 so take the best of every man, and
therwth make up an excellent man. As the Italians got up all the excellent
pictures in the world, that out of them all they might make one masterpeece, or
most excellent picture: (for the sweetness of all the best flowers make most
sweet and excellent honey) so learn of this man, zeal; of another, knowledge;
of another, patience; etc. follow David, where he followed Gods heart; not
where he followed his own heart; if he turn toward lust, blood, idleness, let
us leave him there: let us follow Peter's confession, not his abnegation; be ye
followers of me, says S. Paul, even as I am of Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 1. We must
not imitate every one, but such as Paul, Philip. 3. 17. nor Paul in every
thing, but wherein he follows Christ: the great Apostle injoyneth our
imitation, but gives a limitation, do not ye follow after me, unless you see
the tract of Christ before me, imitemur bonos, sed in bonis, let us follow good
men, but only in what they are good: for otherwise no motion can want a
pretense, as calling for fire from heaven, to consume such as displease us;
Elias did so, and why not we? Offering our children in sacrifice; Iephta (did
so as some think) and why not we? Marying of many wives, and putting away such
as they did not like; the Fathers did so, and why not we? Borrowing, but never
paying again; the Israelites did so by the Egyptians, and why not we?
Murdering of Princes, Ehud did so, why not we? etc.

Yea, there is nothing more perilous* then to draw all the actions of holy men
into examples. Actions are not good or evil, because done by good or evil
men; but because commanded or forbidden by God: now they, perhaps in many
cases, may have had peculiar warrant signed from heaven, whether by instinct or
special command, which we shall expect in vain; therefore much caution must
be used in our imitation of the best paternes, whether in respect of the
persons, or things; else we shall make our selves Apes, and our acts
absurdities. So that as Demosthenes was wisely wont to say, in civil matters,
we live and rule by laws, not by examples: so say I in divine, precepts must
be our guides, and not patterns, except the pattern of our Savior Christ.

And to imitate him is the marrow of all Religion, and the true worship of God;
for then are our actions and intentions warrantable, and praiseworthy, when
they accord with his, (and what Painter would not rather make his picture by
the living face, then by any other picture) whereas to square our lives by other
men's lives, without respect to his, is to set our Clocks by others Clocks,
without looking to the Sun, which is the readiest way to have them go wrong;
for many times, he that is most unfit to observe man, is the most fit to serve
God. The Sybarites desirous to know from Apollo, how long their prosperity
should last; were answered, that so soon as they began to prefer men before
God, their state should be destroyed: and the same we may apply to our selves.

Wherefore let us honor good examples, but live by good precepts; and for such
as are contrary minded, let them know, that that gold which dreads the
touchstone, is but counterfeit; that fellon who does refuse his trial, and
labors to suppress the evidence which is brought against him, does but
confess himself guilty.

53.
FIfthly, 5. Neither is reason as now it is clouded with the mists of original
nor ruption.
that reason, together with good intentions, is no certain rule for us to walk
by, is easily proved: for first, reason, as now it is clouded with the mists of
original corruption; is but a blind guide; for besides that faith is above
reason, there is no one reason but has another contrary unto it, says the
wisest of Philosophers. Solon being importuned, not to shed tears for the
death of his son, for that they were vain and bootelesse; answered, for that
very reason I may the more justly shed them, even because they are bootelesse
and vain. Socrates his wife exasperated her grief by this circumstance; good
Lord, quoth she, how unjustly do these bad Judges put men to death? what
replied Socrates, would thou rather they should deserve death? If my
inferior, of whom I have deserved well, should strike me a box on the ear;
one reason would step in, and bid me give him another, least he be thought the
better man; a second, would cross that, and say, set not your wit to his,
esteem it all one as if an Ass had kick't you; a third would reply, if you
put up this, your patience, like a pully, will draw on more such injuries; a
fourth, noe, the best remedy in a causeless injury is contempt, for this puts
ill will out of countenance, and blunts the point of an enemies malice; a
fifth, do, or you will be esteemed a coward; a sixth, do not, for it is
greater fortitude to overcome your own passions, then to vanquish a City; a
seventh, do, or it will be a discredit unto you; an eighth, noe, it is the
glory of a man to pass by an offense; a ninth, thou may do it by the rules
of justice; a tenth, but thou may not by the rules of charity; an eleventh,
do, or many will laugh at thee; a twelfth, do it not, and wise men will
commend thee; a thirteenth, do, for it was in the sight of many; a
foureteenth, do it not, for then you will be seen by ten times as many; a
fifteenth, then take the law of him; a sixteenth, do not, for such a remedy is
worse then the disease; a seventeenth, do, for thou have not deserved this
from him; an eighteenth, do not, for thou have deserved more from others,
especially from God, who, it may be, appointed him to do this; a nineteenth,
why then be angry with him for his ill condition; a twentyeth, no, rather
rejoice, because thou art of a better condition; a twenty one, but forgive him
not, because he is unworthy to be forgiven; a twenty two, yes do, for though
he is unworthy to be forgiven, yet Christ is worthy to be obeyed, who has
commanded thee to forgive him; a twenty three, at least let it grieve you, to
be so ill requited; a twenty four, no, let it not grieve you, for why
should you vex your self because he has vexed you? And so in many the like,
one reason crossing another; which shows, that Reason yields appearance to
diverse effects, it is a Pitcher with two ears, which a man may take hold
on, either by the right or left hand.

I deny not but Reason to Religion, is as the Apocripha, to the Bible: which if
good, may be bound up, and read with it; but must be rejected, when in crosses
the text Canonical, as in many cases it will. For although Reafon was so
clear in Adam before the fall, that he could see good from evil perfectly;
yet since it has caught a fall, as Mephibosheth did, and so halteth, that it
is not wholly to be relied upon; how be it, because it is of the blood Royal,
it is worthy to be made off; but not worthy to sit in the throne of judgment,
which belongs only to Christ our David, whose word is truth it self. But to
go on.

There is no man commits so foul a fact, though shallow brained in other
things, but he has plausible Reasons to make it good, as Absalom, for lying
with his fathers concubines, in the sight of all the people, having help from
Achitophel 2 Samuel 16. 21. and Haman, in procuring that bloody decree against
all the Jews; for he makes many glorious pretenses, Ester. 3. 8. 9.

Neither was ever any virtue performed so splendent and glorious, but there
has been R^ason brought to prove it faulty, at least, in appearance; witness
our Saviors casting out Devils, which the Scribes and Pharisees gave out, was
done through Beelzebub, Mat. 12. 24. yea, he was made, by them, the greatest
offender, that offended not once in all his life.

Secondly, 6 Neither are good and holy intentio^s enough.
neither will good and holy Intentions warrant what we do, unless they are
backed with a Precept. A good meaning, can no way justify an evillact; for
then any action, be it never so wicked, might be made good. The very Gunpowder
Traitors made conscience of their doings, meant well, and hoped it would make
much for Gods glory, and the Churches good, if their purpose had taken effect.
So Nadab and Abihu, when they offered strange fire, meant well, no question,
and had some good and holy intention in it; yet they were burnt with fire from
Heaven for their labor; because God had flatly forbidden it, Levit. 10. 1, 2.
As for Vzza, when the Ark of God was shaken in the Cart, there is no question
to be made, but he had a solid reason to yield, why he held it from falling,
and that his intent was good, none will question; yet because he did it without
warrant from the Word, the Lords wrath was kindled against him, and he was
smitten dead 1 Chro. 13. 19. 10. Peter's intents were very good, and I could
furnish him with reasons, for his persuading of Christ from his passion, yet
nevertheless he had this answer, get thee behind me Satan, Math. 16. 22.
23. never any man meant better then Gideon in his rich Ephod; yet this very act
set all Israel on whooring, Judge. 8. 24. to 28.

When the wit of man will be pleasing God with better devices then his own, it
turns to madness, and ends in mischief, as our Papists will one day find,
to whom superstition dictates, that it is pleasing to God, to Deifie the
Blessed Mother of our Lord, to help their devotions with a crucifix, Images,
etc. in great humility to make the favorites of Heaven, their mediators; and
those Judges, Jurors, and Arbitrators, who take it for a pious and charitable
work to esteem a poor man in his cause, when God has charged them
expressly, Thou shall not favor the person of the poor, nor honor the
person of the mighty, but thou shall judge thy neighbor justly, Levit, 19. 15.
Exodus 23. 3.

Yea, suppose we do that which God commands in substance; yet if we fail in
the intention and end, namely, in aiming at the glory of God, and the good of
our neighbor; if we do it for any private respects, and not in obedience to
the commandment; God rejects it and reckons it no better then sin and
iniquity; for many shall say unto Christ at the day of judgment, Lord, Lord
we have prophesied in thy name, and in thy name cast out Devils, (then which
no work can be greater) and in thy name done many wonderful works, yet
Christ shall answer them, I never knew you, depart from me ye that work
iniquity, Math. 7. 22. 23. Many years did Saul reign over Israel; yet God
computers him but two years a King, 1 Samuel 13. 1. That is not accounted of God
to be done, which is not well done, both in substance and circumstance.

And as in committing that which is forbidden, so in omitting that which is
commanded, it is no less dangerous, how good soever our meanings be. Saul in
a good intent showed mercy, in saving Agag the King of Amaleck; yet because he
did not therein obey the voice of the Lord, it was no better then Witchcraft,
for which he was rejected of God, and his Kingdom taken away, 1 Samuel 15. 23.
And how much better is the pardoning of a murderer; when the Lord has said,
who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, Genesis 9. 6. I
persuade my self, he who refused to smite the Prophet, and fetch blood of him
upon his own entreaty, thought he did wondrous well, if not merit, in
denying his request; but what was the issue? because thou have not obeyed the
voice of the Lord, says the Prophet to him, behold, as soon as thou art
departed from me, a Lion shall slay thee, and so it fell out, 1 Kings, 20. 35.
36. Not to smite a Prophet, when God commands, is no less sin, then to smite
a Prophet, when God forbids: when he commands, even very cruelty is obedience;
as Abraham's killing of his only Son, had been the most heroical and
religious act, that ever we read of. Why was Sacrifice it self good, but
because it was commanded? What difference was there between slaughter and
Sacrifice, but obedience? The violation of the least charge of a God, is
mortal: no pretenses can warrant the transgression of a divine command; which
made Nehemiah (and should have done that man of God also, 1 King. 13.) not
only distrust a Prophet, but reject his counsel with scorn, that persuaded
him to the violation of a law, Nehemiah, 6. 10. 11. 12. One prohibition is
enough for a good man; God as he is one, so does he perfectly agree with
himself; if any private spirit cross a written word, let him be accursed.

Wherefore have a better warrant for the practice, then either Reason, or good
intentions, or thou may go to Hell notwithstanding; for there is nothing
more dangerous, then to mint Gods services in our own brains.

54.
BUt thou will say; That only Law and precept must be our rule.
if neither custom of the greatest number, nor of the greatest men, nor of the
greatest Scholars, nor of the best men, though thou have Reason for thy doing
it, and good Intentions in the doing of it, is a sufficient warrant for thy
actions; but that all these be crooked and deceitful guides; then what may be
a safe guide, and a sure and infallible rule in all cases, to steer by, and
square the course of thy life?

Answ. As a rule directs the Artificer in his work, and keeps him from
erring: so does Gods word direct the Religious in their lives, and keep them
from erring.

The right way is the signified Will of God; and whatsoever swarves from, or is
repugnant to the right, is wrong and crooked: Law and Precept is a straight
line, to show us whether we do misbeleeve, or mislive: we have a most sure
Word of the Prophets and Apostles, says Peter, 2 Peter, 1. 19. a sure
foundation, says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 3. 11. Ephesians. 2. 20. and as many as walk
according to this rule, peace shall be upon them, and the Israel of God, Gal.
6. 16. search the Scriptures, says our Savior, for in them ye think to have
eternal life, and they are they which testify of me, John, 5. 39.

All Believers are tied to the Scriptures; as the Jews, are tied to their
Cabala; the Turks, to their Alcaron; Logicians to the Axioms of their
Aristotle; Physicians to the Aphorisms of their Hippocrates and Galen;
Geometricians to the compasses of Euclid; Rhetoricians, to the Precepts of
Tully; Lawyers, to the Maxims of their Justinian; and Grammarians, to the rules
of their Priscian; and it has ever been the care of Christians, to stick
close to the written Word, having always, and in all cases, an eye thereunto:
even as the Lodestone (what way soever the wind blows) turns always to the
North Pole; it is as a Load Star, to guide the ships of their souls and
bodies, in the right way to Heaven.

And without this written Word* a man in the world, is as a ship on the Sea
without a guide. The holy Scriptures are a store house of all good
instructions; it is the Christians Armory, wherein are many Sheilds, to defend
our selves; and many Swords, to offend our Enemies; yea, each precept, as a
Sword, will both defend and slay. It is like the Tower of David build for
defense, a thousand shields hang therein, and all the Targets of the strong
men, Cant. 4. 4. it is a clear glass, wherein we may see our beauty, and
deformity, yea, the least spots of evil, and be directed to wipe them out. It
is a light, says Theophilus, which discovers unto us all the slights and
snares of our spiritual adversaries; yea, nothing can deceive them (says he)
that read the Scriptures: Thy word, says David, is a lantern to my feet,
and a light unto my paths, Psalm. 119. 105. this Ariadnes clew of thread, guides
the believer through the worlds maze of temptations, unto the glorious liberty
of the Sons of God. It is an Apothecaries shop, says St. Basil, full of all
sovereign Medicines, wherein every man may have cure for his disease; and
there is no part, or passion of our Souls, says St. Chrysostom, but needs
physic and cure from the holy Scriptures. In fine, it is their counselor, it
is their wisdom, it is their strength, it is their food, it is their Physic,
it is their wealth, it is their joy, it is their life, it is their all in all;
if they have this, they want nothing; if they want this, they have nothing.

But see one of these particulars illustrated, (for I will not spin out each of
these Metaphors into a long continued Allegory) Suppose any little David, a
child of God, be set upon by the greatest spiritual Goliath that ever was,
namely, the World, or the Flesh, or the Devil himself; let him but chose out
of this brook, the Scripture, a few stones, precepts, threats, promises, keep
them in the Scrippe, of his memory, hurl them with the Arm of a strong faith,
from the string of his tongue, as occasion serves, at the combatant, with the
level of Christian prudence, even the stoutest of them shall be compelled to
leave the field and give up his weapons. As for example, if thou be tempted to
pride, answer; it is written, that God resists the proud, and gives grace to
the humble, James, 4. 6. That all proud persons are under the Devils regiment,
his subjects, and vassalls, Job. 41. 25. If to cruelty; that they shall have
judgment merciless, which show not mercy, James, 2. 13. If to contemn
reproof, or hate thy reprover; that he which hardens his neck when he is
reproved shall suddenly be destroyed, and cannot be cured, Pro, 29. 1. If to
swear; that ^athes ca^se the land to mourn, Hosea, 4. 2. 3. And that the
curse of God shall never depart from the house of the swearer, until it be
consumed, Zach. 5. 3. 4. If to covetousness; that the love of money causes
many to fall into diverse temptations, and snares, and many foolish and noisome
lusts which drown men in perdition and destruction, 1 Timothy 6. 9. 10. If to
Hypocrisy; that it is the sin, against which our Savior pronounced seven woes
in one Chapter, and adjudge to the lowest place in Hell, Math. 23. If to
despair, through the consideration of thy manifold sins and infirmities;
that Christ came not to call the righteous, but weary and heavy laden sinners
to repentance, Math. 9. 13. and 11. 28. that he who strives most, and not he
who sins least, shall be best accepted with God. If to lust; that the Law
ordain death for the Adulterer, Levit. 20. 10. and the Gospel excludes the
fornicator out of Heaven, 1 Cor 6. 9. 10. If to drunkenness, that Hell
enlarges it self for drunkards, and opens her mouth without measure, that
all they may descend into it, Isaiah. 5. 14.

And so in every other case which can be named, as well as in this of
temptation, have but recourse to the written Word, this, as an Oracle from
Heaven shall give thee plenary satisfaction, and by this means, viz. by
applying with our Savior, it is written, it is written, Math. 4. thou shall so
silence and overcome the spirit of untrueth, that though he solicit thee by
the World, or the Flesh, or by a Prophet, or an Angel from Heaven, he shall
not be strong enough to divert thee from the good thou intendest: yea, let fire
and faggot do their worst, as once in Queen Mary's time, yet nothing shall be
able to separate thee from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.
35. to 39.

And thus we see, the Word of God to the faithful is an Armory, out of which
they may furnish themselves with all kind of munition; a Magazine, out of which
they may be furnished with all manner of needful provision: whereas on the
contrary, he, which lives, without making this his rule; he, who sets not the
Dial or Clock of his life by this Sun; he who directs not his course in
walking by this North Pole, or loadstarre, but by the wavering, uncertain, and
moovable stars of custom, Example, Reason, or good intentions, sails, without
a compass, and may look every minute to be swallowed up in the Ocean of sin
and judgment.

God has made a promise to us, to keep us in all our ways, Psalm. 91. 11. but
not out of them: we are in our ways so long as we have a command, or warrant
out of the word for what we do: to be kept by God, is so to have him watch
over us by his fatherly providence and protection, that nothing shall befall
us, but what is good for us: and to have a continual guard of Angles, to
protect and keep us from every approaching evil, Psalm 91. 10, 11, 12. How
safe then and happy is the man, that is resolved to do nothing without God;
who commands all creatures, both in Heaven, Earth, and Hell, and they obey him?
the consideration of which made Luther so courageous, that (being persuaded by
his friends to absent himselse from the Diet at Worms) he made answer, though
all the tyles of the houses were so many Devils, yet would I go thither: he
knew he should have more, and mightier with him, then against him, being in his
way, that is, having a warrant out of the Word for what he went about. Neither
could he want examples to encourage him herein; we see David, being in his
way, it was not the Lion, nor the Bear, nor that great Goliath, nor Saul
himself, though he darts a spear twice at him, sends to seek him throughout
all the thousands of Judah, and lays so many plots to take away his life,
could do him any harm. Elisha, being in his way, rather then the Assyrians
mighty Host shall hurt him, the mountain shall be full of Horses and Chariots
of fire to reskew him, 2 King. 6. 17. neither shall Ahab, or Iesabel hurt
Eliah, though they threaten much, and do their worst, I Kin. 19. 2. Let Daniel
and the three children be in their way, do nothing either for through fear or
flattery, but what they have warrant for out of Gods Word; and then throw the
one into the Lions den, and the other into the fiery furnace, Gods providence
shall so keep them, that not a hair of their heads shall perish, Dan. 3. 27.
and 6. 22.

Let the same consideration prevail with us. Have we a warrant out of the
word? are we in the path of Gods protection? in the way wherein the Angels
guard and watch? Let us go on valiantly, and not fear what men or devils can
do unto us. When Joseph had a command from God, to go out of Egypt into the
Land of Israel, after Archelaus succeeded his father Herod, he was sore
afraid, and (as it seems) loath to go; yet considering that God had
commanded him, he disputes no longer with flesh and blood, but goes his way,
Mat. 2. 22. It is too much tenderness to respect the scoffs, and censures and
threats of others, when we have a direct word from God: the fearful sluggard
will cry, a Lion in the way, Pro. 26. 13. yea, but the Scriptures cry, an
Angel, yea, many Angels to stop the Lions mouth: the Lion is in those
by-ways, in which the Prophet walked, 1 Kin. 13. 24.

On the other side: if God take no charge of us, but when we are in our ways,
yea, in his, by having a warrant out of the Word; how are they in their ways,
who spend their whole time in drinking, swearing, whoring? etc. who persecute
the godly, for keeping close to this Word? If that be Gods way, where did he
chalk it out, where, or in what part of his Word have thou a warrant to do
these things, or to hate, persecute, revile, slander, reproach, contemn,
deride, or censure men for being holier and more temperate then thy selse? If
thou want his word, look not for his protection: and miserable is that man,
who in dangerous actions is left to his own keeping; it fares with him,
touching his spiritual adversaries, as with the Dear that leapes over the
Park pale, and straggles abroad, which a hundred to one does cost her her life:
or as it did with Shemei, when he past his bounds set him by the King, who
lost his life for his labor, 1 King. 2. 42. 43. 46. As for example, Pharaoh
and his Host were out of their way, when they pursued the children of Israel
going out of Egypt; but now sped they? the Sea divided to let the Israelites
pass, but fwallowed them up quick, Exodus 14. 28. Baalam, was out of his way,
when he rode to Balack, with an intent to curse Israel, when God had
forbidden him so to do; but the Angel of the Lord met him with a naked sword,
and had slain him, if the Ass had not turned away, Numb. 22. 33. Sampson was
out of his way, when he went in to the harlot Dalilah, or else God had not
departed from him, neither could the Philistims have bound him, Judge. 16 20.
21. Jonas was out of his way, when he was sailing to Tarshis, God having sent
him to Ninive; but how sped hee^ the winds and waves, storms and tempests
conspired together to cross him, and would not be pacified, until he was
cast into the Sea, Jonas 1. 12, 15. And thus Caine, when he went out into the
field to slay his brother Abel, Genesis 4. 8. to 15. Corah, Dathan, and Ahiram,
with those two hundred and fifty Captains, when they gathered themselves
together against Moses and Aaron, Number. 16. 32. Haman when he went out unto the
King, to procure that bloody decree against the Jews, Ester 3. 9. Absalom,
when he rose up against his Father to usurp the Kingdom, 2 Samuel 15. The 42.
children when they followed the Prophet, calling him bald-head, 2 Kin. 2. 23.
24. The seduced Prophet, when he went beyond his commission set him by God, 1
King. 13. The two Captains, and their fifties, when they went to apprehend
Eliah, 2 King 1. 10. 12. Judas when he went unto the high Priests to sell his
Master, and back with the Officers to betray him with a kiss, Mark 14. and
lastly, Paul before his conversion, when he went with authority from the high
Priests to persecute the Christians at Damascus, Acts 9. 1. 2. they were all
out of their way: but how did they speed? I need not tell you what fearful
revenges and sudden destruction they met vvithall in their journeys; only the
last was crossed with a blessing, and instead of judgment, received mercy;
though thou can no more presume to fare as he did, then I can presume to
live, and have the same strength forty years hence, that I have at this
present, because it happened to be so with Caleb, Joshua 14. 11.

55.
WHerefore look to it in time, Use and application of the for mer do^^ri^e.
and if thou meanest not to meet with destruction by the way, keep out of
the worlds road: you see this your reason is saplesse, and wants weight to
be received; yea, we may say of this common objection, as Ierom said of the
Pelagian Heresies, even a repetition of it, is a sufficient refutation of it;
neither needs it any other confutation, but derision and a mere hissing at. You
see that al who follovv example, whether of the greatest number, or the
greatest men, or the greatest Scholars, or the best men, or reason, or good
intentions, are miserably deluded; and that things ought to be judged by Law,
and not by examples; that Gods precepts, must be our only presidents; and that
this only evidences a good conscience, when the maine weight which sets the
wheels on work, it the conscience of Gods Commandment.

As for thy translating and laying the fault of thy drinking upon others, that
is but a mere pretense; it faring with thee, as it did with Harpaste a blind
woman in Seneca's family, who mindles of her own infirmity, complained that
the house was dark wherein she was; or as it did who another, spoken of by
the same Seneca; who having a thorn in his foot; imputed the cause of his
limping to the roughness of the way; for if thine own heart were not vile
and wicked, custom and evil example could no more sway thee, then it does
some other men, who shine as lights in the midst of this crooked generation;
yea, thou would therefore redeem the time, because the days are evil,
Ephesians. 5. 16.

Alas! no man that has grace in his heart, will make the badnes of the
times a cloak to excuse his conformity in drinking and vvasting of his precious
hovvres wickedly; but rather a spur to incite him, to be so much the more
careful not to be svvayed with the common stream.

Happy is that man, who makes another vices steps to climb to heaven by; and
so does every wise and good man. Even the mud of the world, by the industrious
Hollander, is turned to an useful fuel: and the Mariner that has Sea-roome,
can make any wind serve to set him forward in his wished voyage. And good
reason have they to make this use of the corruption of the times; for if the
air be generally infectious, had we not need be so much the more strict in
our diet and careful in the use of wholesome preservatives?

Generallity of assent is no warrant for any act: we that are Christians must
not live by profane examples, but by Gods holy precepts. Indeed, common errors
carry away many, who inquire not into the reason of ought, but the practice;
and judge of truth, not by weight, or value of voices, but by the number. But
what says the Proverb, of bad customs, bad opinions, and bad servants, They
are better to hang then to keep.

I confess, where the Law written does fail, we ought to observe what is
approved by manners and custom: but though, in this case, custom be of great
authority, yet it never brings prejudice to a manifest verity: and there are
other cases, wherein singularity is not lawful only, but laudable; when vice
grows into fashion, singularity is a virtue; when sanctity is counted
singularity, happy is he that goes alone, and resolves to be an Example to
others; and when either evil is to be done, or good to be neglected, how much
better is it to go the right way alone, then to err with company? Yea, most
happy is he that can stand upright, when the world declines, and can endeavor
to repair the common ruin with a constancy in goodness; that can resolve
with Ioshuah, what ever the world does, yet I, and my house will serve the
Lord, Josh. 24. 15.

It was Noah's happiness in the old world, that he followed not the worlds
fashions; he believed alone, when all the world contested against him; and he
was saved alone, when all the world perished without him. It was Lot's
happiness that he followed not the fashions of Sodom. It was Abraham's
happiness, that he did not like the Chaldeans. Daniel's happiness, that he
did not like the Babylonians. It was good for Job, that he was singular in the
land of Vzz: good for Tobias that he was singular in Ninive: good for Annanias,
that he was singular in Damasco: good for Nicho^emus, that he was singular
among the Rulers, as now they all find to their great comfort, and exceeding
great reward.

Yea, it was happy for Ruben, that he was opposite to all his brethren: happy
for Caleb and Joshua, that they were opposite to the rest of the spies: happy
for the Jews, that their customs were diverse and contrary to all other
people, though Haman was pleased to make it their great and heinous crime,
Ester. 3. 8. happy for Luther, that he was opposite to the rest of his country.

And no less happy shall we be, if, with the Dear, we can feed against the
wind of popular applause; if, with the Sturgion and Crab-fish, we can swim
against the stream of custom and example; if, with Atticus, we can cleave to
the right, though losing side; or if we do not, we shall miss of the narrow
way, and consequently fail of entering in at the strait Gate; for the greatest
part shuts out God upon earth, and is excluded from God elsewhere, Math. 7. 13,
14.

But the graciously prudent, will (in things not indifferent) rather do well
alone, then let it alone, and think it no disparagement to be singular among
the vicious: yea, they know, if the cause be good, the more stiff and constant
the mind is, so much the better. If Jesus Christ, and his twelve Apostles be of
their side; they care not, though Herod and Pontius Pilate, and all the Rulers,
and the whole nation of the Jews, together with a world of the Roman faction
be against them.

And indeed, if thou were not a fool, thou would think it better to be in
the small number of Christ's little flock, which are to be saved, then in the
numerous herds of those Goats, which are destinated to destruction. And so
your excuses are taken away, and all proved vain coverings, even no better
then Figleaves, which though they may seems to cover thy nakedness from such
as thy self, yet they will stand thee in no steed another day.

Wherefore drink not without thirst here, that you may not thirst without drink
herafter. Lu. 16. 24. 25. Play not the fool, as Lysimachus did, who being in
battle against the Scythians, for the satisfying of his appetite only, and to
procure a little drink to quench his thirst, gave himself over into his
enemies hands; and when he had drunk his fill, and was haled and leading away
captive into perpetual misery, while he saw his countrymen return home with
joy, began to acknowledge his folly, in these words, O, said he, for how little
pleasure, what great liberty, what sweet felicity have I lost and forgone? Yea,
turn your laughter into sorrow, your feasting into fasting; be revenged of
your selves, of your lusts, and meet your God, and make your peace while now
we call, and you hear; yea, the Lord of his mercy awaken men out of the dead
sleep of this sin, that so seeing their danger, they may be brought to
confess and forsake it, that so they may be saved, Pro. 28. 13.

56.
BUt what do I admonishing, That drunkards have no faith in the Scriptures.
or speaking sense to a drunkard? this is to make him turn the deaf ear; and
a stone is as capable of good counsel, as he: besides, they have no faith in
the Scriptures, they will not believe what is written, therefore they shall
feel what is written. Wherefore political physic the fi^est for them.
In the mean time it were very fit, if it pleased Authority, they were
debarred both of the blood of the Grape, and the spirit of Barley; a just
punishment, for consuming the countries fat: for even clear rock water were
good enough for such Gormundizers, except we had the water of Cl^torius, a Well
in the midst of Arcadia, which causes the drinker of it to loath wine for ever
after.

I do not wish them stoned to death, as God commanded such ryoters and
drunkards to be under the Law: Deuteronomy. 21. 20. 21. nor banished the land, as the
Romans did all vicious and voluptuous persons, that the rest might not be
endangered; and Lycurgus all inventers of new fashions (least these things
should effeminate all their young men) for then I think the land would be much
unpeopled.

Indeed, I could wish there were Pesthouses provided for them in all places, as
there are for infected persons; or that they were put by themselves in some
City, (if any were big enough to receive them all) as Philip King of Macedon
built a city of purpose, and peopled it with the most wicked, graceless, and
irregular persons of all his subjects; and having so done, called it
Poneropolis, that is, the City of wicked persons. And certainly, if it were
considered how many Brokers of villainy, which live only upon the spoils of
young hopes, every populous place affords, whose very acquaintance is
destruction, the like means of prevention would be thought profitable for our
times.

Yea, this were marvelously expedient, considering the little good they do
(being as so many loose teeth, in the Mandible of the Commonwealth, which were
better out, then in) and the great hurt by their ill examples, by devouring the
good creatures of God, which they never sweat for, by disturbing the peace of
the Church and Commonwealth, by pulling down heavy judgments upon the land;
and considering how small hope there is of their amendment, if any at all.

57.
IT may be you have not noted it; but it is a very difficult and hard thing, No
dispossessing of a drunken Devil, purpose the drunkard never so often.
to name one habituated, infatuated, incorrigible, cauterised Drunkard, that
ever was reclamed with age. What said an experienced Gentleman, being informed
that his Son was given to gaming, whores, prodigality, etc? There is yet
hope; age, experience, and want of means will cure all these; but when, in the
last place, it was added, that he was poisoned with drunkenness; then he
absolutely* gave him for lost and dead, his case for desperately forlorn, and
so disinherited him; because this sin, he knew, increased with age, and
would not part till death.

A Gamester will hold out, so long as his purse lasts: an Adulterer, so long as
his loins last; but a drunkard, so long as his lungs and life lasts. What is
noted by Philosophers of every motion, namely, that it is swiftest toward the
Center; may fitly be applied to every drunkard, and covetous wretch; for as
good men grow better and better, so these grow worse and worse, Ier. 9. 3. 2
T^m. 3. 13. they grow in sin, as worldlings grow in riches and honors. O
that we could grow so fast in grace.

Yea, suppose the drunkard has every day purposes to forsake his sin; as I
have known some purpose and strive against this sin, yea so detest and
bewail it in himself, and whomsoever, that it has been an Hazael in his
eyes, and thereupon indent with himself and his friends, for the relinquishing
of it; and yet if he meet with a companion that holds but up his finger, he
follows him, as a fool to the stocks, and as an Ox to the slaughterhouse,
having no power to withstand the temptation, but in he goes with him to the
tippling house, and there he continues as one bewitched or conjured with a
spell, out of which he returns not, till he has emptied his purse of money,
his head of reason, and his heart of al his former seeming grace: so that in
purposing he does but imitate S. George, who is always on horseback, but never
rides; or the Ostrich, that has wings, but cannot fly: he may make a show of
turning, as the door upon the hinges, but never moves a foot from the post of
his olds custom and evil society, unto which he is fast revited; and so mends
as sower Ale does in Summer; or like a dead hedge, which the longer it stands,
is the rottener.

O this is a difficult devil to be cast out; for when a man is once possessed
with this evil spirit, a drunken devil, it is a miracle if ever he become
his own man after. This sin is like a desperate plague, that knows no cure;
it may be called the Kings evil of the soul, (as Chrysostom calls the envy
of wicked men against the godly) for it cannot be cured with the Balm of
Gilead, nor by any Physician there, until God himself says to the heart,
awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead: for by a long, and
desperate custom, they turn delight and infirmity into necessity, and bring
upon themselves such an insatiable thirst, that they will as willingly leave to
live, as leave their excessive drinking. As it fares with some sick Patients,
touching their bodies; who think as good be buried, as so much debarred of
their appetites: so fares it with these, touching their souls; for use what
means you will to reclame them, they will reject it.

What says S. Basil, shall we speak to drunkards, we had as good round a
dead man in the ear? yea, certainly, says another, he is drunk himself, that
prophanes reason so, as to urge it to a drunken man; in regard whereof, S.
Augustine compares drunkenness to the pit of hell, into which when a man is
once fallen, there is no redemption. Whoring is a deep ditch, yet some few
shall a man see return to lay hold on the ways of life; one of a thousand;
but scarce one drunkard of ten thousand.

Indeed, S. Ambrose mentions one; and another, by a modern Divine of ours, is
confessed; and but one a piece, of all that ever they knew, or heard of. I speak
of drunkards, not of one drunken (such who rarely, and casually have, Noah
like, been surprised, and overtaken at unawares) but if once a custom, ever a
necessity. Drunkenness beastiates the heart, and spoils the brain,
overthrowes the faculties and organs of repentance, and resolution.

It is a sin of that nature, that it hardens and makes up the heart against
all repentings. Yea the Holy Ghost, by the Prophet Hosea tells us, that it
takes away the heart, Hosea 4. 11. And we find it too true, for commonly it is
accompanied with final impenitence, which is the greatest evil that is
incident to man in this life, in that it is a certain forerunner of eternal
condemnation: yea, it is much to be feared, Commoly such as a man's delights
and c^res are in health, such are both his thoughts and speeches on his
deathbed.
that the Lord has done by them, as by Jeremiah he threatens the
Babylonians, even given them over to a perpetual drunkenness, Ier. 51. 39.

And is it not most just with God; that he who will put out his natural
light, should have his spiritual extinguished? he that will deprive himself
of reason, should loose also the guide and pylot of reason, Gods Spirit and
Grace? he that will wittingly, and willingly, make himself an habitation of
unclean spirits, should not dispossess them at his own pleasure? that their
deaths should be answerable to their lives? as commonly such as a man's
delights and cares are in health, such are both his thoughts and speeches on
his deathbed. Some that have been used to swearing, have dyed with oaths and
curses in their mouths. Some persecutors have dyed raging, blaspheming, and
despiting the Spirit of grace. Some Usurers have died, while in their conceit,
they were telling their money, and casting it up after ten in the hundred. Yea,
one being used to play at Tables all his life, with great delight, cried out
upon his deathbed, size-ace, cater-trey. etc.

I deny not, but God may raise a Lazarus of this kind, though he be dead in
excess, dead in sense; yea though he be buried, and stinkes again; through
long custom in filthiness, and breath into his nosthrils again the breath of
life, whereby he may become a living soul; but rarely is it seen that he does
so.

58.
NEither speak I of what God can do, for with him all things are possible; Were
there any possibility of their leaving it, they would abstain in the heat of
the plague.
but with men, with drunkards, it is in a manner impossible: for surely if
there were the least possibility of their leaving it, if they were not
altogether hardened, past feeling, and past grace, then would they now
abstain, whilst the plague is hot amongst us. But alas! even at this
present, when many lawful and indifferent actions are unexpedient, these
warped, wicked, wretched men, neither fear, nor cease to roar, drink, drab,
swear, etc. so difficult is the work: like Iairus Minstrels, they cannot
forbear to play and revell, even in the time, and place of mourning;
Dives-like, they must have exquisite music, merry company, dainty fare, etc.
every day; so little are they moved with Gods displeasure, and this grievous
judgment.

Yea, notwithstanding it is for their sakes that judgments are upon us, and
that their crying sins have pierced the heavens, and brought down the Plague
upon thousands, as when Achan sinned, Israel was beaten; neither did the
wickedness of Peor stretch so far as the Plague; yea, the Adultery of those
few Gibeo^ites to the Levites wife, was the occasion of six and twenty thousand
men's deaths, besides all their wives and children, together with forty thousand
and odd of the Israelites, Judge. 20. when the death of those few malefactors
would have saved all theirs, and put away evil from Israel, verse. 13. yea, if
the Camp of Israel suffered so much for one Achan's fault; what may we
expect, that have such a multitude of Achans amongst us?

Notwithstanding, I say it is for their sakes that judgments are upon us; yet
they, of al men are least sensible of them; as it fared with Jonas, who for all
that grievous tempest was for his sake, yet Jonas alone was fast asleep; and
the Disciples, in another case; as wherefore was that unspeakable agony of
Christ, but for the sins of his Disciples, and chosen? and yet even then the
Disciples were asleep.

But why do I make the comparison, when between them there is no comparison?
for the fire of Gods wrath being kindled amongst us for their sakes, they do
but warm themselves at the flame, sining so much the more freely and merrily,
even drinking in iniquity, as the fish drinks in water; and living, as if
they were neither beholding to God, nor afraid of him, both out of his debt
and danger: yea: as if the Plague were not only welcome unto them, but they
would fall to courting of their own destruction, as if, with Calanus, they
hated to dye a natural death.

The pleasure of the world is like that Colchian honey, whereof Zenophon's
Soldiers no sooner tasted, then they were miserably distempered; those that
took little, were drunk; those that took more, were mad; those that took
most, were dead: so most men are either intoxicated, or infatuated, or killed
out right with this deceitful world, that they are not sensible of their
fears or dangers. It is like a kind of melancholy, called Chorus Sancti Viti,
which who so has it, can do nothing but laugh and dance, until they be dead,
or cured; as it made Argos in the Poet, and another, mentioned by Aristotle,
sit all day laughing and clapping their hands, as if they had been upon a
stage at a Theater.

Wickedness makes guilty men fear, where is no cause; these have cause
enough, but no grace to fear: they are so besotted with a stupid security,
that they are not affected with any danger; yea, they account it the chiefest
virtue, to be bold, fearelesse, and careless; according to that, Ier. 5. where
the Prophet complains unto God, thou have smitten them, but they have not
sorrowed; thou have consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction;
they have made their faces harder then a stone, and have refused to return,
verse, 3. which was Pharaoh's case, who though his back were all blew and sore
with stripes, yet he must still persist and presume; yea, because his time was
not come to perish, God lets him alone in pursuing his children, even to the
Sea, and half way over; fair way he had, and smoothly he ran on, till he came
to the midst, not so much as one wave to wet the foot of his Horse; but when
he is too far to escape, then God begins to strike, neither he could, nor
these can be quiet, without their full vengeance; as filching leaves not the
Pilferer with raw sides, but brings him to a broaken neck; they have such
festred and putrified hearts, that ordinary stripes will not reach to the
quick; their long tugging at Satan's Oars, and wearing his Shackels, has so
brawned their flesh, that they are not sensible of an ordinary lash. And this
likewise is the Sailors case, who although the Philosopher would not permit
them to be numbered amongst the living, (as not amongst the dead) yet for all
their many and eminent dangers, no men are more regardlesse of their souls.

59.
Custom of success makes men confident in their sins, Were they not ^eere
strangers to themselves, they could be no other then confounded in themselves.
and causes them to mistake an arbitrary tenure for a perpetuity.

But as the Heathen Menander could say in the like case, if they were not mere
strangers to themselves, they could be no other then confounded in themselves;
their case being like that of Damocles, whom Dionysius caused to sit in his
chair of State, abounding with all kind of delicates; when over his head hung
a naked sword, held up only by a small hair: yea, far worse, for while they
are dancing, the trap-dore falls under them, and they in Hell before they are
aware, their hope makes them jocund, till the ladder turns; and then it is too
late to care or crave.

Security is the certain usher of Destruction; neither is destruction ever
nearer, Security the certain usher of destruction.
then when security has chased away fear, 1 These. 5. 3. as the Philistines
were nearest their destruction, when they were in their greatest height of
jollity, Judge. 16. 25. to 31. Little do sinners know how near their jollity
is to perdition; how nere was Nabal to a mischief, and perceived it not? David
was coming at the foot of the hill to cut his throat, while he was feasting
in his house without fear or wit, and drinking drunk with his sheepeshearers.
Many a time judgment is at the threshold, whilst drunkenness and surfeit are
at the board.

Yea, this hardness of heart and impenitency, is always the harbinger to some
fearful plague, Isay, 6. 10. 11. When God will give over men to his
judgments, he first gives them over to this judgment, of an hard and
impenitent heart: and what does impenitency, but turn all deliverances into
further curses and judgments? so that such a man's deliverance is a worse
judgment, then the judgment from which he is delivered; for it argues, either
Gods utter forsaking of them, as desperate Patients are given over by the
Physician; why should ye be smitten any more, for ye fall away more and more,
says God to the stiffenecked Jews, Isaiah, 1. 5. or else it argues a
reservation of them for some more fearful plague; if by these former
judgments ye will not be reformed by me, (says God) but walk stubbornely
against me; then I will walk stubbornely against you, and smite you yet seven
times more for your sins: Lev. 26. 18. to 40. So that an impenitent man's
preservation out of one judgment, is but a further reservation of him to seven
judgments. What did it avail Cham, that he escaped drowning with the
multitude? he had better have perished in the waters, then have lived unto his
Fathers curse? What did it avail Lot's wife, to escape turning into ashes in
Sodom, when suddenly after she was turned into a pillar of salt in the plain?
Or what did it avail Pharaoh, that himself was not smitten with many of those
judgments, wherein others perished? it was far from being a mercy; yea, it
was a reservation to the greatest temporal judgment of all here, and to that
eternal judgment also in the burning lake, from which there is no redemption.
So that it is not simply our deliverance, but our thankfulness for it, and
obedience after it, that gives sufficient argument to our consciences, that God
delivered us in mercy and favor.

Yea, to prosper in ill designs and ungracious courses, to go on in sin
uncontrolled, is the greatest unhappiness, the heaviest curse: for he that
uses to do evil, and speeds well, never rests, till he come to that evil
from which there is no redemption. Ioab kills Abner, and scapes; again he
embrues his hands in the blood of Amasa, and is not indicted for it; now David
is old, and Adoniah towardly, he furthers him in the usurpation, and big with
prefidence of his own command, he thinks to carry it; but this carried him to
his grave. Fair Absalom was proud and ambitious, yet he flourishes; he kills
his own Brother, yet escapes; he insinuates himself into the affections of
the people, and bold of their fidelity to him, he swells even against his own
royal Father, and becomes a disloyal Traitor. God owes that man a grievous
payment, whom he suffers to run on so long unquestioned; and his punishment
shall be the greater, when he comes to reckon with him for all his faults
together. Yea, though prosperous wickedness is one of the Devils strongest
chains, yet the current passage of ill enterprises is so far from giving
cause of encouragement, that it should justly fright a man, to look back to
the Author, and to consider, that he therefore goes fast, because the Devil
drives him.

60.
THere be three things which usually succeed one another in the Church; The
Plague has wrought (...) or n^ reformation.
great blessings, great sins, great punishments; yea, a fourth was wont to
follow in former ages, namely, great sorrow of heart, great lamentation and
woe, and upon the neck of that, great favor and mercy. As in the book of
Judges, and elsewhere, what a continued circle do we find, of Peace, Sins,
Judgments, Repentance, Deliverances: the conversation of Gods people with the
wicked, tainted them with sin, their sins drew on judgments, the smart of
the judgment moved them to repentance, upon their repentance followed speedy
deliverance, and upon their peace and deliverance they sinned again; thus it
was ever, and in every age of the world, but in this her decrepit and doting
age, in which Religion is become contemptible, and wherein it is a shame to be
strict and holy, in the service of God. But now let God send never so many and
great Judgments, one upon the neck of another, as Sword, Famine, Pestilence,
yea, one pestilence after another; yet no repentance, no reformation. Witness
these two years sickness together, and the year 1625. for of so many
millions of notorious sinners as were in this land; how many, or where are any,
who from thence hitherto have left off their drinking, swearing, whoreing,
profaning of the Lord's day, cheating, etc. can you name ten, yea or two of
a thousand, which you partly know? No certainly, for he that was a drunkard
before, is a drunkard still; he that was a swearer before, is a swearer still;
he that was filthy before, is filthy still, etc. though such a Judgment in a
different age, would have caused an universal repentance and reformation, as
the like (only threatened, not executed) did in the Ninivites. Jonas 3.

But what do I speak of their repentance and reformation; Yea, many are the
wor^e.
when they will scoff at, jeere and persecute any, that shall but refuse to run
with them to the same excess of riot? What do I speak of their being the
better, when they are much the worse for this judgment? for they are not only
the same they were, drunk every day, and scoff^ at those who will not; nor only
swear and blaspheme, as frequently as speak; nor only whore, quarrel, and
the like (when thousands dye in a week, as formerly they have done) but much
more abundant, if they have where withal; for, as some have noted, the
Tavernes and Ale-shops (of which too many are the Thrones of Satan) were never
so thwackt, as in those times, when the streets were almost empty, especially
those houses which had newly, or lately been visited; and which was worth the
observing, each house, if not each company, had music aurium tenus up to the
ears; so the Fiddlers fasted not; what ever the poor did: yea, many poor
snakes, that at other times never drank better than Whey, could now swim in
Wine.

I have my self seen, The Tavernes fnilest, when ^e (...) are emptiest.
when the Bills were at the highest, even Bearers, who had little respite from
carrying dead Corpses to their graves, and many other of the like rank, go
reeling in the streets. Neither were men ever so impudent and audacious in
roaring and declaring their sins in the open streets, as then. Thus they
declared their sins as Sodom.

Neither has this lingering visitation either found or made them better, it is
no rare thing to see men, newly recovered of the Plague (at least when the
sword of the destroying Angel has newly swept away the greatest part of their
families, and they have but newly taken breath from those noisome rooms where
they have been a long time pent up, grow more vicious and insolent, more
abominably licentious and wicked then they were before, so little are they
moved with this grievous judgment.

61.
BUt see the difference between Gods people, The difference between their
practice and the god^es.
and those sons of Belial. He which truly fears God, will in such times of
calamity ( Vriah-like) refrain from many lawful and allowed recreations, well
knowing, that actions of an indifferent nature are not always seasonable; not
ever warrantable; and indeed, neither the time, nor place of mourning is for
mirth; which made our Savior Christ soon turn the Minstrels out of doors,
when the Rulers daughter was dead, Mat. 9. 23 Yea, it is the Lords complaint
against Jerusalem, when he threatened her destruction by Nebuchadnezzar, I
called to weeping, and mourning, and to baldness, and girding with sackcloth;
but behold joy and gladness, slaying Oxen, and killing Sheep, eating flesh,
and drinking wine, Isaiah 22. 12, 13. for which he was so offended, that he
tells them, this their iniquity should not be purged till death, verse. 14.

And does not our Savior seem to blame the old World, for that they did, as
freely as at other times, eat, and drink, marry and give in marriage, while
the Ark was in building, even unto the day that the flood came, and took them
all away, Mat. 24. 38. every of which actions, at another time, had been
approved.

Alas! lawful actions depraved by bad circumstances, become damnable sins;
and things benificiall in their use, are dangerous in their abuse or
miscariage. Is this a time, (says the Prophet to his servant) to receive
money, and garments, and vineyards, 2 King. 5. 26? so the truly humbled soul
will say, is this a time to drink and revell in? can God be pleased that in
this time of visitation, while the Plague or famine lies sore upon our
neighbors, we should give our selves to sport and jovisance? No, and
certainly they have desperate souls, that can rejoice and be merry when the
God of heaven and earth shows himself so angry. For as nothing magnified the
religious zeal of Vriah more than this, that he abandoned even allowed
comforts, till he saw the Arc and Israel victorious: so nothing did aggravate
David's sin so much, as that he could find time to loose the raynes to want
on desires and actions, even while the Arc and Israel were in distress. And
yet David's case was no more like these men's, then Zimrie's case was like
David's; for they drink, and roar, and swear, and whore, as it were in a
presumptious bravery, to intimate, that they regard not Gods wrath, nor weigh
his heavy displeasure. Now though the harlot does bad enough, which wipes her
lips, that the print of her sin may not be seen, and though she commit it,
she will conceal it: yet an Absalom does far worse, that spreads his
incestuous Pallet on the roof, and calls the Sun, a blushing witness, to
his filthiness. Yea, let any man judge, whether they are not frontlesse
Zimries, that dare bring whores to their Tents in the face of all Israel* while
God is offended, Moses and all Israel grieved, the Princes hanged, the people
plagued, that dares brave God and all the people in that sin, which they see
so grievously punished before their eyes; this at any time were abominable, but
now most execrable. Yea, what other is this, then to imitate the Thracians,
who, when it lightens and thunders, shoot Arrows against heaven, thinking by
that means, to draw God to some reason.

And yet no marvel that there should be such; when Lots daughters were so
little moved with that grievous judgment, the turning of Sodom into ashes, of
their Mother into a pillar of Salt, both in their eye, that they durst think of
lying with their own Father, yea, and one of them afterward impudently^ calls
that son Moab, my Fathers son by me: no marvel, when Pharaoh's heart was
more hard after every of the 9. plagues: no marvel, when the high Priests and
Soldiers, together with the spectators, were obdurated at our Saviors
sufferings, notwithstanding the whole frame of nature suffered with him; those
proofs of his Deity, were enough, to have fetched all the world upon their
knees; and to have made all mankind a convert; and yet behold, some, mock and
revile him; some, give him Vinegar, and Gall in his thirst; others, after he
was dead, pierce his blessed side with a spear other, seeing him risen, report
that his Disciples came by night and stole him out of the Sepulcher, etc. But
al hearts are not alike, no means can work upon the wilfully obdured, even
that which would make Pagans relent (as they which never prayed in their lives,
will pray at sea in a tempest) may leave some Christians worse then impenitent.
Lime is kindled with water; and the hotter the Sun shines upon fire, the more
it is heat abateth.

But what will be the issue, I even tremble to think of it; for God has many
strings to his Bow, and many Arrows in his Quiver; when one way takes not, he
tries forthwith another: and this we may be sure of, that he will never leave
smiting, till we smite that which smites at his honor; and let them praise at
night the fairenes of the day; that Ship is most sure that comes safe to the
Haven, says Anacharsis; yea, sins of an inferior rank, shall meet with
temporal judgments; but these that dare sin God in the face, shall bear a
heavier weight of his vengeance, they shall not escape with burning in the hand,
not have the favor to suffer here either Plague, Famine, Sword or the like;
but shall be fatted for an eternal slaughter in hell, an everlasting burning
in the bottomless pit. While sin hides it self in corners, there is some hope;
if there be shame, there is possibility of grace; but when it dares once look
upon the Sun, send chalenges to authority, defy heaven and earth, the ulcer
is desperate, the member far more fit to be cut off, then launced. And so
much of the perpetuity of this sin in drunkards.

62.
NOw a word of exhortation to the sober, touching this time of visitation,
Exhortation to the sober, touching this time of visitation.
that God may be pacified, and we delivered.

First, let us be sure that our delights exclude not his presence.

2 Because the coals of his wrath will not be quenched, without the tears of
true repentance; let us weep with them that weep, others afflictions must
move our affections, as Q. Elizabeth to the afflicted States, Haud ignaramali,
miseris succurrere disco. Yea, weep for them that will not weep.

If any, whose crying sins have pierced the Heavens, and brought down the
plague, will not cry for themselves; God requires that we should cry for them,
we must mourn for them that will not mourn for themselves, Ezekiel. 9. As
indeed, In all ages the godly alone have mourned for the abominations of their
time.
who were they in all ages that mourned for the abominations of the times? Not
they that committed the abominations, as we read, Ezekiel. 9. 4. Alas! their
cheeks were dimpled with laughter. And in the old world, who, but righteous
Noah was grieved for the sins of that age, and the judgment which followed?
And in Sodom, who, but faithful Abraham and just Lot was vexed with the
uncleanly conversation of the Sodomites, and prayed to God for them? And the
like in other ages; as what says holy David, Mine eyes gush out with rivers of
water, because they keep not thy law, Psalm. 119. 136. and again, verse 158. I
saw the transgressors and was grieved, because they keep not thy Word. And
Jeremy, Lam. 3. 48. mine eye, says he, casts out rivers of water, for the
destruction of the daughter of my people, when they were not once touched for
their own sins.

Yea, as for the wicked; when God is angry, and their brethren are in
distress, they are no more troubled then Ioseph's brethren were, when they had
thrown him into the pit, who sat down to eat, with no more compunction then
Esa^, having sold his birthright, fell to his pottage; but far be this from
us. It Is true, the only means to prevent a judgment, is for the wicked to
repent, for the Godly to pray: yet since there is great need of mourning,
need of great mourning, for heavy judgments will not be turned away without
deep sorrows; and considering we have but a few to share with us in the
work, let us double our knockes at the gate of Heaven: the greater the number
of these mad men, and the greater their mirth; the greater had need to be the
company of mourners; or the mourning of that company: it is the mourning of the
penitent, that maintains the mirth of the delinquent: it is the ten righteous
men, that keeps fire and brimstone from these abominable Sodomites. Yea, let
them pray, that could never pray in their lives: as Athis Son to King Cr^sus,
bring dumb from his nativity; seeing his Father ready to be slain, by one of
King Cyrus his soldiers, suddenly brake forth into words of entreaty, and by
his passionate speeches saved his Fathers life.

And this done, we shall at least deliver our selves, that is, So many a^
repent shall be singled out for mercy.
the plague shall not touch us, nor our families; of if it do, it shall be so
sanctified, that it shall rather pleasure, then hurt us.

First, it is probable it shall not touch us; as when Sodom was destroyed, Lot
and his family were singled out, the Angel could do nothing, till he was safe.
Genesis 19. And when the Lord smote all the first borne throughout the land of
Egypt; he spared all the children of Israel, whose doreposts were sprinkled
with the blood of the Passover, Exodus 12. 22. And when all Jerusalem, both
old and young were utterly destoyed; all the mourners were marked on their
foreheads, to the end, the destroying Angel should pass by, and not touch
them, Eze. 9. 4. 5. 6. The like whereof we have, Revel. 7. where the Angel
uses these words, hurt ye not the earth, neither the Sea, neither the Trees,
till we have sealed the servants of God in their foreheads, ver. 3.

Or if the corn be cut down with the weeds, it shall be to a better purpose;
for the one shall be carried into God's Barn, as Lazarus was; the other cast
into the fire, like Dives; one Hypocrite was saved with the godly, for Noah's
sake, not one righteous person was swept away with the rest for company. The
world may be compared to some great Farm, wherein each Nation, is a several
field; the inhabitants, so many plants; God, the owner; whose manner is if he
meet with a very good field, he pulls up the weeds, and lets the corn grow;
if with an indifferent, he lets the corn and weeds grow together; if very ill,
he gathers the few ears of corn, and burns the weeds, but never destroys
both.

Indeed, that every Mother's son of us have not perished by the Pestilence,
as the old world did by the Deluge; it is not because we are less wicked, but
because God has been more merciful. And so much of the perpetuity of this
sin: only, let it teach and encourage us to hold out and persevere in good;
for if they be obdurate in vice, it is a shame if we be not constant in virtue.

63.
NOw if you will know the reason, 7 (...) of excessive drinking.
why their Heaven is the Tavern, whence they never depart, until thy have
cast up the reckoning; why, like Horses, they are only guided by the mouth; in
short it is mostly, that they may drive away time and Melancholy.

First, 1 To drive away me^ancholy which is increased thereby
the pot is no sooner from their lips, but they are mela^choly, and their heart
so heavy* as if a millstone lay upon it; somewhat resembling the fly Pyrausta,
which dies, if out of the fire. I call it melancholy, because they call it so;
but the truth is, they are vexed, like Saul, with an evil spirit, which
nothing will drive away, but drink and Tobacco, which is to them, as David's
Harp was to him, I Sam. 16. 23. They so wound their consciences with oaths,
intentionall murders, rapes, and other actual uncleanesse, and so exceedingly
provoke God, that they are, even in this life, rewarded with the strappadoes of
an humane soul, rackt in conscience, and tortured with the very flashes of
Hell fire; which makes them, many times, lay violent hands upon themselves,
being never well, nor in their own place, till they be in Hell, Acts, 1. 25.
though mostly they bribe conscience to hold the peace; as Cerberus must be made
with a sop, by him that goes to Hell.

You know Caine having murdered his brother Abel, to put away the sting of his
conscience, fell to building. And Ahab having killed Naboth, went to recreate
himself in his Vineyard, Genesis 4. 17. I King. 21. 16. 19. And Saul, when God
had cast him off, would have pleased himself with the honor of the people, 1 Samuel 15. 30. so these, when the horror of their oaths, blasphemies, thefts,
whoredoms, and other prodigious uncleanness, has caused a dejection of
spirit, and the worm of conscience to sting them, how should they remedy it?

How! why (as if Satan alone could expel Satan) straight to the Tavern, and
drink sorrow and care away; or perhaps there is a Factor of Hell present, that
cheares him up, as Iesabel did Ahab when he was sick for want of Naboth's
Vineyard, 1 King. 21. 7. crying, come, you are melancholy, let us both to the
Tavern and Brothel-house: and so cures all his sadness, for that time, with a
charm, wherein nevertheless the principal ingredient is drink, the common
refuge of melancholy sinners, their constant, and never failing friend, to
which also they are as constant: for when did the Sun ever see some men
sober? and how are our Cities and Towns pestered, and our streets strewed with
these filthes? and this is the maine ground of all. For as they that have cursed
and shrewish wives at home, love to stray abroad: so these men being molested
with a scoulding conscience, are feign continually to drink, play, riot, go
to bed with their heads full of wine, and no sooner awake then to it again; so
that their consciences must knock at the door a thousand times, and they are
never within, or at leisure to be spoke withal: indeed at last they must be
met, and found by this enemy, even as Ahab was by Eliah; stay they never so
long, and stray they never so far, they must home at last; sickness will
waken them, conscience must speak with them, as a Master with his truant
Scholar, after a long absence; and then there are no men under Heaven, who
more need that prayer, Lord have mercy upon them; for a wicked man's peace will
not always last, in the end his guilt will gnaw him, with so much a sharper
tooth; yea, they are not more jocund in prosperity, then in disasters they are
amazed.

Whereas they should eat, and drink, and do all things to the glory of God;
they drink, to this end only, that they may the easier forget God, forget him
in his threats, which stick in their souls after some Sermon; forget him in
his judgments, which have taken hold of some of their companions; they drink,
to the end they may drown conscience, and put off all thoughts of death, and
Hell, and to hearten and harden themselves against all the messages of God, and
threats of the Law; as that frantic Musition fell to tuning his Violl, when
his house was on fire about his ears. For most men take no notice at all of
the strokes of Gods wrath, but with the mirth and madness of wine and
pleasures, take away the knowledge of it, and the noise of conscience when it
cries; as the Sacrificers in the valley of Hinnon, by the noise of Instruments,
took away the cries of their sacrificed children: and so much the rather, that
others may not take notice thereof; for though their consciences be often in
pain, yet they will not complain that this shoe wrings them.

Their consciences would feign speak with them, but they will by no means
hear them; whereas if they had wit, and were not past grace, they would both
invite, and welcome this Angel, or messinger of the Lord, so soon as the
waters be troubled, with sackcloth, ashes, fasting, going into the house of
mourning, and pouring forth whole Buckets of water, as is the manner of Gods
people, 1 Samuel 7. 6. But many a time is poor Christ (offering to be newborn
in thee) thrust into the Stable; while lewd companions, by their drinking,
plays, and jests, take up all the best rooms in the Inn of thine heart.

Indeed, blind worldlings and besotted sinners, may call it melancholy, or what
they will; but in Gods Dictionary (the holy Scriptures) it has no such name.
And they may think to drive it away with carnal delights, but this will not
do it: yea, let ten Consorts of music be added, it shall not drown the
clamorous cries of conscience. These are but miserable comforters, and
Physicians of no value, and no way a fit expiation for a grief of this nature;
neither can the world afford an expurgation of this melancholy.

Alas! this is but like some spritly music, which though it advances a
man's mind while it sounds; yet leaves him more melancholy, when it is done, as
Euripides observes. Yea, I Will appeal from your selves in drink, to your
selves in your sober fits, whether it fares not with you, as it did with
Menippus, who went down into Hell to seek content: for what is this other (in
mitigating the pangs of conscience) then as a saddle of gold, to a gal'd Horse;
or a draught of poison, to quench a man's thirst.

Alas! Lot being expuls't Sodom, drank somewhat freely to drive away
melancholy (as we may conjecture) but what came of it? the wine made him commit
incest, whereby he became ten times more melancholy, then he was before. And
surely, they which strive to cure their present misery, with present mirth;
have not their misery taken away, but changed, and of temporal, made eternal;
thou have taken thy pleasure, says Abraham to Dives, therefore art thou now
tormented, Luke 16. 25. I love no such change; I love not to cure one evil by
another, yea, by a worse mischief: as Empiricks in curing one disease, cause
another which is worse. And let them look to it, for surely if men call for
pleasure, to please the conscience, as the Philistines did for Sampson to make
them sport, it will but pull down the house upon their heads. No sooner were
the bellies of Adoniah's guests full of meat, and their heads full of wine; but
their ears were full of clangor, their hearts of horror, the Trumpets at once
proclaim Salomon's Triumph, and their confusion: the feasts of the wicked end
in terror, as it fared with Belshazzar, Daniel chap. 5. v. 1. to 7. after the
meal is done, ever comes the reckoning. Wherefore let my spirit never come and
enter into their Paradise, yea ever abhor to partake of their brutish
pleasures, lest I partake of their endless woes. And indeed who would buy
repentance and misery so dear? as Demosthenes answered Lais the harlot, when
she asked him ten thousand Drachmes of money, for her company but one night;
who would pay so dear for so short a lease? as the Country man replied, seeing
the great preparation, labor, cost, and study for a great triumph, when they
told him it was to last but an hour: for could they have Nectar and Ambrosia
to swallow, yea, could they drink, with Cl^opatra, the riches of Egypt at a
draught, and that upon free cost, (which as Diogines conceived, did add
sweetness to the wine) yet it is but a draught, and quickly down the throat.

Yea, as vain and comfortless are all worldly joys, when they are used to
mitigate the panges of conscience, as it was for Callico to stuff his pillow (a
brass pot) with straw to make it soft.

Indeed, your charms may, with their pleasantness, bring conscience into some
short slumbers; but it waketh eftsoons, and in spite of all your spells,
rages as before. Yea, if but sickness come, these carnal delights will run
from you, affrighted like Rats from a house on fire: pleasure, like Orpah,
kisses, but parts; only grief, like Ruth, weeps, and tarries with you: no joy
will down till there be hope of a pardon; so that no hand can heal you, but
the very same which wounded you: the wounds of the mind can only be cured by
the word of God, which teaches what may be said, what is to be known, what
to be believed, what to be avoided, yea, and what not.

Thus instead of repenting, and laboring in a lawful calling, which is the
only cure of Melancholy ( Fulgentius aptly terming exercise, the death of
diseases, the destruction of all vices, and only cure of Melancholy) they add
sin to sin, leaving Gods remedies, to seek remedy of the devil; whose
office is not to quench fire, but to kindle it, even the fire of lust, with the
fire of drunkenness here, and with those two the fire of hell hereafter.

64.
SEcondly, 2. To drive away time.
they drink that they may drive away time; for every hour, seems a day, and
every day a month, to an idle person, which is not spent in a Tap-house;
whereby with that Strumpet in the Proverbs, Chap. 7. Verse. 11. their feet can
never abide in their own howses, for you shall seldom find a drunkard at
home, when you need him; but lay your plot to seek him in a Tavern (as
whether next, but to all the Tavernes in the Town) or perhaps at a Play house,
(for a Playhouse, or so, only keeps him sober, and makes him an afternoone's
man) and it stands upon a good foundation.

Yea, they seem to have nailed their ears to the doors of a Tavern, and to
have agreed with Satan, Master it is good being here, let us build, etc. for
be they never so long in a Tavern, they think not the time long; yea, they
curse the Clock for have, and are angry that they cannot with Joshua, make the
Sun stand still, or keep the Moon from going down; not till they confound
the Amorites, but till these Amorites work each others confusion: they wish
that the day might be corrupted, and that the night would take bribes, if it
proves any way an impediment unto them; else there they live, nay, there they
dye daily, as Chrysostom speaks.

As come to a man's house, and where is he? his wife knows not; ask the
servants, they know not; when will he be at home? they cannot tell you; yes,
they can, but they blush to speak; forsooth the matter is this, there is his
house, but his dwelling is at the Alehouse, except all his money be spent;
and then if his wife will fetch him home with a Lantern, and his men with a
Barrowe, he comes with as much sense as Michol's image had; else Sun and
Moon go over his head, till he has s^ept himself sober, and watched
himself drunk. For as if loosing their times were nothing, while they are in
a drinking-schoole, they are bound by their Law of good fellowship (and would
be so, were there no such Law) to be pouring in at their mouths, or whiffing
out at their noses, one serving as a shooing horn to the other; for Tobacco
being hot and dry, must have a qualifier of cold and moist from the pot; and
that again being cold and moist, must have a qualifier of hot and dry from the
Pipe; which makes them like ratsband Rats, drink and vent, vent and drink,
Sellengers-round, and the same again.

To which purpose every one has his purveyance at either elbow, a Jurden for
his Urine, on the one side; and a Bowl for his vomit, on the other; that when
with their excessive beszeling they have filled their skins, and are full
gorged, they may empty themselves at pleasure; which they can do, by only
putting their finger to their throat; though some, without ever forcing
themselves, will vomit, as if they were so many live Whales, spewing up the
Ocean, which done they can drink again afresh.

Yet to whet on their appetites the better, and because it is heinous to all
supervisors of the Panchery, either not to go out full bellied, or not to come
in full handed; up comes a service of shooing-horns of all sorts; as Rashers on
the coals, Red Herrings, a Gammon of Bacon, Caveary, Anchovise, and abundance
of such pulle^s on; and then begins the full pots to go round about the Table,
and the empty against the walls.

Neither is it possible the appetite of these Leeches should ever be
satisfied, seeing they have a hundred devices, natural, artificial
wickedness, to make themselves still insatiable: to this end also they use
Tobacco, that by drunkenness they may both expel drunkenness, and being
glutted with wine, they drink smok^, that by this variety, it may not grow
teadious

Thus they spend their money, mispend their time, spend good hours in ill
actions, and great blessings to bad purposes; whereby they are four days in
the week drunk, and the other three not sober; never considering that the
devil is a fisher; sin, his hook; pleasure, his bait; fools, his fish;
nor weighing the danger they are in, making a recreation of misery, sporting
themselves in their sins round about the pits brinke without fear, when as
they are every hour ready to topple into hell, that bottomless gulf of
easeles and everlasting flames.

They desire most to pass away time, then which nothing (though few consider
it) is more precious; yea, says Seneca, there is nothing swifter, nothing
sweeter then time. But did they know what treasure time offers to their poor
souls, they would look with a jealous eye upon the houre-glasse, and sigh at
the dropping of every Sand. And surely they that seek to mend the pace of
time, spur a free and fast enough running Horse; which they had more need to
redeem with double care, and labor, then seek how to hurl it away, yea,
hyre the devil and others to help them.

For my part, I had rather the company would pass away, then the time; except
it be such company, as may help me to redeem the time. And while I live
here, I will study so to use time, as that I may come to live, where time shall
be no more: and doubtless, those that dare loose a day, are dangerously
prodigal; those that dare mispend it, desperate.

65.
OTher reasons and causes there be of it, 3. Cause is lust.
though indeed there is no reason in it, as first, pride is one special cause,
covetousness, another; cowardlinesse, a third; evil company, a fourth; etc.
for they will by no means grant that they drink for the love of drink, any
more then the hunts man pursues the Hare, in cold, in heat, over mountains,
and dales, for love of her flesh; no, will these swilbowles say, yea, swear,
that is the basest thing in the world, they are Epicures indeed that will do
so, though they love it, as they should do God, above all, above health,
wealth, cred it, child, wife, life, heaven, salvation, all; calling for that,
as the Pope once for his dish, even in despite of heaven; for is not their
gullet their god? do they not sacrifice more to their god Belly, then those
Babylonians did to their god Bell.

Alas! they no more care for Wine, That they drink not for love of drink is
either false, or makes their sin double
then Esau did for his pottage, for which he sold his birthright; no more
then Vgacc^o of Luca did for good cheer, who ventured his Dukedom rather then
he would loose a good supper; then Lysimachus did, who made away a whole
Kingdom for drink; then VVenceslaus, who after the same manner consumed his
Empire; then Philoxenus and Melanthius did, who, that the drink might yield
them the more pleasure in going down to their stomachs, wish, the one a Swans
throat, the other a Cranes neck; then Tiberius, who* because he loved wine
above measure, was in derision called Biberius. For let them say, or swear
what they will, I will believe the Prophet Isaiah, who brings in the drunkard
saying thus, Come, we will bring wine, and we will fill our selves with strong
drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant, Isa. 56.
12. and Hanna, who calls drunkards the sons of Belial, 1 Samuel 1. 16. that is,
all belly, and for the belly.

Yea, let some good fellow or other tell me, whether it would not make his
teeth water, and his guts grumble; yea, whether in envy he would not feed
upon his own heart, to see his companions drink their healths round, while he
sat by, only to see and hear them? and if so, confess that you drink, not to
please others, but your selves, as Canus played upon his Harp; not for your
friend's sake, but for the drink's sake; that you drink, not out of need, but
lust; not for health, but for delight.

But we will accept of their own confession, take them at their word, and see
whether they mend not the matter as the Devil mended his damms leg, who
instead of putting it into joint, brake it quite in pieces: for I am much
mistaken, if they do not double their shame by so excusing their fault; for
what more aggravates any ^inne, then this, that men commit it (as I have showed
men usually swear) only because it is sin, and God forbid's it, having
neither profit, nor pleasure, nor credit, nor nothing else to induce them to
it? Surely the less provocation, the greater the offense; yea, greater the
malice of the offender, and greater his dishonor that is offended: this is not
only for a rich man to be a thief and a lier; an old man, to be a fornicator;
both which are abomination to the Lord; but it is all one, as if a chaste man
should force himself to commit a rape upon one whom he cares not for, only to
spite her Husband, or Parent; which sin seems to outweigh any ransom.

66.
Again, whereas I charge them with covetousness, 4 Cause covetousness.
and tell them this is another cause, they will think I am madd. What, they
covetous? who so generous, free, bountiful? yea, they hate a covetous
hoggrubber with a perfect hatred; and yet none more covetous, for drunkards are
not more ryotous in spending, then in gathering they are covetous: and what is
it, any one of these melting prodigals will not practice, rather then let his
port decline? yea, what lewdness, or baseness will he not put in practice,
rather then want to satisfy his lusts?

Yea, ask them why they drink, and keep company so much? their most usual
answer is, alas! I should have no work, I should neither get, nor keep my
customers, I should never else buy a good bargain, etc. for it is admirable to
think, and incredible to believe, how the devil blindes them in this
particular, but I pass it, for an Angel from heaven shall not persuade them to
the contrary, but that it is very profitable for them; though a stander by may
plainly see, that they spend more in time, then in money; and more in money of
times then they get by their drunken customer; as it is usual with many
Dutchmen, to spend the best part of three whole days and nights in the
Tavern, to drive a bargain; neither will they make any bargain, until they
have sharpened their wits with the essence of good liquor; and then are they
(as they think) crafty and politic, that they will deceive any man that
shall deal with them. I have heard one of them boast, he had gotten a thousand
pounds this way; and his reason was, when he drank most, he could bargain
best.

But when both the Buyer and Seller go away with this conceit, that each have
over-reach't the other, the Devil must needs delude one of them, and I am sure
the Vintner will be paid for his wine. But, alas! the Devil has so besotted
them, that they will believe him, even contrary to their own knowledge: as it
fares with Witches, who although they know the Devil to be the Father of lies,
yet will trust him. But for my part, I shall as soon believe that Adam spoke
Dutch in Paradise (according to Goropius Becanus his idle fancy) as believe
thee the richer for thy drinking.

67.
ANd as for pride, they know not what it means; 5 Cause reputation of good
^ellowship.
it is an ill sign they are proud, when they go in rags, being able to spend
so much as they do: and yet any eyes, but their own, may see, that they care
not what they spend, or how much they drink, (yea even forcing nature beyond
their ability) for popular applause, and to have others commend them for
joviall: as one to get him a name, built D^ana's Temple (which was one of the
worlds wonders) another to get him a name, burnt it, but failed of his
expectation, for to prevent his hopes, they suffered not his name to be put in
the Chronicle.

But these have their aim, are reputed generous, and brave blades: which
commendations is like the praise that Homer gives of Paris, that is, praising
the beauty of his Locks, but making him to be the ruin of his country: or like
that which is spoken of Pope Boniface the eight, viz. that he was famous, yet
for nothing, but his wickedness. Since they cannot be notable, they would be
notorious, and, with Ca^ne, marked, though for murderers. Opinion is all they
stand upon, and that from men more gallant then wise, that have more heart then
brain, yea, more lust, pride, and ignorance then either.

Yea, the fame and reputation of good fellowship with them is more sweet then
life, then salvation; for they had rather be famous men upon earth (though it
be for infamy) then glorified Saints in Heaven; yea, they had rather go to
Hell, then be counted Puritans, for shaking hands with their old associats;
wherein they resemble Saul, who stood more upon the praise of men, then the
favor of God; or Ulysses, who pretended to love his native country Ithaca so
dearly, that for it he would refuse to be immortal; or the Lord Cords, with
whom it was a common byword, that he would be content to be in Hell seven
years, so he might have the honor of winning Cales from the English; or some
unconscionable Fathers, who will go to the Devil, to make their Sons
Gentlemen, live miserably, and damn their own souls, that their's may be
left rich, they so love their children above themselves; for as these, so
drunkards are proud of baseness I can feel their Pulses beat hither. But
when all is done, a good name is more to be respected, then a great.

Forsooth, they would get a name; and indeed, they do get the names of common
drunkards, which will never be done away. Or admit they get the name of good
fellows, how ridiculous is that name, when it is gotten? Achitophel has a
name, Judas has a name, Beelzebub has a name, the powder Traitors have got
them a name; but it were happy for such names if they might dye, for they will
stink while they live, and so does the drunkards, when he has obtained the
name of good fellow, in my judgment; and if I cannot beat the Vulgar from
their contrary opinion, yet I will be sure, the Vulgar shall never beat it
into me.

I could here tell you of another pride, Or pride of wit.
which occasions many to drink, and keep company, Pride of wit; not that
drunkards are thereof guilty, but, as Narcissus doted upon his own shadow: so
they conceit of their own Embryan discourse (as the Crow of her own Birds)
that it is fairer and better then ordinary, or else they would not be at such
charges to have you hear it. If ye doubt his pride, mark whether all his
discourse tends not, either to the praise of himself, or the dispraise of
others; unless his praising of another may redound also to his own praise.

But wherein does his vainelye, and the excellency of his brain consist? The
Bean of all his honor lies in scoffs, and jeeres; for take from these Aspes
but their poison and sting, you undo them, they have nothing left of any use;
all their worth lies in witcrackers, as some in the Netherlands have their
wealth in Squibs and fire-workes, others in Mouse-traps and Tinderboxes. Now in
case he has broken a jest well, he sits him down, and sings plaudits to his
own brain, and not only falls in love with all, as Pygmalion fell in love
with his Ivory Image, but if others do not commend and admire it for rare and
excellent, as though it were found in the Phoenix nest, he thinks he has
great wrong. It is not enough, that he thinks himself wise; but we also must
think him so, though he knows in his conscience we think wrong: as once a
Soldier, to have his friends in England think him somebody, gave it out that
he was Captain of a hundred, when his conscience told him, and one of the
company was able to reply, that they were not men but Vermin, which were under
his conduct.

Indeed it were happy for him, if he wanted the wit he has herein; and Satan
should do him a greater pleasure, if he did not so prompt him in scoffs; for,
like Absalom's hair, it proves but an ornament to hang himself withal: the
best office his wit does him, is either to spit out friends with his tongue, or
laugh them into enemies. When one brake a bitter jest upon his friend, he
requited him with his Dagger, saying, I cannot break a jest, but I can break
your head. Now he pays dear for a jest, who spends his time, and money, and
sells his honesty for it: but most unhappy is that wit, which stirs up
enemies against the owner, and proves a snare to it self; well may such an one
have a good wi^, but sure I am, a fool has the keeping of it. And so much of
the fifth cause, for I fear to be tedious.

68.
Sixthly, sottish fear and base cowardlinesse is another maine cause, 6 Is
sotrish fear, and base cowardice.
both of this, and almost all other sins: men dare not refuse to go to the
Tavern when the motion is made, (and they seldom meet one another but they
make the motion) nor refuse when they come there to do as the rest, that is,
to drink drunk, be it to the wounding of conscience, hazard of health, life,
soul, etc. for fear of seeming singular.

Oh how hard a thing is it, for a coward to show his dislike of this sin in
some companies, where he shall be scoft at, and called Puritan, if he will not
revell it with them in a shorelesse excess. And indeed, better be possessed with
any Devil almost, then this bashful Devil, for it will give a man no
respite. But like as Agrippa his Dog had a Devil tied to his collar, and
Paracelsus another confined to his Sword pommell: so the Coward has a Devil
always at his elbow, to divert him from good actions, or to provok him to
evil.

How many men, out of a proud, ignorant, and timorous bashfulnesse, miserably
wrong their own souls, lest the standers by should censure them? much like
that Lacedaemonian child, who suffered his belly and guts to be torn out, by a
Cub or young Fox which he had stolen, and kept close under his garment, rather
then he would discover his theft: or like Eurydamas the wrestler, who when his
Teeth were dashed out by his adversary, dissembled the pain, and swallowed
down his Teeth, blood, and all, to the end he which gave the blow, might not
perceive the mischief: or rather like Herod, who at the request of his Minion,
cut off John Baptists head, and why forsooth (for he was very sorry she made
that her demand, and had rather she should have required half his kingdom)
but because they which sat at table with him, should find him as good as his
word, Mark, 6. 26. 27. O vain and wicked Herod, not God, not his conscience
came into any regard with him, but the people; as what will the world say, if I
should not yield to it? every man will laugh at me, etc. Oh the foolish aims
of ambition! even the misconceits of the points of honor, have cost millions
of souls; this is one notable means to fill Hell, lothnesse to displease; and
certainly there must needs be something in it, that the fearful are placed by
the Holy Ghost in the forefront of the damned crew, which shall have their
part in that lake which burns with fire and brimstone, Revel. 21. 8.
wherefore think of it, it is a damnable plausibility, so to regard the vain
approbation, or censure of the beholders, as in the mean time, to neglect the
allowance or judgment of God. A good heart will rather fall out with all the
world, then with his maker, then with his conscience. It is an ill modesty,
that hinders a man in the way to bliss, or that suffers another to outgoe him;
like some traveling Jade, that hearing another Horse come after, stands still
till he overtakes him.

True love to, and knowledge of Christ will think him worth following through
fire and water: but go thy way, and save thy self, to thy loss; gain the
worlds favor, and loose God's; escape derision, and meet with confusion, and I
will tell thee whom thou are like: thou are like some decayed Gentlemen; who
because descended from an ancient house, will not so disparage themselves as to
serve or work; but which is more for their honor forsooth, take a purse; and
so while they seek to shun disrepute among fools, purchase infamy, and loose
their lives, and how it will fare with thee in the end, Christ Jesus will be
ashamed of thee at the latter day, who art now ashamed for his sake to bear a
few scoffs and reproaches from the world, Mat. 10, 32, 33, 39. For in this
case, whosoever shall seek to save his credit, yea, his life shall loose it,
and his soul too; but whosoever shall loose his credit, life, and all for
goodness and conscience sake, he shall save it, as our Savior witnesses,
Luke 17. 33.

Lastly, touching evil company, expect to hear more in the reasons of
breaking off society with our vicious consorts. The last cause is evil company.


69.
THus what hathbeene spoken, The drunkards chief delight is to infect others.
proves them much worse then beasts; but this is a small evil with them, this
is but to work out their own damnations: their chief delight is to infect
others, A digression proving that all wicked men resemble the devil in
tempting to sin. drawing to perditio*
the Serpents special venom, wherewith these his elves be intoxicated, is to
make others more beasts then themselves.

Indeed this is not the drunkards case alone, for it fares even so with all
wicked men. Wherefore give me leave (yea let me take it) a little to stir the
earth about the roots of this Science. If it be a digression, to tell you of
other tempters, pardon it; if impertinent, (though I hope not) pass on to
Section the 75.

Wicked men as they are all the seed of the same old Serpent, Gen, 3. 15. and
children of the devil, John 8. 44. so they resemble the divill, and imitate
him in all things, so far as corporal creatures can possibly do spiritual
substances; but principally in tempting to sin, and drawing to perdition, and
ever have done, since the Devil their father taught them the way. For even as
Satan himself, had no sooner sinned, but immediately (as ever since) he laid
the plot to draw our first Parents, and in them all their posterity, into sin
with him, Genesis 3. 1. 4. 5. so according to this president, the wicked in all
ages have followed his example, and trod in his steps, whose image they bear,
and whose members they are. For thus it fared with Eve, who was no sooner
tempted to break God's Law, in eating the forbidden fruit, but she becomes a
tempter, and draws her husband into the same sin. Thus with Cham, who when he
had discovered, and scoft at his Fathers nakedness, labored to bring his
brethren into the same disobedience. Tuus with the elder of Lot's daughters,
who when she had made her Father drunk, on purpose to commit incest with him;
the next care she took was to make her younger sister do the like. And thus
it fares with all notorious sinners of all sorts, as with thieves and
murderers, who before they go to rob and kill, call their Mates, and say,
come with us, etc. Pro. 1. 10, 11. Idolaters, Deuteronomy. 13. 6. False Prophets,
Ez^k. 44. 12. Persecutors of the godly, Act. 2. 217. 28. and 23 12. ^ 16.
Covetous wretches, Act. 19. 24. 25. Adulterers, etc. Ge. 39. 7. Wicked men
being like so many corns of Powder, for as every corn of Powder flies off, and
fires his fellow: so fares it with them, all that are viciously bent, seek
after followers; and it is thought the greatest evil, to be evil alone.

70.
ANd as all kinds of sinners are very industrious to tempt, How politic to fit
their temptations to every man's hu^our.
so are they very politic, (in their generation) to use such means as is
most likely to prevail. For as all Fishes are not taken one way, but some with
a net, some with a dart, or dragg* others with a hook; nor with one bait, but
every fish with that bait which is agreeable to their nature and kind, for the
wise Fisher baits his hook according to the appetite of the Fish: so Satan
by these his substitutes, does most subtilely seduce every man according to the
bent and stream of his own nature, and inclinary disposition. For as Jupiter
transformed himself into the shape of Amphitryo, to embrace Alcmena; into the
form of a Swan, to enjoy Leda; into a Bull, to beguile I^; into a shower of
gold, to win Danae: or as Neptune changed himself into an Heyfer, a Ram, a
Flood, a Dolphin, only for the love of those he lusted after: or as Cataline
in Rome, gate all the Gentlemen into his faction by feeding their humors,
pleasing the covetous, with gold; the glutton, with belly cheer and dainties;
the ambitious with hope of honor and preferment; and the like: or as S. Paul
became all things to all men, that he might win the more, 1 Cor. 9. 22. so
does Satan and his ^mps, become all things to all men, that they may pervert
and seduce the more*

To which purpose, and for their greater advantage, they mark how every man is
inclined; as, what he loves, what he hates, what he fears, what he wants
etc. and when they have the measure of a man's foot, then they will fit him;
yea, let any man ask what he will, it shall go hard, but he that offered the
whole world to our Savior, will accommodate his humor. As for example. Some
Danae will not be won to play the whore, unless her lover appear in a shower
of Gold; he has that way, by means of such an instrument, for her. Some
Naaman will not bow in the house of Rimmon, crouch at a Mass, but for his
masters favor; he has that way for him. Another will not betray, or embrew
his hands in innocent blood, without large promises of great matters; he has
that way for him, as promises (though they are the cheapest things men can part
withal) are yet the strongest enchantments, these be the strong lines of
Rome* whereby she catches so many; promises, whereof she is as liberal, as
ever was Antigonus* who was called Antigonus Doson* and let such Asses have no
other Provender, but promises.

Indeed some are so cunning, that they will do more for a small present
benefit, then for the promise of a ten-fold value; Satan is feign to stop
their mouths with ready money: wherefore Gehazi shall have the Talents, Achan
the golden wedge, etc. O that men were so wary, as to say, -- timeo Danaos and
dona ferentes!

Or is there a Bathsheba, so chaste; an Vriah, so sober; that the one will not
be won to pollute the marriage bed; nor the other be made drunk, except they
are solicited by a King; he has that way for them: for even Kings are at his
command, and ready to do him service in the business of tempting; and it is
hard to refuse pledging, where a King begins a health to his subject; for
temptation is then stronger, when it proceeds from a mighty instrument: the
requests of great ones are commands, their very suits imperative. How many
sober, and religious Vriahs, have been wrought to excess by this means? How
many Bathshebahs, and Jane Shores have thus been won, to pollute both a royal
and matrimonial bed: the very countenance of authority is authority enough with
many.

Again, is none so fit as the wife to tempt the husband? why then Adam shall
be tempted by Eve, Ahab by Iesabel, Job by his wife.

Indeed a seducer dares not show himself, in a noted good man's company, in his
own colors; yea, vice stands abasht at the glorious Majesty of a soul well
confirmed in goodness: as Catoe's presence stopped the evil practices of the
Roman brutish Floralia: wherefore in some cases he either conceales himself,
or plays the Hypocrite, by appearing in the garments and habit of virtue. As
for example. Is there a holy man of God, that will not vary a hairs breadth
from what his Maker commands? Satan has another Prophet to seduce him, by
pretending that an Angel spoke unto him by the word of the Lord, saying, thus
and thus, 1 King. 13. 18. Or is none so likely as Peter to prevail with
Christ? why then Peter shall take upon him the devils office, and, in a great
deal of love, tempt his own Lord and Master, Mat. 16. 22. 23. In a word, as
he tempted the high Priests (those arch-Hypocrites) by love of glory; and as
the high Priests with money tempted Judas to betray his Master, and destroy
himself: so he tempts every man, by that way and means which he knovveth
most prevalent with the party tempted.

71.
INdeed, Satan is not so lavish, as to hurl away either cost or labor, How
Satan guls the rude multitude in giving every vice a title, and each vetue a
disgraceful name.
when it may be spared: wherefore seeing the rude^multitude so brutish and
ignorant, that they will be cheated and guld with any thing; he takes advantage
from their darkened souls, and to deceive them, (knowing he needs do no more)
only fowls and smeares the beautiful face of virtue, with the black soote
of those vices which seem to have some affinity with them; as by traducing
each Grace thus: conscience of sin, in the Devils language, is called
precise niceness, and puritanisme; zeal, madness; faith and confidence,
presumption; syncerity, hypocrisy; patience, pu^illanimity; humility,
baseness of mind; wisdom, craft, etc. And on the other side, painting vices
ugly face with the fair colors of virtue, and so present her not in her own
proper colors, but gilded over with some shows of holiness, that it may the
more easily wind and insinuate it self into men's affections, calling lust,
love; envy, emulation; pride, magnanimity; sloth, wariness; covetousness,
good husbandry; drunkenness, good fellowship; ignorance, innocence; pestilent
heresy, profound knowledge and deep learning; Revel. 2. 24. worldliness,
wisdom and policy; rashness, fortitude; etc. as for every several Jemme that
virtue has, vice has a counterfeit stone, where with she gulls the ignorant;
and there is no precept nor command of God, but the Devil commands the
contrary; he is ever gaine-saying what God says; Genesis 2. 17. and 3. 4. 5.

And this is enough, for hereby their poor blind hearts are so deceived, with
that shadow of resemblance which vice carries of virtue; that they embrace and
receive gross vices, instead of glorious virtues, and yet think themselves as
well, and that they shall speed as well as the best. And least one should
mistrust another, he has his clergy to speak for him, and is never without
false Prophets, which are ready to daube over sin with untempered Mortar;
such as for handfulls of barley, and pieces of bread, will sow pillowes under
each arme-hole, prophecy out of their own hearts, and pretend a lying
divination; such as shall preach unto them, Peace, Peace, and tell them that
despise the Lord, though they walk after the stubbornness of their own
hearts, no evil shall come upon them; yea, such as shall even slay the souls
of them that should not dye, and give life to the souls that should not live,
with lies make the hearts of the righteous sad, whom the Lord has not made
sad; and strengthen the hands of the wicked, that he should not turn from his
wicked way by, promising him life. Eze. 13. Ier. 23. 13. to 22. so shutting
Heaven when they should open it, and opening it when they should shut it. And
thus are millions deceived, for nothing sooner wins flesh and blood, then a
Doctrine which tends to licentiousness.

Indeed, most men are so greedy, Many so greedy of ^emptation that Satan needs
but cast out (...) angle.
either of profit, or pleasure, that Satan needs no help from others; for he
can no sooner cast out his Angle amongst them, but immediately, (like the souls
in Lucian about Charons boat, or Coleminers about a line, when the candles
burning blew, tells the dampe comes) they will fasten upon the bayte. As let
Ieraboam only set up Calves in Dan and Bethel, the people are down on their
knees, yea, all, like beasts in herds, will go a lowing after them. Yea, were
there no harlot, no drunken associate to solicit, no Devil to do his office,
wicked men would beget destruction on themselves. If Satan should not feed
them with temptations, they would tempt him for them, and snatch their own
bane; in which case, Satan only suggests the thought, or says the word, and
it is done.

As if he appoint them to lie, they willy; Or suggest the thought.
if he command them to deceive, they will deceive; if he bid them slander, they
will slander, and that as falsely as he; if he persuades them to revenge, to
persecute, etc. they will do it, as spitefully and as fully, as he could do
them himself; and so of every sin, if he but say to any of his servants, let
there be an oath, straight there is an oath; let there be a bribe, instantly
there is a bribe; let there be a quarrel, immediately there is a quarrel; etc.
just as when God said in the beginning of the Creation, let there be light,
and there was light.

72.
THus Satan comes to us, The many ways which Satan has to set upon us.
and sets upon us both ways, visible, and invisible; mediately, and
immediately; by himself, and by others. Yea, this is not all, for that we may
the less suspect him, he makes us become our own tempters, as how many
temptations come in by those Cinque Ports, the Senses? how many more by Satan's
injections, presenting to the affections things absent from the Senses? (as we
have an army of unclean desires, that perpetually fight against our souls)
but most of all by lust it self (a thing not created, yet as quick as
thought, tumbling over a thousand desires in an hour) for you must know, that
the Devil and our Flesh meets together every day and hour to engender new
sins, which is the reason our sins are counted amongst those things which are
infinite, as the hairs of our head, the sands of the Sea, the Stars of
Heaven: yea, the Devils trade and occupation all the day, and all the year
long, is only to make nets, and gins, and snares, to catch thee, and me, and
each man single; the wisdom of Heaven deliver us.

As there is a Sacred Trinity, Satan the great sed^cer, wicked men are
Apprentises, or factors under him.
provoking to good, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: so there is a cursed
Cerberus, intiseing to sin, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil* but the
chief of these tempters is the Devil, whence he is styled, as by a kind of
excellency, the Tempter, as Virgil is called the Poet, Aristotle the
Philosopher, and David the King.

It Is true, he could not work his own ends upon us, if he should profess
himself, and appear to us the very same that he is, and not in the persons of
men, yea, in our selves, and supposed best friends: yet this hinders not, but
Satan may be the chief: for though there be many little seducers besides,
which do us the greatest mischief; yet the Serpent is worse then all his
seed. I Will make it plain. As there are sundry other crafts, so there is a
craft of tempting, whereof Satan is the crafts-master, and the rest are but
his Apprentises, or Factors under him; for there was never any, of what
condition soever, from the first to the last, tempted, but Satan had a hand in
the temptation.

Indeed, some make question whether there be a Devil or no, because they never
saw him; but thou may see him in his effects, tempting thee to lewdness, and
tempting thee to tempt others; for what he cannot do immediately by himself,
that he does mediatly by his instruments; and when he has tempted some men, he
sets them to tempt other men, bestowing his bad office upon them, as once he
did upon heedlesse Eve.

As, alas poor souls! they are but set on by that subtle Serpent, as the
woman of Tek^a was by Ioa^. 2Sa. 14. 3. or as Zeb^deas was by her Sons, Math.
20. 20. compared with Mark. 10. 35. it is but his heart in their lips; for the
Devil opens their mouths, as the Lord, by an Angel, opened the mouth of
Baalam's Ass, N^mb. 22. and speaks in, and by them, as once he did by the
Serpent, when he opened her mouth, and caused her to speak with man's voice.

73.
THat Satan the Prince of darkness, The Devil speaks in and works by them as
once he did by the Serpent.
which rules in the air (even that false Spirit) speaks and works by all
the children of disobedience, as by his Agents and instruments; partly, as a
workman works with his tools; partly, as a Client speaks by his Advocate;
and partly, as a General ^ighteth by his Army, we have plainly set down,
Ephesians. 2. 2. 3. yea, look but, 2 Cor. 4. 4. and there he is styled their god;
and being their god, they must use all possible means whereby to gain souls
to him, by tempting and seducing others; to which end, and that they may be the
better gifted to do the same exactly, this great temper helps their
infirmity, by infuseing of his own nature into them; as when he put it into
the heart of Judas Iscariot, to betray Christ, John, 13. 2. and when he moved
David to number the people, 1 Chro. 21. 1. and spoke to our Savior by Peter,
as through a trunk, and infused his subtilty into Herod to destroy all the
Males; for though Herod be called a Fox, yet this old Fox taught him all his
subtilty.

And this he can easily do. For as the Lodestone, by a secret in nature, not
only^draweth the Iron unto it, as Iet and Amber does Straw, but infuseth also a
faculty into the Iron, whereby one piece of Iron is made apt to draw another
piece after it; yea, the Loadestone being put near a chain of Iron, does not
only draw the link that is next it unto it, but also causes that link to draw
it is fellow, and the next to it it is fellow, and so the rest, until all be
drawn: so Satan, by infusing into some men his serpentine nature, makes them
as apt to tempt others, and they their associates; as when by the infusion of
this divelish nature he had tempted Eve, and made her his vassal, she proved
an apt, exquisite, and ready instrument to seduce Adam to eat the forbidden
fruit, at the price of death eternal: and ever since the devil might use the
words of God, and say, behold, man is become as one of us.

And for number, Satan more me^ on earth to fight for him then the Trinity
which made us.
Satan has more servants then any Emperor of the world, yea, more men (I
fear me) to fight for him, then the Trinity which made us: for whereas few
have the courage to speak for God, and his worship, (even amongst us
Christians) Satan has his tempters and seducers in every country, and place,
yea, in every corner of each country, like continual Leigers, to follow his
business; who both can do it near as well, even as Witches can do almost as
much as the devil himself; and will do it as faithfully as if he did it in his
own person.

What Gideon and Abimelech once spoke to their troops, Judge. 7. 17. and 9. 48.
look on me, and see what you see me do, make have, and do you likewise, and
they did it: the same speaks Satan to his followers, and they imitate and
resemble the devil, as truly as Apes and Monkies will imitate and resemble
men; which though they cannot speak and understand, with such reason as men
do; yet they will counterfeit men in any thing that possible they can compass.

And these his servants are so at his beck, that he needs no more, but hold up
his finger; as the master of a Galley, when he perceives a good gale of wind,
that is fair for his voyage, does with once whisling, make all the
Galley-slaves fall to their Oars. So that Satan has diverse and sundry ways
to assault us, many strings to his Bow, that if some break, the rest may hold;
many trains of powder, some likely to take fire; yea, he is like some cunning
Enginere, that can invent new instruments, according to the present occasion;
and he inventeth all he can, and puts in practice all that he invent^th. Yea,
if men have so many slights to compass their matters, how can the compasser
himself hold his fingers? If the Serpents seed be so subtle, what do you
think of this old Serpent? Yea so many snares and engines are laid, by the
professed enemy of man, to entrap our souls, that we may with reverence and
love wonder at the mercy of God in our delivery; for we fall, O God, we fall
to the lowest hell if thou prevent us not, if thou sustain us not; all our
weakness is in our selves, all our strength is in thee.

Nevertheless, we can thank none, but our selves if we yield; The mind of
man not capeable of a viola^ion either from man or Satan.
for though that old Saba blows many an intiseing blast, to carry us away from
our true alleagiance to Christ Jesus, our King; yet the mind of man is not
capeable of a violation, either from man, or Satan: and who then can I tax for
mine own yielding, but my self?

74.
NOw to speak of, As impossible to rec kon up all sorts of seducers as to tell
the moates in the Sun.
or nominate all sorts of seducers; much more to show the several slights which
wicked men use, that they may make us associate them in their lewdness, is
impossible; yea, I may as well weigh the fire, or measure the wind; as well
reckon up the moates in the Sun, paint Echo to the life, make the Moon a new
coat, and as soon find out the motion of a bird in the air, the way of a
Serpent upon a stone; and the way of a Ship in the midst of the Sea, which are
all too wonderful for me, Prove. 30. 18. 19. yea, had I the gift of prophecy,
and knew all secrets touching the same, I should need two hundred tongues, and
six hundred pens, and a mouth of steel, with an Iron voice; if I should
declare their several diversities. For the four and twenty letters in the
Alphabet make not more variety of words in diverse languages: then the Serpents
subtilty produces diversity of stratagems, in several persons; and I could
easilier tell you what good they omit, then what evil they do.

O the many ways that Satan (through men's help) has to seduce us! and the
many temp^^rs he has, in every corner, Of drunkards who are satan's principal
agents in this business
to set upon us! where shall a man come and not find a seducer? and a drunkard
of all other tempters, as he never cease to seduce; so he seldom misses of
prevailing. But though the Springs and Wards of temptation are so infinite,
that it is impossible to decypher them all, yet according to the measure of the
line, whereof God has distributed unto me, I will discover how the drunkard
seduceth; and so go a middle way between saying all and nothing; and by
looking upon him, you may more then guess at the rest.

Neither will I undertake to tell all, for that the time would be too short,
or this Treatise too long, if I should stand upon every several slight which
drunkards have to seduce; yea, talking Fabi^s would be tired, before he can
relate half of what were requisite to be ^poken of them it would require whole
volumes; for not a fewlines, nor leaves, would contain the same. Besides,
notions when they exceed, are wont, as nails to drive out one another; and
these which I have purposely selected out, are the principal, most behovefull,
and best deserving our discovery, and the worlds notice.

75.
THat none are either affected, or addicted to seduce like drunkards; let their
deeds (which come now to be discovered) manifest.

The drunkards chief delight is to infect others, Drunkards to turn others
into beasts, ^ ^ make them selves di^vells.
the Serpents special venom (as I said before) wherewith these his elfes be
intoxicated, is to make others more beasts then themselves: yea, drunkards
being the devils deputies, to turn others into beasts, will make themselves
devils, wherein they have a notable dexterity; making the Alehouse or Tavern,
their study; their circle, the pot; themselves, the conjurers; men's souls the
hire; reputation of good fellowship, the char me; the characters, healths; the
goblin raised, is the spirit of the buttery; and to drink God, out of their
hearts; health, out of their bodies; wit, out of their heads; strength out of
their joints; all the money, out of their purses; all the drink, out of the
Brewers barrels; wife and children, out of doors* the land, out of quiet;
plenty, out of the Kingdom; is all their business.

These agents for the Devil (drunkards) practice nothing but the art of
debauching men; They practile nothing but the art of debauching men.
for they will take no pains, unless the Devil set them on work; though in
this case, being set like beasts to draw in the devils teame, they will lead
captive unstable souls to sin with c^rds of vanity, and as it were with a
cartrope, Isaiah 5. 18. for to sin, these pernicious sedusers, devils in the
shape of men, are no niggards of their pains. Oh how much is hell beholding to
them! yea, seldom ever do we find goodness so industrious, the children of
light are not always the forwardest in their generation.

Besides, they have many obstacles, 1 These. 2. 18. we would have come unto you
once, and again, says Paul to his converts, but Satan hindered us. Our way is
like C^shie's, full of rubs: but they, like Ahimaaz, take the plain and beaten
path; mischief is nimble, and he that intends evil, will break his sleep to
do it. Judas, and that bench of gray headed Priests and Elders, will be awake,
when Peter and his fellow Disciples (notwithstanding Christ charged them to
watch with him but one hour) are fast asleep, Matthew. 26. 40. to 51. the (...)
sower is in the field, when the husbandman is in his bed, Mat. 13. 25 yea, they
that worship ^he beast, and his Image, never rest day nor night, Revel. 14. 11.

But never did opportunity meet with any, that made more use of it, then do
these seducers, they will husband it to proof, and like some cunning
Antagonist, loose not an inch of their advantage, their dilig^nce is admirable;
the Pharis^es would take great pains, compass^ sea and land to make one like
themsel^^s, Matthew. 23. 15. and Seminary Priests will come from Rome, to draw
one from the true religion: so what will not some drunkards do, or spend, to
make a sober man a drunkard, or to drink another drunkard under the Table;
which may cast a blush upon our cheeks, who are nothing so industrious to
win souls to God.

76.
NOw for the effecting of this (though Drinking (...) forceing of ^eal^^s their
pri^cipall s^r^tageme.
these Milo's (be they never so strong) oftentimes meet with some Titor^us or
other, ^^^onger th^^ they, who throws them und^^ the Table) what comparable to
drinking of healths* (which A^tistbenes calls the only occasion and meane^ of
surfeiting and d^sord^r another* very f^^ly, thepulley or ^^ooing^horn to al
drunkenness and excess^) ^or their drinking and beginning of healths, is
purposely, and serves to no other end, but to draw me^ on to drink more
liberally, then els^ they would, or should do, but to allure and forc^ such as
they find otherwis^ unwilling; yea, their own hearts and consciences can
tes^ifi^ unto them in the sight of of God that they use these healths, but as
so many baits, occasions, or pre^^^ses to allure and provoke their guests, and
friends to pledge them, even unto surfeit: neither must any refuse their
healths, though it be against their natur^s, judgments, hearts and consciences,
which do secretly abhor and utterly cond^mne them.

O how they will wind a man in, by drinking, first, a health to such a man;
then, to such a woman my Mistress, then to every ones mis^r^^; then, to such a
great person; naming some Lord, or Lady or some near friend

Now by this means of drinking their Lords, their Ladies, their Masters, their
Mistresses (and she for the most part a common strumpet) their Magistrates,
their Captains, Commanders, Kindreds, Parents, friends, or companions healths;
^hey will wind men in to drink, even till their brains, their wits, their
tongues, their eyes, their feet, their senses, and all their members fail them.

For commonly when these friends fall to drinking of healths, it is as enemies
fall to fighting with weapons* to show their valor, and (...) get the (...)
and their weapons are (...) who so carries (...) clear, (...) and leads the
rest about (...) (if they can go) in T^^umph; (...) he gets the greatest
honor, that (...) the rest off their legs.

Hereupon their healths must ^ither be great immeasure, Their ^ealt^s either
great in ^eas^re ^r ^^ny in number.
or many in number. Touching the first, you have some like Tricong us Novellus*
who drank three Gallons of wine at once; or Prot^as who gave valiant Alexander
a quaffe of two Gallons, 1 Of great ^ealt^s.
which set him into a disease he dyed of. Is not Steven^on a Town within two
miles of Abindon, famous for his sake, that drank a Peck at a draught? And did
not a Dyer, of Barkhamsted in Hartford-shire, do the like? as for a drunkard
to disrobe the greatest goblet of his liquor, though it be of such weight, that
(as Virgil said once) the left hand is feign to help her sister, he makes
nothing of it.

77
TOuching the second, 2 If t^ei^ ^ealt^s be (...) the liq^^^ i^ stronger or the
number (...).
if they drink but indifferent healths, then the less the healthes are, the
more strong the wine; for the smalnesse of the cup, or glass, is commonly made
up with the strength, vigor, and dearness of the wine, or other liquor; so
that these small healthes, will sooner intoxicate and inebriate men, then
greater healthes, in cheaper and smaler drink; and yet these little healthes,
as well as little wedges, make but way for great ones of the same nature. For
many of them, hating the mixture of Malt and water, will, by their good wills,
let nothing come within them but the purity of the Grape, if they can get it,
and that is as natural to them (through custom) as small beer is to other
men: and no wonder, for if physic be taken too often, it will not work like
physic; yea, poison by familiar use, becomes natural food; as Aristotle (in
an example of a maid, which would pick Spiders off the wall, and eat them
(shows. Whence we may learn, that if Tobacco were as wholesome a weed or
herb, as is pretended; yet being used too commonly, nature entertaines it as a
friend, not as a Physician.

Or secondly, when the healthes a^e small and little in quantity or measure;
they are commonly made up and recompensed with the multitude, number, and
frequencie of them; and this they have learned of the Lombards, of whom we
read this story.

When four ancient men of them met together, they drank an health round, to
each others years; in the end, one challenged the rest to drink severally, so
many times, as they had lived years, and likewise his companions pledged him:
the one was fifty eight; the second, sixty three: the third, eighty seven* the
last, ninety two years old; so he which drank least, drank (...) eight cups
of wine, as Diaconus relates (...).

O the audacious, horrible, and f^ar^full drunkenness (which would ca^se any
Christian heart to bleed and tremble) that is too often caused by these
healthes in every place and corner, especially in the solemn time of Christ's
Nativity!

78.
ANd to mend the matter, Least Satan should want of (...) due (...) drink
the^ (...) their k^ees
least Satan should want of his due reverence and adorati^^, or they abate of
their pleasure (for the more sinful any action, the more sweet) these
wine-worshippers will be at it on their kn^es, especially if they drink a
great man's health; and so make gods of others, beasts of themselves, rank
Idolatry.

I know it is no innovation, The rise and original of health d^inking
or new thing; the custom is rather ancient, then warrantable; our Modern
drunkards have it but by tradition from their Elders, and they did it not
without a president: for health-drinking upon their knees had it is rise and
pedigree, it is birth and ^riginall, from Pagans, Infidells, and Idolaters, yea,
from ^he Devil himself, as St. Basil and St. A^s^in witness, Basil ser. de
^^riet. A^gusti^ de temp Sermon. 231
who affirm that it is but a heathenish custom, savouring only of Paganism
and Gentilisme; yea, that it was but the Devils drink offering, or a part of
that honor, worship, sacrifice, and adoration which the Gentiles, Witches,
Sorcerers, etc. gave to ^eelzebub the prince of Devils, and those other
Devill-gods, to whose honor, name, and memory these adorations were first
invented and consecrated.

Neither can Satan say, Ex^^ples of Gods vengance on ^ealt^ drinkers.
but Christendom has always afforded him men, who have yielded him this
homage: for some when they have been pumpt dry in this case, and blessed all
their acquaintance, they have ^ranke a health to the Devil, as Pope John the
twelfth, alias the thirteenth did. And was there not a Lincolne-shire man well
known, that in his cups drank a health to the Devil, who had no sooner
drank it off, but he fell down dead? yea, Augustine Lachimer reports, that
in Germany the year 1549. there was three, who after they had taken in their
cups, painted with a cole on the wall a loathly Devil, and then drank freely
unto him, talking to him, as if he had bee^^ personally present; but the next
morning th^^ were all found strangled and dead.

Yea, some have proceeded further, even to drink a health to God himself, and
have sped thereafter; as memorable, remarkable, and terrible is that tragical
and strange example of Gods avenging judgment, upon two drunkards and health
quaffers in Nekersho^ew, a Town in Almaine, on the fourth day of July, in the
year 1580; who coming then and there into an Inn, called for bread and wine,
which being brought, they disliked the wine, for it is newness, calling for
some older, and better wine, which being brought in great abundance, they fell
to swill and carouse on to another, till they were both as drunk as swine;
then one of them pouring forth wine, drank a carouse to his fellow, who
pledging him, demanded to whom he should drink; quoth he, drink thou unto
God; he hearing this, drinks a health or carouse to him indeed; and then
demands of his companion, which wine God should pledge him in: upon which he
takes the new wine into his hand, and filling the cup therewith, reaches forth
his arm as high as he could, as though God should have pledged him in good
earnest, saying, God I would feign know what wine thou likest best, this wine
is good enough and too good for thee, if thou had sen^ b^^ter, thou should
have had better, but such as it is, take it, pl^dge me quickly, and carouse it
off every swo^p, as I have done to thee, or else thou do me wrong (the usual
speech and phrase of our drunkards at this day) but no soon^r had he uttered
these blasphemous speeches, but the Lord forthwith proceeds in judgments
against him, causing his Arm, which he had stretched out, to stand steadfast
and unmovable, so that he could not pull it in; and benumming his whole body,
so that he could not move it from the place, in which agony he remained a long
time after (his countenance not changed) rolling his eyes to and fro in a
fearful manner, his breath and speech being taken from him, so that he could
not breath* nor speak a word, and yet seemed to every one to be alive; after
this the people (who flock thick and threefold, to see this wretched spectacle
of Gods wrath (...) vengeance) assayed to remove him from the plac^, but they
could not stir him by any strength* in the end they tied Ho^ses to him to
draw him thence; but ^hey could not move him; then they assayed to burn him,
but no fire would take hold on him: wherefore persuading themselves, (...) God
had made him a spect^cle, stand^^^ president, or fixed stat^^ of his wrath^nd
vengeance to all drunkards and all (...) ages, they surceased their
enterpris^s, wishing the will of the Lord to be done, and in this miserable and
doleful mann^^ (says my Author, Mr. S^^bs in his A^^tomy of Abuses) he stands
to this very day, as a tragical, dreadful, and prodigious spectacle of Gods
heavy displeasure, wrath, and vengeance, against drunkards; the very ^ight,
nay, the very relation, or thought of which, should strike the hearts and
souls of all, who are devoted unto this sin, with terror and amazement.

The other drunken beast his companion, who had escaped the imm^diate hand of
God, was, by the just and avenging hand of the People, hanged upon a Gibbet
before the door of the same house, for an example unto others.

Now consider this all ye ryotous drunkards, who forget God, least he tare you
in pieces, and there be none to deliver.

79.
BUt that it may appear they are more zealous and charitable, Not more forward
to drink healthes then zealous and ^arefull that others pledge the s^^e.
then either to worship Satan their god, or go to Hell their own place
alone; and to prove that their hearts desire is, that others also may be
damned, as St. Paul's was, that Israel might be saved, Romans 10. 1 they are not
more forward in drinking healthes, then they are careful to see that others
pledge them: for a health being once begun, they will look to it precisely,
that every one present shall pledge the same, in the same manner and measure,
be they thirsty, or not thirsty, willing, or not willing, able, or unable; for
measuring other men's palates, bellyes, thirsts, consciences, constitutions, and
dispositions by their own, they will force them oftentimes to drink, against
their wills, their stomachs, their healthes, etc. For tell them you are not a
thirst, which is all the answer I can vouchsafe such, or that it will not agree
with your constitution, they will conclude you an arrant fool, and ill bred.
Yea, in their judgments, Ahasuerus was none of the wisest, in appointing that
none should compel another to drink. Or tell them that the Goths ordained
upon pain of death, how none should drink an health to another, nor be forced,
further then their own free wills induced them; O this was the basest law that
ever was enacted: and yet wise Plato decreed (for the avoiding of excess) that
no one should so much as drink to another; and the Spartans law was, Vt bibat
arbitrio pocula quisque suo. Let each man's measure of drink be his pleasure.

80.
THeir manner is, 1 How they will i^tise.
either to Intise or Enforce others to pledge them. First, to intise and
persuade them, as let but a sober and religious man fall into their company, as
a purse of money may fall into a stinking Privy, O how they will conspire to
pr^v^ke his unwilling appetite with drunken healths! and if they can (like that
Babyl^nish Harlot) make him taste poison in a golden cup, O then they will sing,
and rejoice as in the division of a spoil, and bragg that they have drenched
sobriety, and blinded the light, and ever after be a snuffing of this T^pe^,
Psalm. ^ 3. 4.

Or if they cannot persuade him, 2 How they will enforce
they will hate, and revile him, perhaps stab him that will not pledge their
healths, as if it were an offense not to be forgiven; for now it is counted an
injury not worthy alone of ill words, but also of wounds and stabbs, if a man
will not for company grievously sin against God, wrong his own body, destroy
his ^oule, and wilfully le^p into hell fire: yea, they will hate a man more for
refusing, or crossing their healths then for abjuring his faith, his religion,
or his God; and are more hot, more zealous, stout, and resolute, in the
defense, or maintenance of a health, then in the cause or quarrel of their
Country; and will rather adventure their blood in the field, upon the refusal
of, or quarrel about them, then for the chiefest article of their creed;
whence it is they are so much moved and affected, that they are mighty
impatient and angry with such as cross them in this kind: but nothing so with
others, who hinder them in Gods service, or thwart them in their greatest good.

81.
THat they will ^ate, revile, and stab him who refuses to pledge their healthes,
How impatient of deniell.
needs no other proof then experience: as how many have lost their lives,
because they would not be drunk? though some others ( Vriah-like) have lost
theirs, when they have yielded to be drunk.

Neither is this in use here only, bu^ in other countries the same. It was a
great mercy of God, that I had not my brains knocked out in the Low Countries,
for not drinking a great man's health, and losing mine own.

In the Dukedom of Massovia, it is no more amongst health quaffers, but either
drink to me, or fight with me: hence grow those many murders, stabs, w^unds
without cause (as Solomon speaks) quarrels, fightings, co^tentions, and
debates which we usually hear of, both at home and abroad.

Now what is the reason of all, but this, long custom, Their misprision of
honor and reputation.
and the pravity and wickedness of men, has made it a kind of affront,
indignity, discourtesie, and wrong both to him that begins the health, to those
that second it, and to the person that is remembered in it, to refuse or pass
it by, and not to pledge it, as St. Austin, Ambrose, Ierom, etc. testify,
besides our own experience.

And many men think, they cannot do their absent friends a greater honor*
yea, their friends also take it for an high honor.

But, O the stupidity both of the one and the other! for can this be any honor
or credit unto any, to be thus dishonored of every infamous and beastly
drunkard, of every pot-companion, Tun, or Hogshead; to be the daily phrase,
the Theme the Rhetoric of every ebrious and luxurious sot; the occasion,
cause, and patronage of drunkenness and excess? yea, what Christian would not
scorn to have their healthes, their names, their place and persons made a
common Prologue or praeludium, an ordinary bawd or pandor, an usual inlet,
way, or passage to drunkenness and excess, a common shoe-horne, bait, or
engine to force or draw men on to drink beyond all measure, a daily patronage,
plea, or sanctuary to justify and bear out, or else a frequent, but unjust
apology or excuse to extenuate, salve, or mitigate the excess of sin, and
infamous, wicked, base, and swinish men?

It was a noble answer of a great Prince, Do not drink my health, but pray
for it: and a wise reply of a grave and worthy Statesman of this Kingdom, I
will pray for the Kings health, but drink for mine own. And surely none but
sots will bring themselves into grievous diseases by drinking healthes to other
men; and such is the case of health drinkers. What said Callisthenes to one
that urged him to drink at Alexanders Feast, as others did? I will not, for
who so drinks to Alexander, had need of Aesculapius, Examples of some that
have drunk other men's healthes, and their own deaths.
meaning a Physician.

Nay, it is well if they prevent not the Physician, and drink not themselves
past all hope of recovery; for not seldom do they save the Physician a
labor, and drink at once another health, their own death, as I could
instance in sundry examples, I Will only give you two, but they are as good as
twenty.

At one supper, which Alexander prepared for his Favorites and Captains,
there was no less then one and forty; which killed themselves in that goodly
conflict of carousing healthes. Where Promachus having swallowed down four
Gallons of wine, got the prize and victory.

And at another drinking feast, or combat which he appointed for the Indians,
himself drank his death and ruin, in quaffing off a whole carouse or health
out of Herc^^es cup, and to bear him company, there was five and thirty more
at the same time drank themselves dead in the place, and never revived more,
with carousing healthes and rounds.

There is another example recorded, which is so remarkable, that I am loath to
pass it, though the circumstances vary. It is recorded of Popelus the second,
King of Poland, that having incurred the displeasure of his Nobility through
his ill government, for which they intended to depose him; he feigned himself
to be very sick, by his Queens advice, and thereupon sent for twenty of the
chief Princes of Pomerania, who had the principal voice in the election of
the Pol^nian Kings, to come and visit him in this his sickness, which they did
accordingly; the King upon their coming, requested them to elect his son to
the Kingdom after his decease, which thing they answered they would willingly
do, if the rest of the Nobility would consent; the Queen in the mean time
provides a cup of sudden poison, of purpose to dispatch them, and presents it
to them all, to drink the King her husbands health; they to testify their
love and alleagiance to the King, drank off the cup, as their manner was, unto
his health, but to their own instant confusion and immediate death, and to the
subversion of all the stock and race of the Polonian Princes: a sudden and
fearful, yet a just j^dgement of God upon these Princes, who were much
addicted to the drinking of healthes formerly. But lo the infinite justice of
God on both hands, for out of the dead and poisoned Carkases of these Princes,
there issued such infinite troops and swarms of Rats and Mice, as chased
Popelus, his wife, and all his children from place to place, both by Sea and
land, till at last they were forced to fly to the strong castle of Oraccovia,
where they were drowned, and eaten up of these Rats and Mice, in despite of
Guard and Garrisons, and all those Arts and policies of fire and water-workes
that were used to secure them; as the Polonian Histories do at large declare.

But not to travel so far for examples; how many health-sokers and drunkards
may we see or hear of every year, within the verge and compass of our land,
who do suddenly consume, perish, and come to a fearful end, being cut down
by strange and unexpected deaths, in the very act of their sins, before they
had any time, or space to repent; whose deaths, even charity it self, must
needs judge most miserable, seeing they dye in their sins, and are taken away
in Gods just wrath, even whilst they are sacrificeing their souls to Satan.
And does not the very Echo of these drunken and excessive healthes, daily cry
in the ears of God for vengeance, on all that use them, if not upon the whole
Land, for their sakes? yea undoubtedly.

82.
THen let no drunkard force thee, Original of the word pledge.
either against thy stomach, or thy inability to pledge his healths: yea, let
quaffers quarrel, rage, and scoff, threaten, curse, and load thee with a
thousand censures, yet hold thou thine own still. It is true, they will be
strangely importunate* what then? a shameless beggar, must have a strong
denial.

Indeed if the word pledge were used seriously, properly, opportunely; and not
altogether mistaken, and used in a wrong sense, I should grant it a duty, when
any shall be called thereunto. But sotted drunkards understand not what they
speak, when they use the phrase: for the word pledge, implies no intention of
drinking; as look we but to the original, and first institution thereof, and
we shall find, that when in the borders of Wales twelve Welchmen had
treacherously stabbed 12. Englishmen, as they were holding the cups to their
mouths; it grew to that, that none would drink at any public meeting, except
they had some friend present who would undertake to be their pledge, and
carefully see that none should hurt them the while; but he who uses the word
now, makes himself ridiculous, the occasion being taken away, for (God be
thanked) we have no such cause of fear, having the Laws of God to guide the
virtuous, and the Laws of the Land to restrain the wicked.

Yet their mistake is no more in this their challenge, then it is in the
combat it self, and the victory they get by it; for whereas they make a sport
of drunkenness, counting him a malefactor in the highest degree, that departs
without staggering, and fit to be carried before a Magistrate, to render an
account of his contumacie; and delight to make men drink, till they vomit up
their shame again, like a filthy Dog; or lie wallowing in their beastliness,
like a brutish Swine; this is the most sad and woeful spectacle that can be to
a rectified understanding.

And whereas they brag of the conquest, when with the weapons of full charged
cups, they have overcome the rest; it is both the basest office, and
lamentablest overthrow to themselves, that can possibly be imagined. For what a
barbarous, graceless, and unchristian practice is this, to take pleasure in
making others drunk? as if it were their glory, and pastime, and they took
delight to see God dishonored, his Spirit grieved, his name blasphemed, his
creatures abused, themselves, and their friends souls damned; surely such men
clime the highest step of the ladder of wickedness; thinking their own sins
will not press them deep enough into Hell, except they also lode themselves
with other men's.

And how sottish is their opinion of victory, In c^^quering they are ^^st
overcome.
when even in conquering they are most overcome: for whilst they triumph in a
drunken victory or conquest over their friends, Satan gets the victory over
them: in excessive drinking they have overcome all their companions, this they
see and boast of; but they see not how they are overcome, shamefully foiled,
and utterly overthrown by the d^vell their chief enemy; under whose lash they
are like to be everlastingly. But let him that delights to make another drunk,
read his doom, Habak^k 2. 15, 16. where he shall find, not only shame and
spewing appointed for his glory, but also that a cup of vengeance, even the cup
of the Lords right hand is preparing for him.

And lastly, To be a ^^^pter ^he basest office ^en have.
what office so base as this for men to resemble Crows, which live upon
carrion, or those winglesse Flies, which suck a living out of the corrupt
blood of uncleanness, is bad enough: but to be a tempter, to wear the Livery
of Satan, to be the Pentioner of hell, at the command of that malignant and
degenerous Spirit; this is the most ignominious and dishonorable name and
shame that can be: to be the Hang-mans servant, is an honor to it: for to err
is the part of a man; but to seduce, is the part of a devil. It is ill to play
the wanton, worse to play the beast, worst of all to play the divill.

But thou will say. This is true only of the ruder sort, (...) objection
answered.
and more debauched; and so pertaines not to thee?

Yes, it does. For though thou do not force men to pledge thy healths; yet
thou will entreat, and persuade them to it, by all the Art and oratory thou
can use; and in case they still refuse, thou will think the worse of them,
censure them in thy thoughts, and bear them an inward grudg and spleen in
thine heart, if not slander and revile them with thy tongue. Nay, do thou
not, like the Grecian drunkards, use some such phrase as this? let him drink,
or else be packing, let him carrouse, or carry him out of the house, whereby a
further wrong from others is occasioned; so imitating the Ephesians, who, (as
Cicero reports) having banished their Prince Hermodorus, made proclamation,
that none should excel another, or if he did so, that he should no longer
there dwell, but else where inhabit. How ever it likes thee well enough, that
others of thy company shall by violence enforce them, and this alone makes thee
as guilty, as if thou did it thy self; so that to come fairly off, even
from thy company, and neither drink nor quarrel, is impossible, or, at least,
a wonder.

83.
ANd thus you see, To dam^^ their own souls the least part of their mischief.
that drunkards not only traffic to enrich hell with their own so^les, but
others also: yea, that they are so pernicious, that to damn their own so^les
is the least part of their mischief, for they commonly draw vengeance upon
thousands, by seducing some, and giving ill example to others.

O the multitude of drunkards that one true drunkard makes! What a multitude of
drunkards one true drunkard ^akes.
especially if he be well accomplished with ingenuity, and gifts of nature: as
when Achitophel's head stands upon Simon Magus his shoulders, there is a world
of mischief toward. A will bent to do harm, and a wit able to prosecute it,
like Cannon shot, makes a lane where it goes. For trial, let such an one tell
me, if he can, how many he has drawn into the same sin with him? were he
willing, I fear his memory would fail him, though his conscience hereafter
will not fail to evidence the same against him, with the several aggravations
of each circumstance. As Ovid said of himself; I am second to none in trifles:
so the drunkard may truly say, I am second to none in tempting, yea, tell me,
who are such pandors to sin, such factors for hell, as these men? who do the
Devil such service, who deserve so great pay from him, as drunkards? A true
drunkard is like the Bramble, Judge. 9. 15. which first set it is self on fire,
and then fired all the Wood: or like one sick of the Plague, who (as they say)
is carried with an itching desire to infect others that are clear: or like a
house on fire in the midst of a City, which (if the wind blows vehemently)
stays not in the burning of an house, or two, but sets on fire al adjoining,
one, on this side; another on that; a third, behind it; a fourth, over against
it; neither does the fire cease there, but every one which it has set on fire,
kindles as many more, and so one another, till, it may be, half, or all the
whole City be consumed: for this is the drunkards case directly, who is the
bane of many poor souls, besides his own. It is S. Basil's observation, that
one whore makes many fornicators; but experience shows, that one drunkard
makes ten times as many drunkards.

Yea, the more they can seduce, the more they glory: as when Theudas had got
four hundred followers, he thought himself a jolly fellow, Acts, 5. 36. But
this is no other, then the setting a man's own house on fire, it burns many of
his neighbors, and he shall answer for all the ruins. And surely he who gives
a man wine to deceive him, is first drunk in soul, before he can procure the
others bodily distemper: and to glory in giving weak brains a drench, to see
them wallow in their filthiness; is but to brag how far they are become the
Devils children.

84.
TOuching their manner of seducing. If the Devil would surrender his place it
should be to some good fellow or other.
A drunkard (as if his brains were fired with all the plots, projects, and
cunning Stratagems that Hell can yield) is as rarely gifted in drawing to
sin, as the Devil himself; and is become the child of Hell, by as proper a
right: so that if Satan would change his office, or were to surrender his
place to any man alive, it should be to some good fellow or other, for as the
Chamaeleon can change himself into any color that it sits upon, but white and
red; or as the Polypus can change color at the sight of every object, but blew
only: so a drunkard can be any thing, save good; he has learned to handle a
man so sweetly, that one would think it a pleasure to be seduced; yea, these
Aspes will sting a man so, that he shall dye sleeping. The falsest hearts, will
have the plausiblest mouths; like to Salomons Curtesan, their lips drop as an
Honey comb, and their mouth is smo^ther then Oil; but their end is bitter as
wormwood; and such fair and smooth communication, is no other then a trap or
snare of Honey, as Diogenes calls it. Their custom is, with a pleasing breath,
to waft a man into Mare mortuum, tole him on to destruction, as we tole beasts
with fodder to the slaughter house: and to take away all suspicion, they will
so mollify the stiffenesse of a man's prejudice, so temper and fit him to their
own mold, that once to doubt them, would require the spirit of discerning.

He is such a pleasing murderer, that he tickles a man to death, and makes him
(like Salomon's fool) dye laughing. O how many are there, that hate their
other enemies, yea, and their friends too, and yet embrace this enemy; because
he kisseth when he betrayeth; and indeed what fence for the Pistol that is
charged with the Bullet of friendship? Hilary compares it to a Razor in the
hand of a counterfeit Barber: as when Vriah was set in the forefront of the
battle, and honor pretended, murder was meant. Which is the sole cause, that
drunkards so swarm in every corner of the land, as where shall a man come, and
not find one of these seducers.

85.
INdeed, How drunkards swarm in every cor^er.
heretof^re they were as rare as Wolves; but now they are as common as Hogs:
heretofore it was the sin of Tinkers, Ostlers, Beggars; etc. now of Farmers,
Citicens, Esquires, Knights; etc. heretofore S. Pa^ls speech was current, they
that are drunken are drunken in the night; now they fear not the light, the
Sunshine, no, they make no difference of nights or days; except this, that
drunkenness most rages on the Lords day: heretofore S. Peter's argument was
more then probable, these are not drunk, for it is but the third hour of the
day; now men are grown such husbands, as by that time they will return their
stocks, and have their brains crowing before day, or at least if you will
find many men sober, you must take them in their beds, for they rise up early
to follow drunkenness: formerly men were so unacquainted with insatiate
drinking, that the devil himself was called Robin good fellow; now a man is
hated as bad as the devil; if he refuse to be a good fellow ( id est, a
drunkard) There was a Street in Rome called V^cus Sobrius, Sober-street,
because there was never a drinking house in it; find such a Street in any City
or populous Town in England, and some good man or other will put it in the
Chronicle: yea, if England plies her liquor so fast as she begins, Germany is
like to loose her Charter, for drunkenness, and the French disease, are upon
terms of quitting their Countries aleagiance, and to be made free denisons of
England; nay, have they not already given up the bucklers to the English; who
as in fashions, so in vices, will needs be the Ape of every Nation. It is a
disease, whereof this Nation and generation is sick at the very heart.

Yea, woe is me, how is the world turned beast? what bowsing and quaffing, and
whiffing, and healthing, is there on every bench? and what reeling, and
staggering in our St^e^^s? what drinking by the yard, the Dye, the dozen? what
forcing of pledges, what quarrels for measure, and form? how is that become
an excuse of villainy, which any villainy might rather excuse, I was drunk? How
has this torrent, yea, this deluge of excess in drink drowned the face of
the earth, and risen many Cubits above the highest mountains of religion and
good laws? Yea, would to God I might not say with a Reverend Prelate of ours,
that which I fear, and shame, and grieve, to say, ^. Hall.
that even some of them which square the Arc for others, would not inwardly
drown themselves, and discover their nakedness hereby. That other inundation
scowred the world, this impures it, and what but a deluge of fire and
brimstone, can wash it from so abominable filthiness?

O the drunkenness that is in one day in this Land, yea, in this City, yea, at
some Fair, or Market to be seen! For go but to the Towns end, where a Fair
is kept, and there they lie, as if some field had been fought; here lies one
man, there another; yea, alas for woe! a woman, nay, a swine with a woman's
face: or go into the backe-Lanes, and there you have them, among Frogs and
Toades, their fit matches. And in all probability, this infectious vice of
drunken good-fellowship is like to stick by this Nation; for so long as the
multitude of offenders benumes the sense of offending, a common blot is held no
stain. Drunkenness is as odious with us, as Adultery is in that State,
wherein no body is chaste.

86.
BUt to go on (though I dare not show all their slights they have to draw men
on, Dr^nkards like lulian who never did a man a good ^urn but it was to damn
his soul.
least in reproving, I become a teacher, as it fared with another in the like
case.

A drunk^rd for kindness is another Julian, who was oftentimes bountiful, but
how? he never did a man a good turn, but it was to damn his soul: he so
confirms the profession of his love with vows, protestations, and promises
(as a large complement, for the most part, ushers in a close craft) that you
would think Ionathan's love to David was nothing in comparison, as no faces
look lovelier then the painted. But accept of gain from him, and you are lost
for ever; for, with S^s^r^, you can no sooner taste of this I^^l's milk, but you
shall feel a nail in your Temples; so that the wickedness of a man which
fears God is better, then the good entreaty of a drunkard; his proffers are
like the Fowlers shrape when he casts meat to birds, which is not out of
charity, to relieve; but out of treachery, to ensnare them, they lay wait,
says Jeremy, as he that sets snares; and make a pit to catch men, Jeremiah
5. 26. or like Traps we set for vermin, seeming charitable, when they intend
to kill: and thou may answer these cursed tempters, which delight in the
murder of souls, as the woman of End^r did Saul, wherefore seek thou to
take me in a snare, to cause me to dye? 1 Samuel 28. 9. He, and the Usurer loves
alike, for their charity is no better than cruelty; if they reach you bread
with one hand, be sure there is a stone in the other to do you a mischief; for
under the taste of Nectar, he will poison you with the water of Styx; he is
another Absalom, who made a feast for Amn^n, whom he meant to kill; like some
prurient lecher, who provides a rich banquet for one whom he means to corrupt
and deflour^; or like the Ivy, that by embraceing the tree sucks out the heart
of it; and there is no subtilty like that which deceives a man, and has thanks
for the labor; He who^ the Lord loves shall be delive^ed from their
meretricious allure^e^ts
for as our Savior says; blessed is the man that is not offended at their
scoffs, Matthew. 11. 6. so, blessed is the man that is not taken with their
wiles: for herein alone consists the difference, he whom the Lord loves, shall
be delivered from their meritricious all^rements, Eccles. 7. 26. and he whom
the Lord abhors shall fall into their snares, Prove. 22. 14.

87.
NOw if they cannot seduce us, they will envy and ^ate us.

First, they will envy us, If they (...) not sedu^e u^ they will envy and ^ate
(...).
because we will not run with them to the same excess of ry^t, 1 John 3. 12.
Prove. 29. 27. Psalm 69. 12. Every man is borne a Caine, envying that good in
another, which he wants himself; but a swinish drunkard delights to see the
temperance, 1. H^w drunkard^ e^vie the sober and (...).
sobriety, and other eminent graces of him that fears God, and will not do as
he does; as sore eyes delight to look upon the Sun. Lot vexed himself, because
he saw men bad; these, because men are good; not that God's Law is broken, but
because others keep it better than themselves.

It is true, envy knows what it will not confess; but experience shows that
sordid drunkards are as full of envy, toward such as will not consort with
them, as a Serpent is full of poison. And you may know it by this token, do
they not make it their Grace, both before and after dinner, to disgrace such an
Innocent? O that so many Loayes and Fishes, as did feed five thousand in the
Wilderness, would but stop their mouths, that envy and speak evil of such as
they know no other fault by but their virtue; they pick their own sorrows,
out of the joys of other men; and out of others sorrows likewise, they assume
their own joys: whereas worth begets, in those that are magnanimous,
emulation; in base minds, it contrarily begets envy; will you know the reason?
He that has lost all good himself, is vexed to see it in another, and can no
way be pacified, except that other become as bad as himself: as Demon^des
having himself crooked feet, and losing both his shoes, to be even with him
that had found them, desired the gods, that the parties feet might he as
crooked as his shoes were. But how just is it with God, that this fire of envy,
should be punished with the fire of Hell?

88.
How they wi^^ hate them.
SEcondly, as is their envy, such is their hatred and malice: they hate the
good, because they will not be so evil as themselves, Micha. 3. 2. Matthew, 10.
22. John, 15. 19. 1 King. 22. 8. Proverbs, 29. 27. The temperance and sobriety
of a good man, is as great a vexation to them; as their conversation is to him:
for as if Nature had made them antipathites to virtue, they so hate
righteousness, that they will hate a man for it, and say of good living, as
Festus did of great learning, it makes a man mad; but they cannot know who are
sober, that are mad themselves.

Neither is this of theirs an ordinary hatred, Which hatred is the most bitter
and exorbitant of all other^
for they even eat their own hearts in anger, that they cannot eat ours in
revenge; we pray for the opening of their eyes, and they pray for the pulling
out of ours; we desire the turning of their hearts, and they wish the outting
of our throats: no such concord, no such discord (says one of the Learned) as
that which proceeds from Religion; My name, ^aith Luther, is more odious unto
them, then any thief, or mutherer; as Christ was more detestable to the Jews
then Barrabas. Behold s^^h David, mine en^^ies, for they are many, and they
hate me with a ^ruell hatred, Psalm. 25. 19. yea, so cruel, that it makes their
teeth gnash, and their hearts burst again, Acts, 7. 54. which made the truth's
adversaries give St. Paul stripes above measure; and the Heathen Emperors to
devise such cruel Tortures for all those, which but: professed themselves
Christians.

You cannot anger a sotted drunkard worse, then to do well; yea, he hates you
more bitterly for this, and the credit you gain thereby, then if you had
cheated him of his patrimony, with your own discredit.

That there is no hatred so virulent and bitter, as that which is occasioned by
ver^uous living, and professing of Christ's name, our Savior himself proves
copiously, Math. 10. L^k. 21. where he shows, that it makes them forget all
natural affection; wheth^r it be that which descends, as of Parents to
children; or that which which ascends, as of children to Parents; or that which
is mutual, of Friends, Kindred, or Brethren one to another; so that be they
never so near allied, they shall betray ^^ch other, and cause them to dye,
even for his names sake, as the Text has it.

Neither does their malice extend it self to this or that person only, but
these Hamans so hate the Religious, that they wish, as Caligula once did of the
Romans, that they had all but one head, tha^ so they might cut it off at a
blow, were it in their power, Ester, 3. 6. 8. 9. 13. Micha, 3. 2. Psalm. 83. 4.
But our comfort is, they have not so much authority as malice, resembling the
Serpent Porphyrus, which abounds with poison, but can hurt none, for want of
^eeth.

89.
NOw you must know that this envy and hatred of theirs is too strong to
contain it self, How their envy and ha^red vents it self at the ^outh and
hands.
within the heart, and thereupon breaks forth at their mouth and hands.

Besides seeing the former stratagems will not prevail, and that they cannot
allure, nor persuade to drunkenness, and the like sins, and so work their
wills upon the sober and conscionable by subtilty and fair means; they will
seek to compel and enforce them to do as they do: like as when lustful Amnon
could not win Tamer by fair means, he deflowers her by force. For as the
Devil, who reigns as a Prince in the world of the ungodly, Ephesians. 2. 2. is for
strength, a Lion, and a Fox for wit: so is the world it self, if it cannot
infect us, it will afflict us; if it cannot corrupt our souls, it will taynt
our good names; it is (not like some bashful Suter) easily answered, but so
impudent, that while we have breath, it will never give us over, thinking that
so long as there is life, there is hope.

Now to effect their end, and bring about their purpose, they use diverse and
sundry means, venting their hearts at their mouths in words, and by action in
their hands: with their mouths they will censure, scoff at, revile, rail on,
nickename, slander, falsely accuse, curse, threaten etc. and with their hands
they will (at least if they may be permitted) imprison, smite, hurt; and
lastly, if all this will not do, they will kill us; as there be more ways to
the wood then one.

To reckon up all the tricks they do, and would use, if the law restrained
them not, and to reckon up how many Creatures in the Universe, were a task
equally possible and endless: besides, it would overmuch swell the heap; and
the Pages, like fish, would grow into a multitude, wherefore I will select out
only two verbal properties of their envy and hatred, and pass over the rest.

The malice and envy of drunkards vents it self at their mouths, either. 1 By
censuring or 2 By slandering us


90.
1 FIrst, At their mouths first by censureing the sober.
they will strangely censure us, if we refuse to do as they do, Psalm. 35. 16.
and 69. 10. 11. 12. If a man will not swear, drink drunk, and conform to
their lewd customs, he is an Arch-puritan, by the law which the Jews had to
kill Christ; yea, for this very cause, they will definitively censure one for
an hypocrite, though they scarce know him superficially; at least, if a man be
but careful of his society, they will tax and floute him with stand farther
off, for I am holier th^n thou; they call piety pride, for not going with them
to the Tavern; as indeed there is no goodness in man, but such will ascribe
it to vain glory. The beastly Sod^mit^s thought Lot a proud and imperious
f^llow, Genesis 19. 9. And so Elia^ censures David, I know the pride of thine
heart, says he, when nothing but the zeal of Gods glory, and desire of his
Brethrens good, made him so forward. 1 Samuel 17. 28. 29.

But as all are not Thieves that Dogs bark at; so all are not hypocrites which
they term so. The Pharisie censured the Publican, and the Infidells Paul, who
were more precious in Gods sight, then themselves. But baseness, what it
cannot attain to; it will vilicate and deprave; and prejudice casts a false
color upon the best actions: whence it is, that if our righteousness, do but
exceed the righteousness of a swearer, or drunkard, we are sure to be
censured, yea, persecuted for our righteousness, as Abet was of Caine, because
his own works were evil, and his Brothers good. If a man makes but the Word
of God a rule to walk by, he is too precize; if he will be more then almost a
Christian, he is curious, fantastical, factious, and shall, with David, Psalm.
69. 11. 12. be made the song and laughing stock of every drunken beast:
whereas, if he would be drunk, swear, mispend his time, haunt Tavernes, play
the good fellow, and do as they do, he should have their love, approbation,
and good word; yea, if all men would be profanely wicked, and make no bones of
sin, their censures would cease, and there would not be a Puritan, with some
of them, in all the world.

But it is the custom of lewd men, VV^ereof four reasons first they judge
others by themselves.
(I confess a lewd custom) to measure all others by their own Bushel, to
form both their opinions and censures of us, acc^rding to the mold of evil in
themselves, yea, all (for the most part) judge others by themselves; and hence
drunkards doing all their good in hypocrisy, do thereafter judge of others,
Saint Chrysostom has given the rule. As it is, says he, a hard thing for one
to suspect another to be evil, who is good himself; so it is more hard, for
him to suppose another to be good, who is himself evil. As we see in Nero,
who being monstrous incontinent himself, verily believed, that all men were
most foul libidinists, yea, that there was not a chaste person in all the
world, saving that men cloaked their vice with hypocrisy. I11 dispositions,
cause ill suspicions; and surely he that suspects another to be ill, without
just ground, by so doing proclaims himself to be guilty; for in things
uncertain, a bad construction must needs flow from a bad mind: suspicion, for
the most part, proceeds from a self defect: virtuous men rarely censure; as
great laborers rarely sneeze: so that to censure and traduce another worth,
is to question thine own: besides, it is an uncharitable and ridiculous thing,
for where I want experience, charity bids me think the best, and leave what I
know not to the Searcher of hearts.

91.
INdeed, other reasons may be given why they so censure us, as, first, their
Ignorance causes suspicion; yea, there is 2 Their ignorance makes them
suspicious.
nothing so makes a man suspect much, as to know little; children in the dark
suppose they see, what they see not; you shall have a Dog very violent in
barking at his own shadow, or face in a glass. An ignorant Rusticke seeing a
Geometritian drawing of lines, not knowing to what end he does the same, is apt
to judge him foolish and fantastic. Tell a plain country fellow, that the
Sun is bigger then his cart wheel, and swifter in course then any of his
Horses; he will laugh you to scorn. The Duke of Vondozme one day looking into
his Well with others, and seeing face answer face (having never before observed
the like) went home in all haste, and called for aid against the Antipodes.
Paglarencis was amazed, and said his Farmer had surely coosened him, when he
heard him tell that his Sow had eleven Pigs, and his Mare but one Foale. Yea,
I have read of a silly country fellow, that killed his Ass for drinking up the
Moon.

But their own hearts can tell them, how fruitful a mother of jealousies
their ignorance of spiritual things is, and how it conceives upon first ^ight
of every object which they cannot skill on, and that being once conceived, it
makes the party so travel* to bring forth the same in words and actions of
enmity, that for the interim, he is as busy headed as if a hive of Bees were
in his pate, not considering, that repentance ever follows rash judgment.

Secondly, 3 Their p^ssions and affections make them partial.
their passions and affections infatuate and besot them, and makes them
infinitely partial. For as in an ill pact Jury, whereof there is one wise man,
another honest man, five knaves, and five fools, the greater part overrules
the better part, these ^en, over-beares those two: so fares it with a wicked
man, the five senses, and as many affections are the knaves and fools, science
is the wise man, conscience the honest; now neither science the wi^e, nor
conscience the honest, can be heard, nor give their verdict, but all goes with
the mad senses, and frantic affections.

We know when a man looks upon any thing directly through the air, they
appear in their proper forms, and colors as they are; but if they be looked
upon through a glass, be it green, blew, yellow, or of any other color, all
the things we see, seems to us to be of the color of the glass, through which
we do behold them: even so, a wicked man houlding the false spectacles of his
several passions and affections before the dim sight of his judgment, all
things appear to him in a contrary color. The eye that is blood-shot, thinks
every thing red; those that have the Jaundise, see all things yellow: so these
drunkards, being overgrown with malicious passions, think us in fault, when
themselves are only too blame.

O how the passions of anger, and affection of love overrules and
over-perswades our judgments! we may truly say, that love, hatred, and
indifferency, looks through three pair of eyes: what we see, or hear, being
passionately transported either by love, oranger, we neither see, nor hear it
as it is. The object which we love, seems much more fair unto us, and that
much fowler, which we loath. Yea, even love (Zaleuchus-like) will make a man
put out one of his own eyes, that so he may see his friends virtues not see
his crimes. Has not his affection robbed him of his judgment, wh^ ^hinkes
better of a filthy strumpet, then of his own chaste wife? yea, surely if he did
not look through the false spectacles of his flesh, it could not be.

But anger especially robs a man of his judgment, and lifts reason out of her
seat, which makes these beastly, sensual swilbowles so partial in judging
between themselves and the godly. As for example, (indeed the Scriptures afford
not mamy examples of it, in them which were drunkards, for drunkenness was
then as rare, as now it is common, but what is true of all the Serpents seed,
must needs be true of Satan's peculiar ones. How did anger rob Haman of his
judgment, who thought Mordecae's not bowing the knee to him, a more heinous
offense, then his own murdering of thousands? And Iezabel of hers, who
thought it a greater sin in El^ah to kill Baals Prophets, then in her self
to slay all the Prophets of the Lord? And the Phari^is of theirs, who could see
more unlawfulnes in the Disciples plucking a few ears of corn, and the
Palsie^ man's carrying his bed on the Sabbath* then in their own devouring of
widows houses; and could better afford themselves to murder Christ, then
others to believe in him; yea, they could better afford themselves to be the
greatest of sinners, then our Savior to be in company with sinners. And
lastly, Ahab, who thought Eliah troubled Israel more, in doing the will of the
Lord, then himself, in provoking the Lord, above all the Kings of Israel which
were before him? which is the case of our drunkards, they censure more deeply,
our fearing of God, then their own blaspheming of him,; and think it a more
heinous offense, for us to be sober, then for themselves to be drunk. What
then are their censures of us, when we do offend?

Yea, if men's passions and affections did not make them strangely partial; how
could they suffer their faithful and painful Minister (who lies ledger for
the great King of Heaven and Earth) to feed upon Crusts, and spinne out twenty
or forty Marks a year, into a thread as long as his life; yea, murmr at his
great means, and boast of their large contribution, and complain he keeps no
hospitality, though indeed even books would require ten pounds of the money: I
speak not of their blockish stupidity, who think none live more idly then
Scholars) when yet themselves, being undeserving Attorneys, or silly
Tradesmen, who do little else, but stand in their Shops, or ungodly
Ale-house-keepers, whose whole life is but a vicissitude of filling and
emptying, will get, and spend one hundred, two hunderd, three hundred pounds
per Annum a piece, and yet complain of a hard world? surely they think
Ministers can preach without study, as the Apostles did; or live by miracle, as
John Baptist did, who was in his diet, habit, and carriage indeed a miracle.

3. Another reason is, 4 They see and look to us not to themselves.
as these drunkards can see us, but not themselves: (without a glass) so they
look to us, not to themselves: it faring with them as it did with the ^airies,
called Lamiae, who made use of their eyes, when they went abroad; but put them
in a box when they came home; and they have much the more quiet for so doing, a
wicked man's conscience being like a bad wife, that will either be gadding
abroad, or scoulding at home.

In surveying their own evil actions they are beetle eyed, or like him, John
the 9. who had never a seeing eye; or at least like Polyphemus, who had only
one eye; but in spying ours, they have the eyes of a Basiliske, and are as
quick sighted as Argos, who had his head compassed with an hundred eyes; yea,
as Lynceus (who as Varro speaks) could see through a wall; or if they have two
seeing eyes, yet, like the purblind, they see double, or like those women of
Scythia called Bithiae, they have two sights in each eye: for if they look
upon our actions, it is with an evil eye, judging of us by what we should
be; if upon their own, it is with a tender eye, and so judge by what they are
in their own opinion, and the judgment of sense.

And to mend the matter, Satan, like our cunning men, presents unto them
spiritual things in a false glass, stamping his own image on Gods silver, and
Gods Image on his own dross, and so comes their often mistake in censuring.

Neither are their memories less partial, for in remembering our faults, they
are like Clement the sixth, who never forgot any thing he had once learned; but
touching their own, they resemble Claudius the Emperor, who presently forgot
whatsoever he did, or spoke.

Now put all together, and tell me whether it fares not with drunkards, as it
did with Pentheus in Euripides his Bacchus, who supposed he saw two Suns, two
Thebes, every thing double, when his brain alone was troubled?

92.
SEcondly, How drunhards will raise slanders of the conscionable.
if we refuse to participate with them in their sin, it shall go hard, but
they will make us partake with them of their shame: as if Joseph will not
commit adultery with his Mistress, she will accuse him for an adulterer, and
make him worse thought of then her self. Innocence is no shelter against evil
tongues; malice never regards how true any accusation is, but how spiteful.

The baggage World desires nothing more then to scarre the face that is fairer
then she; and it is Satan's policy, (because report both makes jealousies,
where there are none, and increases those that there are) to abuse our ears,
in hearing; our tongues, in speaking; and our hearts, in believing lies, to
disable us from discerning the truth.

Yea this of slander, like a ^uge and mighty Polypheme, has done such service
to the uncircumcised, that examples thereof in Scripture, are like moates in the
Sun; as whom have we mentioned therein, without mention of some false
accusation? Naboth was a blasphemer upon record, and proved so by affidavit;
Eliah, was a troubler of Israel; Jeremiah, an enemy to the State; Susanna, a
Whore; John Baptist, had a Devil; Paul, was a polluter of the Temple; Stephen,
was a destroyer of the Law; all the Disciples, sectaries, subverters of the
State, etc. Acts 28. 21. Yea, Christ himself was a Wine-bibber, a seducer of
the people, a Beelzebub, and what not? And the same devil who spoke in
Iezabel, and those wicked ones of old, now speaks in our debauched drunkards;
and deboyshed swearers, who resembling the Devil, Rev. 12. 10. Job 1. 7, 9,
11. will charge a man (if he be not for their turn) with many things, as the
Jews did Paul, Acts 24. but proving nothing, verse 13.

Neither needs their any proof; How apt others are to believe their slanders,
and afterward to spread them.
for the common people as good as thought so before. Worldly minds looking
upon Jordan with Syrian eyes, think none can be of any other, then their own
diet, (as some Moors think there is no other complexion then their own,
because they never saw men of more temperate Clymates) and because they find
their own filthy lusts, so strongly prevailing with themselves; they cannot
conceive how they should be capeable of a repulse from others; and indeed, it
is hard for a wicked heart to think well of any other, because it can think
none better then it self, and knows it self evil.

Wherein also is another disadvantage, that cannot be helped; the multitude
will sooner believe them, then our selves, affirmatives being apter to win
belief, then negatives are to uncredit them. You know the high Priests and
Elders were not more ready to aise a slander upon our Savior CHRIST, after his
death, Matthew 28. 12. 13. then the common people were apt to believe the same,
verse. 15. yea, the jews believe it to this day. Calumny supports her self by
lying, How pleasant it is to wicked men to ^eare ill of the religious.
and she may do it safely among evil minded men, because they are Judges,
that, for the most part, will inquire no further, but believe at first. Yea,
says Luther, they hunger and thirst after these scandalous reports of the
Godly, and if at any time they hear of the disgrace of some good and eminent
person, like hungry Hogs, they muzzell in their excrements, and feast upon
them, as upon dainties; there being nothing that so glads their hearts, that so
opens their mouths, with so much insolency and triumph: O what care they take
to spread the same abroad by a common fame! as let conscience say whether this
be not so, yea, whether they will not censure, and condemn all the generation
of Gods people, because they hear ill of some few, that care only to be
thought good.

As true it is there are such monsters, such white devils, who make Religion a
very stalking-Horse to villainy; yea too many men, that dishonor God, by
wearing of his livory. But what was Satan to the children of God? Job. 1. 6.
though he thrust himself into their company? or what wise man will tax all the
Apostles, because one was a Judas? To argue, because some are so and so,
therefore the rest are alike, is a saplesse reason, only becoming a fool:
yea, to condemn all, for a few that are bad, is as equal and just, as it was
for Simeon, and Levi, to murder all the Sechemites, for the offense only of
Hamor's Son, Genesis 34. 2. 25. 31.

But to go on. Drunkards feed themselves with others adversity, as Beetels
are fed with their fellows dunge; and like flesh-flies, make the wounds of
Gods children their chief nourishment; yea, Crocodile like, they would, if
they could, fatten themselves with our warmest blood; and no wonder, when there
are some that naturally feed upon poison, and are fatned with it.

But they must needs be filthy creatures, that feed upon nothing but
corruption. To delight in men's supposed sins, is the sport of Devils; recovery
from sin, is the joy of good men and Angels. Cham derides his Fathers
nakedness, it should have been his sorrow, he makes it his sport; but it is
ill for a man to make himself merry, with that which angers God.

93
IF you will know the manner of their The manner of their dealing in this case.
dealing in this case, it is lively expressed by the Author of the book of
Wisdom, Chap. 2. 12. to 23. which is a glass more clear then Crystal, to
show the face of every drunkards heart.

As first, they will lie in wait to find faults in us, and pry more narrowly
into our actions, then the best man would willingly they should: and a reserved
man's behavior, you know, is like a verse, wherein every syllable is measured;
yea, what is scarce thought a fault in other men, they will hold in us a
heinous crime, and thereafter take occasion in every company to erect our
faylings very high, like St. Paul's, for the gaze of all, whereas they hide our
good parts under ground, like St. Faiths, that none may note them; for these
Flies will skip over all a man's sound parts, to wit, his excellencies, to
fasten on a scab or ulcer; resembling our Prognosticators, that are more
diligent to make mention of foul weather, then of fair; storms and thunder
they much harp upon, but calm and serene days pass them unobserved; dealing
by good men, as one did by Homer, who (as Erasmus relates) collected all the
lame and defective Verses out of his works, but past over infinite others,
which were by him most excellently made.

Or, if in case they find not spots, they will feign them; for malice makes
them so nimble eyed, that they will find a knot in a Bullrush, staying, or
going, we know, one, or the other, is offense enough, to those that seek
quarrels; a crooked staff will serve to beat a Dog, when a straight one
cannot be found; Cambyses but dreamed that his Brother should be King of
Persia, and put him to death.

Yea, these Spiders will turn every thing into poison, and pick out of the
most premeditated action, something to cavil at, either by misinterpreting
things, and so turn good into evil, (as an easy invention may put false
matters into true Syllogismes) or if they cannot wrest them sufficiently, they
will remit them unto dissimulation, and coin others, devise of him some
slander or other, as Turtullus did of Paul, Acts, 24. 5. And indeed, if they
did not so, they should want color to persecute us.

The which if thou well considerest, will make thee so far from believing
evil reports of good men, especially from the Devils servants, (drunkards)
that thou will think so much the better of them, for (though the blind eat
many a fly) yet, in the judgment of the wise, not he that is accused, but he
that is convicted, is guilty, as Lactantius has it. Hereupon when those
railing jews brought Paul to the Bar, Gallio drove them from the judgment
seat, because he knew they had more malice then matter against him. In the
Chancery are many accu^ations, they never mean to prove; yea, upright Cato
was fifty times undeservedly indicted, and accused by his fellow Citizens, yet
every time acquitted, and found innocent; and Aristophanes ninty five times by
the Athenians, and every time pronounced innocent. If it be enough to accuse,
who shall be clear? which occasions our Savior to say, not, which of you can
accuse? (for they accused him of many things) but, which of you can convince me
of sin? who can prove that I am a Conjurer, a Samaritane, a wine bibber, etc.
as Erasmus upon the place. In a word, as I never yet read, or heard of a
conscionable Israelite that has not past under some calumniation, so I cannot
yield him a true Israelite that deserves it.

94.
NOw sundry reasons may be given, 7 Reasons why they slander us.
why drunkards and vicious followers of their own lusts, like Miners, are ever
working to blow up our untainted names: as doing it, either, with the Lapwing,
to divert, by their false cries, the traveling stranger from finding the nest
of their filthiness; or, with the curtayled Fox in the Fable, to endeavor to
have all Foxes cut tayld; or, with the Fish Sepia, to darken with the pitchy
ink of aspersions all the water, that so themselves may escape the net of
censure, justly cast to catch them; or, they speak evil of us, because they
cannot do evil unto us; or, they do it to incite and stir up others to do
the like; or, because God has put an enmity between the men of the world, and
his children; or they do it, because Satan will have them do it; or else to
have themselves thought as good as any other; they will not have any thought
good that dwells near them, etc.

But the chief reason and end why they do the same, is, that they may
discourage us in the way to Heaven, floute us out of our faith, and draw us
back to the world; that so they may have our company here in sin, and
hereafter in torment, as I shall prove anon.

But first see the former reasons explained; Ever such as scoff at, and
traduce others have greater faults themselves
only let me premise this (and it may serve as an hand in the Margent) that as
Cham was worse then Noah, whom he derided; and Ishmael worse then Isaac, whom
he mocked; and Saul worse then David, whom he persecuted; and Iezabel worse
then Naboth whom she defamed and murdered: so you shall ever see, that they
which are wont to scoff, and jeere at, traduce, and persecute others, have
greater faults themselves, and cause to be jeered, and flouted at, traduced,
and evil entreated; which they cannot tell how to cover, but by disgraceing of
others. First reason of their raising slanders to divert men's thoughts from
minding their villainy.
Whereas by this means, while the people laugh at us, by reason of their
odious aspersions, they never mind them: as when a great man objected to the
Player, his sauciness, in that he durst personally tax men on the Stage; his
answer was, be content, for while the people laugh at our foolery, they never
mind your villainy. As, is it not usual for them (being conscious of their own
defects) to be ever defaming good men, that by this means, they may draw away
the thoughts and consideration of the beholders, from climing up into their
faults, while they are fixed and busied upon a new object? One color we know,
being laid upon another, does away the former, and remains it self. A
cutpurse in a throng, when he has committed the fact, will cry out, My
masters, take heed of your purses; and he that is pursued, will cry, Stop
Theife, that by this means he may escape unattached: and so in every like
case, there is none apter, to cry, Treason, Treason, then Ahaliah, who has
slain all the Kings seed. Yea, so it is, that the smallest spot in a sober
man's face, shall excuse all the sores and ulcers of their bodies.

95.
SEcondly, seeing the drunkards wicked and sinful life, 2 By depraving the
godly themselves pass for indifferent honest men.
is reproved by the others Godly conversation: as how is a vicious person
discredited, and made contemptible, by the virtuous life of a holy man? seeing
straight lines help to show the crooked, as doubtless Pharaoh's fat kine,
could not choose but make the lean ones more ill favored: for the whiter the
Swanne is, the more black is the Crow that is by her; hence a swarthy and hard
featured visage, loves not the company of clear beauties.

Whereas on the otherside, were all the world ugly, deformity would be no
monster: among the Myconians baldness is no unseemely thing, because they are
all so borne: yea, a base person may come to preferment, if none be thought
better then himself: he which has but one eye, may be King amongst the
blind: even Heliogabalus, that beastly monster, thought to make himself the
sole god, and be only worshipped, by banishing all other Religions out of the
world.

At least, as the splendour of the others virtues, does obscure the meanness of
his credit; (as the Suns brightness obscures the light of a candle) so by
depraving him, and all his fellows, himself shall be judged virtuous, very
cheap accounted a man of honesty and honor, though a drunkard or an Homicide.

And indeed, how should Naboth be cleanly put to death; or Joseph fairly clapped
in Irons, if first the one be not accused of blasphemy, and the other of
treacherous incontinency? Whereas by using these means, those ends were easily
achieved: you know, if a man would have his Dog killed, he needs but give it out
that he is mad: 3 Drunk^rds censure and slander (...) godly to ^acite and
stir up other ^ to do the like.
which leads me to a third reason, for.

96.
3 THirdly, drunkards censure and slander such as are sober and conscionable,
to incite and stir up others to do the like: as those ancient enemies of the
Gospel, clad the Martyrs in the skins of wild beasts, to animate the Dogs to
tear them: which is an old and cunning practice of theirs.

We read that Maximinus set certain vile persons on work, to accuse the
Christians of heinous crimes, that so he might persecute them, with more show
of Reason: and what any one of them does, is a law to the rest. For as one Dog
sets many Dogs on barking; or as one Beacon set on fire, occasions many to be
kindled: so one tongue set on fire from Hell, (as St. James speaks) sets many
others on fire.

The ignorant multitude (as if, with the Zigantes, And the multitude like a
flock of sheep if they see but one take a wrong way all the rest will follo^
they fed only upon Apes flesh) are just like so many Apes, which will imitate
any thing they see others do, though it be to the cutting off a lim: they are
like a Kennell of hounds, for if they but hear a good man censured, slandered,
or but nicke-named, Puritan, they run away with the Cry, and bark out the
term against every honest man they meet, to the disgraceing even of virtue
and true Religion.

The force of Example prevails strongly to produce the likeness of manners
in any; much more with that ignorant fry, the multitude, who can scarcely
discern between their right hand and their left, as it fared with those six
score thousand Ninivites, Iona, 4. 11. And whose judgments are so light, that
(like Philetas Chous, Of which many examples.
who was feign to tie lead to his heels, or the bird Cepphus) every least wind
that blows, is enough to carry them away: for like a flock of sheep, which
if they see but one take a wrong way, all the rest will follow, and it is easier
to drive a flock of them, then one single, as Cato Censorius once spoke of the
Romans. As for example, let Corah but kindle a fire of conspiracy, two hundred
and fifty Captains will bring wood to increase it; let but Demetrius the
Silversmith begin a quarrel against Paul and his companions, for preaching
against Idolatry; when he perceives his profit to cease, and his craft in
danger to be set at naught, all the workmen of like occupation will join with
him, and others with them, till the whole City be filled with uproare and
confusion, every one taking Diana's part, and not one taking part with God,
Act, 19. 23. to 41. you know a stone thrown into the water, makes of it self
but one circle, but that one begets a hundred: in a word, if but some godless
persons in Sodom assault just Lot, and his two Angels, before night all the
men of the City, from the young even to the old, from all quarters, will
compass the house round about, revile him, and seek to break open the door
upon him, yea, though they are stricken with blindness, they will still
persist, till they have wearied themselves, and feel fire and brimstone about
their ears, Genesis 19. 4. to 25.

We give but a touch here (when we could be large) for I speak to those that
understand; and plain things, which our selves are daily witnesses of, need
no proof. It is but too well known how many blaspheme and persecute the
Godly, because they see others do so; as many will yawne, when they see others
yawne; and make water, when they see others do so before them; that most men
yield themselves (like dead Images, or engines) to be moved only with the
wheels of custom and example.

Like so many fools, they know their heads are insufficient to direct them,
and therefore they resolve that custom shall: whence it is that we are
censured, laughed to scorn, and counted silly fools of the greatest number,
that we are made the But of every ones malice, and the subject of all their
discourse: for should the world be barred this practice, should we, or could we
gag people from censuring, talebearing, slandering, detractions, etc. there
would be silence at our boards, silence at our fire ^ides, silence in the
Tavern, silence on the way, silence in the Barbers shop, in the Mill, in the
Market, every where silence, yea, our very Gossips would have nothing to
whisper.

Indeed, every visible act of vice, should be our encouragement to virtue; but
woe is me, we are Cesternes to sin, Sives to grace.

97.
Fourthly, That they may mitigate their own shamewith our discredit.
our infamous drunkards censure and slander us, that they may mitigate their
own shame, with our discredit; having lost their own, they so vex, if they
hear or mee^e another which has got a good name, that presently they will set
upon him, and seek by all means to take it away, as Panus having lost his
Boat, sued every one for it that he met.

Their cunning is to condemn others, that themselves may be justified: as
Caligula took off the heads from the images of the gods, to set up his own:
or as Merchants, who to raise the prices of their own commodities, beat down
the prices of others: we know the twinkling stars at the approach of the
Sun lose their light, and after regaine it not, until darkness be upon the
deep.

Bad natures, whom they cannot reach by imitation, they will endeavor to do
by detraction: and do so in some measure, for by making virtue contemptible,
and depraving the Godly, they seem to be upon the same ground with them; being
out of hope to attain to the virtues of the Religious, they seek to come at
even hand, yea, have the better, by depressing them: for like Gamesters at
play, what the one loses, the other wins; or like two buckets in a Well, as
the one dries, the other dippeth. Yea, their dealing with us, is like that of
a Theife, who meeting with a full purse, not only takes it away, but returns
a stab.

Pride was ever envious and contumelious; thinking she adds so much to her own
reputation; as she detracts from others. And is it not good policy, for a
swinish drunkard, or a beastly liver, to fling dirt in a holy man's face, seeing
any color seems the fairer, when black is by?.

But let these depravers take heed, least imitating the fact of Censor Fulvius
(who as the Heathens feign, untiled Juno's Temple, to cover his own house)
they partake not of the like judgment, run mad and dye despairing.

98.
Fifthly, 5 They Iraduce us because they cannot otherwise burt us.
these drunkards speak evil of us, because they can not do evil unto us;
and traduce us, because they cannot otherwise hurt us.

Because the Law binds their hands, they will be smiting with their tongues;
and because they dare not smite us on the mouth, (as Annanias served Paul, Act.
23. 2.) they will smite us with the mouth, which is as bad, or worse. For as
these spitting Adders will smite their stings very deep; so their wounds are
commonly incureable.

Many particular persons know to their smart, A slander once raised will scarce
ever dye.
that a slander once raised will scarce ever dye, whereas truth has much a do
to be believed, a lie runs far, before it can be stayed; yea so far, that even
death it self, which delivers a man from all other enemies, is not able to
deliver him from this of the tongue. A report once coming into the mouth of
the vulgar, whether true, or false, like wildfire, can never be quenched; why?
report and hearsay is the alone oracle of the common people, and what they
speak, is hard to disprove, would any undertake the same; for it is the
jealous man's misery, he may prove his wife false, he can never prove her
true; besides, the evil minded would have it true, and what men would have to
be, they are apt to believe.

Yea, in this case a wicked drunkard will believe that to be true, which
lately he knew to be false; for a liar may tell his lies so often, till in
the end* he forgets that himself was the deviser and so believes them
himself; wherein men are parties, they are apt to be partial.

But this is not all the mischief, for their evil reports will increase, as
well as continue: a man's good name is like a milkwhite Ball, Yea the slander is
increased,
that will infinitely gather soil in tossing: for this is there manner, one,
begins a whisper; another, makes it a report; a third, enlarges it to a
dangerous calumny; a fourth, adds somewhat of his own, the which is augmented
and divulged for a truth by a thousand. So that as a stone cast into a pond,
begets circle upon circle: or as a little Ball rolled in the Snow, gathers it
self to a great lump: so the report that is but a little spark of fire at the
first, proves a great flame, by that it has past through many mouths. Or admit
the best that can come, I am sure a man once wounded in his good name, is
seldom cured, without skarres of suspicion: as fine linen being once stained
with black Ink, though it be washed never so, will retain an Iron-mould ever
after.

O the malice and mischief of aslanderer, The sin and p^ntsh meant of a
slanderer.
for he not only wounds the party of whom he speaks, but the party likewise
to whom he speaks, if he either rashly believes it, or is delighted in
hearing it, or further divulgeth it, or does not defend the absent wronged
party; so slaying three at once, with the one Arrow of his viperous and
venomous tongue, himself being one of the number, as Luther well observes:
wherein he puts down Menelaus, that Roman Archer, in the wars between
Constantius and Magnantius; for although he could shoot three Arrows at once
at one loo^e, and therewith wound three at the least, yet he could kill but
one, with one Arrow.

Yea, in case this slander spreades it self; the first relater may have to
answer for the sins of a thousand, wherefore no marvel if after those
words, Deuteronomy. 27 24. Cursed be he that smites his neighbor secretly, it be
added, and let all the people say, Amen: no marvel if, Psalm. 101. 5. it be
written, him that privily slandereth his neighbor, will I destroy.

99.
SIxthly, drunkards traduce and slander us, 6 They must do what Satan will
hnve them
because they must do what Satan will have them: yea, it is he that speaks
by them, as once he did by the Serpent; neither could he speak for want of a
tongue, if it were not for wicked men. A calumny, says one of the Fathers, is
the Divel's mind, in the mouth of a man, his Arrow, shot by man's Bow; he
lends him his lies and malice, and borrows his tongue to utter them,
because the Devil wants a tongue: hear this all ye, whose tongues runs so
fast on the Devils errand; it is but his heart in your lips.

The accuser of the brethren makes use of wicked men, to traduce those, whom
he cannot seduce as he desires: he makes them drunk with malice, as well as
with Wine, and they spew out cursing and slander against such as are better, or
would have them better then ver they means to be, Mat. 5. 44. whence it is,
that the Devil is not more blackemouthed then a slanderer; nor a slanderer
less malicious than the Devil, Ioh. 8. 44 where they are proved his children,
and he their father.

Yea, they show themselves to be of the same house, The receiver as bad ^ as
the talebearer.
who easily and willingly believe their slanders, neither does Satan less
profit, or advantage himself by them. For first, while he fills their ears, he
kills their souls, as one of the Fathers has it. Secondly, as he which
reports a slander, has the Devil in his tongue: so he that receives it, has
the Devil in his ear, as Bernard excellently; the one, is the Foot-post, and
messenger of Satan; the other is the Recorder or Register of Hell: and were
their no receivers in this kind, there would be no thieves; if some had not
itching ears to hear false rumors, others would not have scratching tongues,
like the pens of Libellers, to make and move them; for see we not, that the
least check or frown of a stander by, will silence the barking tongue: and
indeed, had they both their due, tale-bearers should be hanged by their
tongues, and tale. hearers by their ears, as Plautus speaks. And so I have
given you the subordinate reasons, the principal follow.

100.
SEventhly, They will flout us out of our faith have our company here in sin
and herafter in torment.
the maine reason and end wherefore they do all this, and a great deal more,
is, that they may discourage us in the way to heaven, flout us out of our
faith, and draw us back to the world; that so they may have our company here in
sin, and hereafter in torment.

The which that themselves may acknowledge (and a fair print it must be, that
a drunkard can well read seeing he wears his eyes in his tongue) much more
must proofs be plain, if they acknowledge this for a truth; I will take leave
to expatitate, and where as I have hither to but spoken of them strictly, as
drunkards; now I will speak of them more largely, as they are wicked men, seed
of the Serpent, and children of the Devil.

First, 1 They would have our company in fi^ne.
they do it that they may discourage us in the way to heaven, flout us out of
our faith, and draw us back to the World, that so they may have our company
here in sin

As why does the World cast such a number of blocks in our way, to hinder us,
but because in every one that repents, she loses a limme or member? all
these things will drunkards do to the man whom the King of heaven and earth
will honor with adoption, conversion, and regeneration: but so long as we
remain in our natural condition; and will pledge them in their finnes, they
have no quarrel against us. As Holofernes said to I^deth, fear not in thine
heart, for I never hurt any that are willing to serve Nebuchadnezzar, the King
of all the earth, Iudeth 11 1. so these drunkards, never molest any, that are
content to serve Satan, the Prince of this world.

As let any experienced Christian tell me, whether he was ever scoft at, or
molested by drunkards, so long as he marched under satan's colors: whether
they ever hated him, until Christ had chosen him, John 15. 19. Again let him
tell me, whether he was not made a byword of the people, Job 17. 6. A song of
the drunkards, Psalm. 69. 12. and generally hated of all. Mat^h. 10. 22. so
soon as he became religious and conscionable.

For all wicked men are like the women of Lemnos, what a strait the godly are
in,
who when they had every one slain their husbands and kinsmen; exiled
Hypsiphyle the Kings daughter, for that she alone saved her Father alive. So
that a Christian in respect of his hard straits, between Gods Law, on the one
side, and the malignant world, on the other; may fitly be compared to the
Gibbeonites, who if they made not their peace with Joshua, must dye by
strangers; and if they did make their peace with him, they must dye by
neighbors: or to Susanna, who if she did yield unto the two Elders, must lose
her chastity, and hazard her soul; and if she did not yield, she must loose
her life: for we have a Wolf by the ears, which we can neither stay nor let
go with safety: if we seek to please God by a holy life, we displease the
world, and that will hate and vex us; if we seek to please the world, we
displease God, and he will hate and condemn us; for their commands are
diametrically contrary, Acts 4. 18. 19.

When our affections, like wild and mad Horses, are violently gallopping to
Hell, if the Spirit of God, by repentance (as with a bridle) suddenly gives a
jerck and turns them, yea sets them going as fast the other way, in the more
narrow path toward heaven; presently those our companious in the broad way,
stand marvelling at us that we break off company, and envy to see themselves
casheered; and good reason, for the world as you have heard loses a limme or
member in every one that repents.

The men of the world think it quarrel enough to the children of God, that
they will no longer continue miserable with them; if the Gibeonites but turn to
Joshua, then there is quarrel enough for the Amorites against Gibeon; they
cannot abide to loose any of their community* neither is it otherwise with the
head of this hellish complicies, there needs no other cause of his utmost fury,
then to see a poor soul struggling to get out of the reach of his tyranny.

That great Dragon, the Devil, and these his subjects, drunkards, make war,
and are wrath with none but the woman, and the remnant of her seed, which keep
the Commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ, Revel. 12.
17. The Devil and the World are much like the proscription of the Inquisition,
or the Athenian Ostracisme, which throws out none but the best and worthiest
among men.

Nothing is more distasteful to the World, then for a man to separate and
divorce himself from her evil society, and wicked customs: It seems to
them strange, says Saint Peter, that you run not with them, to the same
excess of riot, therefore speak they evil of you, 1 Peter 4. 4. He that
refuses an health, or will not swear, he that cannot conform to the vices of
lewd men, is more taken notice of, then a great Personage; as a blazing Sarre
is more gazed upon then the Sun, because the one is strange, the other
common; and he had need be much more careful of his actions, then another
man; for they will lie in wait to find faults in him, and let him slip never
so little, if it be not a wonder, it is strange, and all strangers we observe
more strictly, then we do those that have dwelt among us.

101.
IT is between the seed of the Serpent; and the seed of the Woman, Let us turn
openlyprophane theirquarrell is at ^ end.
as between Turks and Chrictians, the Turks call and account Christians as
Dogs; but let the same Christians turn Turks, and they shall be highly
reckoned of: so let us turn openly profane, their quarrel is at an end;
nothing but our goodness is the whetstone of their envy: so that one notable
proof of saving grace in us, is, the exercise of their malice against us, John
15. 19. Alas! had we continued the Devils subjects, we should have been let
alone.

The Israelites were never set upon by Pharaoh and all his forces, Satan
disturbs not his own^.
until they were gone out of his land: the blind man, nor his parents were
ever troubled of the Jews, until Christ cured him of his blindness: nor the
diseased man grudged at for eight and thirty years together, till Christ said
unto him, take up thy bed, and walk; but then as he carries his bed, so he
carried reproaches: so long as S. Paul joined with the high Priests and Elders
to make havoc of the Church, he was no whit molested by them; but when he
became a Convert, and preached in the name of Jesus, who so hated and
persecuted as he? If the Church travel, and bring forth a male, it is in
danger of the Dragon's streams, but not else; that Goliath defies none, but the
Host of the liveing God; Satan meddles not with his own, they are as sure as
temptation can make them, they meddle not with repentance, and he meddles not
with them: to sin he would have our paths smooth, and calm, and pleasant,
winning us forward; but if we turn our feet toward S^on, then he encounters,
and blocks up our way with temptations, yea, then this Ahab will wage cruel
war with, and fight against us, until he recovers his Ramoth Gilead, that is,
our soul, I Kings 22. 3. otherwise he is more subtle, then to spend his
malice on them that do him ready service: carnal drunkards need no entreaty
(much less be forced) to be officious, for they have a free will to that
which is evil, it is only a Job that the devil delights to vex with anguish,
he knows an Absalom will run laughing to hell; it is some Peter whom Satan
desires to winnow, Luke 22. 31. some are all chaff; he will not meddle with
them; Ephraim is joined with Idols, let him alone, Hosea 4. 17. let him alone,
says God, let him alone, says Satan; he is as fast as I would wish him, so
all is in peace, Luke 11. 21.

But let them take it for a fearful sign of a dead heart, No greater
t^mptation then not to be tempted.
when they feel not Satan's buffetings, for there is not a greater temptation,
says Gregrory, then not to be tempted, why? they shall not feel his hate,
till they feel his heat, even his unquenchable fire in the burning lake.
Alas! he cease to tempt them whom he has already won, but the godly
are enemies, therefore they must look to be assaulted.

Neither were he his craftsmaster, if he did otherwise. Does any Prince or
General make war with his own subjects or soldiers, that march under his
colors? no, but with rebels and enemies. What Jayler lays more bolts upon
the shackled malefactor, that loves his Prison, and would not change? this is
for such as have attempted to break Prison. Besides, there is great reason why
the godly are tempted more then the wicked, because the wicked do him service
in this particular, and tempt others.

Again, the crafty thiesfe will not break into an empty house, but where he may
find some good booty: the empty Traveller sings before the thief, and may
pass unmolested; it is the full purse which invites the highway man. The Pirat
never spends his shot upon Cole-Ships, but lets fly at the rich Merchant: so
if the Devil and his instruments, drunkards, set upon us, it is a good
argument, and we may presume there is the Treasure of grace, at least the
beginnings of it; for where there is no light, there is no shadow.

As Christ was no sooner baptized, and the Spirit descended on him, but
presently Satan had a bout with him; yea, as lacob was no sooner conceived in
the womb, then Esau strove with him, Genesis 25. 22. so every true Christian
begins his war with his being, both our births are accompanied with tears;
so that when once we put our endeavors to godliness, expect no quiet, for
a Christians life can no more be without sorrovves, then the Sea can be
without waves and flovvings.

And yet our case would be far worse, Our case would be (...) worse (...)
should be (...) peace (...) them.
if we should yield unto them, both here, in respect of our consciences; and
hereafter, in respect of our souls. As I have read of a Christian, that to
save his life, turned Turk; but this could not save him, for they presently in
derision hanged him up, with these words, Morieris in fide, Turca, how ever
thou live, thou shall dye a Turk.

102.
ANd so you have the drunkards heart and tongue delineated, 2. There malice and
envi^ would break out at their hands if they were not m^nacled by the Law.
and therein what they do to us, in case we will not run with them to the
same excess of ryat, Now see, with the like patience, what they would do,
in case the Law restrained them not, and how the malice and envy of their
hearts, would break forth at their hands; for having done all this, and not
finding the issue to answer their expectation, viz. that they cannot discourage
us, but that we still persevere and hold out in our peremptory course of well
doing, and will not reconcile our selves unto them, nor the world, do they
what they can; they would proceed further, if they durst, and might be allowed
by the Law, First they would combine together and lay (...) p^^^s to destroy u^.
as.

First, they would combine themselves together, and cunningly undermine us: 1
Samuel 18. 17. 21. 25. Jeremiah 18. 18. Acts 6. 9. 10. yea, lay divellish plots
to destroy us: Daniel 6. Exodus I. 9. 10. Psalm 83. 3, 4, 5. Acts 4. 26, 27.
and 19. Chap. and 23. 10, 14.

Secondly, 2 They would deliver us up unto the Magistrate.
they would deliver us up, and falsely accuse us to the Magistrates, I Sam. 22.
9. 10. and 23. 19. 20. and 26. 1. Acts, 6. 8. to 13. and 24. 13.

Thirdly, 3 Give de^ilish counsel against (...) and cause (...) to be (...).
they would persuade, and give devilish counsel to them against us, Rev. 2.
14. Ier. 38. 4. Act. 17. 13. and never leave until they had, in the fourth
place, shut us up in Prison, I Kings, 22. 27. ler. 36. 5. and 15. 10. Luke 21.
12, Acts, 5. 18. and 12. 4. and 4. 3. and 22. 25. and 28. 17. 2 Cor. 11. 23.
and in case we would not yet yield to associate them in evil doing, nor
conform to their lewd and wicked customs, then would they give us bodily
correction, as,

First, ^ strike us.
they would strike us, 1 Kings, 22. 24. Ier. 20. 2. and 37. 15. Acts, 23. 2. 2
Cor. 11. 23. 24. 25.

Secondly, 5 ^urt and ma^me us.
they would hurt and mayme us, Numb. 14. 10. ludges, 16. 21. Acts, 14. 19.

Thirdly, Lastly, drunkards would kill us for being so res^actory.
if all this would not do, in the last place these drunkards and vicious
livers would kill us, for being so refractory, they would make us either bow or
break; they would kill our bod^es, if they could not corrupt our souls; if we
would not part with our innocence, we should part with our lives; as it fared
with the three children, that were put into the fiery furnace, because they
would not worship the golden Image, as others did, Dan, 3. and all the Prophets
of the Lord, whom Iezabel slew, because she could not bring them to her own
bow, I King. 18. 4. and those numberless Martyrs, whose souls St. John saw
under the Altar, Rev. 6. which were killed, because they would not do and say
as the rest, yea, even for the word of God, and for the testimony, which they
maintained, ve. 9.

And why fares it not so with us? why do not the same drunkards, vicious
liveers, and other enemies of holiness, which now envy, hate, censure, scoff
at. nicke-name, rail on, and slander us, even strike, maime, and kill us, but
because their hands are tied by the Law?

I dare say it fares with many of them (because they cannot have their wills)
as it did with Achilles, who is feigned to eat his own heart, because he
might not be suffered to fight.

Why are not our Sanctuaries turned into Shambles, and our beds made to swim
with our bloods long before this, but that the God of Israel has crossed the
confederacy of Balack. It is no thank to wicked men, that their wickedness
does not prosper; the wo^ld would soon be over-runne with evils, if men might
be so ill as they would.

Alas! if our Gracious King and State did not maintain true Religion, and
countenance the some, it would be otherwise then it is with the people of God;
as the Word of God, and former experience witnesses.

103.
1 FIrst, the word of God witnesses the same, The same prooved by Scripture.
as look but, Rev. 13. and you shall find it foretold by the Holy -Ghost, that
so many should be killed, as would not worship, and give honor to the Image of
the Be^st, that man of sin, that man of pride, that opposes and exalts
himself above all that is called god, or that is worshipped, 2 These. 2. 4. and
our Savior foretells, that we shall not only be hated of all men and
Nations for his names sake, but be killed and put to death, Mat. 24. 9.

Yea, he affirms expressly, that we should not only receive this hard
measure from strangers and enemies only, but from our dearest and nearest
friends; that the Brother should betray the Brother to death, the Father the
Son, and that children should rise up against their Parents, and cause them
to dye, even for his names sake, Mat^. 10. 21. 22. meaning, when they are not
restrained by godly Kings, and their wholesome Laws.

Neither do we want examples to make good these testimonies, for by whom was
upright Abel persecuted and slain, but by his own Brother Caine* Who scoffed
at righteous N^ah, but his own Son Cha^m? By whom was that virtuous and
religious Lady Barbara put to death, for embracing the Christian faith, but by
her own Father Dioscorus? And lastly, by whom was our Savior Christ betrayed,
but by his own Disciple ludas?

2. But to go on; 2 By experience of former ages.
experience, as well as the Scripture, proves it. In the time of the ten
persecutions, it was no more, then sacrifice, or dye. In the time of Queen
Mary, the Martyrs must either deny their faith, disclaim their pure Religion
and service of God, worship that bloody whore of Rome, according to her
damnable traditions, or be chained to a stake and burnt; either part with their
faithes, or part with their lives; if they would not obey them, rather then
God, they had a Law, by which men ought to dye.

Yea, at this present, although we (blessed be God, and our Gracious Protector
for it) endure little, but the lash of evil tongues, which is the most
favorable persecution, yet in Spain, and other places, our brethren do
groan under a merciless Inquisition. Oh the quintessence of cruelty that they
have wrung out unto them! the rehearsal whereof would make a man's ears to
tingle, and his heart to tremble. For as in the time of the ten persecutions,
it would cost a man his life, to profess himself a Christian, the Heathen
Emperors making it death by their Edicts; and as in the time of Queen Mary, if
one professed himself a Protestant, he was sure to be burnt: so in Spain, at
this day, some have been burnt, and others put into an agony of seven years
continuance, which is worse, for having a Testament about them in the English
tongue, or a Bible in their house, or declaring their faith some other way. And
can any doubt, but drunkards would deal as cruelly with us, if they might be
permitted?

It is easy to guess how cruel their hands would be, in case the Law
restrained them not, who even draw blood with their tongues: as how will
drunkards shoot their shafts up to the feathers, in the disgrace of such as
will not humor them, and never give over, so long as they have an Arrow in
their Quiver; to hear them would even make a man think they were generated out
of the Dragons tooth, as Orpian is said to be made by Pallas.

In brief (for I might be endless in the prosecution of this) take one
example, 3 By the experience of our Savior, who suffered twenty two ways
only for his goodness^.
which might serve instead of all that has been spoken. What was the reason
our Savior Christ the Master himself was envied? Math. 26, 15? contemned?
Math. 12. 24. and 13. 55? rejoiced at in his misery and distress? Math. 27.
29. hated? John, 7. 7. murmured against? Luke 15. 2. had his Doctrine withstood
and contraried? Luke 5. 21. Math. 9. 34. his actions misconstrued? Math. 11.
19. tales carried of him? Math. 12. 14. devilish counsel given to Pilate and
the people against him? Math. 27. 20. scoft at? Math. 27. 42. nicknamed? Math.
13. 55. rayled on? Luke 23. 39. slandered? Math. 28. 13. which slander is
believed amongst the Jews unto this day, ver. 15. cursed? Gal. 3. 13.
threatened? John, 11. 53. undermined in talk, that they might accuse him? Math.
22. 15. why did they use disdainefull gestures before him? Math. 27. 29. 39.
combine together, and lay devilish plots to destroy him? Math. 12. 14. take him
Prisoner? Math. 26. 57. smite him? Luke 22. 64. hurt and wound him? Mat. 27.
29. John, 19. 34. and lastly, put him to death, even that cursed death of the
Cross? Math. 27. 35. Not for any evil they found in him; for their own words
are, he has done all things well, Mark. 7. 37. He has done, such was his
power; all things, such was his wisdom; well, such was his goodness; and yet
crucified, and abused every way, he must be; it was only indeed for his zeal,
purity, and holiness, and because his life and practice was clean contrary to
theirs, his Doctrine too powerful and pure for such carnal hearts to embrace,
or endure; so that it is plain, and all men may see, who are not dead in sense,
how it would fare with us, might our enemies, Drunkards, Swearers, etc. have
their wills.

104.
When Politicians Rhetoric once failed, But they cannot do as they would
thoug^ their punishment shall be the same as if they did it.
Carters Logic should do the feate; their Arguments should be all Steel,
and Iron, they would speak Daggers points, as Ioab discoursed with Amasa in
the fifth rib; or as Zedekia disputed with the Prophet, a word and a blow, yea,
a blow without a word; for he smote him first, and spoke to him afterward.

Every wicked man, especially a drunkard, is like Julius the second, who threw
St. Peter's keys into the River Tiber, protesting, that thence forth he would
use and help himself with St. Peter's sword; if reason should fail, and
railing would do no good, they would come to Plow-mans Logic, Gunpowder
arguments, open violence, they would take up swords to strike, or stones to
cast at us.

But our comfort is, they cannot do as they would, though their punishment
shall be never the less. For as the will to do God acceptable service, is
accepted, as if it were service indeed: so the intent and offer of wrong, shall
be judged for wrong in that Court of Justice; good and evil thoughts and
desires, in Gods account, are good and evil works; and he which in good,
accepts the will for the deed; condemns the will for the deed, in evil: now
these men in their hearts, and Gods account, are murderers, and for murderers
they shall be arraigned at the great day of accounts; for they would kill us,
if they durst, they do kill, so far as they can.

It were no living for godly men, if their enemies hands were allowed to be as
bloody as their hearts; if they were not stinted by a divine and supreme
power: but for our comfort as men and devils are under the restraint of the
Almighty; so blessed be God, and blessed be our Gracious Sovereign (the very
breath of our nosthrills) fear of authority swayes thousands, who are not
guilty of a conscience.

Alas! if lewd men should not fear the Magistrate, more then they fear God,
or the Devil, there were no living among them.

Besides, how often are they curbed by a Divine hand? How often do the Angels
(those ministering Spirits, sent forth for the good of the Elect) resist their
Actions, even in those sins which their hearts stand to. It is no thank to
lewd men that their wickedness is not prosperous: whence is it that the world
is not over-runne with evil, but from this, that men cannot be so evil, as
they would?

It is with these men, as it was with Zoilus, that common slanderer, who being
demanded why he spoke evil of such, and such answered, because I cannot do
them evil, or else like another Parisian Vigils, we should feel their swords,
before we heard their alarums.

Wicked men have courage above their strength, and their dareing is above their
skill; they have courage to attempt much more then their ability is to
perform; not like David, who did as much as he undertook, in killing Golish.
When the Devils hands are bound, he vomits a stood of reproaches with his
tongue, Rev. 12. 15. The Master keeps the Mastive chained up from hurting his
friends, yet sets him on the these, if he see cause: so God does by Satan, it
is not that Mastives fault, that he tares not all in pieces; wherefore we may
be glad we escape so as we do, as a Justice, upon the Bench, told a condemned
person at the Bar, who sued to him for mercy.

105
NOw of this their savage disposition, 5 Reasons of their savage disposition.
there are five maine reasons to be rendered.

1. First, They must do the works of their father the Devil.
because they would do the works of their Father the Devil; he is a
murderer, and so his children are given to blood, John, 8. 44. and what can
the Lamb expect of the Butcher, but killing? yea, and so given to it, that
often times it contents them not to shed the blood of others, except also they
shed their own blood: as Nero, who was so artificial in cutting of throats,
that at last he runs upon his own sword, saying, I have lived dishonourably,
I will dye shamefully: and Saul, who being blooded against David and the
Priests, became as unmercifull to himself, by wreaking his teene on his own
bowels: and ludas that was so cruel against the innocent blood of his Master,
became as cruel against the nocent blood of himself: and I wonder how the
murderer can expect any other doom, that either hears how many have done the
like, or reads, Genesis 9. where God says, who so sheddeth man's blood, by man
shall his blood be shed; for in the image of God has he made man, verse. the 6.
The meditation whereof, if it did thoroughly sincke into men's hearts, would make
them more cautious; how much more, if they did read and understand, Genesis 4. 10.
where God indit^ing Cain for murdering his Brother, says, What h^st thou
done? the voice of thy Brothers blood cries unto me from the earth. In which
place the Original has it in the plural number, bloods, and so signifies,
the voice of the blood shed, and of all the blood which might have come of that
blood, if it had not been shed; which being so, implies that a man may kill a
thousand, in killing of one.

Secondly, 2 That the^r deeds of darkness may not come to l^ght.
that their deeds of darkness might not come to l^ght. Vriah must be put to
death, least David's Adultery be discovered, and himself disgraced: a living
Curre, you know, will do more harm then a dead Lion. The Genealogies of the
Jews must be burnt, that Herod may be taken for a lew, and one of the blood
royal: and it is a sure rule, that of eggs fried in the pan, come no ill
Chickens.

3. Thirdly, 3 otherwise they cannot follow their sins so freely nor so
quietly.
the wicked through malice would seek by all means to cut off the godly,
because their wicked and sinful lives are reproved by their godly
conversation; neither can they follow their sins so freely as they would, nor
so quietly, without detection or check; now if Abel's good works reprove
Cain's evil deeds, let Cain but take away the cause, kill Abel, and the effect
shall not follow.

4 Fourthly, 4 What they cannot make good by arguments of reason they would by
arguments of steel and iron.
whereas the Godly are too hard for them in disputing (take Steven for an
instance) they would be even with them by casting of stones, stop their mouths
with brickbats, fetch Arguments from the Shambles; and this they are sure would
do, when all other hopes and healps fail, they would not stand to argue the
case with us; for let the accused plead what he could for his own innocence,
the Wolf would answer the Lamb, indeed, Thy cause is better then mine, but my
teeth are better then thine, I will devour thee; so they would put off the
Fox, and put on the Lion, and make their party good, if not with Argument^ of
reason, yet with Arguments of steel and Iron; but this is a very hard way of
confuting.

5 Fifthly and lastly, 5 Their glory and ^ edit is e^lipsed.
their glory and credit with the world is eclipsed by suffering those which
excel in virtue. We know the Moon has so much the less light, by how much
it is nearer the Sun, yea, so long as the Sun shines above the Horizon, the
Moon is scarc^ly s^e^e: which made Adrian and Nero to kill all such as
eclipsed their glory by any demerit: and for this cause Mercine was murdered
of her fellows, because she did excel the res^ in beauty.

Yea, this has made wicked men, in all ages, to deal with the godly, as
I^lia^ the Apostate did by our Savior Christ; who took down his Image in
contempt, that he might set up his own in the same place, and have the people
worship it; which he knew they would never do, so long as the other was
reverenced.

You know Herod thought he could not be King, if Christ should reign; yea, as
though he had been of the race of the Ottom^ans, he thought he could not
reign, except, the first thing he did, he killed all the Males in Beth^m from
two years old, and under; and the Pharisees, that they should be despised, if
Christ were regarded; and hereupon they put the old Carinthians Law in
execution, that hanged a man in the forenoone, and sat in judgment on him in
the afternoon.

106.
ANd so I have shown how Drunkards do intise, The ground of all their
tempting and enforceing to ^^ane.
how they would enforce to sin, what they do, with their tongues; what they
would do, with their ^ands, if they were not manacled by the Law; and prooved
that the cause of all is, they cannot have our company in sin. But one thing,
of no less consequence, is behind, namely, the cause of this cause, which
follows; for before I speak of their drawing to perdition, and desire of
community in the burning Lake, I will make the way clear, by giving you the
Original ground of all.

The maine ground or reason why drunkards (and indeed all natural men) hate
and persecute the Religious, Drunkards children of the Devil and partake of
his nature.
and none else, is, the one are the seed of the Serpent, children of the
Devil, and partake of his nature, I John, 3. 8. 10. 12. 14. Acts, 13. 10.
John, 6. 70. and 8. 44. and 14. 30. and 16. 11. Math. 13. 38. 39. 2. Co^. 4. 4.
2 Timothy 2. 26. Genesis 3. 15. and 5. 3. Ephesians. 2. 1. to the end, and 5. 14. 1 Cor.
15. 22. Romans 5. 12. 18. Titus, 33. to 8. 1. Peter, 2. 9. 10. 25. John 3. 3. 5.
6.

And the other, children of God, Those whom they hate and persecute the
children of God and partake of the Divine nature.
and members of Christ, and partake of the divine nature, 2 Cor. 6. 18. Gal. 3.
26. John, 1. 12. 13. and 3. 5. etc. 2 Pet. 1. 4. James, 1. 18. 1 Pet. 1. 15.
Romans 8. 9. 16. 17. 29. 1. Cor. 6. 19. and 12. 27. Ep^sians, 5. 30 This is the
cause upon which indeed all the former reasons and causes do depend, as the
lesser wheels in a clock depend on the great one; or as the branches of a
Tree depend on the stock and root, and spring from it, as the Arteries of man's
body do from the Heart, and Veins from the Liver: for in reason, if it be so,
they must needs be very contrary; and if contrary, no marvel they should so
ill agree; for there can be no amity, where there is no sympathy, no
reconciling of Turks and Christians, no neighborhood, no alliance, no
conjunction is able to make the cursed seed of the Serpent, and the blessed
seed of the Woman ever agree, since God and the Devil are everlastingly fallen
out; one blood, one belly, one house, one education, could never make Cain and
Abel accord, Jacob and Esau, Isaac and Ishmael at one; yea, though they be Man
and Wife, Parent and Child, yet, if they be not like, they will not like: and
indeed, what is the Father, or Mother, or Brother of our flesh, to the Father
etc. of of our spirits? Can there be such a parrity between the Parent and the
Child, the Husband and Wife, as there is a disparity between God and Satan? no
certainly, the corporal sympathy is nothing, in comparison of the spiritual
antipathy, which is between the two natures, Divilish, and Divine.

If Athens and Sparta could never agree, Virtue and vice can never accord.
for that the one was addicted to serve Minerva, the other Mars, being each of
them Heathens: there must needs be a greater enmity between a regenerate man,
and him that is wholly carnal: for what fellowship, as the Apostle speaks, can
there be between righteousness and unrighteousness; what communion between
light and darkness; and what concord between Christ and Beliall; and what
peace between the Believer and the Infidel? 2 Cor. 6. 14. 15. and wherein do
these godless persons, drunkards, (though they live in our Church) differ from
infidels? only in name.

An enemy may be reconciled, enmity cannot. A vicious person may be made
virtuous, but vice and virtue can never accord; these are so diametrically
opposite, that the two Poles shall sooner meet, then these be reconciled. A
wicked man, says Solomon, is abomination to the just; and he that is upright
in his way, is abomination to the wicked, Prove. 29. 27. and S. James
witnesses, that the amity of the world, is the enmity of God, and that
whosoever with be a friend of the world, makes himself the enemy of God,
lames 4. 4.

Michael and the Dragon cannot agree in one heaven; nor ^ehemiah and Sanballat
in one City; nor the clean and the Leprous in one Camp; nor the Arc and
Dagon in one house; nor God and Idols in one Temple; nor John and Cerinth^s in
one Bath; nor Isaac and Ishmael in one family; nor Jacob and Esau in one womb.
In vain then shall any man attempt, to make an agreement betwixt a wicked and
a godly man; except the one, of wicked becomes godly, or the other, of godly
becomes wicked: for there is such an enmity, or mutual malevolence between
person and person. That as the fish Lexus, is poison to man, and man to him: so
these can no way brook one another.

Yea, that cannot properly be said to ridd this enmity out of them, which rids
them out of the world, death it self: for what we read of those two Birds,
Aegitbalus and Achanthus, namely, that they so hate one another living, that
being dead their bloods will not mix, but presently separates: and that which
is recorded of Florus and Anthus; Polynices and Etheocles, viz. that the two
former being killed, their bloods would not be mixed; the two latter being
burnt together, their ashes instantly parted; is truly verified in this enmity
and antipathy, which is in the seed of the Serpent, against the seed of the
Woman; for it is so deadly and mortal, that dureing life it is altogether
irreconcilable, and after death, they part and separate as far asunder, as
is hell from heaven, Man. 25. 32. 41. and 10. 16.

107.
AWicked man can agree with all that are wicked, They can brook all conditions
of men, ^ave practisers of piety.
be they Papists, or Turks, or Athiests, profane and loose persons, for all
these agree with him in blindness and darkness, yea, they are all, hail
fellow well met; but with sincere Christians, and practisers of piety, he
cannot agree; the Religious shall be sure of opposition; because their light is
contrary to his darkness; grace in the one, is a secret disgrace to the other.

Yea, let wicked men be at never so much odds one with another, But the
Religious shall be sure of opposition.
yet they will concur and join against the godly. As for example. Edom and
Ishmael, Moab and the Hagarins, Gebal and Ammon, Amal^ck and the Philistims,
the men of Tire and Ash^r, each had several gods; yet all conspire against the
true God, Psalm. 83. 5. to 9. Manasses against Ephraim, and Ephraim against
Manasses; but both against Judah. Herod and Pilat (two enemies) will agree, so
it be against Christ; they will fall in one with another, to fall out with
God. The Sadduces, Pharisees, and Herodians were Sectaries of diverse and
adverse factions, all differing one from another; and yet all these join
together against our Savior, Matthew. 22. the Libertines, Cyrenians,
Alexandrians, Cilicians, and Asians, differ they never so much, will join in
dispute against Steven, Act 6. 9. Herod neither loved the Jews, nor the Jews
Herod; yet both are agreed to vex the Church.

Thus wicked men, like Sampsons Foxes, though they be tied tail to tail, yet
they jointly set on fire and burn up the Barley field of Gods Church.

I cannot think of a fitter Emblem of a natural man, then Lyme, which agrees
well with all things that are dry, and of it is own nature; but meeting with
water (a thing directly opposite) it breaks, burns swells, smoaks, crackles,
skips, and scatters, so nature will give a man leave to be any thing, save a
sound Christian, and agree well with all others, be their conditions never so
contrary, provided they agree in the maine, are all seed of the same Serpent:
but let the natural man meet with one that is spiritual, they agree like heat
and cold; if the one stays, the other flies; or if both stay, they agree like
two poisons in one stomach, the one being eve^ sick of the other, be they
never so ne^re allied.

And no marvel; for though they dwell in the same house, yet they belong to
two several Kingdoms; and albeit they both remain on earth, yet they are
governed by two several Laws; the ones Burgueship being in Heaven, Phil. 3.
20. and the other being a Denison belonging to Hell; as Irishmen are dwellers
in Ireland. but Denisons of England, and governed by the Statutes of this
Kingdom.

Neither is it strange, Not strange that wicked men should a^rees^ well
that wicked men should agree one with another; for even savage beasts agree
with themselves, else the wilderness would soon be unpeopled of her four
footed inhabitants: we know the Lion, is not cruel to the Lion; nor the
Leopard, to the Leopard; nor one Tiger, to another; nor the Dragon, to the
Dragon, ^aith Aristotle, but every one will fight with, and against the Lamb;
one Crow never pulls out another Crows eyes; on Wolf will not make war with
another; but every Wolf will make war with a Sheep: yea, the Snakes of Syria,
the Serpents of Tyrinthia, and the Scorpions of Arcadia, are gentle and sparing
to them of their natural soil, though cruel to others, as Plini^ reports.

Yea, even Devils themselves, while they so mortally hate, and violently oppose
God, and his Image in all the sons of Adam, are not at enmity with
themselves, but accord in wickedness: and Judas, the very worst of men, he
that would be false to his own Lord and Master, would yet be true to his
chapmen, the high Priests: even evil Spirits, and the worst of men, keep
touch one with another.

108.
THis also is the sole cause, They strive t^ be sup^rlative in sin.
why they strive so after perfection of evil, (if it be a digression, either
pardon it, or pass on to Section 113) they being the Devils children, must
imitate him in all things, yea, partaking of his cursed nature, they can do no
other: as the children of God, partaking of the Divine nature, can not but
resemble God, and in nothing more, then in being holy, as he is holy, and in
striving after perfection of holiness.

Abundance of men giving the raines to their wicked nature, and wanting both
the Bit of Reason, and the Curb of Religion, more then i^itate Iehu; for as
Iehu said in dissimulation, Aha^ served Baal a little, but Iehu shall serve him
much more: so these, in the uprightness of their heart^, seems to say, such
and such a wicked wretch serves the devil a little, but I will serve him much
more. Yea, knowing the devil is like that King, which Montaigne speaks of, with
whom that Soldier only, which in one, or diverse combats, has presented him
with seven enemies heads, is made noble; many of them count it the greatest
honor to commit the greatest sins, and are sorry they cannot commit a sin
unpardonable, and without, or beyond a president; imitating Aristides of
Locris, who dying of the biting of a Weasell, was grieved, that he had not
been bitten by a Lion. I have heard a cauterised Gallant, boast of his lying
with women of all conditions, save Witches; and protest that should be his next
attempt: but what do I mentioning such a novice, or speaking of that, which
was only heard by a few.

I would feign know, Many examples of monsters and superlative sinners.
I say, how men in this and other ages before us, could wholly employ their
time, and strength, and means; how they could take such pains, and be at such
cost, to commit robberies, rapes, cruel murders, treasons, blow up whole
States, depopulate whole Towns, Cities, Countries, seduce millions of souls,
as Mahomet and the Pope have done, make open war against the Church of God, as
Herod, Ant^ochus, and others did; persecute the known truth, as I^lian the
Apostate did; invent all the new vices they can, and destroy the memory of all
ancient virtues, as Heliogabalus did; make it their trade to swear and
for-sweare, if any will hire them, as our post-Knights do; not unlike those
Turkish Priests, called Seitie and Cagi, who for a Ducket will make a thousand
false oaths before the Magistrate, and take it to be no sin, but a work
deserving praise, by lies, swearing, and forswearing, to damnifie Christians
what they can; did they not strive tooth and nail (as we use to say) to
imitate their father the Devil?

O that our Land had not such monsters, who, upon an hours warning, can lend
Iezabel an oath, to rob poor Naboth of his life and Vineyard! that we had not
such Vultures, irreligious harpies, that have consciences like a Barne-doore,
and seldom wake, but to do mischief! some men and women that will be bauds
to their own wives and daughters! O that the Sun should shine upon her, that
will sell for gain unto hell, that body which she brought forth with such
pains to this earth! certainly, there was never woman more deserved to be
called the Devils damme then she: some that dare the day to witness their
ungodlines, and do their villainies, as the Phari^ies gave their alms, and
said their prayers, to be seen of men! who ( Z^mry-like) dare bring whores to
their Tents openly; yea, like Absalom, dares spread a Tent on the top of the
house, and go in to their Concubines in the sight of all men! yea, Gallants,
that in a bravery, will assemble themselves to their Minions by companies, (I
must not say they are harlots houses) and there commit their adulteries in the
presence of each other! not much unlike Diogenes the Cynick, an impudent
fellow, who would openly commit filthiness even in the streets.

And when their bodies have been the Organs of unrighteousness, their mouths
shall after be the Trumpets to proclaim it: much like those savage women which
(as Montaigne relates) for a badg of honor, wear as many fringed tossells
fastened to the skirt of their garment, as they have lain with several men: you
shall often hear old men glory in their fore passed whoredoms, boast their
homicides, etc. yea, perhaps, if it be possible, make themselves worse then
ever they were: yea, rather then men will want matter of oftentation, they will
boast of the fowle^t vices, as Agesilaus bragd of his stumpt foot, Sertorius
of his one eye, and Rathro^d of his scabs; for their excrements they account
ornaments, and make a scarf of their halter; but this is a cursed commemoration.

Again, men there are, who (like them of Gibeah, I^gd. 19. and the Sodomites,
Genesis 19.) are not content with the common way of sinning, but are mad with a
prodigious and preposterous lust, bring forth the men that we may know them,
verse 5.

And has not this age some, whoequall Lycaon, that was turned into a Woolfe by
Jupiter, for his cruelty? who seem to have been suckled with the milk of
Woolfes, as it is reported of the first founder of Rome? who, through custom,
have made sin so familiar unto them, that the horror of it is turned into a
pleasure? who being inured to blood, make killing of men but a sport, as it
fared with Abner, who called it playing, when every one thrust his sword into
his fellows side? 2 Samuel 2. 14. 16. some you shall haver hazard land, life,
soul, (yea, more, if more could be) on the fortune of a Rapiers point, when
but ask whence the cause of that contention arises, they cannot tell you
without blushing, so vain, and so frivolous is the occasion: many men had
rather see a combat fought, wherein one man kills another, then hear a
Sermon, or partake of a rich banquet; being of Hannibal's humor, who seeing a
ditch swim with man's blood, professed never to have seen a fight which more
delighted him: or of Herod's, who thinking he could not shed blood, and be
cruel enough while he lived, and to make the jews sorry for his death,
whether they would or no, commanded, and made sure that they should slay all
the Noble-mens children in Jury, as the breath went out of his body: some
resemble Cajus Caligula, who, amongst other tyrannies, caused at his meals
ordinarily one to cut off before him the heads of poor prisoners, wherein he
took great pleasure: or Nero and Domitian, who studied strange deaths, to
afflict the Saints, and to suppress the Gospel: or Justinian, who, being
restored again to his Empire, as often as he moved his hand to wipe the filth
from his nose, which was cut off, he commanded one of his enemies, or some of
their allies to be put to death: or lastly, the Numantines, who being besiedged
by the Romans, and brought to great misery, made a vow, no day to eat meat,
unless the first dish might be of a Romans flesh; nor drink any drink,
unless their first draught were Romans blood.

Again, are there not some as blasphemous, as impudent Pharaoh, who being
bloodied with his unresisted tyranny, could belch out defiance in the face of
heaven ( who is God?) thinking he might be bold with heaven, because he was
great on earth: or Nicanor, who being persuaded from cruelty upon the Sabbath
day, in that God had appointed it holy, answered, if God be m^ghty in heaven, I
am also mighty on earth; though the same tongue that spoke it, was cut into
little pieces, and flung to the Fowls, and the hand that smote, was cut off
and hung before the Temple: or lastly, Pope H^ldebrand, who asked the Sacrament
of Christ's body, before all the Cardinals, how he should destroy Henry the
Emperor? and having no answer, flung it into the fire, saying, could the Idol
gods of the Heathens tell them what should succeed in all their enterprises, and
can not thou tell me? And many the like; for the time would be too short for
me to speak of all I might, who being past feeling, have given themselves to
work all kinds of wickedness, even with greediness, Ephesians. 4. 19.

Besides, I cannot (without red cheeks) name the things that are commonly done
by them, not in secret, but openly, and that without blushing, yea, not without
boasting; and the report of sin, is often as bad as the commission; I am ^oth,
I say, to speak of that, whereof the very speech is loathsome. Wherefore to shut
up with a word of application.

Do we not know, or have we not heard of such as these, who are indifferent in
nothing but conscience? I would there were none such to be known, or heard of,
or, at least, I would they were thrown out of Christ's Crosse-row, but if there
be, and ever has been such, let any reasonable man judge, whether they could
be thus desperately wicked, if they did not emulate I ate Satan, strive after
the perfection of evil, to be superlative in sin, to h^ve, as it were, the
lowest place in hell, and who should come there first; as Gods people desire to
imitate God, strive after perfection of holiness, and to have a greater degree
of glory in the Kingdom of Heaven.

109.
QUestion. Satan works men by degrees to this height ofimpiety and not all at
once.
But how does Satan work men to this height of impiety?

Answer. Not at all once, but when custom of sin has deaded all remorse for
sin. A man at first goes into sin, as a young swimmer into the water, not
plunging himself over head and ears at first dash, but by degrees, till he
come in profundum, and then co^temnit.

The imbellick Peasant, when he comes first to the Field, shakes at the report
of a Musket; but after he has ranged through the fury of two or three
Battles, he then can fearelesse stand a breach, and dares undaunted gaze death
in the face: so the first acts of sin, are for the most part trembling,
fearful, and full of the blush; it is the iteration of evil, that gives
forehead to the foul offender: it is easy to know a beginning swearer, he
cannot mouth it, like the practiced man; he oaths it, as a cowardly Fencer
plays, who as soon as he has offered a blow, shrinks back, as if his heart
suffered a kind of violence by his tongue; yet had rather take a step in vice,
then be left behind, for not being in fashion.

The first time the Fox saw the Lion, he feared him as death; the second, he
feared him, but not so much; the third time, he grew more bold, and passed by
him without quakeing. There is no man suddenly very good, or extremely evil,
but grows so: as a River is small and foredable at the head, but greatens as
it runs on, by accession of new waters. Solomon first takes two wives, then
three, then hundreds; and having once got beyond the stakes of the Law, and all
modesty, he is ready to lose himself amongst a thousand bedfellowes.

As men eat diverse things by morsels, and digest them with ease, which if they
should eat whole, would choke them: so fares it with sinners. We deal with
our consciences, as with our Apparel, when we have got on a new suit, fresh
and fair, we are very chary of abusing it, we take heed where we sit, what we
touch, or against what we lean; but when it is once grown a little old,
soyled and sullied, we have no such regard of it, we little pass what we do
with it, nor mind where we cast it; so the uxorious husband, at the first
idolizeth his wife, no noise must disturb her, the cold wind must not blow
upon her, the Sun must be shaded from her beauty, her feet must scarce touch
the earth, nothing must offend her, she commands all, her will is a law; it may
be, after a while none of all this, but the contrary: even such is our dealing
with conscience; as we see in David, who at first was so tender of it, that the
lap of Readiness garment only troubled him to the heart; but giveing way to his
own corruptions, and Satan's temptations, to what a height of sin was he
risen? at first he only loosed the raynes to idleness; from idleness, he
proceeds to lust; from lust, to drunkenness; from drunkenness, to murder,
etc. Murder shall be employed to hide adultery, the fact which wine cannot
conceal, the sword shall; yea, what a brood of sins has the Devil hatched,
out of this one egg of Adultery; Vriah shall bear his own Mittimus to Ioab,
and be the messenger of his own death; Ioab must be a traitor to his friend;
the Host of God must shamefully turn their backs upon their enemies, much
blood of Israel must be spilt, many a good Soldier cast away, that murder
must be seconded with dissimulation, and all this, to hide one Adultery.

O how many, by this means, have declined from a vigorous heat of zeal, to a
temper of lukewarm indifferency; and then from a careless mediocrity, to all
extremity of debauchednesse; and of hopeful beginnings, have ended in
incarnate Devils! resembling Domitian, who (when first chosen Emperor) did so
abhor cruelty, that he would not suffer any beast to be killed for sacrifice;
yet after by degrees, and when custom had brought an habit, he thought no
cruelty too much, to put in execution against men: or Dionisyus, who so long as
he was beloved, and well reported of, was a good man; but when the privy talk
to his defamation came to his ears, he fell by degrees to exercise all manner
of cruelty: or Nero, who at first being required to sign (as the manner was)
the sentence of a criminal offenders condemnation, earnestly wished of God,
that he ^ould not write, rather then be forced to doom a man to death; and yet
after, became the most lively Image of cruelty that we read of.

Vice is a Pere patetike, always in progression; yea, both grace, and sin,
are of a growing nature: for as it is in wealth, he that has much, would have
more: so in virtue, and vice; but evil men especially, and deceivers wax worse
and worse, deceiving, and being deceived, 2 Timothy 3. 13. they go first over
Shoes, then over Boots, then over shoulders at length over head and ears in
sin, as some do in debt.

110.
O The dangerous and insensible insinuations of sin! Cu^t^me of sin takes
away the ^ense of sin
if that crafty tempter can hereby work us but to one dram of less
detestation to a familiarity in evil, he promises himself the victory.

Custom brings sin to be so familiar, that the horror of it is turned into
delight; and as men do at first less like sin, so with continuance they do
less feel it: frequency in sin, takes away the sense of sin; as a man may
look so long upon the Sun, that he shall become blind, and then he is not
sensible of any light it has; or hear a great noise so long (as they which
live near the fall of the River Nilus) that it may make him stark deaf: for
even so it fares with the notoriously wicked, who being familiarly accustomed
to all manner of lewdness, can commit foul sins with less touch of
conscience, then others can hear of them: as you shall have Blacke-smiths that
are used to the frequent and daily handling of hot Iron, hold a scorching fire
brand in their hands, and laugh whilst another would rore out; Estrich-like,
they can concost Iron, and put it off, as easily as another weak stomach can
do jelly. Oh how the soul, that takes a delight in levvdnesse, is gained
upon by custom!

Neither will any means restrain such a Sampson, for let him be bound with
green vvithes (the shame of men) they will not hold him; with new Ropes, (the
fear of authority) they will not hold him; with the pin and vvoofe (of Law
and Gospel) none of these will hold him.

Indeed, for a time shame it self may hold them in, though sin holds them
under; but shortly after they have brazen faces, so bloodlesse, that they
cannot blush; and then farewell all good.

There is some fear to offend, some knowledge of good and evil, some remorse,
some conscience, while shame lasts: but if shame once depart, knowledge goes,
and fear goes, and remorse goes, and conscience goes, none will tarry behind
shame; at least, where the fear of God (which is the bridle and curb to
sin) is absent, all vices will there be present and abound; and when they are
once crusted over with perseverance, no hope of returning: like as the Tortise
(delighting in the Sun) swimmeth on the top of the water so long, until the
heat hardens her shell, that she cannot sinck, and then she is taken.
Wherefore let not this point part with us, till it has taught us two things,
to wit, to make conscience of small sins; not to reiterate, or allow our
selves in the practice of any known sin.

111.
ANd so you have the maine ground, foundation, Again, God has proclaimed an
enmity between the wicked and the godly, for so long as the world endures.
root, or spring of their opposition; which yet is not all, for, admit their
natures were not contrary, this alone were omni-sufficient, God, from the
beginning, has proclaimed an enmity between the seed of the Serpent, and the
seed of the woman, which is irreconcilable and endless: for as it has been
from the beginning of time; so it shall last to the end of all time: when time,
says one, began, this malice first began; nor will it end, but with the latest
man. It is an everlasting act of Parliament, like a Statute in Magna Charta,
Genesis 3. 15. where even in Paradise, Iehova, the eternal God, and Lord of
Hosts, says unto Satan, I will put enmity between thee, and the woman; and
between thy seed, and her seed; he, or it shall bruise thine head, and thou
shall bruise his heel; whereby Satan's seed, is meant the wicked of all ages;
and by enmity, bitter, immoderate, inveiterate, irreconcilable, and endless
hatred, and division, opposite to that amity and familiarity, which formerly
had been between the Woman and the Serpent; as Expositors universally
conclude.

So that there was a twofold kingdom set up in this world (both spiritual) a
kingdom of sin and darkness, Satan is their King and they must seek his
wealth (...) honor all they can and strive to enlarge his kingdom by winning
all they can from Christ by a continual w^rre and skirmish.
and a kingdom of light and holiness; the King and chief commander of the
one, being Satan, the Prince of darkness, the god of this world, and chief
of evil Spirits; his subjects, all unregenerate men: and the King of the
other, being Christ, called in Scripture, the wonderful Counselor, the mighty
God, the everlasting Father, and Prince of peace, the Lords of Lords, and King
of Kings, Isay, 9. 6. Rev. 17. 14. who is also the chief of men, even the
chief Son of man; his subjects, the godly and regenerate alone: between
which Kings, and their Regiments, God himself having proclaimed a perpetual
war, saying, I will put enmity between the one, and the other, how can we
expect less? for with God, neither does his word disagree from his intention,
because he is truth it self; nor his deed from his word, because he is power
it self; God is not as man, that he should lie, neither as the Son of man,
that he should repent: has he said, I will put enmity between the men of the
world, and his own people, and shall he not do it? or, has he spoken the
word, and shall not he accomplish it? Numb. 23. 19. Heaven and Earth shall
pass away, but one jot, or tittle of his word shall not pass, till all be
fullfilled, Math. 5. 18. So that to be without temptations, reproaches, and
persecutions, we may rather wish, then hope: for what peace can we look for,
between the seed of the Serpent, and the seed of the woman, since God
himself, from the beginning, has set them at enmity? yea, once to expect it,
were an effect of frenzy, not of hope.

112.
THat Satan is their King, you have it, As they have not been waiting (...) in
any age.
John 14. 30. and the Prince of this world, it is plain, John, 12. 31. and
that he rules by, and works in all the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2.
makes clear: and that they are his servants, kept by the Devil in a snare,
and taken Captive of him? at his will, are the very words of the Holy Ghost, 2 Timothy 2. 26. which being so (considered together with the former proclamation)
how should they not seek his wealth, and honor by fighting for him; How
should they not strive to enlarge his kingdom, and the territories of Hell, by
winning all they can from Christ, by a continual war and skirmish, as they
have not been wanting hitherto in any age?

Yea, I could produce testimonies and examples till dark night, to prove that
there has been in all ages, is now, and ever shall be (between these two
Kings, Satan and Christ, and their regiments, the wicked, and the godly) a
perpetual war enmity and strife, according to the Lords prediction, or
proclamation; for there is scarce a Page in the Bible, which does not either
express, or imply, somewhat touching this war: yea, as if the Scriptures
contained nothing else, the Holy Ghost ^ignificantly calls them, the book of
the battles of the Lord, Numb. 21. 14. as Rupertus well observes.

But because it would take up much room, and none, except they are blind, will
question the same I will wave that.

Satan is not a Captain of forties, nor of fifties nor of sixties, nor of
hundreds; (...) he is General over all which fight not under Christ's Banner;
which is but a little flock.

It Is true, every Christian in his Baptism has taken presse-money of Christ,
to be his Soldier, and to serve him in the Field of this world, against his,
and our enemies: yea, I confess, amongst us Christians, Christ is the subject
of all tongues; O that he were the object of all hearts: but whereas the
School disputes of him, the Pulpit preaches of him, Hypocrites talk of him,
time-servers make use of him, Politicians pretend him, profane men swear by
him, millions profess him; few love him, few serve him, few care to honor
him: godly men, even amongst us Christians, are like timber trees in a wood,
here one, and there one. Yea, it is to be feared, that, as once in Israel a
thousand followed Baal, for one that followed God; so now many serve the world,
and the flesh, and the Devil, for one that truly serves God in sincerity,
truth, and holiness.

Now as when Abimeleck reigned, down went Gideon's children: so where wicked
men bear sway, and sin reigns, down goes Christ's friends, and the fruits of
faith. And when has the visible Church kept her own so well, but it might
truly be said (not as the women of Saul and David, Saul has slain his
thousand, and David his ten thousand, but) Satan by himself and his Host,
has slain more then his hundred thousand. Yea, of these drunkards, who have
taken the Devils oath of allegiance, he is a very mean soldier, that has
not won some from Christ's Standard: as amongst the Hungarians, he is not held
worhty to wear a weapon, nor reputed a brave gentleman, who has not killed a
Turk: Yea, some there are that have won more men from him, then they have
been weeks at their own dispose; as Cato Censorius boasted, he had taken
more towns in Spain, then he had been days in the country. Nay, has not
the Devil made as good use of some famous drunkard, as Sampson did of that
Jaw Bone of an Ass, Judge. 15. wherewith he slew a thousand men?

113.
NOw wherein do they overcome, They would have our company in torments.
and what is it these spiritual Kings, and their Regiments chiefly fight for
(for having made clear way, I come now at length to prove the second part of
my former proposition, namely, that their utmost aim and end (whether they
seek to intise or enforce us to sin with them) is, that they may have our
company hereafter in the burning lake) but to win souls each from other? and
what think you do drunkards, the seed of the Serpent, and children of the
Devil, more delight in, then the murder of souls? and why do they so
subtly persuade, and so violently enforce us to sin with them, but that
they may pluck us out of Christ's fould, and bring us into the same place of
torment, whether they are going? This is the very end and purpose of all their
warring against the seed of the woman. For as nothing but the dishonor and
rape of Tamer, No thing hut our (...) the herpen^ and is ^eede.
could please Amnon; and nothing but the blood of Amnon, could satisfy
Absalom; and nothing but the heart of Absalom, could content Ioab; and nothing
but the death of Ioab, could pacify Solomon: so nothing but our souls, will
satisfy the Serpent and his seed. This is the very Prick, White, and Butt,
whereat they shoot all their Arrows, and lay their level.

If any shall say, this word is too big for my mouth, I wish them, first hear,
and then determine. The Devil by these, as through so many Bows, shootes a
deadly Arrowe at thy soul, as Lycian Pandorus did at Menelaus the Grecian; but
God, like Pallas, turns by the Shaft, and makes it hit upon the body, goods,
or good name; as that upon the buckler of his girdle.

Why think you are all their frowns, and frumps, and censures, and scoffs;
Why so many slanders, and stigmaticall nicknames raised and cast upon the
Religious? why are they the alone object of their scorn and derision, but that
they may flout them out of their faith, dampe, or quench the spirit, where they
perceive it is kendled, but that they may baffle them out, and make them
ashamed of their holy profession and religious course, and consequently pull
them back to the world;

Why did the Heathen Emperors so violently oppose, and so cruelly persecute
the Christians, but to make them become Heathens too? Why did Bonner and
Gardener, with the rest of that crew, in the time of Queen Mary, burn at the
stake all that truly professed the purity of Religion, but to win them from
Christ? Why did St. Paul, before his conversion, breath out threatenings and
slaughters against the Disciples; why did he persecute them, even to strange
cities, shut up in Prison, and punish them throughout all the Synagogues, but
that he might make them renounce Christ, and his religion, and compel them to
blaspheme? as himself confesses, Acts, 26. 10. 11. Why did the high Priests
so consult and contrive about putting Lazarus to death, after he was raised;
and Christ also, that raised him, but because for his fake many of the Jews
went away, and believed in Jesus? as the Holy Ghost affirms, John, 12. 10. 11.
see also Chap. 11. 48. Lastly, if there were not many men so cursedly wretched,
as to delight in the murder of so^les; what should holy David so much, and in
so many places, use these, and the like expressions, They have laid wait for
my soul, Psa. 59. 2. 3. They rewarded me evil for good, to have spoiled my
soul, Psalm. 35. 12. Mine enemies, the wicked, compass me round about for my
soul, Psa. 17. 9. They gather themselves together, and lay wait for my soul,
Psalm 56. 6. and many the like, which was not more his case, then it is ours:
for all their aim, when they either tempt, or afflict us, is, that they may
make us square our lives, according to their rule, (as that Giant did
proportion the bodies of all his guests, to the bed of his Harlot; either by
stretching out, if they wanted in length; or cutting off, if they did exceed)
and consequently, draw us to perdition.

They rather wish all damned with themselves, then any to be freed from their
own Prison: and as in the blessed, there is perfect charity; so in the damned,
there is perfect envy; neither the good would be saved, nor the wicked would
be damned alone; wherefore they seek to win all they can.

114.
WHen once a man is got out of the snare of the Devil, he will do what he
can, Good men draw all they can (...) heaven, wicked all they can to ^ell.
to pluck others after him. As by his sins and bad example, he has drawn
others from God: so now he will, all he can, draw others with himself to God;
Saul converted, will build up, as fast as ever he plucked down; and preach, as
zealously, as ever he persecuted.

But take a view of each case in several persons, and first of the godly. We
read that Noah and Lot, hazarded their own peace and safety, (such was their
charity, to preserve theirs that afflicted them) they did admonish others, like
Prophets; and advise them, like Fathers; but both in vain; these holy men
seemed to them as one that mocked, and they did more then seem to mock them
again. We read likewise, how Andrew was no sooner converted, and become
Christ's Disciple; but instantly he seeks out his brother Simon, to gain
him also to the same faith, John, 1. 41. And of Philip, that he did the like to
Nathaniel, verse 45. And of the woman of Samaria, that she did the like to many
of her neighbors, John 4. 28. to 41. And of the twelve Apostles, that so soon
as they were endued with the Holy Ghost, they spread the Gospel throughout the
whole world, and with so good success, that we read of three thousand souls
converted, by one of them, at one time, namely, by Peter; so well did he obey
Christ's command, who said unto him, when thou art converted strengthen thy
brethren, Luke 22. 32.

Yea, Moses so thirsted after the salvation of Israel, that rather then he
would be saved without them, he desired the Lord, to blot him out of the
Book of Life, Exodus 32. 32. and Paul to this purpose says, I could wish my
self to be separated from Christ, for my brethren, that age my kinsmen,
according to the flesh, meaning the Jews, Romans 9. 3. Their charity, and
spiritual thirst after salvation, was much like the natural thirst of
Alexander, who being with his troops in the Field, and in extremity of thirst,
when one presentted him an Helmet of water, he refused it, saying, si solus
bibero, hos maeror occupabit: or that of Rodolphus the Emperor, who in his
wars against Octocarus, King of Bohemia, being offered drink by a rusticke
that attended his harness, when both he, and his whole Army were ready to
perish with thirst; refused it, saying, that his thirst was for all his Army,
and not alone for himself.

There is a great dearth of reason and charity in that man, who would be
happy alone; much more do they desire the blessedness of others, that are of
the communion of Saints: all heavenly hearts are charitable, and it is a great
presumption, that he will never find the way to heaven, who desires to go
thither single: yea, a desire to win others, is an inseparable adjunct, or
relative to grace; for it is impossible, that a man should be converted, but
having got himself out of Satan's clutches, he will seek to draw others after
him; yea, where the heart is thankful, and inflamed with the love of God and
our neighbor, this shall be the principal aim: as that virtuous Lady, which
Camden speaks of, having been a Leper her self, bestowed the greatest part
of her portion, to build an Hospital for other Lepers.

Neither can enlightened souls choose but disperse their rays: we are no whit
thankful for our own illumination, if we do not look with charity and pity,
upon the gross misse-opinions and misprisions of our brethren. It is a duty
commanded by God, Iud. 22. 23. 2 Timothy 2. 25. 26. Heb. 3. 13. And every good
man's meat and drink, is to do the will of him that sent him; and though he
cannot do, what he would; yet he will labor to do, what he can, to win others;
not to deserve by it, but to express his thanks.

115.
ANd as Gods people would not be saved alone, They shall answer for
soule-murther.
but win all they can, knowing, society no small part of the very joys of
heaven: no more would wicked men be damned alone, but mislead all they can,
thinking it some ease and comfort in misery, to have companions. As for
example. What made the Scribes and Pharisees compass Sea and Land, to make one
of their profession, but that they might make him twofold more the child of
hell, then themselves? as out Savior expressly witnesses, Matthew. 23. 15. Yea,
they shut up the kingdom of heaven (so far forth as they could) and would
neither go in themselves, nor suffer others, that would have entered, to come
in, v. 13. And what else, but this love of community, made Baalam (being a
cured reprobate himself) so willing; first, to curse all Israel, and after,
when that would not fadge, to give such divellish counsel against them? Nnmb.
22. Reve. 2. 14
Or what is the reason think you, of all their practices against the just now
of their, tempting them, and attempting what they can against them, but this,
they would discourage us in the way to heaven, beat us off from our holy
profession, or being religious, and draw us back to the world, that so they
might have our company here in sin, and hereafter in torment? as if this were
not to carry brimstone to their own fire, and to make their own bed in hell.

And let such know, that how many Novices, or Apprentises of Religion soever,
have been beaten off, by means of their scoffs, slanders, reproaches, or
other their malicious practices against the godly; how many soever they have
forestalled with prejudice against the religious, by making their favor to
stink before their neighbors, and acquaintance, through their lies and
forgeries; so putting a sword into their hand, to slay them, as the children of
Israel unjustly charged Moses and Aaron, touching Pharaoh, and his servants,
Ex. 5. 21. or how many soever are drawn to do and commit the like sins, by
their example; even so many of Christ's band* they have (as much as in them
lies) diminished, and shall one day be arraigned and condemned, not only for
high treason, against our Sovereign Lord Christ, but also for slaying so many
souls with death eternal; which sin, having a reward of torment answerable,
(as I shall show anon) must of necessity, bring upon them more then double
damnation. Wherefore let them, more wisely then Dives, look to it in time,
take heed of pouring water upon the fire of the Spirit, which had more need of
kendling, then of quenching; and beating down the weak hands and knees, which
should rather be listed up for God, and against Satan.

And thus you see that drunkards, and all wicked men, (whose meat and drink it
is, to do the will of their Father) aim at our eternal ruin, as the devil
did at the ruin of our first Parents, and their offspring; and how could they
do so, if they did not partake of the devils nature yea, if they were not
quite changed from men into devils?

116.
BUt see other two reasons, why they desire community in the burning lake,
Other reasons why they would have our company in the burning lake.
and why they make no bones of soulemurther, the first is this, they know
themselves irrecoverably lost, and therefore they are desperate, because they
cannot rise themselves, 1 Being out of hope themselves they are loath others
should fare better then they.
they would ruin all; they know, they have so grievously offended God, and so
despited the Spirit of grace, so ^inned against knowledge, and conscience, and
so often reiterated theirabominations, that they are become so incurable, and
past hope of remedy, that no medicine, can help them, as God speaks, touching
the sorrows of the Jews by Jeremiah, Chap. 30. 12. 13. 15. as sometimes it
fares with a sick patient, who while he has hope of cure, is willing to
abstain from such meats as are dangerous* and hurtful for him; but knowing
his disease incurable, forbeareth nothing that he likes, and likes only those
things which are most forbidden him; so the Proverb is verified in them, Over
Shoes, over Boots, yea, which is desperate, over shoulders.

As a man sinking into the deep water, catches hold of him that is next him:
so men diving into the bottom of iniquity, pull down their adherents: and how
can they more lively prove themselves the Devils children, whose aim it has
ever been, seeing he must of necessity be wretched, not to be wretched
alone?

It is little content to them to be reprobates, except they have company.
Wherefore as falling Lucifer drew numerous Angels with him: so all his agents
and adherents, as firebrands, in burning themselves, burn others; the Devil
out of malice misleades them, and they others: what wretched companiouns then
are these men! the Lord grant we may know no more of them, then by hearesay.

117
SEcondly, 2 They think it will be some ease and comfort in misery to have
companions.
there is another winning reason, why they strive so after community: for you
must know, the Devil propounds to them and they to themselves, some appearance
of good in every thing they do. They think it some ease and comfort, in
misery to have companions, yea, the more, the merrier, think they, as sorrows
divided among many, are borne more easily: it is some kind of ease to sorrow,
to have partners; as a burden is lightened, by many shoulders: diverse backs
will carry a greater burden, with less pain; or as clouds scattered into
many drops, easily vent their moisture into air: many small brooks meeting,
and concurring in one channel, will carry great vessels: yea, our griefs are
lessened, our joys enlarged, our cares lightened, by one friendly associate. In
all heates of anguish, good assistance and society breathes some cool air of
comfort: when Paul must answer before Nero, he complains, that no man stood
with him, but all men forsook him, 2 Timothy 4. 16. And certainly, it was a
plague upon a plague; to the Leper, that he was condemned to live alone: it
cannot but aggravate their sickness, which are now pent up, by reason of this
visitation, and compelled to be sick without any visitant, either to ease, or
pity them.

The comfort of fugitives is, that ther^ be many fugitives; we know nothing
seems to fall, where everything falls; a general disease, is a particular
health: whereupon the Curt taild Fox, in the Fable, endeavored to have all
Foxes curtaild. They have a whimsie in their brains, much like that of
Amurath, who, at the taking of Isthmus, sacrificed six hundred young Grecians
to his Fathers soul, to the end, their blood might serve as a propitiation, to
expiate the sins of the deceased. Wherein they imitate the Dragon, which is
very desirous of the Elephants blood, for the coldness of it, wherewith she
desires to be cooled; or the great Cham, who whenever he dies, takes order,
that ten, or twelve thousand Tartars be slain, to accompany his death.

But ala^^e poor souls! they are much mistaken, in thinking it will either
comfort, or ease them, But this will ad to the pile of their torments
to have fellowship in torment: for though by the multitude, of participants,
the joys of Heaven are enlarged; yet hereby the sorrows of Hell are much
increased; for know this, thou Tempter, that thou do not more increase other
men's wickedness on earth, (whether by persuasion, or provocation, or example)
then their wickedness shall increase thy damnation in Hell, as is plainly
seen in the case of Dives; for what made that damned churl move for his
brethren (seeing there is no charity in Hell) but that he felt, every step they
followed of his leading, to increase the pile of his torments, Luke 16. Non
fratres dilexit, sed seipsum respexit, he desired not their salvation, but his
own less damnation. Again, this is made good, Genesis 3. where the Serpent is
cursed, for making Eve transgress; and Eve, for making her husband sin.

Yet such is the implacable enmity, and unchangeable malice of the Serpent, and
his seed; of the Prince of darkness, and these his adherents, against the
children of light, that they will enhance their own damnations, to procure
other men's; rather make their own fire hotter, then not labor to bring others
to the participation of their own torments; Yea, though their consciences tell
them, that such a bitter root shall answer for it self, and for all the
corrupt branches, yes they will endure more grievous misery, to have a more
numerous society.

And so much of the war which God proclaimed, between Satan and Christ, and
their Reigiments, the wicked and the Godly. If you would know the original,
and meritorious cause of this proclamation; it was Adam's sin, in eating the
forbidden fruit; and Sathan's malice, in moving and seduceing him thereunto;
the Original of this discord, is from original sin.

118.
We have got through the greatest part, The Devil beholding to whores, but
far more to drunkards for none help to people hi^ inferanall kingdom like
them.
and are past by the principal stages of the drunkards progress; there is but
one mile further, of about eight short furlongs, to go, and we have overcome
it; yea, to speak truth* I am now at the top of the hill, and shall, after a
short pause, go down faster then I went up. But let us make a stand here, and
look back upon what we have past, since Section (75.) from which stage
hitherto, I have shown how drunkards imitate that old Serpent the Devil. In
Tempting Enforceing to sin, and in

drawing to perdition. After a review taken, let any stander by (for being no
ways a party, I refer it to him) say, whether Satan be so much beholding to
any men alive as to them; whether he has any servants, that do him such
faithful service; any factors, that make him a better return of souls; any
General, that subdues so many soldiers to him; any Advocates, which plead so
hard for him, as the true drunkard; I presume he cannot nominate, or think of
one*

I consesse, a beautiful whorish woman (another of the Devils lime-twigs) who
has a flattering tongue, Pro. 6. 24. smooth and enticeing words, Pro. 7. 5.
lips which drop like an honey comb, and a mouth (...) soft then oil, Pro. 5.
3. as Solomon speaks* does the Devil singular good service in the business of
tempting; for infinite are the souls, which these artificial Paradises have
beguiled; yea, it cannot be denied, but Satan is more beholding to the face,
then to all the body besides. For as through an Hell upon earth, God brings
many to Heaven: so through an Heaven upon earth, many bring themselves to Hell.
And she has one privilege above other tempters, for, Cockatrice-like, she
kills with her very ^ight; yea, she is able to take a man, with her very
eyelids, Pro. 6. 25. which makes the wise man say, that many have perished by
the beauty of women, Ecclus. 9. 8. yet nevertheless, let her have as many
lovers, as Toringa once had (who attempting to count them upon her fingers, was
forced to call for a bushel of Pease, before she could number them all) and
strength like Rotorus, who contracted with a notable Pirate, to serve the turn
of him and him hundred soldiers: and (...) will as free as Dunkerke, which
bids (...) to all comers, so that any (...) Fellow may ride her post to the
Devil, with a golden bit; she shall never be able to fill Hell (her body will not
hold out) nor help to people that infernal Kingdom; as some drunkards do,
that are gifted thereafter.

The which considered, together with his other sins of idleness, epicurisme,
adultery, murder, his vain babbling, scurrilous jesting, wicked talking,
impious swearing, atheism, etc. (for he has treble heads to Cerberus, that
ugly Porter of Hell) proves him the King, or chief of sinners, as the
Basiliske is called the King of Serpents; and not only shows them to be
children of the Devil, as they were long since, but to be really metamorphosed
into Devils, as lots wife was really metamorphosed into a pillar of Salt, and
Ulysses companions into Hogs and Dogs, and Cadmus, with his wife, into
Serpents: yea; certainly, if the Devil would change his properties, he would
put himself into the person, and appropriate to himself the very qualities of
some drunkard; how ever, he chooses drunkards to be his instruments, to t^mpt,
rather then other sinners, because they are more fit for it, then any other; as
of all the creatures which God made, he chose the Serpent, an instrument, to
tempt Eve, because it was more subtle then any beast of the field. Genesis 3. 1.

As also for the natural affection which they bare to him, above other men;
for the drunkard loves Satan so extremely, that, for the most part, he either
swims to him in blood, or sails to him in a vessel of wine, before nature
summons him to depart, and will needs be tormented before the time.

All which their zeal, We should be as zealous and industrious to win souls
to God.
industry, and fervent affection, to do the will of their Father, should teach
and stir up Go^s people to the like zeal, industry, and fervent affection,
to do the will of their Father. Their voluntary lewdness, calls for our
dutiful and more zealous obedience; that our God may have as faithful
^ervants, as he has unfaithful enemies. Shall wicked men be at more cost and
pains, to please an ill master; then we can afford to please so good a God, so
gracious, so loving a Father? Shall they labor so hard, for that which shall
confound them; and shall we think any pains too much, for that which shall
(...) us? Is it their meat and drink to do mischief; and shall good duties
down as a Potion with us? This were to acknowledge more venom in the seed of
the Serpent, then there is health in the seed of the woman.

Indeed, the world could not stand before us, if our truth might be but as
hotly followed as their falsehood. O that our God, whose cause we maintain,
would inkendle our hearts, with the fire of holy zeal, but so much as Satan
has inflamed theirs, with the fire of fury and faction O Savior, it was thy
meat and drink to do the will of thy Father, how do we follow thee, if we
suffer either pleasures, or profits to take the wall of thy services? But of
this elsewhere.

119.
FOr I consider, Their punishment.
that both by Gods, and man's Law, next after indictment and conviction,
follows sentence; and after sentence is past, comes execution; if a reprive,
or pardon be not use out, in the (...). Wherefore, as drunkards have seen
their sin laid open, so let them now hearken to their punishment*

If there be any of these Antipodes to God and his Kingdom, who like Trees,
have rooted both head and heart into the earth, and set heaven at their heels,
that have in this Treatise, as in a picture, taken a full view of his own
horrid and detestable condition, and with B^palus the Pain^e^, read the lively
character of his odious and deformed demeanor; and after he has seen, as in
a clear glass, the ugly face of his foul heart, with those spots and
wrinkles, which otherwise he could not have confessed in himself, and further
seen how miserably he has been deluded in his judgment, touching the
religious; and shall notwithstanding resolve against yielding, and presence the
humouring of his soul, before the saveing of it, and shall think it a
disparagement to repent him of his errors, and would rather obstinetely
continue in them, then disclame them; so shutting his eyes, that he may not
see; and stopping hes ears, that he may not hear; and hardening his heart,
that he may not consider; presumptuously, as Pharaoh did; maliciously, as (...)
did; desperately, as Ahab did; and blasphemously, as Julian did; let him know
this, that he shall surely perish. The reason of it, is taken out of the
Proverbs, an Arrow drawn out of Salomen's sententions Quiver, read the words,
and tremble, A man that hardneth his neck, when he is rebuked, shall suddenly
be destroyed, and cannot be cured, Prove. 29. 1. yea, faith the Lord himself,
Prove. 1. 24. 25. 26. because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched
out mine hand, and ye would not regard, but despised al my counsel; I will
also laugh at your destraction, and mock when your fear comes.

And of this we have sundry instances. The Sons of Ely would not harken unto,
nor obey the voice of their father, why? because (says the Text) the Lord was
determined to destroy them, 1 Samuel 2. 25. Their hearts must be hardened, that
they may be destroyed. I know, (says the Prophet to Amaziah) that God hat
determined to destroy thee, because thou have done this, and have not obeyed my
counsel, 2 Chr. 25. 16. 20.

O remember that there is a day of account, A description of the last judgment
and of hell.
a day of death, a day of judgment coming, wherein the Lord Jesus Christ
shall be revealed from heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, to
render vengeance unto them which obey not unto his Gospel, and to punish them,
with everlasting perdition from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his power, 2. These. 1. 7, 8, 9. Jude 15. Wisdom 5. 1. to 10. at which time
thou shall hear him pronounce this fearful doom, Depart from me ye cursed,
Matthew. 25. 41. which is an everlasting departure, not for a day, nor for years
of days, nor for millions of years, but for eternity; and that from Christ to
the damned, to the devils, to hell, without either end, or ease, or patience
to endure it; at which time, within thee shall be thine own guilty
conscience, more then a thousand witnesses, to accuse thee; the Devil, who now
tempts thee to all thy wickedness, shall on the one side, testify with thy
conscience against thee; and, on the other side, shall stand the holy Saints
and Angels, approving Christ's justice, and detesting so filthy a creature;
behind thee, an hidious noise of innumerable fellow damned reprobates;
tarrying for thy company; before thee, all the world burning in a flaming fire;
above thee, that irefull Judge of deserved vengeance, ready to pronounce the
same sentence upon thee; beneath thee, the fiery and sulphurous mouth of the
bottomless pit, gaping to receive thee; into which being cast, thou shall ever
be falling down, and never meet a bottom; and in it thou shall ever lament,
and none shall pity thee; for thou shall have no society but the Devil and
his Angels; who being tormented themselves, shall have no other ease, but to
wreak their fury in tormenting thee; thou shall always weep for pain of the
fire, and yet gnash thy teeth in indignation, for the extremity of cold; thou
shall weep to think, that thy miseries are past remedy; to think, that to
repent is to no purpose; thou shall weep to think, how for the shadow of a few
short pleasures (if they could be called pleasures) thou have incurred these
sorrows of eternal pains, which shall last to all eternity: thy conscience
shall ever sting thee, like an Adder, when thou think, how often Christ by
his Preachers offered thee remission of sins, and the Kingdom of Heaven
freely, if thou would but believe and repent; and how easily thou might
have obtained mercy in those days, how near thou wast many times to have
epented, and yet did dest suffer the devil and the world to keep thee still
impenitent; and how the day of mercy is now past, and will never dawne again,
for thou shall one day find, that conscience is more then a thousand
witnesses, and God more then a thousand consciences.

120.
IF you will not believe me, yet at least believe Pharaoh, The same further
amplified
who in the rich man's scalding rtorments has a Discite a me, learn of me; he
can testify, out of woeful experience, that if we will not take warning by
the word (that gentle warner) the next shall be harder; the third and fourth,
harder then that; yea, as all the ten plagues did exceed one another, so the
eleventh single, exceeds them all together: innumerable are the curses of God
against finners, but the last is the worst, comprehending and transcending all the rest; the fearefullest plagues God still reserves for the upshot, all the
former do but make way for the last.

When the Dream, and the Miracle, and the Prophet had done what they could
upon Nebuchadnezzar; God calls forth his temporal judgments, and bids them
see what they can do; if they will not yet serve, he has eternal ones, which
will make them repent every vein of their hearts and souls, that they did not
repent sooner.

Oh that I could give you but a glimpse of it, that you did but see it, to the
end you might never feel it, that so you might be won, if not out of faith,
yet out of fear; for certainly, this were the hopefullest means of
prevention: for though diverse thieves have robbed passengers, within sight of
the Gallows; yet if a sinner could see but one glimpse of hell, or be
suffered to look one moment into that fiery Lake; he would rather choose to
dye ten thousand deaths, then commit one sin: and indeed, therefore are we
dissolute, because we do not think what a judgment there is after our
dissolution; because we make it the least and last thing we think on; yea, it
is death, we think, to think upon death, and we cannot endure that doleful
bell, which summons us to judgment.

Something you have heard of it here, and in Section the 44. But, alas! I may
as well with a Cole paint out the Sun in all his splendour, as with my pen, or
tongue, express the joys of Heaven (which they willingly part withal) or
those torments of hell (which they strive to purchase) For as one said, that
nothing but the eloquence of Tully could sufficiently set forth Tullie's
eloquence: so none can express those everlasting torments, but he that is
from everlasting, to everlasting; and should either man, or Angel, go about
the work, when (with that Philosopher) he had taken a seven-nights time to
consider of it, he might ask a fortnight more, and at the fortnights end, a
month more, and be at his wits end, at the worlds end, before he could make a
satisfiing answer, otherthen his was, that the longer he thought of it, the
more difficult he found it: alas! the pain of the body, is but the body of
pain; the anguish of the soul, is the soul of anguish.

121.
BUt to be everlastingly in Hell, to lie for ever in a bed of quenchles flames,
is not all: Drunkards shall have a double portion of vengeance to other men.
for as thy sins have exceeded, so shall thy sufferings exceed; as thou have
had a double portion of sin to other men here, so thou shall have a double
portion of torment to them hereafter; the number and measure of torments, shall
be according to the multitude and magnitude of offenses; mighty sinners shall
be mightily punished, for God will reward every man according to his works,
Revel. 20. 12. 13. and 22. 12. As our works are better or worse, so shall our
joys in heaven, our pains in hell be more or less; as every one has been
more wicked, he shall be more wretched; Capernaum exceeding Sodom and
Gomorrah in sin, shall feel also an excess of punishment; and the wilful
servant shall receive more stripes, then the ignorant, Luke 1^. 47. 48. Mat.
10. 15 which being so, viz. that every man shall be punished according to
merit; what will become of thee? surely thy sins are so prodigious, that they
scorn any proportion under a whole volume of plagues.

But see wherein thy sins exceed other men's, The drunkards sins aggravated
by the circumstances.
that shall go to the same place of torment, how every sin receives weight
and increase in regard of circumstances, and how thou, after thine hardness and
heart which cannot repent, heapest unto thy self wrath against the day of
wrath, and of the declaration of the just judgment of God, who will reward
every man according to his works, Romans 2. 5, 6.

The particulars which greaten, aggravate, and add weight to thy sins, and
make them above measure sinful, are so diverse and sundry, that I may not
insist upon all; yet some are of such import, that I dare not omit them.

First, the civil justitiary, who omi^t^th the performance of those good
duties which the Law require^h, First, the civily righteous have hell for their
portion bu^ drunkards are notoriously wicked.
is in a damnable condition; but thou in a far worse, who wilfully runnest on
in the commission of those sins, which the Law flatly forbids. It was the not
slaying of Agag. 1 Samuel 15. that lost Saul his Kingdom, and the favor of God.
The not circumcising of Moses his first borne. Exodus 4. had like to have cost
him his life. The not relieving of poor Lazarus, Luke 16. was the rich man's
ruin. It was not the evil servants spending his Masters money, which cast him
into prison, but the not gaining with it; he did not evil with his Talent, no,
it was enough to condemn him, that he did nothing with it.

Now if barrenness be sent into the fire, how can rapine look to escape? if
omission of good works be whipped with Rodds, surely commission of impieties
shall be scourged with Scorpions.

The old world did but eat, and drink, build, and plant, marry and be merry,
and were swept away with the Beesom of an universal deluge: which things were
in themselves lawful: what then shall become of Liars, Swearers, Drunkards,
Adulterers, malicious monsters, scandalous sinners, whose works are in
themselves simply unlawful? If the civily righteous shall not be saved in
that great and terrible day, where then shall all ungodly drunkards, and
deboyshed swilbowles appear?

Heaven is our Goal, we all run: lo the Scribes and Pharisees are before
thee; what safty can it be to come short of those, that come short of heaven?
Except your righteousness exceed, etc.

Meroz was cursed by the Angel, because they came not to help the Lord, in
the day of battle, Judges 5. 23. they fought not against God, yet because they
did not fight for him, they are cursed. And if they that stand in a lukewarm
neutrality shall be spewed up, sure the palpable and notorious offender, who
takes up arms against God, and opposes all goodness, shall be trodden under
foot of a provoked justice.

O consider this, and lay it to heart, you, that commit sins of all sorts and
sizes; you, that can tear heaven with your blasphemies, and bandy the dreadful
name of God in your impure mouths, by your bloody oaths and execrations; ye
that dare exercise your saucy wits in profane scoffs at Religion; ye that
can neigh after strange flesh etc.

122.
SEcondly, 2. His sins are against knowledge and conscience.
the sins which thou committest are against knowledge and conscience, and so
far greater then the same sins, if another should do them ignorantly. The
servant that knows his masters will, and if he do it not, is a greater
sinner, and shall endure a greater punishment, then he which neglects the
same, not knowing it, Luke 12. 47. 48. to know and not obey, does but teach God
how to condemn us; the greater light we have, the more shame it is for us to
stumble. Anaxagoras that saw the Sun, and yet denied it, is condemned, not of
ignorance, but of impiety.

The infidel disputes against the faith, the impious lives against it, both
deny it; the one in terms, the other in deeds; both are enemies to the
Gospel; but of the two, it is worst to kick against the thorns, we see, then
to stumble in the dark at a block, which we see not: it shall go ill with
sinful Pagans, but worse with wicked Christians; for the Thistell in the
Forest shall not fare so ill, as the barren Figgtree in the Vineyard, the Vine
fruitless, is of all Trees most useless: the daughter of Sion would never
have been so notorious an Harlot, had she not first been so rare a Virgin:
Julian and Lucifer had been less damned, if the one, had not been a
Christian; and the other, an Angel of light.

Read we not that the sins of the Jews were greater, then the sins of
the Gentiles? because, in Jury God was known, and his name great in Israel; it
was not so, says the Holy Ghost, with other Nations, neither have the Heathen
knowledge of his ways; so the sins of us Christians (other circumstances
being matches) are greater, then the sins of the Jews; because our knowledge
is more, or may be more; they had but an aspersion, line to line, here a
little, and there a little; we have an effusion, Asts 2. 17. I will power out
my spirit upon all flesh. For if simple ignorance find no mercy; what Cloak is
long enough, to cover wilful and affected ignorance? certainly, if nescience
be beaten with stripes, wilful impiety shall be burned with fire; sin, even
in ignorance, is a Talent of lead; but sin, after knowledge, is a millstone,
to sink a man to the lowest. If flaming fire be their portion that know not
God, and could not; how terrible shall their vengeance be, that might know him
and would not? howsoever men live, or dye, without the pale of the Church, a
wicked Christian, who either does, or may know the whole revealed will of God,
shall be sure of plagues.

O how many at that dreadful day (when God's revenges have found them out)
shall unwish themselves Christians, or wish that the Gospel and they had never
been acquainted? yea, how will they in hell curse their knowledge, and
unprofitably wish, that they had been Idiots or infidels, and never had so
much as heard of Christ; when they shall find this glorious light, a means to
promote them to a higher place in the kingdom of darkness, and procure to
them, a greater revenew of torment then others have, who know less? for he who
is ignorant of, or neglects his own salvation, all his knowledge tends to
his greater condemnation: to know good, and do evil, makes a man's own
mittimus to Hell. If with Baalam and Judas, we have knowledge in the head,
without holiness in the heart; we shall, with Vriah and Bellerophon, but carry
letters to cut our own throats; or with that servant in the comedy, carry
Satan a special warrant, to bind us hand and foot, and cast us into
everlasting fire.

123.
THirdly, 3. He sins not of infirmity but presum^^ously and of set purpose.
as in sin there is sundry steps and degrees, whereby one and the same sin,
may be lessened, or increased; so thou do mightily increase the guilt of thy
sin this way. As for example. It is a fearful thing to omit good; more
fearful, to commit evil; (as I have showed) but worse, to delight in sin;
worse then that, to defend it; but worse then worst, to boast of it; which is
an usual thing with thee.

Or thus, he does bad enough, that sins through infirmity, being led captive
against his will, to do foul crimes; but thou do incomparably worse, who
sinnest presumtuously, and of se^ purpose, yea, of obstinate and resolved
malice against God, and his image (as I shall in due place prove) sining, not
only without all shame, but not without malice; insomuch that it is thy least
ill, to do evil; for behold, thou speak for it, joyest in it, boastest of
it, enforcest to it, mockest them that dislike it; as if thou would send
challenges into heaven, and make love to destruction.

Fourthly, 4. His sins are so open and scandalous that the Gospel is
dishonored and (...) God blasphemed.
thy sins exceed and weigh down other men's, that shall go to the same place
of torment, because they are so open and scandalous; for he that sins
publicly, to the dishonor of God and religion, is a greater offender, then if
he did the same at home, and in private.

Sin that is done abroad, cease to be single, for it is many sins in one,
and that in a double respect; it stumbles others, it infects others. First, it
stumbles others, and this does much to increase it. It did wonderfully
aggravate David's sin, that it caused the enemies of God to blaspheme: and made
the sin of Elie's sons (whose scandalous lives, made men abhor the
offerings of the Lord) so heinous, that God even swore unto Ely, that the
wickedness of his house should not be purged with sacrifice, nor offering for
ever, 1 Samuel 3. 14.

O the difference between thy practice, and what it ought to be: Christians
ought to be blameles, pure, and without rebuke, yea, to shine as lights to
other men, in the midst of a naughty and crooked nation, Phil. 2. 15. whereas
thou by thy deboyshed life: and abominable licenciousnes, do scandalize the
Gospel and true religion, yea, make it odious to Turks and Infidels,
according to that of the Apostle Romans 2. 24.

Secondly, it infects others, in which regard, says I siodore, It is a greater
offense to sin openly then secretly; for he is doubly faulty, who both does,
and teaches the same. To sin before the face of God, is to dishonor him;
but withal to sin before the face of men, whereby others are taught and
encouraged to do the like, is doubly to dishonor him. An exemplary offender,
is like a malicious man sick of the plague, that runs into the throng to
disperse his infection, whose mischief outweighes all penalty: Many an
Israelite committed fornication, and yet upon repentance got pardon; but Zimry
that would do it impudently, in the face of God and man, was sure to perish.

124.
Fifthly, 5 He commits many sins one in the^ eck of another, and multiplies the
same sins often.
this aggravates thy guilt exceedingly, in that thou addest sin to sin; as
first, thou committest drunkenness, and then in the neck of that thou
blasphemest God, slanderest thy neighbor, seducest thy friend, committest
adultery, murder, etc. as thou best know the wickedness, whereunto thy
heart is privy: when for a less matter then one of these, that worldling
forfeited his soul, Luke 12. 20.

Again, thou aggravatest thy guilt, by multiplying of sin, that is, by
falling often into the same wickedness; and hereby Satan makes sure work,
for though the Devil be the father, lust the mother, consent the midwife,
sin the child, and death the portion; yet all is like to miscarry, if custom
become not an indulgent nurse, to breed up the ^ame till it come to an habit.

Satan first twines certain small threads together of seeming profit,
pleasure, etc. and so makes a little cord of vanity, therewith to draw us unto
him; and afterward composeth of such lesser cords twisted together, that
cart-rope, or cable (custom of iniquity) and therewith he seeks to bind men
fast unto him for starting; for when ^inne, by custom and long practice, is
grown to an habit, this is sin in perfection, or the perfection of sin;
because custom in sin, brings hardness of heart; hardness of heart,
impenitency; and impenitency, damnation.

Yet this by the way is to be noted and remembered, that men of years liveing
in the Church, are not simply condemned for their particular sins, but for
their continuance and residence in them: sins committed make men worthy of
damnation, but liveing and abiding in them, without repentance, is that which
brings damnation upon them: such as live within the precincts of the Church,
shall be condemned for the very want of true faith and repentance.

125.
SIxthly, 6 He sins against mercy, the abundance of means, and the many
warnings, which others never had.
thy judgment shall not only be increased, according to thy sins; but God
will therefore adjudge thee, to so much the f^rer and severer condemnation, by
how much thy means of repentance has been greater.

If I had not come and sp^ken unto them (says our Savior) they should not
have ^ad (...); but now have they no cloak for their sin, John, 15. 22.
Ordinary disobedience in the time of grace; and wilful neglect of Gods call,
in the abundance of means, is a great deal more damnable, then the commission
of sin in the days of ignorance and blindness, when the like means are
wanting. Those Gentiles, the Ninivites, were more righteous then the Jews, in
that they repented at the voice of one Prophet, yea, and that with one Sermon;
whereas the Jews refused and resisted all the Prophets, which God sent among
them; but the Jews who resisted our Savior Christ's doctrine, and put him to
death, were more righteous then such as amongst us are scoffers at Religion,
and Antipodes to the power of grace, they were never convinced that he was the
Messiah, sent from God to redeem the world, as all, or almost all are, that
call themselves Christians, because they profess themselves members of Christ,
and Protestants, in token that they are ready to protest against, and resist
all such as are professed enemies to, and opposers of Christ's Gospel.

As for the Heathen Philosophers, who knew not God in Christ, they are more
righteous then wicked Christians beyond compare, for they believed as Pagans,
but lived as Christians: whereas such believe as Christians, but live like
Pagans: yea, many of them would have been ashamed to speak that, which many
of these are not ashamed to do: and though we are unworthy to be called
Christians, if we profess him in name, and be not like him in works; yet the
most part of men amongst us proclaim to the world, that they have never
thought whether they are going to Heaven or Hell.

There be many professed Christians, but few imitaters of Christ: we have so
much science, and so little conscience; so much knowledge, and so little
practice; that to think of it, would move wonder to astonishment, had not our
Lord told us, that, even amongst those that hear the Gospel, three parts of
the good seed falls upon bad ground.

The common Protestant is of Baalam's Religion, that would dye the death of the
righteous: but no more, Joshua's resolution; I and my house will serve the
Lord, is grown quite out of credit with the world: and there are more
banquerupts in Religion, then of all other professions: but let men take heed,
least by their disobedience they lose their second Paradise, as our original
Parents did their first. If we are commanded to exceed Scribes and Pharisees
in our righteousness, then those that come short of the Ethnic Pagans, what
torments shall they suffer? Jerusalem is said to justify Sodom; yet were the
Sodomites in Hell; now if we justify Jerusalem, sure we shall lie lower in
Hell, then either the Sodomites, or the Jews; for we are so much the worse, by
how much we might have been better.

126.
BUt see how many ways God has called thee, The several ways whereby God
calls to repentance.
how many means he has used, that he might win thee to repentance.

First, the holy Scriptures are, as it were, an Epistle sent unto thee from
Heaven, and written by God himself, to invite and call thee to repentance: and
therein Christ himself no less says unto thee from Heaven, when thou art
drinking, swearing, mocking, scoffing, deriding, envying, hateing, opposing,
and persecuting any that believe in him, then once he did to Saul, why
persecutest thou me? I am Jesus whom thou persecutest; it is hard for thee to
kick against the pricks: for whatsoever the Spirit speaks generally, or
specially in the Word, is the voice of the whole Trinity, and intended
particularly to thee, and to me, and to every man single, his case being the
same: What* do thou look for Caine or Judas to come out of Hell to warn
thee? it is sufficient their sin and punishment is written for thy learning.

But this is not all; for though he calls chiefly by his Word, yet he does not
call only by it; for never any thing happened unto thee in thy whole life,
whether thou receivest benefits, or punishments; hearedst threatenings,
exhortations, or promises, from any his Ambassadors of the Ministry, but all,
whether fair means, or foul, have been sent from God, to invite and call
thee to faith and repentance; He even therefore threatens Hell, (says St.
Chrysostom) that he may not punish thee by the same.

All Gods blessings are like so many suitors, woing thee to repentance; yea,
they put on even the forms of Clyents, and petition thee for repentance; his
afflictions are Ambassadors, sent to treat with thee about a league, which
cannot be had without repentance; all the creatures of God, ordained for thy
use, are so many silent Sermons, so many trumpets, that summon thee to
repentance; in brief, wherefore does the Spirit of grace knock at the door of
thine heart, with such infinite checks, and holy motions, but that he would
come in? and he will not come in, till repentance has swept the house.

Why wast thou not with thy harlot, like Zimry in the arms of Cozby, smitten
in the act of thy Adultery? Why was not thy soul and hers, sent coupled to the
fire of torment, as your bodies were undevided in the flame of uncleanness?
While thy mouth is opened to swear and blaspheme, why is it not instantly filled
with fire and brimstone? When thou art dead drunk, why art thou suffered to
wake again alive, but this, God waits (as in the Parable of the Fig tree,
Luke 13.) another, and another year, to try whether thou will bring forth the
fruit of repentance, and new obedience? yet presume not; for as when men give
long day, they expect larger payment; so does God, or for default thereof,
conferres a heavier doom; the first felony may s^ape, in hope of amendment;
but the second, much more the seventh, meets with (as well it deserves) a
halter.

Yea, of this be sure, if Gods long suffering works no reformation, this
silent Judge will at last speak home. The Elephant suffers many injuries from
the inferior beasts; but war being too far provoked, his revenge is more
extreme, then his patience was remiss: and the higher the Axe is lifted up,
the deeper it cuts.

But what do I nominating particulars, when thou have had more warnings, and
invitations, then thou have hairs on thy head: Gods benefits offered thee in
Christ (and they all solicit thee to repent) are without number, though thy
sins strive with them, which shall be more. If thou could count the
numberless number of creatures, they would not be answerable, to the number of
his gifts; though the number of thine offenses, which thou returnest in liew of
them, are not much inferior.

Not to enter into particulars, which were endless, but to give you the sum
or epitomy of them; for I had rather press you with weight, then oppress you
with number of Arguments. The Lord Christ has not only ransomed thee from
infinite evils here, and everlasting torments hereafter; but also purchased
every good thing thou do enjoy, whether for soul, or body, even to the very
bread thou eatest, and that with the price of his own precious blood; and, as
if all this were too little, he reserveth for thee such pleasures at his right
hand, as never entered into the heart of man to conceive; and to the end only,
that thou should serve, and set forth the praise of his Name, who has done
all this.

As he descended into Hell, that we might never come thither; so he ascended
into Heaven, to prepare a place for us, which we have no right unto.

What should I say? If we look inward, we find our Creator's mercies; if we
look upward, his mercy reaches unto the Heavens; if downward, the earth is
full of his goodness, and so is the broad Sea; if we look about us, what is
it that he has not given us? Air, to breath in; Fire, to warm us; Water, to
cool and cleanse us; Clothes* to cover us; Food, to nourish us; Fruits, to
refresh us; yea, Delicates, to please us; Beasts, to serve us; Angels, to
attend us; Heaven, to receive us; and, which is above all, his own Son to
redeem us. whithersoever we turn our eyes we cannot look besides his bounty.

O consider of these his mercies, you that forget God; and then, though there
were no Hell, no punishment for sin, yet you would not transgress. Have thou
any brains, or heart to conceive what it is he has bestowed, what thou have
received, what thou have deserved? No surely, for if thou had brains, and
were a wise man, it would make thee mad, as Solomon speaks in another sense,
Eccl. 7. 7. or if thou had a heart not like a stone, or an Adamant, the
consideration of Gods love, and thy odious unthankefulnesse, would make it
split and break in pieces. But hear it again.

First, thou were created by him a man, and not a beast: in England, not in
Aethiopia; in this clear and bright time of the Gospel, not in the darkness
of Paganism, or Popery.

Secondly, thou were redeemed out of Hell by his precious blood; he spared not
himself, that his Father might spare thee. Oh think what flames the damned
endure, which thou may escape, if thou will thy self; me thinks this should
melt a heart of Adamant.

Thirdly, he has preserved thee here from manyfold dangers of body and soul.

Fourthly, he has all thy life long plentifully and graciously blessed thee
with many and manifold good things.

And lastly, promised thee not only felicity on earth, but in Heaven, if thou will serve him.

127.
BEsides, The same further amplified.
as these mercies are great in themselves, so our unworthiness does greater
them more, being showed to us, who are no less rebellious to him, then he is
beneficial to us. And is all this nothing to move thee? do thou thus requite
him? art thou so far from loveing and fearing him, that thou hate others,
which do? O monstrous ingratitude! oh foolish man, to look for other, then
great, then double damnation!

O that such sovereign favors as these, should not only not profit thee, but
turn to thy destruction, through thy wilful, blind, and perverse nature!

He is thy Lord, by a manifold right; his tenure of us is diversely held, and
thou his servant by all manner of obligations; indeed our tenure of him is but
single, he is ours only by faith in Christ, Gal. 3. 26.

First, he is thy Lord by the right of creation, thou being his workmanship,
made by him.

Secondly, by the right of redemption, being his purchase, bought by him.

Thirdly, of preservation, being kept, upheld, and maintained by him.

Fourthly, thou art his by uocation, even of his family, having admitted thee a
member of his visible Church.

Fifthly, his also (if it be not thine own fault) by sanctification, whereby
he possesses thee.

Sixthly, and lastly, he would have thee of his court by glorification, that he
might crown thee every way his. Yea, he has removed so many evils, and
conferred so many good things upon thee, that they are beyond thought or
imagination; for if the whole Heaven were turned to a book, and all the
Angels deputed writers, they could not set down all the good, which Christ
has done us.

Now favors bestowed, and deliverances from danger, binds to gratitude; and
the more bonds of duty, the more plagues for neglect. Has God contrived so
many ways to save us, and shall not we take all occasions to glorify him?
Has he done so much for us, and shall we deny him any thing that he requires,
though it were our lives, yea our souls, much more our lusts? we have hard
hearts, if the blood of the Lamb cannot soften them; stony bowels, if so many
mercies cannot melt us. Was he crucified for our sins, and shall we, by our
sins, crucify him again? Do we take his wages, and do his enemy service?
Is this the fruit of his benificence, of our thankfulness? Is this the
recompense of his love, to do that which he hates, and hate those whom he
loves?

O for shame think upon it, and at his instance be persuaded, by whose blood
you were redeemed from all these evils, and interrested in all these good
things. The Apostle could not find out a more heartbreaking argument, to
enforce a sacrificing of our selves to God, then to conjure us by the mercies
of God in Christ, Romans 12. 1. and indeed, we could not be unthankefull, if we
thought upon what the Lord gives, and what he forgives: but if the thought of
these things will not move thee, Lord have mercy upon thee. For, as it is a
fearful mark of a reprobate, always to abuse Gods mercy and patience, to
the hardening of our selves in our evil courses: so good turns aggravate
unkindnesses, and our offenses are increased with our obligations: yea, there
is not one of these favors, of those warnings, which I have mentioned, or
which thou have received, that shall not once be a wirnesse against thee, as
appears by, 1 Samuel 2. where God says unto Ely, by the Prophet, Did not I do
such and such things for thee, and thy fathers house, wherefore then have thou
done thus and thus? And likewise by Chap. 15. where the Lord reproving Saul for
his disobedience, exceedingly aggravates his sin, by what he had formerly
done for him: yea, how does the Lord by the Prophet Nathan aggravate David's
fact, by repeating the many and several favors, and deliverances, which
formerly he had extended to him, 2 Sa. 12. 7. to 13.

128
YEa, Even this book will be a witness against them, when their consciences
are awakened.
even this very Book shall be a witness, and rise up in judgment against
thee (as Plutarch told Trajane the Emperor, touching his letter of advise) and
those very eyes that read it, and that understanding, and will, which has
conceived, and consented unto the equity and truth of it, shall be cited as
witnesses against thee. And, in the mean time, thou shall never hereafter
drink, swear, whore, seduce, hate, persecute, or reproach any for well doing,
but thy conscience, as a sergeant, shall arrest thee upon it; yea, this Book
shall gnaw thee at the heart, with a Memorandum of Hell, that thou shall with,
O that I could abandon my sins, or else that I had never had such a warning.

But then, And then perhaps the gate of mercy wi^^ be sh^t.
perhaps, the gate of mercy will be shut, and though thou would gladly
repent, yet it will be too late, then shall thou begin to say; O what a warning
had I such a time, what an opportunity did I then let slip! woe is me, that
ever I was borne; and woe is me, that ever I had such a warning, which cannot
choose but double my damnation hereafter, as now it doubles my fear and horror.

Even thus, and no otherwise will it fare with thee, when once thine eyes are
opened: and opened they shall be, for though Satan, and thy corrupt conscience
do sleep, and suffer thee to sleep for a while, yet, at least upon thy death
bed, or in hell, when there shall be no more hope, or means of recovery, they
will both wake against thee, and awaken thee up, to everlasting anguish and
unquietness: yea, God shall once enliven, and make quick the sense of thy
benumbed conscience, and make thee know his power, which would never take
notice of his goodness; he will then teach thee with a vengeance, as Gid^on
taught the men of Succoth with briers and thorns. Those careless guests made
light of their calling, to come unto the marriage of the Kings son; but they
found at last, (when they were shut out) that there was no jesting; and the
rich man lift up his eyes in hell, Luke 16. 23. those scorching flames opened
them to purpose, they were never opened before.

129.
THis is the difference between a godly wise man and a deluded worldling: Want
of consideration the cause of all impiety and neglect of obedience.
that which the one does now judge to be vain, the other shall hereafter find
to be so, when it is too late.

O the want of consideration what is spoken, and who speaks, is the cause of
all impiety, and neglect of obedience. The reason why Samuel returned to his
sleep one time after another, when God called him, was, he ignorantly thought
it was only man's voice: and for the same reason, thou will not listen to what
justice and truth speaks in this behalf, otherwise, thou would search the
Scriptures and try, whether my doctrine and allegations be of God, or no, Acts
17. 11. and being of God, and agreeing with the pensell of the Holy Ghost (for
otherwise thou art free) entertain these lines, as if they were an Epistle
sent unto thee from heaven, and writ by God himself, to invite and call thee
to repentance: and though thou can not imitate Zacheas, who was called but
once, and came quickly to Christ; yet thou would imitate Peter, and at this
last crowing of the Cock, remember the words of Jesus, which says, take heed
to your selves, least at any time your hearts he oppressed with surfeiting and
drunkenness, and cares of this life, least that day come on you at nnawares,
Luke 21. 34. and again, whatsoever ye do unto the least of mine, ye do it
unto me; and weighing them with thy self, go out of thy ^innes by repentance;
as he went out of the high Priests Hall.

And so doing, it should be unto thee as Ionathans three Arrows were to
David, which occasioned his escape from Readiness fury: or as David's Harp was to
Saul, which frighted away the evil spirit from him, 1 Samuel 16. 23. yea, as
the Angels was to Peter, that opened the Iron gates, loosed his bands, brought
him out of Prison, and delivered him form the thraldom of his enemies; yea, if
thou be thine own friend, it shall serve thee as a Buoy, to keep thy the
ship of soul from splitting upon the Shelf of presumption; which is my prayer,
and hope, and should be my joy to see it; these things have I said, that ye
might be saved.

You know, the good counsel of Saul's servant, ledd him, in a doubt, to the man
of God; but his own curiosity, ledd him to the Witch of Endor, 1 Samuel 9. 6.
And that little, which Craesus King of Lydia, learned of Solon, saved his life:
and if Pilate would have taken that fair warning which his wife gave him, as
he sat to judge Christ; it might have saved his soul, Matthew. 27. 19. and so
may this thine, if thou will be warned by it. But if this, nor no other warning
will serve thee, if neither present blessings, nor hope of eternal reward will
do any good* if neither the Preachers of God, in exhorting; nor the goodness
of God, in calling; nor the will of God, in commanding, nor the Spirit of God,
in moving can prevail with thee; tr^^ble to think what a fearful doom will
follow; for they shall tremble at the voice of his condemnation; that have shut
their ears, at the voice of his exhortation, Prove. 1. 24. to 32. And so much
of the sixth aggravation.

130.
SEventhly, 7. He not only commits foul crimes, but draws others into the
same sins.
this will above measure aggravate thy doom, and add to thy torment, that
thou seducest, yea, enforcest others to sin, and drawest them to perdition
with thee; for the infection of sin, is much worse than the act; and
misleades into evil sin more, and shall suffer more, then the actors; and
although to commit such things as thou do, single, and alone, were enough,
yea, too much to condemn thee; yet because thou drawest others with thee to the
same sins, thy damnation shall be far greater.

For they whom thou have taught to do ill; increase thy sin, as fast as they
increase their own. Now if their reward in heaven be so great, that save one
soul from death, Dan. 12. 3. how great shall their torment be in Hell, that
pervert many souls to destrustion? Matthew. ^. 19. they shall be maximi in
inf^rm, greatest in the kingdom of hell: he that can dam^ many souls, besides
his own, supererogates of Satan, and he shall give him a double fee, a
double portion of hell fire for his pains. Who then, without a shower of
tears, can think on thy deplorable state; or without mourning meditate thy sad
condition?

Yea, if Ely was punished with such fearful temporal judgments, only for
not admonishing, and not correcting others which sinned; what may thou
expect, that do intise others* yea, enforce them? though to intise others
were wicked enough. Let me say, to the horror of their con^^rences that make
merchandise of souls, that it is a question, when such an one comes to hell,
whether Judas himself would change torments with him.

How fearfully think you, do the seducer and seduced greet one another in
hell? me thinks I hear the Dialogue between them, where the best speaks first,
and says; Thou have been the occasi^^^ of my sin; and the other, thou art
the occasun of my more grievous torment, etc. Evil men delights to make others
so; one sinner makes another, as Eve did Adam: but little do they think how
they advance their own damnations, when the blood of so many souls as they
have seduced, will be required at their hands: and little do sinners know
their wickedness, when their evil deeds, infect by their example, and their
evil words infect by their perwasion; and their looks, infect by their allure
ments; when they breath nothing but infection; much less do they know their
wretchdnesse, till they receive the wages of their unrighteousness, which
shall not be paid, till their work be done; and that will not be done, in many
years after their death.

For let them dye, they sin still. For, as if we sow good works, succession
shall reap them, and we shall be happy in making them so: so, on the contrary,
wicked men leave their inventions and evil practices to posterity, and, though
dead, are still tempting unto sin, and still they sin in that temptation;
they sin as long as they cause sin. This was Ieroboam's case, in making
Israel to sin; for let him be dead, yet so long as any worship his Calves,
Jeroboam sinned; neither was his sin soon forgotten; Nadab his son, and
Basha his successor, Zimry, and Omry, and Ahab, and Ahaziah, and Iehoram all
these walked in the ways of Ierob^am which made Israel to sin; and not they
alone, but the people with them. It is easy for a man's sin to live; when
himself is dead; and to lead that exemplary way to hell, which, by the number
of his followers, shall continually aggravate his torments. The imitaters of
evil, deserve punishment; the abetters, more; but there is no hell deep
enough, for the leaders of public wickedness: he that invents a new way of
serving the devil, has purchased for himself a large patrimony of
unquenchable fire.

Though few men will confess their sins; yet many men's sins will confess
their master. To beget a president of vice, is like the setting a man's own
house on fire, it burns many of his neighbors, and he shall answer for all the
ruins. Alas! while I live, I sin too much; lerme not continue longer in
wickedness; then life.

Sin has an ubiquity; one sinners example infects others, and they spread it
abroad to more; like a man that dies of the Plague, and leaves the infection to
a whole City; so that he must give an account even for the sins of a
thousand; yea, they have so much to answer for, that have thus occasioned so
much ill, that it had been happy for them, if they had never been at all,
then being, to be laden with the sins of so many.

O what infinite torments does Mahomet endure, when every Turk that perishes
by his juggling, does daily add to the pile of his unspeakable horrors! And so
each sinner, according to his proportion, and the number of souls, which
miscarry through the contagion of his evil example; for they shall speed at
last, like him that betrayed a City to a Tyrant; who when he had conquered it,
first hanged up the party that helped him to it.

Yea, perhaps God will even in this life make them an example of his just
vengeance, and provoked indignation; as he did Pharaoh and Julian as their
sin has perverted many, so their fall and ruin may perchance convert many:
the life of Julian, made many Infidels; the death of Julian, made many
Christians: God will teach men to fear him; even by their ruin, that taught
them not to fear him. Yea, the D vell, who now is their good master, will in
the end reward these his subjects, as that Emperor, which Plutarch speaks of,
did by one that killed a great man, who first crowned him, for his valor; and
then caused him to be executed, for the murder: or as the Wolf does by the
Ewe, who sucks her, while she is a little one; and devours her, when she is
grown a great one: Nutritus per me, sed tandem saevtiet in me. So that it were
happy for all seducing drunkards, whors, etc. if they were prevented of doing
this great mischief, and in their nonage thrown alive into the Sea, as the
Citizens of Rome threw Heleogabalus into the river of Tiber, with his mother
Sem^a, to bear him company, for that she bear and brought forth such a gulf of
mischiefs, as Lampridius reports: yea, the whole State should fare the better
for such riddance, for so they should become (though not profitable) yet
infinitely less hurtful, to such as should remain.

131.
THe eight circumstance which aggravates thy sin, is the object, or party
which is offended; 8. They abuse and persecute, not the evil, but the good,
who are to God as the Apple of his eye.
and in this respect, thou art liable to the greater condemnation, in that thou
injurest those whom God tenderly loves, which is far more displeasing unto
him, then if the same were done unto others: they are as the signet upon his
right hand, yea, as the Apple of his own eye, he that touches you, says God,
meaning the Jews, his chosen and beloved people, touches the Apple of mine
own eye, Zach. 2. 8. And who are they which thou scoffest at, traducest,
nicknamest, revilest, and persecutest, but the best of men, such as are most
religious and conscionable, such as will not swear, nor be drunk, nor commit
such wickedness as thou do? Now he which does these things to evil men,
who are Gods enemies, grievously offend him; for what says the Scripture? him
will I destroy, that privily slandereth his neighbor, Psa. 101. 5 and the word
neighbor includes very heathens. How heinously then do they offend, which do
the same, and worse to his children? 2 Cor. 6. 18. Galat. 3. 26. John 1. 12.
who partake of the Divine nature, 2 Peter 1. 4. and are like God in hol^nesse,
1 Pet. 1. 15. members of Christ's body, 1 Corinthians. 12. 27. bone of his bone, and
flesh of his flesh, Ep. 5. 30. and being Temples of the Holy Ghost 1 Cor. 6.
19. If the Goats at the great day, shall be bid depart into everlasting
torment, for not feeding, clothing, visiting, Matt. 25. 41. to.46. what shall
be done to those that persecute Christ in his members?

But let as many as have ears, hear what God has threatened in his word
against such. I will produce but a few of many, the Holy Ghost affirms, that
he will destroy them for ever and root them out of the land of the living,
whose tongues imagine mischief, and are like a sharp Razor, that cutteth
deceitfully; loving to speak evil, more then good, Ps. 522. to.5. that he
will confound such as persecute his children, and destroy them with a double
destruction, Ier. 17. 18. yea, that he will render unto their enemies,
sevenfold into their b^some, their reproach wherewith they have reproached the
Lord, Psalm. 79. 12.

O consider this ye that forget God, least he tear you in pieces, and there
be none that can deliver you. In fine, that he will rain upon them snares of
fire and brimstone with storms, and tempests, Psalm. 11. 6. and after all, cast
them into a furnace of fire, where shall be wailing; and gnashing of teeth for
evermore; when the just, whom they now despise, shall shine as the Sun in the
Kingdom of their Father, Matthew 13. 42. 43.

Men may dip their tongues in venom, and their pens in poison, to speak
against the righteous; but the Lord will once revenge the cause of his poor
ones, he will not always hold his peace, nor hide his face; well may the
vengeance of this sin sleep, but it can never dye: yea, as truly as God has
threatened, to curse all them that curse his children, Genesis 27. 29. so as truly
will he perform it, in one kind or other; either cursing them in their bodies,
by sending some foul disease; or in their estates, by suddenly consuming them;
or in their names, by blemishing and blasting them; or in their seed, by not
prospering them; or in their minds, by darkening them; or in their hearts, by
hardening them; or in their consciences, by terrifying them; or in their wits,
by distracting them; or in their souls, by damning them.

It were endless (for the Sea of examples has no bottom) to recite all,
which Scripture, and Ecclesiastical history makes mention of, with the variety
of fearful and incredible judgments, both spiritual and corporal, which
God has executed upon them, even in this life; though I count it a mercy to
smart here, (if they dye penitent) rather then be reserved to those flames,
which are easelesse and endless, that fearful damnation, made up of an
extremity, universality, and eternity of torments.

Yea, if God caused two and forty little children to be devoured of wild
Bears, for calling Elisha bald-head, 2 Kings 2 24. how can these aged
persecutors hope to escape? yea, what vengeance shall be prepared, or is
enough for them? If God will come in flames of fire, to render vengeance unto
them which know him not; how terrible will he appear to these his professed
enemies, who wittingly, willingly and maliciously oppose him, and his image,
all they can?

132.
OBjection. That the use their tongues only a friv^lous excuse.
But thou have only used thy tongue against them; whereas some have shed the
blood of the Saints. Well, suppose it be so, yet what should they suffer from
thee, if they were at thy mercy? It is not so material what thou do, as
what thou desire: the very purpose of treason, though the fact be hindered,
is treason: not the outward action, but the inward affection is all in all with
God, who measures the work by the will, as men measure the will by the work.

But to take only what is confessed: the persecution of the tongue is a greater
evil, then thou art aware of. We read that Chams scoffing only, brought his
Fathers curse, and God's upon that. And that their sin, which brought a
scandal upon the holy Land, and made all the people to murmr against Moses,
dyed by a plague from the Lord, and was the cause that they never entered into
it; they found it was no jesting matter, Numbers 14. 37. Now we may judge of
their sin, by their punishment: yet their sin was not half so bad, as theirs
is, who amongst us, cause the way of truth to be evil spoken of; for this is
either atheism, or frenzy, or blasphemy, or rather all these; and thou shall
one day wish, with Hecebolus, that thy tongue had been rivetted to the roof of
thy mouth from thy conception, rather then thou had sinned so against the
brethren, wounded their weak consciences, and so risen up against Christ, 1
Cor. 8. 12. yea to be a scoffer, is the depth of sin; such an one, is upon
the very threshold of hell, as being set down in a resolute contempt of all
goodness.

Besides, some men will better abide a stake, Some can better abide ast ache
then others ascoffe.
then some others can a mo^k. Zedechiah could happily have found in his heart,
to have harkened to the Prophets counsel, but that this lay in his way; I am
afraid of the Iemes, least they deliver me unto the Chaldeans hands, and they
mock me, Ier. 38. 19. It was death to him to be mocked. A generous nature is
more wounded with the tongue, then with the hand; yea, above hell, there is not
a greater punishment, then to become a Sanni^, a subject of sc^rne. Sampson
bore with more patience the boring out of his eyes, then the (...) of the
Philistims; they made a feast to their gods, no Musician would serve, but
Sampson, he must now be their sport, that was once their terror; every wit,
every hand plays upon him, who is not ready to cast his bone, and his jest at
such a captive^ so as doubtless he wished himself no less dease, then blind,
and that his soul might have gone out with his eyes: oppression is able to
make a wife man mad, Eccl. 7. 9. and the greater the courage is, the more
painful the insultation.

Alcibiades did profess, that neither the proscription of his goods, nor his
banishment, nor the wounds received in his body, were so grievous to him, as
one scornful word of his enemy Clestiphon. Yea, O Savior, thine ear was
more painefully pierced, then thy brows, or hands, or feet; it could not but
go deep into thy soul, to hear those bitter and girding reproaches from
them, Thou came to save. And hereupon good Queen Esther, in her prayers to
God for her people, does humbly deprecate this height of infelicity, O let them
not laugh at our ruins. And David acknowledged it for a singular token of Gods
favor, that his enemies did not triumph over him, Psalm. 41. 11. Thou think
not tongue-taunts to be persecution; but thou shall, one day hear it so
pronounced, in thy bill of indictment. Ishmael did but flout Isaac, yet St.
Paul says, he persecuted him, Gal. 4. 29. God calls the scorning of his
servants, by no better a name then persecution: and whatsoever thou conceivest
of it, let this fault be as far from my soul, as my soul from Hell.

Alas! this is no petty sin; for one malicious scoff made F^lix nothing,
day and night, but vomit blood, till his unhappy soul was fetched from his
wretched Carcass. And Pherecydes did no more but give religion a nickname (a
small matter, if thou may be made judge) yet for that small fault, he was
consumed by Worms alive. And Lucian for barking, like a dog, against Religion,
was by a just judgment of God, devoured of Dogs.

Yea, suppose the best that can come, namely, that God gives thee an heart to
repent of it, beforethou go hence, and that thy soul has her pardon sued out
in the blood of Christ, as it fared with St. Paul, that chosen vessel; yet
know, that thy body and mind shall smart for this sin above all: do but
hear the Apostles own testimony of himself, 2 Corinthians, 11. 23. to 34:
did he make havocke of the Church? the world made havocke of him for it; did he
hale men and women to prison? himself was often imprisoned: did he help to
stone Steven? himself was also stoned: did he afflict his own countrymen? his
own countrymen no less afflicted him: did he lay stripes upon the Saints? the
Jews laid stripes upon him: was he very painful and diligent to beat down
the Gospel? he was in weariness, and painfulness, frequent watchings, and
fastings, in hunger, and thirst, cold, and nakedness, to defend the Gospel,
etc. Thus he endured when he was Paul, what he inflicted as he was Saul; and
yet he did it out of ignorance, 1 Timothy 1. 13. from whence we may argue, by way
of concession, thus.

If he that found mercy, felt the rod, which scourged him so smart: what shall
their plagues be, in whose righteous confusion God insulteth? Pro. 1. 26. Isay,
1. 24. If he who had his book, felt so much pain; what shall they feel, that
are sentenced to eternal death? If he that did it of ignorance, and out of
zeal, was lasht with so many stripes; what will become of them, that do the
same knowingly, and maliciously? If Christ will be ashamed of them, when he
comes to judge, that only were ashamed to confess him, when he came to
suffer: how will he reject those with indignation, that rejected him with
derision? If the wretched Gergasites, who repelled Christ for fear, are sent
into the fire: what do they deserve, who drive him away with scorn?

133.
NOw the reason why God punishes this sin so severely, that is done to the
godly, Christ takes as done to himself. And well b^ may, for their hatred is
against God and Christ.
is this. What wrongs and contumelies are done to his children, he accounts as
done to himself; as we may plainly perceive, by, Psalm. 83. 2. 5. 6. Pro. 19.
3. psalm. 44. 22. and 69. 7. Romans 1. 30. and 9. 20. Math. 10. 22. and 25. 45.
Luke 21. 17. Zach. 2. 8. 1 Samuel 17. 45. Isa. 37. 4. 22. 23. 28. Psalm. 74. 4.
10. 18. 22. 23. Psalm. 89. 50. 51. Acts, 5. 39. and 9. 4. 5. Psalm. 139. 20. Isa.
45. 9. Job. 9. 4. Isa. 54. 17. 1 The. 4. 8. 10. 15. 18. 20. 21. 24. 25. 23.
Number. 16. 11. 1 Sa. 8. 7. And well he may, for they that hate and revile the
Godly, because they are godly, as these do, hate and revile God himself; and
they that fight against the grace of the Spirit, fight against the Spirit,
whose grace it is; and whatsoever wrong is done to one of Christ's little ones,
is done unto him, Math. 25. 45. It is an idle misprision, to sever the sense of
an injury, done to any of the Members, from the Head: there is that strait
conjunction between Christ and believers, that the good, or evil offered
them, redowndes to him; Christ is both suffering, and triumphing in his Saints;
in Abel, he was slain of his Brother; he was scoft at by his Son, in Noah;
he wandered to and fro, in Abraham; in Isaac, he was offered; sold, in Joseph;
driven away, in Moses; in the Prophets, he was stoned; in the Apostles, tossed
up and down by Sea and Land. What did Ioseph's brethren, in going about to
kill him, but in effect, and so far as they could, they killed their father in
him: Ioab smot Absalom's body, but therein David's heart. The Rebel says, he
means no hurt to the person of the King, but because he does it to the
Subjects, he is therefore a Traitor: thus when the proud Philistine defied the
Army of Israel, David said directly, that he had blasphemed God himself, 1 Samuel 17. 45. and Rabsheka defying the Jews, is said, by Hezekiah, to have
rayled on the living God, Isa, 37. 4. 23. 24. as eager Wolves will houle
against the Moon, though they cannot reach it. Saul, Saul, says Christ,
seeing him make havocke of the Church, why persecutcst thou me? I am Jesus whom
thou persecutest, Act. 9. 4. 5. and Jesus was then in Heaven, but we know, the
head will say, and that properly, when the foot is trod upon, why tread you
upon me?

Wicked men are like that great Dragon, that old Serpent, called the Devil,
and Satan, Rev. 12. who when he could not prevail against Michael himself,
nor pursue that man child, Christ, he being taken up to God, and to his Throne;
waged spiteful and perpetual war with the Woman, who had brought forth the
man Child, that is, with the Church, and the remnant of her seed, which keep
the Commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ.

History reports, how one being to fight with a Duke in a Duel, or single
combat; that he might be more expert, and do it with the greater courage, got
his picture, and every day thrust at it with his sword: and only to deface the
picture of an enemy, when we cannot come at his person, has a little eased the
spleen of some. It contents the Dog, to gnaw the stone, when he cannot reach
the thrower. It was well pleasing to Saul, since he could not catch David, that
he might have the blood of Ahimelech, who used him so friendly, and relieved
him in his great distress, 1 Samuel 21. so though these men cannot wreake their
malice upon God, he being out of their power and reach, yet, that they may do
him all the mischief they can, have at his Image, they will wreake it upon his
children, in whom his Spirit dwells: as Mithridates killed his Son Siphares, to
be revenged of the mother: or as Progne slew her Son Itys, to spite her
husband Tereus; or as the Panther, that will fiercely assault the picture, for
the inveterate and deadly hatred which he bears to man: or as Calignla caused
a very fair house to be defaced, for the pleasure his Mother had received in
the same; it being as true of malice, as it is of love, that it will creep,
where it cannot go.

Which being so, shows that this thy sin is not small: for if one revile or
slander his equal, it is an offense, and may bear an action of the case; but
if a Noble man, it is Scandalum Magnatum, deserving sharper punishment; and if
the King, it is Treason, and worthy of death: then how foul must that sin
be, which is a trespass committed directly against God, the King of Kings, 1 Samuel 2. 25. and how fearful the punishment?

Wherefore take heed what thou do, for as verily as Christ is King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords, so will he dash all those pieces of earth, which rise up
against him, as a potters vessel.

134.
TRue it is, they are so blind that though they do hate God, Though they are
so blind that they think they love God
and his graces, where everthey find them, and desperately fight against the
most high, yet they think they love God, or, at least, do not hate him; yea,
what one is there of them, not ready to call for a Basin, with Pilate, and to
wash his hands from this foul evil, with many fair pretenses? yea, if they
had no answer to frame, no false plea to put in, we might well say that Satan
were turned fool, and that his scholars had no brains left: but let the
sacred truth of holy Scripture be judge, and all the powers of their souls and
bodies do fight against him; not a ^inew, nor a vein, of theirs, but it wars
against their Creator, John, 15. 23. 24. which at last shall appear, for
(though they may dissemble it for a time, yet) when vengeance shall seize upon
them, then shall they openly and expressly blaspheme him to his face, Revel.
16. 9. 11. common eyes may be cheated with easy pretexes, but he that looks
through the heart at the face, will one day answer their Apologies with
scourges: yea, if a man could but feel the very pulse of these men's souls, he
should find, that the foundation of their hatred and enmity to (...), is their
hatred against God, and Christ, the chief of the Woman's seed: even as when
Satan slew Job's servants, his malice was against Job: or as when Saul darted
a Spear at Jonathan, his spite was against David, 1 Samuel 20. 33. or as when
Sampson burnt the corn, vineyards, and Olives of the Philistines, his quarrel
was against his Father in Law, who was a Citizen of Timnah, Judge. 15.

He that loves not the Members, was never a friend to the Head; he that wrongs
the wife, is no friend to the husband; he loves neither, that vilifies either;
lip-love, is but lying love; if thou lovedst God heartily, thou would love
the things and persons that he loves; virtue is the livery of the King of
Heaven, and who would dare to arrest one that wears his cloth, if he were not
an Arch-Traytor and Rebel; if we loved him, we would love one another. When
David could do the Father Barzillay no good, by reason of his old age, he
loved and honored Chimham his Son, 2 Samuel 19. 38. And to requite the love of
Jonathan, he showed kindness to Mephibo^heth: so if thou bear any good will
to God, whom it is not in thy power to pleasure, thou will show thy
thankfulness to him, in his children, who are bone of his bone, and flesh of
his flesh. Is our Jonathan gone? Yet we have many Mephibosheths; and he that
loves God, for his own sake, will love his Brother, for Gods sake, especially,
when he has loved us, as it were, on this condition, that we should love one
another; whereas thou hate the children of God, even for their very graces
and virtues; for thou could love their persons well enough, if they were not
conscionable. And so much of the eighth aggravation.

135.
NInthly, ^ ^^hom they wrong a^e their best friends to whom they owe their very
lives.
again touching the party wronged, thy sin is incomparably greater, in as
much as thou make that the subject of thy derision, which is the only means
of thy preservation. Know thou not, or may thou not know, how the wicked
owe their lives unto those few good, whom they hate and persecute? It were bad
enough to wrong enemies, but to wrong such, by whom thou art preserved alive,
is abominable: but see it proved, for this may seem incredible to thee,

The religious, whom thou persecutest, keep off judgments from thee, and the
whole land. 1 By their innocence. 2 By their Prayers.


First, by their innocence. 1 By their i^nocency
The Innocent (says El^phas) shall deliver the Island, and it shall be
preserved, The ^eligious keeps off judgement^ from them.
by the pureness of his hands, Job. 22. 30. Run to and fro by the streets of
Jerusalem, (says God to Jeremiah) and behold now, and know, and enquire in
the open plac^s thereof, if ye can find a man, or if there be any that
executes judgment, and seeks the truth, and I will spare it, Ier. 5. 1. to
which testimonies, I could add a world of examples, even all Noah's family,
were preserved from drowning in the general Deluge, for Noah's sake. In the
destruction of Sodom, if ten righteous persons could have been found, the
whole City had been spared; ten, had saved ten thousand, Genesis 18. 29. 32. yea,
when there was no remedy, but destroyed it must be, the Angels promised Lot,
whomsoever he brought forth should escape for his sake. Again, God saved Zoar,
a City belonging to Sodom, for Lot's sa^e, Genesis 19. 21. Now Zoar might happily
be as bad as Sodom; but here was the difference, Zoar had a Lot within it;
Sodom had none. Potiphar was a Heathen, yet his house shall be blessed,
because Joseph is in it: a whole family, yea, a whole Kingdom, shall fare the
better for one despised, traduced, imprisoned Joseph, though he were sold for a
slave. Laban was cruel, churlish, wicked, yet he shall be blessed for Jacob's
sake, Genesis 30. 27. Among two hundred three score and sixteen souls, there was
but one Paul; yet behold, says the Angel, God has given thee all that sail
with thee, Acts, 27. 24. 44. Zacheus alone believed, yet this brought salvation
to his whole house, Luke 19. O the large bounty of God, which reaches not to
us only, but to ours!

136.
SEcondly, good men by their prayers keep off judgments from them. ^ by their
prayers.
The Saints are like Sampsons hair, the strength of the Land, and the very
pillars of a State, even such pillars, that ten of them would have supported
Sodom from falling, and their prayers would have cried louder in Gods ears for
mercy, then the sins of those thousands did for vengeance: the prayer of a
righteous man avails much (says St. James) if it be fervent, Chap. 5. 16.

I need not tell you what prayer has done; as that it has shut up the Heavens
from rayning, and opened them again, made the Sun stand still in the
firmament, one while, go back, another, divided the Sea, and made it stand as
a wall, fetch fire and hailestones from Heaven, thrown down the wales of
Ierico, subdued Kingdoms, stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of
fire, raised the dead, let out of prison, etc. only see what it has done in
this very case. Was not Abraham's prayer so powerful, that God never left
granting one request after another touching Sodom, until he left asking? Genesis
18. 32. Was not Moses prayer for the people, when they had made the golden
calfe, and imputed their deliverance to it, so powerful, that God was feign to
say unto him, Let me alone, Moses, that my wrath may wax hot against them, and
consume them, and yet Moses would not let him alone, but pleads his promise,
what the Egyptians would say, etc. until he had obtained their pardon, though
God promised to make of him a mighty people? Exodus 32. 10. to 15. was not Lot's
prayer touching Zoar so powerful, that God says unto him, I have received thy
request concerning this thing, that I will not overthrow this City, for the
which thou have spoken, adding this moreover, that he could do nothing to
Sodom, until he was entered into Zoar? Genesis 19. 20. 21. 22. Thus the prayer of
Abraham removed that judgment from Abimelecke his wife, and women servants,
when the Lord had shut every womb, Genesis 20. 17. 18. Thus Moses prayer removed
the leprosy from Mirriam, Number. 12. 13. 14. 15. and kept off sundry judgments
from the Israelites, as when they murmured against him at the Red Sea, Exodus
14. 11. 15. Again, at the waters of Marah, Chap. 15. 25. then at the Desert of
Zim, Chap. 16. then at Repidim, Chap. 17. 4. then, when they fought with
Amalecke, ver. 11. after, when the Lord would utterly have consumed them,
Chapter, 32. 10. to 35. then he removed from them that judgment of fire, which
burnt among them, Number. 11. 1. 2. again, when they murmured for flesh, verse. 4.
10. 31. after that, he saved them from being consumed by the Pestilence, Number.
14. 12 to 21. then from another plague, Chap. 16. 45. to 49. and lastly, he
took away the Serpents by his prayer, Number. 20. 6. 7. 8.

Again, how many several plagues did he remove from Pharaoh and all Egypt,
by his prayer? As first, the judgment of Frogs, Exodus 8. 8. then, the judgment
of Flies, ver. 30. 31. then, the Thunder, Hayle, and Fire, Chap. 9. 33. then,
the Grasshoppers, Chap. 10. 18. 19. etc. Thus by the prayer of Iehoahas, all
Israel was delivered from the oppression of the King of Syria; 2 King. 13. 4.
5. And by Samuel's prayer, the Israelites were delivered out of the hand of the
Philistines, 1 Samuel 7. 8. 9. And by the prayer of Esaias. and Hezekiah, the
Israelites were delivered from the great Host of Senacharib, under the conduct
of Rabshekah, and that miraculously, for the Angel of the Lord, in one night,
smote in the camp of the Assyrians, an hundred four score and five thousand,
2 King. 19. 4. 20. Many the like examples I could give you.

137.
ANd are not the like faithful prayers of godly men amongst us, In their (...)
they will sue to the godly, and desire them a love to pray for them.
alike prevalent with God, both for the averting and removing of judgments,
which now have been, and daily hang over our heads, through the many and
grievous sins, which wicked men daily commit, and which cry in the ears of
God for vengeance? yes, undoubtedly, for if there were not some Abraham's, and
Lots, and Ezraes, and I^shuas, Isaiahs, Ioels, and Ieremiahs, amongst us,
pouring out there souls before God, in cries and lamentations for our
iniquities, what should become of us, Eze. 9. 4. 8. Nothing will do it but
prayer, and fasting, and repenting; and the fasting and prayers of faithless
people, God regards not, Ier. 14, 12. yea, the sacrifice of the wicked is
abomination to the Lord, only the prayers of the righteous is acceptable unto
him, Prove. 15. 8.

And this they will confess in their affliction: wherefore when Godless
persons are in any distress, they ever praythe people of God to pray for them,
and commonly those too, whom they have most hated and abused: for the oppressor
is in no man's mercy, but his, whom he has trampled upon: and injuries done us
on earth, give us power in heaven.

Hereupon Ieroboam's hand being dried up, Of which many examples.
for stretching it out against the Prophet, he sueth to the man of God, saying,
I beseech thee pray unto the Lord thy God, and make intercession for me, that
my hand may be restored unto me; and the man of God besought the Lord, and the
Kings hand was restored, 1 Kings 13. 4. 6. Thus the Israelites pray Samuel, to
pray for them, 1 Samuel 12. 19. and again cease not to cry to the Lord our God
for us, that he may save us out of the hands of the Philistims, 1 Samuel 7. 8.
and he did so, and the Lord heard him, delivered them, and slew their enemies,
verse 9. 10. Thus Mirriam, though she grudges at, and contests with Moses, was
forcst to be beholding to Moses for his prayer, before she could be cured of
her Leprosy, Numb. 12. 13. Thus when the Lord's wrath was kindled against
Eliphaz, and his two friends, nothing would appease the same, but the prayer of
Job, whom they had so contemned, as the Lord himself witnesses Job 42. 7. 8
Thus Elimas the Sorcererprayes Peter to pray for him. Yea, of whom did Dives,
being tormented in the flames of hell, expect and seek for ease, but from
Lazarus, whom lately before he despised^ Luke 16. 24.

For though the wicked scorn and despise the godly, ^ho count it a sin to
cease praying for their greatest enemies.
in their prosperity; yet in their distress they only are set by, to pray unto
God for them; who are more ready to solicit God for their mortallest enemies
and persecutors, then they to desire it, be it at the time, when they wrong
them most; witness Steeven, who when the Jews were stoning him to death,
kneeled down and cried with a loud voice, Lord, lay not this sin to their
charge, Acts 7. 60. And our Savior Christ, who when he was scoffed at,
scornd, scourged, beaten with Rodds, crowned with Thorns, pierced with Nails,
nailed to the Cross, filled with reproaches, as unmindfull of all his own
griefs, prays for his persecutors, and that earnestly, Father forgive them:
they cry out, crucify him; he out cries, Father pardon them: yea, they account
it a Sin to cease praying for their worst enemies, 1 Samuel 12. 23.

138.
NEither (in time of calamity) do they think it enough to be freed themselves
(as they are sure, Wicked men's thoughts touching the religious, not the same in
distress, as ^ prosperity.
a judgment shall be no judgment unto them) as we see in Moses, who fared
well himself, what ever the rest suffered: what needed he to have afficted
himself with the affliction of others^ himself was at ease and pleasure in
the Court of Pharaoh; but a good heart can not abide to be happy alone, and
must needs, unbidden, share with others in their miseries; and at several
times after: for when God threatens to consume the Israelites, with the same
breath, he promises to make of Moses a greater Nation, and mightier then
they, Exodus 32. 10. 11. and again, Numbers 14. 12. 13. All which (when their
enemies have the wit to discern) forces them to confess their own folly,
wickedness, unthankfulness; the godlies superlative goodness, etc. As once
Laban to Jacob, Genesis 30. 27. and Pharaoh to Moses, Exodus 9. 27. 28. and again
Chapter 10. 16. 17. saying, I have sinned against the Lord, your God, and
against you; forgive me my sins, only this once, and pray unto the Lord your
God that he may take away from me this death only. And Saul to David, saying,
I have sinned, I have done foolishly, and have erred exceedingly, thou art more
righteous then I, for thou hastrendered me good, and I have rendered thee
^vill, etc. 1 Samuel 24. 18. and 26. 21.

Though afterward, when the rod is off their backs, they are apt to harden
again, and return to their old byas, as did the same Pharaoh and Saul.

For no longer then they smart, no longer can they see; and unless affliction
opens their eyes, there is no persuading them, but the righteous man is worse
then his neighbor; yea, none so vile, no such enemies tothe State, as the
religious. What though it were but Haman's pretense, yet it was Abab's very
case, who peremptorily thought Eliah the cause of all his misery, when it was
himself, his sin brought the famine; Eliah's prayer, brought the rain; yet
Ahab tells Eliah (and speaks as he thinks) thoutroublest Israel. And nothing
more usual, then for wicked men, to hate, persecute, and complain most of
those, to whom they are most bound, and beholding. Saul received more benefit
from David, then from any one man in his Kingdom besides, both in frighting
away the evil spirit from him, killing Goliath, and many the like; yet none was
so hated, persecuted, and evil spoken of by him, as he was. Thus Laban and
Potiphar were most angry with Jacob and Joseph, for whose sakes only they
prospered.

139.
ANd thus you see, Their ingratitude and great ^olly.
that the righteous man keeps off judgments, and procures blessings, not
only to himself, but others, his family, friends, enemies, to the whole City,
and Nation wherein he lives, yea, his posterity for many ages fare the better
for him; as God promises to establish David's house, for his sake, and bless
it for ever, 2 Samuel 7. 12. 13. 15. 16. And promises to Phineas the son of
Eleazar, who turned away the Lords anger from the children of Israel, and saved
them from being consumed, that he would give unto him his covenant of peace,
and to his seed after him, together with the Priests office for ever, Numb.
25. 11. 12. 13. Thus Israel, from time to time, were blessed and fared the better
for Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob's sake, even many years after they were dead,
De. 4. 37. 1 Kin. 11. 12. as Abraham, Is^ack, and Jacob, yea all the posterity
of Adam, are blessed, for Jesus sake, for else all, even the best, should have
perished, all were apostates, Adam did forfeit his Patent, and none but a
Savior could renew it; but see the different natures of the godly and the
wicked.

God forbeareth the wicked for the godlies sake. As when Augustus had conquered
Antheny, and taken Alexandria, the Citizens expecting nothing but present
massacre, the Emperor proclaimed a general pardon, for Arrius his sake, a
Philosopher of that City, and his familiar friend. Whereas the wicked, in
requital, persecute the godly, for whose sake they are forborne; and contemn
those, to whom they owe their very lives: like as Brutus, Cassius, Domitius,
Trebonius, Cimber Tullius, and many others, slew Julius Caesar, with 23. wounds
in the Senate house; albeit he had lately pardoned them for sighting against
him on Pompi^'s side: or as they, whom William the conqueror most advanced, had
the special hand in his destruction; or as Pompilius Lan^, whom Marcus Tullius
Cicero, saved from the Gallows, by pleading his cause before the judges, when
he was accused for murdering his Father, was the prime man, that pulled his head
out of the Litter, and cut it off.

But, O foolish and unwise! is this any other piece of policy, then if the
Sodomites should make have to turn out Lot, and his family, that fire and
brimstone may make have to destroy them for as when the Prophets went from
Jerusalem, then Sword, and Famine, and Pestilence, and all plagues rained upon
them; even as fire came down upon Sodom, so soon as Lot was gone out. Or as
when Noah, and his family, were once entered the Arc, the Flood came, and
destroyed the first world, Genesis 7. 11. 13. so the number of Christ's Church
being accomplished, fire shall come down to destroy the second world; yea, the
rain should not fall, nor the earth stand, but for the elects sake, the earth
should burn, the elements melt, the heavens flame, the devils, and all
reprobates be laid up in hell, the elect men and Angels imparadised in heaven
all, but for this, Gods number is not yet full; till this be done, Satan may
range abroad, the wicked domineere, the righteous suffer misery, and sin
walk their round, the heavens move, the Seas ebb and flow, the world stand,
and the Lord suffers all.

Wherefore cease ye malicious sinners, to vex the religious; you are beholding
to them for your very breath: if they were taken away, you should be tormented
before your time: yea, make you friends of such as fear God, for it is no small
happiness to be interrested in them, who are favorites in the Court of
Heaven; one faithful man on these occasions, is more worth, then millions of
the wavering and uncertain.

Indeed, you may so long provoke the Lord, that he will not suffer his people
to pray nor entreat for you, as is well set forth, Ier. 7. 13. to 17. and then
can you expect nothing but death and hell. Yea, the time will come, when all
Christ's enemies shall be dragged out of the prison of their graves, to behold
him whom they have pierced, Revelation 1. 7. at whattime, there shall be no
Moses to stand in the gap for them; no Aaron, to stand between the living and
the dead; no, Noah, Daniel, or Job to pity, or pray for them; yea, when there
shall be no more mercy, no more patience, no more repentings in God toward
them, but judgment without mercy or mitigation, but God laughing at their
destruction, and the Saints, which shall judge the world, 1 Cor. 6. 2, 3.
rejoicing to see the vengeance, that they may at length wash their feet in the
blood of the wicked, Prove. 1. 26. Psalm. 58. 1 ^. when there shall be no Rocks,
nor Mountains to fall upon them, when the earth shall melt with heat, when
the day of the Lord shall burn as an oven, and eat their flesh as it were fire,
Revel. 6. 16. 2. Pet. 3. 10. Mal. 4. 1. 2, 3. lam. 5. 3.

140.
TEnthly, 10 Their si^ is not against the ^fe of body or estate, but against
she souls of men.
thy sin is incomparably greater, and consequently, thy punishment shall be,
in that the hurt which thou do to thy neighbor, is against his soul. For
as the hurting and endamaging of the person and life of another, is a more
heinous offense, then is the diminishing of his goods, and outward estate: so
the hurt which redowndeth, by our means, unto the soul of any, is much more
abominable every way, both in it self, and in the sight of God, then is that
wrong, which is offered unto his body.

Now thou art a soul murderer, yea, many are the souls which thou have
(intentionally, and as much as in thee lies) slain with death eternal: and
what can thou expect (without repentance, and an answerable endeavor to win
souls as fast to God, as formerly thou have to Satan) but to be many fathoms
deeper in Hell, then other men^ will God power out his curse and vengeance on
them, which make the blind stumble, to the hurt of his body, Deuteronomy. 27. 18. and
will he not much more, do this to soule-destroyers^

Objection. But thou, A^objection answered,
like those Disciples, John 6. 60. wilt think this a hard saying; neither can
thou believe, that thou art a soul murderer, though I have made it
undeniable, in Section the 100. 101. 113. 134. 115. 116. 117.

Answer. But it will one day be a harder saying, if you take not heed, when
Christ shall answer all your apologies, with depart from me into everlasting
fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25. 41. Luke 13. 25. to 29.
As for further proof of what I lay to thy charge, I could easily show thee,
how The daily scoffs reproaches etc of thee and thy fellows. 1. Detaines many
From entering into a religious course. 2. Staggers many Which have made some
progress in the way. 3. Keeps many From doing the good which they would, or
appearing the same which they are. 4. Beats many Clean off from their
profession. 5. Hardens many And makes them resolve against goodness. For there
is no such rub in the way to Heaven, as this; Satan has not such a tried
shaft in all his quiver; which makes our Savior pronounce that man blessed,
that is not offended in him, Matthew. 11. 6. But of these severalls elsewhere,
least I should overmuch seem to digress: only I grieve to see how they wrong
themselves, in thus wronging others: for in that wicked men do so mock and
deride such as are in love with heavenly things, it is hard to say, whether
they do most offend, in hindering the honor of God thereby, or their
neighbors welfare, or their own salvation. What are the waters of thine own
sins so low, that thou must have streams from every place, to run into thine
Ocean^ thy own bu^then is unsupportable, yet thou will add to the weight
other men's, that thy rising may be irrecoverable. Content thy self, for
assuredly, thou shall once pay dear for it, either by tears, or torment.

Yea, let such take heed, for the fire of Hell will be hot enough for a man's
own iniquities; he needs not the iniquities of others, like fuel and Bellows
to blow, and increase the flame: which if they well considered, would make them
cherish all good desires in the weak, and to deal in this case, as we use
when we carry a small Light in the wind, hide it with our lap, or hand, that it
may not go out. Oh how much easier is it to subvert, or cast down a thing, then
to erect it, when even a base fellow could destroy that Temple in one day,
which was six and thirty years in seting up.

True it is, None ^ut counterseits will be beaten from Christ's standard by their
scoffs and reproac^es.
if the barking of these Currs shall hinder us from walking on our way, it is a
sign we are very impotent; yea, if our love be so cold to Christ, that we are
ashamed for his sake to bear a few scoffs and reproaches from the world, it is
evident we are but counterfeits: for, for our comforts, it shall not be so
with those whom God has any interest in, notwithstanding all the scoffs of
Atheists and careless worldlings, they shall not only loose their labors
herein, but themselves too. The faithful will neither buy peace with
dishonor, nor take it up at interest of danger to ensue: well may they serve as
Snuffers, to qualify our zeal, andmake it burn brighter, but never become
such Extinguishers, as to put it quite out, either by persecutions, or by
persuasions. So that their spiteful adversaries imagine but a vain thing,
they shall be no more able to hinder any one from salvation, whom God has
chosen to his Kingdom of grace and glory, then Saul with his Courtiers, could
hinder David, from attaining the promised Kingdom of Israel: they may move the
godly, but not remove them; They have often times afflicted me, from my youth,
may Israel now say, but they could not prevail against me, Psalm. 129. 1. 2 It
is given to the great Dragon, and the Beast, in the thirteenth of the
Revelation, to make war with the Saints, as well as with the rest which dwell
upon the earth; but he shall not prevail with any, save those, whose names
are not written in the Book of Life, verse. 8. if so, let them not spare to do
their worst; the winds may well toss the Ship wherein Christ is, but never
overturn it: if Christ have but once possessed the affections, there is no
dispossessing him again: as that Cloth which is thoroughly dyed black, will
afterward take no other color. The League that Heaven has made, Hell wants
power to break: who can separate the conjunctions of the Deity, Whom God did
predestinate, says Paul, them also he called; and whom he called, them also
he justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified, Romans 8. 30. They
shall sooner blow up Hell with trains of Powder, then break the chain of
this dependant truth. No power of man is able to withstand the will of God, it
shall stand firmer then the Firmament: it is as possible to stop the motion of
the Sun, as the course of Gods predestination. A fire in the heart overcommeth
all other fires without, as we see in the Martyrs, which when the sweet
doctrine of Christ had once gotten into their hearts, it could not be got out
again, by all the torments, which wit, and cruelty could devise: and the reason
is, they over-looke these bug-bears, and behold Christ calling, the Spirit
asisting, the Father blessing, the Angels comforting, the Word directing, and
the Crown inviting.

Alas! if their scoffs, and all they can say, could flout us out of the
integrity of our hearts, when our fore Fathers feared not the flames, we were
fearful cowards. Indeed, the timorous Snaile puts out her horns to feel for
danger, and pulls them in again without cause. If the sluggard hears of a Lion
in the way, he quakes; but tell it to a Sampson, or a David, they will go out
to meet him: yea, let Aggabus tell Paul of bands at Jerusalem, he answers, I am
ready not only to be bound, but to dye at Jerusalem, for the name of Jesus,
Act. 21. 13 The Horse neighs at the Trumpet, the Leviathan laughs at the
Spear: so tell the resolved Christian of enemies, or danger, he fears not,
he cares not; to carnal friends he says, I know ye not; to diswaders, get
ye behind me Satan.

But what of all this What though none of Christ's own band can be diminished.
When thou do the utmost of thy power, and, so far as in thee lies, flout
men out of their faithes, and slay them with death eternal and when the
intention, and offer of this mischiese, shall be judged, as if thou had done
the mischief? God regards not so much what is performed, as what was intended;
and measures what we do, by what we meant to do. He that shot at a Mark, and
killed a man, by the Law of God, was not held a murderer; but he that shall
purpose to kill a man, though he be prevented, is as guilty of his blood, as if
he had actually killed him. One man wills the knowledge of another wife, he
never attaines it, perhaps never attempts it; yet he is an Adulterer. A man
would steal, if he durst, he is a Thief, though he have stolen nothing. A
strange thing; says Augustine wittily, the man is still alive, and yet art thou
a murderer; the woman is still chaste and untouched, and yet art thou an
Adulterer. Good and evil thoughts and desires, in Gods account, are good and
evil works; and as mostly he accepts the will for the deed; so usually he
mesures the deed by the will. Men indeed look on the outward appeareance, 1 Samuel 16. 7. and so measure the will by the work, but God beholds the heart,
Ier. 11. 20. and measures the work by the will: for though our persons shall
be judged according to our works, yet our works shall be judged according to
our hearts; as was the widows Mite, Mark, 12. 43. the Lord accepts
affecting, for effecting; willing, for working; desires, for deeds; purposes,
for performances; Abraham had only an intention to offer Isaac, and yet the
Holy Ghost tells us, that Abraham did offer Isaac, and 'twas rewarded as done.
Neither had David been less guilty of Vriah's death, in that he wrote to Ioab,
to put him in the forefront of the battle, that he might be smitten and dye,
although he had escaped the sword, then he was, it being performed, 2 Samuel 11.
15. nor Iesabel of Naboth's, in that she sent her Letters to the Elders of his
City, to that purpose, Their intention of soul murder shall be rewarded, as
if they ^ed do^e the same actually.
1 King. 21. 10. 19. so he that murders souls intentionally, is as guilty, as
if he had done the same actually, and shall speed thereafter; for God (who
pnnisheth, or rewards nothing but the will) will even arraigne and condemn
thee for doing the same in fact.

141.
TO which may be added (as another aggravation, 11. Their sin does not extend
it se fe t^ ^ this or that person only but to milions, yea, after ages.
belonging to this circumstance) the extention of it. And herein thou do
outstrip almost all other sinners, in the heynousnesse of thy offense: for
whereas other sins, viz. swearing, theft, murder, etc. may be compared unto
a single Bullet, which kills but one at once, namely, the party offending: one
of thy sins, viz. drunkenness, may be compared to chaineshot, which sends
men by clusters to Hell; the other, I mean, thy scandalizing the way of truth,
and turning good into evil, is like that plot of the gunpowder Treason, which,
if it had taken effect, would have destroyed a multitude at one blow. Yea,
thereby thou do not only thy utmost, but even sufficient without Gods great
mercy, to murder and destroy all that hear of thy milicious slanders, and
bitter invectives, make them ashamed of their holy profession, and fly from
Christ's standard, back to the world.

Now injuries are so much the more intolerable, as they are dilated unto more:
those offenses which are of narrow extent, may receive an easy satisfaction:
the amends are not possible, where the wrong is universal; as may be collected
from the story of Queen Vashti, Esther, 1. 16. 17. 18. And thou do not
inveigh against this, or that particular person, or congregation, but against
all the faithful throughout the land: wherein thou more then resemblest a mad
Dog, who spares none, but bites at all that come near him: for this thy ill
report of the way of truth, like poison, disperseth it self into every vein
of the body politic.

Now he is monstrously malicious, and deserves grievously to be punished, that
casts poison into one cup, with an intention to poison one alone; but he more,
which throws it into the whole vessel, whereof all the family drinks, with
a purpose to speed every one in the house; but he is desperately and
prodigiously wicked, beyond expression, who hurleth deadly poison into the
fountain, whence the whole City is served (as once the Jews served this City)
and even such, and no other is thy case, it differs not a hairs breadth; only
thou poysonest souls, the other bodies, and therein transcendest.

Now as this is an heinous offense, above any I can think upon; so great
offenses, if ever they obtain forgiveness, had need of answerable
satisfactions: notorious offenders, may not think to sit down with the task
of ordinary services; the retributions of their obedience, must be
proportionable to their crimes; as was that of Paul's, who as he had done more
evil to the Saints, then all the rest of the Apostles; so he labored more
then they all, in adding to the Church such as should be saved; yea, faith God
to Ananias, I will show him how many things he must suffer for my Names sake,
Act. 9. 16.

142.
THus I have unfolded thy several and superlative sins; But the drun kard
has ^ shift to evade all this, and what else can be spoken.
and laid before thee the punishment due unto them single: I have also shown
thee how they are greatned and aggravated by sundry circumstances, which will
also add weight to thy torment, and (without repentance) double thy doom. All
which me thinks being put together, and duly considered should make thee loath
and abhor thy present condition, and not only awaken thy conscience, but
fetch blood from thy secure heart; yea, if thou wishest, or carest to be
saved, or ever hopest for entrance into Gods Kingdom, thou will with Ephraim,
strike thy self upon the thigh, Ier. 31. 19. smite thy breast, with the
Publican, Luke 18. 13. and with amazement and indignation say, what have I
done^ what shall I do to be saved^ at least if it be possible.

But as there is no hole to be found in all the Bark of Popery, 1. He can
apply Christ's passion and Gods mercy as a war rant for his li^^ntious^^sse.
but some popish Proctor, or other, will find a peg to stop it: so though this
Pot has so wide a mouth, that, as one would think, no Potlid could be found
big enough to cover it; yet thou have a shift for thy persevering, or rather,
the enemy of mankind has furnished thee with an evasion; for, that he may make
smooth the way to perdition, he will tell the procrastinator, that the Thief
upon the Cross was heard by our Savior, at the last hour; and that God is
merciful, therefore he may go on boldly; and let the worst that can come,
repentance at the last hour, and saying, Lord have mercy upon me, (which the
common people make their necke-verse) will make all even; otherwise, God is not
so good as his word, who says, at what time soever a sinner repents etc. for
he can take liberty to continue his sensual lusts, by a warrant of Scripture:
what is written for his consolation, he turns to poison, making of his
restorative Physic, a drink to intoxicate him to desperateness: yea, he can
apply Christ's Passion, as a Warrant for his licentiousness, not as a remedy;
and takes his Death, as a License to sin; his Cross, as a letters Patent to
do mischief: so they not only sever those things, which God has joined
together, sin, and punishment; and join together, what God has severed,
sin, and reward; but even turn the grace of God into want onnesse, as if a
man should head his Taber with his pardon.

Wherein the Devil deals with them, as once with our Savior, Cast thy self
down headlong, for the Angels shall bear thee up; so plung your selves into
this, or that sin, the mercy of God shall help you out; poison thy self,
here is a counterpoyson; break thy head, here is a plaster, surfeit, here is a
Physician.

Upon which ground, the most impudent and insolent sinners, Drunkards,
Adulterers, Swearers, Mammonists, etc. presume, that though they live like
Swine all their life long, yet a cry for mercy at last gasp, shall transform
them into Saints, as Circe's charms transformed Men into Swine. We are all
willing to believe what we wish.

The Devil makes large promises, The hope of an bypocrite is easi^y blown
into him, and as sooneblown out of him.
and persuades his they shall have what they desire, but ever disappoinrs them
of their hopes: as what a liberty, what wisdom, did he promise our first
Parents^ when indeed, he stole from them that liberty and wisdom they had:
even as Laban promised Jacob beautiful Rachel, but, in the dark, gave him
bleare-ey'd Leah: or as Hamor promised the Sechamites, that by their
circumcision, all the goods of the house of Israel should be theirs, whereas in
deed, the goods of the Sechamites fell to the house of Israel, Diabolus
^entitar, ^t fallat; vitam pollicetur, ^t peri^at, says S. Cyprian.

The condition of an inconsiderate worldling, is much like as Alchymists; who
projecting for the Philosophers stone, distills away his estate in Limbecks, not
doubting to find that, which shall do all the World good; yea, he dares
promise his friends before hand Gold in whole Scuttles: but at last his glass
breaks, and himself with it. Thus when Agag was sent for before Samuel, he
went pleasantly, saying, the bitterness of death is past; but his welcome, was
immediately to be he^en in pieces, 1 Samuel 15. 33. The rich man resolves when he
has filled his Barnes, then soul rest; but God answers, no, then soul come
to judgment, to cverlasting unrest, Luke 12. 19. 20.

The hope of an hypocrite is easily blown into him, and as soon blown out of
him; because his hope is not of the right kind; yea, it is presumption, not
confidence, viz. hope frighted out of it is wits; an high house, upon weak
pillars, which upon every little change, threatens ruin to the inhabitant, for
a little wind blows down the Spiders-web of his hope, whereby, like the
foolish builder, he comes short of his reckoning. That heart, which Wine had,
even now, made as light as a feather, dies, ere long, as heavy as a stone, 1 Samuel 25. 36, 37.

143
IT is Satan's method, first, Wicked men are altogether in e^treames either
God is so merciful that they may live how they list, or so just, that be will
not pardon them upon their repentance.
to make men so senseless, as not to feel their sins at all; and then so
desperate, that they feel them too much. In the first fit, men live, as if
there were no Hell; in the last, they dye, as if there were no Heaven. While
their consciences are asleep, they never trouble them; but being stirred by
Satan, (who, when he sees his time, unfolds his Ephemerides, and leaves not
the least of all theit sinful actions unanatomized, but quoats them like a
cunning Register, with every particular circumstance, both of time and place)
they are fierce, as a mastive Dog, and ready to pull out their throats. This
Serpent may be benumbed for a time, through extremity of cold, but when once
revived, it will sting to death.

The Devil is like Dalilah, who said to Sampson, the Philistims be upon thee,
when it was too late, and she had taken away his strength, Judges 16.

Wicked men are altogether in extremes; at first, they make question, whether
this or that be a sin; at last, they apprehend it such a sin, that they make
question whether it can be forgiven: either God is so merciful, that they may
live how they list; or so just, that he will not pardon them, upon their
repentance: no mean with them, between the Rock of presumption, and the
Gulf of despair: now presumption encourages it self, by one of a thousand;
and despair, will not take a thousand for one. If a thousand men be assured to
pass over a Foord safe, and but one to miscarry, desperation says, I am that
one; and if a thousand Vessels must needs miscarry in a Gulf, and but one
escapes, presumption says, I shall be that one^as we read of but one sinner,
that was converted at the last hour, of millions that had less iniquity, yet
have found less mercy.

But see further the strength of their argument. Objection of the thief upon
the cross answered.
The Thief was saved at the last hour; and therefore, I shall. Thou may as
well conclude, the Sun stood still in the days of Joshua; therefore, it shall
do so in my days: for it was a miracle, with the glory whereof, our Savior
would honor the ignominy of his Cross: and we may almost as well expect a
second crucifying of Christ, as such a second Thiefes conversion at the last
hour. He were a wise man that should spur his Beast till he speak,
because Baalams Beast did once speak: yet even so wise, and no wiser is he,
that makes an ordinary rule, of an extraordinary example.

Again, the Thief was saved, at the very instant of time when our Savior
triumphed on the Cross, took his leave of the world, and entered into his
glory. Now it is usual with Princes, to save some heinous malefactors at their
Coronation, when they enter upon their Kingdoms in triumph; which they are
never known to do afterward. Besides, the Scripture speaks of another, even
his fellow in that very place, and at that very instant, which was damned.
There was one faith S. Augustine, that none might despair; there was but one,
that none should presume. That sudden conversion of one, at the last hour,
was never intended, in Gods purpose, for a temptation; neither will any, that
have grace, make mercy a Cloak or warrant to sin; but rather a spur, to
incite them to godliness; well knowing, that to wait for Gods performance, in
doing nothing, is to abuse that Divine providence, which will so work, that it
will not allow us idle: and yet by Satan's policy, working upon wicked men's
depraved judgments, and corrupt hearts, in wresting this Scripture, it has
proved, by accident, the loss of many thousand souls.

The flesh prophesies prosperity to sin, yea, life and salvation, as the Pope
promised the Powder traitors, but death and damnation (which Gods Spirit
threatens) will prove the crop they will reap; for God is true, and all flesh
is a liar.

144.
BUt God sets forth himself to be incomparably gracious, Object.
merciful, God in mercyis in finitly transcendent.
longsuffering, abundant in goodness, etc. Ezo. 34. 6. and is acknowledged to
be so by David, Psalm. 86. 5. by Joel, Chap. 2. 13. by Jonah, Chap. 4. 22. by
Micha Chap. 7 18. and in many other places.

It is very true, Answ.
for it is a part of his title, Exodus 34. 6. he is mercy in the abstract, 1
John 4. 16. 2 Cor. 1. 3. 1 Timothy 4. 10. rich and abundant in mercy, Ephesians 2.
4. 1 Pet. 1. 3. 19. his love is without height, or depth, or length, or breath,
or any dimensions, even passing knowledge, Ephesians. 3. 18. yea, the Scripture
advances God's mercy above his justice, Psa. 36. 5. to 12. not in it is essence
(for God in all his Attributes is infinitely good, and one is not greater then
another) but in it is expressions and manifestations. It is said of mercy, that
it Pleases him, Micha 7. 18. whereas justice is called his strange work, Esaias
28. 21. Lamentation 3. 33. that he is slow to anger, but abundant in goodness,
Exedus 34. 6. he bestows mercyes every day, inflicts judgments but now and
then, sparingly, and after a long time of forbearance, when there is no remedy,
2 Chronicles. 36. 15. Esaias. 65. 2. that he visits the iniquities of the fathers
upon the children, to the third and fourth generation only; whereas he shows
mercy to thousands, Exodus 20. 5. 6 so that by how much three or four come
short of a thousand, so much does his justice come short of his mercy, in the
exercise of it.

Again, that his love to his people outstrips a Father's love to his son,
Matthew. 7. 11. and a Mothers too, Esaias 49. 15. for he is the Father of mercies,
2 Cor. 1. 3. as being himself most merciful; and the author of mercy and
compassion in others. In fine, he is so merciful, that the Kingly Prophet
repeates it over six and twenty times together in one Psalm, that his mercy
endures for ever, Psalm. 136.

But what makes this for thee, But this makes nothing for such as love their si
is, better ^hen their souls.
except thou repentest^ Indeed, let the wicked forsake his ways, and the
unrighteous his own imaginations, and return unto the Lord, and he will have
mercy upon him, and to our God, for he is very ready to forgive, says Esaias,
Chap. 55. 7. and that we should not doubt of this, he redoubles the promise,
Ezekiel 18. and confirms the same with an oath, Chapter 33. 11. Yea, he is
more ready to show mercy upon our repentance, then we are to beg it, as
appears in that example of the Prodigal son, Luke 15 20. Do but repent, and
God will pardon thee, be thy sins never so many and innumerable, for
multitude; never so heinous, for quality and magnitude; for repentance is
always blessed with forgivnes; yea, sins upon repentance are so remitted, as
if they had never been committed, I have put way thy transgressions as a cloud,
and thy sins as a mist, Esaias 44. 22. and what by corruption has been done,
by repentance is undone, as abundance of examples wi^^esse. He pardoned David's
ad^ltery; Salomon's idolatry; Peter's apostacy; Paul did not only deny Christ,
but persecuted him; yet he obtained mercy upon his rep^^tance.

Yea, amongst the worst of Gods enemies, some are singled out for mercy:
witness (...), Mary Magda^en, the Thief, etc. many of the jews did not only
deny Christ, the Holy one, and the Just, but crucified him; yet were they
pric^ed in heart at Peter's Sermon, gladly received the word, and were
baptized, Ast. 2. 41. And a very Gentile, being circumcised, was to be admitted
to all privileges and prerogatives, concerning matters of faith, and Gods
worship, as well as the children of Israel, Genesis 17. 13.

But on the other side, unless we repent and amend our lives, we shall all
perish, as Christ himself affirms, Luke 13. 3. 5.

145.
FOr though mercy rejoices against justice, His mercy rejorceth against
justice, but destroys not his justice.
James 2. 13. yet it de^troyeth not Gods justice: though he is a boundless
Ocean, flowing with mercy; yet he does not overflow; he is just as well as
merciful; yea, says Bernard, Mercy and Truth are the two feet of God, by
which he walks in all his ways: his mercy, is a just mercy: and his justice,
is a merciful justice; he is infinite in both; he is just, even to those
humble souls that shall be saved; and he will be merciful, while presumptuous
sinners go to hell: and therefore in his word, he has equally promised all
blessings, unto those which keep his Commandments; and threatened all manner
of judgments, to those which break them; with their several extremes,
according to the measure and degree of every sin, Deuteronomy. 28

Neither is salvation more promised to the godly, then eternal death and
destruction is threatened to the wicked: His mercy is a just mercy.
and as Christ is a Savior, so Moses is an accuser, John 5. 45.

Alas! though to all repentant sinners, he is a most merciful God; And
therefore has equally promised all blessi^gs to thosewhich keep his command
ments, and threatened all manner of judgments to those that break them
yet to wilful and impenitent sinners, he is a consuming fire, Heb. 12. 29.
Deuteronomy. 4. 24. does not the Apostle say, that neither fornicators, nor idolaters,
nor adulterers, nor buggerers, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor
railers, nor extortioners, to which number S. John, Revelation 21. 8. adds,
the fearful, and unbeliveing, and murderers, and sorcerers, and all liars,
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Corinthians. 6. 9. 10. Galathians 5. 21.
but shall have their part in the Lake, which burns with fire and brimstone,
which is the second death? And does he not likewise affirm, that all they
shall be damned, which believe not the truth but had pleasure in
unrighteousnes? 2 These. 2, 12. does not the Lord say, Ier. 16. 13. that he will
have no mercy, for such as are desperately wicked? And again, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. 20.
that if any man bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace,
although I walk according to the stubbornness of mine own heart, that he
mill not be merciful to him? etc.

Does not our Savior himself say, that the gate of heaven is so strait, that
few find it? Mat. 7. 13. 14. and will he not at his coming to judgment, as
well say unto the disobedient, Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels: as to the obedient, Come ye blessed of
my Father, inherit the Kingdom, etc. Yes, they are his own words, Matthew. 25.
34. 41. and S. James says, that he shall have judgment, without mercy, that
has showed no mercy, James. 2. 13.

In fine, he that believes in the Son, has everlasting life; but he that
obeys not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him,
Ioh. 3. 36. For, as mercy, in the second Commandment, is entailed only to
believers, and to those which love God, and keep his Commandments: so God, at
the last day will reward every man according to his righteousness. 1 Samuel 26.
23. as he did David, 2 Samuel 22. 21. though not for his righteousness, Deuteronomy.
9. 4. 5. 6. which is as a menstruous cloth, Esaias. 64. 6.

Yea, he has sufficiently manifested his justice and severity already in
punishing sin, and pouring vengeance, upon others that have provoked him: as,
(1.) upon the Angels, (2.) upon our first Parents, and all the race of mankind,
(3.) upon the old World, (4.) upon whole Monarchs and Empires, (5.) upon whole
Nations, (6.) upon whole Cities, (7.) upon whole Families, (8.) upon diverse
particular persons, and (9.) upon his own Son, that no sin might go
unpunished; which may make all impenitent persons tremble, for

As the Locrians might once argue; if our King is so just, to his own only
son, in punishing adultery, that he caused one of his eyes to be pulled out, and
another of his own, how can we his subjects expect to be dispensed withal?
so may I argue; if God was so just and severe, to his own Son, that nothing
would appease him, but his death on the cross; how can the wicked, his
enemies, look to be spared? If he spared not a good and gracious Son, says
S. Bernard, will he spare thee, a wicked and ungracious servant, one that never
did him a piece of good service all thy days? If he punished David's adultery
and murder so sharply, (a man after his own heart, yea, and that after his
sin was remitted) what will he do to his enemies, but send them to that
devouring fire, that everlasting burning? If a. 33. 14. If Gods own children
(who are as dear and near to him as the aple of his eye, or Signet on his
right hand) suffer so many and grievous afflictions here; what shall his
adversaries suffer in Hell? if Sampson be thus punished; shall the Philistims
escape? Yea, if judgment begin at the house of God; where shall the ungodly
and wicked appear? If many shall seek to enter in at the strait gate, and
shall not be able; how shall they be able, who seek not at all? Luke 13. 24.
And if the righteous scarcely be saved; where shall the ungodly and sinner
appear? as the Scripture speaks, 1 Pet. 4. 18.

And thus you see, that mercy is for vessels of mercy, Mat. 5. and not for
vessels of wrath: that he, which is truth it self, has a like threatened the
eternal death and destruction of the wicked; as promi sed the salvation of the
godly.

146.
BUt thy carnal heart, which is flint, Wicked men believe no part of Gods
word really and in deed.
unto God; wax, to the devil; will believe the promises, let go the
threatenings: you shall dye, says God, is heard; but you shall not dye, says
the devil, is believed; as it fared with Eve, when she eat the forbidden
fruit: yea, thou believe his promises, that thou shall have them; but thou
believe not his precepts, to do them; nor his threatenings, that thou shall
suffer them, for thy not believing and disodedience: which shows, that thou
truly believe neither: yea, this makes it apparent, that either thou
believe there is no God at al, or else that God is not just and true, nor
speaks as he means in his Word, which is worse; or if thou do believe
that he is a just and true God, thou believe also, that thou shall be
punished, (as he threatens) for thy provoking of him; and thou provokest him,
that thou may be punished, which is worst of all: so that take thee in the
best sense, thou art but one of David's fools, which say in their heart, there
is no God, and live thereafter; which is never a whit strange, for it is
usual with them to think there is no God, for whom it would make that there
were none; what we would have to be, we are apt to believe.

I confess, it is hard for men to believe their own unbelief, in this case;
much more hard to make them confess it: for he, whose heart speaks Atheism,
will profess with his tongue, that he believes there is a God, and that he is
just and true, and that every tittle of his word is equally true; which being
but granted, this must necessarily follow, that God will as well punish the
impenitent, as pardon the repentant.

Wherefore be no longer faithless, touching what is threatened against
obstinate sinners, but faithful: for he that will not believe these witnesses
of Gods severity against sin, shall everlastingly perish.

But, suppose the Scriptures were less express and clear in this point: the
Law must not be interpreted according to the delinquents judgment, but after
the will and meaning of the Lawgiver, which made the same.

Indeed, a world of men believe, with Origin, that God is so merciful, that al
in the end shall be saved, both reprobate men, and Devils: they presume that
God must needs save them, because he made them, without any other ground;
though in another fit, they are as apt to despair, and to say with the same
Origin, should all other sinners obtain mercy, yet not I: yea, it is to be
feared, that many die with this fond presumption of mercy in their minds, as
the Israelites with meat in their mouths; but shall they therefore be saved,
because they think they shall be saved? no, no more then Esau had the blessing,
and Agag his life given him, because they confidently thought they should.

147.
SEcondly, All the promises in tailed to believers and limited with the
condition of faith and repentance
look upon the promises single, 'and thou shall find, that they are not made
indefinitely, to al; but with a restriction, to such only, as are qualified and
made capeable thereof, by grace from above.

The Penmen of holy Writ, have set out Gods mercy in high and stately terms,
Heb. 4. 17.. 18. Ion. 4. 2. 1 Pet. 1. 2. 3. Ephesians 3. 18. but withal, they
declare that he resembles Augustus Caesar, in his dispensing the riches
thereof, of whom they which write his life, note, that in his military
discipline, he was exceeding liberal and lavish in his gifts, to such as were
of any de^ert; but withal, as sparing and strait handed, to the undeserving.

What though Christ in the Gospel, has made many large and precious promises?
there are none so general, which are not limited with the condition of faith
and the fruit thereof, unfeigned repentance; and each of them are so tied and
entailed, that none can lay claim to them, but true believers, which repent
and turn from all their sins, to serve him in holiness, without which no
man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12 14. Esaias 59. 20. So that he must for sake his
sin that will have God to forgive it, 1 Samuel 2. 30. As for instance, our
Savior has made public Proclamation, Mark. 16. 16. that whosoever shall
believe and be baptized, shall be saved; but mark what withal is added, he
that will not believe, shall be damned. Again, Heb. 5. 9, he is said to be the
author of eternal salvation, unto all that obey him; not unto them, which
continue in their rebellious wickedness, and never submit themselves, be ruled
by the scepter of his word. These and many the like promises, yield joyful
assurance to the sinner that repents; no comfort to him that remains
impenitent.

Or in case the condition of faith andrepentance is any where unexprest, yet
every promise must be understood with such condition: yea, it was never heard,
that any ascended into heaven, without going up the stairs of obedience, and
good works; that any have attained unto everlasting life, without faith,
repentance, and sanctification: for, even the Thief upon the Cross believed
in Christ, and showed the fruits of his faith, in acknowledging his own sin,
reproving his fellow, in confessing our Savior Christ, even then, when his
Apostles denied and forsook him, in calling upon his Name, and desiring by his
means everlasting life.

For know this, that whosoever Christ saves with his blood, he sanctifies
with his Spirit; and where his death takes away the guilt and punishment of
sin, it is also effectual for the mortifying of sin, Romans 6. 5, 6.
Christ's blood, says Zanchie, was shed, as well for abl^tion, as for
absolution; as well to cleanse from the soil and silth of sin, as to clear
and assoyle from the guilt of sin. God has thosen us in Christ before the
foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him,
in love, Ephesians. 1. 4. they therefore that never come to be holy, were never
chosen.

He is said to have given himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purge us to be a peculiar people unto himself, zealous of good
works, Titus 2. 14. and Luke 1. 74, 75. Yea, the Lord binds it with an oath,
that whomsoever he redeemeth out of the hands of their spiritual enemies,
they shall worship him in holiness and righteousness, all the days of their
life, 1 Peter 2. 24. Other Scriptures, to this purpose are many; as Matthew. 19.
17 he that will enter into life, must keep the Commandments, viz. so far
forth as he can. And Titu^ 2. 12. The grace of God which brings salvation,
teachethus that we should ^eny ungodlines, and worldly lusts, and that we
should live soberly, and righteously, and godly, in this present world.

By all which it is plain, that as Christ's blood is a Charter of pardon, so
withal, it is a covenant of direction; and he that refuses to live, as that
covenant prescribes, may perish, as a malefactor that is hanged, with his
pardon about his neck. And yet every drunken, dissolute, and deboyshed person,
doubts not to fare well while they fear not to do ill.

148.
BUt secondly, One part of the covenan^ of grace is, that we ^ will for^ake the
Devil and all his works, constantly believe, etc.
what else did thy vow in Baptism (which is a seal of the covenant) import,
but that there are Articles and conditions, viz. certain duties, on thy part,
to be performed, as well as promises on Gods part to be fulfilled? A Sacrament
is the sealing of a League, with Covenants between party and party, says
Pareus, Now as God has covenanted, and bound himself by his Word and Seal,
to remit thee thy sins, adopt thee his child by regeneration, and give thee
the Kingdom of heaven, and everlasting life, by, and for his Sons sake: so
thou did for thy part, bind thy self by covenant, promise, and vow, that
thou would forsake the Devil, and all his works, constantly believe Gods
holy Word, Mark. 61. 16.
and obediently keep his Commandments, the better thereby to express thy
thankfulness toward him, for so great a benefit, 1 Pet. 3. 21: Ps. 116. 12.
13. 14. And we know, that in Covenants and Indentures, if the conditions be not
kept, the Obligation is not in force; whereby many even ( Magus-like) after the
water of Baptism, go to the fire of Hell.

Yea, except we repent and believe the Gospel, that holy Sacrament (together
with the offer of grace) instead of sealing to us our salvation, will be an
obligation under our own hand and seal against us, and so prove a seal of
our greater condemnation.

149.
BUt, Object.
for ought thou know, thou art regenerate, What it is to be born again:
have repented, and do believe in Christ, as well as the best.

Indeed, Answ.
some will not believe they have the Plague, till they see the Tokens: but to
put this out of question, know that to be regenerate, is to be begotten and
borne anew, John 1. 13. by the ministry of the Word, James 1. 18. 21. and the
Spirits powerful working with it, Ioh. 3. 3. 5. 8. and of the children of
wrath, and bondslaves of Satan by nature, to be made, by grace, through faith
in Christ, (the Sons of God, Titus 3. 3. to 9. and that they which are thus
borne, have Christ formed in them, Galathians 4. 19. are led by the Spirit of
God, Romans 8. 14. and live uprightly, 1 John 3. 9. and exercrse righteousnese,
ver. 10. Regeneration will always manifest it self by a just and holy life,
by the innocence of our actions, and the sobriety of our speeches: God's
children are known by this mark, they walk not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit, Romans 8. 1. they are translated from the reign of sin; to the reign of
grace; they confess him, ore, with the mouth; profess him, opere, with the
life; love him, cord, with the heart; for these are the three objects of a
Christians care, the devotion of his heart, the profession of his mouth, and
the conversation of his life.

It is the sum of all Religion, to imitate him we adore: he that follows
Christ's ex ample, is a true Christian; he that squares his life according to
the rule of Gods Word, is godly, and none else: for otherwise if we be
drunkards, and swearers, well may we boast that we are the Sons of God, as
the Spaniards did to the West Indians, when they came first amongst them: but
he that knows any hing, will certainly conclude with those poor Salvages,
that he cannot be a good God, who has such evil Sons; well may he be the
god of this world, as the Devil is called, 2 Cor. 4. 4.

If Christ be formed in any, he destroys the Devils power, which formerly he
had in them, Heb. 2. 14. 15. and his wicked works, 1 Ioh. 3. 8. he is not
subject to the dominion of sin, sin does not reign in him, Psa. 19. 13.
wherefore be resolved against transgression, as you would be resolved of your
regeneration, and salvation. True conversion works a manifest change; the old
man, changes with the new man; worldly wisdom, with heavenly wisdom; carnal
love, for spiritual love; servile fear, for Christian and filial fear; idle
thoughts, for holy thoughts; vain words, for holy and wholesome words; fleshly
works, for works of righteousness, etc. as if a man were cast into a new
mould. Otherwise, if godliness has not made us good, what power has it
wrought? A feeble godliness it is, that is ineffectual; if it has not wrought
us to be devout to God, just to men, sober, and temperate in the use of Gods
creatures, humble in our selves, charitable to others, where is the godliness,
where is the power?

When the heart is changed, and set toward God, all the members will follow
after it; as the rest of the creatures after the Sun, when it arises; the
tongue will praise him, the foot will follow him, the ear will attend him, the
hand will serve him, nothing will stay after the heart, but every one goes,
like hand-maides, after their Mistress; which makes David (presenting himself
before God,) summon his thoughts, speeches, actions, etc. saying, all that is
within me praise his holy name, Psalm. 103. 1. Prove. 23. 26. so that it is a
true rule, he that has not in him all Christian graces, in their measure, has
none; and he that has any one truly, has all. For as in the first birth, the
whole person is borne and not some pieces: so it is in the second, the whole
person is borne again, though not wholly; how much the regenerate man is
changed from what he was wont to be, may be seen, 1 Corinthians. 6. 9. 10. 11.
Tit. 3. 3. to 8. Romans 6. 4. to 23. and here upon Christ is compared to purging
fire, and Fullers Soap* to signify, how he should fine and purg, purify and
cleanse his people Mal, 3. 2. 3.

God never adopteth any his children, but he bestows love tokens upon them,
which are the earnest of his Spirit in their hearts, 2 Cor. 1. 22. and his
saving graces, as an earnest, and for a sign: that they shall overcome their
Ghostly enemies, and live everlastingly with him in heaven: as he gave
Hezekiah, the going back of the Sun ten degrees, for a sign, that he
should be delivered out of the hands of the King of Ashur, and have added to
his days fifteen years, 2 Kings 20. 6. 8. 11

Alas! though there be scarce a man on earth, but he thinks to go to
heaven; yet heaven is not for every one, but for the Saints, would any man have
a lot in Canaan, let him be a sure to be a true Israelite.

And so we see, there must of necessity be a manifest change; that
fruitfulness, is the best argument, he has begotten us anew; that the signs
of salvation, are to be sought in our selves, as the cause in Jesus Christ;
that we must become new creatures, as S. Paul has it, 2 Cor. 5. 17. talk with
new tongues, Mar. 16. 17. and walk in new wyaes, Matthew. 2. 12. hating what we
once loved, and loving what we formerly hated, then shall we have new names,
Rev. 2. 17. put on new garments, and have a portion in the new Jerusalem,
Revel. 21. otherwise not. Take notice of this, all ye carnal worldlings, who
are the same that ye were always, even from the beginning', and think the
same a special commendations too, though you have small reason for it, for
that we need no more to condemn us, then what we brought into the world with
us. Besides, do you live willingly in your sins? Let me tell you, ye are
dead in your sins, this life is a death; and we need no better proof, that
you are dead, then because you feel not your deadness.

150.
SEcondly, What to repe^ and bell eve, and how we may know whether we have or
not.
that thou have not repented, nor do yet believe, is plain; for as faith is
a gift of God, whereby the elect soul is sirmly persuaded, not only that the
whole word of God is true, but that Christ, and all his benefit do belong unto
her: so it is an honorable, and an operative grace, always accompanied with
other graces, over bearing fruit: and repentance, being a fruit of faith, is a
whole change of the mind, and a very sore displeasure against a man's self for
sin, as it is sin, and a breach of God's holy Laws, and for offending so
good a God, so merciful a Father, with a settled purpose of hateing and for
sakeing all sin, and yiedling universal obedience for the time to come:
wherefore, have thou a true, lively, and a justifying faith? it will manifest
it self, by a holy life. For, as fire may be decerned by heat, and life by
motion: so a man's faith may be decerned by his works: for, though faith alone
justifies, yet, justifying faith is never alone, but ever accompanied with
good works, and other saving graces: as the Queen, though in her state and
office she be alone, yet she goes not without her Maids of honor, Tttus 3.
8. spiritual graces, the beauties of the soul, and good works, the beauty of
graces: and our justification is to be proved by the fruits of our
sanctification: faith and works are as inseparable, as the root and the sap,
the Sun and its light; and wheresoever they are not both present, they are both
absent, I am. 2. 17. 24. faith purifies the heart, Act. 15. 9. works by love,
Galath. 5. 6. and sanctifies the whole man throughout, 1 These. 5. 23. Act. 26.
18. for as if our repentance be sound, it will make us grieve for sins of all
sorts, secret, as well as known; original, as well as actual; of omission, as
of commission; lesser (viz. thoughts) as well as greater; yea, as well for the
evil, which cleaves to our best works, as for the evil works. Romans 7. 21.
and as heartily and unfainedly desire, that we may never commit it, as that God
should never impute it, 2. Tim. 2. 19.

Again, it will work tenderness of conscience, and such a true filial fear
of God, that we shall fear to displease him; not so much because he is just,
to punish us, as for his mercy and goodness sake; and more fear the breach of
the Law, then the curse: which we may know, by asking our own hearts these
questions. Whether we would refuse a booty, if we had as fit an opportunity to
take it, and no man perceive the same, as Achan had? Whether we would refuse a
bribe, like Elisha, though we should meet with one, which were as willing and
able to give it as Naaman? Whether we would not deceive, though we were in such
an of fice as the false Steward, whose Master referred all unto him, and knew
not when he kept any thing back? Whether we would not yield, in case it
should be said unto us, as the Devil said to Christ, all this will I give
thee, if thou will commit such a sin? Whether we have a Spirit without guile?
Psa. 32. 2. and be the same in Closet and Market, as being no less seen in
the one, then in the other? Whether we more love to be, then seem, or be
thought good, as Plato spoke of his friend Phocion, and seek more the power of
godliness, then the show of it, Job 1. 1. For Christians should be like Aples
of gold with Pictures of silver, whose inside is better then their outside, but
both good: and he serves God best who serves him most out of sight; that
wheresoever he is keeps a narrower watch over his very thoughts, then any
other can do of his actions; and no man's censure troubles him more then his
own.

Again, whether we are as careful to avoid the occasions of sin, as sin
it self, and not now and then, but continually? Whether we sear our own
corruptions, as well as Satan's temptations? Whether we esteem the Word, as if
God immediately spoke to us in particular? etc. So likewise if our says be
true, our obedience is constant, like the fire of the Temple, which never went
out, Rev. 21. 7 and universal, making conscience of all Gods Commandments,
one, as well as another; the first table, as well as the second; and the
second, as well as the first; Matthew. 5. 19. for a regenerate mind cannot
consist with a determination to continue in any one sin; as when Christ cast
out one devil, we read that he cast out all, even the whole Legion, Mark 5.
12. God loves those best, that stick closest to his Word in every tittle: and
as Parents most affect those children, that most resemble them: so does God.

It is true (says Saint Augustine,) God gives us Commandments impossible to
nature, that we may the rather seek unto him for grace: and corruption will
mix with our purest devotions, imperfection swayes in all the weak dispatches
of our palsied souls. In all we do, we something do amiss:
And our perfection, imperfection is.
Neither is it to any man given, Corruption wilmix with our purest devotion.
to be absolute in any thing: yea, the very best of us, have not done one
action Legally justifiable all our days; so, that we are as far from
perfection, as the center of the earth is from the circumference, which
semediameter or space is judged, by the most expert, to be three thousand five
hundred miles.

What then, because we cannot obey in all, shall we obey in nothing? if we
cannot perform our duty, as we ought; let us do our good will, and endeavor
what we can: for it is better to hault in the right way, then run in the
wrong; especially, when God expects no more then we can do, and accepts of
what we are willing to do; for if we purpose before hand not to sin, and in
the act do strive against sin, and after the act be sorry for the sin, sin
shall never be laid to our charge; if we hate our corruptions, and strive
against them, they shall not be counted ours. It is not I, says Paul, but sin
that dwells in me for what displeases us, shall never hurt us; and we shall
be esteemed of God to be, what we love, and desire, and labor to be.

Now let this point be argued in the Court of the conscience (for although
others may give a shrewd guess, yet the mother knows best, whether the child
be like the Father or no?)

Say, whether thou art guilty of these graces, or not guilty? He who makes not
conscience of sin, has no true faith; and the true method of grace is, first,
cease to do evil, then, learn to do well, Isa. 1. 16. 17 for, as we die to
nature, ere we live to glory: so we must dye to sin, ere we can live to
righteousness; there can be no fellowship, between light, and darkness,
Christ and Belial, the Arc and Dagon cannot lodge under one roof; the house
must first be cleansed, ere it can be garnished; in a pair of Tables nothing
may well be written, before the blots and blurs be wiped out; the good
husbandman first stubs up the thorns, and pulls up the weeds, then sows the
good seed: if the wax receive a new image the old does cease: at least, as the
increase of light, makes a decrease of darkness (it being impossible, that two
things of contrary natures should be together in one subject, the one not
expelling the other, either wholly or in part) so it is between grace and
corruption. In a word, if thou can say, I deprecate all sin, I repent
heartily of that is done, I abhor to commit it, I earnestly pray against it, I
strive, with all my power, to avoid it, I thirst for more grace, I am ready to
all good works, I rest wholly and only on my Saviors merits, thou may go
on, and say, I therefore rightly believe, I believe, and therefore am
justified; I am justified, therefore called; I am called, therefore elected; I
am elected, therefore I shall be glorified. Otherwise, if thou be, as it
were, a dead man, continuing under the burden of notorious crimes, without
forrow, or fear, or remorse, or care of amendment, Ephesians. 2. 1. If thou art a
drunkard, if thou art frequent in the language of hell, viz. swearing, cursing,
and6, without fear, or sorrow, or striving to leave it; if thou delightest to
boast of sin, and mischief, or seek to defend it, Psalm ^2. 1 if thou art
of a reprobate judgment, touching actions and persons, esteeming good evil,
and evil good: if the devil has so bewitched thee, that thou preferrest hell
to heaven, and blamest those that do otherwise: if thou imitatest a bad stomach
in turning every thing to an evil construction, so making a temptation of every
thing Titus 1. 15. if, Ishmael like, thou mockest, or, Cham-like, thou scoffest
at the religious, or usest bitter jests against them, Psalm. 1. 1. Ephesians 5.
4. if thou raisest slanders of them, or furtherest them, being raised, Psalm
4. 2, and 31. 18. and 35. 20. as the red Dragon, Revelation 12. cast a flood of
water out of his mouth, after the woman, when he could not reach her with his
claws, verse 15. or any way opposest them (for the opposition of goodness,
gives thee the title of wickedness, which alone is the enemy thereof, and
shows thou art a soldier of the great Dragon, who goes out to make war with
that blessed seed, that keep the Commandments of God, Revel. 12. 17.) these
or any one of these, especially the last, show that thou never came where
regeneration, repentance, and faith grew; that thy soul (like Venus Altar in
the I Will Paphos) was never yet rained upon by grace from above, for if the Image
of God by faith were repaired in thee, thou could not but be delighted with
those that are like thy self, thou could not but love the godly, because
they are godly; for the very first part of conversion is, to love them that
love God, 1 John 3. 10. And in vain shall a man's heart absolve him, that is
condemned by his actions: for virtue and vice are both Prophets, forewarning us
of things to come; the one, of certain good; the other, of pain, or penitence.

151.
BUt behold an other starting hole. For if the evil spirit sees thee convinced
of the necessity of repentance; he will persuade thee to defer it until
hereafter, But he can repent when sickness comes.
knowing that if he can prevail therein, it is all one, as if thou had never
purposed to repent at all; for as experience may inform us, not one of a
thousand, which take this course, ever attain unto it; for either they
adjourne the time prefixed, from next year to next year, etc. or else they
attain not to that repentance which is true and sound. But see the particulars
laid open.

Thou promisest thine own soul that thou will repent, when thou art sick,
(though indeed the farthest end of all thy thoughts, is the thought of thy end;
and to make thy reckoning at the last day, Death may be sudden, and give ^ man
no lea^^e to be sick^.
the last and least thing thou make reckoning of.) But hark in thine ear: Oh
secular man, thy life is but a puff of breath in thy nosthrils, and there is no
trusting to it; yea, the least of a thousand things can kill thee, and give
thee no leisure to be sick.

Surges may rise on sudden ere we think,
And whiles we swim secure, compel us sink.
S^ul being minded to ask counsel of the Lord, concerning the Philistines, was
prevented for want of time, 1 Samuel 14. 19. And commonly we never have so
much cause to fe^re, as when we fear nothing. When Sampson was sporting with
his Dal lah, he little thought that the Philistines were in the chamber, lying
in wait for his life, Ind 16. Full little do sinners know how near their
jollity is to perdition; judgment is often at the threshold, while
drunkenness and surfeit are at the table.

152.
BUt admit what thou imaginest; namely, 2 Or if death be not sudden repentance
is no easy work, and late repentance is seldom true.
that death be not sudda^ne: much the better, for is it not commonly seen,
that the purpose of proroging for a day, or a week, does not only last for a
year (as the suspension of the Council of Trent, made for two years, lasted
ten) but as ill debtors put off their creditors, first, one week; then,
another: till at last, they are able to pay nothing. so deal delayers with
God, they adjourn the time prefixed, from next year, to next year, whereby
they, and that good hour never meet: as you shall observe one Coach wheel
follows another, one minute of a Clock hastens after another, but never
overtake each other. In youth, men resolve to afford themselves the time of age
to serve God; in age, they shuffell it off to sickness; when sickness comes,
care to dispose their goods, lothnesse to dye, hope to escape, etc. martyrs
that good thought, and their resolution still keeps before them. Or else it
fares with them, as with many an unthrifty Tradesman, who is loath to turn
over his books, and cast up his debts, least it should put him into sad dumps,
and fill him with melancholy cares.

When Christ went about to cast out devils, they said, he tormented them before
the time, Matthew 8. 29. so, whenever thou go about to dismiss thy
sins, and pleasures, though thou stay till thou be an old man; yet they will
still say, thou dismissest them before the time; but then is the time, when the
devil says the time is not yet, for the devil is a layer.

Alas! how many men post off their conversion, and at twenty, send Religion
before them to thirty; then, put it off to forty; and yet not pleased to
overtake it, they promise it entertainment at three score; at last, death
comes, and will not allow them onehowre: and perchance when their soul sits on
their lips, ready to take her slight, then they send for the Minister, to teach
them how to die well. But as, in such extremity, the Apothecary gives but some
opiate Physic: so the Minister, can give but some opiate Divinity, a cordial
that may benum them; no solid comfort, to secure them: here is no time to
ransack for sins, to search the depth of the ulcer, a little balm to supple,
but the core is left within; for though true repentance is never too late, yet
late repentance is seldom true.

But here is great hope, thou will say, as it is the Divinity of diverse, let
men live as they list, in ignorance, and all abominable filthiness, so they
call at last, and but say, Lord have mercy upon me, we must infallibly
conclude, their estate as good as the best; as though the Lord had not said,
you shall cry, and not be heard, Prove. 1

I know the mercy of God may come, inter pontem and fontem, inter gladium and
jugulum, betwixt the bridge and the brook, betwixt the knife and the throat;
and repentance may be suggested to the heart in a moment, in that very
instant; but this only may be, there is no promise for it, many threatenings
against it, little likelihood of it; it were madness for thee to break thy
neck, to try the skill of a Bonesetter.

But how many, on the other side, dye in Spira's case^ who being willed in his
sickness to say the Lords prayer, answered, I cannot find in my heart to call
him father: whereas, not one of many leave a certain testimony, or sure
evidence behind them, that their repentance is true and sound. And indeed, how
is it likely they should dispatch that in half an hour which should be the
business of our whole life^ For as he which never went to Schole, will hardly,
when he is put to it, read his neck-verse: so he, that never learned the
doctrine of repentance, in his life; will find it very hard, if not impossible,
at his death. Let men therefore repent while they live, if they would rejoice
when they dye: let them with Noah, in the days of their health, build the Arc
of a good conscience, against the floods of sickness; yea, if they have spent
a great part of their time in the service of sin, as Paul did, let them, for
the residue of their life, make the world amends, by their double, yea treble
endeavor, to redeem that time, by a holy life, and godly conversation; for
else we may justly suspect the truth and soundness of their repentance, and
conversion. We seldom read of any, that were long barren, either in soul, or
womb, but they had the happiest issue afterward; witness Sarah, Manodh's
Wife, Hannah, Elizabeth, Saul, Mary Magdalen, etc.

As for the purposes of repentance, which men frame to themselves at the last
hour^, they are but false conceptions, that (for the most part) never come to
bearing; and indeed, millions are now in hell, which thought they would repent
hereafter; not being wise enough to consider, that it is with sin in the
heart, as with a Tree planted in the ground, the longer it grows, the harder
it is to be plucked up, it is too late to transplant Trees after two seven
years: or a Nail in a Post, which is made faster by every, stroke: or a Ship
that leaketh, which is more easily emptied at the beginning, then afterward. Or
a ruinous house, which the longer it is let run, the more charge and labor
will it require in the repairing. Yea, sin out of long possession, will plead
prescription; custom of any evil, makes it like the laws of the Medes and
Persians, which may not be altered, or removed: an old vice, is within a degree
of impossible to be amended; which makes the Lord say; by his Prophet; Can the
Black-more change his skin, or the Leepard his spots; then may ye also do
good, that are accustomed to do evil ler. 13. 23.

All other men have but three enemies to encounter with, the Devil, the World,
and the Flesh; but he that has long continued in the practice of any evil,
has a fourth, which is worse then the worst of them, even custom, which is a
second, or new nature.

153.
BUt suppose after many years spent in the service of sin, 3 Or suppose thou
offer thy best devotions to God will be accept of thy dry bones, when Satan
bath suk'd out all the ^arrow.
and Satan, thou art willing to relinquish thy lusts, and offer thy service,
and best devotions at the last gasp to God; will he accept them no, in all
probability he will not: for hear what himself says, Pro. 1. Because I have
called, and ye refused, I have stretched out mine hand, and ye would not
regard, but despised all my counsel, and would none of my correction: I will
also laugh at your destruction, and mock when your fear comm^th; when your
fear comes like sudden desolation, and your destruction like a whirlewind.
When affliction and anguish shall come upon you, then shall you call upon me,
but I will not answer; you shall se^ke me early, but you shall not find me;
because you hated knowledge, and, did not choose the fear of the Lord. You
would none of my counsel, but despised all my corrections, therefore you shall
eat the fruit of your own way, and be filled with your own devises, ver. 24.
to 32.

And this is but justice, if God be not found, of those that were content to
loose him: if he hear not them, that would not hear him: if he regard not
them, that disregarded him; if he shut his ear against their prayer, crying to
him for pardon, that stopped their ears against his voice, calling upon them for
repentance, as Salvian speaks. Alas! no child would be whipped, if he might
escape for crying; but he only finds help in adversity, that sought it in
prosperity: and there can be no great hope of repentance at the hour of death,
where there was no regard of honesty in the time of life^: God uses not to
give his heavenly and spiritual graces at the hour of death to those, who
have contemned them all their life: yea, it is sensles to think, that God
should accept of our dry bones, when Satan has sucked out all the marrow; that
he should accept of the lees, when we have given to his enemy all the good Wine.

But, hear what himself says, by the Prophet Malachy, c. 1. 8. and S. Jerome
upon the place, it is a most base and unworthy thing, to present God with that,
which man would disdain, and th^nk sco^^e to accept of.

Wherefore, Admonition not to defer^e repentance.
as you tender your own soul: even to day hear his voice, set upon the work
presently; he that begins to day, has the less work for to morrow. And
proroge not your good purposes, least ye saying unto God in this life, with
those wicked ones in Job, depart thou from me for a time; God say unto you in
the life to come, depart from me ye cursed, and that for ever.

He has spared thee long, and given thee already a large time of repentance;
but he will not always wait for denyals; his patience at length will turn into
wrath. Time was, when he stayed for the old world, an hundred and twenty
years; he stayed for^ a rebellious Nation, forty years; he stayed for a
dissolute City forty days: but when that would not serve, his patience was
turned into fury; and so many as repented not, were cast into hell. If in any
reasonable time we pray, he hears us; if we repent, he pardons us; if we
amend our lives, he saves us: but after the hour prefixed in his secret
purpose, there is no time for petition, no place for Conversion, no means for
pacification. The Lord has made a promise to repentance, not of repentance: if
thou convertest tomo^row, thou art sure of grace; but thou art not sure of to
morrowes conversion: so that a fit and timely consideration is the only thing,
in every thing; for, for want of this, Di^es prayed, but was not heard; Esau
wept, but was not pitied; the foolish Virgins knocked, but were denied: and how
many, at the hour of death, have offered their prayers, supplications, and
services unto God, as Iuo as offered his money to the Priests, and could not
have acceptance, but they died as they lived, and went from despair unto
destruction.

154.
BUt thou will say unto me; Objection, that most men are of a contrary
judgment and practics.
if this be so, that all the promises are conditional; that mercy is entayled
only to such as love God, and keep his Commandments; that none are real
Christians, but such as imitate Christ, and square their lives according to the
rule of Gods word; that of necessity we must leave sin, before sin leaves
us; and that God will not hear us another day when we call to him for mercy,
if we will not hear him now, when he calls to us for repentance; how is it,
that so few are reformed, that most men mind nothing but their profits, and
pleasures, yea, count them fools, that do otherwise?

I answer, Where of a double reason.
there be two maine reasons of it, though one be the cause of the other. 1
Ignorance. 2 Unbelief.


First, First few men believe the whole written word.
few men believe what is written of God in the Scripture, especially, touching
his justice and severity in punishing sin, with eternal destruction of body
and soul: for, did they really and indeed believe God, when he says, that his
curse shall never depart from the house of the swearer, Zack. 5. they durst not
swear, as they do. Did they believe, that neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters,
nor Adulterers, nor Thieves, nor Murderers, nor Drunkards, nor Swearers, nor
Raylers, nor Liars, nor Covetous persons, nor Extortioners, nor Vnbeleivers,
nor no Unrighteous men shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven; but shall have
their part in the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the
second death. 1 Cor. 6. 9. 10. Rev. 21. 8. they durst not continue in the
practice of these sins, without fear, or remorse, or care of amendment. Did
they believe, that except their righteousness do exceed the righteousness
of the Scribes and Pharisees, they shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, Matthew. 5. 20. and that without holiness no man shall see the Lord,
Heb. 12. 14. with many the like, it were impossible they should live as they
do. Yea, if they did in good earnest believe that there is either God or
Devil, Heaven or Hell, or that they have immortal souls, which shall
everlastingly live in bliss or woe, and receive according to that they have
done in their bodies, whether it be good or evil, 2 Cor. 5. 10. they could not
but live thereafter, and make it their principal care, how to be saved.

But alas! they are so far from beleiving what God threateneth, in his Word
against their sins; that they bless themselves, in their heart, saying, we
shall have peace; we shall speed as well as the best, although we walk
according to the stub^ornnesse of our own wills, so adding drunkenness to
th^rst, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. yea, they prefer their condition before other men's, who
are so abstemious, and make conscience of their ways, even thinking that their
God deceives them with needless fears, and scruples, as once Rabshek^h would
have persuaded the Jews, touching their trust and confidence. 2 King. 18. 22.
25 30. 32. 33. 35.

The believe what they see, and feel, and Know; they believe the laws of the
Land, that there be places and kinds of punishment here below, and that they
have bodies to suffer temporal smart, if they transgress; and this makes them
abstain from Murder, Felony, and the like: but they believe not things
invisible, and to come; for if they did, they would as well, yea, much more,
fear him that has power to cast both body and soul into Hell, as they do
the temporal Magistrate, that has only power to kill the body: they would
think it a very hard bargain, to win the whole world, and lose their own
souls, Luke 9. 25. but enough of this, having proved the Drunkard an Atheist,
Sect. the (146.)

155.
SEcondly, 2 Ignorance is th^cause of all sin.
another maine reason is ignorance; yea, ignorance, if we rightly consider it,
is the cause of all sin; sin indeed; at first was the cause of ignorance
but now ignorance is the cause of sin. Swearing, and lying, and killing, and
stea^eing, and whoring, (I may well add drunkenness) abound, says the
Prophet, because there is no knowledge of God in the Land, Hosea, 4. 1. 2. It
is a people that do err in their hearts, says God, why? because they have
not known my ways, Psalm. 95. 10. ye are deceived, says our Savior, because
ye know not the Scriptures, neither the power of God, Matthew. 22. 29. when
Christ wept over Jerusalem, what was the cause? even their blindness; If thou
had known, says he, at the least, in this thy day, those things which how
are hid from thine eyes, Luke 19. 42. Because men know not the wages of evil,
therefore they do it; and because they would securely do it, therefore they
refuse to know it. Oh that men knew how good it is to obey, to disobay how
evil, then should we have a new world; but the Devil takes an order for that,
where he can prevail; and therefore he has the Po^e, in one part of the
world, who will allow his subjects (I mean the Layty) no divine learning; the
Turk in another, who denies to his any learning at all: and this is no small
advantage unto him, for that Edict of Iulianus the Emperor, whereby it was
interdicted unto Christians, to be admitted into Schools, Lectures, and other
exercises of learning, was esteemed a more pernicious engine and machination
against the Christi^n faith, then were all the sanguinary per^ecutions of his
predecessors.

Ob: But blessed be God, and our gracious Sovereign, may some say, this is not
our case, we have plenty of light in our Horizon, our Land abounds, both with
humane and divine learning.

A^sw. Very true, and it is a blessing, which we can never be sufficiently
thankful for; and yet the Devil takes such an order, that the odds is not
much, between our light, and their darkness: for, either, Wizard-like, he
prese^^s things in a false glass; or, Sorcerer-like, he makes things appear
other then they are, by deception of our spiritual sight; or, Sophister-like,
he darkens the truth (which the Word will not suffer to be conceald) with
subtils distinctions, as a man that puts out the candle with snuffing it; or,
Casuistlike, he fills men's heads, with a world of Problemes and Paradoxes;
their hearts and consciences, with a thousand needless and endless questions,
unprofitable, cold, and bloodlesse impertinencies, whereby the sound and saving
knowledge of Jesus Christ, and him crucified (which was the only care and
study of St. Paul: I Cor. 2. 2.) is the portion but of a few, even amongst us,
as the effect shows: for, are not most men, to whom the Gospel is so
gloriously preached, cheifely guided according to the Rudiments of the world,
and not after Christ? Col. 2. 8.

Quest. But will any now, in this clear Sunshine of the Gospel, be
persuaded that they know not Christ crucified?

Answer. It is too true, that few know him, R^ghtly a ^anknows no more then be
practices.
for if they knew Christ, they could not but love him; and loving him, they
would keep his commandments, Job. 14. 15. for hereby, says St. John, is it
known that we know him, if we keep his Commandments, 1 Ioh. 2. 3. but he
that says, I know him, and yet keeps not his Commandments, is a liar, and
there is no truth in him, ver. the 4.

Rightly, a man knows no more then he practices; it is said of Christ, 2 Cor.
5. 21. that he knew no sin, because he did no sin; in which sense, he knows no
good that does no good; and he may know much, that cannot utter much, as a
Martyr answered Bishop Bonner, My Lord, I cannot dispute for the truth, but I
ca^ dye for the truth: a good argument, to prove that he knew Christ, for men's
actions express their knowledge better then their words.

Virtue is ordained a wife for knowledge, and where ^hese two join, there will
proceed from them a Noble prodiene, a generation of good works: but they that
wander in by paths, declare themselves ignorant of the right way of salvation,
Romans 3. 17. That is but a raw knowledge, which is not digested into practice.

What Is the difference, between Christianity and infidelity, but holiness?
For as Rhetoric, is the Art of speaking well; and Logic, the art of
disputing well; and Magistracy, the art of governing well: so Christianity is
the art of liveing well. It is not worth the name of knowledge, that may be
heard only, and not seen: good discourse is but the froth of wisdom, the
pure and solid substance of it, is in well framed actions; when we are wise in
our hands, as the Dutch are said to be. These things if ye know, happy are ye
if ye do them, John, 13. 17. and in Deuteronomy. 4. 6. keep the Commandments of
God, and do them, for this is your wisdom and understanding before God and
men.

The Knowledge that saves us, He that has saveing knowledge, bath every other
grace.
is more then a bare apprehension of God; it knows his power, and therefore
fears him; knows his justice, and therefore serves him; knows his mercy, and
therefore trusts him; knows his goodness, and therefore loves him; etc. for
he that has the saving knowledge of God, has every other grace; there is a
sweet correspondence between every one, where there is any one in truth. As
in the generation, the head is not without the body, nor the body without each
member, nor the soul without it is powers and faculties: so in the
regeneration, where there is any one grace in truth, there is every one, 2 Cor.
5. 17. but see it in particulars. They that know thy name, says the Psalmist,
will trust in thee, Psalm. 9. 10. there is says. Let him that rejeyceth, rejoice
in this, that he understands and knows me, Ier: 9. 24. there is joy. He that
knows God, hears us, I Ioh. 4. 6. there is an awful attention to the Word
preached. If thou knew me, says our Savior, thou would have asked of
me, John, 4. 10. there is the Spirit of prayer and supplication. He that knows
God, loves God, and the children of God. I John. 4. 7. 8. He that knows God,
keeps his Commandments, I John, 2. 3. Now I know thee, says Job to God, I
abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes, Job. 42. 5. 6. He that knows
God, is borne of God, I John, 4. 7. there is love, obedience, hurnility, godly
sorrow, regeneration, I might go on, and instance in every other grace. For as
feeleing is inseparable to all the Organs of sense, the eye, sees and feels;
the care, hears and feels; the palate, tastes and feels; the nosthrills,
smell and feel: so knowledge is involved in every grace, faith, knows and
beleives; charity, knows and loves; patience, knows and suffers; temperance,
knows and abstaines; humility, knows and stoopes; repentance, knows, and
mournes; obedience, knows and does; confidence, knows and rejoyees; hope,
knows and expects; compassion, knows and pities. Yea, as there is a power of
water in every thing that grows, it is fatness, in the Olive; sweetness, in
the Figg; cheerfulness, in the Grape; strength, in the Oak; talenesse, in
the Cedar; redness in the Rose; whiteness, in the Lilly, etc. so knowledge.
is in the hand, obedience; in the mouth, benediction; in the knee, humility; in
the eye, compassion; in the heart, charity; in the whole body and soul, piety.

Alas! if menhad the true knowledge of Jesus Christ, it would disperse and
dispell all the black clouds of their reigning finnes in a moment: as the
Sun does no sooner show his face, but the darkness vanishes: or as Caesar
did no sooner look upon his enemies, but they were gone. Egypt swarmed with
Locusts, till the west wind came, that left not one. He cannot delight in
sin, nor dote upon the world, that knows Christ savingly.

156.
OB. Ob. That the strictest lovers, are ^eldome the ^sest men ^^swered.
But the objection, which as they think cannot be answered, like the
invincible Navy in 88. is this. We see by experience, that the strictest livers
are seldom the wisest men; yea, who more vicious, then many that know most?

Answ: I am not ignorant, that some Fools have made other Fools believe, that
none trouble themselves about Religion, but the simplest; yea, the most holy
and religious, in all ages, have been accounted Fools and mad men, El sha was
counted no better, by that man of the Sword, 2 King. 9. 11. in Hosea's time,
the Prophet was esteemed a fool, and the spiritual man mad, Hosea, 9. 7. yea,
our Savior Christ, with open mouth, was proclaimed mad, by his carnal hearers
John, 10. 20. Mar. 3. 21. and Paul the like, by Festus, Acts, 26. 24. yea, all
the Apostles were reputed Fools, 1 Cor. 4. 10. and this has been the worlds
vote ever since; the sincere Christian was so reputed in Pliny's time, and
after in St. Austins time, yea, Julian the Pelagian could gibe St. Austin, that
he had none of the wise Sages, nor the learned Senate of Philosophers on his
side, but only a company of mean tradesmen and handycrafts-men, of the
vulgar sort, that took part with him; whose answer was, thou reproachest the
weak things of the world, which God has chosen, to confound the things which
are mighty.

And is it otherwise now? Is not the honest, devout, orthodox Christian, the
plain dealing and religious man, he that declares his meaning by his words,
that cannot, or will not lie, and desemble, shift, and flatter, temporise, and
accommodate, buy promotion, supplant, grow rich, take bribes; he that will
rather suffer then do evil, ordinarily esteemed an idiot, or silly ass? yes,
by all that are craftily wicked, as you may hear out of their own mouths,
Wisd. 5. 3. to 9.

To worldly men Christian wisdom seems folly, says S. Gregory; and well it
may, for even the wisdom of God is foolishness with the world, 1 Cor. 1. 18.
23.

But shall we therefore take it for grant, Worldly men count wisdom felly, and
folly wisdo^e.
that they are wisest, because they suppose and say they are? no, for first, as
he must have a sweet breath, that can judge who has a sweet breath: so to
judge who is a wise man, is only the office of a wise man.

Secondly, the Laws of our Land, will not admit a delinquent for a witness,
afafter he is found guilty; neither will Irand they stand convicted of folly,
Sections the 34. 38. 39. 40. 51. 91. 157. 184. 190. But if they will put
themselves upon a fair trial, they shall have an equal proceeding; or if
they will hear the case argued, if reason give not sentence on the good man's
side, let me suffer as a slan^erer.

Indeed, wisdom has always carried that show of excellency, that not only
the good have highly affected it, as Solomon, who prayed for wisdom; and
Moses, who studied for wisdom; and the Queen of Sheba, who traveled for
wisdom: but the very wicked have labored for it, who are ashamed of other
virtues: so that wisdom is not only justified of her children, but also of the
children of folly.

Knowledge is so fair a virgi^^, that every clear eye is in love with her; it
is a pearl, despised of none, but Swine^O the pleasure that rational men take
in it! they that care not for one dram of goodness, would yet have a full
scale of knowledge, though they never mind to do good, yet there is no good
which they would not know; among all the trees of the garden, none so pleases
them, as the tree of knowledge. As wisdom is excellent above all, so it is
affected of all: as oil was both of the wise and foolish Virgins; it has
been a mark, which every man has shot at, ever since Eve sought to be as wise
a^ her Maker. But as an hundred shootes, for one that hits the mark, some
short, some over, and some aside: so an hundred aim at wisdom, for one that
lights upon it, ^cclesiastes 7. 28. Yea, as many think themselves good
fellows, for one that is a good fellow indeed; so many think themselves
wisemen, for one that is wise indeed.

Of all sorts of men in the world, none repute themselves, or are reputed by
others wiser, then the profound humanist, and cunning politician; and the yet
neither of these, may compare with the go^ly (...) for wisdom and knowledge.

157.
FIrst, They not always the wise^ which know most
not the humanist; for they are not always the wisest, which know most as I
have proved at large ^. 50. 51. I will further confirm it.

There are a generation of men, that mightily thirst after wisdom and
knowledge; and to get it, they are no niggards of their labor, for they leave
nothing unstudied, but themselves; they know all parts and places of the
created world, can discourse of every thing, visible, and invisible, divine,
humane, and mundane, whether it be meant of substances, or accidents, are
ignorant of nothing, but the way to heaven; are acquainted with all Laws and
customs, save the Law of God, and customs of Christianity; they are strangers
no where, but in the Court of their own consciences; yea, they build as hard,
and erect as high, as did the Babel projectors, but never come to the roof;
they spend alltheir time in seeking after wisdom; as Alchymists spend all
their present estates to find the Philosophers stone, but never find it; for
their thirst after knowledge being a natural thirst (which stands more upon the
quanity, then the quality, themselves being like Balances, which make no
difference betwixt Gold and Lead, but in the weight; for a worldling is as well
pleased with the handmaid, humane, or mundane wisdom, as with the Mistress,
divine and supernatural; whereas none but this will content the generous
Christian; natural men resembling the three lower elements, of Air, Water, and
Earth, which are pleased with lower romes; the regenerate, the element of Fire,
which no place will content, but the uppermost, it is own Region) they never
attain to that which is true wisdom indeed. For as the ragged Poettold
Petronius, that Poetry was a kind of learning, which never made any man rich;
so may I tell these, that humane learning, of it self, never made a wise man.
For so long as men desire knowledge, and not a blessing with it, for no other
end, but to remove their ignorance; as Pharaoh used Moses, but to remove the
plagues; and study the Scriptures and other books, only to make gain
thereof, or to be the abler to dispute and discourse, as boys go into the
water to play and paddle there, not to wash and be clean, as many, with Eve,
do highly esteem the tree of Knowledge, but regard not the tree of Life, they
may heap up knowledge upon knowledge, be ever pouring into their brains, as
the fifty daughters of King Da^^us, who killed their husbands, are feigned to
be always filling of a Tunn, with water, that is bored full of holes, but
labor they never so much about it, yet they can never bring it to pass; for
whenever they dye, they are undone, that hour, like Penelope's night, will
undo all that ever the day of their life did weave; wherein they resemble
Albertus Magrus, who bestowed thirty years stud^e and pai^es upon an Image, or
St^t^^, till with engines and wheels within, he had made it able to speak
diverse words very distinctly, the which Thomas Aquin^^ ^t^terly spoiled in one
minute

But to make it more plain. I would feign know, what it is, or what it profits
a man, to have the Etymology and derivation of wisdom and knowledge, without
being affected with that which is true wisdom indeed: to be able to decline
virtue, yet not love it? to have the theory, and be able to prattle of wisdom
by roate, yet not know what it is by effect and experience? to have as expert a
tongue, and as quick a memory, as Portius, who never forgot any thing that he
had once read? A perfect understanding, great science, profound eloquence, a
sweet style, to have the Force of Demosthenes, the depth of Theseus, the
persuasive art of Tully, etc. if withal he live a wicked life? with the
Astronomer, to observe the motions of the Heavens, while his heart is buried in
the earth? with the Naturalist, to search out the cause of many effects, and
let pass the consideration of the principal, and most necessary? Viz. 1.
Sin the cause of all Misery and wretchedness. 2. Grace the cause of all Good
and happiness. 3. God's will of all other causes, the cause 4. God's glory of
all other causes, the effect With the Historian, to know what others have done,
and how they have sped, while he neglects the (...) of such as are gone the
right way? with the Lawmakers, to set down many Laws in particular; and not
to remember the common law of nature, or law general, that al must dye? or
lastly, with Adam, to know the nature of all the creatures, as appeared in his
naming of them; and with Solomon, to be able to dispute of every thing, even
from the Cedar to the Hysope, or Pellitory, when in the mean time he lives
like Dives, dies like Nabal, and after all goesto his own place, with Judas?
^lasse! many a fool goes to hell with less cost, less pains, and more quiet.

That is true knowledge, The religious man wi^er than the b^ma^i^t.
which makes the knower blessed; to be wise and happy, are (...) terms, says
Aristotle in his Ethics; and man's happiness, ^aith another, consists in
believing the Gospel, and obeying Gods commands, which is sure to be crown ed
with everlasting felicity: yea, Socrates could say, that learning pleases me
but a little, which nothing p^ofits the owner of it to virtue; and being
demanded who was the wisest man? he answered, he that offends least.

He is the best scholar that learnes of Christ obedience, humility, etc. he
is the best Arithmetician that can add grace to grace; he is the best learned,
that knows how to be saved; yea, all the Arts in the world are artlesse Arts
to this.

But few are thus wise and learned; because they think that to be wisdom,
Several mispr^sions of wisdom
which is not; like Eve, who thought it wisdo^e to eat the forbidden fruit; or
Absalom, who thought it wisdom to lie with his Fathers Concubines, in the
sight of all the people; or the idle servant, who thought it wisdom to hide
his Talent; or the false Steward, who thought it wisdom to deceive his Master:
for, if a man take his mark amiss, he may shoot long enough, ere he hit the
White: and these men, are as one that is gone a good part of his journey, but
must come back again, because he has mistaken his way: for however these
men's knowledge may seem wisdom, (as a Bristow stone may seem a Diamond) yet
it only seems so, it is not so; for if they were wise, says Saint Bernard,
they would foresee the torments of hell, and prevent them: yea, Epaminondas
could say, that of all men he was the wisest, that lived well, and died well;
for, quoth he, the art of dying well, is the science of all sciences, and the
way to learn this art, is to live well. We only praise that Mariner, which
brings the Ship safe to the Haven. Again, if thou were a wise man, thou
would know what wisdom is, and not mistake one thing for an other: as Jacob
in the dark mistook Leah for Rachel, and then chose the best: as a traveller
for his provision and convenience in his journey, carries his money in Gold,
thou would like a wise Merchant freight thy felfe with that commodity, or
coin, which for metal and stamp will pass for current, both in this world,
and in heaven: whereas thy lip-learning, and tongue- wisdom, and
braine-knowledge, is perishing, and will stands thee in no stead in the next
life, nor any way further thee in the way to bliss. For thou art but like a
Powdermaster, who has provision against an enemy, but is ever in danger of
being blown up: or some covetous churl, who though he have lights good store,
yet is content to sit in the dark: or an irregular Physician, who prescribes a
wholesome diet to others, when himself feeds foully, and surfets with
intemperance: which in reason is to play the fool, and to imitate the
Miletians, who as Aristotle writes, were not fools, but did the self
samethings that fools were accustomed to do: wherein this is all the
difference, a man shall be the rather punished, and the more, because he has
known good, and done evil, for knowledge without grace, will but sink men
lower in Hell. And great reason shall all such have, who either know, and
believe not; or believe, and repent not; or repent, and amend not; or amend,
and persevere not in well doing, to cry out upon their deathbeds, as Tully did
in his latter age, would God I had never known what wisdom meant.

Again, as themselves are never the better for their great wisdom and
learning: so, no more are others: for commonly they resemble dark Lanthornes,
which have light, but so shut up and reserved, as if it were not: and what is
the difference betwixt concealed skill, and ignorance? It is the nature and
praise of good, to be communicative, whereas if their hidden knowledge do ever
look out, it casts so sparing a light, that it only argues it self to have an
unprofitable being.

We know the Unicorne has bu^ one horn, but he does more good with that,
then other beasts do with two: so an holy man does more good with a little
knowledge, then a worldling with a great deal; yea, he thinks himself as
happy, in giving light to others, as in receiving it into himself.

Now suppose a man's greatest learning. be religion, and his knowledge only lies
in the best things, as the weaker vessel may hold the better liquor; yet a
competent estate well husbanded, is better then avast patrimony neglected.
Never any mere man, since the first, knew so much as Solomon; many that have
known less, have had more command of themselves.

True it is, in some kind of skill they out. strip even the best of Gods
people; who, if they are put to it, may answer as Themistocles did, when one
invited him to touch a Lute for, as he said, I cannot siddle, but I can make a
small Town a great State: so may the godly say, we cannot give a solid reason
in nature, why Nilus should over flow only in the Summer, when watersare at the
lowest: why the Lodestone should draw Iron, or incline to the Polestarre; how
the heat of the stomach, and the strength of the net her chap, should be so
great: why a flash of lightning should melt the Sword, without making any
impression in the Scabbard; kill the child in the womb, and never hurt the
mother: how the waters should stand upon an heap, and yet not overflow the
earth: why the clouds above, being heavy with water, should not fall to the
earth suddenly, seeing every heavy thing descends, except the reason which
God gives, Genesis 1. 6. and Job 26. 8. but we know the mystery of the Gospel,
and what it is to be borne anew, and can give a solid reason of our faith, we
know that God is reconciled to us, the law satisfied for us, our sins pardoned,
our souls acquitted, and that we are in the favor of God: which many, with
their great learning, do not know. And thus the godly are proved wiser, then
the wisest humanist, that wants grace.

158.
SEcondly, they are wiser then the most cunning Politician that lives. 2. Wiser
then the most cuuning ^oli^^^^s
For to judge aright, the greatest Politician is the greatest fool, for he
turns all his religion into hypocrisy, into statisme, yea, into atheism
making Christianity a very footstool to policy.

Indeed, they are wiser in their generation, then the children of light, and
are so acknowledged by the Holy Ghost: Luke 16. 8. But why? not that there is a
deficiency of power in the godly, but will: for could not David go as far as
Achitohpel? could not Paul show as much cunning as Tertullus? yes, surely if
they would. But because their Master Christ has commanded them to be innocent
as Doves, they have vowed, in an Heroical disposition, with Abraham, Genesis 14.
22. that the King of Sodom shall not make them rich; no crooked, or indirect
means shall bring them in profit, they will not be beholding to the King of
Hell for a Shoo tie; and hereupon, the Foxes wiles never enter into the Lions
head.

But take these Politicians as they are in their own Element, and it may
peremptorily be spoken of them, as one speaks of women; that in mischief
they are wiser then men, near upon as that old Serpent the Devil; yea, they
are so arted in subtilties, through time, and practice, that they will have
tricks in their sconces to overreach the Devil himself: indeed, he has one
trick beyond all theirs, for like a cunning fencer, he that taught them al
their tricks, kept this one to himself, namely, how to cheat them of their
souls.

But to go on. These are not wise as Serpents, according to our Saviors
counsel, but wise Serpents, that is, wise in evil, not wise in that which is
good; or, if you will, wise in goods, not wise in grace. For as that old
Serpent seemed to boast, that he was richer then Christ, when he said, all
these are mine: so the politician may truly say, for the most part, I am wiser
then my plain dealing neighbor, by five hundred pounds, but see their wisdom
displayed.

They are such cunning dissemblers, that like Pope Alexander the sixth, what
they think, they never speak: why is this cast away? says Judas, crafty cub!
he would have had it himself: as the Fox would dissuade other beasts from that
booty, which he means to make his own: or like a fellow that rides to the
pillory, they go not the way they look; they will cut a man's throat under
color of courtesy: as Ulysses by gold and forged letters, was the means of
stoning Palamedes, even while he made show of defending him: and then, to wipe
off all suspicion from themselves, their gesture and countenance shall be like
Julius Caesar's, who seeing Pompie's head, fell a weeping, as if he had been
sorry for it, when by his only means it was cut off; so, like Rowers in a
Boat, whilst, in their pretense, they look one way, in their intent, they go
the quite contrary.

It is observed of the Fox, that he will stand by the river and let his tail
play in the water, till the Fish come flocking about it; and then with a jerke,
he swoopes them out with his paw: these are such Foxes, they will not look
toward the booty they aim at; yea, they are so politic, that no man shall
be able to determine, either by their gesture, words, or actions, what they
^esolve; for their words, like an Italian Torch, will prove your bane, when
they seem to give you most light, and best direction; they will say, as
Elisha to the Syrian Army, follow me, and I will lead you to the man whom ye
seek, when they lead you into the lap of your enemies. 2 Kings 6. 19. And
suitable to this is their gesture and actions, for like Acco, they will evermore
seem to refuse, what they most desire* and to desire, what they most despise.

Yea, they can hardly be read, though, like Hebrew letters, you spell them
backwards: for admit the stander by conceives their going to be like that of a
Crab-fish, contrary to the way they look, as our Savior knew it fared with
the Pharisees and Sadduces, Mat. 16. 1. 3. which made him conclude with, O
Hypocrites! yet having not the spirit of discerning, he can but guess at it,
and so give over; only this he may be sure of, that they do not intend, what
they pretend; like as in juggling feats, though we know not how they are done,
yet we know well, that they are not done, as they seem to be.

Now if they can any way advantage themselves by another ruin, and do i^
cunningly, as Iesabel did, when she killed Naboth, by suborning false witness
against him, and proclaimed a Fast, before the murder; though all such policy,
be but misery; and all such knowledge, ignorance; yet, o how wise they think
themselves, now they are able to blind the Devil with a Cushion: but they are
grossly mistaken, for wherein does this their great wisdom consist, but
first, in being wise to deceive others, as the old Serpent did our first
Parents; or, secondly, in the end to deceive themselves, as the same Serpent
did, which brought a curse upon himself for so doing, Genesis 3.

The crafty Fox hugged himself, to think how he had cosened the Crow of her
breakfast: but when he had eaten it, and found himself poisoned with it, he
wished the Crow her own again. Wealth got by deceit, is like a piece of
buttered sponge, (an Italian trick) it goes down glib, but in the stomach
swells, and will never be got out again. The gains a man gets by deceiving,
at last, he may put in his eye, and yet see himself miserable. Sin is the
greatest cheater in the world, for it deceives the deceiver.

That it is so with them, and all others, who go to counsel, and leave the
God of wisdom behind them, let their case be viewed in other persons. What
^aith Pharaoh to his deep counselors? Come, let us do wisely, when indeed he
went about that which destroyed him, and his country. The Scribes, Pharisees,
and Elders took counsel against Christ, as though they would most wisely
prevent their own Salvation. Ioseph's Brethren to prevent his having dominion
over them, as his dreams imported, thought they had taken a very wise course,
in selling him to the Ishmalitish Merchants, which was indeed the only means
to effect it. See here in these three examples, you have the depth and solidity
of our great est and wisest politicians; and yet lewd men, most absurdly, and
ridiculously, call wicked policies, wisdom; and their success, happiness;
but herein Satan makes them of all Fools the superlative, in mistaking
villainy and madness, for the best virtues.

And what is the summa totalis of all, but this, Faux- like, they project other
men's overthrow, purchase their own: neither has any man been wise to do
evil, but his wisdom has had an evil end, as,

O the multitude of examples which are recorded, to give credit to this
Doctrine! Was not the wisdom of the Serpent turned into a curse? the wisdom
of the Pharisees into a woe? the wisdom of Achitophel into folly? the wisdom
of Nimr^d into confusion? the wisdom of the unjst Steward into expulsie^ out
of Heaven? the wisdom of Iesabel into a shameful death? and shall not the
deceivers wisdom, the extortioners wisdom, the sorcerers wisdom, the
hypocrites wisdom, the matchevilians wisdom, and the persecutors wisdom have
their several ends answerable? yes undoub^edly; for in the issue, their case
will be but like the Spiders, that was weaveing a curious net to catch the
Swallow, who when she came, bore away both net, and web* and weaver too.
Wherefore O God make me but soul wise, and I shall never envy their knowledge,
that pity my simplicity: yea, let me be weak in policy, so I may be wise to
salvation. But to make it more manifest, that they are stark Fools, come we
to particulars, though I Will give you but one of ten, being loath to surfer my
Reader.

159
The particulars wherein the Pol^tician is a Fool, are these six.
1 He is improvident and without foresight. The c^^ning politician a fool, in
6. particulars.
2 He says in his heart there is no God. 3 Let him be brayed in a Mortar, he
will not depart from his foolishness. 4 Virtue is in far less esteem with
him then riches. 5 He proves cruel to himself. 6 He rates not things
according to their true value.
FIrst, like a natural Fool, he is improvident and without foresight, First,
be is without foresight, and never thinks of the reckoning he is to give.
Matthew. 7. 26. never bethinking himself, what a reckoning he is to give,
until it is too late, until he is bearen with his own Rod: for if such an
one have wealth, which lasts but for the present day of this natural life, it
may be, but a day natural, as the same Sun saw Job both rich and poor, to a
proverb; and as sometimes, by reason of fire or water, there has been but
one day, betwixt a great City, and none, as Seneca observes; or an earth quake,
(which this present year, has in the Province of Calubria the inferior, in
the Kingdom of Naples, utterly destroyed many Cites, Towns, and Castles,
killed, drowned, and suncke into the earth about fifty thousand persons, within
the circuit of 70. miles compass, in one instant of time, viz. between three
and four of the clock in the afternoon, being Saturday, the 17. of March,
1637.) they take no care, or thought for the morrow of eternity, how they shall
fare then; yea, they run on in sin, and so upon score with Satan, without
fear or wit how they shall satisfy the same; yea, all that he offers them,
whether it be this Orphant's good, or that Heirs lands, this enemies life, or
that great man's office, be the means never so indirect, and horrid, they will
greedily embrace the same, and never think what a woeful reckoning will come
in the end; As, Item, for falsehood; Item, for forgery; Item, for hypocrisy;
Item, for bribery; Item, for sacrilege; Item, for murder and treachery: but
come they once into those flames with Dives, and find that of Samuel to Agag,
1 Samuel 15. 33. verified upon them, as thou have done to others, so shall it be
done to thee, O then I had not thought, but now I see, I have spun a fair
thread, when I must answer for all my sins, that am not able to answer for
one of the least of them; then, woe is me that ever I was borne; and then,
gladly would every Ahab restore to Naboth his Vineyard, every Judas his bribes,
every Achan would willingly cast down his gold gotten by Sacrilege, and every
Gehazi his goods gotten by forgery and deceit. But which of these Fools will
believe this, before the feels it, and before it be too late?

Secondly, like David's Fool, 2 He will not believe exce^t his senses say ame^
to it.
he says in his heart there is no God, Psalm. 14. 1. yea, as if he were a brute
beast, he will believe nothing but what he is led to by sense. For suppose you
tell such a covetous Laban, or cruel Pharaoh, that God sees him, when he is
contriving his secretest plots against his people, and withal takes notice of
his oppression, Genesis 31. 12. Exodus, 3. 7. he will not regard it; for,
Marius-like, he esteems it a great point of virtue to be skillfull in
cosenage, and Mammon is all the god he worships; yea, and herein he applauds
his choice no less, then that Popish dolt did, who having got the picture of
St. Franc is curiously painted in his Closset, said, they talk of the Rhode at
Rome, and our Lady of Lauretta, and Katherine of Sienna, and James of
Compostella; but I have a picture at home, meaning yellow pictures, worth ten
of them.

Thirdly, Idiot-like, 3 Bray him in a mortar he will not depart from his folly,
viz. his (...)
bray him in a Mortar, as wheat is brayed with a Pestell, yet he will not
depart from his foolishness, Pro. 27. 22. for let God send never so many
messengers to him, and plagues upon him, as he did upon Pharaoh, he will not
depart from his sins; he must retain, if not all, yet, at least, this his
beloved sin, until he is overwhelmed in the bottomless Ocean of his wrath:
yea, let him hear, even our Savior himself say, that he shall give an
account at the day of judgment, for every idle word, Matthew. 12. 36. yet he
will go on in his helli^h plots, and persuade himself, he shall give no
account at all; or let some Prophet of the Lord tell him, what trains are laid
to catch his soul, and how many Principalities, spiritual wickednesses, and
powers of darkness lie in ambush against him, Ephesians. 6. 12. As El sha
disclosed the trains and ambushments of the King of Syria, against the King of
Israel, 2 King. 6. 9. 10 which was as good a piece of service as could be, he
makes nothing on it he shall speed as well as his fellows, and indeed so he
shall, even as Laban, or Nabol, or Dives do in Hell, if in due time he repent
not, and so restore what he has wrongfully gotten; as the worst of them would
do, if they were suffered to return out of Hell, to their former riches.

Now that thou may repent while the day of thy life lasts, take one motive
from the damned in Hell, who would gladly repent now, but cannot. St. Augustine
asks this question, what we think the rich glutton in Hell would do, if he
were now in this life again? would he take pains, or no, quoth he, would he
not bestir himself rather then return into that place of torment again? yes,
his tears should even strive with the sand in the hourglasse, he would do any
thing, to seek the Lord while he may be found. Wherefore to day if ye will
hear his voice, harden not your bearts. Yea, as our Savior Christ said, to
forewarne all revolters, Remember Lot's wife: so say I, to forewarne all
Arch-politicians, and cunning Machevillians of the world, remember poor
Naboth's Vineyard.

160.
FOurthly, 4. He cares more for a little muck to leave behind him, then for
soul or bedy.
virtue is in far less esteem with the cunning Politician, then riches. As
it fares with a natural fool, he is so far from selling all that he has,
to buy the rich Pearl of faith, with the wise Merchant, Matthew. 13. 46. that he
will sell this rich Pearl, and all other grace to boot, to purchase the
trivial commodities of white and red earth; and good reason, as temporising
Statesmen, politic Machevilians, and hypocritical Ambidexters think, who
make a show of Religion, but in their hearts laugh at it; he knows no other
coin, he desires no other stamp; yea, to be rich, thinks this worldling, is
to be three parts of the way on-ward to perfection. Indeed, gold is the only
coverlet of imperfections, it is the fools curtain, that can hide all his
defects from the world, yea, from himself: for though he have a want of all
good, and which is worse, a sense of want of that want, yet he thinks himself
in a very good estate and so much nearer to Heaven, for having abundance of
earth.

And yet if God did not give to some of them their riches in wrath he would not
deny them the use of their own; as how often are men baser by being wealthier,
like Pierce Gavistone, who (as the Chronicle reports) the more he was enriched,
the worse was his estate; or whether it be, that they have not so much wit, as
to know their money will buy them all necessaries of meat, drink, apparel,
and the like; or whether, by a just judgment of God, the Devil makes them his
drudges, to get and bring him in gold (as the King of Spain does the poor
Indians) that he may keep it in bank, for the next prodigal to spend, as ill
as the other got it, (as how often is that spent upon one Christmas revelling, by
the Son, which was forty years a getting, by the Father?) I know not; but
sure I am, that though with that Priest, 2 King. 12. 9. they can put a world of
gold and silver into their chests, yet they cannot take it out again, to do
themselves good; for the Devil keeps the key, as Iehoash the King of Israel
did of that chest, verse. 10.

So that a covetous griper is like Tantalus, who stands up to the chin in
water, and has all kinds of fruits hanging over his head, but is not suffered
to taste them. Or like an Ass, who is laden with gold, but feeds upon thistles.
Or like the Indians, who though they have all the gold amongst them, yet are
the most beggarly and naked people alive. For what is he other then a rich
beggar, or a beggar in the midst of his riches, when upon all his estate there
is set a spell, and his wealth says to him in effect, touch not, taste not,
handle not?

But O fools incomparable! Aristippus cared only for the body, as if he had
had no soul: Zeno but for the soul, as if he had had no body: Achitophel for
his family alone, as if he had had neither body, nor soul of his own to care
for: but these care neither for soul, nor body, nor family, (for he both tyres
and starves them) but for a little mucke to leave behind them.

Fifthly, as a fool can find in his heart to be surety for a stranger, 5. He
ca^ find in his heart to go to He^ so his son (...) be left rich.
yea, yield himself to Prison for another enlargment, Pro. 17. 18. so the
politic worldling, and cruel oppressor, can find in his heart to go to Hell
for another; he will damn his own soul, to leave his Son rich: yea, what a
deal of pains and care does the covetous man take, for his own damnation, he
scarce wears a good garment, or eats a liberal meal, or takes a quiet
sleep, but torments himself to get that, for getting whereof he shall be
tormented: so himself is voluntarily miserable here, and elsewhere, that
others may be happy.

And yet let him, with Pope John the 22. leave behind him 250. Tons of gold,
even all this will not make his Son happy, 'its well, if it make him not more
unhappy.

No, neither it, nor the whole world, without grace, shall ever make him
contented: as it fared with Alexander, who having conquered this world, was
troubled that there was no more worlds, for him to conquer.

Besides, in a short time, this Son of his must part with his wealth also:
for either his r^ches shall be taken from him, as they were from Job, or else
he from his riches, as the rich man was from his substance and wealth.

Wherefore it were more policy a great deal, for him to make his Son good,
then great; for godliness is great gain, as the Apostle well phraseth it, 1 Timothy 6. 6. because it gains God himself, and so his blessing upon all outward
means, Hagg. 1. 6. etc. O that thou had the wit, to know how, when all is
done, to be saved; and to have thy children saved, is the best plot, to know
that the Proverb, which says, Happy that child, whose father is gone to the
Devil, is far from being Canonical.

Sixthly and lastly, 6 H^ (...) trifles before things of greatest worth.
he estemes not of things according to their true value, but prefers bables
and trifles, before things of greatest worth; which is the most remarkable
property of a natural fool, that is.

As Judas preferred thirty pieces of silver before Him that was the price of
the world, and ransom of mankind: so the Politician preferres earth, yea,
Hell, to Heaven; time, even a moment of time, to eternity; his body, before his
soul. (which if a man have once lost, he has nothing else to loose) yea, his
outward estate, before either soul or body.

Whereas the godly care for the soul, as for the chief jewel and only
treasure; and for the body, for the souls sake; and for this world, for the
bodies sake, and settle their inheritance in no land, but the land of promise,
their end being to possess a kingdom without end. They are not like Shebna,
who built his Sepulcher in one country, and was buried in another: but like
our English Merchants, that traffic in Turkey, and get wealth in Turkey, yet
plant not in Turkey, but transport for England. Gods people are not like the
first Indians, that hanged Bugles at their ears, while they left their gold on
the dunghills. It cannot be said of them, as it may of the most, that they
worship the golden Calfe; because they consider, that pecunia the world's
Queen (I mean that world, whereof the Devil is King) extends her regiments
but to the brim of the grave, and is not current one step farther. Yea, they
are so far from being of these men's minds, who are of Alexander's mind (who
(as the Philosopher said) yesterday the whole world did not content him, now
ten cubits contain him) that they think him none of the wisest, who being
asked, whether he would rather be Socrates, or Croesus, the one, an industrious
and painful Philosopher, the other* 2 man flowing in all abundance; was so
discreet as to answer, that for this life he would be Croesus, but for the
life to come Socrates.

But to return to the worlds wiseman, let him be offered his choice (as
oftimes he is) whether he will forgo himself, I mean his faith, which is the
sum of all, or such a booty: he will forgo his faith, and consequently his
soul, himself, and all that is truly his; like the foolish Ma^iner, that
seeing a fish in the Sea, leaps into the water to catch that, which, together
with his life, he loses: or like Narcissus, who to embrace his shadow,
drowned himself: yea, set life and death before him, as Moses did before the
Israelites, Deuteronomy. 30. 15. 19. 20. and withal show him, from Matthew. 25. 46.
that this life offered is eternal felicity, that death threatened everlasting
woe, and misery, which words are of such extent, that as a worthy Writer has
it, though all the men that ever have, or shall be created, were,
Briareus-like, hundred handed, and should at once take pens in their hundred
hands, and should do nothing else, for ten hundred thousand millions of years,
but sum up in figures, as many hundred thousand millions as they could, yet
never could they reduce to a total, or confine within number this trisillable
word (e-ter-nall;) or that word of four sillables (e-ver-last-ing) and then
bid him choose which of the two he likes best, his heart, which is harder than
an Adamant, will make answer, take Heaven, Paradise, that eternal felicity, and
future happiness, who will, it is good for me to be rich and happy while I live:
much like Cardinal Burbonius who said, he would not leave his part in Paris,
for his part is Paradise: or, Themistocles, who was not ashamed of this
damnable speech in his mouth, If a man should show me two several ways, the
one leading to Heaven, the other to Hell; of the twain I would choose the
latter: wherein he is more sottish, then the Indians; and more heathenish, then
the infidels of Florida, Virginia, New England, and Kanida, who for a Copper
Kettle, and a few toys, as Beads and Hatchets, will depart from the purest
Gold, and sell you a whole country, even the houses and ground which they dwell
upon; for the whole world is not worth one soul.

But worldly hearts are penny wise, and pound foolish; Worldly men are penny
wise and pound ^oolish.
they know how to set high prises upon the worthless trash of this world, but
for heavenly things, or the God that owes them, this they shamfully
under-value: like Judas, who valued Mary's ointment, which she bestowed upon
the feet of Christ, at three hundred pieces of silver, and sold his Master on
whom that odor was spent, at thirty: And this is one reason. As the affection
which an adulterer bears to a strumpet, does exceedingly diminish the love,
which he should bear to his lawful wife, so the love that wicked men bear to
these vain, and transitory things, wondrously diminish that zeal and
affection, which they should bear toward Christ and heavenly things.

But it is far otherwise with the godly; But it is otherwise with the godly.
for as they that are after the flesh, savor the things of the flesh: so they
that are after the Spirit, savor the things of the Spirit: and our opinion
only endeareth and increases the price of things. When one boasted how fair
a shee-slave he had bought for a pound; another made reply, that she was to
dear, of a groat. Commodities are but as they are commonly valued. Now because
transitory things, in the next life, bear no value at all; and because there
is nothing firm under the firmament, they hold it very good coveting what they
may have, and cannot leave behind them. And though others most love, what they
must leave; and think that money will buy any thing, like foolish Magus, who
thought the Holy Ghost himself might be had for money; or the Devil, who
presumed that this bait would even catch the Son of God; yet the wise and
religious can conceive no reason, why it should be so doted upon, as it is;
especially, since riches can no more put off the Gout, or assuage grief, or
thrust out cares, or purchase grace, or suspend death, or prevent hell, or
bribe the devil, then a Satin sleeve can heal a broken Arm.

They think it the best purchase, that ever was in the world, to buy him who
bought them; in comparison of whom, all things are dross and dung, as S. Paul
speaks Philip. 3. 8. for if we once have him, we have all things: If, says
Paul, God has given us his own Son, how shall he not with him give us all
things also? Romans 8. 32. and again, 1 Corinthians. 3. All things are yours,
whether it be Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death;
whether they be things present, or things to come; even all are yours, and you
are Christ's, and Christ Gods, v. 21. 22. 23. And indeed, if God give the
substantive, Christ, we may be sure he will likewise afford the adjective,
things, necessary for this life, Matthew. 6. 33. so that the godly man, is only
rich, the servant of Christ, is Lord of all.

161. Iudeed, though the devil makes fools of them, yet he makes them wise
enough to make fools of any that will trust them*

ANd thus you have the wisdom of humanists and Politicians decyphered,
together with the wisdom of Gods people: you see the difference between them,
and therein, as I suppose, that the former are none of the wisest, and that the
later, viz. the vvisest politician upon earth, the most ample and cunning
Machevilian that lives, be he a doctor in that deep reaching faculty, is a
stark fool, in six main particulars: ergo, not so wise as the godly man, nor
so wise as the world reputes him, or he himself. Yea, he is worse then a
fool, for, says Saint Augustine, If the Holy Ghost terms him a fool, that
only laid up his own goods, Luke 12. 18. 20. find out a name for him, that
takes away other men's.

Yet by the way, mistake me not, I am far from advising thee to trust them
ever the more, for their simplicity: I would rather wish thee to beware them;
for though the Devil makes fools of them, yet withal, he makes them wise
enough, to make fools of us; and though they be but one eyed, with Gorgon, yet
have they also iron talons; and though with the Osprey, a ravenous bird, they
have one flat hand to stroke, yet have they another with claws, which will
cruelly gripe; yea, though they have the faces and tongues of men, yet they
have the talons of Gryffons, full of rapine, cruelty, and oppression.

But you will tell me, that the world is of another Judgment.

I answer. So shall we if we look upon them sidewayes, as most men do, (like
as Apelles pictured Antigonus, making show only of that half of his face,
which was perfect, but hiding the other side, wherein he was blind and
deformed) then we shall take them for wise men, and so be mistaken.

I confess, They are wise men in foolish things, and foolish men in wise
things.
the one speak Latin, Greek and Hebrew; the other Statutes, History, and
Husbandry well enough, to make their neighbors think them wise men; but the
truth is, they seem wiser then they are, as we use to say of the Spaniards:
whereas the godly, like the French, are wiser then they seem; as thus, they
are wise men in foolish things, and foolish men in wise things; sharp eyed, as
Eagles, in the things of the earth, but as blind as Beetles, in the matters of
heaven; and may be compared to Bats, Night-crowes, Owls, and Cats, which can
see better in the dark, then in the light: their wisdom is like that of
Moles, which will dig under ground with great dexterity; but are blind when
they come into the Sun; or Cats (especially the later sort) that are only
gifted to catch Mice, being in every thing else the simpliest creatures that
live: or the fish Polypus, which is a most stupid and foolish fish, yet uses
great skill, in taking of other fishes: yea, these are directly like witches,
and that in four particulars. First, a witch is rarely pregnant in doing that
which is evil, 2. a witch neither can, nor will do good: 3. a witch will sell
her soul to the devil, that she may a little excel others in mischief; 4.
both they, and these, are indeed blind and in darkness, as having their
beginning from Satan, the Prince of darkness, and their end in hell, which is
the pit of darkness: for as they and witches, do the same work; so they shall
have the same wages, because they are wise to evil, their wisdom shall have
but an evil end.

Again, if innocence be acknowledged mere simplicity, then none are so simple
as the religious; for, as it seems, their ignorance will not suffer them to
do evil. Yea, as Plistonax the Son of Pausanias, when an Orator of Athens
said, the Lacedaemonians were unlearned and ignorant: answered, thou say
true, for we only, of all the Grecians, have learned none of thine ill
conditions: so may I say to these; the godly, of all others, have learnt none
of your Atheistical practices.

But let the Holy Ghost determine, that knows better how to judge then any:
and then, he is most wise, that is most holy: for goodness, in the Scripture,
is termed wisdom; and vice, folly; sinners and fools, Synomina, Prove. 1. 7.
In the dialect of the wise man it is plain, that the greatest sinner is the
greatest fool: and David thinks there is no fool to the Atheist, Psa. 53. 1.
whose ways utter his foolishness, Ps. 49. 13. And though worldly men call the
simple, fools, yet God calls the crafty, fools, Jeremiah 8. 9. Luke 12. 18.
20 Mat. 6. 23. and of all Atheists, which seem wise, there be no such fools
in the world, as they which love money better then themselves.

To conclude, the fear of the Lord, is wisdom; and to depart from evil, is
understanding, Job 28. 28. and he that is truly wise, thinks that to be
wisdom and folly, which God thinks so.

162. They may be called subtle, persons, but not wise men, except we take the
greatest ^olly, for the greatest wisdom.

IF you would know what to judge of them, and how to call them; they are
properly subtle persons, as the Holy Ghost styles Ionadab, who gave that
wicked and crafty counsel to Amnon, 2 Samuel 13. 3. 5. and the woman of Tekoa 2 Samuel 14. 2. and Elimas Acts 13. 10. being rarely gifted to deceive, and more
crafty and wily then is usual; but not wise men, or if it may be termed
wisdom, (as sometimes the Scripture terms it wisdom) in an holy derision, as,
Ge. 3. 22. is to be understood: or else calling it wisdom, because worldly men
deem it so, as in another place, it calls preaching, the foolishness of
preaching, because wicked men esteem preaching but foolishness: and as Christ
calls the Pharisees, just, because they justified themselves, Luke 15. 7. or
thirdly, meaning by wisdom, the wisdom of the flesh, or of the world, and
that is as much, as if it should say in other words, foolishness; for the
wisdom of the world is foolishness with God, says Paul, as the wisdom of
God is foolishness with the world, 1 Cor. 2. 14. I am sure, to be wise to
evil, is an evil wisdom, or rather wisdom backward: for, where as God says,
if any man will be wise, let him become a fool, that he may be wise: these,
on the contrary, become wise, that they may be fools; they study the
dangerous art of selfe-Sophistry, to the end, that they may be wily to beguile
themselves, and to plot selfe-Treason, then which there is no greater, when the
betrayer and betrayed spell but one man.

There is, yea, this is a kind of wisdom, which is more contrary to wisdom
then ignorance: and indeed, whence proceeds the subtilest folly, but from the
subtilest wisdom? For as from the extremest friendships, proceeds the
extremest enmities; and from the soundest healths, the mortallest diseases: so
from the rarest and quickest agitations of our minds, ensue the most
distempered and outrageous frenzies; there wants but half a pegs turn, to pass
from the one to the other. In mad men's actions we see how fitly folly suiteth,
and meets with the strongest operations of our minds; who knows not how
unperceivable the neighborhood is, between folly and the liveliest elevations
of these wits; yea, their crafty wisdom, the occasion of their folly, thy
wisdom and thy knowledge, says Isai^h, they have caused thee (...) 47. 10.
and what is rebellion but folly? as Job 28. 28. Proverbs 9. 10. 12. and 11. 3.
Deuteronomy. 4. 6. Hosea 14. 9. James 3. 13. 17. 2 T^m. 3. 15. and other the like
places show.

If then (to use our Saviors words) the light that is in them be darkness,
how great is that darkn^sse? Matthew. 6. 23. If their wisdom and knowledge be
ig^orance; how great is that ignorance? yea, how inconceivably great is the
folly of that ignorance? surely in my judgment it is such, that if the Law
admit any to be begged for fools, these are the fittest; and I cannot but
wonder to see, how the most are mistaken in them: but being thus discovered, I
hope it will appear, that as love and lust are not both one; so a cunning man,
and a wise man are not both one. We have seen some that could pack the
cards, and yet cannot play well.

Now as I have shown these two sorts of men their folly; And even such fools
are the voluptio^s.
so it were as easy to show, that the voluptuous are fools also; though, of
all men, they are the wisest in their own conceits, because they live the
merriest and freeliest of all others.

Yea, I could make it plain to them, that the very worst thing in religion,
even the reproach of Christ, is better then the best pleasure, that is in the
sweetest sin; for so it was to Moses, a man of a right esteem: and that one
day in the courts of God, viz. his holy Temple, is better then a thousand
elsewhere; for so it was to David, a man of a refined and reformed judgment:
yea, S. Paul, a sanctified man, after he was rapt up into the third heaven,
reckoned so meanly of the things below, that he could hardly find forth a
comparison for them homely enough. Philipians 3. 8. It is true, carnal men
think that if they once embrace religion, farewell all joy and delight: but they
only think so, it is not so, for a good conscience, when it is at the worst; is
even filled with joy, Act. 5. 41. 2. Cor. 1. 5. thus it fared with Steven, Act.
7. 55. 56. and those disciples, Chapter 13. 52. yea, a good conscience made
Peter more merry, under stripes, then Caiaphas upon the Judgment Seat; and
Paul happier in his chain of iron, then Agrippa in his chain of gold. Neither
have Gods children a less portion of outward blessings, then the wicked, when
God knows the same good for them. Abraham was as rich as any of our Aldermen;
David as valiant as any of our Gentlemen; Solomon as wise in humane skill, as
any of our deepest Naturians; Susanna as fair, as any of our painted pieces,
etc.

But I fear me Egypt has been so teadious to you already that you ask for
Goshen; though, indeed, you have been all this while in the light, that you
have looked upon darkness; for darkness could never be seen by it self, but by
the light.

Besides, I have searched and rubd enough this sore, only the plaster is
wanting; wherefore I will wind up this objection, with a few helps to, or
means of true wisdom, and saving knowledge; that so each one may be able to
understand the Scriptures, and what qualifications God requires in such, to
whom he will show mercy: and so much the rather, because the work of
regeneration begins at illumination; a man desires not, that he does not know,
says Chrysostom, neither are unknown evils feared.

163.
I^ any would ob^aine this excel lent grace of saving knowledge, 6. Helps to
saving knowledge
let him use these six helps and further ances, 1. Discard all filthy lusts and
(...) affections. 2. Get an humble heart. 3. Procure the eye of a lively faith.
4. Be constant in Prayer. 5. Be irequent and studious in the Scriptures. 6.
Advise with others.


First, let him be careful to dispell and remove al filthy lusts and lewd
affect^on^, for these are our Eues, First disc^rd^al fi^^hy lusts and
affections.
which do deceive us; our Dalilahs, which ^ull us asleep, while we are
deprived of the strength of our reason; our enemies, that are ever fighting
against our souls, as Peter speaks, 1 Peter 2. 11. Yea, there needs no more
to besot a man, then the inordinate love of money; for had one as many eyes as
the Poets feign of Argus, the melody of gain would play them all out, or fast
asleep. Our affections, like fire and water, are good servants, but evil
master; for being corrupted and overswayed by lusts, there be no such enemies,
as these homebred, and of a man's own household.

Sin is like the Albug^, or white spot in the eye, which dims our
understandings, and makes fools of Catoes and Platoes, and Tullies, and
Achit^phels, leaving them never an eye to see withal. For as the Arc would
not stay with the Philistines: so wisdom and grace will not stay with sinners,
but ^lieth from them, as believers would do from a persecuting Tyrant. If
Jerusalem forgets her first love, presently her right hand forgets her cuning,
and her tongue cleaves to the roof of her mouth, Psalm. 137. 5. 6. If sins
come in at the fore-dore, graces will go out at the postern: what communion
has light with darkness? they will not keep company together: virtues drop
from such a tree, like leaves and fruits in a great wind: yea, one sin opens
the door for many virtues to go out. If one virtue be offended, she lureth
away all her fellows; as when ner, was offended, he drew away many of
Ishbosheth's friends, and they shrunk from him.

As a Judge to acquit his office, must be free from passion and affection,
touching either party; and as our eyes, could not aright judge of colors,
except they were void of all colors; nor our tongues discern of tastes,
unless freed from tastes: so no man can jndge aright of passions, except his
mind be altogether free from passions. Wherefore be not so much led by lust
passion, or affection, as by reason. We know appetite in a burning Feavor,
will call for cold drink, even to the overthrow of our lives, if reason gainsay
it not. But as they that would see more sharply and certainly, shut one eye: so
do thou, let the eyes, or windows of thy affections be shut to the
allurements of the world, and the flesh, least they draw thee from the right
line of obedience: yea, shut to humane reason also, least it make thee mistake
and swerve from faiths injunctions. And then if thou can but bring thy flesh
with it is lusts, a little asleep, while thy soul is waking, thou have entered
through the gate into the porch of this heavenly Palace. But he that will do
this, must shun all dispute with Satan: of which else where.

Secondly, he must get an humble conceit of his own wisdom. 2 Get an humble
heart.
The first step to knowledge, is to know our own ignorance; we must become
fools in our own judgments, before we can be truly wise, 1 Cor. 3. 18. And
indeed, the opinion of our knowing enough, is one of the greatest causes of our
knowing so little: for what we presume to have attained, we seek not after.
Humble eyes are most capable of high mysteries, he will teach the humble his
way, says David, Psalm. 25. 9. yea, the first lesson of a Christian is
humility, Matthew. 11. 29. Pro. 1. 7. and he that has not learnt the first
lesson, is not fit to take out a new.

One would think, that a worldly wise man, might most easily also make a wise
Christian: but St. Paul says, no, except first he becomes a fool, that is,
acknowledge his clear light and wisdom, which he has so magnified for
clearenesse, to be blindness and ignorance, he cannot be wise in this case, 1
Cor. 3. 18. Yea, says St. Cyprian, it is as much lost labor, to preach unto a
man the things of God, before he be humbled, with the sight of hi^ wants, as to
offer light to a blind man, to speak to a deaf man, or to labor to make a
brute beast wise.

Pride is a great let to true wisdom, for God resists the pro^d, and only
gives grace to the humble, James, 4. 6. 1 Pet. 5. 5. hence it comes to pass,
that few proud wits are reformed. I am come unto judgment into this world,
says our Savior to the Pharisees, that they which see not, might see; and
that they which ^ee, meaning in their own opinion, might be made blind, Ioh.
9. 39. which was the reason he propounded his woes to the Pharisees, and his
Doctrines to the people.

An heart full of Pride, is like a vessel full of air: this selfe-opinion
must be blown out of us, before saving knowledge will be powered into us.
Humility is the knees of the soul, and to that posture only the Lamb will open
the book: Christ will know none but the humble, and none but humble souls
truly know Christ.

Now this grace of humility is obtained, by taking a serious view of our wants:
the Peacock's pride is abated, when she pe^ceives the blackness of her legs
and feet. Now, suppose we know never so much; yet that which we do know, is
far less then that which we are ignorant of; and the more we know, the more
we know we want, at all, both wise and holy ^en, have felt and confessed:
yea, this was the judgment of the vvisest, even amongst the Heathen* (...)
being demanded why the Oracle of Delpho^ should pronounce him the vvisest man
of Greece, made answer, I know nothing, but this, that I kno^ nothing; neither
can there be any thing in me to ^^rifie the Oracle, e^cept this, that I am not
wise, and know it; whereas others are not wise, and know it not; and to be
ignorant, and know it not, is by far the greater ignorance. So the renowned
Orator Cicero, even bevvayled his own emptiness, I would, quoth he, I could
light on the truth, as easily, as I can (...) fasehood: a negative knowledge,
was the greatest knowledge, he would acknovvledge in himself.

He is wise, that can truly see and acknowledge his ignorance; he is ignorant,
that thinks himself wise: I Will clear it by a similitude, being here below,
we think one Island great, but the whole earth unmeasurably; if we were above
in the firmament, with these eyes, the whole earth, were it equally enlightened,
would seem as little to us, as now the least Star in the firmament seems to
us upon earth: and indeed, how few Stars are so little as it? even such is the
natural man's mistake, in judging of, and comparing what he has, with what he
wants; natural wisdom, with spiritual and Heavenly.

Wherefore, if thou perceivest not more strength and wisdom to be in the
weakness and foolishness of Gods truth, 1 Cor. 1. 25. (which therefore only
seems weakness and foolishness, because the strength and wisdom of it is
not perceived by the fleshly eye) then in the strength and wisdom of the
profoundest Naturian, and, if thou beleivest not the godly to be most wise; do
not blame them for foolishness, but thy self for blindness, and desire the
Lord (as Elisha did for his servant) to open thine eyes.

Thus, as by mortification and dying unto sin, we come to vivification and
living unto grace; or, as by dying the death of nature, we obtain the life of
glory: so by becoming a fool, a man may attain to wisdom. Wherefore get
humility, and thou have mounted another step toward wisdom, entered a second
room of this Palace.

164.
THirdly, let him get faith. For as without faith, 3 Procure the eye of a
lively faith.
no man can please God: so without faith no man can know God. Faith does
clearly behold those things, which are hid both from the eye of sense, and the
eye of reason. I am come into the world, says our Savior, that whosoever
believes in me, should not sit in darkness, John, 12. 46. Reason and faith
are the two eyes of the soul. Reason discernes natural objects, faith
spiritual and supernatural. We may fee, far with our bodily eye, sense;
farther, with the minds eye, reason; but farther, with the souls eye, Faith,
then with both. Yea, the rational does not so far exceed the sensual, as
the spiritual exceeds the rational: and though reason and humane learning, is
as oil to the Lamp of our understandings, which makes them burn clearer;
yea, so doubles the sight of our minds, as Menander speaks, that there is as
much difference, between the learned and unlearned, as there is between man
and beast: yet Faith and illumination of the spirit, adds to the sight of our
minds, as a Prospective glass adds to the corporal sight, Matthew. 16. 17.
Christ is the Sun of the soul, Reason and Faith the two Eyes, I am the light
of the world, says our Savior, he that follows me, meaning, by a lively
Faith, shall not walk in darkness; but shall have the light of life, John, 8.
12. and more see two eyes then one. Yea, the day, with one eye, does for more
things descry, then night can do with more then Argus eyes. Unregenerate men
who want faith, are like blind Sampson, without his guide. So that we must have
minds lifted above nature, to see, and love things above nature; heavenly
wisdom, to see heavenly truth; or else that truth, which is saving, will be to
us a mystery, yea, seem foolishness* 1 Cor. 2. 7, 8, 14. whereas the spirit
reveals all things to the beleiver, even the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2.
10, 12, 15, 16. giving him a mouth, and wisdom, where against all his
adversaries shall not be able to speak, or resist, Luke, 21. 15.

Wherefore get faith, and thou have mounted another step to wisdom, entered a
third room of this Palace.

Fourthly, 4 Be con^stant in prayer for the spirits help.
he must be frequent and fervent in prayer to God, for the direction of his
holy Spirit, for,

First, humble and faithful prayer, ushered in by meditation, is the cure of
all obscurity, especially being accompanied with fervor and fervency. If any
lack wisdom, says St. James, let him ask of God, which gives to all men
liberally, and reproacheth no man, and it shall be given him, Iam. 1. 5. mark
the words: it is said, if any: wherefore let no man deny his soul this
comfort: again, ask, and have, it cannot come upon ea^ier terms: yea, God
seems to like this suit so well in Solomon, as if he were beholding to his
Creature for wishing good to it self, yea more, whatsoever we ask in prayer,
if we believe, we shall have it, Math. 21. 22. And in vain do we expect that
Alms of Grace, for which we do not so much as beg.

Secondly, as Sampsons companions could never have found out his Riddle, if
they had not plowed with his heyfer: so no man can say that Jesus is the Lord,
but by the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12. 3. And as none can behold the light of the
Sun, but by the benefit of the Sun: so none can know God (who is called the
Father of lights, in the plural number, because of the degrees and diversities
of his gifts) nor the things of God, but by the revelation of God, 1 Cor. 12.
8. Math. 16. 17. with the Spirits help, the means can never be too weak;
without, never strong enough. One excellent and necessary prerogative of the
spiritual man, is this, he has God for his teacher, he learnes the counsels
of God, of that spirit, which only knows God's counsels, Luke, 21. 15. For
though his outward man receives the elements and rudiments of Religion, by
breeding and education; yet his inward man receives them by heavenly
infpiration. For as spiritual wisdom is not the fruit of time and study, as
the natural is: so it has a higher fountain then nature to feed it, even
the Spirit of God; which is no small privilege; for the Scholar learnes
quickly, when the Holy Ghost is his teacher; the eye sees distinctly, when the
Holy Ghost does enlighten it.

When Christ taught in the Temple, they asked, how knows this man the
Scriptures, seeing he never learned them? so it is a wonder what learning some
men have, that have no learning: like Priscilla and Aquila, poor Tent-makers,
which were able to schole Apollos, that great Clarke, a man renowned for his
learning. What can we say to it? for no other reason can be given for it, but
as Christ said, Father, so it pleases thee. For as Jacob came so soon with
his Venison, that his father asked him, how he came by it so suddenly; and Jacob
answered, because the Lord thy God brought it suddenly to my hands: so holy and
righteous men, can give no other reason, why they understand the words of God
so easily, and the wicked do conceive them so hardly, but that God brings the
meaning suddenly to their hearts, as we read, Luke 24. that Christ standing in
the midst of his Apostles, after he was risen from the dead, opened their
understandings, that they might understand clearly the Scriptures, and what
was written of him, in the law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the
Psalms verse. 44. 45. Lo, how suddenly their knowledge came unto them! But
see what a general promise God, in the person of vvisdome, has made to all
that serve him, Pro 1. 23.

Wherefore importune God the Father, for the dir^ction of his holy Spirit, and
thou shall, at the least, have light enough on earth, to bring thee to the
light of Heaven.

But in praying for wisdom, But pray not for knowledge without putting
difference
observe one caution, do not pray for it, without putting difference. There is
a speculative knowledge in the brain, common to hypocrites, with Gods
children; Heb. 6. 4. and there is an experimental and saving knowledge in the
heart, peculiar to the godly alone, Ephesians. 4. 8. and 5. 8. pray especially for
the last of these, let thine hearts desire be, to know God in Christ; Christ,
in faith; faith, in good works; to know Gods will, that thou may do it; and
before the knowledge of all other things, desire to know thy self; and in thy
self, not so much thy strength, as thy weakness: pray that thine heart may
be instead of a Commentary, to help thee understand such points of religion as
are most needful and necessary, and that thy life may be an exposition of thy
inward man, that there may be a sweet harmony betwixt Gods truth, thy
judgment, and whole conversation; that what the natural man knows by
thinking, thou may double by feeling the same in thine heart and affections:
as indeed, experimental and saving knowledge is no less felt, then known;
and I cannot tell how, comes rather out of the abundance of the heart, then by
extreme study, or rather is sent by God unto good men; like the Ram that was
brought to Abraham, when he would have sacrificed his Son Isaac. For God may
grant our (...) in judgment,


But if thou shall pray unto God for knowledge, without making a difference;
and shall stand more upon the quantity, then the quality: so resembling the
curre in the fable, which preferred the shadow to the meat; or those parents
among the Heathen, which sacrificed to the gods for children, but not for good
children; or Nero's Mother, who being told, that her Son should be Emperor,
but to her grief and sorrow, answered, so my Son have the Empire, let my
sorrow and grief be what it will; or Eudoxus, whose wish and prayer to the
gods was, that he might once view the Sun near at hand, to comprehend his
form, greatness, and beauty, on condition he were immediately burnt and
consumed by it. God will either cross thee, in thy desire, as he did those
anticke builders, Genesis 11. 3. to 10. who purposed a Tower, the top whereof
should reach unto Heaven, for no other cause, but to get them a Name. And what
if the height had answered their desire? Or as he does daily men and women,
that had rather be rich, or honorable, then good? or if he do grant their
desires, yet he will grant it them in judgment; as he did a King to the
Israelites, and Quails, with which he fed their bodies, but withal sending
leanness into their souls; or as he granted a Boy to Sr. Thomas Moor's Lady,
who being sick of Daughters, prayed importunately for a Boy, and nothing but a
Boy would serve; whereupon she had a Boy, which (as Sr. Thomas wittily and
twittingly told her) would be a Boy, so long as he lived; or as Christ
committed his purse to Judas, when as he gave his holy Spirit to his faithful
Apostles; or as Bacchus is feighned to deal with Midas, who desiring of him,
that whatsoever he touched might instantly be converted into gold, granted his
request, but so as it became his bane; for his wine became gold, his bread
gold, the feathers of his bed, his shirt, his garments, and every thing else,
were all turned into that hard metal, whereby he was half starved with
hunger, and half with cold, as Fulgentius relates; he would gladly now have
unprayed his prayers.

Alas! even the wicked, for the most part, have their desire; yea, more then
their hearts can wish, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 73. 7. 9. but what is the
issue? they set their mouths against Heaven, like an unruly jade, that being
full fed, kickes at his master; yea, how often does wisdom without grace,
prove like a fair estate in the hands of a fool, which not seldom becomes
the owners ruin; or like Absolom's hair, which was an ornament vvherevvith
he hanged himself: yea, vvisdome without grace, is nothing else but a cunning
way of undoing our selves at the last; for is not many men's knowledge to them,
like the Arc to the Philist^nes, which did them more hurt then good? A wicked
man's knowledge may make him prouder, not better,; more rebellious, not more
serviceable: thy wisdom and thy knowledge, says Isay, they have caused thee
to rebel, Isa. 47. 10. O how many do mischief instead of good with their
knowledge? like H^rod, whom you shall see turning over the Bible, searching the
Scriptures, examining the Prophets, but to what end and purpose to know good,
but to do evil? yea, the greatest evil under the Sun, slay Christ in the
cradle: with many their knowledge and learning is not for God, and for Gideon;
but for Antichrist, and for Babylon. And so of all other gifts: how many are
the wor^e for them? As, give Saul a Kingdom, and he will tyrannize; give Nabal
plenty, and he will be drunk; give Judas an Apostleship, and he will sell his
Master for money.

Wherefore, in praying for wisdom, pray not so much for braine-knowledge, as
to be soule-wife; nor more for wisdom it self, then for a blessing upon it;
that God will so sanctify it unto thee, that he may have glory, thy self and
others good by the same; for, for want of this, many are able to speak like
Angels in the Church, while they live like Devils abroad.

Ob: But I cannot pray, or not to purpose.

Answ: 2 Objections answered.
As we pour some water into the Pumpe, that thereby we may fetch up more: so
let us pray, that we may pray more and better. When the Mill is set on going,
an easy wind keeps it so; and a stronger increases the motion.

Ob: But I have often prayed, and yet remain as stupid as a stone.

Answ* Though, with Peter, thou have fished all night, and caught nothing, yet
cast out thy net again, pray still, and the issue shall more then recompense
the delay: yea, thy perseverance in prayer, will prove that thou have mounted
another step to wisdom, entered a fourth room of this Palace.

165
Fifthly, ^^ Use the ^ means.
he must use the means, as well as pray; acquaint himself with the
Scriptures, for they, and they alone are able to make a man wise unto
salvation, Be s^udious in the Scriptures and follow that rule.
as St. Paul tells Timothy, 2 Timothy 3. 15. we must not, in the search of
heavenly matters, either follow the blind guide, carnal reason; or the
deceitful guide, our corrupt hearts; but the undeceiveable guide of Gods Word,
which is truth it self.

And great need there is. For, as we cannot see the foulness of our faces,
unless it be told us by some other; or we take a glass, and look our selves
therein: so neither can we see the blemishes of our souls (which is a notable
degree of spiritual vvisdome) but either God must make it known unto us, by
his Spirit; or we must collect the same out of the Scriptures, that
Celestial glass; though this also must be done by the Spirits help.

Now if thou will truly profit by reading the Scriptures, resolve to make them
the rule of thy life. What is the reason many are conversant in those divine
and heavenly mysteries, all the days, of their life, and yet are neither the
wiser nor the better, resembling Worms in a book, or fish in the Sea, which
though they are bred and nourished therein; yet, the one, is never the more
learned, nor the other, one jot the salter: or like some Athenian Gentlemen in
our City, who were wont to spend all their time in measuring of Paul's, yet know
not the length of it: or some Innes of Court Gentlemen, that study the Law,
but, being borne to great means, never intend to practice it: or, rather some
Physicians, who learn the use of Physic, and prescribe it to others, finding
sweetness and profit thereby, but will not once taste thereof themselves,
knowing it unpleasant.

Yea, what is the reason, that in studying the Scriptures, they resemble the
rustic Sayler, who sees Gods wonders in the deep, but so, as they rather
appear his playfellowes, then the stirrers of his zeal? yea, that the very
means of their reformation, should become the very fuel of their wickedness?
whereas, the story of God, makes others no less good then wise, who improve
their time by it; as some do at a game at Chesse, who by way of return, learn
both Arithmeticke, and Geometry.

The reason is this, natural and ungodly men read and hear the Scriptures,
and mind not; or mind, and understand not; or understand, and remember not; or
remember, and practice not; no, this they intend not, of all the rest; and they
which are unwilling to obey, God thinks unworthy to know.

When the Serpent taught knowledge, he said, if ye eat the forbidden fruit,
your eyes shall be opened, and you shall know good and evil, Genesis 3. 5. But
God teaches another lesson, and says, if ye will not eat the forbidden fruit,
your eyes shall be opened, and you shall know good and evil, Romans 12. 2.

Indeed, an holy submission to the word is the A B C: the Primmer and Grammar,
the first lesson and the last lesson of a Christian: so to know the good, and
perfect* and acceptable will of God, that we our selves become good, and
perfect, and acceptable in Gods sight, Romans 12. 2. is all in all. Touching
wisdom, it is the beginning, the middle, and the end; they that observe the
Commandments have a good understanding, says David, Psalm* 111. 10. and proves
it true, by his own example and experience. I understood, says he, more then
the ancient; and became wiser then my teachers, because I kept thy precepts,
Psalm 119. 97, 98, 99, 100. and he was brought up to little else but keeping
his Fathers sheep; only his aim was; that the word might make him not witty,
but holy, teach him to follow virtue and embrace wisdom, not talk of it; and
therefore God gave him both goodness, and wisdom, as he gave Solomon
wisdom, and riches, and honor, when his petition was only for wisdom.

Briefly, he that can say with David, I love thy Law, and keep thy precepts,
and hate all the ways of falsehood, Ps. 119* 79. 104. may follow, with David, I
have more understanding then my teachers and know more then the ancient, verse
98. to 107. But, as David could not understand why the wicked prospered, until
he went into the Sanctuary of God, Psalm 73. 17. and as Aaron, might not enter
into the sanctuary, where God did answer, until he had sanctified himself;
so, if we will understand mysteries and hear* God himself speak, we must put
off our sins, as Moses put off his shoes, Exodus 3. 5. or else we shall be like
images, that have ears, and cannot hear, Psalm. 115. 6. 1 Cor. 2. 14.

Wherefore, be studious in the Scriptures, and follow that rule: add nothing
of thine own unto it, but obedience and subjection, and thou have mounted
another step to wisdom, entered a fifth room of this Palace.

166.
SIxthly and lastly, he must do, touching his spiritual estate, 6. Go to
counsel.
as worldly men do, touching their temporal possessions: go to counsel, take
advise of the Learned, (I mean the Ministers) when he is in any doubt: as who
knows the spots of his own face, but either by the reflection of a glass, or
by the relation of others? and in a work of great consequence, it argues the
candor and modesty of a man, to desire a coadjutor.

Now the Priests lips, says Malachi, preserve knowledge; and the people seek
the Law at his mouth, for he is the messenger of the Lord of Host^, Mal. 2. 7.

Yea, there is use to be made of our friends, private Christians, we ought to
borrow our friends eyes; and lend them ours; for that we do not more love our
selves above others; then we see others better then our selves; we can more
easily see a moate in another eye, then a beam in our own, Matthew 7. 3,

It is not amiss sometimes to go from home, to hear what news there is at
home: as Tarlton told the Queen, he was going to London, to hear what news
at Court: so a wise man will gather much knowledge of himself, from others
observation; lookers on many times see more, then the actors do. Tully said,
he could better hear the news of Rome at Antium, then at Rome it self;
neither can Paris tell more news of France; or Madril of Spain, then our
Exchange in London of both. Yea, what Traveller is able to speak so much of
foreign parts, as he that looks no further then his study.

Besides, every man in his own cause is a party, and therefore partial; so
that he which learnes of none but himself, has a fool to his teacher: yea,
Salom^n, no less then nine times* brands him for a fool, who refuses
admonition.

But herein observe one caution: neither advise, nor consult with brutish
sensualists; for their knowledge is ignorance; their wisdom, folly; their
sight, blindness, etc. they neither consider what reason speaks, or religion
commands, but what the will and appetite affects: for will is the axeltree,
lusts and passions the wheels, whereupon all their actions are carried, and
do run; appetite being their lord, reason the servant, and religion their
slave; whereas religion should govern their judgments, judgment and reason
their wills, and affections, as Adam should have done Eve,

These are the six steps which lead up to the palace of wisdom; answerable to
those six steps which led up to Salomons Throne; which all must ascend by, that
mean to enter: the more of them you have ascended, he nearer you are to heaven,

If you have once attained this precious grace of s^ving knowledge, you will
(as much as in you lies) ^moloy the same, to the glory of the giver. There be
some that care not to know; and there be some, that care for nothing else but
to know; many strive after, and pray for knowledge, but why? they would be
wiser, not holier by it: it is their own honor they seek, not the honor of
christ: if they may be thought great Rabbis, deep and profound S^hollers,
this is the height of their ambition; though neither the Church be benefited,
nor God glorified by it, whereas they ought the contrary. For, as the grace of
God is the fountain from which our wisdom flows, so the glory of God should
be the Ocean to which it should run: it is derived from the one, and must be
directed to the other. Yea, that God may be honored by our wisdom, is the
only end for which he gives us to be wise; and for default of this end, he not
seldom curses the means, whereby many striving to expel ignorance, fall
into error; as an Empirick to cure one disease; cau^eth a worse.

If you would know in special, whom they are, that in using their gifts, seek
not the glory of God; you may discern them by these marks. First, they will
have all the talk, wheresoever they come, like Parrats. 2. They contemn others,
like the Pharisees. 3. They will be wiser then God, and not submit their
judgments and opinions to his word, like the Romish Pontifician Doctors, who
because the commandment thwarts their opinions, and stands plainly forbidding
images; that images may stand, they forbid the Commandment. 4. They spurn at
him which tells them of their faults, like Abner. 5. They jump with their
superiors in every thing, like the Herodians. 6. They turn with the time, like
Demas. 7. They seek their own credit, by the discredit of others, like the
enemies of Paul. 8. They love to hear their own praise, like Herod. 9. Above
all, they would have their own wills, like Iezabel; let these men deny it if
they can. Yea, I would feign know what fruit, or effect these men's knowledge
has in them, except it be to enable them to dispute, and discourse, to
increase wit, or to increase wealth, or to increase pride? whether the utmost
of their aim be not to enrich, dignifie, and please themselves; not once
casting the eye of their souls at Gods glory, or their neighbors good? as let
any fluent Herod, or eloquent Turtullus tell me, whether his knowledge puffs
him no^^p, as if he had eaten a Spider; and whether he seeks not more the
praise of his wit, then the profit of his soul, and fears not more an affront
from his superior, then he fears hell.

Again, let any strong brained Achitophel tell me, whether he had not rather
seem wicked, th^^ simple? Any unrighteous Judge, or Lawyer, whether his whole
aim be not the purchasing of land, without either fear of God, regard of
men, or the discharge of his duty and office.

Briefly, so many as are puffed up with their knowledge, or do not part with
their sins, show, that they never sought it for Gods glory, but for their own
honor and glory; and certainly, if we seek nor Gods glory, in doing his
work; he will give us no wages, at the latter end.

But to apply what has been spoken. The application of what has been spoken
If it be so, that God reveals himself savingly to none but his children, the
godly; and that none are soul wise, but such as digest their knowledge into
practice, and employ their wisdom to his glory that gave it, and the good of
themselves and others: then your objection, of what the world thinks (like a
child's bubble blown into the air) is fallen to the ground, and dissolved to
nothing. Alas! the world is no more fit to judge of cases of conscience, then
a blind man is fit to judge of colors. Wherefore as the Orator would admit
none but Rhetoricians, to judge of his Orations: so henceforward, admit none
but spiritual men to sway thee in spiritual matters, and follow our Saviors
counsel, seek to justify thy judgment and practice to the children of
wisdom, of whom wisdom is justified; and not to fools, by whom she is daily
crucified. Only condole these blind men's disasters, and drop some tears in
pity and compassion, for their great and grievous misery. And so much for the
objection.

167.
NOw that I may fasten again the thread of my discourse, Admonition, not to
make mercy a ^olster for continuing in ^in
where I brake it; and fall in, where I left off; let your thoughts return with
me to the Law (I mean, to the Law of Christ) and to the testimony alleged,
and explained from: 142. to. 154. and you will easily confess, that Satan
has hitherto gulled you, and all in your case; that he holds a pair of false
spectacles before the eyes of wicked men, and thereby persuades their
deceitful hearts, that the bridge of Gods mercy is far larger then it is:
and they give such credit thereunto, that while they think they are upon the
bridge, they go besides, and so are sure, in the end, to fall, and be drowned
in the waters of eternal destruction.

Wherefore if thou meanest to fare better, make not Christ a bolster for
si^^ne, least the plaster prove worse then the sore; nor Gods mercy a warrant
for thy continuing in an evil course; for this is to sin with an high hand, or
with a witness (as we use to say) which if thou do, thou shall also perish
with a witness, Deuteronomy 29. 19, 20, 21. I have heard of a woman, that
presumed so much upon her husbands love, that if he should find her in the bed
of incontinency, he would not harm her; but it proved far otherwise, to her
shame and ruin: and so it will fare with thee, in the end, for he that
deliberately resolves to sin, does what he can, to make himself uncapeable
of forgiveness: yea, how should the cross of Christ be a friend to them, that
are enemies to his cross, Philip. 3. 19. and trample upon him with their feet,
because hitherto he has borne the contumelies of their tongues, and excesses
of their lives?

O what a blasphemous imagination is this, against Jesus Christ! to think that
he came into the world to be a patron of sin, or a bolster, whereupon we may
more securely sleep in sensuallity; and not to destroy the works of the
devil, 1 John 3. 3. 8. 9. 10.

Oh that Christians should so live, as if the practice of the Gospel, were
quite contrary to the rule of the Law! but such men show what they are, for
none but base minds, and perverse dispositions, says Saint Bernard; will
therefore be evil, because God is good: and those that belong to Gods
election, will never make that liberty which Christ has purchased for them,
with his precious blood; a cloak to cover their wickedness; but rather a spur,
to incite them to godliness; they, for whom Christ dyed, will not
presumptuously lavish on his score not caring what they spend, because he is
able to pay for all: no, they will live as though there were no Gospel; dye,
as though there were no Law: and nothing so soon leads an ingenuous mind to
repentance, as when he considers Gods bountifulness and long suffering
toward him, Romans 2. 4. there is mercy with thee, says David, what? that thou
might be despised, blasphemed? etc. no, (if you take him so, you mistake
him) but that thou might be feared, Psalm 130. 4. and the love of Christ
constrained Paul to duty, 2 Cor. 5. 14.

168.
WHereas nothing will do good upon thee; What small hope of the dr^n kards
yielding.
for albeit, I have informed thee how dangerous thine estate is, that thou
might plainly see it, truly fear it, and timely prevent it; yet I have not
the least, or, at most, very little hope of thy yielding. For first, these
lines to thee, are but as so many characters written in the water, which leaves
no impression behind them; thou being l^ke one, that beholds his natural face
in a glass; who when he has considered himself, goes his way, and
forgets immediately what manner of one he was, James 1. 23. 24. or like some
silly fly, which being beat from the candle an hundred times, and often ^inged
there in, yet will return to it again, until she be consumed. If thou will
behold thy case in another person, look 2 King. 8. 12 to 16. Proverbs 23. 35.
All those Beasts which went into the Arc unclean, came likewise out unclean.

Secondly, though these sparks of grace may kindle piety in others, yet not in
thee: for what is light, to him that will shut his eyes against it? And men of
thy condition do on purpose stop their ears, and wink with their eyes, least
they should see with their eyes, and hear with their cares, and understand
with their hearts, and so should be converted, as our Savior shows, Matthew.
13. 15. and Saint Paul, Acts 28. 27. O, if these Adders had not stopped their
ears, how long since had they been charmed!

And indeed, it were an unreasonable motion in me, if I should request minds,
preposessed with prejudice, to hear reason: there is no disputing with him
that denies Principles, if they believe not Moses, and the Prophets, they would
never be persuaded, although one should be sent unto them from the dead, to
testify what a place of torment they are going unto, Luk 16. 31. A brute beast
is as capeable of good counsel, as a drunkard, once became a scorner; for like
Salomons fool, braying in a mo^^ar will not alter him: yea, a very stone, (to
which Ezeki^l compares a hard heart, Chapter 11. 19.) is not more insensible,
then such a sinner; for he will neither be softened, with benefits, nor broken,
with punishments; neither God's severity, can terrify him; nor his kindness,
mollify him; yea, the more these anvills are beaten upon, the harder they are:
the change of means, whether the Word, Judgments, Mercies, etc. do^ but
obdure their hearts instead of melting them; as we see in the example of
Phara^h. We know the same Sun which procuretha sweet savor from flowers,
makes carrion to stink. And as the same water, which washes other things
clean, makes clay more dirty: so this, which has been collected out of the
Word, instead of diminishing their sin, will (as may be feared) increase it:
like as Physic, if it works not upon choler, turns into choler; their
nature being serpentine, in lapping this sweet milk, they turn it forthwith
into poison.

Let one charm never so sweetly, these Adders will not only stop their own
ears, but stop the charmers mouth too, if they can.

At least, if we play upon David's harp, to drive away the evil spirit, from
these Readiness; they will let fly the darts of reproach, and the arrows of
^lander at us, yea, whereas I offer them Wine, as Christ did to the Jews; they
will return me Vinegar, as the Jews did to Christ, or they have lost their
old wont.

What should I say? if thou be a drunkard, and a sco^^er, thou art dead in
sin (only thy sin is alive) and not only dead, as Iairu's daughter was,
Matthew 9. 25. nor only dead, laid out, and coffind, as the Widows Son of
Nau^ was, Luke 7. 14. but dead, coffind, and buried, as Lazarus was, John 11.
39. even tell thou stinkest in the nosthrils of God, and all good men. And what
rubing can fetch heat in such a dead body?

So that to admonish thee, were as if a man should knock at a deaf man's door:
yea, it were almost as ridiculous, as that Ceremony, which the Mahometans use,
of flinging stones to stone the devil with.

If you would have a president, to make good what has been spoken, see Matthew.
27. where when Jesus cried with a loud voice, and yielded up the Ghost; the
veil of the Temple rent in twain, from the top to the bottom, the earth did
quake, the graves did open themselves, and the dead Saints came forth, and went
into the holy City, the Sun was forsaken of his light, etc. as if all were
sensible of their Maker's suffering; when as the generality of the people, yea,
those great Clerks, the Scribes, and Pharisees, were altogether insensible,
and worse then all the rest of the creatures; the very stones of the Temple
were soft, in comparison of their stony hearts, and they which were dead in
their graves, were alive to those which were dead in their sins.

So that I have no other message to deliver unto thee, then that which the
vigilant captain delivered, together with a deaths wound, to his fleeping
watchman; dead I found thee, and dead I leave thee.

Only thou, O Father, (to whom nothing is hard) if it be thy good pleasure (as
why not? seeing it will make much for the glory of thy great Name, to save such
a mighty sinner, who, Manasses-like, has multiplied offenses, above the number
of the sand of the Sea, and is bound down with many Iron bands) say unto his
soul, live. It Is true, thy angry threatening toward sinners is importable, but
thy merciful promise is unmeasurable, and unsearchable: thou therefore that
art able to quicken the dead, and make even of stones children to Abraham,
mollify these stony hearts, with the blood of the Lamb, and make of these
children of the Devil, members of thy Son Jesus Christ.

169.
ANd so much of the Drunkards Character, Much of him has been spoken, but
nothing near all.
though I might expatiate; for he is a creature made up of many ingredients, to
which every vice contributes something, as the gods did to Vulcan, toward the
making of his Pandora; for as many vices challeng part in him, as Cities did of
Homer: the true toffe-pot is deficient in no evil under the Sun, though few,
or scarce any, sufficiently discern and deplore the same, by reason of
custom, and the commonnesse of this sin.

Much of him has been said: O how much more might be said! I could carry you
a great way farther, and yet leave more of him before, then behind: for he is
like some putrid Grave, the deeper you dig, the fuller you shall find him,
both of smitch and horror. Yea, as in Hercule's Monster, there was still fresh
heads arising, one, after the cutting off of another: and as in Ezekiel's
Vision, after the fight of some abominations, still more: so, as the Lord said
to his Prophet, I should yet show you more abominations in him, then these; but
that it would crave a longer time, then I am willing to afford him, or my
Reader me, with patience.

If any marvel at this which has been discovered, he would marvel much more,
if all should be told; and say, it was a true report that we heard of his sin,
of our danger, of the Churches loss, but the one half was not told us. Yea,
if half so much were known to man, as God knows of him, how would all
drunkards hang down their heads for shame? or if we had but a window into his
breast (which Momus would have had in Vulcan's man) or that he had written on
his forehead what he thinks (as Tully so much wished) or that himself might
discern unpartially in an instant (as Mercury made Charon, in Lucian, by
touching of his eyes) what strange monsters would there appear to be? what
ugly, odious, hiddious feinds would represent themselves? O what swarms, what
litters, what legions of noisome lusts are couched in the stinking stye of a
drunkards heart? which I may rather wish, then hope to unbowell, or anatomize:
for man, says St. Augustine, is a great deep: one may better tell the hairs
of his head, then the thoughts of his heart; and God only has reserved it, as
a prerogative Royal to himself, exactly to search it to the bottom. Iem. 17.
9. 10.

Then what am I, that I should attempt to empty the same? when the Well is not
more deep, then my pitcher is narrow, little, brittle, my plummet light, my
line too short, and weak to sound it. For if I cannot see it, how should I
describe it? if I cannot know it, how should I make you know it?

Yet, as well as I can, I have deliniated this monster, given you (as in a
small Map) the Drunkard set forth in his colors, together with his skill,
will, and power in seducing, and by this you may guess at the residue: for as
huge as the Sea is, we may taste the faltnesse of it in a drop. If these be
their words and actions, what think you are the secrets of their hearts?
certainly, if all their thoughts did but break forth into action, they would
not come far short of the Devils them selves.

170.
IF any shall think I have been too bitter; The foulenes of this sin,
const^ained me to be so bitter.
let them pardon this holy impatience; and blame the foulness of this sin,
not my just vehemence; considering that the medicine is but fitted to the
disease; the wedge but proportionable to the timber; or (as I rather fear) my
expressions have too little heat in them, to unwarpe these crooked boards.

The harder and more knotty our hearts are, the harder and stronger must be the
blows that shall cleave them. That vvood which a single Iron will not rive,
must have a double wedge, to split it. Nothing but a Diamond will cut a
Diamond; and nothing but Gunpovvder will blovv out some kind of flame.

Cold diseases, must have hot remedies. Wounds more dangerous, require more
dolorous plasters. Neither is my aim, so much to stroke the ear, as to
stricke the conscience.

Besides, here is honey, as well as a sting; and those invectives, which are
most keen and sharp, do but resemble Ionathan's Arrows, which were not
shot to hurt, but to give warning: whereas their scoffs and slanders, may
fitly be resembled to Readiness Spear, which was darted on purpose, not to hurt
only, but to murder and destroy. More I might have said, less I could not.

Indeed, it is a sin more worthy the sword of justice, It is more worthy the
sword of justice, then the pen of an (...).
then the pen of an adversary: which had almost persuaded me (as one did
Luther, when he began to preach against the Popes usurpation and Tyranny) to
desist, so soon as I began: for mine own Reason suggested unto me (as
Luther's carnal friend to him) you had as good hold your peace; this vice is
so incurable, this disease so epidemicall, that you will never prevail against
it; get you to your study, and say, Lord have mercy upon us, and procure your
self no ill will.

But I considered, that all hearts are so in the hand of God, that Saul may
become an Apostle; and that there is no sin, but some have been reclaimed
from it; which gave me some hope.

And when I had got into it, with much ado (like a man into a crowd) I could
as hardly get out again: matter representing it self, like those waters in
Ezekiel, Chap. 47. which at the first were but ancle deep, and then knee
deep, and then up to the loins, which afterward did so rise and flow, that
they were as a River, which could not be passed over: yea, it fared with me
herein, as once it did with Elias his Servant, who at the first, and for a
great while, saw nothing; at the length a little cloud as big as a man's hand,
but by and by the Heavens were black with clouds and wind, after which
followed an exceeding great rain, 1 Kings, 18. For, as St. Augustine said of
the two Mites, a little money, but a great deal of charity: so may I of the
title of my book, viz. the Drunkards Character, the words are few, but the
matter contained in them is infinite: in which respect, I may liken them to
Gold, which is so ductile, that an ounce of it will be made to cover an Aker of
land.

171.
NOw why have I unmasked their faces? Written rather to keep men from
drunkenness, then in hope to reclaim any from it.
is it in hope to humble them? no, for I have acknowledged, yea proved, that
all the water in the Sea will not wash one of these Black-mores white: and
therefore to expect this, were to make my self ridiculous, like him that
carried his saddle, to shame his horse. Alas! the flesh, unto them that shall
perish, will be stronger then all my reasons. But I have done it for their
sakes, who are not yet infected with this drunken good-fellowship, and that the
others purpose may be infatuated; for vices true picture makes us vice detest.

I have done my best to increase your detestation of evil company, that you
may the rather love and make choice of good company: the end why I declame
against drunkenness, is, but (as the Orator once said) to keep men sober.

And what though some will mock a these threatenings, with those Sodo^ites?
Genesis 19. 9. 14. happily some one Lot, or other, will follow my counsel. A
reproof, says Solomon, enters more into him that has understanding, then an
hundred stripes into a fool, Pro. 17. 10. And what though every plant that is
watered, proves not fruitful? yet if God (who it may be has bidden me
speak) but accompany his word to the hearts of some, if but a few, if but one,
even thy self, be persuaded instead of loving this vice, to hate it, the
labor is not in vain; the gain of one soul is greater then the Indies.

Yea, it shall comfort me, that I have done my best to pluck up this
infectious deadly weed; that I have hopefully and administered unto hem, whom I
cannot cure; and that I have brought water enough to wash these Ethiopians
white, if it were in the power of water to do it.

Physicians say, if the disease be once known, the cure is half done: so if
we could see corruption in the true form, we would loath it. But as the
conjured Devil appears not to the Necromancer in hidious and frightfull
shapes, but in some familiar representation: so vice ever shrouds and shows it
self, in forms most delectable to flesh and blood: whereas here you have
drunkenness (in part) disapparelled of her robes, at least her face is
unvailed, to the end, the sight of it may cause a loathing; and that loathing,
a forsaking; that thou may know, abhor, and beware their allurements,
strive again the sin, shun all occasions of it, bewail their cases, that
are led captive to it, etc.

And nothing (as Anacharsis holds) will sooner reclaim a man from
drunkenness, then the seeing and remembering of a drunkards odious condition,
and beastly behavior: which made the Spartans ever bring their Slaves (when
drunk) before their children, that by beholding them, they might learn to
detest the vice.

Yea, the Persians, and Parthians, to this end kept; one, the picture of an
Epicure; the other, the picture of a Strumpet, always in their houses; and
found by experience, that nothing was so opperative against ebriety and
whoredom, as the continual seeing of those ugly and deformed descriptions;
which yet were amiable to this monster, in the judgment of an understanding
clarified.

Quest: But thou will ask, He the soberest and honestest man, which resembles
this drunkard least.
how thou shall use and apply this so sovereign, a remedy, for thy best
advantage.

Answ: Upon every occasion examine what the drunkard (here set forth) does, and
do thou the contrary: as Domitian was answered, demanding, how he might rule?
to be no less loved of the people, then his Predecessors in the Empire were
hated: for he is the most sober and honest man, that resembles this Drunkard
least: as Demaratus replied to an ill liver, that demanded of him, who was the
honestest man in Sparta? he that is most unlike thee.

Do but conne this lesson, it is enough. Nevertheless, least I should imitate
those, who kindle a fire under green wood, and leave it so soon as it but
begins to flame; turn over the leaf, you have complete Armor against evil
Society. For considering a vision of the sin, without a provision against it;
a discovery how they tempt, without directions how to avoid their temptations,
is not enough: as in the former Treatise, I have showed what drunkards do; so
in that which follows, I will show them and others what they should do.

FINIS.
COMPLETE ARMOR AGAINST EVIL SOCIETY.

By R. Iunius.

1 COR. 5. 11. If any man that is called a brother, be a fornicator, or
covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with
such an one eat not. LONDON, Printed by R. Badger, for George Latham, at the
Bishops-head in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1638.

Complete Armor, AGAINST EVIL SOCIETY.
172.
IN the former Treati^e I have applied my self to drunkards in showing how
injurious they are, to God. Their neighbors. Themselves.

For all that has been spoken, may be reduced to one of these heads. In this
which follows, I will wholly apply my self to the sober; I mean such, as
either are sober, or would be sober; such, as care more to be good men, and
good Christians, then good fellows*

Indeed, it remains that I should show the drunkard how he may leave his
drunke^^esse, and become, first, a sober man, and after that a found Christian:
but how hard a matter is it (as Cato speaks) to preach abstinence to the
belly, (...) drunkar^^ has been too long sick to be recouere^^
which has no ears, and will take no denial however the case stands?
Besides, the drunkard has been too long sick of this disease, to be
recovered: for the sound of the pot, with him, will drown al reprehension, all
admonition; even all the precepts, and sweet promises, all the menaces, all the
terrors of God, contained in the Bible, cannot move them, bnt he that is thus
filthy, will be filthy still, in spite both of Law and Gospel. The drunkard
will rather be confounded; then reformed: for (as if he were infected with the
poison of that Serpent, which is cold in the fourth degree mortal) he lackes
heat to be wrought upon; he has a brazen brow, a stiff neck, an
uncircumci^ed ear, a fat heart, yea, his heart is adamantine, as strong as a
stone, and as hard as a nether Mil-stone, Job 41. 15. a blinded eye, an
obdurate soul, etc.

Nay, he is dead in sense, and dead in soul, as I have proved; why then should
I touch that sore, which is all dead flesh? The sick man may hear, or feel,
the dead can neither: yea, when a man is dead, chafe him, rub him, bow him,
put Aqua-vitae into him, then take him by the hand, and bid him, walk, yet he
cannot stir the least joint; except the soul be restored, all persuasions
are in vain.

I have said enough to persuade them to a detestation of this vice, had they
the least spark of grace, or matter combustible in them. But, alas! how
should mud take fire? plants, and stones lie under the same beams of the
Sun, and are wet with the same moisture of the clouds, yet the plants spring
and grow, when there is no alteration of the stones. An Ethiopian enters black
into the Bath* and comes out again black. A good man is easily stopped in his
evil intendments, as David, in his purpose of murdering Nabal, but nothing
shall prevail with the desperately minded.

Nay, Nothing will do good upon a wisked ^eart.
if I may speak it with reverence, what means can God use, that shall be able
to convert such an one, which resolves against yielding? neither Word,
judgments, mercies, threatenings, promises, or an Angel sent from the dead to
warn him, Whereof ma^s (...)
shall prevail. The nine plagues shall not prevail with Pharaoh: the graves
openning, the dead arising, the Temple renting, the light of the Sun failing,
the Centurion confessing, etc. will do no good upon the Scribes and
Pharisies^yea, though Ahab be told from the Lord, that if he go to war, he
shall perish; yet he goes and speeds accordingly.

Again, let Malchus be smitten to the ground, with the very words of our
Savior, let him have his right ear cut off, and miraculously healed again by
him, whom he came to apprehend, yet he will be one that shall lead him bound to
Pilate: O Malchus, could thy ear be whole, and not thine heart broken, and
contrite with remorse, for rising up against so merciful and so powerful an
hand! let the Sodomites be all stricken blind, for contesti^g with Lot, and his
two Angels, they w^ll not cease seeking his door, to break it open, persist
they will, until they feel fire and brimstone about their ears, Genesis 19.
Yea, let God himself forbid Balaam to go with Bala^ks messengers, to curse
the children of Israel; yea, let an Angel stand in his way, with a drawn
sword to stop him; yea, let him hear his beast speak under him; yet he slights
all: who does not wonder, that this Magician wondered not! who would not look
that his hair should stand upright, his blood forsake his cheeks, that he
should alight from that strange kind of beast, and stand amazed at the miracle!
yet still he persists, and resolves desperately, as Esther did religiously, if I
perish I perish. What shall I say? Reason once debauched, Reason once deba^ched
is worse then brutishnes
is worse than brutishness. I see the savagest of all creatures, Lions,
Tigers, Bears, and. by an instinct from God, came to seek the Ark (as we see
Swine foreseeing a storm, run home crying for shelter) not one man do I
see* except Noah, and his family: so none but the well affected, whose hearts it
pleases the Lord to change, would follow my directions, should I take the
pains to prescribe: as they only followed Saul, when he was chosen King,
whose hearts God had touched, 1 Samuel 10. 26.

Indeed, though they refuse to hear, yet we must not altogether be silent.
The fountain casts out her water, though none come to drink: and though
Physicians come not to infected persons, that are past cure, yet they give
Antidotes to preserve the sound. Wherefore a word, and but a word to them of
the remedies; because others have well handled them already, were they as well
put in practice.

173.
IF there be any then that would relinquish this sin, The tran^ccendey of
the sin of drunken nesse.
that would mortify and subdue this abusive, excessive, unseasonable drinking;
that would leave this swinish swilling, which makes sick the Land, this
besotting sin, If any would re^^n quish this sin let them.
that takes away the heart, especially from God, against the first
commandment; this idolatrous sin, which makes men worship the belly, and
sacrifice upon their knees to others, instead of God, against the second Comman
dement; this blasphemous and execrable sin, that sets men so on swearing,
cursing etc. that makes a jest of Gods words, and his Name; that profane and
sacrilegious sin, which makes no difference of times or days, but most rages
on the Lords day; this mad and unruly sin, that knows neither Magistrate, nor
Minister, nor Father, nor King, nor Caesar; this murtherous sin, which kil^l
more then the sword; this adulterous sin, which fills all corners with whoredom
and uncleannes; this thievish sin, that steals away men's time, wealth, wits,
that robs the poor of their due; this slanderous sin, that loades the world
with tales and slanders, against the Host of the living God; this Atheistical
sin, that believes no more the threats and promises of God, then if some
Imposter, had spoken them; this hellish sin, which hardens and makes up the
heart against all repentings; this unnatural sin, that puts off al thoughts
of ones family, 1 Lay to heart the things delivered.
ones self, and sends him on grazing with Nebuc hadnezzar, this sin, this
vile sin thus transcendent; let him first dwell upon, and lay to heart the
things formerly delivered, that by this taste he may learn to detest the
drunkards qualities; 2. Avoid the causes formerly h^^dled.
let him remove and take heed of all the forenamed causes, (especially of
affecting popular applause, and reputation of good fellowship) that so the
causes being removed and taken away, the effect may cease: to unlearn evil, is
the best kind of learning.

Next observe these Rules, which I shall but touch; whereof some are general;
some more proper and peculiar. The general means are,

174.
FIrst, 3 Believe their state dangerous and that there is n^ way to ^elp, ^ut
by chang to the cou^ trary.
believe thine estate dangerous, and that there is but one way to help thee,
viz. to repent what thou have done, and never more to do what thou have
repented, not fostering one known sin in thy soul* for the only way to become
good, is, first, to believe that thou art evil; and by accusing our selves, we
prevent Satan; by judging our selves, we prevent God. And lastly, one hole in
a Ship may sink her, one Bullet may kill a man, as well as twenty: neither is
repentance without amendment any more then to pump, and never stop the leake.

2. Secondly, if thou be convinced, and resolvest upon a new course, 4. Be
constant and peremptery in their resolution.
let thy resolution be peremptory and constant. If with these premonitions,
the Spirit vouchsafes to stir in thy heart, by good motions, and holy
purposes to obey God, in l^tting thy sins go, as once the Angel in the Poole
of Bethesda, take hold of opportunity, and having ears to hear, harken what
the Spirit faith, and take heed you harden not again, as Pharaoh and the
Philistines did. Thou know Pharaoh had many purposes to obey God, in letting
the children of Israel go, but still hardens again, as often as he purposed,
until God had almost destroyed the whole Land; yea, after he had stood out
nine plagues, when death entered within his Palaces, he dismissed the people,
but presently after, in all have makes after them to fetch them back again;
yea, he could seem religious, when the fit took him; every great plague put
him into a Fever, and then he was godly of a sudden, O pray for me now, but
when the fit was over, Phara^h was Phar^^h again, as profane as ever; nine
times he began to relent, and nine times again he hardened his heart; but he
was never good egg nor bird, his beginning was naught, his proceeding worse,
and who could look for better at his later end: and the Philistines being five
times punished, five times repented themselves, and at last returned to their
old by as again, in which they remained constant, 1 Samuel 5. and 6. Chapters.

Again, Pilate had strong purposes and desires to let Christ go, yet at
lenght condemned him, to content the people, Luke 23. 22. to 25. The young man
in the Gospel resolved verily to follow Christ, but turned back and went away
sorrowful, when he heard the condition propounded, of giving that he had to
the poor, Mat. 19. 22. Judas was grieved for murdering Christ, yet no change
ensued, he after murdered himself; all these conceptions dyed, before they
came to the birth: therefore take heed, least it should fare so with thee. How
many thousand good motions of the Holy Ghost prove stillborne and abortive,
through our negligence, or be over-laid with our vanities? we use them, as
Julius Caesar did the Paper that concerned his own life, all the other
petitions he read, only that he put in his pocket, and never looked on it.

Men commonly regard the songs of Sion, as they do music, which they hear
at night in the streets, whiles they are in bed; perhaps they will step to the
window, and listen to it awhile, as if they liked it, but presently to bed
again.

O do not like the Israelites, who are said to hear God, and, in the same
Chapter, to worship the Calfe; quench not the Spirit, 1 These. 5. 19. If thou be
upon the mountain, look not back again upon Sodom, as Lot's wife did. If
thou be within the Arc, fly not out again into the world, as N^ah's Crow did.
If thou be well washed, return not again to the mire, as the Hog does. If
thou be clean purged, turn not again to thy filthy vomit, as the Dog does.
If thou be going toward the land of Canaan, think not of the fleshpots of
Egypt. If thou have set thy hand to the plow, look not behind thee; for better
not begin, then leave off having begun; better remain cold, then first be
hot, then lukewarm, and after key-cold again. For as in natural things, as
water that which has been a little warmed, becomes more cold, then if it
had never had any heat in it: so in spiritual, the evil spirit having once
forsaken a man, if he returns to that house, after it is empty, swept, and
garnished, he brings with him seven more spirits, worse then himself, and
the latter end of that man is worse then his beginning, Matthew. 12. 43. 45. Thus
it fared with Julian the apostate, and Judas the traitor, who suffering the
devil to enter into him, when he had newly received the Sacrament, he could
never afterward be driven out again: so if the devil enter intothee, after
thouhastreceived this warning, had these good purposes, and made these holy
resolutions, he will possess thee, like Judas, stronger then he did before.
Oh, it is a fearful thing to receive the grace of God in vain; and a
desperate thing, being warned of a Rock; wilfully to cast our selves upon it.

Wherefore, resemble not the Chelidony stone, which retains his virtue no
longer, then it is rubbed with gold; nor the Iron, which is no longer soft, then
it is in the fire. Be not like those which are Sea-sicke, who are much
troubled, while they are on shipboard, but presently well again, when they
come to shore; for that good, says Gregory, will do us no good, which is not
made good by perseverance.

175
3 NOw if thou intendest to hold out in thy good purposes, 5 Shame not to
confess^t by dislike of it in thy self and others.
and meanest to bring thy thoughts to the birth; thou must not be ashamed to
confess, with that honest theife upon the cross, even before thy companions
and fellow drunkards, that thou art not now the same man thou wast, both thy
mind and judgment is ch^nged, and so shall thy practice, God assisting thee;
nay, thou wi^^ not only forsake thy sin, but their company too, except they
will forsake their old customs of drinking, and scoffing, and jeering at
sobriety and goodness.

And so doing, thou may perchance win thy Brother, even as that penitent
wanton, in St. Ambrosse, did his old love; who when she courted him, according
to her accustomed manner, and wondered at his overmuch strangeness, saying, why
do you not know who I am? answered, yes, I know you are still the same woman,
but I am become another man, I am not I now, neither would You be You any
longer, if ye knew so much as I do.

4 But if yet they persist, 6 Fly evil company.
and seem incorrigible, fly their company for fear of infection, least it
happen with thee, as once it did with a chaste person among Penelopes suitors,
who went so often with his friend, till in the end he was caught himself: for
if thou keep them company, there is no possibility of thy holding out to the
end, though thou should for a time: as a man may make some progress in a
good way, and yet return before he is half at his journeys end, as Saul kept
himself well for two years, Judas for three years, and (as it is storied)
Nero for five years, yet all fell into damnable wickedness, scarce three
worse in the world. But of this more in it is proper place.

Besides, how hard a thing is it for thee, a coward, to show thy dislike of
this sin in some companies, where thou shall be scoff't at thy self, if thou
dislike their drinking, and scoffing at others?

Fifthly, another thing which I had need to advise thee of, 7 Take heed of
delays.
is, to take heed of delays; for to leave sin, when sin leaves us, will
never pass for true repentance: besides, if the evil spirit can but persuade
thee to defer it until hereafter, he knows it is all one, as if thou had
never purposed to leave thy sin at all; as you have it largely proved,
Sections, 151. 152. 153.

Sixthly, 8 Omit not to pray for divine assistance.
omit not to pray for the assistance of God's spirit, to strengthen thee in thy
resolution of leaving this sin. St. Ambrosse calls prayer, the key of Heaven;
yet prayer, without answerable endeavor, is but as if a wounded man did desire
help, yet refuses to have the sword pulled out of his wound.

Seventhly, be diligent in hearing God's Word, 9 Be diligent in hearing.
which is the sword of the Spirit, that kills our corruptions, and that
unresistable cannon-shot, which battereth and beats down the strong holds of
sin.

Eighthly, 10 frequent in the use of the Lord's Supper.
be frequent in the use of the Lord's Supper, wherein we daily renew our
covenant with God, that we will forsake the Devil, and all his works of
darkness.

Ninthly, 11 Meditate what God has done for thee.
ponder and meditate on Gods inestimable love toward us, who has not spared
to give his Son to death for us, and the innumerable benefits, which,
together with him, he has plentifully bestowed upon us, both in temporal and
spiritual things; say unto the Lord, what shall I render unto thee for all thy
benefits, but love my Creator, and become a new creature.

Tenthly, 12 Meditate on that union we have with Christ, etc
meditate on that union, which is between Christ and us, whereby we become
members of his glorious body, and so shall we stand upon our spiritual
reputation, and be ashamed to dishonor our Head, by drawing him, as much as in
us lies, into the communication of this swinish sin: consider that our
bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, the which we shall exceedingly
dishonor, if, by drinking and swilling, we make them to become like wine
vessels.

Eleventhly, 13 Consider that the Lord be^oldeth thee whersoever thou art.
consider that the Lord beholds thee in all places, and in every thing thou
do; as the eyes of a well drawn picture, are fastened on thee, which way
soever thou turnest; much more, while in a brutish manner thou lie wallowing
in this sin; and consider him as a just judge, who will not let such gross
vices go unpunished.

Twelftly, beever, 14 often think of the day of judgment.
or at least often thinking of the last and terrible day of Judgment when we
shall all be called to a reckoning, not only for this sin, but for all other
our sins, which this shall occasion, to our very words and thoughts.

And lastly, if thou receivest any power against this great evil, forget not
to be thankful; and when God has the fruit of his mercies, he will not spare
to sow much, where he reapes much.

176.
More especially, (...) the heinousness of this sin, and the evils which
accompany it
that thou may master and subdue this abominab^e sin, does but set before
thee in a general view, the heinousness thereof, and the manifold evils and
mischiefs, which do accompany it, of which I have already spoken, as, that it
is a vice condemned by God and men, Christians and infidells; that thereby we
grievously offend God, by making our bellies our god, by unfiting and disabling
our selves for his service, by abusing his good creatures, which with a
pleantifull hand he has bestowed upon us, the necessary use whereof, many
better then we want; that thereby we sin in a high degree against our
neighbors generally, and particularly against the whole Church, and common
wealth, strangers, and familiar acquaintance, and most of all against our own
family; that hereby we most grievously sin against our selves, by making us
unfit for our calings, and for the performance of all good duties, by
disgracing our profession, and bringing our selves into contempt, by making our
selves the voluntary slaves of this vice, by impovershing our estate, and
bringing upon us want and beggary, by infatuating our understandings, and
corrupting our wills, and affections, by deforming, disabling, weakening, and
destroying our bodies, and bringing our selves to untimely death, by excluding
our selves out of the number of Christ's members, by quenching the gifts of the
Spirit, and strengthening the flesh and lusts thereof, by causing our souls to
be possessed with final impenitency, which is inseparably accompanied with
eternal damnation.

Also remember, that as in it self it is most sinful, so it is also the cause
of, almost, all other sins; as of the manifold and horrible abuses of the
tongue, of many wicked and outrageous actions, and particularly, of those
fearful sins of murder and adultery.

Also, call to mind that as it is the cause of sin, so also of many heavy and
grievous punishments, as making a man liable to a fearful woe, and Gods heavy
curse, subjecting his name to infamy, his state to beggary, his body to
diseases, infirmities, deformities, and immature death, his soul to senseless
sottishness, and depriv^ng the whole man of the joys of Heaven, enters him
into the possession of eternal hellish torments: and this will be a good
means, to make thee moderate thy greedy desires, mortify thy carnal
affections, and curb thy unruly appetite, by putting a knife to thy thro^^e,
as Solomon advises, saying, I could, but I will not take more then is good, or
fit.

Yea, the consideration of these things, and of the woeful condition that
drunkards are in, will provoke thee to hate their opinions, to strive against
their practice, to pity their misguiding, to neglect their censures, to labor
their recovery, and to pray for their salvation. For, O how ugly does this
monster appear to the eye of that soul, which has forsaken it! how does she
hate her selve, for loving so foul, so filthy a fiend! for to an understanding
rectified, the drukard is a strange Chimaera, more prodigious then any monster,
being etc. The Drunkard a strange Chimaera, more prodigious then any Monster,
being, in Visage a Man, but a Brotheus. in Heart, a Swine. in Head, a Cephalus.
in Tongue, an Aspe. in Belly, a Lump. in Appetite, a Leech. in Sloth, an
Ignavus. The Drunkard a strange Chimaera, more prodigious then any Monster,
being a Ierffe for Excessive devouring. a Goat for Lust. a Siren for Flattery.
a Hyaena for Subtilty. a Panther for Cruelty. The Drunkard a strange Chimaera,
more prodigious then any Monster, being in Envying, a Basiliske. in Antipathy
to all good, a Lexus. in Hindering others from good, a Remora. in Life, a
Salamander. in Conscience, an Ostrich. in Spirit, a Devil 1. in surpassing
others in sin 2. in tempting others to sin 3. in drawing others to perdition,
even the most despicable piece of all humanity, and not worthy to be reckoned
among the Creatures which God made.

177.
SEcondly, 16 Abstain from drunken company, for all depends upon t^^^.
if thou would reclaim thy self from this vice, have a special care to
refrain the company of this drunken Route, Pro. 23. 20. 1 cor. 5 11. who not
only make a sport of drunkenness, but delight also to make others drunk: I
say (as Christ said) beware of men, Math. 10. 17. for he that goes into wicked
company, will come wicked out, at least worse then he went in. It is rare, if
we deny not Christ, with Peter, in Caiaphas his house: with Solomon, it is
hard having the Egyptian, without her Idols: whereupon, the Fuller, in the
Fable, would not have the Colliar to live in his house, least what he had made
white the other should smut and collow: yea, be as wary, and as wise as a
Serpent, to keep out and get out of their company, but as innocent as a Dove,
if it be po^^ible, while thou art in it, and can not choose; remembering
always, that they are but the Devils deputies, yea, humane Devils, as once
our Savior called Peter (being isntrumental to Satan) satan himself, get
thee behind me, Satan, Matthew. 16. 23. they that will have his trade, must have
his name too. Now by thy observing, or not observing this Rule, it will
appear, whether there be any hope of thy reclaiming, for all depends upon
this; yea, could the most habituated, incorrigible, cauterized drunkard, that
is even dead in this sin, but for sake his ill company, I should not once
doubt of his recovery; for do but drive away these unclean birds from the
carkasle, a million to a mite the Lord has breathed into his nosthrills again
the breath of life, and he is become a living soul.

Thirdly and lastly, 17 abstain from drunken places.
abstain from drunken places, which are even the nurseries of all riot,
excess, and idleness, making our land another Sodom, and furnishing yearly
our Jayles and Gallouses (far be it from me, to blame a good calling, to
accuse the innocent in that calling, I know the Lord has many in the world in
these houses, but) sure I am, too many of them are even the dens and shops,
yea, thrones of Satan, very sinkes of sin, which, like so many
common-shores, or receptacles, refuse not to welcome and encourage any in the
most loathsome pollutions they are able to invent, and put in ctise, Ad^onition
to sellers of drink, Churchwardens, Constables etc.
who (if there were any hope of prevailing) would be minded of their
wickedness, Ad^^nition to sellers of drink, Churchwardens, Constables etc.
in entertaining into their houses, encouraging and complying with these
traitors against God, and of their danger in suffering so much impiety to rest
within their gates: for if one sin of theft or of perjury, is enough to ^ot
the rasters, to grind the stones, to level the walls and roof of any house
with the ground, Zac. 5. 4. what are the oaths, the lies, the thefts the
whoredoms, the murders, the numberless and namelesse abominations, that are
committed there. But should I speak to these* I should but speed as Paul at
Ephesus, I should be cried down, with, great is Diana, after some one
Demetrius had told the rest of this occupation, Sir^, ye know that by this
craft we have our wealth; surely, if fear of having their Signs pulled down,
their Licenses called in, etc. cannot prevail, it little boo^es me to speak.

Only to you Churchwardens, Constables, and other Officers, that love the
Lord, the Church, the State, your selves, and people, help the Lord, the King,
and his laws against this mighty sin; Present it, indite it, smite it, every
one shoot at it, as a common enemy, do what you can to suppress and prevent
it.

Tell me not, he is a friend, a Gentleman, such an ones kinsman that offends;
for he is better, and greater, and nearer to you that is offended; learn to
fear, to love, and obey your Maker and Savior, your gracious Protector; yea,
learn this Normane distinction, when William the first censured one that was
both Bishop of Baieux and Earl of Kent, his Apology to the plaintiff popeling
was, that he did not meddle with the Bishop, but the Earl: do you the like,
let the Gentleman escape, but stock the drunkard; meddle not with your friend
and kinsman, but for all that, pay the drunkard; or if you do not to your
power, you shall have Ahab's wages, his faults shall be beaten upon your
backs, 1 King. 20. 42.

But most of all are they to be desired, who are within the commission of
peace, in God's name, whose servants they profess themselves to be, to
remember him, themselves* their country, their oaths; and to bend their
strength and power against this many headed monster, that they will purge the
country, much more their own houses, of this pernicious and viperous brood:
yea, if there be any love of God, any hatred of sin, any zeal, any courage,
any conscience of an oath, away with drunkenness out of your houses, Towns,
Liberties, balk none, bear with none that offend: say they be poor, in whose
houses the sin is practiced; it is better one or two should loose their
gain, than Towns of men should loose their wits, their wealths, their souls.
Oh beloved, did you hear, and see, and smell, and know what is done in some
one Tavern, or Ale house in the Land; you would wonder that the earth could
bear the house, or the Sun endure to look upon it. But alas! how many of
these houses be there, in some one Town! how many of these Towns, in some
one Shiere: and so upward!

You often complain of bastardies, Sheep-stealers, robbers, quarrellers, and
the like: will you be eased of these diseases? believe it, these gather into
the Alehouse, as the humors do into the stomach, against an Ague-fit; take
them there, drive them thence with some strong Physic, and you heal our Land,
at once of infinite distempers.

178.
ANd so much to make the sick whole: To keep ^ut of this (...) of the devil
and drunkkards.
now to preserve the whole from being sick of this almost irrcoverable disease.
Would thou keep out of this snare of the devil and drunkards? consider in
the first place, 1. See the danger and know their ^ime.
that out of the premises arises this conclusion: how we live in so corrupt an
air, that we need many Antid^tes to keep us from being infected: for lay
altogether, and the sum is, that Satan and his instruments; are ever, and
every way practicing to lift us out of virtues seat, that we are compassed
round with temptations, Some men age^ts for Christ, others for Satan; but
Sathansinstruments have many advantages above Gods servents is wining sou^^.
even as the Sea compasses the earth, watching where it may conveniently get
in; here, kissing the banks with flattering waves; there, swelling against it
with roaring billows; for, if the devil can not win men to hell, as he
seems an Angel of light, he will strive to accomplish it, as he is a spirit
of terror, and what he cannot do by himself, he will by his instruments,
wicked men.

More particularly. Consider that every man has two great and importunate
suitors for his soul, virtue and vice, whose agents are good and evil men;
those that are agents for virtue, leigers for Christ, are chiefly his faithful
Ministers; their commission, is the Word: the weapons of their warfare, their
tongues; the only means they use, is, to entreat and beseech men, by the
mercies of Christ, that they will be reconciled unto God; the only motive to
induce men hereunto, is, that if they will part with the sinful pleasures of
this life, they shall have a glorious kingdom prepared for them in heaven,
which few have faith to believe, and, of them which do, fewer will undergo
those grievous temptations and persecutions, which usuaully accompany the
profession of the Gospel.

For though the Gospel brings remission of sin, and remission of sin
occasions all true joy and peace internal, and eternal peace with God, and
peace of conscience; yet our war with Satan, the World, and the Flesh, is
wonderously increased thereby; which makes diverse, that seem to be of Christ's
band: forsake him: for with many, like mutinous Soldiers, no longer pay, no
longer fight: as that desperate mercenary said, he came not to fight for his
country, he came to fight for his money; like the Law-logick, and the Switzers,
they are for his service, that gives them the best ready wages: here Satan
takes his hint to usurp upon the children of perdition, religion bri^gs
crosses, Ecclesia est haeres crucis; they find their devotion answered with
tribulation, and cannot be quiet, because they seem to be good. Now steps in
the Devil, why should you buy misery with want, when as you may want misery?
why will you embrace certain cares, in hope of uncertain comforts? why do
you take pains to be poor, when you may be rich with case? Here they, that
have not the grace, nor the face to give the devil the lie, throw the plow
into the hedge, and will not wait till harvest, but lay hold on these new
offers of the world, and for a mess of pottage sell their patrimony.

Whereas on the other side,, those that are agents for vice, factors for the
devil, have diverse and sundry ways to prevail; whether of policy, to allure
and persuade; or of strength, to compel and enforce us to yield. Satan, as
you have heard, has many strings to his bow, that if some break the rest may
hold; many trains of powder, some likely to take fire; yea, he is like some
cunning Enginere, that can invent new instruments, according to the present
occasion, and inventeth all he can, and puts in practice all that he inventeth;
and when old tricks of cheating can do no good, Satan and his instruments
will find out new* O the many advantages that Satan's instruments have, above
Gods servants, both in wooing and winning to sin by fair means, and in
keeping such as they have won, and likewise in compelling and enforcing by
foul! you have seen sundry of them, in the former Treatise: I will show you
yet more.

179.
AS for winning by fair means: first, An evil suggestion is more ready at
hand then a good.
how ready at hand is an evil suggestion? good counsel is like unto
Well-water, that must be drawn up with a Pump or Bucket; ill counsel is like
to conduit-water, which if the cock be but turned, runs out alone.

Secondly, 2 We are more prone to evil^^en good.
how easy a Rhetoric draws us to the worse? yea, it is hard not to do evil
uninvited: even Virgil a heathen could say, that it was an easy thing in sin
to go on amain, and with much facility, to descend into hell which is below,
as a man that goes down a hill, cannot choose but run; or at least, one man
has more power to pull him down, then half a dozen the contrary; but to go
forward in goodness and virtue, to ascend so steepy a hill as heaven which is
above, is hard and difficult; yea, we had need be drawn by many strong helps;
for in this case we resemble the Spider, which can descend with a ladder of her
own making, be the place never so low, but cannot ascend one inch, without
some prop; or rather a very stone, which descends naturally, is not raised but
by violence. -- facilis descensus --
Sed revocare gradum --
down stream the Boat goes fast enough, to stop it is all the cunning, before
it strike on a Shelfe. Those things which the ground naturally produces of it
self, she soon and easily brings forth, and that in abundance; you shall find
your furrows full of Cockle and Darnell, though you never sow them; but what
is sown, not without much labor, and that sparingly, because she is to those
a mother, to these a step-dame.

And commonly it fares with counsels as it does with meats; those which are
least wholesome, are most requested: and the faction of evil is so much
stronger in our nature, then that of good, that every least motion prevails
for the one, scarce any suit for the other; and seldom shall we see truth so
successful as falsehood. Whence it was, that Theodota and Calisto, two
beautiful harlots, could each of them boast, that they excelled S^crates; for
that they, when they pleased, could draw away by their allurements, his
disciples and auditors from him, whereas he could not, with all his great
wisdom and learning, draw from them any of their lovers? whose answer was. No
marvel, for I draw, with an unpleasing hook, to virtue, whose way is
difficult and hard; whereas you draw, with a pleasing With of down to vice,
which is easy, and men are naturally of themselves prone to it.

180.
THirdly, 3. The world begins with milk, ends with a bammer: Christ keeps back
the good wine until afterward
the world like Iael, beginns with milk, and ends with an hammer; whereas
Christ keeps back the good wine until afterward, and makes his servants
break their fast with the rod. Yea, he that offered our Savior all the
kingdoms of the world, and the glory thereof, is ready to yield a man more
then he shall require, as the same Iael did Sisera; for, as when he asked her
water, she gave him milk: when he only desired shelter, she made him a bed:
and when he begged but the protection of her Tent, she covered him with a
mantle, giving him more then he asked, but withal, more then he expected: so
deals Satan and the world with a poor soul. The divill is like a late
Emperor of Turkey, who married his own daughter to a Basha on the one day, and
then, after a night pleasure, sent for his head the next morning: for here, he
is a tempter: hereafter a tormenter; And herein Christ's serv^nts and the devils
differ: this life is our hell, and their heaven: the next shall be their hell,
and our heaven, Psalm. 17. 14. Matthew. 5. 4. Luke 6. 21. John 16. 20.

Indeed, our outward afflictions here are so sweented with inward consolation,
that this world may rather be called our purgatory: for a Christian here, in
respect of his manifold troubles, and sweet consolation in christ, seems half
in hell and half in heaven, as Petrus Tenorius, Archbishop of Toledo, caused
King Solomon to be painted upon the walls of his Chapel, after he had a long
time considered the weighty reasons on each side, whether he were damned, or
saved: or as the Papists feigned Erasmus to be, for that he was half a
Protestant, half a Roman Catholic: but this inward consolation is hidden to
the world.

Fourthly, 4. The devil can delude their fancy and judgment of natural men.
the devil and his instruments can so delude the fancy and judgment of a
natural man, that as he sees nothing desirable in a religious life, so he
shall give no credit to, nor believe any thing that the godly shall affirm. As
for example. Let us tell one, whom they have converst withal, how sweet a
religious life is, and how far the light of God's countenance, the peace of
conscience, and joy in the Holy ghost; does surpass all earthly felicity; he
will not believe there is any such thing, because it transcends his conceit:
as a poor laboring man in the country said to his neighbor, he believed not
there was any such sum, as a thousand pounds of money, though rich men talked
so much of it: they will believe no more, then what comes within the compass
of their five senses, for they are all the Articles of their faith. But they
are ill discoverers, that think there is no land, when they can see nothing but
Sea. Yea, viewing the godly but with natures eye, they think both God and
nature envies them of all others, and that most men are deluded with a
poisonous lie, in making only the virtuous happy.

But in case we say with Ste^en, that we see Christ Jesus sitting at the right
hand of God; these blind wizards are ready to throw stones at us, for
confessing what we see, or for seeing what is hid from them.

Again, let them see a man careful to avoid the ginnes and snares of Satan,
which are laid in every place to take his soul; they will judge and call him a
scrupulous fellow, for watching against that, which they neither see nor fear;
as wonder is the daughter of ignorance. Indeed, as country men will rather
believe the reports of travelers, then go to see it: so they will believe
these things, rather then be troubled, or much trouble themselves about them.

Again, let God, by his Ambassadors, offer them the Kingdom of heaven upon
fair and easy terms, they will none of it, yea, they will slight it: as the
golden Indies was offered to diverse Princes, and they vilipended it, because
they never saw it, yet the wealth was worth their labor, that undertook it:
and so in all other cases, worldly hearts (especially being thus deluded) can
see nothing in actions of zeal, but folly and madness; until we be borne
again, we are like Nicodemus, who knew not what it was to be borne again,
John 3. Until we become zealous our selves, we are like Festus, who thought
zeal, madness, Act. 26. until we be humble our selves, we are lie Michal,
who mocked David for his humility, and thought him a fool, for dancing before
the Arc, 2 Samuel 6. 16 yea, it was true then, and it is true now, and it will
be true always, which S. Paul observes, 1 Cor. 1. 18. that to such as shall
perish, or are, for the present, in a perishing condition; religion, shall
seem foolishnes; piety has no relish to a brutish man's palate, but
distasteful; and indeed, how should they like the food, which they never
tasted, or be in love with the party of whom they have not the least knowledge?
For, as to speak is only proper to men: so to know the secrets of the kingdom
of heaven, is only proper to believers. Sense, is a mere beasts; reason, a
mere man's: divine knowledge, is only the Christians.

181.
FIfthly, 5. Forestal them see with prejudice that they shall resolve against
being religious.
the World and the Devil can so forestall men's judgments with prejudice
against Gods people and goodness, that they shall resolve never to be religious,
so long as they live: as how many, by reason of that general contempt, which
the devils instruments cast upon religion, are both hindered from good, and
hardened in evil, to their own ruin and destruction? 1 Pet. 2. 7, 8. Yea,
this makes them become more impudent, stupid, and insensible then Salom^n's
drunkard, for, as touching admonition, they are like the deaf Adder; tell them
what God says in his word, they will stop the ear with the tongue, by
engrossing all the talk; neither is it the highest eloquence of the best
Preacher; can make him fit for heaven, for they resolve against yield ng, and
words are vagabonds, where the perswader has an evil opinion of the
perswader. Oh this is a difficult devil to be cast out even like that we
read of, Mat. 17. 16. for as all the Disciples could not cast out that Devil,
no more can all the Preachers this: yea, certainly where Satan has once set
this his porter of prejud ce, though Christ himself were on earth, that soul
would never admit him, take no good from him, no, not so much as think well of
him, as we see in the Scribes and Pharisees, who made an ill construction of
whatsoever he did or spoke; for when he wrought miracles, he was a Sorcerer;
when he cast out devils, it was by the power of devils; when he reproved
sinners, he was a seducer; when he received sinners, he was their favourer;
when he healed the sick, he was a breaker of the Sabbath, etc. And even so it
fares with these men: for, as an ill stomach turns all it receives into ill
humors: or, as the Spider converts every thing she eats: and the Viper every
thing she touches into poison: so they, whatsoever they hear, or see in the
godly. In fine, as Beggars with Scumea make their own flesh raw: so these with
prejudice make their own eyes blind: whereby it fares directly with such an
one, as it does with the Serpent Regulus, no charming can charm him: for
prejudice, 6. If gentle persuasions will no^ (...) they will comp^d by violence
like the goddess Adrasteia (or Sorceres rather) takes memory, wit, and grace,
from all that entertain it, and leaves them in Pyrrhon's condition, who would
not believe what his eyes saw, and his ears heard.

Sixthly, they have a great advantage of Gods servants in this, when they have
tried in vain all fair means, they can use violence; as it is the use and
manner of all those that are agents for vice, factors for the devil, first to
use gentle persuasion, but if that will not serve, compulsion. They handle us,
as once that Praetor did a Soldier, who to make him renounce Christ, first (as
Jerome notes) imprisoned him in his own house, allows him a chamber well
furnished, soft lodging, dainty cheer, wine, music, all delights; when this
would not do (yet Lord, how many are thus prevailed vvithall to leave their
Savior) then he casts him into a dark dungeon, loades him with irons,
starves him with the hungry allowance of husks and puddle water; when
nothing would do, he burns him: or as Bonner handled the Martyrs, whose
custom was, first to allure them with fair promises of honors, favors,
preferments, etc. if that would not do, send them to Smithfield; for as bloody
as he was, he had sometimes in his mouth butter and oil, as well as fire and
faggot.

182.
Again, Again, as in getting, so in keeping such ^s they have got.
secondly, as Satan's instruments have great advantage of Gods servants in
getting, so no less in keeping such as they have got, both in regard of
pleasure, peace, freedom, and many the like privileges, which the worldling
has above Gods people.

1. In regard of pleasure, first, 1 In regard of pleasure.
whereas others that turn to God, bar themselves of such delights, and
pleasures, as here they might enjoy; these may satisfy themselves and their
lusts to the full, live at ease and pleasu^e, and give their affections the
full swing; yea, and be so applauded for it, as if, with the people of China,
they of all others saw with two eyes: both which makes them like their
condition so well, that they would not change upon any terms: and hence it
was that many Scholars of every Sect become Epicures, but none of the Epicures
became of other Sects, as one objected to Archelaus. True it is, the godly,
even here, have more true joy and pleasure, then the most happy worldling
alive: but none can know the spiritual joy and comfort of a Christian, but he
that lives the life of a Christian, John 7. 17. as none could learn the
virgins song, but they that sang it, Revel. 14. 3. no man can know the peace
of a good conscience, but he that keeps a good conscience; no man knovves
what that hid Mannah, and white stone with a new name written in it is,
but they that receive the same, Rev. 12. 17.

The World can see a Christians outside, but the raptures of his soul, the
ravishing delights of the inward man, and joy of his spirit, for the remission
of his sins and the effusion of grace, with such like spiritual privileges,
more glorious then the states of Kingdoms, are as a covered mess to the
vvorldling, and so abates nothing of the advantage which Satan and his
instruments have, above Gods servants in winning souls, and Keeping such as
they have vvon.

Secondly, 2 In regard of freedom.
in regard of freedom they have a free scope and liberty to do or say what
they please; whereas Gods people are restrained, even in their very thoughts.

Yea, many times in things of an indifferent nature: as even actions of
indifferency, when once they are felt to trench upon the conscience, lay deep
obligations upon the soul, even whiles they are most slighted by careless
hearts; there being no less difference in consciences, then stomachs, of
which some will digest the hardest meats, and turn over substances not in
their nature edible, whiles others surfeit of the lightest food, and complain
even of dainties. Everygracious hear is in some measure scrupulous and finds
more safety in fear, then in presumption.

O what a poor slave do they hold the man of a tender conscience! they dare
swear and blaspheme, why? their tongues are their own; whereas we fear an
oath. They dare spend their time in dalliance, and after make it their glory;
we dare not make the members of Christ the limms of an Harlot, fearing least
Heaven should be shut against us for the sin, and Hell swallow us for
boasting of the sin. They dare deny any fact, and wager lies, with that
Grandfather of lies and liars; we dare not tell an untruth, though it were to
save our selves, to relieve the poor, to honor God. They dare drink
themselves into beasts; we dare not, least we should never be recovered again
unto Men. They dare oppress the poor, revenge all wrongs done them, etc. we
dare not so reproach our Maker, nor wring Gods weapon out of his hand. They
dare sin God in the face, and presume upon his patience; we fear him as a
consuming fire. In fine, they dare hazard the breaking of their necks; we would
not willingly break our shins.

183.
THirdly, 3 In regard of peace, and that
in regard of peace. 1 with Satan. 2 with the world. 3 with themselves.


First, 1 With Sath^^.
they have far more peace with Satan then Gods people, for he fights not
with his own subjects or soldiers, as has largely been proved; yea, well
may these have more peace then others, seeing the barques of their souls are
rowed with far less labor (having the wind of Satan's temptations, and the
tide of their own affections to drive them) then the other, who row against
both.

2 In regard of their peace with the World, the World loves her own, 2 With
the World
but hates all that Christ has chosen out of it, Ioh. 15. 19. and this is a
strong tie to flesh and blood, though our Savior calls this a cursed
condition, Luke 6. 26.

Yea, how does the indifferent worldling applaud himself therein; together
with his own discretion and mediocrity; for seeing this man, vexed for his
zeal; that other, hated for his knowledge; a third, persecuted for the
profession of his says, etc. he says within himself, welfare a quiet
ignorance: so his body is but like a lump of scarce moving earth, and his
soul a standing puddle in the midst of it.

3 They have far more peace (if it may be called peace) with their own
hearts then the Godly; 3 With themselves
for their consciences being either brawned with the custom of sin, or cast
into a dead sleep by Satan, they feel not those perilous wounds which sin
impaires them withal: yea, being past feeling, they can with more ease digest
the hardest and foulest offense, then the stomach of an Estridge can digest
Iron; whereby they esteem of their sins, as Paul speaks of an Idol, that
it is nothing in the world: as for oaths, yea, the sin of blasphemy, it is a
very mite, a moate, a nothing; in a word, how sick soever their souls be, I
mean, how wicked and detestable soever their lives, yet they have healthful
consciences, which never complain, or once pain them, no, they hear not a
Syllable of ill language from them, they never check them, do they what they
will, neither did they ever doubt in all their lives, or were once troubled in
mind or conscience, They think themselves more happy in serving the Devil then
others in serving of God.
as many scrupulous fools are; and hereupon, they think themselves more happy
in serving the Devil, then others in serving God: as those apostate Jews in
Egypt did, Ier. 44. 16. to 19. Alas! what should they fear? they prosper in
their wickedness, they do what they list, and the Lord lets them alone;
therefore they think he is pleased with them, and with their actions, and that
which way soever they take, the end of their journey must needs be salvation;
yea, this makes them think they do wondrous well: as Dionysius, when he had
dispoyled an Idols temple of all the gold therein, and finding the winds
favorable in his Navigation, applauds himself, saying, see how the gods
approve of Sacrilege; according to that in the Psalms, he that makes gain,
blesses himself, Psalm. 10. 3.

Besides, they have good hearts and meanings, as how common is it with them to
talk of good meanings, when they are the worst doers in a country; yea, when
in their practice they embrace all moral virtues in their contraries; yea,
though they make not such a show to the world, they have as good a heart as the
proudest, and hope to be saved as well as the best, and so let who will say to
the contrary, they are sure to go to Heaven, as straight as a Sickle; and so
they shall, for they shall go into Heaven (if they amend not their lives) when
the Sodomites come out of Hell; and in the mean time their souls are so much
the sicker, by how much less they are sensible of pain; they were wretched,
if they felt their danger; more wretched, being they feel it not, as once
Tully said of Anthony.

184.
THirdly, 3 They are better proficients then Gods people. 1 Because* the Devil
blinds them and (...) shows the sweetness of fin hides the thought of
punishment.
as Satan has many advantages above Gods servants, in getting Disciples, and
keeping such as he has gotten; so, no less in making them proficients in
evil: for it cannot be denied, but Satan's servants thrive more under him in
sin, then Gods servants can do in grace: the reason is this, Satan, who is
the god of this World, blinds the minds of all unbeleivers, that the light of
the glorious Gospel of Christ should not shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4. 3. 4. Ephesians.
2. 2. 2 These. 2. 9. 10. for as Satan is the Prince of darkness, so he rules
in the darkness of the understanding, dealing with wicked men, as Faulkeners
do with their Hawks; who, that they may carry them quietly, and do what they
list unto them, first blind their eyes with a hood.

Hercules when he stole away the golden Aples from the Hesperides (who, as the
Poets feign, had an Orchard of them) first, slew the Dragon that kept them:
the keeper and watch of our souls is the understanding; now if Sampson's eyes
be once pulled out, the Philistines may bind him with fetters, put him in prison,
make him grind at the mill, make him a subject of scorn, and what not? If the
Raven can but first pick out the poor sheep eyes, he may easily prey upon
the whole body: if the Eagle can but throw dust in the Hearts eyes, she makes it
nothing afterward to kill him: if the Dragon have once bereaved the Elephant of
sight, his whole body easily becomes a prey to his fury: all these, namely, the
Philistines, the Raven, the Eagle, and the Dragon, are fit emblems of Satan,
who first seizes upon the eye of the understanding, and then preyes freely
upon the rest of the soul.

And indeed, what may not an enemy do to him which wants his sight? If the
Assyrians be once blinded, how easily may one lead a thousand of them, into
the midst of any Samaria, even to their ruin? 2 King. 6. 18. 19. Yea, how
impossible is it for a man, not to ruin himself, when he wants his sight?
Polyphemus, so soon as Ulysses had pulled out his eye, runs reeling and rushing
against every rock, until he had dashed out his brains. So much darkness as
is left in the soul, so much room is there left for Satan to deceive us.
While the candle is out, it is safe for rogues to play their tricks in the
dark. Indeed, he will afford his servants any degree of knowledge, whether it
be divine, humane, or mundane, so it be not a practical, experimental, and
saving knowledge: he will allow them an understanding, like that of the Scribes
and Pharisees, which was enough to condemn them, but not to save them: yea,
let the Devil, like Nahash, only obtain our right eyes of faith to be pulled
out, it fufficeth, he cares for no more, he will then let us enjoy our peace,
our pleasure, and what other privileges we do desire.

It is more true of virtue and God's truth, then it was of that Creetish
beauty, no man loved her, that never saw her; no man ever saw her, but he loved
her: neither could concupiscence bring forth sin, without the consent of
Reason; and this would never consent, so long as the eyes are open. Wherefore
the Devil to utter his damned commodities, deals as some tradsmen about
their bad wares, puts out the true lights, and sets up false lights in their
stead. If the light of knowledge might freely shine in the soul, Satan's
suggestions would soon make him ashamed, and vanish with all his works of
darkness. If temptations might be but turned about, and shown on both sides,
the kingdom of darkness would not be so populous. But when the Tempter sets
upon any poor soul, he shows the bait, hides the hook; all sting of
conscience, wrath, judgment, torment is concealed, as if they were not;
nothing may appear to the eye, but pleasure, profit, and seeming happiness in
the enjoying of our desires; those other woeful objects are reserved for the
farewell of sin, that our misery may be seen and felt at once. Thus he dealt
with David in his adultery and murder, he presented to him, through the false
glass of the flesh, the pleasurable and over amiable delight of his sin; but
concealed that shame, that grief, those wounds of conscience, those broken
bones, Psalm. 51. and sharp corrections that were to follow, that he could not
so much as think of them: and so he dealt with our Savior, he showed him all
the kingdoms of the world, and glory thereof; but there was also much grief
as well as glory in the world, he would show him none of that: so in every
sin there is far more gall and bitterness, then honey and sweetness; yet
he suffers not our deceitful hearts to take any notice thereof, till it be too
late; as it fared with our first Parents, who could not see what they did,
until they had eaten the forbidden fruit: but then, says the Text, were their
eyes opened; the Devil that shut them before, opened them them, Genesis 3.

Yea, for the most part he labors to keep men blind, during the presumption
of their lives; and only opens their eyes, in the desperation that waits on
their death, or in Hell, as it ^ared with the rich man; who never lift up his
eyes to Heaven until he felt those flames: like the Syrians* whose eyes were
never opened, till they were in the midst of their enemies: sin shuts up men's
eyes, but punishment opens them.

185.
ANd so much of the advantages, Not to ^e overcome by their alurements we must
^e
that Satan and his instruments have above Gods servants, in getting, and
keeping, and improving their converts: whereby it appears, that he who will not
be overcome by them, must be watchful. wise. valiant.



As well watchful, to defeat; and wise, to (...) their crafty alurements; as
valiant, to despise their cruel impositions for that we may be the better for
what we have heard, these three uses would be made thereof; else, evil were as
good not seen, as not avoided; our happiness is in the prevention, not
prevision of them, wherefore.

First, Watchful
since the Devil, and the World are ever practicing to lift us out of virtues
seat, and study nothing but our destruction, by tempting and enforcing us to
sin; let us be watchful, ever prepared, always ready, and standing upon our
guard; like as wise and experienced Soldiers, when they look every minute for
the approach of their enemy, do both wake and sleep in their armor, least
they should be surprised at unawares: or like wise Mariners, who always
prepare and make ready their tackling, that a storm (which they cannot look
to be long without) may not take them unprovided: well may we sheath our
swords, but put them off we may not: yea, let us, in vigilance and
watchfulness over our selves, imitate the Nightingale, which sleeps with her
breast upon a thorn; for fear of the serpent, that continually studies her
ruin. The Philistines could not blind Sampson so long as he was awake; would
thou not be overcome? be not secure. Yea, would thou be secure? continually
buckle unto thee the whole Armor of God, prescribed by St. Paul, Ephesians. 6. 13.
to 19. and walk circumspectly, Ephesians. 5. 15.

The traveller that has money in his purse, rides with a Pistol by his side:
yea, the rich Merchant will not step over into the Low-countreyes, without a
Man of War at his heels, least he should meet with a Dunkerker by the way.
An assaulted city must keep a careful watch, and so must thou, if thou will
keep out of their snares: we see they are busy and subtle, therefore it
behooves us to be circumspect. When the theife compasses the house, let the
owner guard the house. If a Castle be besiedged and not defended how shall it
stand? whereas, in vain does the theife look in at the window, when he sees
the master standing on his guard in the room; besides, it is easier to keep
an enemy out by bolting the doors, then to thrust him out, being once got in.

186
SEcondly, 2 Wise.
let us be wise and cautelous to avoid their crafty allurements, take heed of
beleiving their words, of trusting their promises, of yielding to their
persuasions and solicitations, when they woe us to drink more then will do us
good: yea, let quaffers quarrel, rage, and scoff, threaten curse, and load
thee with a thousand censures; yet hold thine own still, pledge the Devil for
none of them all.

O^. Many objections answered.
But I shall offend my friend, and the rest will take exceptions.

Answ. Thou art what thou art, when thou art thus tried and put to it:
wherefore, if the wife of thy bosom shall tempt thee to evil, or seek to
alienate thy affection from God and his Law, she is a traitor both to thee, and
to him, and therefore must be rejected. What says St. Hierom? should my Father
kneel to me, my Mother beseech me with tears, my Brothers and Sisters seek
to entise me to the love of this world, and the neglect of Gods worship, I
would shake (...) my Father, tread under foot my Mother, and spurn my
Brothers and Sisters, rather then they should be a means to keep me from the
service of God.

Neither will the complaint of our first Parents, be taken for a good answer or
plea another day: That others deceive thee, will be a poo^e plea another day.
it will be fruitless to say, such and such a friend deceived me: Eve was
persuaded by the serpent to eat the forbidden fruit, and Adam by Eve; yet that
would not justify them in the Court of Heaven, each of them had a several
curse, both tempters, and tempted.

True it is, drunkards being better acquainted with wrangling then reasoning,
and deeper in love with strife then truth; what they cannot maintain by
reason, a feminine testiness shall outwrangle, at least, if a man will be
subdued with words, which is the case of none, but cowards and fools: but as
for their exceptions. If thou would avoid all circumvention by these
multiplied healthes, pledge the healths of none, and then none can take
exceptions: he that would not be drawn to pledge many healthes, let him not
admit of any upon any terms.

But they will be importunate above measure. Ans. A shameless beggar must have
a strong denial. O but I shall be held unmannerly, discourteous, uncivil,
etc. What, because thou will not hazard thy health, credit, soul, etc to
gratify a beast. But they are such as love me, and do it in kindness; This
kindness of theirs is but a dog^like kindness, as you shall have a Spaniell,
in great love to his master, leap upon him, slabber his clothes, lick his
face; is it, I pray you, any incivili^y to beat down such a cur? I tell thee,
a dog will not more defile thee, then these drinking cattle will, unless thou
beat them off with flat denialls.

Wherefore, though I wish thee not to be rude and uncivil, yet be sure to
shake off these hold-fasts, and neither make thy stomach too heavy, nor thy
head too light with answering expectation. It is better to be thought
unmannerly, discourteous, or injurious toward men (especially such men) then
indeed be so unto God himself.

As for their love and friendship, if thou but knew whose factors thy ill
companions are, thou would even hate them, and either not come in their
company, or hasten out of it with all possible speed; for nothing more proves
them enemies, then their too much importuning thee; and they can be no other
then wicked, when their very mercies are cruelty.

Neither do these enemies ever wound so deadly, They neverwound so deadly as
when they stroke with a silken hand
as when they stroke us with a silken hand: for by their smooth tongues, and
milky language, they serve their friends, as the Tyrannous Emperor served his
servauts, whom he stifled in a chamber filled with Roses: they are like the
mistaken Lantern in eighty eight, for under pretense of guiding, they will
draw us into hazard and loss among our spiritual enemies, and whosoever has
put confidence in their words, have found them to resemble sincking floores,
which will fail us, when our weight is on them. These cunning hypocrites,
never intend so ill, as when they speak fairest: resembling some crafty
cheater, who while he holds men at gaze with tricks of juggling, picks their
pockets.

But alas! most men, not knowing this deepnesse of Satan, or not having
courage enongh to deny the requests of a seeming friend, or fearing, least they
should seem rude, know not how to deny: yea, it is the common complaint, they
were not able to gainsay: and indeed, most men, in this particular, are like
new wax, which admits of an easy impression: or like a light, and unballasted
vessel, that is at command of every wave, of every wind: or like Vitellius, who
never denied any man's request: or lastly, like the Babylonia^s who with a
little sweet music, would be made to do any thing, Daniel 3. 7. Yea, they are
so flexible, that let a tempter but hold up his finger, the creatures shall be
abused, the Lords day profaned, the Word relinquished, and all religion
suspended: so they divide themselves into three parts; God has one part,
(indeed that is only in purpose) the world has another, the flesh another,
and the devil at length will have all.

187.
I Should here advise men to a double care and circumspection, Temptations on
the right hand the worst.
touching these flattering allurements, because temptations on the right hand
have commonly so much more strength in them, above the other, as the right hand
has above the left; they are more perilous, because they are more plaufible
and glorious. Many that keep on their clothes in the wind, yea, that hold
their Cloakes the faster, when it is rough; not only lay by their Cloakes; but
unbutten themselves in the Sun. The Cannon does not so much hurt against the
wall, as a mine under the wall. Satan winnes not so much by battery, as by
treachery; presents, and parlies win him more, then the weapon, or the dragg
of a compulsive hand. The golden sword will sooner conquer, then one of steel:
yea, says one, there is no doubt of that soul, which will not bite at a
golden ho^ke. When all the Philistines could not with their strength bind
Sampson, Dalilah did it with her subtilty. All the spite of Ioseph's brethren
was not such a croffe to him as the inordinate affection of his Mi^tresse.
Every one is not a Ioab, to be fetched home to us, with firing his fields; as
they say Witches are brought to the house, where they have done mischief, by
casting some relics into the fire. The devil did not appear to Christ in a
terrible form, threatening the calamities of earth, or torments of hell, but
by fair promises of many Kingdoms, and much glory. But I defer the
exhortation unto the conclusion.

Though indeed a wise man unbidden will suspect the smooth stream for deepnes,
A wise m^n will suspect the smooth stream for deepnesse.
knowing, that no faces look lovelier, then the painted. The Italian thinks
himself, upon the point, to be bought and sold, when he is better used then
he was wont to be, without manifest cause.

Too much importunity, does but teach a wise man how to deny. The more we
desire to gain, the more do others desire that they may not loose. The
earnestness of the requester teaches the petitioned to be suspicious; and
suspicion teaches him how to hold, and fortify.

Again, sometimes we are wrought to good by contraries, foul acts, (says
Horace) keeps virtue from the charms of vice: and not seldom does our good
God, as a wise Physician, make this poison of theirs medicinal, to his
children; so that their meretricious offers, and Siren-like allurements, do, by
his grace, but procure the good man's hate.

And good reason; for though Satan and his instruments, like a flattering
host, promise good cheer, yet the reckoning pays for all. and he that
compares the welcome with the farewell, shall find, he had better have fasted:
for if we swallow the bait, the hook will choke us. And indeed, if we could
as well see what God has in store for us, as that the devil here offers us;
we would not regard the devils largess.

188.
THirdly, 3 Valiant.
let us be valiant and courageous to undergo the consequents, what ever
follows, upon this refusal: for behold, a great block, yea, a Lion in thy
way: thou shall be mocked and branded for a precisian: haveso many frowns and
frumps, and censures, and scoffs, be pointed at for singular, endure so many
base and vile nicknames, that a milk-sop will never be able to undergo them.
Few men but will sin against God and their own consciences ratherthen be scoft
at.
Yea, if thou be a coward, thou will fear to do the good which thou
would, in this and other cases, or appear the same that thou art: for this
is a charm more powerful then a Witches night-spell, to detain all Novices and
Apprentises of religion, from keeping a good conscience. For as in the
Netherlands no man will stop the homicide, for fear of being counted an
hangman: so here, no mere man almost will refuse to be drunk, for fear of
being censured for sullenness and singularity.

And indeed, he had need to be more then man, that can contentedly make
himself contemptible, to follow Christ; have his religion, judged hypoc^^^;
his Christian prudence, craft and policy; his Godly simplicity, silliness; his
zeal, madness; his contempt of the world* ignorance; his godly sorrow,
dumpishnesse, etc. for these and the like, as unseasonable frosts, nip all
gracious offers and beginnings in the bud, and (as much as in them lies) with
Herod, labor to kill Christ in young beginners; yea, the censures and scoffs
of these Atheists and worldlings, like the blasts of Rammes-hornes, before the
walls of Ierico, lay all the strength of a young beginners virtue level at one
utterance; for the first sparks of grace are in appearance like fire in green
wood, which if it be not followed and cherished will suddenly dye, and go out;
whereby each resolution becomes as a false conception, which never lives to the
birth of any act.

And certainly, the Devil gets more by such discouragements and the reproaches
that are cast upon religion, then by fire and faggot: for Helena's bowl,
Medea's unction, Venu's girdle, nor Circes cup can more i^^haunt, then this
afrights.

Yea, tell me if you can, what has ever been found such an enemy to virtue,
as this fear; or such a spur to wickedness? O the multitude of souls that
wicked men scoff out of their religion! how many thousands in this kingdom
are content to be misled with the multitude, rather then be an object of their
scorn and derision? how many hold it the best and safest way, in differences
of religion, with out farther question, to take the stronger part; that so,
doing as the most do, they may have the fewest to find fault with them?

Yea, how few are there that go beyond those white-livered Rulers, Ioh. 12.
who, because of the Pharisees, and loving the praise of men more then the
praise of God, chose rather to conceal their knowledge of, and love to Christ,
then to be cast out of the Synagogue, for confessing of him, verse 42. 43. I
dare say, a world of people in this land, are in Zedekiah his case, convinced
in their consciences that they ought to do as their faithful Prophets warn
them, but they are afraid they shall be mocked, have so many frowns, and frumps,
and censures, and scoffs, that they cannot buckle to such a course, look Ie
38. 19. As I doubt not but the preaching of the Word has so prevailed with
many that even think religion a disparagement, and that fear nothing more,
then to have a name that they fear God, that they have some secret liking to
the truth and power of godliness, yea, strong purposes in better times, to
own it, if they drop not into hell before those times come. So these men owe
God some good will, but they dare not show it, because of this, they would
please him, yet so, as they might not displease others, nor themselves with the
young man in the Gospel, they will follow Christ, so Christ propound no other
conditions then what they like off. But all such carnal thoughts ought to
strike sail, and give place to that Oracle of our Savior, whosoever shall be
ashamed of me, and my wo^ds, or deny me before, or among, this adulterous and
sinful generation, him w^^^ I deny, and be ashamed of also, before my Father,
and his holy Angels in heaven, Matthew 10. 33. Mark 8. 38.

We read that C^^sar's young men were loath to fight, and so have scarres, only
least the women should mislike them; so our young Christians, for the most
part are so afraid to displease the meretricious world, that they fear nothing
so much, as to be, or seem good; hate nothing more then to be fashioned
according to the Word of God, and so, whereas shame of face was ordained for
sin, now shame is turned from sin to righteousness; for they which are not
ashamed of the greatest evil, are ashamed of the least good; and this bashful
Devil never leaves a great many, so long as they live, whereby with the rich
man, Luke 16. they never think of heaven, till tormented in the flames of hell.

189.
BUt is not this base blood, that blushes at a virtuous action? Is it not a
shame, But it is base blood that blushes to do well.
to be ashamed of things either good, or not ill? Is it not a sottish fear
and cowardice, that pulls us back from goodness, much more, that constraines
us to evil? certainly, in any good action, that must needs be bad that hinders
it.

But to forbear good is not all; for oftentimes, to congratulate the company,
are not many of us fain to force our selves to unworthiness, and evil
actions, when we run exceedingly against the grain? Yea, even while we are
doing them, our hearts chide our hands and tongues for transgressing, agreeable
to that of S. Augustine, who confesses, that he was much ^shamed of his
shamefastness, and tenderness in this case, and further, that he often belyed
himself with sins, which he never committed, least he should be
unacceptable to his sinful companions; and no marvel, when even Peter denied
his Lord, and cursed himself, to get credit amongst a cursed crew.

Thus as if we cared more to be thought good, And they are ^ooles who will be
sense (...) of their re^i^^io^.
then to be so indeed, we force indurance on our selves, to omit good actions,
and commit evil, both against conscience, merely out of fear, least lewd men
should laugh at us. O childish, cowardly, and base! Surely, for a man to be
scoft out of his goodness, by those which are lewd, is all one, as if a man
that sees should blindfold himself, or put out his eyes, because some blind
wretches revile and scoff at him for seeing; or as if one that is sound of
limms, should limpe or maime himself to please the cripple, and avoid his
taunts. A wise man will not be scoft out of his money, nor a just man be
flouted out of his faith, the taunts of Ishmael shall never make an Isaac out
of love with his inheritance.

Indeed, they that least can do, best cavil can; but virtue scorns muddy
censures, and unstained honor to be suborned by vulgar breathes; yea, she is
strongest when she lives in the press of many temptations: for to do well,
where is neither danger nor solicitation to evil, is a common thing; but to do
well, where is both peril and opposition, is the peculiar office of a man of
virtue: for virtue (as Metellus speaks) rejects facility to be her
companion. Yea* he that has truly learned Christ, had rather live hated of all
men for goodness, then beloved of all for vice; rather please one good man
then content a thousand bad ones; his single authority being sufficient to
countervaile the disdain of a whole Parish.

And indeed, how little is that man hurt, whom malice condemns on earth, and
God commends in heaven? let the world accuse us, so God does acquit us, it
matters not: for, alas! their words are but like a boys squib, that flashes
and cracks, and stinks, but is nothing: and they that hang their faith on such
men's lips, do but, like Ixion embrace a cloud, instead of Juno; and well may
he claim a Boat-swanes place in Barkley's Ship of fools, that will sell his
soul for a few good words, from wicked men's tongues. What is it to me, how
others think me when I know my intent is good, and my ways warrantable; a
good conscience cares for no witnesses, that is alone as a thousand.

190.
BEsides, Of necessity we must (...) ^vil spo^^ of ^^y (...)
of necessity we must be evil spoken of by some. A man shall be sure to be
backed, and have abbettors* either in good or evil, and by some shouldered in
both: there was never any to whom some Belialists took not exceptions: it is
not possible to please or displease all, seeing some are as deeply in love with
vice, as others are with virtue; and the applause of ignorant and evil men
has ever been vilipended by the wise and virtuous. Phocion had not suspected
his speech, had not the common people applauded it. Antisthenes mistrusted some
ill in himself, for the vulgar commendations. Much more reason have we that
are Christians, when we find that spiritual things are mostly represented
unto vicious men false and clean contrary, to what they are indeed, as
corporal things in a glass, wherein those that are on the right hand, seem
to be on the left; and those again which are on the left hand, seem to be on
the right: as it fared with Saint Paul, who (speaking of his unregenerate
estate) says, I also thought verily in my self, that I ought to do many
contrary things against the Name of Jesus* Act* 26. 9.

That vicious drunkards, And wi^ked men ju^ge by con^rar^es.
and indeed all natural men judge by contraries, think and call good, evil,
and ev^ll, good; white, black; and black, white; commend, what God in his word
condemns, and condemn what he commends; I might prove by an hundred
testimonies and examples out of Scripture but these may serve.

First, ^ Of ^^ings
touching things, as if they wore their brains in their bellies, and their
guts in their heads, they highly esteem what is abomination in the sight of
God, Luke 16. 15. and what God highly esteems is abomination to them, Pro. 13.
19.

Secondly, that which is called wisdom in Gods book, they account
foolishness, 1 Cor. 1. 18. 20. 23. and 2. 14. and 4. 10. Luke 6. 27. to 36. or
madness. Acts, 26. 24. Wisd. 5. 4. and contrarily, that which God calls
foolishness and madness, they term wisdom, Genesis 41. 8. Job. 5. 13. Pro. 28.
11. Ier. 4. 22. 1 Cor. 3. 19. Exodus, 1. 10. Josh. 9. 4. Titus, 3. 9. Pro. 10.
18.

3 They think there is no God, Psalm. 14. 1. or that he is careless and
minds them not, Psalm. 10. 11. and 94. 7. or that he is not so just, as to
reward every one according to his works, Psalm. 10. 13.

4 They think the service of God (which is the greatest freedom) John, 8. 34.
36. Romans 6. 16. 18. 22. the only bondage, Psalm. 2. 3 4. and to serve their own
lusts, and therein the Devil, whose captives they are, 2 Timothy 2. 26. the only
freedom, Psalm. 12. 4.

5 They censure true faith in the Godly, to be presumption, 2 Chronicles, 32. 11.
14. Romans 8. 38. 39. and yet think their wne presumption to be true faith.

6 They not only think profession arbitrary, but blame worthy; when as our
Savior commands it, upon pain of being denied before God, and his holy
Angels, at the later day, Matthew. 10. 32. 33. Mark. 8. 38.

7 They censure, yea, condemn us to the pit of Hell, about vanities of their
own devising, Luke 7. 33. 34. Mark. 7. 5. and justify heinous crimes in
themselves, verse. 11. 12. 13.

8 They think if they have the worlds friendship, and good opinion, that they
are in a passing good and happy estate; when nothing more truly proves them in
a cursed condition, Luke; 6. 26. James, 4. 4.

191.
SEcondly, 2 Of persons.
touching persons.

First, they account the sincere Christian, which walks according to the rule
of Gods word, an Hypocrite, Job. 4. 6. and the greatest Hypocrite, who is a
Christian in name only, they acquit of Hypocrisy, Isay. 66. 3.

2 They think such enemies to the state' who are greatest friends, yea, props
of the State; and those friends, who are the greatest enemies, 1 King. 18. 17.
18. Genesis 39. 5. 20. Job. 22. 30. Isay, 6. 13.

3 They account themselves the most valiant and courageous, because they are
apt to fight upon every idle quarrel, be it but the lie; which is the greatest
pusillanimity, or, at most, but stupid and desperate madness, and shows that
their lives are but little worth, seeing they will sell them so good cheap;
when they are the basest cowards, and vilest whitelivers in a country, not
daring to suffer for Christ, or, in a good cause so much as a poor Nickname;
how much le^^e would they burn at a stake for him (as the Martyrs did, even
weak women) which is the only true valor? and yet contrarily, account the
righteous, who are as bold as a Lion, so their cause be good, Pro. 28. 1. the
most hen-hearted and ^earefullest.

4 They account Gods people the most dumpish and melancholy of all others; when
indeed, they are, or have cause to be the only joyful people alive, Psalm. 4.
7. Heb. 10. 34. Job. 20. 5. Eccles. 9. 7. Matthew. 13. 44. Luke, 1. 44. 47. and
2. 10. John, 16. 22. Acts, 13. 52. Romans 14. 17. and 15. 13. 2 Cor. 7. 4. Gal.
5. 22. James, 1. 2. 1 John, 1. 4. etc.

5 They take themselves to be wise, because they are wise to do evil; and
think the Godly simple, because they are wise only to that which is good, Romans
16. 19. not considering, that wisdom is as the waters, of which, some descend
from above, and some spring from beneath, James, 3. 15. 17.

6 Such as by faith and true repentance are purged from their filthiness in
the blood of Christ, and walk in newness of life, they think pure in their
own eyes; though indeed, they esteem their very righteousness but as a
menstruous cloth, I say, 64. 6. when it is themselves that are pure in their
own conceits, as wanting the light of Gods Spirit, and the eye of faith.

Thirdly, 3 Their judgment and practice is quite contrary to Gods word.
touching their judgment and practice jointly.

First, they glory in their shame, Phil. 3. 19. I mean, their wickedness,
Genesis 19. 34. and are ashamed of that which should be their only glory and
crown of rejoicing, viz. holiness.

2 Whereas the mercy of God is the chief motive, to make his children fear
him, Psalm. 130. 4. they make it the only motive, for them to continue in sin,
Jude, 4.

3 Whereas the Godly render them good for evil; they again, render them the
greatest evil for the greatest good, Psalm. 35. 12. to 16. Acts, 7. 52. to 60.
persecute them to the death, for showing them the way to eternal life, Acts,
5. 30. to 34. Ier. 18. 20.

4 Even their very mercy and kindness is cruelty, Pro. 12. 10. witness the
drunkards love, to his friend; the adulterers, to her whom he defiles; the
pitiful man, who gives or obtaines a pardon for the murderer, which not only
betrays the parties soul, but makes the whole land guilty of blood; and
lastly, he who makes offers of preferment to a Protestant, so he will become a
Roman Catholic; these and many the like are cruel mercies.

5 They reject the Commandments of God, Mark, 7. 8. 9. that they may observe
the traditions of men, and give heed unto Spirits of error, and doctrines of
Devils, 1 Timothy 4. 1.

6 And lastly, they think they do God good service, in wronging and killing
of his children, John, 16. 2. as Paul did, in persecuting; and the Jews in
executing Christ.

192.
Which being so, We should read their words backward.
namely, that their judgments are directly opposite to the Word of God, that
they read practical divinity with the Devils spectacles, just as Scholars
do Hebrew, backwards; either taking the conceptions of the Holy Ghost to be an
adulterous seed, as once it fared with Joseph, touching Marie's being with
child, Matthew. 1. 19. or contrarily, the conceptions of Satan, viz. thoughts
and affections, which spring from Pride, Lust, Ignorance etc. to be the
spiritual conceptions of the Holy Ghost, and to come from zeal and piety, as
once Ely, 1 Samuel 1. 14. and those mockers, Acts, 2. imputed the true work of
the Spirit to drunkenness; who would not rather be dispraised, then commended
by them? For to be praised of evil men (says Bion) is to be praised for evil
doing: so the better they speak of a man, the worse, and the worse, the
better: you shall have them maintain with incredible impudence, accompanied
with invincible ignorance, that if a man will not swear, drink drunk, etc.
that he is over precise; though they may as soon find Paradise in Hell, as
any Text in Scripture, which makes for looseness, or against circumspect
walking. Yea, who would dream that so gross blockishnesse should find harbor
in any reasonable soul, as to think that God should like a man the worse, for
his being the better, or for having a tender conscience, or look for less
fear, reverence, and obedience from his servants, then we do from our
servants: and yet the same men will grant, that a servant can never be too
punctual in his obedience to his Masters lawful commands: but you see the
reason, they are of a reprobate judgment, Esaias., 5. 20. and so speak, think,
and do altogether by contraries, like Heliogabalus, who wore shoes of gold,
and rings of leather: or the Blackmores, who judging of beauty by contraries,
paint the Angels black, and the Devils white: or the Jews, who preferred
Barrabas, a theife, a murderer, a seditionary, infamous for all, odious to all
before Christ, that came to save them.

Wherefore, if we be wise, we will read their words backward, But those prove
deep wounds to weak Christians which are balm and physic unto abler
judgments
understand them by contraries, count their scoffs and reproaches our glory,
which they take to be our shame; so imitating the Christians in the primitive
Church, who (seeing the Infidells, never met them, but they would make the
sign of the Cross, in derision of their Christianity, for that the God, whom
they worshipped, was hanged on a Cross) to show that they were so far from
being ashamed thereof, that they gloried in nothing more; then in that which
their enemies chiefly derided, would not only make the sign of the Cross upon
their childrens foreheads, the most open and eminent place, at the time when
they were baptized, but would frequently do the same, in the presence of the
said Infidells, as occasion was offered. However, I pray God keep me from
being an honest man according to their description.

Besides, no wise man, that observes their life and practice, but will think
their dislike of him an honor, and apply to them, what once the Orator spoke
to S^llust, it cannot be, but he who lives thy life, should speak thy
language: yea, a very Heathen would chose his religion by such men's enmity, for
it is the honor of Religion and goodness, that it has drunkards, swearers,
etc. for her scoffing adversaries: as Tertullian thought much the better of
Christianity, because Nero persecuted it. However, the faith of the righteous
cannot be so much derided, as their success in the end will be magnified,
Wisdom, 5. 1. to 22.

But this is the misery, those prove deep wounds to weak Christians, which
would be balm and Physic unto abler judgments: and admit some have the wit
to discern their dispraise, an honor; their praise, a dishonor; yet wanting
courage, and being afraid to displease, they even suffer themselves to be
brutishly driven with the drove, and, like nails in a wheel, turn, as they
are turned, without either conscience of sin, or guidance of reason. But if
we live, like them that are reserved to judgment; how should we not think our
selves to be reserved with them?

Indeed, if, with Demas, He would never endure blows who cannot con^^ct evil
words.
thou will needs forsake Christ, to embrace this present world, it is well thou
give over so soon, leavest off before thou do begin, never set thy hand
to the plough, do not disgrace religion by professing it, for thou would
never hold out to the end; he would never endure a blow, who cannot concoct a
word: he is not like to overcom astrong and potent enemy, who cannot vanquish
himself: he that is discouraged and made return with an Ishmaelitish
persecution of the tongue, how would he endure a Spanish Inquisition, or those
Marian times? he that is so afrighted with a Squib, how would he endure the
mouth of a Canon.

But hear one thing before thou goe^^. It is a shrewd sign that the Lord is
departed from a man, when he is thus basely afraid of those that cannot hurt
him: for when the Lord was departed from Saul, he began to be afraid of David,
never before, 1 Samuel 18. 12. true faith looking upon the Preserver and reward,
never fears to do well, nor to reprove those that do ill; and such cowardly
Soldiers, as will turn their backs for a few foul words, are not for
Christ's standart: yea, wat you what, they shall stand in the forefront of them,
that shall be cast into that lake of fire and brimstone, Rev. 21. 8. they have
been most backward to goodness, therefore shall be foremost in vengeance.

193.
BUt to bear ill words, rather then be drunk, We ought not be drunk to save
our lives.
is not all which God requires in a Christian: he must suffer blows even to
death rather then yield. Some (which think themselves both sober men, and good
Christians) presume they may be drunk, so it be to drive away a disease, or to
prevent a quarrel, but they reckon without their Host, for we must not do
evil, that good may come of it: that which is ill of it self, is not to be
ventured on, for the good that comes by accident. Better the body be
debilitated, or dye by an honest disease; then be cured by a dishonest medicine
(says St. Austin) yea, admit thou were put to this extremity, that thou must
either drink excessively, against thy stomach and conscience, or else thou
must die for it, as sometimes it falls out, either drink, or i will stab thee;
it is far better, says the same Augustine, that thy sober and temperate
flesh should be slain by a sword, then that thy soul should be overcome by
this sin of drunkenness. And indeed, the magnanimous Christian will lose his
life, rather then the peace of a good conscience, like John Baptist, he will
hold his integrity, though he lose his head for it.

And indeed, Death in a good cause shall pleasure, not hurt us.
let a man but keep a good corespondence with God, and his own conscience,
and then he may answer all, as he did when the Tyrant threatened him, I will
take away thy house, yet thou can not take away my peace: I will break up
thy school, yet shall I keep whole my peace: I will confiscate all thy goods:
yet there is no Praemunire against my peace: I will banish thee thy country,
yet I shall carry my peace with me: so may thou say, take away my riches,
yet I have Christ; take away friends, liberty, wife, and children, life, and
all, yet I have Christ, that is to me both in life and death advantage.

Suppose thou be killed for obeying God, rather then man: what greater honor
can be done thee? Queen Anne Bolane, the Mother of blessed Queen Elizabeth,
when she was to be beheaded in the Tower, thus remembered her thanks to the
King. Of a private Gentlewoman, said she, he made me a Marquess, of a
Marquess a Queen, and now having left no higher degree of earthly honor for
me, he has made me a Martyr. And what said Iustine Martyr to his murderers,
in behalf of himself, and his fellow Martyrs; you may kill us, but you can
never hurt us? And Francisco Soyit to his adversaries, you deprive me of this
life, and promote me to a better, which is, as if you should rob me of
counters, and furnish me with gold. The sooner I die, quoth another, the sooner
I shall be happy: and even in the very act of suffering, God gives courage with
the one hand, and holds out a crown with the other, 2 Cor. 1. 5. and 12. 10.

When Pyrrhus tempted Fabricius, Which has made many prefer it before the
greatest pleasure, profit, or honor.
the first day with an Elephant, so huge and monstrous a beast, as before he
had not seen; the next day with money, and promises of honor: he answered, I
fear not thy force, and I am too wise for thy fraud. He will never fear to be
killed, who by killing is sure to be crowned. His resolution, is like that of
Consalve, who protested to his soldiers, thewing them Naples, that he had
rather die one foot forwards, then to have his life secured for long by one
foot of retrait. And good reason; for does not our Savior say, whosoever
shall seek to save his life in this case, shall lose it (I, more, he shall
lose both body and soul eternally, for so the words imply) but whosoever shall
lose his life for my sake, and the Gospells, he shall save it? Mat. 10. 39.
Luke, 17. 11. 33.

This privilege has God given to those that fear him, that they need not to
fear any thing else. Yea, though every pain they suffer, were a death,; and
every cross, an Hell; they know they have amends enough, when they hear the
Holy Ghost say, Apoc. 2. 10. be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give
thee the crown of life. And indeed, this promise which is added, should, me
thinks, be a notable spur to our perseverance, should exceedingly sharpen
the commandment and drive it more deeply into our minds, making us to say,
with Pompey (being to carry corn to Rome in time of idearth, and the Sea
tempestuous) it is necessary that I go on, not that I live.

Many have thought health worthy to be purchased with the price of Cauthers and
Incisions, how painful soever; but alas! eternal life is a precious
pearl, which a wise Merchant will purchase, though it cost him his life, (yea,
had he a thousand lives) and all that he has, Mat. 13. The women told Naomy
that Ruth was better unto her then seven Sons, Ruth. 4. but Christ is better
then seventy times seven lives: for what is life, together with a perpetuated
fame, from Adam till doomes day, in respect of salvation for eternity? or what
are they, that can only kill the body, to Him, that after he has killed the
body, can cast both body and soul into Hell?

But as warm clothes to a dead man: But others prefer the worlds favor
before Gods.
so are the motions of valor to a fearful heart: say what can be said,
clear men's judgments, cure their prejudice; many will yet fear the worlds
opinion more then Gods displeasure; which is to run into the fire, to avoid
the smoke; and more dread the mockes and flouts of men on earth, then they do
the grinning mockes of the Devils in Hell; which makes them cease to be good
Christians, that they may be thought good companions: wherein they put down
Aesop's foolish fishes, that leapt out of the warm water, into the burning
fire for ease: or Timocrates, who, as Thucydides relates, killed himself for
fear, least he should be drowned.

Wherefore, seeing all men cannot receive this gift of fortitude, save they to
whom it is given; I will yet show you, if not a more excellent, yet a more safe
way to avoid this danger, and all other their allurements.

194.
IF thou would neither be intised nor enforced to pledge them, We must
refrain their company, and not dispute with them o^ we shall not bold out.
in any of their wicked customs, divorce thy self from all acquaintance and
society with the vicious, yea, entertain no parley with them.

There are some vices of that nature, that they cannot be vanquished but by
avoiding; such is fornication, fly fornication, says the Apostle, 1 Corinthians.
6. 18. that is, flee the company of fornicators; for to be in a lewd woman's
company, says Solomon, and depart innocent; and to take fire in a man's bosom,
and not singe his clothes; or go upon live coals, and his feet not be burnt,
are equally possible, Prove. 6. 27, 28. such is the frailty of man's nature, that
if the eye but see, or the ear hear, or the hand but touch a whorish woman,
the heart will go nigh to catch, and take fire, verse 29. And thus is fares
with this sin, bid a man consort a while with drunkards, and depart from them
innocent, you may as well put a match to dry powder, and forbid it to take
fire, except he be very well stayed, and of better governd affections then
ordinary. It is not safe to commit a little Wherry to the Seas violence. A
stick that has once been in the fire, much more a Torch newly extinguished,
being forth with put to the flame, will soon be kindled again. Wherefore keep
out of the reach of thy vicious ^equaintance, and if they becken thee one way,
be thou sure to take the contrary, at least entertain no parley with them.
When Castles once come to a parley, there is great fear they will yield: and
gates that are always open, will sometimes admit an enemy. No disputing with
Satan, or his deputies: when our first Parents fell to arguing the case with
that old Serpent, though in the state of innocence, when they had wit at will,
and their reason at command, they found him too hard for them: how much more
too weak shall we find our selves, that now are as we are? surely, we are like
to lose all, if once we enter into disputation with that old Sophister, and
crafty Fox, after the experience of six thousand years almost, and when our
ownflesh (which his the greatest both deceiver and dissembler in the world) is
become his cunning solicitour.

Alas! he desires no more then to be heard speak; for grant him but this, and
he will persuade thee to believe, even contrary to thine own knowledge: as how
easily did he persuade Eve, by himself; and Adam, by her, (when they gave but
care to him,) to believe what he spoke, though they had heard God himself say
the contrary, but a little before? Genesis 2. 17. and if innocence found no means
of resistance, what hope have we so extremely degenerated? And indeed, why do
we pray not to be led into temptation, if we lead our selves into temptation?
If we will not heepe our selves from the occasion; God will not keep us from
the sin: and if God do not keep us, we cannot be kept: we cannot, we will
not choose but fall. Wherefore shun the society of evil men, as Iosoph shunned
the society of his Mistress, and leave them that leave God, as Noah did the
old World, and that by God's commandment, Genesis 7. 1. 7. and Abraham the
Cananites, Genesis 12. 1. and Lot the Sodomites, Genesis 19. 17. and Israel the
Egyptians, Exodus, 12. 37. 41. and Moab and Ammon, Numb. 27. 1. 2. 3. 16. 17.

195.
BUt is it warrantable, Quest.
may some say, to separate from our old acquaintance, That it is lawful (...)
wi^hdraw our selves from ^hei^ soci^ty and ^ow.
(being vicious) and other the like company?

Not totally; for then we must go out of the world, 1 Cor. 5. 10. nor from any
in all cases; Answ.
for then we must separate from the public assemblies: nor in regard of civil
society, and necessary commerce; for this were to unglew the whole worlds
frame, which is contexted only by commerce and contracts, there by certain
wise uses to be made of them, for our convenience or necessity, which need not,
yea, must not be forborne: as wherefore serves discretion, but that (as a
glass window) it may let in the light, and keep out the wind?

Neither can wicked men, in this case, be avoided: but so long as we are in
this World, we must converse with men of the World: and we know it is lawful
enough, in terms of civility, to deal with infidels, yea, even thesavage
Cannibals may receive an answer of outward courtesy. If a very dog fawn upon
us we stroke him on the head, and clap him on the back, much less is the
common bond of humanity untyed by grace; disparity in spiritual professions,
is no warrant for ingratitude: yet a little friendship with such, is enough;
the less communion with any of Gods enem es, the more safety: and sure I am,
that those who affect a familiar entirenesse with such, bewray either too much
boldness, or too little conscience.

Yea, we may not only converse with evil men, but communi^ate with them also
without harm, so it be not in evil things: as in the Sacrament the unworthy
receiver eats and drinks damnation to himself, sibi, non tibi, to
himself, not to thee.

But as touching a familiar en^irenesse, and leagues of amity, that they are
unfit, unwarrantable, dangerous, is easy to prove. As what says the Holy
Ghost by S. Paul? We command you brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus
christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every brother that malketh
inordinately, and not after the instruction which (...) received of us, 2 These.
3. 6. And again, speaking unto the converted Ephesians, touching others among
them who were whoremongers, unclean persons, covetous men, and idolaters, he
says, be not companions with them, Ephesians 5. 5. 7. And lastly, in that case
of the incestuous Corinthian, he does not only excommunicate him, but makes a
rule upon it, that if any one, which professes himself a Christian, shall live
in any scandalous course, that they shall not afford him so much as civil and
familiar converse, I Corinth. 5. 11. If any man that is called a brother, says
he, be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a raiter, or a drunkard,
or an extortioner, with such an one eat not. Mark this all ye swinish
drunkards, and beastly livers, that God discharges us your society.

But to proceed. Why was that Law ^nacted, for the strict avoiding of Leprous
persons? it was not the body only that was herein respected, by the God of
spirits; those that are spiritually contagious must be still and ever avoided,
they must be separated from us, we from them; they from us, by just censures;
or if not, wefrom them, by a voluntary declination of their familiar
conversation: or if they can join our heart to theirs, they will disjoyne it
from God; to let pass Saint Paul's charge, 2 Corinthians 6. 17. come out from
among them, and separate your selves: And that of the Angel, Revelation 18. 4.
come out of her my people, which especially have relation to Idolaters: see
what has been the practice of Gods people since Noah, Lot, Abraham, and
Israel, which have been alleged already. Does not David say, I have not sat
with vain persons, neither kept company with the dissemblers. I have hated the
assembly of evil doers, and will not company with the wicked, Psalm. 26. 4. 5.
And was not Joseph, whom the Holy Ghost styles a just man, fully minded
(before the Angel forbad him) to put away Mary, after he was betrothed unto
her, when he but supposed her to be dishonest? Matthew 1. 19. And was not all
this, to show us what we should do in the like cases?

Wherefore, let us tread in their steps, and say with a worthy Divine, though I
may have many bad acquaintance, yet I will have no bad companions: for even the
tame beasts will not keep with the wild; nor the clean dwell with the
leprous. But above all, let us keep no drunkards, nor swearers in our houses,
Psalm 101. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. no, nor scoffers, Ismael must be turned out of
doors, when he once falls a jeering of Isaac: and indeed if we do, it is a
shrewd suspicion we are not sincere our selves: for grace, as it is resembled
to heat, so like heat, it gathers together things of one kind, separateth
things of a contrary nature, as dross from Gold.

In fine, if they have forsaken all honesty and good conscience, it is time for
us to forsake them: if they depart from us, in the foundation of faith and good
works; let us (as justly we may) depart from them, in the building of
brotherly fellowship: they build on the sand, let us build on the rock: yea, if
they forsake the right way, we must forsake them, or Christ will forsake us.

196.
BUt least this should not suffice: see some reasons to enforce thee thereunto,
Five reasons of breaking off society with our vicious consor^^.
which all Gods people propound to themselves, when they bid adue to their old
associates in the broad way, and purpose to pledge them no more in their wicked
customs. The reasons are principally 5. and they are weighty. 1. That they may
come to the sight of their errors. 2. That we may not be Infected by them nor
partake of their sins. 3. That we may not be infeoffed in their punishments.
4. That So far as is possible we may be at peace with all men. 5. Because
their company would bereave us of comfort, which otherwise we should enjoy,
being alone.

First, First that they may ^oke into themselves
that thereby they may come to the sight of their errors, and consequently, be
reclaimed. S. Paul, when he commands the Corinthians to shut the incestuous
person out of their society and fellowship, gives this reason, that his Spirit
might be saved in the day of the Lord, 1 Corinthians. 5. 5. Again, when he writ
to Timothy, that he had done the same, touching Hymeneus and Alexander, he
yields this to be the reason, that they might learn not to blaspheme, 1
Tu^othy 1. 20. And in another place. If any man obey not our saying, note him
by a letter, and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed, 2 These. 3.
14.

It was the practice of the primitive Church, in her first love, that she
might shine in beauty and fairenes above alother Synagogues, not to admit any
scandalous person, or open offender into the Communion of Saints; until their
foul spots were carefully washed off, and taken away by the tears of
repentance. The bread of the children was not given unto dogs; neither, by an
equal bounty, to the godly and the wicked, was there an equal encouragement
to godliness and iniquity, but a separation was made between the sick and the
whole; and this separation had no other intent, but edification; even an
edification of the spirit, by the destruction of the flesh: so that men could
find no fault with the dispensers of this power, having nothing to complain
of, but that their lives thereby were sought to be amended, and their souls to
be saved. I confess, that was a separation of a higher nature, the power of
the keys being added, they were delivered up to Satan, shut out of heaven;
herein it is not so, but this serves to the same end, and is done only in cases
of like fact.

The cause was weighty, for which the gates of heaven, were to be locked;
great, in the thing done; or great, in the wilfulness of the doer; and this
not without reason: for the doom was heavy, and fit for the back of a strong
and mighty evil: it was a short damnation, a temporal hell, a shutting out of
heaven upon earth, yea, heaven in heaven, even the joys, and comforts of the
spirit of consolation. Neither could it be but an excellent remedy, for,
besides that it was Gods institution, the remedy was fitted to the disease: a
degree of presumption, was encountered with a degree of despair; the Scorpion
was made a medicine, against the sting of the Scorpion; Satan was set on
work, to take him down by terror unto salvation; whom before he animated and
puffed up to destruction; he, that said at first, sin boldly, for ye shall not
dye at all; now he changes his voice, and says, thy sin is greater then
can be forgiven thee. But the wisdom of dispensation suffered this roaring Lion
no longer to terrify, but until his terror did mollify: he aimed indeed at
despair and destruction; but the Church aimed at humiliation, and conversion,
yea, at consolation and salvation. And indeed humiliation for sin, is the
only way to conversion from sin; conversion from sin, the only way to the
consolations of the Spirit; and the comfortable spirit is both the guide and
the way to life eternal: therefore, when the man is humbled, Satan is
casheired; the horseleech is taken away, when he has sufficiently abated the
vicious and superfluous blood.

Thus were men healed, by wounding; exalted by humbling: O admirable use and
command of Satan! he is an enemy to God, and yet does him service; he is an
adversary to man, and yet helps him. A strange thing, that Satan should help
the incestuous Corinthian, to the destruction of his flesh, his concupiscence,
and the edification of his soul. A strange thing that Satan should teach
Hymeneus and Alexander not to blaspheme: he is the author of blasphemies, and
yet he teaches not to blaspheme.

But is Satan contrary to himself, and is his kingdom divided in it self?
no surely: ^ut one that is stronger then he both in wisdom and power,
manageth both his craft and malice, to ends, which himself intends not. The
devil is one and the same still, even purely malicious; but God suffers him to
go on in his temptations, just so far as temptation is profitable, and no
further: therefore while Satan is driving the offender to despair, God stops
his course, when the sinner is come to due humiliation: and then, as it was
with Christ in the wilderness, so is it with the humbled sinner, Satan is
dismissed, and the Angels come and minister unto him.

This was the nature, manner, and end of public excommunication: private has
relation to it; both touching cause and end. First, public had respect to the
cause; that it was to be used, only in case of scandalous, open, and notorious
impiety: so has the private; we do not break off society with any for
weaknesses, and sins of infirmity. Secondly, that did only aim at their
amendment, conversion, and salvation: so does this; we desire only to have them
look into themselves, where the fault lies, and seek to amend their course:
and certainly nothing will sooner make the adulteress or drunkard bethink
themselves, then when they see, all that are honest and sober, even their
neighbors and old associates, shun their company and despise them, as if they
were not worthy of humane society: and if they have the least desire to be
reputed honest and sober again, and admitted their familiar converse, (without
which, they are, as it were, banished into exile) they will do what possibly
lies in them to redeem their credit, and merit their good opinion, by a more
sober, honest, and holy demeanor: the disparity lies only in the power and
severity of the agents; we cannot, we do not, we desire not to deliver them up
to Satan; but heartily pray that they may be delivered from him, and all
evil.

197.
THat we may not be infected by them, partake of their sins. 2. That we may
not be i^fected by them* nor partake of their sins.
It is a true Proverb, Evil company corrupts good manners: and He that will
not evil do, must keep from all that longs thereto. To be safe from evil
works, is to avoid the occasions; especially, he that will keep himself from
iniquity, and have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, must
have no fellowship with wicked persons, the workers of darkness: Joseph
thought no weapon comparable, for the beating off his Mistresses assaults, to
running away.

The first thing that God did, after he created Heaven and Earth, was, to
separate light from darkness; probably to show, that the good should first of
all separate from the evil, if they mean not again to become evil. It is
not more hard to find virtue in evil company, then to miss vice. They were
mingled among the Heathen (says the Psalmist) and what follows? they learned
their works, Ps. 106 35. Peter had never denied and forsworn his Master, if he
had not been in company with Christ's enemies: but then how soon was he
changed? Now, says one, If such a Cedar fell, how shall I stand? I will not
therefore hazard the frail potsheard (my flesh) upon the rock of evil company
for any thing. David had never dissembled, if he had not been among the
Philistines: which made him after (that he might wisely shun that occasion)
say, depart from me all ye workers of iniquity, for I will keep the
commandments of my God, Psalm. 119. 115. intimateing, that he could not
otherwise: nay, how many thousands have confessed at the Gallows, I had never
come to this but for evil company, which drew me to these courses? yea, the
truth is, we can not come amongst these vipers, and not be stung by them; for
even to hear them speak, will make us either angry, or guilty; and not to be
intemperate with them for company, is a great discourtesie, if not a quarrel.
Many a man had been good* that is not, if he had but kept good company.

There is a pliable disposition in all men naturally to evil; we follow it, as
Iron does the Loadstone, by a natural and hidden propensity: our corrupt
nature is like fire, which, if there be any infection in the room, draws it
straight to it self: or like Jet, which omits all precious objects, and
attracts nothing but straws and dust: or, if a man has both good and bad in
his nature, either of them will fortify, as they meet with their like; or
decline, as they find a contrary: as Sampson did in his strength, who, at
first being hard enough for all the Princes of the Philistines, at last, by
keeping Dalilah company, they set a boy to lead him.

Yea, suppose a man stands indifferent; his company, whether good or evil,
will work him into a new nature; and by continuance, he shall grow up to the
same height with them, as the Hop grows to the end of the pole, be it never
so high, and he himself shall do the like to others; as one piece of Iron,
being rubbed with the Loadstone, will draw another piece, even as if it were the
Loadstone it self.

A good man in ill company is like a precious pearl, fallen into the mud;
which the longer it lies, the deeper still it sinkes into it: for, if the
force of custom, simple and separate be great; the force of custom, copulate,
and conjoined, and collegiate, is far greater; for their example teaches,
company comfort, emulation quickneth, glory raises: so as in such places
the force of custom, is in her exaltation: which made the mother of Alexander,
the twenty sixth Emperor of Rome, so careful of her sons education, that she
kept continually a guard of men to take heed, that no vicious persons came unto
him, to corrupt him in evil.

It was a good conceit of Themistocles, and not trivial, when he set up a bill
of an house, which he had to let, that he added, aye, and there be good
neighbors too: for it shall go hard, but neighborhood will somewhat mould the
whole family into better or worse, as themselves are. The ^ore eye, we know,
infecteth the sound: and they that sleep with dogs, shall swarm with fleaes:
yea, a man's posterity after him, shall gain, or loose by the bargain. It were
happy, if the injury of a wicked man could be confined to his own bosom;
that he only might fare the worse for his sins; that it were but self do,
self have: but as his lewdness, like some odious sent, is diffused through the
whole room, or place where he is, and reaches to the times, upon which he is
unhappily fallen: so after generations are the worse by means of him. An ill
president, is like Goodwin Sands, which not only swallowed up his patrimony,
but still continues a dangerous place, where too many have miscarried. He is a
very mean person, that draws not some Clyents after him: even Thewdas and
Judas had their four hundreds to accompany them. One man may kindle such a
fire, as thousands are not able to quench: one plague sore may infect a whole
nation: and all the veni^^ of sin is not spent in the act.

Sin among men, like the Murraine in Cattle, or scab among Sheep, is of a
catching and infectious quality: and, like the Plague or Leprosy, will run
along from one to another: our corrupt nature is like tinder, which is kindled
with the leaft spark: wherefore it behooves us to avoid all provoking objects:
as a man that has Gunpowder in his house, keeps it safe from fire: and well
were it for us, if lewd ones were forced to cry, as the Leper in Israel, I am
unclean, I am unclean.

Every thing labors to make the thing it meets with like it self; fire,
converts all to fire; air, exiccates and draws to it self; water, moistens
and resolves what it meets withal; earth, changes all that we commit to it
to her own nature. Every man will be busy in dispending that quality which
is predominant in him: we can converse with nothing, but will work upon us, and
by the unperceived stealth of time, assimilate us to it self: one rotten Aple
will infect a whole floor: one putrid grape corrupts the whole sound cluster.
The choice therefore of a man's company, is one of the most weighty actions of
our lives* for our future well or ill being depends on that election: if we
choose ill, every day inclines us to worse, we have a perpetual weight hanging
on us, that is ever sinking us down to vice.

Antisthenes wondered at those which were curious in buying but an earthen dish*
to see that it had no cracks, nor inconveniences, and yet would be careless
in the choice of friends, and take them with the flavves of vice. What was the
reason (think we) that our Savior would not suffer his vveake Disciple, in
the Gospel, to go and bury his dead father? Luke 9. 60 It was not any
averseness to civil, much less filial respect and duty to Parents; yea, he
preferred mercy before sacrifice; but he well knevv, that when he once met
with his carnal friends at the funeral, they would pervert him again, and
quickly flout him out of his new Masters service, and that the Gospel should
soon loose a Preacher of him. The reason why the Raven returned not into Noah's
Arc, as the Dove did, is given by some, because it met with a dead carkase by
the way.

A wise man will be wary, not only to shun sin in the action, but in
the very occasion. How many, that meant not to sin, are vvonn only by the
opportunity? for occasion and our nature are like two inordinate lovers, they
seldom meet, but they sin together, and every act of sin, ties a new knot:
if we keep them asunder, the harm is prevented: and it is easier to deny a
guest at first, then to turn him out, having stayed a while: it is easier to
keep fire from flax, then to quench it after it is on fire: a man may spit out
a spark, but when once kindled, there is hardly any quenching of it. Why do we
pray, deliver us from evil, but that we imply, besides all other mischiefs,
that there is an infectious power in it, to make us evil? Let us therefore do
what we pray, and pray that we may do it: yea, O Lord, free us both from
speech and sight of these bauds and panders of vice, so far as is possible;
if not, at least from joining in league, or dwelling in house with, or having
dependency on such.

Oh how many are there, that, like the Pine Tree, with their very shadow,
hinder all other plants from growing under them: or, like the great mountain
Radish, which, if it be planted near the Vine, causes it to starve and
wither away? Alas! it is nothing to be godly in Abraham's house: but for a
man to dwell in the tents of Kedar, or to live in the Court of Sardanapalus;
and yet to keep himself upright, is a matter of great difficulty, especially,
for him that is not well rooted by time and experience. A sore new skind will
fret off again, with the least rubbing; yea, the very sight of evil is
dangerous, to such an one; lusting, for the most part, follows looking; as we
see in Eve, Genesis 3. 6. and David 2 Samuel 11. 2, 3. which makes Solomon speaking
of a strange woman, advise us to keep far from her, and not once come near
the door of her house, Prove. 5. 8. It is a hard matter for that soul, not to
fall into those vices, unto which the eyes and the ears are enured, not out of
love, but custom, we fall into some offenses.

We read that Persina, that Ethiopian Queen, in Heliodorus, by seeing a fair
picture of Perseus and Andromeda, was brought to bed of a fair white child;
whereas Pope Nicholas the third's Concubine, by seeing of a Bear, was brought
to bed of a Monster. I am sure this is true in the moral of it; which should
make us equally love good company, and hate evil. I know there be in every
place whole troops of evil persons; and where there are many pots boiling,
there cannot but be much scumme: so that a man shall find it, either
impossible, or hard, never to be amongst them, or shift off their
solicitations. Wherefore if at any time (as no ^lie is more importunate) they
thrust themselves into thy conversation, do as those which must necessarily
pass by a carrion in the way; hold thy breath, be alone in a multitude,
abhor to participate with them in their vices, and hasten to be out of their
air, as Peter did out of the high Priests hall, so soon as Christ looked upon
him: and if they yet follow thee, turn back to them, with the Angels farewell,
increpet te Dominus. And lastly, if by chance, with Peter, thou have taken the
least soil, or infection from these poisoned and pitchy Links, be sure to
scrape or brush it off thy soul again, by prayer, examination, and
humiliation: as they that come out of infected houses, air, or wash their
garments, for the more safety. Thus did Peter, not without cause, not without
benefit and commodity.

198.
IT is true, Object.
they will persuade us; that instead of being infected, Many objections
answered.
we may gain by their company; and tell us, that true Crystal may touch the
Toade, without being poisoned; that the Diamond will lie in the fire,
without being consumed; that fish may live in salt waters, and yet retain a
fresh taste; that though rust will fret into the hardest steel, yet it does not
eat into the Emerald; that though the Lodestone draws Iron after it, yet it
cannot stir Gold; nor the Jet steel, though it does straw; that though the
Sun hardens clay, yet it softens wax; that if a Ship has a sure Anchor, it
may ly safe any where; neither is it absolutely unlawful for us to keep them
company, seeing Christ kept company with Publicans and sinners of all sorts.

Answ. Here are good words, but no security; which therefore an experienced man
gives the hearing of, but stands (the while) upon his own guard. No charity
binds us to a trust of those whom we have found faithless. Credulity upon
weak grounds, after palpable disappointments, is the daughter of folly. He
that has once broken his faith, will not easily be trusted. I know Physicians
may converse with Leprous persons, uninfected; but then they must have stronger
Antidotes, then their natures give them, or else themselves shall stand in the
same need, and of Physicians become Patients, and need Physic: so that may be
lawful, in a sage and stayed person, which is unfit for an ungovernd eye once
to look upon. We read, Genesis 19. 17. that Lot and his wife, were forbidden to
look back at the destruction of Sodom; when to Abraham it was left at large,
and without restraint, he being a man of better ruled affections. Again, I
know the Devil cannot hurt me, so long as God is with me: as the best
Lodestone cannot draw Iron unto it, if the Diamond be by: yea, the very fear
of God, and thought that he looks on, as one spoke of grave Cat^, will keep
a man from yiedling to their temptations, as it did Joseph, touching his
Mistrisses allurements: and that faith, as it is no coward, so it is ever
victorious: what then? though faith be confident, yet it is not impudent; it
knows a guard of Angels will keep us in all our ways, but not in our
wanderings: though it may be lawful to come among them, yet wisdom forbeares
some lawful things, because they may be occasions of things unlawful. He that
abstaines from nothing that is lawful, will soon be brought to do that which
is unlawful. The note which comes too near in the Margent, will skip into the
Text, at the next impression. He that will go as near the ditch as he can,
will at some time or other fall in. He that will do all that he may, will
sometimes do what he ought not. It is hard for the best man to say how far
he will be tempted. If a man will put him self among Philistines, he cannot
promise to come forth innocent; or if he do, that soul which lives among
thorns, shall hardly thrive in Grace. How many have fallen into a fashion of
swearing, scoffing, drinking, out of the usual practice of others: as those
that live in an ill air, are infected with diseases? A man may pass through
Ethiopia unchanged, but he cannot dwell there, and not be discolored. When
once a man gives himself over to be the companion of vice, in the end he
becomes the very slave of vice. The Ox being tied to the Fig Tree, loses
his strength. Many strokes overthrow the strongest Oak. Many drops of rain,
though never so soft, pierce the hardest Marble, yea, even the flint stone. And
let graces be never so well fixed in a man's heart, yet he may soon have them
consumed and wasted this way, if he take not heed: as Snow and Ice cannot be
so hard congealed, but they will melt, if they come to the fire. And little do
our peremptory resolvers in this case know, or consider, either the insinuative
power of evil, or the treachery of their own hearts, in receiving it, or the
importunity of wicked deceivers, in obtruding it: they are the worse for their
society, and perceive it not.

An Egg covered with falt (as Philosophers teach) has the meat of it
consumed, whilst the shell is whole. And we read of many Towns, which have in
time been undermined, even with the most impotent and weak Creatures, as one
in Spain with Coneyes; in Thessalia with Moles; in France with Frogs; in
Africa with Flies.

Many an one receives poison, and knows not when he took it. Many breath in
this world, like men sleeping in a boat, are carried down the stream, even to
their gravesend, without waking, to think where they are.

No man proves extremely evil on the sudden: through many insensible
declinations do we fall from virtue. Sathan's agents are still scattering his
fiery darts, among the Army of Israel; and when they light upon wood, they
kindle; when upon flax, they flame; when upon gunpowder, they blow up all. They
therefore that love such intricate and perplexed walks, had need of Iron shoes.

True it is, that Christ conversed and kept company with Publicans and sinners,
(as the Physician with the sick) to heal their souls: neither did they make
him worse, but he made them better: but as true it is, that he was without the
level of temptation; and so is no general warrant. I will therefore not only
shun evil, but the means to come to it; and to avoid hurt, I will keep my
self out of shot: neither will I presume, being but a man, to follow my master
in that which he did as God. Indeed, many are so presumptuous of their
strength, that they think they can come in any company, and yet come off
clear: but he which comes to save one drowning, must be stronger then the
other, or else he will be drowned himself.

Pliny reports, that a Family near Rome would go upon live coals without
being burnt: had it hereupon been necessary for others to put the same in
practice? no: neither is it necessary for us to do that herein which our
Savior did. Our minds have not that ballast in them, which his had, and so are
sooner endangered, by the floods of wickedness.

Secondly, whereas they object: that we may gain by their company: I confess
it possible, for even the most venomous and ravenous things that are, have
their commodities, as well as their annoyances: And the Cock by scraping in a
dunghill, did once find a Jewel: Virgil from Enniu's dunge did Gold extract:
and Apothecaries of Vipers flesh can make an Antidote against poison: an
Harlots face may suggest chastnesse: and a sinful surfeit may prove an Antidote
for sin: yea, as external cold kindles the heat of the stomach: so we
find it recorded in holy Writ, that some, by a spiritual Antiperistasis, have
grown hotter in their zeal, by being encompassed with the outward cold of
wicked an irreligious company: like Roses and Lillies, which flourish the more
for being beset with Thorns: and Violets, which are the sweeter and more
odoriferous, for being beset with Garlike and Onions; for as much as they suck
and draw all the ill savours of the ground unto them. Thus it fared with Lot,
who served God better among the beastly Sodomites, then when he was separated
from them. And some others there are no doubt, who, as they owe not this grace
to themselves, so they are more for wonder, then imitation. For if Daniel found
a guard in the Lions Den, shall another thrust himself there into for shelter?
and if Peter walked upon the pavement of the water, did the rest of the
Disciples step forth and follow him? No.

Ob. But say some. By keeping them company we may win them, and happily
convert their souls.

Answ. I answer. Hope not so much to convert them; as fear that they will
pervert thee: for virtue is not so alluring as vice: the one spreads it self,
like poison in a vessel* the other is not half so dispersive. Sin, and
Hagar, are more fruitful then virtue and Sarah: falsehood, more successful
then truth. The sore eye infecteth the sound: the found will not mend the sore.
Vinegar will mar wine; wine will not mend vinegar, Infection is spreading and
catching: health is not so. An hundred sound persons shall sooner catch the
plague, from one infected person; then he receive his health from them.

Solomon that wonder of wisdom, might think by joining in affinity with his
neighbor Princes, and marrying their Daughters, to win those Heathens to the
Kingdom of God: but he was deceived, for he could do no good upon them; they
wrought him too much evil. And does not experience teach us, that the good are
sooner perverted by the bad, then the bad converted by the good? even as a
tainted air does more easily infect a sound body, then an wholesome can clear
the sick.

We read of certain Magneticall, or Adamantine Rocks, in the Isles of
Moniole, which draw all ships unto them, that have any Iron pinnes, holding
them so fast, that they are not able to stir: evil society, are such Rocks;
holy men, the ships; natural and inbred corruption, the Iron pinnes: he that
will be safe, let him keep far enough from such Rocks.

A good man, joined in league with one that is wicked; is like a living man,
bound to a dead corpse, which will sooner suffocate him, then he revive that:
or, like an Isickle, can endure the rough northern wind of persecution well
enough, but melts with the heat of the Sun, sweet allurements of the
world, and the flesh. The children of God are, as it were, dead to their lusts;
but if they should tempt God, by a too familiar society with the vicious; who
knows, but as live coals will kindle dead ones; so their evil speeches and
actions may kindle and inflame them with the love and liking of lewdness?
Indeed, as one said to his suppliant, make me a Diviner, and I will make thee
rich: so may a good man say to a vicious; make me Angelical, that is,
incapable of being seduced, and I Will do my best to make thee a Convert.

199.
3 OUr entirenesse with wicked men feoffes us, 3 That we may not be infeoffed
in their punishments.
not only in their sins, but oftentimes in their punishments also; as it
fared with the 36. men which were slain before Aye, for Achan's sake, Joshua
7. where we see the innocence of so many thousand Israelites was not so
prevalent, to expiate his one sin; as his one sin was, to tainte and bring
judgment upon all Isr^el. If the Storke be taken damagefeceant with the
Cranes, she is enwrapped in the same net, and cannot complain that ^he is
surprised. He that walks with the wise (says Solomon) shall be wise; but a
companion of fools, shall be afflicted, Pro. 13. 20. This Augustine well
observes, speaking of the religious, taken amongst the rest of the Goths, Iure
amaram vitam sentire, quia peccantibus amari esse nolue^ unt. And hereupon
Moses separates Israel from Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, saying, d^part from the
Tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs; le^st ye perish with
them, Number. 16. 26. And does not God himself say to his people, touching
Babylon, Go out of her, my people, that ye be not partaker of her sins, and
that ye receive not of her plagues? Rev. 18. 4. Where sin is let in,
punishm^nt will not be kept out. Yea, if Lot had stayed in Sodom, he had been
destroyed: if his Sons would have gone out, they had every man escaped.

Indeed, we cannot be too far off from such company; and it were happy if
they were kept by themselves; for so long as the infected person is shut up,
his plague does not spread. And besides the benefit of our safety, wickedness
would soon be ashamed of it self, if it were not for the encouragement of
companions. Solitariness is the fittest Antidote for spiritual infection. It
were happy for the wicked man, if he would be separated from himself.
Antisthenes would often say, It was a great oversight, sithence they purged
their Wheat from Darnell, and their wars from cowardly Soldiers, that they
purged not their common wealth from lewd and wicked people.

Or if our persons escape scot-free, yet we may suffer in our estates, and be
crossed in our most weighty designs and determinations, only for joining in
league or friendship with Gods enemies. Because thou have joined thy self with
Ahaziah (says Eleezar to Iehosophat) the Lord has broken thy works; and the
Ships were broken, that they were not able to go to T^rshish, 2 Chro. ^0. 37.

But admit they can not infe^ffe us, either in their sin or punishment: yet
their society will be a shrewd vexation to us. As let a religious man fall into
their company, as an honest man may fall into the hands of thieves, they will
conspire how to affl^ct his eyes, with unchaste visions; his ears, with
fearful oaths, his unwilling appetite, with drunken healths; which even a
civilized Pagan would abhor. We read that Clitomachus the wrestler (though a
great company-keeper, yet) if he had heard but one filthy word, would presently
depart. How was just, Lot vexed with the uncleanly conversation of his wicked
neighbors? Sodom was worse then a Jaile to his righteous soul: and report
lies, if our Jailes be not much like to Sodom, the very dens of mischief, the
Schools of wickedness: a Malefactor learnes more vilany there, then ever he
knew before: drunkenness and blasphemy, usurp the place of mortification and
humility.

Or lastly, if their society be not a vexation to our minds; at least it will
be a great disparagement to our names* every one will conclude, almost
infallibly, such as our company is, such is our disposition. The common Proverb
is, like will to like, And, Birds of a feather, will flock together. When
Iepthah was himself in banishment, there gathered to him idle fellows, such as
himself, Judges 11. 3. When David was in trouble, and vexed in mind himself,
their flockt unto him all those that were in trouble, vexed in mind, or that
were in debt, even four hundred of them, to the Cave of Adullam, 1 Sa. 22. 2.
Yea, our Savior meets no less then ten Lepers in one knot. Fellowship is
that we all naturally affect, though it be in Leprosy: even Lepers will flock
to their fellows, where shall we find one spiritual leper alone? drunkards,
profane persons, heretics, will be sure to consort with their matches. And
hereupon the Laced^m onians, when they would certainly be informed, what the
disposition and behavior, of any one was, would wisely inquire with what
persons, they were linked in fellowship. And indeed, he that makes himself a
companion of all, sells his reputation very cheap: it being as great an
indecorum, for a holy Christian to be in the company of graceless persons, as
it is for a reverend Divine to sit upon the Stage in a public Theater; or an
old man to dance with little children in the streets.

Base company (says one) kills both our fame, and our souls: it gives us
wounds, which will never admit of healing. How many have irrecoverably lost
their good names, by keeping company with suspected persons? and whether the
report be true or false, it is no easiething to disprove a slander, for like
an unruly spirit once raised, it is hard to conjure down again. A man's good
name is much easier kept, then recovered,

And thus you see, that evil company endangers our souls: or could our souls
be free, yet our persons are in danger; or could our souls and persons both
be safe, yet our estates are in jeopardy: or could our souls, bodies, and
estates be secure, yet our fame would suffer, and our good name lie at the
stake. Wherefore etc.

200.
BUt admit we could keep them company 4. Because their company will bereave us
of much comfort, whichother wise we should enjoy.
yet this inconvenience would ensue: their company would bereave us of much
good, which otherwise we should enjoy, being alone; it fareing with the godly
wise, as with Saint Ambrose, who was wont to say, I am never less alone, then
when I am all alone, for then I can enjoy the presence of my God without
interruption. They are able to say, as Du^artus, and (before him) Scipio, I
have never better company, then when I have no company* for then can I freely
entertain my own thoughts, and converse with all the learned, which have
been in former ages.

Antisthenes being asked what fruit he had reaped of all his study? made
answer, I have learned by it, both to live, and walk with my self. And
Alphonsus King of Arragon being demanded, what company he liked best? replied,
Books, for these (says he) without fear, or fl^ttery, or any reward, tell me
faithfully all that I desire to know. Cicero was, and I am of his mind* and
though I be no Hermit, to sit away my days in a dull Cell, yet will I choose,
rather to have no companion then a bad one.

When Cato Vtican, in vacation times, and at his best leisure, went to recreate
himself in the country, he used to carry with him the best Philosophers, and
choicest books. Algerius an Italian Martyr said, He had rather be in prison
with Cato, then with Caesar in the Senate house: so was it more comfortable, to
be with Philpot in his Cole-house, then with Bonner in the Palace: Boner's
conscience made his Palace a Cole-house, and a dungeon; whiles Philpot's made
the Cole-house a Palace. The state of grace is heaven upon earth; and he that
knows the sweetness of Gods presence, will deem it more tolerable to be
ever alone, then never able to be so.

When I read of Hiero the Tyrant of Syracusa, and other such, that gave over
their Kingdoms, to live a solitary life, I somewhat wonder: I should not, to
hear of a religious and Christian King that did so. It is impossible for the
natural man to be so merry, in company; as the believer alone; yea, says S.
Augustine, the tears of those that pray, are sweeter then the joys of the
Theater. Indeed, a witty jest may make a man laugh more, and louder: but he who
has an inheritance fallen to him, feels a more solid joy within: so he that
enjoyes his Savior, and has the assurance of heaven, is truly merry at the
heart, and keeps Hilary Term all his life. And indeed, nothing in the world
is worth envy, besides the condition of a true Christian.

But to what end do I tell a blind man, how glorious and bright a creature the
Sun is? or a poor man, what sums of money are in the Kings Exchequers? To
so many as are unrenewed I speak in Parables, Revel. 2. 17. Yea, this seems
to them a Paradox, that the people of God should be a merry people: for
contrariwise, they dream of nothing but solitariness, and melancholy: as the
common people thought Tully to be most idle, when he studied most: or as the
Husbandman in Aesope objected idleness to the Poet: but as he replied, I am
never so idle as in thy company: so may the religious, we are never so
solitary, never so melancholy; as when in society with you that are vicious.
This was David's case, which makes him cry out, W^e is me, that I must remain
in M^seck, and dwell in the Tents of Kedar: he found it a heavy yoke to be
yoked with irreligious companions.

And a double reason may be given of it, though we fear not to suffer either
in our persons, goods, or good names (as before you have it.) For first, the
soul that lives among thorns, shall hardly thrive, they are such Backbyasses
to a godly life, that they will do what they can, to hinder our goodness to
heaven, and the goodness of heaven to us; they will wither all our good parts
and qualities which are in us; like an evil North Wind, they blow upon the
buds of our graces, and nip them.

2. Secondly, It would make a man's heart to bleed, to hear and consider, how
swearing, blaspheming, cursed speaking, railing slandering* quarrelling,
contending, jesting mocking, scoffing, flattering, lying, dissembling, vain,
corrupt, and filthy scolding, scurrilous, lose, and idle talking, does overflow
with them in all places: so that such as fear God, had better be any where;
then in the company of most men. Now I were madd, if I should so affect
company, as to live voluntarily where vexations shall daily salute me.

Indeed, a man is not rightly said to live, until he has abandoned wicked
society. Similis having lived seven years apart from the world, after a long
time spent in a military life, he left this Epitaph behind him, Here lies old
Similis, yet one that lived but seven years. This made Frederick the third,
Elector Palatine, when some such friends of his desired his company, to answer,
I have lived enough to you; let m^e now live to my self, and with my Lord
Christ. Yea, Saint Augustine, ten days before he dyed, desired none might
come to him, that so, in that time, he might the better fit him self for God.
And indeed, that soul can never enjoy God, that is not sometimes retired.

O that we could, in any reasonable time; give a stop to our madding and
straying fancies: that we could, after so long time spent in the lusts of the
flesh, and pride of life, bring home our cogitations and intentions unto our
selves, shake off these violent hold-fasts, bid our companions farewell, which
have too long engaged our souls, and estranged us from our selves.

But when we are so wedded, combined, and glewed to the world, it is no easy
matter to make a safe retreat: it is a fleaing to some to be sundred; thereby
you pull away some piece of themselves.

In this case, what we cannot do all at once, let us gain upon our selves by
degrees* go back step by step; first, block up one passage, then another. Will
you know what course Demosthenes took in this case? He* to the end that his
acquaintance and nearest friends might not (by carrying him abroad, according to
their custom) withdraw him from his study and books, caused the hair of his
head to be shaved off; and after took an order, that they should not peep out,
until he had shook off his consorts, by continually making them loose their
labors. It were happy for our young studients, if they would a little imitate
him; if they were not overmuch affected and addicted to company keeping; if
they would but consider, that friends are the thieves of time, the most
precious jewel they can part withal.

201.
BUt here it will be objected. Object.
That we are melancholy persons, O^j^ction of joy and goodfellowship answered.
strayers from the drove of mankind, and whereas nature has made us sociable
creatures, in making us men, religion has al^ered to a crazied disposition,
whereby we are mispleasing to all, as all to us.

To this is answered. Answ.
Suppose it were true (but I shall in place more convenient prove, that the
religious only enjoy true mirth, and that worldly mirth is more talked of then
felt, spiritu^ll joy more felt then talked of, though I may appeal to any man's
conscience* that has been softened with the unction of grace, and truly tasted
the powers of the world to come) yet they think it is better being a good
Christian, then a good fellow; and hold it far better, in good sadness to
be saved with a few, as Noah was in the Arc, then in good fellowship, with
the multitude, to be drowned in sin, and damned for company.

We are content ( says one) to pass, through somewhat more unsociably, into
happiness; it suffices we shall meet with good company at our journeys end,
in the kingdom of heaven, even an innumerable company of Saints and Angels.

The men of the world practice, what once a Jester spoke, who, when a great
Lord asked him, whether he would go to Heaven or Hell? answered, to hell, for
there (quoth he) I shall be sure to meet your Lordship, and the greatest part
of mine acquaintance. But it is not so with the true Christian: he little loves
Christ, that will not follow him without company: and his zeal is cold to
heaven, whom the example of numbers can turn another way. Wherefore let us say,
as much as Peter said; and do more, then Peter did; though all men should
forsake thee, yet will I nt leave thee, O Savior: neither magnitude of
Princes, nor multitude of people, shall prevail with me.

But the world wrongs religion, when they accuse it to be an enemy to
goodfellowship: for she has not a follower, which does not say with David,
Psa, 119. 63. I am a companion to all them that fear thee, and keep thy
precepts: for the godly man's chief delight is in the Saints, and such as
excel in virtue, Psalm 16. 3. Yea, and their fellowship is so good,
profitable, and delectable, that as Synesius was of opinion, that King Hieron
got more by Simonides acquaintance, then Simonides did by his; and as we read
that Pharaoh, Saul, and Nebuchadnezzar were more pleasured by Joseph, David,
and Daniel, then Daniel, David, and Joseph were by them: so I persuade my
self, great persons would find themselves more then required, if they would
vouchsafe the company of some poor Saints: for a wise and holy Christian (like
his Lord and Master) wheresoever he goes, makes better cheer then he finds,
in an happy exchange of spiritual repast for bodily. Yea, as Plato accounted it
one of the four great privelidges* for which he was especially bound to
nature, that he lived in the time of Socrates: so they should think it none of
the least favors, for which they were bound to bless God, that they enjoyed
so religious and holy society.

It is true indeed, there is a supposed good fellowship, to which religion is
an enemy; because it is an enemy to this holy fellowship of the Saints: and
good reason, the one are to the other, as Wolves are to the Lambs: now is it
any marvel if the Lambs care not greatly for the company of the Wolves? the
Lamb would not willingly be alone; yet it is far better when solitary, then in
a wolvish society.

Generous minds will associate with their matches and equals, or none: as
David being a King, when he was expulsed his own Country, resorts to none but
Kings: for first he goes to Achis, King of Gath; then to the King of Moab, 1 Samuel 21. 10. and 1 Samuel 22. 3.

Neither are our ding-thirsts, who lavish out their estates, and throw the
house out at windows (as we use to say) good fellows, though they call
themselves so: for good fellows and evil men are incompatible; like Simeon
and Levi, sworn brothers, but brethren in evil; which is too evil a
brotherhood, for an honest man to make one in, or (indeed) a wise man: for is
not ^ee a fool, that will sell Heaven for company* as a great many true
drunkards do? For my own part, if I have good company, I will cherish them as
Lot did his Angels, which were sent for guardians: if I have any bad, I will
study to loose them, least by keeping them, I loose my self in the end.

202.
5 ANother reason why we should separate our selves from their society, 5, That
we may be at peace with all: which is not possible* if we k^ep them company.
is, that according to the Apostles rule, s^ far as is possible, we may have
peace with all men, which is no way obtainable, but by a separation. A wicked
man (says Solomon) is abomination to the just: and he that is upright in his
way, is abomination to the wicked, Prove. 29. 27. if so, either no communion, or
no peace.

Believers, and such as are enemies to the Cross of Christ, can never be
reconciled, at least in heart. What communion can righteousness have with
unrighteousness? You may as well tie a sure knot between a Cobweb and a
Cable, as a true and fast love-knot, between the child of God and a wicked man.
These two yoked together, agree like the Harp and the Harrow: they are as
suitable, as a wooden Leg, and a Thigh of flesh: which makes the Apostle Romans
12. 18. in enjoining us to have peace with all men, to add, if it be possible:
and in another place to say, be not unequally yoked with infidels, for as we
should not be yoked with infidels; so we should not be yoked with common
drunkards, and swearers, nor with Atheists, which are no better then infidels;
for that also is to be unequally yoked, unless we be Atheists too.

As the Jews might not consort with the Canaanites: so we may not consort
with them, which are like Can^anites. Wi^e Solomon charge us from God, that
we should not keep company with gluttons and drunkards, Proverbs 23. 20.
and the Apostle enjoyneth us, not to have any fellowship, nor so much as eat
with a drunkard, 1 Cor. 5. 11. and that we should have no fellowship with
these unfruitful works of darkness, or, if unvvittingly and unvvillingly we
be thrust into any such society, we must not imitate, but reprove them,
Ephesians 5. 11. and we profess our selves the servants of God: now they
are bad servants, who will keep company with their masters enemies,
especially, after he has straightly charged them to the contrary.

Alas! what should we do in the presence of base persons, when even our
sober ignorance, in ill courses, is more then disesteemed of the world? Yea,
when it is not enough for them to be bad themselves, except they rail at the
good? when if there be one in a company, that abhorres impious language, they
will blaspheme on purpose to vex him? when they will think themselves
slighted, if they be not sent away drunk? when to depart sober, is held in
civility? and we cannot talk idly enough, nor do lewdly enough, to bear them
company; we can neither say as they say, nor be silent when we see and hear
their baseness. As whom would it not stir, to hear oaths strive for number,
with words; scoffs, with oaths; vain speeches, with both? we love neither to
bite, nor fawn; yet we can not forbear to speak the naked truth; which if we
do, will breed a quarrel. As for instance; one, jests pleasantly with his
Maker; another, makes himself sport with Scripture; a third, fills his mouth
with oaths of sound; a fourth, scoffs at the religious; one, speaks villainy;
another, laughs at it; a third, defends it; one, makes himself a swine,
another, a devil. Now who, that is not all ^arth, can endure it? Yea, who,
having grace, can hear such wickedness, and feels not some spark of holy
indignation arise in him, while he thinks of it? or who having not lost his
spiritual sent, can endure the savor of such noisome and stinking breath, as
their rotten lunges send forth. Well born children are touched to the quick,
with the injuries of their Parents: and not thus to be moved, is to confess
our selves bastards. Indeed, men of steel stomachs can digest any discourse,
though never so course; but the gracious know, that as they must render an
account for every idle word, so likewise for their idle silence; for in this
case not to reprove them either by word, or gest^re, is to do the same things
in judgment and conscience, which the other does actually. Every evil we see
does either vex, or infect us. The very sight of sin makes a man either sad,
or guilty: if we see it, and be not sorrowful, we are sinful. If Lot had not
been vexed with the beastly Sodomites, God had been vexed with him: yea, in
such a case not to be very angry, is to make God very angry. Ely heard of his
sons impiety, no doubt with grief enough, but not with anger enough;
therefore he is punished with hearing of their destruction, that was too
remiss in hearing of their transgression. It is easy to be guilty of another
wickedness, even our very permission appropriates crimes to us: we need no
more guiltiness of any sin, then our willing tolleration. All sins which
we give allowance to, being committed, or not hindered by us, if we may, are
ours, as if we committed them: first, Commanders; 2. Abbettors; 3. Counselors;
4. Consenters; 5. Commenders; 6. Connivers; 7. Concealers; 8. not hinderers;
each of these will be found guilty before Gods Tribunal. What says the
Prophet to King Iehosaphat, would thou help the wicked, and not only so,
but would thou love them that hate the Lord? therefore for this thing the
wrath of the Lord is upon thee, 2 Chronicles. 19. 2. we need do no more to bring
the wrath of God upon us, then even to love and favor those which hate him.

How much better then to oppose thy friend by reproving him, then that God
should reprove thee for being at one with him.

But this is no friendly part: yes, the Scripture affirms, Objections answered.
that not to tell ones Brother plainly of his faults, at least, if there be
probability of doing good, is to hate him in his heart, Levit, 19. 17. And
Philosophy tell us, that is truly perfect love, which, to profit and do good,
fears not to hurt or offend; that admonitions and corrections are the
chiefest offices of friendship. Diogenes when they called him Dog, for his
sharp kind of rebuking, would answer, That other Dogs used to bite their
enemies, but he his friends, for their greater good. and Scipio the elder, when
his friends, for so doing, turned his enemies, was able to say, I have given
mine enemies as much cause to love me, as my friends.

Phocio^ when a friend of his would have cast himself away, would not suffer
him, saying, I was made thy friend for this purpose: and to King Antipater,
thou can not have me both for thy friend and flatterer. Indeed, a flattering
friend is a bitter enemy, yea (as one sweetly) no enemy can be so mortal, as
those officious Clyents, whose flattery soothes a man up in wickedness; for
they are traitors to the soul, and by a pleasing violence kill the best part
eternally. Whence Euripides exhorts men to get such friends, as would not spare
to displease them, saying, friends are like wines, those that being new are
hard and harsh, prove best; the most pleasing, are least lasting: and indeed,
he that loves not such a friend, hates himself.

A wise man will say to his friend, love heartily, and then speak what thou will. And for a man not to chide his friend, least he should offend him, is as
if (when he were ready to be drowned) he should fear to catch him by the hair
of the head, lest he should loose a few of them. Wherefore either let them abide
thee no friend to their faults, or no friend to themselves.

And what if admonition and reproof be as unwelcome to thy friend, as water
into a Ship? what if it sound no better to him, then music out of tune; or
taste no sweeter, then bitter pills, which si^ke men take with an unwilling
willingness? will thou neglect the office of a friend, to avoid the suspicion
of an enemy?

Indeed, if thou meet with a contentious fool, thou shall do wisely, in not
answering whatsoever he objects: for it is more policy and discretion to gain
a friend without trouble, then a foe with it: and our Savior says, give ye
not that which is holy to Dogs, neither cast ye your Pearl before Swine; least
they tread them under their feet, and turning again all to rent you, Matthew.
7. 6.

Again, as in Gods and their own behalf we are bound to reprove them: so in
our neighbors also, to whom, in this case, we owe a duty: for, ^dmit we are in
company when, and where our brothers good name is taken away by false report;
it is our duty to defend the truth, in his behalf: we must neither backbite
others, nor be willing to give ear unto backbiters of others. It was an honest
speech of one; as I will be my present friends self, so I Will be my absent
friends deputy, to say for him what he would, and cannot speak for himself.

But thou will ask me. What need men trouble themselves with that which so
little concerns them?

My answer shall be such another question. What needed Moses to have afflicted
himself with the afflictions of others, that he might work their deliverance,
when himself was at ease and pleasure in the court of Pharaoh? what needed
Jonathan have purchased his fathers displeasure, and brought his own life in
jeopardy, that he might justify David in his uprightness, and save his life?
what needed Calvin, in the year 1556, when Perin had conspired against the
estate of Geneva, have run into the midst of their naked swords, to appease
the tumult? what needs the hand cast it self betwixt a blow and the head,
though it be cut off by this mean? what needs the eye serve more to the use of
the other members, in being watchful rightly to direct them, then for it
self? A good heart cannot abide to be happy alone; which is a religious
answer, to a reasonable question unreasonably moved. Yea, admit it were not a
duty for one member to seek the good of another, or of the whole, and that God
had not enjoined us so to do: I am sure it is a pardonable fault, to do less
good to our selves, that we may do more good to, and for others.

But suppose we offend them not this way; yet we shall another, if we keep
them company. The natural man conceits of himself, far beyond what another
esteems him: and in case he finds he is undervalued, will fly in your face,
and perhaps do you more mischeife, then can easily be repaired: as that was
done in one quarter of an hour by our first Parents, which tended to the ruin
of them, and all mankind. It is usual with drunkards to kiss when they meet,
and kill when they part. Drunken Alexander kill^d Clytus, for whom sober
Alexander would have killed himself. The Danes and Norwayes once purposing for
England, fell drunk on shipboard, and so slasht one another, that there was an
end of their voyage. Out of their gallant disposition, you shall have one kill
another, upon the interpretation of a word; a manifest confession, that their
life is not much worth, since they will sell it so good cheap: yea, there are
not wanting of them that resemble Fimbria of Rome, who meeting a Citizen that
he hated, gave him a deadly thrust into the body with his sword, and the next
day entered an action against him, that he had received but part of his blade
into his body, and not all, as he meant it.

Yea, perhaps they may make you to do that which you never dreamt of: like
Herod, who cut off John Baptist's head, only to answer the expectation of the
standers by, Matthew. 14. 9. As for flattery it never wants welcome, while
self-love is at home: but the plain dealing man cannot live among these
Vipers, and not be stung by them: yea, he lives most in trouble, that most
seeks to have peace with them by a familiarity.

Well then, if they are so offensive to the stomach of our company, that they
will not let us be at peace; our best way will be to spevv them out, to deal
with our old vicious consorts, as the Fox in the Fable did by his Fleas: who
wading backward into the water, by degrees, drew them all into a lock of Wool,
which he had in his mouth, and then left it swimming; even leave them, without
taking leave of them; or if you like not to tear friendship asunder upon the
sudden, you may unsowe it by little and little. He that would not continue a
friend, may but neglect him, and have his aim.

203.
OB. The agreement of wicked men not worthy the name of peace.
But I hear none boast so much of peace, as the ungodly; nor none taxed so
with contention, as the religious.

Answ. Boast of it they may, but it is apparent that the way of peace they have
not so much as known: indeed, they have some kind of agreement among
themselves; and so have Serpents, and Bears, and Wolves: it is a rare thing,
to see one Wolf devour, or fight with another: yea, they have made a covenant
with death, and are at agreement with Hell, I say, 28. 15 and yet: as there is
no peace to the wicked, Isa. 57. 21. so there is no peace among the wicked; for
every combination in evil, is rebellion, and not peace; rather a consp^racy,
then a concord; like the agreement of Absalom and Achitophel, combining
together against David; or of Herod and Pil^te, conspiring against Christ; or
of the f^lse Apostles, plotting against Paul, so meeting in malice to do
mischief: but a goldy dissension is better then such a wicked peace.

Neither can any wonder, that wicked men do so cons^ire in evil, that there
is such unanimity in the broachers and abbetters of it; if he but take notice
of those Devils, which being many in substance, were yet one in name, action,
habitation, even a whole Legion in one man, Mark, 5. 9. all the praise of
concord is in the subject; if that be holy, the consent is angelical; if
sinful, devilish; true peace is to have peace with God, war with our
lusts, To. 5. 1. and 7. 22. 23. peace with virtue, war with vice: whereas
they have peace and are at league with their sins, but are at war with God,
and good men all at once: but a just war is a thousand times better, then
such an ill conditioned peace; yea, it no way deserves the name of peace,
except we be at enmity with the Serpent, at unity within our selves: we ought
so to be at peace with men, as that we do not war with God and his graces:
peace must be followed with holiness, Heb. 12. 14. wherefore Zachary joyneth
faith, peace, and truth together, Zach. 8. 16. and St. Paul, peace and
righteousness, peace and edification, peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans
14. 17. 19. 20. etc. Thus the Scripture sets us our bounds for peace, which we
may not pass; and shows that ungodly men are not guilty of this grace; that
they do but talk of peace, not practice it.

But suppose we could enjoy peace in their company; A d^unkard ca^ never love
him that is sober and religiou^.
yet we can never expect to have their loves: for drunkards only love
drunkards, and one wicked man another; but care not a rush for any that are
good: being like Phalaris the Tyrant, who would never grant any request, except
it were to a dissolute woman, but such he never denied. Likeness we know is
the cause of love, and love the cause of likeness; whereas the beleiver and
the unbeleiver are altogether unlike; the one being crucifi^d and dead to the
world, Gal. 6. 14. but made alive in Christ, 1 Cor. 15. 22. The other being
spiritually dead, even while they are alive. 1 Timothy 5. 6.

We seldom see different dispositions entirely loving: for hence grows the
height of friendship, when two similary souls do blend in their commixions.
And hence it is, that two friends are said to come into Vulcan's shop, to beg
this boon of him: that he would either bea^e them on his Anvile, or melt them
in his Furnace both into one, the which he granted. I'ts likeness that makes
the true love knot of friendship; when we find another of our own
disposition, it appears the same soul in a divided body. Nature that makes us
love our selves, makes us, with the same reason, love those that ar^ like us. A
friend is a more sacred name, then a Brother, Pro. 18. 24. For what availes it
to have the bodies from the same original, when the souls within them differ?

And yet some ( Rehoboam- like) passing over the religious, will join
themselves with ungodly persons; like as some put away honest wives, and go to
harlots: wherein they deal as wisely, as if a man should cast away his fleshy
leg, and set on another of Wood.

Causa patroci^io non bona pejor erit. Or, A wicked man^ love mercenary
inconstant and not worth the having.
admit thou should enjoy a wicked man's love; it is but mercenary, base, and
inconstant, and so not worth the having. Indeed, there was never such abject
and servile prostitutions of presentations, as life, soul, devotion,
adoration, servant, slave, etc. as there is now amongst our drunkards and
rorers, and what love they express to one, they profess to all; every one
they know, or salute, is their friend: but friendship so distracted, like as
the River Ganges was by Cyrus, into 365. brooks, both looses her name and
nature: a lover of so many, never loves any.

Or, admit a drunkard do love thee: either he loves thee for his own sake,
because he has some pleasure, or profit, or credit by thee, (as prosperity
procures friends, no less then adversity proves them) which is, with
Craterus, to love the King, rather, then with Ephaestion, to love Alexander:
now I do not hold him wo^thy thanks, that professes me kindness for his
own ends.

Or secondly, he loves only thy body or natural parts, which is but the worst
piece of thee; and love to the body, is but the body of love; the soul of
love, is the love of the soul.

Neither does he truly love, that loves the body more then ^he mind and soul,
or common gifts before saving graces; this love as it is never long lived, so
it is of^ but feigned; as you shall have drunkards and dissembling politicians
salute one another, with God save you, at their meeting; and wish one another
hanged, ^t their parting; Italian-like, they will be glorious and complementall
in their in vitations, but if you accept of their offer, they will hate you for
it ever after. A drinking friendship, is but a drunken friendship: and believe
it, thou will find those friends firmest, that thy vertue^ purchase thee: these
will love thee, when thy wealth is gone: whereas those that be won without
desert, will also be lost without a cause: you need but be an Arbitrator
between two such friends to make them both your enemies: things that differ in
their end, will surely part in their way: now thy end, is to gain him; his
end, to make a gain of thee: for let the passage of profit be stopped, his love
is likewise at a stand: have you deserved never so well from him, the denial
of one favor, nay, an health, shall drown the memory of many fore-performed
ones: which is all one, as if for the abortion of one child, a man should kill
all the former issue: whereas the good man's thanks for old favors, lives even
in the blows of injury: or can you not feed these vermin as you have done,
away they go, like a Sun Dial, you shall be no longer regarded, then you
are shined on by prosperity: yea, Rats run not faster away from an house on
fire; nor lice from a dead body, then they from poverty: and if ever it be your
misery to stand in need of them, look for no other requital, then Job had of
his carnal friends, whom he compares to a deceitful Brook, which in winter is
hard frozen with cold, in Summer dried up with heat; between winter and
Summer passing away, always deceitful, never of use, Job. 6. 14. to 19.

Yea, a man may say of such friends, as a learned Antiquary said of Rum^ey
Marsh, bad in Winter, hurt^ull in Summer, never good: nay, this comparison
falls short, for thou have sped well, if such friends prove not dangerously
hurtful, as well as helpelesse. Have I not known some of them resemble the
Snake, which when a kind Husbandman had taken out of the cold, and cherished in
his bosom, and she had recovered her lively heat, and was grown lusty,
singled out him ungratefully to try her first sting upon? or a Promotour, that
in Lent eats flesh at your table, and yet is the first that accuses thee to
the Magistrate. If Ziba be waxed great under Mephibosheth, he will give him a
lift for all he has. A promoted Beggar has not seldom renounced his advancer.

And what else can be looked for from them? They cannot make conscience of
civil duties, who make none of divine. If a man have cast off his God, he will
easily cast off his friend. They that have broken their faith with him, will
keep no faith with us. When Religion is once gone, humanity will not stay long
after.

I take leave of this point, with a caution. Reveal to such men no secrets;
for he that now loves thee dearly, may come to hate thee deadly: nor believe a
word that they say; for they are like Antigonus, who never denied any suit,
that was asked; but withal, never performed any thing that he granted; for
what they promise when they are drunk, they forget when they are sober; or
like Saul, who being persuaded of David's worth and loyalty, swears, as the
Lord lives he shall not die, 1 Samuel 19. 6. yet within four verses, for all
his oath, he da^ts a Spear at him, intending to nail him to the wall; and in
the next verse, he sends messengers to his house to kill him; or like the
Council of Constance, who made promise to John Husse of a conduct and safe
return; yet, like forsworn persecuters, put him to death.

204.
OB. But here some of them will reply. That we lay the saddle upon the wrong
horse, Objections answered.
when we tax them for want of peace, love, and friendship; in that the
religious only show inconstancy, by bidding farewell to their old friends and
acquaintance, so soon as they embrace religion.

Answ* Change in the vicious were a ra^e ve^tue.
To this is answered. First that constancy, except it be in the truth and in a
good cause, is impudency: change in the vicious is as great a virtue, as
constancy in the virtuous. The Almaines were praised for changing their
customs, which were found to be but bad before, as Tacitus affirms.
Constancy in things ill, is so far from being a virtue, that it is an
absolute vice. Of things imperfect, change is the way to perfect them. The
Gentiles became believers, the Jews Infidells, Zacheus turns from the world,
Demas turns to the world, Paul turns an Apostle, Judas an Apostate: I would
feign know, whether charge in the Gentiles, Zacheus and Paul, was not as great
a virtue, as it was a vice in the Jews, Demas, and Judas?

Saint Paul was inconstant indeed; for to day (as it were) he breathed out
threatenings, and slaughter against the Disciples of Christ and to morrow he
preaches Christ in the Synagogue: what then? will any (not debauched) censure
him of fickleness for it? nay, will not all wise men think it a great honor
to him, and commend him for shaking hands with the high Priests, and his fellow
Pursevants, when once he heard that voice from heaven? Act. 9. 4.

There is not any so near unto us, but if he fall from God, we may fall from
him. It merits the name of wilfulness, when we will not admit of a lawful
chang to the better.

As Philocrates sported with Demosthenes: you may not marvel Athenians, that
Demosthenes and I do differ, for he drinks water, and I drink wine: so some
laugh at us for being sober with Rhenish; and we as much pity them, for being
drunk with Canary. Again, they censure us of inconstancy; we them of
impudency. Now in this case when that is reputed ridiculous by one, which is
accounted sage by another as wise; what shall we do, but make Gods Word the
umpier? Wherefore, in all changes, I will have regard to these three things,
God's approbation, mine own benefit, and the not harming of my neighbor; and
then where the change is not a fault, I will never think it a disgrace, though
the great exchange, the World, should judge it so.

Even modesty, in some, is a vice; when out of a weak flexibility of nature, a
man has not courage enough, Even modesty in some is a v^ce.
to deny the request of a seeming friend.

If a man never abandoneth evil, until he abandoneth evil company, it is
high time to take courage: yea, the longer we have been with them, the more
need have we to hasten out of them. If this satisfy not, as the Emperor
Frederick said to certain of his Minions, that were importunate to get into
their hands the ancient demeasne of the Empire, that he would rather be
accounted of small l^berallity, then perjured: even so had we, in this case
rather be accounted inconstant, then be unconscionable.

To the second part of the objection, I answer. That true love and friendship
is only among good men. True love and friend ship only among good men.
The wicked may talk of it, and one drunkard may profess to another that he
loves him as well as himself; and therein speak truth, for, says Augustine
most elegantly, to such an one, thou love thy self, so as thou will destroy
thy self; and thou will destroy him whom thou love as thy self; yea, better
then themselves; for you shall have one Ruffian salute another, with, God save
you Sir, but after some strange attestations, swear away himself with, God
damn me Sir: now how can any wise man think him a friend, that is his own
enemy? he that is evil to himself, to whom will he be good?

But see the depth of such a man's love, and whether it be not to damn thy body
and soul everlastingly. S. Ambrose tells us of one, who solicited a godly woman
to incontinency, saying, he infinitely loved her: she answers, if you love me
so well as you seem, put one of your fingers into the flame, till your flesh
be burnt off: he replys, that was no part of love in her to require it: yes,
said she, if yours be love, to cause both my body and soul to be burnt in hell
fire, for ever, which by consequence will follow, if I yield to your request,
and take your counsel. Oh that thou had the wit to answer the drunkard, when
he tempts thee, thus.

Indeed there is a kind of agreement, which is strengthened by sin it self:
as if one fee the keeper of a wench, his secrecy is bought for ever. But all
this while, if one call another, friend, it is but to give him a nickname,
whereof he is not guilty: for true friendship is so sacred, holy, and pure,
that it will not be used in evil: which made Pericles, when he was desired by
a friend of his, to aid him with false witness, answer, that he would be
friend him as far as the Altar, meaning so far, as stood with piety and
religion, or his duty to God, but no further; and Phocion refuse to help his
son in law Cariles in judgment, being accused for bribery, saying withal,
that he had made him his friend and allie in just and reasonable matters, and
in them only; and this likewise made Papinian, a Pagan, (being commanded by the
Emperor Caracalla, whose Steward and familiar he was) refuse to defend an
unjust cause, (as Marcellinus records) and thus it fares with all that are
truly religious. There is not any one (quoth the sincere Christian) either in
blood, or otherwise so near unto me, but if he fall from God, I will fall from
him: why? our Savior Christ has taught me, both by precept and example, that
I should acknowledge none (so as to be led by them) for my brother, sister, or
mother, but such as do the will of my Father, which is in heaven, Matthew. 12.
46. to 51.

Whereas on the contrary, in things lawful, nothing rivits hearts so close, as
religion: Nothing rivi^s hearts so close as religion.
it unites them together as glue does boards together: it makes a knot, even
between such as never saw one another face, that Alexander can not cut: yea,
Tyrants will sooner want invention for torments, then they with tortures be
made treacherous. How many have chosen rather to embrace the flames, then to
reveal their companions, and brethren in Christ? There is no friendship like
the friendship of faith. There is Amor, among Beasts; Dilectio, among Men;
Charitas, among Christians, that is their peculiar: nature, makes husband and
wife but one flesh; grace makes them even one spirit: and it is a question,
whether natural Parents are to be loved above spiritual: we know that Christ
preferred his spiritual kindred, to that of the flesh: and major est connexio
cordium, quam sanguinum, says Beza. Why should we love them more, that
brought us into this sinful and miserable world; then those, that bring us
into a better world, where is neither sin, nor misery? why them, that live
with us on earth but a while; equal to them, that shall live with us in heaven
for ever?

But to go on. Surely, as grace in her self is far above nature* so is she
likewise in her effects; and consequently, unites in a far more durable bond.
Christians hearts are joined one to another, with so fast a glue, that no by
respects can sever them: as you may see in that pair of friends, Jonathan and
David: none had so much cause to disaffect David, as Jonathan; none in all
Israel, should be such a looser by David's success, as he; Saul was sure
enough settled for his time, only his successor should forgo all that which
David should gain; so as none but David stands in Ionathan's way to the
Crown; and yet all this cannot abate one dram of his love. As also in Ruth
and Naomy, whom nothing, but death, could part, Ruth. 1. If you will see other
examples, look Romans 1. 10, 11. 1 These. 2. 17, 19. 20. Gal^thians 4. 18, 19.
Act. 20. 37, 38. and 16. 15. Luke 4. 42. 2 Kings 2. 4. 9. and 4. 9, 10. As
grace is the greatest attractive of love; so is it the surest bond; it is like
varnish, that makes ^eelings not onle shine, but last. Where God uniteth
hearts, carnal respects are too weak to dissever them; since that which
breaks off affection, must needs be stronger then that which conjoyneth it,
and why does S. John use these words, once to the elect Lady, 2 John 1. 2. and
again to Gajus, 3 John 1. whom I love in the truth, but to show, that to love
in the truth, is the only true love? Indeed, religion is the surest cement of
all societies: the loser joints of all natural and civil relations, are
compacted and confirmed by the sinews of grace and religion: and such a lose
joynted friendship cannot hold long, which wants the nerves of religion.
Wherefore give me any foe, rather then a resolved Christian: no friend unless
a man truly honest.

205.
BUt here it will be objected. Object.
That we hate and contemn all, Another ^bjection answered.
who are not like our selves: that we remember them so much to be sinners,
that, in the mean time, we forget them to be men and brethren.

I answer. Answ.
This were to dash the first Table against the second; whereas they are
conscious of both alike. A charitable heart, even where it hates, there it
wishes that it might have cause to love: his anger and indignation against
sin, is always joined with love and commis^ration toward the sinner, as is
lively set out, Mark. 3. 5. and Philippians 3. 18. where S. Paul tells us of
them (weeping) that are enemies to the cross of Christ: and Mar. 3. 5 That our
Savior, while he looked upon the Pharisees angerly, mourned for the hardness
of their hearts. Zeal is a compounded affection of love and anger. When Moses
was angry with the Israelites and chid them sharply; at the same time he prayed
for them heartily. And Jonathan, when he was angry with his Father, for vowing
David's death; did still retain the duty and love, both of a Son to his
Father, and of a subject to his Sovereign. A good man cannot speak of them
without passion, and compassion: yea, they weep not so much for their own
sins, as we do, (according to S. Chrysostom's example) O that our prayers
and tears could but recover them.

Those that are truly gracious, know how to receive the blessings of God,
without contempt of them who want; and have learned to be thankful, without
over lines; knowing themselves have been, or may be, as wretched and
undeserving, as S. Augustine speaks. A true Christian can distinguish between
persons and vices; offenders, and offenses; and have no peace with the one,
while he has true peace with the other; love them, as men; hate them, as evil
men; love, what they are, not what they do; as God made them, not as they have
made themselves; not so hate, as to be a foe to goodness; nor so love, as to
foster iniquity. It is a question, whether is worst of the two, to be vices
friend, or virtues enemy. Now says Augustine, He is not angry with his
brother, that is angry with the sin of his brother: yea, if we hate the vices
of a wicked man, and love his person; as the Physician, hates the disease, but
loves the person of the diseased; there is nothing more praise worthy, as
says the same Father. And another, It is the honest man's commendation to
cont^mne a vile person. And another, I know no greater argument of goodness,
then the hatred of wickedness, in whomsoever it resides; yea, David makes it a
note of his integrity, Psalm. 31. 6. and 139. 21. 22. and 26. 4. 5. and in Psalm.
15. He is bold to ask the Lord this question; Who shall dwell in thy
Tabernacle? who shall rest in thy holy mountain? the answer he receives, is
this, 1. He that walks uprightly, and works righteousness. 2. And speaks
the truth from his heart. 3. He that slandereth not with his tongue, nor does
evil to his neighbor, nor receives a false report against his neighbor. But
the fourth is, He, in whose eyes a vile person it contemned, while he
honors them that fear the Lord* and he cannot be sincere who does not
honor virtue in rags, and loath vice, though in a robe of State. So that, as
the Prophet asked Iehosophat, 2 Chronicles. 19. 2. would thou help the wicked,
and love them that hate the Lord? it may be demanded; should Christians be
friends with them who are enemies to the Cross of Christ? no, no. And yet to
the men, separate from their manners, we have no quarrel, but wish them
better, then they either wish to us, or to themselves.

Indeed, if we should contemn them, as they think we do; it were but a just
recompense of their folly and wickedness: for as one speaking of the poverty
of the purse, says, that poverty is justly contemptible, which is purchased by
following of vice: so may I, of the poverty of the mind; that poverty of wit
and grace is justly contemptible, which is purchased by a wilful rebellion
against God, and the great means of knowledge and grace which we enjoy. To
conclude this point, we think it is better to leave them, and be thought proud,
wrongfully; then stay with them, and be known bad, certainly.

206.
Again, Object.
some will allege, we give offense to them that are without, Another objection
answered.
which is contrary to the Apostles precept, who says, Give none offense,
neither to the Jews, ^or to the Grecians, nor to the Church of God, 1 Cor. 10.
32. as they will make a crooked staff serve to beat a Dog, when a straight one
cannot be found.

Nothing but ignorance is guilty of this scruple: Answ.
for the offense is only taken, not given: and herein they pervert the Apostles
words, touching offenses, as Pharaoh's servants did the same word, when they
said unto their Master concerning Moses, How long shall he be an offense unto
us? Exodus. 10. 7. for he means in that place, only such offenses as are
contrary to the doctrine of the Gospel, as he has expounded his own meaning,
Romans 16. 17. And if nothing might be done* whereat vvi^ked men are offended,
then the word of God must not be preached, nor his holy and divine precepts
walked in, yea, Christ must not have come into the world to redeem it, for he
was to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishnes, 1 Cor. 1. 23
But all which God has commanded must be done; and all which he has left,
indifferent, may be done, and none may, or ought to censure the doing of it.
The precept is plain, one believes that he may eat of all things; and
another which is weak eats herbs, says the Apostle, and what follows? let
not him that eats, despise him that eats not; and let not him that eats
not, condemn him that eats; for God has received him, Rom 14. 2. 3.

If I know the thing to be good, and that I do it to a good end, what care I
for their idle misconstruction? morally good actions must not be suspended,
upon danger of causeless scandal: in things indifferent and arbitrary, it is
fit to be overruled by fear of offense: but if men will stumble in the plain
ground of good; let them fall without our regard, not without their own peril.

Now that the Cuckoe may acknowledge this for her own egg, notwithstanding she
has laid it in the Doves nest; let the men of the world know, that it is not
an offense given by us, but taken by them; yea, they first give an offense to
us by their ungodliness, and after take the just reward of the same, namely,
to be excluded our society for an offense: wherein they imitate Athanagor as,
who (as Tully reports) would always complain of his punishment, but of his
fault he would say nothing: or Adam, who was ashamed of his nakedness, but not
of his sin: wicked men are neither sensible of doing injury, nor patient in
suffering for it. It Is a rule of justice, that what men deserve, they should
suffer: yea, in this particular case, Gods rule is, if thou take away the
precious from the vile, thou shall be according to my word, Ier. 15. 19. And
we would have them suffer this exclusion no longer, then till they deserve it
no more: let them return unto us, (do as Themistocles, who being in his youth
vicious and deboyst, afterward made the world amends, by his brave exploits)
and we will return unto them, keep them company, account them true friends,
good men: otherwise we have an absolute prohibition from God himself, Ier.
15. 19. let them return unt^ thee, but return not thou unto them. And good
reason there is for it, in a musical instrument, the strings that be out of
tune, are set up, or set down to the rest; but the strings that be in tune,
are never stirred, nor meddled with: though indeed I might have stopped their
mouths with this very question, whether is better to obey God, or humor
sensual men? As our Savior Christ stopped the high Priests mouths, when they
asked him, by what authority he cursed the fruitless Figgtree; cast the
buyers and sellers out of the Temple, etc. by demanding of them, whether John's
baptism was from heaven or of men, Mar. 11. 29.

But in case they will not return unto us, we had rather offend each of them
once, then our selves every day. It is pity that ever the water of baptism was
spilt upon his face, that cares more to discontent the world, then to wrong
God. They are unjust and over partial, that will go about to exact from us,
that which we owe not, with more rigor then they will exactfrom themselves,
that which they owe.

And so I have given you the reasons, why such as are, or desire to be
conscionable and religious* break off company with them; and vindicated the
most usual exceptions against it. I will now make some use of the point; and
so leave it for them to chew upon.

207.
1. TO sum up all in a word, 2 Use of the former reasons.
or l^y all these grounds and motives together. If we endanger our selves, our
lives, our estates, loose our credit, our peace, our time, by frequent
associating wit^ ungodly men, and can no way expect their love and friendship;
be sure you come not (or at least stay not) in their company. It is not safe
venturing among them, in confidence of our own strength; no more then it is to
consort with cheaters, in hope that they will not cozen us. Dead fire, we know,
being stird up, will burn a fresh: and corruption, like a candle new put out,
is soon kindled again; If Satan but blow upon it, the own heat is enough
to inflame it.

No, venture not thy self, though thou have once, or twice come off clear
from them; Sampson could withstand his wives temptation seven days, but at
length, by her importunity, she prevailed with him, Judge. 14. Over many in this
case are like to sick men, who when they have had a good day, or two, think
themselves presently well again; so they make bold to put off their Kerchifes,
to put on thinner garments, and to venture into the fresh air; whereupon
follow unrecoverable relapses. Wherefore take heed, or if thou do keep them
company, it is an argument, that thou art sick of their disease, idleness.
And of this Use so much.

2 If wicked company are so infectious, that they will work a consumption in
any man's virtues, 2 Use.
that is daily conversant with them, and waste them from an ounce, to a dram;
from a dram; to a scruple, to a grain, to nothing, so that he may say with
Christ in the crowd, who has touched me, for I feel virtue gone out of me?
Let us be (as Seneca advises) more circumspect, with whom we eat and drink,
then what we eat and drink. He that has money, will beware of thieves: if
you have any grace, venture it not among these riflers: for, art thou inclined
to pray? they will tempt thee to play: would thou go to a Sermon? by their
persuasion, the Tavern or Theater stands in the way. But alas! if others
tempt thee not* thou will tempt others: temptation needs not stand, like a
Taverne-bush, in thy way, for thou will invite thy self, hunt after temptation.

3 Is every man busy in dispending that quality, 3 Use.
which is predominant in him? And can we converse with none but will work upon
us, and by the unperceived stealth of time, assimilate us to their own
customs? will two friends, like two brands set each other on fire with
good, or ill, when one alone will go out? will a straight tvvig, if it be
tied to a crooked bough, become crooked; or a crooked tvvig, become straight,
if it be tied to a straight rule: as Peter denied his Master amongst the Jews,
whom he confessed amongst the Apostles? Then keep company, but let it be with
such as may make thee better; fly evil society, least their kind words so
work upon thy yielding nature, that thou know not how to deny: they are
such as have taken the Devils oath of Allegiance; and thou have small hope to
prevail with them to good.

A certain King (as St. Augustine reports) being hard favored, and fearing
least his Queen should bring forth children like himself; got many fair and
beautiful pictures, which he caused her steadfastly to behold every day: go
thou and do likewise, be conversant with good men, and in good things, and thou
shall do that unbidden, which others can scarce do compelled by the Law, as
Aristotle speaks of the study of Philosophy. O what an happy thing it is to
converse with the virtuous! their gracious words, or holy examples, will be
sure to stir up the gifts of God in us; they will either add something to
our zeal, or something to our knowledge: the society of Prophets, is able to
make even a Saul prophecy. The sight of others falling heartily to their
meat, brings on our stomachs: yea, if we have no gifts to stir up, their
communion cannot but leave some tincture behind it; if not of Piety, yet, at
least, of a good profession, and some inclinablenesse. If Saul had not had a
good and discreet companion, when he went to seek his Fathers Asses, he had
returned back as wise as he came: but now he is drawn into counsel with the
Man of God, and hears more then he hoped for, 1 Samuel 9. 6. The messengers of
the same Saul, when they lived in the Court, were (as is likely) carried away
with the svvinge of the times, and did apply themselves to their Masters
ungodly practices, as appears in their going to apprehend David, that Saul
might kill him: yet were they no sooner in company with the Prophets, in
Nayoth, but their minds were changed, and they likewise prophesied, 1 Samuel 19.
20.

Ob. But say some of Bacchus his fools. I keep company with brave fellows,
that are generous, free, bountiful etc.

Answ. Alas! thou do but slander him with these titles. He is a proud, 2
Excuses taken away.
ignorant, inconsiderate Ass, that fears he is not loved, unless he be lose
and scattering; that strives so to be like a god in bounty, that he throws
himself into the lowest estate of man. He that gives to, and spends upon all
abundantly (which is for none to do, but him that has all) he that had rather
keep company with the dregs of men, then not be the best man: he that ravells
out a spacious fortune upon flatterers; he that out of vain glory will be
worshiped and kneed, to the spending of a fair inheritance, and then ends his
days in lewdness and contempt (as what is it, that ambition will not
practice, rather then let her port decline) he is a foolish Steward, that thus
showers away in one year, what his ancestors have been gathering twenty: yea,
he is a mad man, that makes his kindness to others, prove cruelty to himself,
and all his posterity.

Ob. Again, others are all for mirth, they keep company at the Tavern, with
none but curious and quaint wits, eloquent Poets and Orators; now ask them, as
Manoah did Sampson, Is there never a companion for thee among thy Brethren, the
people of God, that thou must associate thy self with these of uncircumcised
hearts and tongues? They will answer. Give me only these for my companions, for
they please me.

Answ. Can none please thee, but such as displease God? do thou not know,
that who so will be a friend to such, makes himself the enemy of God? James,
4. 4. or art thou ignorant, that pleasant wits viciated in accustomed
lewdness, with sweet tunes entise men to destruction; as is morald in that
fiction of the Sirens, they delight the sense, but slay the soul: and will any
man poison his body, to please his taste? or go into an infected house, to
fetch out a rich suite? or put his finger into a fiery Crusible, to take out
gold It Is true, like Iugglers and such as play tricks of Legerdimaine, they
will deceive us with a kind of pleasure and delight: but is it any privilege
for a man to be tickled to death, that so he may dye laughing? Their discourse
may be resembled to the fruit that undid us all, which was fair in sight,
smooth, in handling, sweet in taste, but deadly in effect: or to the Clarian
water, which made men eloquent, but withal short lived: or the gifts, which
those Elfes called Lamiae, used to present unto children which made so many as
accepted of them loose their comeliness for ever after. And he that much
affects their company (being an honest man) is just like that free Citizen,
that so doted on a female slave, that he would needs marry her; though by that
match, he were sure, by the Law, to become a slave with her. He overvalues the
drunken and reeling love of these men, that buys it with the ruin of
himself, his estate, and family. Wherefore, as in Meats, we do not only stand
upon pleasantness, but wholesomenesse: so let us regard wholesomenesse as well
as pleasantness, in our discourse and company. A good man can lend nothing to
the increase of mirth in wicked company: and he that will not lend, let him
take heed of borrowing.

And so much for defense against what they do, which may be avoided.

If you would have as much against what they say, which must be endured,

Read a late Treatise, called, THE VICTORY OF PATIENCE. In the mean time,
think what account you shall give of that you have read.

FINIS.
THE TABLE
A
ADmonition, admonitions and corrections the chief offices of friendship, 826.
no admonishing a drunkard, 52. he is incapable of good counsel, 106. drunkards
and swearers contemn it, 98* admonition to sellers of drink, Officers, etc.
711. Adultery, look drunkenness Agents, some for Christ, some for Satan,
714. Satan's agents have many advantages above Gods servants in winning souls,
714, and keeping, 727. and improving them, 734. Aggravation, the drunkards sin
aggravated by eleven circumstances, 465. Atheism, drunkards and al vicious
men, Atheists in heart 229. 558. 590.
B
BElieve, drunkards will believe nothing except their senses say Amen to it,
623. they have no faith in the Scriptures, 229. few men believe the whole
written Word, 590. they seem to believe the promises, but really and indeed
believe no part, 558. Bitter, why so bitter and tart, 9. Blessings, no
blessings without God bless them to us, 658.
C
CEnsure, 347. of it four reasons, 349. Chide them sharply when they pray for
them heartly 848. Children, well born children are touched to the quick, with
the injuries of their parents, 824. wicked men children of the devil, and
partake of his nature, 407. those whom they hate, traduce, etc. children of
God, and partake of his nature, 407. each must do the works of their father,
402. Combine, wicked men combine against the godly, 391. and lay divellish
plots to destroy them, ibid. Company evil a maine cause of drunkenness, 286.
exhortation to avoid evil company, 856. and keep good company, 858. that it
is lawful to shun their company, and how, 776. five reasons why, 781. I that
they may look into themselves, 782. 2 that we may not be infected by them, 787.
3 that we may not be infeoffed in their punishments, 805. 4 because their
company will bereave us of much comfort, 811. 5 that we may be at peace, 821
many objections about leaving their society, answered, 796. excuses for keeping
company, taken away, 860. drunkards would have our company in sin, 382. and
likewise in torment. 436. they think it will be some ease to have company, 448.
but it will prove contrary, 449 Confident, why worldlings are so jocund and
confident, 109. Consideration, want of it the cause of all impiety, 490.
Consciences of wicked men will be awakned, when perhaps the gate of mercy will
be shut, 488. Constancy, and inconstancy, 840. change in the vicious as rare a
virtue, as constancy in the virtuous, ibid. Contempt of religion, the greatest
rub in the way to heaven, 532, Corruption will mix with our purest devotions,
574. Covenant, that we will forsake the devil and all his works, constantly
believe, etc. one part of the covenant of grace, ^64. Covetousness, a cause of
drunkenness, 275. covetous men fools, 613. in 6. main particulars made good,
621 Cowardlinesse one special cause of drunkenness, 282. it will not suffer a
man to do well, 749. but this is base blood, 753. a coward pot-valiant will
kill and stay, 48. Counsel, we should go to counsel and advise with others,
668. wicked men give divellish counsel to others, against the godly, 392.
Custom of sin takes away the sense of fin, 427.
D
DEath, as men live, so commonly they dye, 236. defering repentance til death,
579. death may be sudden and give a man no leave to be sick, 580. or if it be
not, repentance is no easy work, 581. and late repentance is seldom true,
ibid. death in a good cause, shall pleasure, not hurt us, 769. which has made
many preserre it before profit, pleasure, etc. 770. Degrees, Satan works men
by degrees to the height of impiety, and not all at once, 423. Drunkenness.
seven causes of it. 259. the transcendency of the sin, 694. it is the root of
all evil, 27. the rot of all good, 33. it disables and indisposeth a man to
all good, 32. the cause of adultery, 54. and of murder, 50. brings poverty,
62. deformes a man, 66. debilitates the body, 40. beastiates the soul, 59.
finds men foo^es, or makes them so, 124, examples of drink besotting men,
129, discovers all secrets, 82. makes dry, and they cure sin with sin, 78,
no dispossessing of a drunken devil, 231. we ought not be drunk, to save our
lives, 768. Drunkards, not to be reckoned among men, 2. for they are beasts and
wherein, 7. yea, they exceed beasts, in beastliness, 5. are inferior to them
in five particulars, 10. they shame their creation, 14. the drunkards outward
deformities, 37. his inward infirmities, 40. he is his own executioner, 19. 47.
one drunkard, tongue enough for twenty men, 80. his vain babbling, 85.
scurrilous jesting, 86. wicked talking, 87. impious swearing, 89. his discourse
and behavior on the Ale-bench, 115. to drink is all his exercise, 144. all his
labor is to satisfy his lusts, 74. they drink not for the love of drink, if
you will believe them, 272. which being so, doubles their sin, 274. they drink
more spirits in a night, then their flesh and brains be worth, 145. Drunkards
transform themselves into the condition of evil Angels, 25. and practice
nothing but the art of debauching men, 307. how they intise, 319. what they
think of him they cannot seduce, 521. but in time of their distress they
think otherwise, ibid. how they will enforce men to pledge their he^lths, 320.
how impatient of denial, 321. an unpardonable crime not to drink as they do,
137. to damn their own souls, the least part of their mischief, 331. one
true drunkard makes a multitude, 332. if the devil would surrender his place,
it should be to some good fellow or other, 334. the devil speaks in, and
works by them as once he did by the Serpent, 299. how drunkards smarme in
every corner, 336. Satan, more men on earth to fight for him then the Trinity
which made us, 301. Drunkards like Julian, who never did a man a good turn, but
it was to damn his soul, 339. wherefore keep out of their reach, 714. see the
danger, and know their aim, 714. refrain dispute with them, or thou will not
hold out, 773. punishment of drunkards, 147. 456. they are reserved to the
great day, ibid. the drunkard has been too long sick to be recovered, 690.
they have a way to evade all Gods threatenings, 542.
E
ENmity, between the wicked and godly, 341. proclaimed by God in Paradise,
430. Envy, if drunkards cannot seduce us, they will envy and hate us 341. how
their envy vents it self at their mouths 1. by censuring the sober, 347.
whereof four reasons, 349. secondly, by slandering them, 358. whereof seven
reasons, 366. again at their hands many ways, 391. of which five reasons,
402. Evil we are more prone to then good, 717. Example of: the greatest
Number, 165. let Custom, 162. be added. the greatest Men, 169. let Reason,
202. be added. the greatest Scholars, 177. let Good intentions, 206. be added.
Example of the best men, 197. no safe rule to walk by without a precept, 162.
Excuses of drunkards taken away, 154.
F
FAith, 653. Drunkards would flout us out of our faith, 381. Fear and
cowardice a cause of drunkenness, 282. Fools, the greatest politician, the
greatest fool, 013. in five particulars made good, 621. some wise in foolish
things, and oolish in wise things, 638* bray them in a mortar, they will not
leave their sins, 624. though the Devil makes fools of them, yet he makes
them wise enough to make fools of any that will trust them, 636 the voluptuous
fools, 643. the greatest bousers, the greatest buzzards, 121. the greatest
humanist, without grace, little better. 604. Forsake, none but counterfeits
will forsake Christ, for all they can do, 534. Friends, wicked men wrong none
so much, as their best friends, to whom they owe their very lives, 515. love
and friendship only among good men, 843*
G
GOd, his gifts numberless. 481. Godly, what is done to them, Christ
challenges as done to himself. 508. Goodness alone the whetstone of a
drunkards envy, 386. Good and bad agree together, like the Harp and Harrow,
821. good men must be imitated, only in good things, 157. good intentions
cannot justify evil acts, 206. good ^ellowes who, 820. reputation of
goodfellowship 277. Guilty we may be of another sin, diverse ways, 825*
H
HAnds, hatred and malice of drunkards, would break out at their hands, were
they not manacled by the Law, 391. Heart, to get an humble heart, 649. Hatred
against the religious, the most bitter and exorbitant, 343. they hate none but
the good, 411* but they are sure of opposition. 412. how their hatred vents it
self, 345. their hatred is against God and Christ, 508. not to tell our
neighbor of his faults, is to hate him, 826. to hate the vices of a wicked
man, but love his person, 849. we should hate evil in whomsoever, 850. Hell,
a description of it, and the last judgment, 458. 461. good men draw all they
can to Heaven, 440. wicked men all they can to Hell, ibid. none help to people
Hell, like drunkards, 4^1. they would have our company in Hell, 436. and why,
446. the covetous man can find in his heart to go to Hell, so his son may be
left rich, 629. Healths, a shoing horn to all excess, 309. they drink others
healths, their own deaths, 323. of which many examples, and of the just
judgment of God upon drunkards, 314. healths great in measure, or many in
number, 310. if small, the liquor is stronger, or the number more, 311. healths
upon their knees, 313. not more forward to drink healths, then zealous and
careful that other pledge the same, 318. the rise and original of health
drinking, 313. Honesty, he the soberest and honestest man, that resembles the
drunkard least, 691. good-fellowship the utmost of a drunkards honesty, 139.
Honor, misprision of it, and reputation, 322 Hope easily blown into a wicked
man, and as soon blown out of him, 444. Hurt, drunkards would hurt and maime
us, for being sober and conscionable, if they durst, 392.
I
Idleness, a cause of drunkenness, and drunkenness a cause of idleness, 72.
an idle person good for nothing but to propagate sin, 73, Ignorance of
drunkards, 121. 107. and all natural men, 177. 600. the cause of all sin, 593.
drunkards insensible of their sin and danger, because ignorant. 107.
Ingratitude and great folly of wicked men, 526. Intention of soule-murther
shall be rewarded as if they did it, 539. Joy, if true, only enjoyed by good
men, 817. the joy of worldlings more talked of then felt, 817. objections
touching joy and good-fellowship answered, 817. Judge, wicked men judge of
things, 757. and persons, 759. by contraries, 761* their judgment and practice
clean contrary to Gods Word, ibid. how the Devil deludes the fancy and
judgment of a nature all man, 721. Judgments of God, what use drunkards make
thereof, 111. the religious keep off judgments* 516. first by their innocence,
516. secondly, by their prayers, 517.
K
KIll, drunkards and wicked men would kill the godly, if they would not yield
392. of which their savage disposition, five reasons, 402. first, they must do
the works of their father the Devil, 402. secondly, that their deeds of
darkness might not come to light, 404. thirdly, they cannot follow their
sins so freely, so quietly. ibid. fourthly, what they could not make good
with reason, they would with iron, ibid. fifthly, their glory and credit is
eclipsed by the godly, 405. but they cannot do as they would, though their
punishment shall be all one, 399. King, Satan their King, and they must seek
his wealth, and honor, and enlarge his Kingdom, by winning all they can from
Christ, 431. Knowledge, he that has saving knowledge, has every other grace,
597. six helps to saving knowledge, 646.
L
LAw, and precept our only rule, 210. Look, Drunkards look to us, not to
themselves, 356. Love, wicked men think they love God, but they do hate him,
512. Drunkards love their sins, better then their souls, 551. a Drunkard can
never love thee being sober and religious, 834. a wicked man's love, mercenary
and inconstant, 835. nothing rivits hearts so close as religion, 845. Lust
provoked by drunkenness, 54. discard all filthy lusts and corrupt affections,
646.
M
Means must be used, 664. to sin against mercy, the abundance of means, and
many warnings, mightily aggravates sin, 475. Melancholy, Drunkards drink to
drive it away, 259. but this increases it, 260. Memory, Drunkards have shallow
memories, 132* Mercy, God in mercy infinitely transcendent, 550. but it makes
nothing for such as will not part with their sins, 551. his mercy is a just
mercy, 554. mercy rejoices against justice, but destroys not Gods justice,
553. if we forsake our sins, God will forgive them, how many and how great
soever, 152. wicked men apply Christ's passion and Gods mercy as a warrant for
their licentionsnesse, 542. they are altogether in extremes, either God is so
merciful, that they may live how they lift, or so just, that he will not
pardon them upon their repentance, 546. Mocking, some will better abide a
stake, then others a mock, 504. Mourn, in all ages the godly alone have
mourned for the abominations of their time, 255. Modesty, in some a vice, 842.
Most, objection that most men are of another judgment, answered, 589.
Multitude, how Satan guls the rude multitude, 293* the multitude will do, what
they see others do, 371. of which many examples, 372. Murder caused by
drunkenness, 50.
N
NAmes, we should taint our names, by keeping evil company, 808. to defend our
neighbors good name if we can, a duty, 828. Natural men, called beasts in
Scripture, 3.
O
OBedience, God has equally promised all blessings to the obedient, and
threatened all manner of judgments to the disobedient, 554. Offenses, Objection
against offenses, answered, 742.
P
PAssions and affections make partial, 352. they must be discarded, 646 Peace,
our case would be far worse, if we had the worlds peace, 390. not strange that
wicked men should agree so well, 414. agreement of wicked men, not worthy the
name of peace. 832. Persecute, wicked men persecute, not the evil, but the
good, 499. Petitions, God may grant them in anger, 659. Plague, be it never so
hot, drunkards are the same, 137. it has wrought little or no reformation,
245. many the worse for it, 247. Taverns fullest, when the streets emptiest,
248. Pledge, the original of the word, 327. Practice, how the godly and wicked
differ in their practice, 249. we know no more then we practice, 595. Pray,
Gods people count it a sin not to pray for their greatest enemies, 523. pray
not for knowledge without putting difference, 658. when we cannot pray, what,
663. Presumptuously do drunkards sin, 471. Prejudice makes many resolve against
yielding, 724. Pride and reputation of good-fellowship, a cause of
drunkenness, 277. pride of wit, 280. Promises entailed to believers, and
limited with the condition of faith, and repentance, 560. Profession of
religion, 382. 532. look Scoffs. Punishment, wicked men complain of their
punishment, but of their sin they speak not, 539.
R
REason, as it is clouded with the mistes of original corruption, a blind guide,
202. once debauched is worse then brutishness, 693. Reckoning, worldlings
never think of the reckoning they are to give, 621. Regeneration, what, and how
we may know our selves to be regenerate, 565. Repentance, what, and how we may
know whether we have repented, 570. not to defer it, 588. sickness no fit
time for it, 79. God will not accept our dry bones when Satan has sucked out
all the marrow. 586. the several ways whereby God calls to repentance, 478. in
a judgment, so many as repent, are singled out for mercy. 257 if any would
repent of, and relinquish this sin of drunkenness, let them first lay to heart
the things delivered 695. secondly, refrain the causes, ibid. thirdly, believe
their state dangerous, and that there is no way to help, but by a chang to the
contrary, 696. fourthly, be peremptory in their resolution, ibid. fifthly,
shame not to confess their dislike of it, in themselves and others, 700.
sixthly fly evil company, 701. seventhly, take heed of delays. 702. eighthly,
omit not to pray for divine assistance, ibid ninthly, be diligent in hearing,
703. tenthly, frequent in the use of the Lords Supper, ibid. eleventhly,
meditate what God has done for them, ibid. twelfthly, think on the union we
have with Christ, ibid. thirteenthly, consider that God ever beholds them, 704.
14ly, often think of the day of judgment, ibid. fifteenthly, consider the
heinousness of this sin, and the ^vills which accompany it, 705. sixteenthly,
abstain from drunken company, 709. for all depends upon this: seventeenthly,
abstain from drinking-places, 710. Report, of necessity we must be evil
spoken of by some, 756 the evil report of evil men an honor, 763 Reputation,
he of most reputation, that can drink most, 139. Reward of drunkards, 146.
and swearers, 104. they shall have a double portion of vengeance to other men,
464 Righteous, the civilly righteous have hell for their portion, 465.
S
Satan has all worldlings under his command, 21. 402. 432. and they must do
what he will have them 379. by degrees he works men to the height of impiety,
423. Saints falls should make us beware, not presume, 157. Scoffs beat off
many from their profession, 532. the scoffer, commonly worse then the scoffed,
367. none but fools will be scoffed out of their religion, 754. yet few, that
will not offend God and their conscience, rather then be scoft at, 749.
Scripture, he must be studious therein, and follow that rule who will know
Christ savingly, 664. Security, the certain usher of destruction, 242.
Separate, Drunkards and swearers deserve, like dirt in the house of God, to be
thrown out, 93. of which five reasons, 94. happy if they were kept by
themselves, 230. Shame, Drunkards would mitigate their own shame, by
discrediting the good, 374. Singularity, a virtue, when vice is in fashion,
225. Sins against knowledge and conscience, 467. open and scandalous sins
how evil, 472. to multiply the same sins often, 473, to commit one sin on
the neck of another, 473. how one man's sin may extend it self to millions;
yea, after ages, 539. Drunkards not only sin, but make others sin too, 493. the
Devil shows the sweet of sin, but hides the bitter of punishment until
afterward, 734. custom of sin, takes away the sense of sin, 427. Slander,
Drunkards raise slanders of the godly, 358. of which seven reasons, 366. how
apt men are to believe slanders of the godly, and to spread them, 360. what
delight wicked men take in hearing evil of the good, 361. a slander once
raised will scarce ever dye, 377. how they mitigate their own shame, by
slandering others, 368. and often prevail against the good hereby, 370. the
condition of a slanderer set out, 363. his sin and punishment, 378. Smiting,
God will not leave smiting, until we smite that, which smites at his honor,
253. Soul, Drunkards guilty of Soul murder, 443. 530. nothing but our Souls
will satisfy the Serpent, and his seed, 436. covetous man, cares more for his
outward estate, then for body or soul, 626. Spirit, saving knowledge not
attained, without the Spirits help, 655. Strait, what a strait, the godly are
in, 383. Striking, 392. Subtilty, and wisdom, two different things. 641.
Success, custom of it makes men confident, 241* Suffer, our Savior suffered
two and twenty ways of his^ enemies, 397. Suggestion, evil moreready at hand
then a good, 717 Superlative, some men strive to be superlative in sin, 415.
several examples of superlative sinners, 416. Suspicion, ignorance the cause
of it. 351. Swearing, the most in excusable sin, 100. of which 2 reasons, 101.
that of all others the swearer shall be sure of plagues, 104. three ways to
make men leave their swearing, 112.
T
TAle-bearing, the receiver as bad as the talebearer, 380. Tempting, Satan
the Tempter, wicked men his Apprentises, or Factors under him, 298. the many
ways that Satan has to set upon us, 297. as well reckon up the motes in the
Sun, as all sorts of Seducers, 304. all wicked men resemble the Devil in
Tempting, 286. how politic they are in Tempting, 288. Drunkards, Satan's
principle agents, in this business, 306. the Drunkards chief delight is to
infect others, 286. Temptations on the right hand the most dangerous, 746. A
wise man will suspect the smooth stream for deepnesse, 747. they never wound
so deadly, as when they stroke us with a silken hand, 745. to be a Tempter the
^asest office, 330. their seduceing of others, will add to the pile of their
torments, 450. how greedy most men are of temptation, 295. Satan needs but say
the word, 295. or suggest the thought, 296. the mind of man not capeable of a
violation, either from man or Satan, 303. it will be a poor plea an other
day, to pretend that such and such deceived us, 743. he whom the Lord loves,
shall be delivered out of their snares, and he whom the Lord hates, shall fall
into them, 341. Satan disturbes not his own, 387. no greater temptation, then
not to be tempted, 388. Thief, objection of the thief upon the cross
answered, 548. Thoughts of wicked men touching the religious, not the same in
distress, as in prosperity, 524. Time, they drink to drive it away, 267^ if
times be bad we should be more careful, 223. Tongues, that drunkards use
their tongues only a frivolous excuse, 503. a lewd tongue, a loud one; and a
loud tongue, a lewd one, 86. Traduce us, because they cannot otherwise hurt us,
376.
V
Virtue and vice can never accord, 409. Victory, Drunkards in conquering are
most overcome, 329. Vice, every vice has a title given it, and every virtue a
disgrace, 293. Violence, when by gentle persuasions they cannot prevail, they
use violence, 726.
W
Wicked, nothing will do good upon a wicked heart, 691. whereof many
examples, ibid. a continual war, between the wicked and the godly in all
ages, 432. Watchfulness, 740. we must be Watchful, Wise, and Valiant if we
will not be overcome by their allurements 739. Where Is, the Devil much beholding
to whores, but far more to drunkards, 451. Wine, the drunkards high esteem
of it, about making wise, 45. Wine lawful, if used lawfully. Win, we should
be as zealous and industrious to win souls to God, as they are to Satan, 455.
Wisdom, no wicked man a wise man, 189 how wise the drunkard is in his own
conceit, 118. of which two reasons, 119. drunkards purblind to worldly wisdom,
stark blind to heavenly, 133. they not always the wisest which know most,
604. the religious man wiser then the most profound humanist, 608. or the
cunningest Politician, 613. several misprisions of wisdom, 609. worldly men
account folly wisdom, and wisdom folly, 601. objection, that the strictest
livers, are seldom the wisest men, answered, 600. Witness, every invitation
to repentance, will be a witness against us, 484. Word to believers is all in
all, 213. Words, he would never endure blows, that cannot concoct evil words,
767. we should read their words backward, 763. World begins with milk, ends
with an hammer, 720. whereas Christ keeps back the good wine until afterward,
ibid. many prefer the worlds favor before Gods 772. Worldlings have more peace
with 1. Satan, 731. 2. the world, 731. 3. themselves, 732. then Gods people,
they may satisfy their lusts to the full, 727. have free scope and liberty to
do or say what they please, 729 whereas Gods people are restrained in their
very thoughts, ibid. whence they think themselves more happy in serving the
Devil, then others in serving of God, 733. they profit more in sin, then the
godly in grace, 734. they are penny wise and pound foolish, 634. but it is
otherwise with the godly, ibid. Wounds, those prove deep wounds to weak
Christians, that would be balm and physic unto abler judgments 765.
Z
Zeal a compounded affection of love and anger, 848 we should be as zealous in
good, as they are in evil 455.
FINIS.

