A brief rehearsal of the death resurrection, and ascension of Christ, gathered
together out of ye four Evangelists and Acts of the Apostles by the most
godly and great learned man Huldriche Zuinglius, written first in Latin, and
now translated into English, that such as understand not the Latin tongue
should not want the use of so worthy and profitable a treatise.

Perused and allowed according to the order appointed in the Queen's majesty's
Injunctions.

decorative woodcut title page border

The preface and introduction into the history of the Passion and death of
Christ.
AMong all the histories (gentle reader) that any time have been written from
the beginning of the world unto this present was there never any to be compared
to the history of the Passion, resurrection, and ascension of Christ, written
most exactly by ye four Evangelists, albeit dispersed and in sundry places,
and aptely not without great travel and pain gathered in due order by ye most
godly and well learned man Zuinglius, with certain brief annotatio^s and many
wholesome and godly instructions and declarations of the harder places adjoined
unto it by the same man for the easier understanding to ye reader, which
history as it is most certain and true, for that no percel thereof was written
but by the holy ghost (although he used men as instruments thereunto) which
only is truth, and from whom proceadeth nothing but truth. So by it is set
forth unto us the spring and ground of our salvation, namely the passion and
death of Christ the price of our redemption, the only pacifieng of the wrath
of god toward us, and way to eternal joy which Paul affirms to be great and
wonderful and such as neither eye has seen, neither ear has heard, nor heart
can imagine but what shall I need now to make any long or further declaration
either of ye certainty thereof, whereof no christian man having ye fear of god
before his eyes has ever douted: or of the commodity coming unto us by the
same, which is so amply and manifestly set forth in the treatise it self. But
for as much as it is written in a strange tongue namely in latin which ye
multitude of our country understand not, and also (which is much to be
lamented) many of these which are in place of teachers, such is the
infelicitie of this our time, lest these I say should utterly want the use of so
fruitful a work, I was moved and thought good both for the aduau^cement of
the glory of god, and also for our brethrens farther increase of knowledge, to
bestow some labor at such convenient leisure as I could well spare, to turn
it into our English tongue plainly and truly without all art or eloquence, as
one tendyng nothing else but the ends aforesaid, which if I obtein, I shall
account my labors right well bestowed, minding also farther to trauail in the
same kind of labor, if I shall se by this that my labor has been profitable.

FOr as much as the death of Christ is the life of all the elect, it behooves
therefore to know by what means it is made our salvation, which in it self
cannot be but salvation: For Christ (as Simeon declares) as he is set for the
rising of many, Luke. ii.
so is he again set for the fall of many, And this comes to pass (which
oftentimes happens) that that which is given unto us for a remedy against
poison, by our vice is turned to be nomand destruction. There be which do think
upon the cross and death of Christ our savior after a certain kind of
carnal affection thinking they have done their duty excelle^tly well, and that
they have done god high service if so be yt they have every year a certain
grief with Christ dieng, and that they witness ye same with tears. Those ought
to remember that Christ desired the women not to weep for his sake, Luke.
xxiii.
for he says, weep not for me or for my sake, but he admonished the^, of the
misery which should come upon them for their ingratitude and infidelity, and
therefore he adds weep for your selves, for the days will come. etc. I will
not speak now of the ambition which we have sought for in such feigned sorrow,
for we would seem to be such as were heavy with Christ, when as in deed we were
nothing less. Others min^ble up certain cold prayers in memory of the
passion, others divide the order of the passion for synguler days, or certain
hours, other some again do abuse the same as it were by magical
enchauntments to their own glory and covetous desire, not sekyng Christ, but
themselves, let us rather think, or rather meditate, and depely weigh and
consider why Christ died: and here shall the veins of faith and charity open
themselves. God so loved the world (says S. John) that he gave his only
begotten so^ for it, Joan. iii.
that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have life everlasting.
It comes of a singular charity, that god does give his only begotten son
unto the death for miserable and damnable servants, the which being
considered, kindles our hearts and binds us altogether to god: and
whatsoever other thing god has given unto us besides him self, it would have
done us little good, yea although he had given a most excellent creature it
would not have satisfied the flesh, he gave himself therefore to us, in his
son, that there by we should nothing doubt of his love and favor, but he
died that we might live. He was nailed to the cross, that he might deliver
us for he has borne our sins upon his body, Esaias. liii. i. Pet. il.
and has taken al our infirmities upon him, by whose beating and whipping we are healed. He is the price which was given for our rede^ptio^, by him our
unrighteousness is put away. and blotted out before god. In him the justice of
god is pacified, in him is life given to them which believe. The meditation of
these things will lead us, not only into the vains of God his goodness, but
also to the springs of our sins. Let us therefore consider this in Christ,
for what thing he was given unto us of god, wherefore Christ does not only
teach us, that we should thoroughly acknowledge our selves unrighteous and
condemned, but also does open unto us with the same, the bosom of mercy, as a
most sure sanctuary, and does also comfort the consciences which in a manner
are desperate and heavy lade^ with the burden of sins, giving unto them which
be his, Romans viii.
peace and tranquillity. For what can he which has given his son, deny us
afterward? Let us therefore first think upon this in the cross of Christ, that
is, Christ to be the price of our redemption, the sacrifice for sins, our
satisfaction, i. Cor. i.
our righteousness, life, holiness, gate and way to god, the pledge of salvation
and everlasting life, the only mediator, intercessor, and reconciler, by whom
the way to god is made open, by whose death our sins dye and perish. Michel.
v. i. Pet. ii. Hebr. xiii.
Then let us remember, what this captain and emperor of our life does set
before us, which is given unto us of God the father, not only for a redemer,
but also a foregoer and guide of the way, that we rejecting all things, might
follow his steps, and having our eyes fixed upon him, Romans viii.
might follow him, without the walls of the castle, bearing the reproach which
he had, we might be made semblable unto the Image of the son of god utterly
denieng all ungodliness, Ad Tit. ii.
and hurtful desires, Romans vi.
yea denying our selves, let us bear the cross after him, being grafted in
his death, let us mortify the members which are upon the earth, and whereas
before we have set our minds upon unrighteousness, let us now endeavor our
selves to righteousness and holiness. Neither is Christ a painted or graue^
example and so dead, but a lively example and of efficacy, which does shine in
the faithful, and is expressed, and works truly, which does show forth it
self both in word and in deed, and in the whole actions of the life, a lively
example I say, and such as expresses all heavenly virtues, as charity,
obedience, modesty long suffering, gentleness, patience, pureness and
constancy, then which example there is none more perfect or absolute, for what
greater charity can there be than for to suffer death for his enemies? neither
was this in his childhode, as the children were slain of Herod: neither died
he after the manner of the rich or honorable men, but he died a most filthye
and vile death, that is to say, of the cross, and that between.ij. thieves. I
mean he was put to such a death, as wicked and mischeuous men are, being
counted for a disceauer. Moreover Christ took upon him in himself, whatsoever
is hard, vile, and troublesome in this world. This I say did Christ choose, and
took it upon himself for us, lest the flesh might have any occasion of
complaynte. Men will suffer any thing so that they may escape death but Christ
besides all evils suffered death, and that a most bitter death, he despised
whatsoever is great and precious in this world he chose and suffered whatsoever
is unpleasant and evil unto the flesh as poverty, reproach, infamye, rebukes,
blasphemies, stripes, bonds, wounds, and finally death, to thend that we might
learn to despise the world with all his entisementes, and to suffer all
adversity for him with joy. For we cannot approach to heavenly things except
we cast away and despise earthly things, he which loves the world, cannot love
god, and he which despises the world and whatsoever is in the world sauoureth
eternal things, and things of god. No adversity ca^ trouble or throw dou^ such
a man, no prosperity ca^ puff him up, humility, obedience have need of his
example which being god, descended, and took upon him our infirmity, being
obedient unto the father, eue^ to the death. By these things which we have
forespoke^ I thik it is manifest enough, after what sort the death of Christ
should be meditated of us, what is set before us to be learned by the same, and
what it is to have grief with him, namely to follow his steps, which committed no
sin, neither was there found any guilem his mouth which being railed on with evil
words, i. Pet. ^^.
replied not evil words again being troubled with evils he threatened not, but
referred the vengeance to him which judges justly, let us also learn ye like
things, that we may be strong without fear and co^sta^t, and if any thing be
to be suffered for Christ his sake, for the truth and for righteousness, that
with a courageous mind we may bear reproaches, rebukes, and death, that
there be nothing so hard nothing so grievous, ^om. viii.
which we should not be ready to bear for him. This is to be made like
fashioned unto Christ, to suffer that which he suffered, to do that which he
did, to glory and rejoice if any thing happen to be suffered for Christ, for
god forbid that we should seek any other glory in this world, Romans v.
then in the cross of our lord Jesus Christ, Gala. vi.
by whom the world is crucified unto us, and we to the world, ii. Cor. vi.
ii, Cor. iiii. ii. Cor. v.
whose marks let us bear in our bodies, in much suffering, in afflictions,
in necessities, in tribulations, in stripes, in imprisonme^ts, in seditions, in
labor, in watching, in fasting, in pureness. etc. We are always delivered
unto the death for Jesus sake, that the life of Jesus might be made manifest
in our flesh. The love of god does constrain us that we diligently weying this
that if one man died for all men, then all we before were dead, and that one
died for all, yt they which live hereafter might not live to themselves, but to
him which died, and rose again for them. Let us never therefore be weary, ii.
Cor. i^^^
for although our outward man be corrupted, the inward man nevertheless
shall be renewed every day, for the smalnesse of our affliction which endures
but a very small time, shall get unto us an everlasting weight of glory above
measure, i. Pet. iiii.
so that in the mean time we regard not those things which we see, that is to
say which dure but for a time, but those things which are not seen, that is
to say eternal things. Wherefore seeing Christ has suffered for us in the
flesh. Let us also be armed with the same cogitation, that he which suffers
in the flesh has ceased from sin, for this purpose, that now he should not
live according to the lusts of the flesh, the rest of the time which is in
the flesh, but according to ye will of god, let it suffice us that we al our
life time before, have lived according to the manner of Gentiles, when as we
were conversant in wantonness, in lusts, dronke^nes, gluttony, bibbings, and
bancketings, and in detestable worshipping of images, let us not marvel, as
though some new thing happened unto us if that we be tried by fire, for this is
done to try us withal, but let us rejoice, that God thinks us worthy to
suffer any thing for him, and that we should be made parteners of Christ his
afflictions, in the revelation of whose glory, we shall also joy with great
reioising, if we suffer rebukes and slanders for the name of Christ, we are
blessed, because the glory and spirit of god remains upon us. For if we have
died with Christ, we shall also live with him, ^^. Tim. ii. Romans vi.
if we have suffered with him we shall also reign with him and no man is crowned,
but he which lawfully wrestleth. Let us therefore suffer affliction as good
soldiers of Christ, which have made promise to Christ in ye sacrament of
baptism, ^^b. xii.
being appointed to go on his warfare and grafted in his death. Therefore let us
not be wrapped with the business of this life let us not be defiled with
worldly desires, let us run by patience in the battle which we have set before
us, having an eye to Jesus which is the captain of faith and finisher, who
setting before himself joy, suffered the cross, contemning reproaches and
rebukes, let us diligently consider that he suffered such gainsaying of sinners
that we being weried in our minds should not faint. Let us think how vile a
thing it is to shrink away from such a captain, or for us to be so sluggish,
when as he fights so strongly and so valiauntly. Let us consider how evil it
becomes the members to be proud, high minded and envious, when as the head
does so humble it self, and is so fervent in charity. Let us also weighe how
great infamy it is for a captain, to take upon him so many wounds and lastly
of all death, ii. Tim. ii. Act. xiiii. Eccle. ii. Jacob. i. Joan. xiii.
and the soldiers to be a sleep and give themselves to rioring, whosoever
therefore will live godly in Christ Jesus, must prepare themselves to suffer
persecutions, and by many tribulacions, must strive to come to everlasting
life, they must abide in the fear of god, and prepare their minds to
temptations, and keep themselves pure from this world. Christ has given us an
example, that we should do even as he has done.

Luke. 22. Now the feast of unleavened bread drew nighe which is called ye
Passover, namely after two days.

IT was commanded unto the Jews that on the feast day of the Passover,
Exodus xii. xiii. xiiii.
when they did eat the lamb, they should eat unleavened cakes 7. dais after,
which figure Paul opens in the 1. Cor 5 and shows that we must purge the
old leaue^, for that a littel leaue^ does leaue^ all that is mingled with. It is
meet for such as ar born of new by Christ to live a new and innocent life,
that they may be as it were a certain new dough and unleavened. For our Pass
over Christ (says he) is offered up a lamb without spot. Let us therefore
celebrate this festival day, not with old leaven, neither with the leaue^ of
malice and wickedness, but with bread wantyng leaven, that is with sincerity
and truth. The Passover of the Jews has a figure of the liberty which
should come by Christ, for even as in the old time god saved the children of
Israel in Egipte from the murder, with which the Egiptians were punished,
namely whose doors were sprinkled with the blood of the Lamb, and after that
he led them forth with a mighty arm safe and sound through the red sea, and so
delivered the^ from the most grievous yoke of Pharao. So also he saves those by
Christ which believe, from everlasting death, and has delivered the^ from the
power of darkness, tra^sferryng them into the kingdom of his beloved son,
Colo. i.
by who^ they have redemption, namely remission of sins by his blood, John.
i.
and this is the cause why Christ would die at this time, that we might
understand that is that lamb of god, which should take away the sins of the
world and they which are washed with his blood should be safe from the
destroyer, John. iii.
for so God loved the world that he gave his only begotten son ^or it, that
every one which believed in him might not perish but have life everlasting,
John. v
for they which do believe in Christ do come unto no judgment or punishment
but have passed from death to life yea although they were dead yet shall they
have life in him which is the resurrection and life But where as Mark says
it was Easter, and Matthew, John. ^^
after two days shall be Easter, Luke expounds it and says, the festival day
of the Passover drew ^ere, or was at hand, that is, it should be shortly.
namely after ij. days. It is therefore a preue^ting of the time. But the feast
of the Passover by John, does seem to be the day followyng the eating of the
Lamb. So the days of sweet bread are put for the Passover, because they came
both togethers.

Then the high priests, and the elders were gathered together in the house of
the high priest, whose name was called Caiphas, consulting togethers how they
might take him and kill him by guile, but they feared the people, and therefore
they said amongst themselves, not on the feast day, lest peradventure there be
a commotion made by the people. THen this word, then, is not referred unto
the time in the which he speaks these things, but to the time wherein they
were gathered together. The audacitie of the flesh is here to be noted: which
when it goes about to lie in wait against the truth, it consulteth diverse
ways, and in those counsels choseth and observes occasion and time for the
purpose. Wherefore then they lay their heds together, when as the people were
busily occupied in preparyng of the lamb. They which resist the truth, do
assemble and lay their wits together, Psalm. ii.
against their lord to destroy him because he was contrary to their works. They
inuente diverse causes to accuse him withal, knowing that as soon as he were
taken all the people would forsake him. But how impudent so ever the flesh
is, it fears nevertheless, where as nothing is to be feared. For when they
had agreed that he should not be taken on the festiual day, yet nevertheless
by the ordinance of god, he was taken on the feast day, and that without any
uproar: and yt happens oftentimes unto the wicked, which they fear, yea and
which they seek by all means possible to avoid. This we may perceive in ye
counsel of Caiphas who thought it better, that one should be taken away, tha^
that the whole nation should perish, and furthermore if Christ should be taken
away, to take heed that the Romans should not oppress them. But whilst
these folishe men do avoid one vice, they run into the contrary. The Jews
hoped that if Christ were rid out of the way that then the people wuld forsake
him, but after the death of Christ many more believed and came unto Christ, tha^
there did before, when as in one day many thousands received the faith.
They feared lest if Christ lived the Romans would have taken away their
country and nation, which happened unto them 40. years after. So God derideth
the counsels of the ungodly, and brings to pass that they are snared and
taken in their own counsels. And the self same thing in our days, does the
Pope, the Cardinals, the Bishops, the Monks, and evil senators, but they
hide their counsels, yea they adorn them with the title of honesty and
religion.

And Satan had entered into ye heart of Judas Iscariot which was one of the xii.
and he went his way to the chief priests and magistrates, eue^ with this mind
to betray him unto the^. He al so bargained with the^ how he might betray him
unto them, saying: what will ye give me, and I will deliver him unto you* And
they hearing this were glad, and bargained with him, promising to give him xxx.
silver pieces. When he had therefore promised this unto them, he sought
occasion and opportunity, to deliver him unto them without a tumulte. THe
Evangelist John reherseth by occasion, what moved Judas to betray Christ,
forsooth because he was sorry that he had lost part of the money, of the price
of the oyntement which Mary had powered upon Christ. Wherefore this most covetous
man wuld satisfy this loss an other way. He describes therefore the Supper
which was prepared for Christ in the house of one Simo^, and besides that, he
declares the things that were done there. If any man think it good, he may
adioyne that history unto ours, we studieng to be brief have only taken but a
few necessary things. Matthew who also by the way makes mention of this
cause, says that the disciples did murmr, which seems to be spoken by
the figure called Synecdoche, for John says by express words, that Judas was
angry, and that he alleges the care of the poor, to be the cause of his
anger when in deed he nothing cared for the poor, but lucre and gain moved
him, for he was a thief and bare the bag, he covers his covetousness with
a show of liberality and mercy. So do they which say they do defend the old
religion. They make a show as though they sought to defend the honor of God,
the worshipping of saints, and the authority of the sacraments. etc. Let us
learn to what inconvenience covetousness and studieng for money does drive a
man unto, we do all condemn and curse Judas, but we should see, whether we be
not also like unto him, which do scrape unto our selves richesse by hook or
crook, we lie, deceive, and forsake justice. But they are a great deal more
hurtful which use disceite in ecclesiastical goods, and such goods as be
dedicated to the poor. Their minds were now ready on every side to the
matter they went about, being moved thereto by envy, and couetuousnesse of
gain. For such is our nature, that we be all more prompte and ready in
private matters than in common and this comes to pass, because all our
thoughts, all our counsels, and all that ever we can do, tend only unto this
end that we may enriche our selves, and for the same we study both dai and
night. Seeing therefore that all our cogitations and reasons serve for this
purpose, that is to keep and seek our own things, it is no marvel though
we be nothing attentife about those things which appertain unto the common
profitte, and because the fire of love is wholly turned upon our selves, it
can not put forth any flame toward our neighbor, and it is not possible
for us to seek the glory of GOD from our heart, when we seek our own
glory in all things. If the Maiestrate should consulte, or deliberate at
what price wine of Heluetia should be sold, or what it should be esteemed
at, every one would weyghe and consider with him self many days before,
how he might save his own things, and augmente his own Lucre. And thereof
comes it that all and synguler being compelled, do speak and pronounce
most promptelye and diligently in the senate. If we were as diligente and
busye in public affairs, and in matters of godliness and virtue, if we
would so think of them day and night, as we do of private matters, we should
be then more pro^fe and ready, when we should consulte of them. But alas, we
are feeble in these things, and we be slouthful, negligent, idle, and sluggish,
seeking our own things only, and not those things which are of Christ, and
this is the cause that they be so cold which are rulers either in religion or
in commonweals, hereof comes so great a number of wicked deeds amongst
the people, for they which wyl^ be rich, i. Tim. vi.
do fall into the snares of the devil, and into diverse temptations, so that
the sam^ may say that covetousness is the root of all evils. The mind which
is given to covetousness does nothing that is right and honest* for it has
shaken of the fear of god, and we^ded it self to all mischief, but why goes
h^ to the high priests? when the evil will talk^ or have to do with the evil,
there must com^ some occasion and commodity between. Ther^ is none of such an
audacitie, which will call a^ other unto him, to help him to steal, of wh^ he
is not persuaded before in his mind, tha^ he is a thief, or else at the least,
that he favors thieues, and that he gathers by certa^ outward signs,
which do show for the wha^ the inward mind is. None will offer to defloure an
honest matrone or a virgin, vnless^ there be some occasion given him by their
manners and gestures. If that the shamefastness of virgins could not be won by
flattery, then would there none crave it so wantonly of the^. Therefore Judas
goes to those who^ he knew ^o be offended with Christ, he takes counsel
with those men, whose minds were bente with hatred against Christ, which had
consulted a littell before of the death of Christ he had learned by many
signs, that the priests were such men, therefore he fears not to go unto
them, but rather solliciteth them first before he was called of them, what will
ye give me? says he. Oh what an impude^cy was this ^o these bouchers and
thieues, which do exercise and follow warrefare, which do take corrupted bribes
of strangers, are not ashamed ^o ask them of Emperors, kings, and Prin^es,
yea and those which have need of them ^re not ashamed to think it lawful,
for them ^o give them such bribes. But how such men ^re made companio^s and
parteners with Iu^as, the Evangelists do plainly declare, when ^s they say that
Satan entered into the heart ^f Judas, for when he does once possess the
^earte, he hurleth men hedlong into all mischief. Therefore he being styrred
up by the ^iuell and by covetousness does meditate to ^etray his Lord and
savior, yea such a lord ^s had elected him to the Apostleship, which had
made him ruler of his things and loved him excedingly, and when he had
devised ^his mischeuous deed, he makes means to accomplish his wicked
enterprise, and diligently executes the same he would have it done without
tumult, that many should not have knowledge thereof. For Judas sought
opportunity to take him at such a time and in such a place whereas multitude of
the people which did use to follow Christ very often, might not be with him.

Before the feast of the Passover, when Jesus knew that his hour was come,
that he should depart out of this world unto the father, for as much as he loved
his own which were in the world, unto the end he loved them. I Told you
before that John took the Pass over, for the day following the eating of the
Lamb: the Evangelist does Rhetorically amplify the excellency of Christ, that
his lowlines might ye more depely be known. He (says John) which knew al
things, he which knew the hour of his death, he to whom the father had given
all things into his hands, which came from god. etc, He I say washet^ the
feet of his disciples. Let all prophets, bishops, governors of commonweals,
and leaders of the people learn of this teacher, fayt^ love, and care toward
those which are committed unto them. Christ loved his even to the death, he
never forsakes them, he never cease, after he had once begun to love them,
h^ was obedient unto the father even to the death, that he might set before us
an example of humility and weldoyng. etc.

Now on the first day of the feast of unleavened bread, the disciples came unto
Jesus, saying unto him where will thou that we prepare for thee the Passover?
and he said, go into the city, and prepare for us to eat ye Passover there but
they said, where shall we prepare? Jesus answered, go into the city unto a
certain man, behold there shall meet you entryng into the city a man bearing a
pitcher of water, follow this man into the house wherein he enters, and say
you to the good man of the house. The master sends unto thee, my time is at
hand, that I should eatin thy house the Passover with my disciples, where is
the lodging, where I shall eat the Passover with my disciples? And he will
show you an upper chamber, which is large, trimmed and prepared, there make it
ready for us. So his disciples went forth, and came to the city and found as
he had said unto them, and they made ready the Passover. NOthing is done here
by chance, nothing is done rashly all things are foresene and ordained by the
providence of God, without beginning. All things are governed by his counsel
and will. These things are therefore written by the Evangelist, that we might
understand, that Christ was not compelled to die by violence or of necessity,
but of his own free will and by the will of the father, and because that all
the shadows of the old Testament vanished away in Christ, it is declared also
that Christ is that Lamb which is prefigured in the old Testament, as Paul
teaches in the 1. Cor. 5. ca. But this word Pass over is taken diverse ways,
sometimes properly for that passing or slippyng over of the Angel in Egypt,
when as he slew the first begotten of the Egiptians, but spared the Israelits,
upon whose doors the blood of the lamb was sprinckeled, sometimes it is taken
for the festival day it self, and sometimes for the la^b which is killed and
that by denominacion, as here when he says to kill, to eat or prepare the
Passover. So this word Passover is put for the Lamb, and again the Lamb is
called the Passover, Genesis xvii.
when as it was only but a memorial of the passing over. So the bread is
called afterward the body of Christ, when as it is but the token of the body,
and circumcision is called the covenant, Genesis xvii.
of the which covenant it was but the sign. We learn here the poverty of
Christ, who not having where to put under his head, is compelled to prepare his
supper with his disciples in other folks houses after the manner of the poor.

And when even was come, Jesus came with the xii. and when it was time he sat
down, and the xii. with him, and he said unto them, I have earnestly desired
to eat this Passover with you before I suffer. For I say unto you, henceforthe
I will not eat of it any more, until it be fulfilled in the kingdom of God,
and as they were eating. Jesus took the bread, and giving thanks, brake it, and
gave it to his disciples, saying. Take and eat this is my body which shall be
given for you, do this in remembrance of me, and taking the cup he gave
thanks, and said, Take this and divide it among you, this cup is the new
testament through my blood, which is shed for you, for I say unto you, that
after this I will not drink of this fruit of the vine, until that day, when I
shall drink it new with you in my fathers kingdom, and they al drank of it.
IT is exactely described of all the Evangelists, how Christ did institute the
sacrament of his body and blood after ye figurative supper yt he might declare,
that the figures of the old testament were accomplished and finished in him,
and that all things were renewed, that they might have in memory his
wonderful great benefit given them in the cross, no less the^ the old
fathers had in eating of the Passover, that the new might be agreeable to the
old, and that light might succeed darkness. He shows first with how great
a desire he did eat this supper with them, namely with a vehement and a most
fervent desire: for this figurative speech in Hebrew is, I have desired, or in
desiring, that is, I have desired with a wonderful and great desire to eat this
Passover, that is, this memorial Lamb, and I have no less desired to eat
with you this new supper, in the which I comme^d unto you the memory of my death
to be celebrated of you for ever. For as often (as Paul expounds) as ye
shall eat of this bread, and also drink of this wine, you shall be myndfull of
my death. Let the memory of this benefitte never slip from you, let it never
be forgotten, let it alwais remain in your hearts. Let your mouth alwais
declare and show forth this, preach you this every where, celebrate this
without ceasing, and give wonderful great thanks for this. For it is not
meet that you should at any time put in oblivion my death, seeing that I have
with so great a desire suffered death for you, which am so desirous of your
salvation that I do even give away my life for you, I w^ll suffer my body to
be nailed to the cross as a sacrifice for your sins, and I will shed my
blood to wash you withal. I do so much esteem you, that I am ready to redeem
you by my death, from everlasting death. I do set before you signs of this
benefit and of this redemption, which being eaten of you shall renew the
memory of me, unto the which signs I gave the names of my body, and blood, that
they might the more strongly move your senses. My death is your life, if so be
that you believe that by my death I have appeased god for you, and that my blood
has washed away your sins, this shall norishe and fatten you inwardly. This
being weighed with a true faith, shall make merry and pacify your minds. Take
therefore and eat, do this in remembrance of me, I go now from you, so that
from henceforth I shall not eat and drink with you after the accustomed
manner. I shall with my blood being shed confirm that testament which sometime I
established with Abraham, but after a new sort, not by the blood of beasts as
it was in the old time, but by mine own blood. Neither shall my covenant
stand with the Jews only, but with all mankind. This word branch or fruit
of the vine, is a paraphrases of wine, and does signifye not only that to be
wine which Christ drank in the cup and gave unto his disciples, but it also
declares, that it was blood, but such as came out of the vine, and not powered
out of his body, as if a man would say: this is of the fruit of wheat, he
should by circumloqution signify bread, and therwithall declares, that it is
not only bread, but also it is bread made of wheat and of no other grain. For
there is also bread made of Rye and of Otes. etc. And this emphasis have all
parephrases, and specially the Hebrew parephrases. So when Christ calls
himself the son of man. Therefore he says, henceforth I will no more eat nor
drink (wherefore it is likely, Christ him self also did eat and drink) namely
after this sort, but after an other sort and new, that is to say after my
resurrection, and I will the^ eat with you when as you shall eat with me at my
table in the kingdom of my father, but not after that sort as bodies are wont
to be fed, but in the state of immortality. Therefore the kingdom of god is
either the time after the resurrection or else a more full knowledge of Christ,
The kingdom of God
or else the eternal life after this life, in the which the faith full shall
eat and drink upon the table of Christ wiih Christ that most sweet drink of
immortality as appears in the.xxii. chapi. Luke. As concerning the sense of
these words of Christ, this is my body and of the food of the soul, we have
spoken inoughe of, in an other place. Let us not dispute how the bread is made
the body of Christ, but let us rather remember the benefitte performed unto
us by the body of Christ, that being inwardly satiated in our minds we may
lift our hearts to him which sits at the right hand, of the father, that is
in a certain limited place in heaven, that we may love one another, that we may
live innoce^tly, that we may give thanks unto the Lord, and walk worthily in
our vocation. To eat of the body of Christ is none other thing, but to beeleue
that his body was given to the death, to make satisfaction for our sins. To
drink the blood of Christ, is nothing else but to believe that Christ his blood
was shed for ye washing away of our sins: neither is there any other eating of
the body of Christ, then that which is done by faith, of the which Christ
speaks in the 6. chap of John neither can it be done of any but of the godly.
But the eating of the simbolical and mistical bread, is common both to the
godly and also to the ungodly, although after a diverse sort. For there be
some which do eat the bread of the supper unworthily, and drink the wine
unworthily, and by that means do get unto themselves death and judgment, that
is punishment. And those although they eat and drink with their mouth the
sacraments of the body and blood of the Lord, yet nevertheless, they eat not
the body of Christ, neither do they drink his blood, unless they will make
Christ a liar (which far be it from the everlasting and infallible truth)
when as he says. They which eat my flesh and drink my blood, abide in me
and I in them. There is none (I think) that will affirm if he have his right
wits, that this agrees with the ungodly, but as for the godly, they do not
only eat with their teath the signs, neither have they ^are signs but besides
the eating of the signs which is done with the mouth of the body, they are
inwardly fed in their minds with the body and blood of Christ by the eating of
faith, which faith the spirit of Christ kindles within the^, at such time and
as much, and to who^ it pleases him. For the operation of his spirit is not
bound to the signs, neither is grace so put in them, that it should be brought
unto them as it were in a wagon, but Christ that chief and eternal bishop does
feed the faithful with his body and blood, the minister only administering the
sacraments outwardly, unto whom he sets before their eyes, puts in
remembrance, and declares the grace of god, he brings it not to them he
gives it not, neither does he distribute it to the^. Therefore a faithful mind
does receive the body and blood, and having received it, the spirit of God
does with heat digest it, and pours it into the inward bowels of the soul,
of the which springs a marvelous and inward refreshing unto a godly mind,
when we celebrate therefore the Supper of the Lord or thanks giving, let us
remember that only sacrifice which was offered upon the cross with thanks
geuyng. For we are admonished that by the flesh and blood of the only begotten
son of God, offered upon the cross for us, we are redeemed from everlasting
death, and that the same are made to us spiritual food to norish and keep us
in everlasting life, and for as much as Christ has offered up himself a most
acceptable sacrifice for us unto ye father, in giving his body to the death, and
powered forth his blood to wash us wtall, it is wholly our parts to meditate and
to preach abroad, so great a love, and so wonderful great a benefit, and to
give thanks for so lively a death, and by that means our faith will more
increase toward God the father, also his love, and good will toward us will
be more and more kindled. Moreover we are admonished by this most holy Supper,
to offer and vow our selves wholly body and soul unto Christ for a sacrifice,
considering that he has suffered death to restore us unto life, and desire not
to live now to our selves, but to Christ. Finally the remembrance of the body
given, and of the bloodshed, is therefore set before the church of Christ in the
holy signs of the supper, that by the same it might more certainly receive as
it were a certain privy toke^ of her redemption, and might call into memory,
that we are so compacte by faith into one body, that we are made the members
of one head Christ. It is therefore mete that we be bound together with a
singular charity amongst our selves, and with doing good one to an other. Let
the death of Christ therefore never slip out of our hearts, let us always
remember that Christ is wholly made ours. that we should also be his by faith
and charity, and our neighbors by charity, and let us abide in him by faith,
and he in us by love, let us do and suffice all things for him which died for
our sakes.

And when supper was done, when the devil had put in the heart of Judas, Simon
Iscariot to betray him Jesus knowing that his father had given him all things
into his hands, and that he came from God, and should go unto God, he rose
from supper, and put of his garments, and when he had taken a linen towell,
he girded himself with it, then he poured water into a basen, and began to
wash the fete of his disciples, and to wype them with the lynnen towell
wherewyth he was girded. GOd sets before us in Christ an example which
ought never to go out of our sight, namely of all virtues. Let us consider
his unspeakable charity, joined with a singular humility. God therefore
teaches us in Christ charity, humility, liberality, gentleness, strength,
long suffering, and constancy. Let us do good unto all men, both to our
fre^des, and to our enemies, neither let us look for any other thing for our
benefits, then hatred and most grievous persecution. Yet let us not in the mean
while be drawn away from doing good, neither let us at any time cease. This is
that which Paul says, all that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer
persecution. He which amongst mortal men will plan^ virtues, and set forth
righteousness, must put forth himself wholly to the hatred of all men, and must
vow him self for righteousness, and eue^ as Christ could not be plucked away
by no reproaches or hatred, i. These. i^^
from righteousness and truth, from charity and well doing, but that he obeyed
the father even to the death, and consta^tly suffered whatsoever the ungodly
did unto him, and loved his so well unto the end. So also must all the godly
do. They must constantly go forward to do good in the myddest of all euels,
neither must they faint or be weary at any time as overcome with the hatred of
evil men. Christ loved and did good even unto his death, he served and
profited all men, and thereby got nothing but extreme hatred, and most cruel
death. To depart out of this world, and go to the father, is a periphrasis of
his death, as though he would say, Jesus knowing that he should dye now, but
as we have told you, the Hebrew periphrasis have great emphases, and are of
more efficacy, than if the sentence had been set forth plainly and without figure.
What is to dye.
For by these words he shows and declares a great consolation unto the
faithful, namely that the death of the faithful, is no other thing, but to
leave the world and to go to God. And is not this a great consolation to leave
the world, that is, al wickedness, all infidelity, al labor and affliction,
and to go unto God which is the most good, and also the most loving father? who
would not rejoice when he hears this, that by death he is delivered from al
evils, and endued with all good things? And to the christians to die, is no
other thing, than to leave the world and to go unto God, whereas otherwise if
we should die without Christ, death were the most terriblest thing that could be
unto all flesh. The Evangelist therefore by these words does make death
pleasant and acceptable, and does declare what death and also what the pain of
sin is made unto us by the death of Christ, namely the end of all evils and the
beginning of a new and everlasting life. Therefore worthily says David, that
the death of the saints is precious in the sight of God, when as in the mean
time, the death of sinners is most ill. The farther we depart from the
world, so much the nerer we come unto God. Again the more we come and addicte
our selves unto the world, the more we depart from God, between these two
there is no mean, neither may thou cleave to both of them, but in that the
Evangelist does say that the devil did put this treason into the heart of Judas,
he does it to declare that these wicked deeds and mischiefs are done by the
devil, as of the author of them, that is to say by his instruments. For in deed
there be in man certain good affections created of God, but by man's fault they
are corrupted and made evil, as the covetous desire of things. These
affections does the devil snatche unto himself, and draws unto him
whatsoever he catch, and uses them at his own pleasure. So that which is
created good in us of God, the devil draws to our destruction. He put of his
garments. etc. It is a kind of speaking, which describes the thing
manifestlye, and as it were sets it before our eyes.

Then he came unto Simon Peter, and Peter said unto him, will thou wash my
feet? Jesus answered, what I do thou know not now, but thou shall know
hereafter, Peter said unto him: Thou shalt never wash my feet. Jesus
answered: If I wash thee not, thou shall have no part with me. Simon Peter
said unto him, Lord not only my feet, but also my hands and my head, Jesus
said unto him. He that is washed has no need, but to wash his feet, but is
altogether clean, and ye be clean but not all, for he knew which of them
should betray him, and therefore he said, ye be not all clean. HEre is set
forth in Christ an example of singular charity and humility, and in Peter
the blindness and curiosity of humain wisdom. Christ perfourmeth the same in
deed which he had taught in word, for in the eleventh chapter of Matthew, The
submission of the mind.
he says, learn of me because I am meke and humble in heart, he therefore
expresses humilitye in him self, for what greater a baseness can there be
than for the son of God, and the King of Kings to humble himself to the
feet of his servants* Let us hereby learn to throw down our selves, to
attribute nothing to our selves and to boast nothing at all, yea and look how
much the more in estimation we be, so much the more let us humble our selves.
So says Paul in ye xij to the Romans and ij. to the Philippia^s. But in
Peter is declared ye stubbornnes of the flesh, which inquireth after captive al
things curiously, neither does it obey God but his own reason, but it should
have made his understanding unto the obedience of Christ, Peter understood what
Christ would do, for he did se that he would wash his feet, but he understood
not what Christ me^t by this washing. Therefore Christ says, that which I do,
that is, that which I entend, thou knowe^^ not, that is, thou understand
not, thou perceiuest it not: we are so dull and so sluggish, that after we have
seen things done, it is long before we can understand them, neither do we know
what they mean? God oftentimes signifies by some outward thing, that which at
the first sight we understand not, as we may easily see in the prophets by who^
he declares certain thigs by examples, which afterward he opens and
expounds. So in the supper he ge^eth bread and wine that by these things and
tokens he might set forth unto them the remembrance of his death, he washes
the fete, not to that intent, that he wuld wash away the filthiness of the
fete but that he might signify, that he only is he which should purify us,
setting ^orth some higher matter, which may be manifestly perceived by his
answer unto Peter, and by other words. For many have and receive part with
Christ, whose fete Christ has not washed, To be washed, is to believe truly.
but no man shall be partaker of the glory of Christ, and of the life
everlasting, but he which shall be washed with the blood of Christ and whose
affections shall be purged by his grace. Moreover he commends unto his
disciples charity, that one might help an other by mutual love, not only in
washing of fete, if necessity so require, but in helping our neighbor in all
things, but this is to be marked diligently, that they which be faithful have
yet need to wash their fete, that is, to wash away their daily fallings and to
purge away the affections still springing in the flesh which thing certain not
considering, have come to that madness, and pride that they dare affirm
themselves to be without sin, for all that John says. If any man says he has no
sin, i. John. i. Romans vii.
he is a liar and deceives him self. Paul complained yt he found in his
members another law, repugning the law of the mind and spirit. Or how can those
men pray this praie^ every day, forgive us our trespasses, when as they
acknowledge none? Christ therefore teaches that the beleuers ar purified by
faith that is to say, by the sprinckling of his blood. Moreover that they
which are purified and cleansed, yet nevertheless have need to wash their
feet, and that they are still vnpure, lastly he pronounces manifestly enough,
that al they be not clean which are conuersaunte in the outward fellowshippe
of the disciples of Christ. For he says, ye be clean but not all, meaning
Judas which was present amongst the Apostels in body, but his mind and heart
was all one with the Pharisees, wherefore to be washed or to be clean, which
are all one, is to believe verily and without any dout that thou art washed and
purified by the blood of Christ. To wash the fete.
To wash the feet is to acknowledge and confess before God with sighing and
detesting our daily sins, and then after our fall to run to God by
repentance. For we can not pass through this way whilst we live here
amongst so many enemies, without falling, it is so dirtye and vnplayne, and the
weakness and slippernesse of the flesh is so great. But howsoever the feet
do stagger, yet if the head of faith be safe, the matter is well enough. For
the faithful can not be beaten down, by such fallinges, if the Lord up hold
them with his hand.

After therefore he had washed their fete, and put on his garments he sat
down, and said unto them again, do you know what I have done unto you? you
call me master and lord and you say well, for I am so, if I therefore which am
your lord and master have washed your fete ye ought also one to wash an others
feet, for I have given you an example, that eue^ as I have don, so might you
also do. Verily, verily, I say unto you, the servant is not greater than his
lord, neither the Messenger greater than he, which sent him, if you have
known these things, blessed are ye, if ye do them. THe lord by this exaumple
of humility and well doing, does put us to shame for our hautenes of mind and
coldness to do good, which as we gape for honor and riches, and do brag of
those things which we have not. So also we despise and neglect our fellow
servant neither do we only neglect them but besides that we hurt them and
do them injury. Let us therefore follow the example of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Let us put away our hautenesse of mind, let us cast down our courages,
let us embrace our brethren with fervent love, let us bear and suffer the
infirmity and burdens of other men, being ready to submit our selves to all
men for him which did so much cast down him self for our sakes. Let us
always remember the Lords commandment of brotherly love and liberality
toward the poor, for he will have mercy and not sacrifice. Christ in deed
does prescribe unto us a most perfect form of life, Ose. ii.
yea and in manner impossible for us to do when as he says, so love one an
other, as I have loved you. How be it if we shall endeavor to follow the same,
and if we shall attempt to follow af-his prescripte as much as he shall give us
grace to do, although we attain not unto it (as we shall never do) yet he will
gentlye forgive us our trespasses. It is not enough to know these things, and
to hear them, or to preach them, but we must do them, that is, we must study
and apply our selves to these things, we must exercise our selves in these
things, and as it were contend with our neighbor in well deseruyng. So at the
length we shall prove learned and exercised in them.

And there was a great contention amongst the^, which of them should seem to
be the greatest, but he said unto them. The kings of the gentiles reign over
them, and they which have power over the^ are called gracious, but ye shall not
be so, but let ye greatest amongst you be as the lest, and the chiefest as he
that serves. For who is greater he that sytteth at the table, or he which
serves? Is not he which sytteth at the table? And I am in the midst of you
as he that serves, and ye are they that have continued with me in my
temptations. Therefore I appoint unto you a kingdom, as my father has
appointed to me, that ye may eat and drink at my table, in my kingdom, and
sit on xii. seats judging the xii. tribes of Israel, when I sent you without
bag and scrippe, and shoes, lacked ye any thing? And they said nothing, he
said therefore to them but now he that has a bag let him take also a scrip, and
he that has none, let him sell his coat and bye a sword. For I say unto you
that yet the same which is written must be performed in me. Even with the
wicked was he numbered, for doubtless those things which are written of me
have an end, and they said behold there are two swords, and he said unto them,
it is enough. When as Christ teach most humility, the flesh seeks to be
exalted and to be great. So corruptis our nature, that it seeks nothing else
but his own, yea and the^ when as most ernest matters are in hand, Christ
teaches them to submit themselves to others to love one another, to help one
an other by charity, and yet in the mean time they are not ashamed to reason,
who should be greatest, and this moved them to this question, because Christ
declared unto them his death, but Christ puts down with great gravity ye
hautenesse of mind, and exhorts the^ to submit themselves, showing the^ who
is ye greatest in ye church, namely he which submits him self to al me^ and
is servant to al me^. But because they were elected to preach the word, he
therefore withdraws their minds from his hautenes, with ye which the princes of
the world are almost puffed up. The princes of the gentiles, Profane Princes.
it is a kind of speaking for the Princes of the nations, not they only which
govern the gentiles or infidels, as the chief capitains of the Anabaptists do
expound, when as they go about to prove by the words of Christ, that a
christian man ought not to be a Magistrate, but Christ by these words does
not help their opinion, but rather subuerte it, of the which we will speak in
his place. Christ does fortify before, the minds of his disciples, whom he had
elected to preach the gospel against the hurtful affections of the flesh,
amongst the which the study for honor and disease of ambition, has no small
power, the which if they once creep into the hearts of prelates of religion,
they bring with them innumerable hurts. Neither is there any other pestilence
more hurtful to the church, than the desire of ambition, pride and confidence
in it self. For he is no true godly man that trusts to him self, and the
apostels were sick of this disease, the Lord permittyng the same, that they
might learn by this, so much the more to acknowledge and humble themselves.
Therefore he says, O ye my disciples ye are not of the number of them which are
pr^nces and magistrates in ye world, you have an other office appointed you.
Princes obtain their names according to their doings, and have in the mean
time some dominion over those which are committed to their charge, That
affection of dominion and principality ought not to be in other kings and
princes, but rather they do get the^ names to be called gracious in deserving
well of their subjects, as Euergetes, and the father of the country
Abimilech. etc. And it is more often seen, that they do more oppress their
subjects, than ease them of their burthe^s and although this be evil, yet
nevertheless it must be suffered in them which have dominion in the world but
not in the kingdom of heaven. For when they take armor and drive away the
enemy and punnishe the evil, they serve also Christ with their sword, when as
nevertheless they are somewhat defiled, and have some thing common with the
business of the world, so that they cannot be wholly with out dregs, and be
always bent to heavenly things. But for you which are the light of the
world, being lightened of me which am the true light, a greater integrity is
mete, and a greater pureness, ye must shine above other in the light of faith
and charity, not in word only but in example of life, let not your hearts
have a regard to earthly things, but being purged from the contagiousnesse of
al earthly dregs, let them be carried upward as it were like fire unto heavenly
things. Be ye therefore far from ambition, from the desire of money, and from
all those things which may wrap your minds in earthly things. Se that you
seek not gredily for glory and rule in the world, for I have preferred you to
the kingdom of heaven, that is to the preaching of grace, and truth. Be ye not
therefore bent to other things which might withdraw you from your office, let
other men seek to be lords, have ye only a care to serve others, that shall
extol you to the eternal joy, and shall make you mighty in deed. Look upon
me which came not to rule or to be great, but I am rather conuersaunt
amongst you ministering unto you as a most abject servant, and washing your
feet, I have left heaven and descended unto you, taking upon me for your
sakes all poverty and affliction, why should you then be ashamed to serve
others for my sake? It is a small matter that ye have abiden with me hitherto,
and that ye have cleaued unto me, which nevertheless was not of your own
power, for ye have not elected me, but I descending from my fathers seat have
called and chosen you, what good soever therefore ye have, you must not ascribe
it unto your selves, but altogether unto me, lift up your minds to things
that are to come, you shall not lose your labor if you abide with me, I will
reward it to the uttermost, eue^ as you have been partakers of my afflictions,
so shall you also be companions of my joy, so that ye be constant in that which
I send you about and apply not your minds to other things. For it is not
sufficient, that ye have abiden with me hitherto after a sort, for they were but
skirmishes, and slight battails, but now there be greater troubles at hand.
The time is now present that Satan turns al his force and all his armor
against me and you. Ye know that ye wa^ted nothing, when I sent you without
things necessary for your journey and also unarmed, be ye therefore constant,
and stand ye firmly, for such a multitude of wicked persons shall come upon
us, that it shall seem that we have need of swords. For those things which
are written of me must needs be performed, and go ye forward without fear in
preaching of the truth, I will never be absent from you, as I have before
defended you. I will provide for you, and minister unto you all such things as
ye want. By these words the lord plucketh out of the hearts of the
disciples, the affection of the flesh, wherewyth they were touched, and also he
prepares and encourages them to battayles which were to come. For they
should suffer greater things after his departure, when as they should stir up
by ye preching of the truth ye displeasure of all me^ against them. Of the
which evils he has presently showed an example by himself declaring unto the^
and to all the godly, what they must suffer in this world for the truth, and
that there is a wonderful great reward prepared for them which continue unto
the end. But in that he says, let him sell his coat and bye a sword, it is
a phrase of speech, by the which is signified a most great danger to be at
hand, as though Christ would say. If they rage so against me, they will not
spare you, be ye therefore strong and constante, for they shall so spoil and
kill you, that it shall seem that ye have need of swords, and yet he bids
not them to fight with the sword, which before so diligently had forbidden them
that they should not resist evil, and to turn the other cheke to him which
would give the^ a blow, yea and afterward he bids Peter (striking Malchus)
to put up his sword, neither ca^ the Papists prove by this an ecclesiastical
sword and a profane sword. Christ simply foretells the danger which drew
nere to him and his disciples, teaching by the way that they should ouercom and
drive away al these things by the sword of both the testame^ts, that is to
say, by the sword of the spirit. The men which follow the Apostels have no
need of swords, but if they shall diligently continue in preaching of the
truth, they shall stir up the swords of all the wicked ones against them, whom
they shall again resist with the sword of the spirit, and they shall overcome
in this battle the lord aiding them.

I speak not of you all, I know whom I have chosen, but that the scripture
might be fulfilled, he that eats bread with me, has lifted up his hele
against me, I tell you now before it be done, that when it shall be done ye
might beeleue that I am he. When he had spoken of the washyng of the fete,
Anagogi^ Analepsis Epanodo^
he ascends in the mean time by a figurative speech unto the purity of the
mind, and by the same very aptely enclineth his talk to the vnpurenesse of
Judas the betraier, and it is a repeticion or a retourning. Election makes the
sons of God, but faith is the sign of election, for none have faith but the
elect. By these words he teaches the heart of Judas, for there be many always
in the church, which dissemblyng a faith, being otherwise most wicked. Let
these men think that they cannot hide themselves from God, although sometimes
they deceive men for man sees but the outward things only, To lift up the
hele.
God beholds and allows the heart. To lift up the foot or hele does
signifye after a figurative kind of speech, to lie in wait for any man, to
offend, oppress, despise or to hurt any man and with the feet to make have
to accomplish the same. The Germains use the same kind of speech. So likewise
in the Psalm. Their feet make have to shed blood. To eat b^rad
etc. To eat bread with any man, is to be partaker of his table. and also
simbolically to be familier, and to be received into a more frendeship. So
Judas was taken into the number of the Apostels, and did eat the supper with
the Lord, and yet this unfaithful and ingrate man, was not ashamed to betraye
his lord, which had done so great a benefit for him. By these words he does
make the fault of the betrayer more grievous, but to that intent that by making
mention of his gentleness toward him, he might pluck him back from his
purpose.

When Jesus had said these things, he was troubled in spirit and said. Verily,
verily I say unto you that one of you shall betraye me, for the hand of him
which betrayeth me, is with me upon the table. All ye shall be offended by me
this night, for it is written. zach. xii.
I will smite the shepeheard, and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered, but
after I am risen, I will go before you into Galile, but Peter answered and
said unto him. Though al men should be offended by thee, yet will I never be
offended, Jesus said unto him. Verily I say unto thee, that this night,
before the cock crow, thou shall deny me thrice. Peter said unto him, though
I should dye with thee, yet will I not deny thee. Likewise also said all the
disciples: and the lord said Simon, Simon, behold Satan has desired you, to
sift you as wheat, but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not,
therefore when thou art converted strengthen thy brethren. And he said unto
him, Lord I am ready to go with the into prison and to death. And he said, I
tell thee Peter, the cock shall not crow this day, before thou haste denied
thryce that thou knew me. Verily I say unto you that one of you shall betray
me, and they were exceeding sorrowful, and began every one of them to say unto
him, is it I lord? and the disciples behold one another, doubtyng of whom he
spoke, and he answered and said, he that dippeth his hand with me in the dish,
he shall betraye me. Surely the son of man goes his way, as it is written of
him, but woe be unto that man, by whom the son of man is betrayed, it had
been good for that man if he had never been borne. Then Judas which betrayed
him said. Is it I master? he said unto him. Thou have said it. Now there was
one of the disciples of Jesus which leaned on his bosom, namely he whom Jesus
loved. To him therefore beckened Simon Peter that he should ask, who it was
of whom he spoke, he then as he leaned on Jesus breast, said unto him Lord who
is it? Jesus answered it is he to whom I shall give a sop when I have dipped
it, and when he had dipped the bread he gave it Judas Iscariot Simo^s son,
and after the soppe, Satan entered into him. Then said Jesus unto him, that
thou do, do quicklye, but none of them that satte at the table knew for
what cause he spoke it unto him, for some thought, because Judas had the bag,
that Jesus had said unto him, bye those things that we have need of against
the feast, or that he should give some thing unto the poor, as sone then as
he had received the sop, he went immediately out, and it was night. CHrist the
king of the heavenly kingdom, which came to preach and offer the kingdom of
heaven to the men in the world (but yet to such as he had chosen out of the
world) which also had given in charge to his apostels to call all men to
this kingdom does first pluck out of their hearts all such diseases which
ought to be far absent from the kingdom of heaven, namely the lusts of the
flesh and of the world, to the entente that they which should teach others that
kingdom might first express the same in themselves. For God has translated
us (says Paul) from the kingdom of darkness, Colo. ^.
into the kingdom of his well-beloved son, into his wonderful light, that we
might now be the sons of God, who renouncing the old Adam, i. Pet. (...)
Tit. ii.
and casting away all ungodliness, and worldly desires, might live godly
justly and soberlye in this world, lookyng for that blessed hope, and appearing
of the glory of the great God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ. Heb. xiii^
For we have here no abiding city, but we look for one to come, namely that
heavenly Jerusalem, in the which we are appointed citizens, fellow citizens
with the saints and of the household of God, Ephe. ^^. i. Pet. ii.
but it is mete that they which be strangers and pilgrims in this world,
should abstain from fleshly lusts, which fight against the soul, having
honest conversation amongst the gentiles, that they which speak evil of us as
evil doers, may have us in estimation for our good works, and glorifye God in
the day of visitatio^. In his former talk he reproved ambition and
covetousness, now he reprehendeth self trust and desire of money, of the
which the one was in Peter and the other in Judas and the disciples. Peter not
weighing his own strength promises greater things than he can perform,
neither does he believe the lord who admonished him of it, but despising all
other, boasts himself only to be strong, Judas which had conceived this
horrible mischeuous act in his heart, does not hear the Lord which called
him back from it. So plaieth our flesh, when it is left to it self. No man
acknowledges his error, no man will believe him which admonishes him. Every
man hops that he can be hidden, when as he is not called by name, howsoever
his conscience withstand him inwardly. Christ assayeth Judas diverse ways to
withdraw him from his pretense, in which the wonderful gentleness and love
of Christ is to be marked who will not the death of a sinner, but that he
should be converted and live but the more that Christ shows and puts forth
his loving kyndnes, so much the more his ungodliness is hardened, so that he
dare most impudently say is it I? Moreover this most wicked variety dares
thrust himself into the holy fellowship and table of the lord, not fearyng to
lie unto him which knows all things. So great a thing is hypocrisy, and a
heart possessed with covetousness. So in like manner dare we sometimes com to
the holy communion with Judas boasting our selves to be godly, when as inwardly
we be most ungodly. And although both Peter and Judas fell either of them, yet
great is the diversity between the denial of Peter, and the betrayeng of
Judas. Peter being overwhelmed with a sudden terror sinned of fear and
cowardnesse of mind, but Judas sinned of a pretensed malice, for the deuell
had possessed his heart, Christ therefore says that Peter's faith was not
altogether gone, for although he denied him outwardly with his mouth, yet
nevertheless his heart fell not from Christ, and god suffers the godly
sometimes to slip, that they may know themselves more thoroughly, and humble
themselves in mind, learn and acknowledge their infirmity, and after their
fall they may rise again more strong and better couraged. They may learn to
put no confidence in themselves, to be sorry for other men's falls, and to be
more careful, and for that cause Christ says, and thou after thou art
converted strengthen thy brethern. Satan so stirred up Judas, as we have heard
before, that not only he shroncke from Christ, but besides that he betrayed
him to his enemies to be destroyed, and here it is said that the devil entered
into him, after the sop, which is thus to be understood, that the devil
which before had possessed him, did now more fully possess him, and more urge
him to bring to pass the mischief which he had conceived. For even as in
faith there are certain degrees, so also is there in infidelity and breach of
faith. No man is made most good upon the sudden, so no man is most wicked
suddenly, by littell and littell we slide into the pitfall, if we watch not, if
we resist not the beginning and if we neglecte small matters. Our foot must
be plucked by and by out of the clay of sins, least it fasten more depely in,
we must straight way resist the affections, least they come to have dominion
over us. Satan slepeth not, he never cease, but walks about like a roaring
Lion, seeking where to get his pray, whom let us resist by faith, and he will
fly from us. The lord is strong to deliver us out of the mouth of the Lion, so
that we fly unto him by and by with our whole heart, and cast our selves all
wholly upon him with a sound faith, let us take heed of the meat and of the
bait which that most subtle enemy lays for us, lest when we have devoured
it, we fall with Judas into the everlasting night.

And when he was gone Jesus said, now is the son of man glorified, and God is
glorified by him, and God shall glorify him by him self, and shall glorify him
by and by. My littel children, yet a littell while I am with you, ye shall
seek me, and as I have said to the Jews, whither I go, ye cannot come, so
also I say unto you now, I give you a new commandment, that ye love one an
other, even as I have loved you, do ye also love one an other, by this shall
all men know, that ye are my disciples, if ye have mutual love amongst your
selves. Simon Peter said unto him, lord whither go thou? Jesus answered
him, whither I go, thou can not follow me now, but thou shall follow me
hereafter. Peter said unto him, lord why cannot I follow thee now? I will give
my life for thee, Jesus au^swered, will thou give thy life for me? Verily,
verily I say unto thee the cock shall not crow before thou have denied me
thrice. WHen the betrayer was gone, Christ makes mention of his glorifieng not
without o^, and rejoicing of the spirit. Now is the son of man glorified. He
speaks of the thing to come and at hand as though it were now past, that we
might see the certeintie of gods providence. The time is now present that the
son of man shall be made noble after a new sort yt is to say, by his death,
cross, resurrection, and ascension, and other things which followed after the
se^dyng of ye spirit, as miracles and the conversion of the Gentiles. etc. For
that cause says Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, that the son of God,
which was borne of the seed of David as touching the flesh, was declared to
be the son of God with power, as concerning the spirit of sa^ctification, in
that he rose again from the dead. And this power of ye resurrection, of the
which Christ also speaks here, should follow within few days after, which was
not done by an angel, or by any creature, but by the power of the father, as
Paul witnesses in the second of the Colossians, where he says. Who has
raised him up. etc. Christ therefore says and God shall glorifye him. He also
by these words comfort the hearts of his disciples who were not a little
troubled now, because he had made mention unto them of his death, as though he
would say. The time is come that I shall accomplish the will of my father that
is, that I shall dye, but by this my death my father shall be glorified. Be ye
not therefore troubled, ye shall see and that by and by what great glory my
father will give me. By these words we be taught not to be sorye, if any
troubles com unto us by the ungodly, for the cross and also death get unto the
godly most great glory, when as nothing can chance unto the godly, which
is not ordained by the good will of the father, and which shall not bring unto
them wonderful great glory. Furthermore the glory of God comes by those
things which we suffer for his names sake, and what is he that would not wish
to have the glory of God set forth, yea eue^ with his own hurt and danger? And
when as hipocrites do go away from the fellowshippe of the faithful, then is
the church delivered from a most great evil, so that the faithful which
desire to have ye glory of god set forth, may worthily rejoice. And for because
that Christ had foretold that such great evils should come unto his disciples,
and had showed them the danger, which they should be in by the means of falls
brethren, of whom Judas went before as a figure of them, now in the mean time
he comfort and encourages them, least they should be fainte hearted, and
discouraged, teaching them, by what means, they might stand steadfast, and to
be safe against all the evils, which were at hand, namely by concord and
mutual love among themselves, as though he would say. How soever diverse
tempests do happen, how soever the ungodly rage against you, have ye only a
care for this, the which above all other things I give you in charge, that ye
be joined together amongst your selves with a fervent charity. For so shall
ye stand firm against all the assaults of your enemies, if ye be bound with
this bond no man can hurt you. This shall be the most certain sign, that ye be
my disciples, if they shall see in you that love which was in your master. The
boastyng and presumption of the flesh is seen in Peter, which that he might be
taken away, the lord suffers him to fall that he might learn to
acknowledge him self, and to live afterward in fear and with modestye. In the
mean time we must mark the love of God, which does not altogether reject us,
because of our infirmity, but takes in good worth our folishnes, and
turns it to good, we have of purpose left out that which John writes from
the xiiii. chap. to the xviii. least our book and those things which we have
expounded in John should increase to a great volume. They therefore which are
desirous of the same, let them read them in John and apply them to this place.

When Jesus had spoken these words he went out according to his accustomed
manner with his disciples over the brook Ceder, that is to say into the Mount
Olyuete, where was a gardein into the which he entered, and his disciples also
and Judas also which betrayed him knew the place, because Jesus had oftentimes
resorted thither with his disciples, and when he came unto the place which is
called Gethseman he said unto them, sit ye here, till I go aside and pray, and
he took Peter and James and John with him, and he began to be afraid and to be
vexed and he said unto them my soul is sorrowful even unto the death abide ye
here and watch with me, pray that ye enter not into temptation, and being
gone forward a litel, and departed from the^ almost a stones cast, he fell upon
the earth and being prostrate kneling upon his knees, he prayed, saying, Abba
father, all things are possible unto thee, if it be possible take away this
cup from me, nevertheless not my will, but thy will be done. CHrist had armed
his disciples against the persecutions which were to come, and had taught them,
with what swords they should resist them, that is to say, by the knowledge of
both the testamentes, and by the sword of the spirit which is the word of
God, being a two edged sword and cuttyng on either side, and percyng even into
the inward parts, furthermore he had admonished them not to put any distrust
of his care and goodness, for that having him for their defense and save guard
they should be even as safe as they had been always before. For although
he should go from them as concerning the body, yet for all that he would not
forsake them, but be present with them in his spirit even unto the end of the
world. Moreover he would pluck out of the^ the affections, with the which
nature is defiled, to the intent they might wholly depend of him, renouncing
the world, and applieng themselves to heavenly things. Now he sets forth an
example in himself, with what mind, and with what constancy all the godly
should receive the cross, he goes forth against death that he might declare,
that he died not against his will, but willinglye, and of love, not dissembling
in the mean time his infirmitye and fear, lest we should despair if at any
time our flesh should be made afraid with temptations and dangers coming
upon us, if it should be touched with sorrow, or have an horror of adversity,
provided that we do not cowardly faynte and flee. For there happens also unto
the godly and constant men some fear of the flesh, but the fear of God which
is in them, and their faith to God, shakes of and overcomes the fear of the
flesh. This we see manifestly in Christ, who as he took upon him for our
sakes, the infirmity of the flesh, being made like unto his brethren in all
things, so also he was not ashamed to confess his fear and sorrow to his
disciples. That we might have wherewith to comfort us in all temptations, and
that we might know that God will not reject us. because of the infirmity of the
flesh, so that we fly unto him with our whole heart, and with a perfect faith. He
was sorry for us, he prays unto the father for us, that we might learn by
him, what we should do in dangers, and to who^ we should fly unto, he
declares himself to be man in deed, which is touched with the feelyng of
death, nevertheless in the mean time, he consecrateth himself wholly to the
will of the father, unto whose will he submitted his own will. The self same
thing must we do. when tempests do assail us, Let us acknowledge our own
imbecilitie and let us attribute nothing to our own strength, neither trust
to our selves, and howesoeuer the devil, the flesh and the world rage,
howsoever the enemy oppress and urge us let us not for all that despair but
let us fall down before our most pitiful father, let us desire his aid, and
let us utterly deny our affections, and consecrate our selves wholly unto
him, Math. x.
let us cast our selves wholly upon him. It has pleased our heavenly
father, that this infirmity should abide here in our flesh, that we should be
put forth unto many and diverse afflictions and oppressions, that we should be
objected to dangers assailing us on every side no otherwise then when sheep
are thrust forth amongst wolves, that by these means, our stubborn flesh
might be at the least by some mean restrained, and brideled with certain
snafles, even as a wild and untamed horse is, that we might learn to live
always in humbleness and in the fear of the lord, and when we are tossed
with the oppressions of the world to have our whole regard unto him in whom
only we have peace. Let us acknowledge the most good will of our father in
all affliction, Psalm. lxv.
and temptation, who leads us through water and fire, but to our refreshing,
who boyleth away our dross in the furnace of temptation, that we be made pure
vessels to his glory and sanctifying of his name, let us diligently weigh the
profitte that comes thereby unto us here and in the world to come. i. Cor. x.
And that our father is always present with us, neither suffers he us to be
tempted above our power, but with the temptation does also show the end, either
in geuyng strength and constancy in the battle, and comforting our
imbecillitie, or else surely in pluckyng and delivering us out of evils and
dangers. It is al together mete that we utterly denying our selves, do
sacrifice and consecrate our selves wholly unto his will. To be altogeher
without the cross it profits us not, therefore our most best father leads
us between fear and hope, and lays upon us a cross, that we might not be
carried after our own lust, but might follow Christ his son which is our
head, and in all these things our minds are heavy, sorrowful and moved with
impatience, by reason of the infirmity of ye flesh, but yet in the mean time
faith sustaineth this infirmity of the flesh that it cannot altogether fall or
faynte, and the power of God does more manifestly show forth it self in our
weakness. How we ought to pray.
when as it does erect and stay us up by putting forth his hand. Christ
teaches us furthermore, with what submissio^ of the mind and of the body, with
what feruentnesse, and with what gesture of the body we should pray, also what
place is apt and mete for prayer, to whom we should direct our prayer, and
in what sort it should be done and when we should pray etc. For although the
mind of the godly ought always to be bente unto God, yet most of all when the
enemy does assail it, lest it fall into an agonye, and the more we are
grieved and vexed, so much the more fervently must we give our selves to
prayer, and for because that prayer is an earnest talk of the faithful heart
with God, therefore we must chose out a litte place for the same, which may be
void of all concurse of people and noise lest there should be any thing, be it
never so small that might disturb a man or pluck him back from God, but
that the mind may cleave unto God without separation, and with how great a
submissio^ of the body a mortal man should appear before gods majesty and the
throne of grace, Christ does manifestly declare in falling prostrate with his
body, and bowyng on his knees, and a fervent prayer does not only lift up to
god yt hands, but also it lifts the eyes and the heart unto god, that is to
say unto the hills from whence comes help Besides this an ernest and devout
prayer does burste forth with tears out of the eyes, but also with drops of
blood out of the body, as we may see in the tremblyng of Christ. We learned
therefore by our head, that we should never despair of gods help, when
temptations do assail us, and not to fall when any pensiveness of heart or
impacie^ce comes upon our minds, but rather run unto God with a sure faith
and declare unto him our cause, to desire him to show us how to come out of
temptation, and to supporte our weakness with his spirit.

Then Jesus came again unto his disciples and found them sleping, and he
said unto Peter, Simon slepest thou? could thou not have watched one hour
with me? watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation. The spirit is ready,
but the flesh is weak. HEre is declared after what sort the frailnesse of ye
flesh behaueth it self toward the unmeasurable and unspeakable grace of
Christ, and how unthankful we be for so great benefits, Christ prays and
sweateth blood wholly to advance the salvation of his but they sleep soundly,
forgetting their excellent free promise which they before had promised.
Christ therefore gives them warning, to learn to know themselves, and to ru^
unto God for strength. Our will is oftentimes prone, and bursteth forth with a
sudden violence, but we are very slow in performyng, wherefore Christ which
knows us, both within and without, teaches modestye and puts away all
rashness from us, he teaches us to be myndefull of our fraylenesse, and to be
seruente in prayer unto the father, without whom we can do nothing and by whom
we may do all things. Neither let us cocker the flesh to much least we should
trust any thing in our own strength. The faithful must always stand
girded in their standing, Satan sleeps not, no more must we sleep, but
watch and stoutely resist, we are still in the battle. All things are full
of dangers and snares, we must not therefore lie snorting on sleep but we must
watch and fight with a fervent faith and faithful prayer. Christ also teaches
that when we have finished our talk with god, we should have a regard to
our neyghbors and chiefly the weak ones, to exhort and stir them up. From
faith we must return to charity and so like a circle from charity again to
faith. For a man is not occupied alwais with one kind of business there be
courses of things. This sentence, pray that ye enter not into temptation is
expounded two wais either that temptation is overcome by a faithful prayer,
the more ye pray, the less ye shall be tempted, or else that we should pray that
the Lord lead us not into temptation, as it is in the vi. chap. of Math. in
the lords prayer, the spirit of the faithful being endewed with the spirit
of God is ready, but the flesh has yet infirmity adjoined which repugneth
against the spirit. For the faithful does find an other law in his members
which repugneth the law of the spirit, howsoever the inward man delights in
the law of god, as though he wuld say, ye have promised many things, but ye
perform littell.

And he went again and prayed the same words. O my father if this cup can
not pass away from me, but that I must drink it, thy will be done. And
returnyng, he found the^ on sleep again. for their eyes were heavy, neither
could they tell what to answer him, and he left them and went again, and
prayed the third time, the same words, saying. O father if thou will, take
away this cup from me, nevertheless not my will be done, and there appeared
an Angel from heaven, comforting him, and being in agony, he prayed more
earnestly, and his sweat was like drops of blood, trickelyng down to the
ground, and when he had risen from prayer, and came to his disciples, he found
them slepyng for heaviness, and he said unto them, what sleep ye? Sleep
he^ceforth and take your rest, it is enough, rise, watch and pray, that ye
enter not into temptation. Behold the hour is at hand, and the son of man
shall be betrayed and given into the hands of sinners. Rise up, let us go, lo
he that betrayeth me is at hand. LEt us above all things diligently weigh and
consider the love of Christ, who loves us even to the death, being careful for
the salvation of his, of whom nevertheless he received small thank, he took
upon himself whatsoever is contrary to the flesh, being like unto his
brethren in all things without sin. But in his most grievous dangers he alwais
runs to the father, he imploreth him only he looks for consolation at his
hands only, neither does he in the mean time forget his, which were weak
and feeble and troubled, but goes to se them again, comfortyng and
strengthening them. Let us acknowledge that we have nothing but fraylenes and
sins, let us set these things before the father and require help of him,
for he tempts us to that end, that we should run unto him, and cast our
selves wholly upon him, loking undoubtedly for help for him. For even as he
was present with his son, and sent his angel to comfort him, so will he alwais be
present with us; so yt we call unto him for help, and shrink not away from hi^.
We easily learn by the example of Christ of what force prayer is before God,
when it is repeted without werinesse and fervent. Wherefore the godly must always
watch and pray that we may overcome the temptations which be at hand, and that
we may beware of them which be to come. Sleep now and rest, either it is a
nipping taunte, or else a fatherly gentleness in bearing with the weak ones.

Judas then when he had received a hand of men, and officers of the high
priests, came thither with la^terns and torches, and weapons, and while he yet
spoke (I say) Judas one of the.xii. came, and with him a great multitude with
swords and clubbes, being sent from the high priests and elders of the
Scribes, but Judas went before them, and he had given them a token saying,
whom so ever I shall kiss, he it is take him and hold him, and lead him
warelye. When Judas therefore drew nere to Jesus to kiss him, he said. God
save thee Master and kyssed him, and Jesus said unto him. Friend wherefore art
thou come? O Judas betrayest thou the son of man with a kiss? The^ Jesus
knowing all things which should come unto him, went forth and said unto them,
whom seek ye: They answered him, Jesus of Nazareth, Jesus said unto them, I
am he. Now Judas which betrayed him, stood with them, as soon then as he had
said unto them, I am he, they went backewardes, and fell to the ground. Then
he asked them again, whom seek ye? And they said, Jesus of Nazareth, Jesus
answered, I said unto you that I am he, therefore if ye seek me, let these go
their way, that the word might be fulfilled which he spoke. Of them which thou
gave me have I lost none. AFter that fervent prayer, in the which as he had
prayed that he might not fall into the danger that was at hand, so also he
submitted himself wholly to the will of the father, utterly denying his own
will, he now shows his obedience and constancye in going to meet his
enemies, and that wyth^ wyllyng and ready mind, as Esaias has prophesied, Esaias.
liii.
for no man could have taken away his life from him if he himself had not
willingly given it. Let us also after our prayer in the which we commit our
selves to the father, and desire his aid, learn of our head stoutely for to
fight, and to persevere with singular patience in the battle, nothing doubtyng
but that our father will be present with us his children, even as he was
present with his son, remembryng this that it lies not in our enemies power
to oppress us. when they list themselves, but then only, when our father will
who has care over us. For the enemy cannot hurt us one whit, until God do
permit him the same, as it is manifest by Jobs temptation, but more manifest
in Christ and his disciples. For how often would they have put him to death?
and yet they could prevail nothing against him, before the hour appointed by
the father, yea and when they took Christ yet might they not lay hands on
his disciples, over whom Christ having a care commanded them that they should
depart in safety. If so be it shall seem good to our father to make us
pertakers of the afflictions of his son, let us diligently consider his love
and good will toward us, who has not spared his own proper son but has
given him to the death for us. Why should we then refuse to suffer and to be
adflicted for his glory. But let us rather give thanks to the father who
lays us forth with his son to diverse temptations, and affections. For if we
have been pertakers of his death and passion, we shall also be pertakers of his
resurrection. It we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him. Let us be
thoroughly persuaded of this, that our father does so love us that he will
suffer nothing to happen unto us which shall not be done to his glory and our
salvation, and that nothing can chance unto us against his will, whom to
repugne or to be against is most ill for us which be called and are the sons
of god. Neither ought we only stoutly to go forward, and to receive the
dangers brought unto us for Christ, but we must also do it cherefully with
mekenes, humility, obedience, suffryng and singular charity. This is to be
marked in Christ, that he would not use his own power, by the which he might
have destroyed his enemies, which came unto him, but he entertained them with
most great gentleness and love, obeying the father eue^ to the death. So let us
also give place to our right and let us not resist evil, but ouercom evil
with good. Let our heart be armed with patience, feruente in love, and endewed
with weakness, that in our patience we man possess our souls, how lovingly
does he receive the betrayer? how graciously he speaks unto him and calls
him friend? how ge^tly he vouchsafes to kiss him, and how swetely he
allureth his traitorous mind from his pretense to repentance? let us
diligently mark in the example of Judas besides those things which are
spoken of before gooddes judgment, and let us learn humbly to think of our
selves, and to stand before God with great fear and trembling. For let him
which stands (says Paul) take heed that he fall not. There is nothing safe
from chance, nothing is of all parts blessed, when as such a great disciple
of Christ does fall, who can he^ceforth trust to him self? Let us beware of
hipocrisy, that we be not wolves amongst the sheep of Christ, and false
brethren in the fellowship of the godly. Nothing is more contrary to god than
hipocrisy and vnpurenesse. Nothing does more alienate us from God than does the
covetous desire of things. Let us not therefore faynte from the grace of God,
let us not slip away from so great dignity, as to be the sons of God. Let
us not refuse the gatheryng together of us, for what a foul thing shall it be,
for to depart from the living God, from such a most loving father, to fall
away from so great a benefactor, and to ioin himself to be a soldier of the
Devil, and to flee unto the enemy of Christ? Ah how great an unthankfulness
is it, for them which be washed with the blood of Christ, and sanctified with
the spirit of God, for to join themselves in fellowship which the ungodly
wicked ones, and to be made of the sons of God, the servants of Satan? In
that they come with weapons, it is a figure of those which fight against the
truth by violence and not by the truth.

Then they came and laid hands upon Jesus and took him, and when they which
were about him saw what would follow, they said unto him. Lord shall we smite
with the sword And Jesus answered, and said, suffer them hitherto, and behold
Simon Peter one of them which were with him, stretchyng out his hand drew out
his sword, and strikyng the servant of the high priest, cut of his right
ear, and the seruau^ts name was Malchus. Then said Jesus to Peter, put up thy
sword in ye sheth, will thou not that I shall drink of the cup which my
father has given me? Put up therefore the sword in his place. For all that take
the sword shall perish with the sword. Either think thou that I cannot now
desire my father, and he will give me more than twelve legions of Angels? How
then should the scriptures be fulfilled which say, that it must so be
done, and when Jesus had touched his ear he healed it. THe flesh is wont in
adversity not to ru^ unto God, but to his own weapons, and this does Christ
reprehende in Peter, as though he would say, we must not fight now with
weapons, but with sufferaunce and mekenes. It is no time now to strike the
enemy with the sword, but to obey the will of God. If I have need of weapons and
armies of soldiers, I could suddenly have of my father a great and infinite
number of soldiers ready to help me. I am not also here, neither came I
hither, to the intent I should fight with the sword, but that I might redeem
you by my death, and leave with you an example of patience. By these words
Christ does teach us patience, that we should not revenge our selves if that
any man have done us any displeasure in private things, but that we should
patiently and quietly bear the injuries which he does unto us, he does not
for all that take away the sword from the magistrate, which bears it
according to the laws. for the defense of the good, and the destruction of the
evil, Romans xiii. Math. xv.
for he says, he which takes the sword, understand, being moved thereunto of
his own pleasure, rashly. and of a wicked affection. as for the magistrate he
takes it not after that sort, but receives it, God delivering and committing
it unto him, and takes it that he may use it justly, and according to the will
of God, and that he may with the same punish the hurtful as often as need shall
require, that is, as often as the glory of God and health of the godly requires
it. Romans xiii.
The magistrate as long as he uses the sword laufully, he himself does not
strike, but God by him. For god uses the magistrate as his minister, all
things have their time, to sondrye men are certain offices appointed, so that
it is not every man's part to take unto him the sword, and to stryke, neither
must it be done at all times. That was the time wherein Christ would show his
most great love toward mankind wherein he would declare himself to be the
savior of the world, and would put forth himself to all evils, and not the
time wherein he would use his power and most just judgment. Christ therefore
restrains and keeps under the zeal of Peter, which was f^ruen^e in deed,
but it was not directed to gods will, and he declares that he came not to hurt
or to work displeasure, but to save and obey the will of the father in all
things. Jesus is taken that we might be delivered, he is bound that we might
be losed from the bonds of sins, he is sold to ungodly ones, that we being
sold under sight be brought into the liberty of the sons of God. Let this
exaumple of Christ be set always before our eyes, let it be depelye
imprynted in our hearts, that we may learn to put our stubborn and
obstinate stiff neck under the yoke of Christ. Let us not put away the
bonds of gods law, let us willingly serve God and our neighbor, let us not be
full of ianglyng, stiffenecked, stubborn and desirous of reuengemente, but let
us go forward in humility, obedience, and lowlines of mind, as sheep
appointed to be slain and killed.

The same hour said Jesus to the multitude, and to them which came unto him,
from the high priests and magistrate of the temple and elders ye be come out as
it were against a thief, with swords and clubbes, to take me. I sat daily
teaching in the temple amongst you, and ye took me not, but this is your hour
and the power of darkness, but all this is done, that the Scriptures of the
prophets might be fulfilled. Then al his disciples forsook him and fled and
there followed him a certain young man, clothed in linen upon his bare body,
and the young men caughte him, but he left his linen cloth, and fled from
them naked. CHrist as he is redye to suffer all things which these men devised
to work against him so also he cease not to revoke them from their malice
which they had taken in hand, neither does he allow their intent, although
he suffer it quietly, declaring also unto the^ yt they could have had no power
against him, if he him self had would. As though he would say, and do ye not
understand that ye can do nothing against me, when as I being daily
conuersaunt amongst you* and yet ye could not take me, although ye assayed it
diverse times. Now ye have chosen the night for this purpose, and that not
unaptly, for ye be crafty varlettes and children of darkness the prince of
darkness leads you captyue and stirs you up to persecute me and my
disciples, and this was forespoken not long ago of my prophets. So ought we
to suffer the invasions of the wicked, and that with great mildnes of mind,
and patience, neither must we revenge our selves with our own hand. But in the
mean time must so set before the eyes of the wicked their mischeuous doings,
that they may understand how much they sin against God and us, to see if we
can by any means revoke them from their conceived malice, and win them to the
lord, or at the least to take from them all occasion whereby they might excuse
their sins.

Then the band and the capitain, and the officers of the Jews took Jesus and
bound him and led him away to Annas first, for he was father in law to Caiphas
which was the high priest the same year, and Caiphas was he that gave
counsel to the Jews, that it was expedient that one man should die for the
people, and Annas sent him bound to Cayphas the high priest. They therefore
taking Jesus led him to Cayphas the high priest, where the Scribes, the
chief priests and the elders had assembled together. LVke the Evangelist
says, they led him and brought him, and this seems to be spoken not without
an emphasis as though he would say. They led him which had healed all men, and
which contained and led al things who if he had not led them, they had all
perished. Luke and the other leave out the house of Anna, of the which John
makes mention very aptly, howbeit there is nothing left out of the
Ea^ngelists, that pertayneth to the verity of the history, and it seems that
this examining of Christ concerning his disciples and his doctrine, was done in
the house of Cayphas, and not in ye house of Anna. For in that he is led to
Anna, it was done because it was in their way as they went, and to honor Anna
withal. But examining of his doctrine and disciples belonged to Caiphas who
was the high priest for that year. Therefore Anna se^deth him by and by away to
Caiphas his son in law, which the^ was in office. And I judge that all the
denials of Peter were done in the court of the bishop which may easily be
gathered if they be weighed by ye order of the history of John and others. John
makes mention by the way of Anna, and the^ returns to Caiphas which if it be
not marked, it might seem that al these things were done in the house of Anna,
which nevertheless the other three mention to be done in Caiphas house (and
Cayphas was he) It is a digression to the description of the person. Caiphas
counsel, which is more manifestly set forth in the xi. of John, is so put
forth of him, as though it should be healthful to the common wealth, when as
he intended nothing but to put Christ to death. In that he spoke the truth, it
was of the holy ghost, but he spoke this of guile and malice, for the ranckor
of his heart made him to speak those words. In the mean while he adourneth his
envy, and pretends the commonwealth to hide his deceit, and he uses the
words which were like himself. The priests saw their authority to diminishe
daily, and that very many claue unto Christ, and therefore they feared their
own things, for ye which cause Caiphas uses this argument, by the which he
might chiefly stir up their hearts. Why stay ye, says he? do ye not see our
authority decays, and that by this man? If ye will have your own state to be
in safety, the^ take this man away, ye be slothful and lingerers, which shall
turn at length to your own displeasure. etc. Wherefore he is the first author
of Christ's death, and he encourages the rest, to the conceived mischeuous
act, his house therefore was a fit place for the ungodly ones to take counsel
together. Let us apply these things to our times and let us learn to discern
between a good citizen and a faithful senator, and between a traitor and a
false man. They which have traytorous minds do always pretend in their
counsels the health of the common wealth, when as they go about the
destruction of all good men, and into their houses do the owls fly unto,
where they dare speak freelye. Such metinges, assemblies and conspiracies in
cities, are most certain causes of the destruction of a common wealth, which
every man may most easily perceive, though he be meanly skilled in histories,
and if so be that ye O magistrates are ignorant of these things, then be ye
very unskillful, and ye have small experience of things, but if so be that ye
do know those things, and do not beware of them. nor punish the authors, then
are ye to unjust, wicked, and enemies to your country, and in that we do so
cry against those, we do it not to this end only, that ye should punish them
(which I fear me is in vain) but because it is our duty so to do, and for so
much as we assuredly forsee, that such men will be the destruction of the
common wealth. it is therefore needful to admonish you of them. Least we
should be blind watchmen and dombe dogs.

And Peter followed him a far of even to the inner court of the high priest,
and there followed also an other disciple which was known of the high priest,
who also entered in with Jesus into the house of the high priest. But Peter
stood without at the door. Then went out the other disciple which was known to
the high priest, and spoke to her that kept the door, and brought in Peter,
and when Peter was come in, he sat down with the officers to see the end,
and when they had made a fire in the midst of the hal, and were set down
together. Peter also sat down amongst them, and warmed him at ye fire, and
the servants and officers stood there, which had made a fire of coals, for
it was cold, and they warmed themselves and Peter also stood amongst the^, and
warmed himself, whom when a certain maid of the high priest which kept the
gate, saw sittyng by the fire, and lookyng earnestly upon him, said. wast not
thou also with Jesus of Galiley? Then a certain other said. This man was also
with him, Peter denied it before them al and said: woman I know him not neither
do I know what thou say, and he went forth into the porch, and the cock
crewe. Then an other maid saw him, and said unto them which were there. This
man also was with Jesus of Nazareth, and he denied it again with an oath
saying? I know not the man, and about the space of an hour after, other
which stood thereby saw him, and said, verily thou also art one of them, for
thou art of Galiley, and thy speech also bewrays thee. Then said one of the
servants of the high priest, his cosen whose ear Peter smote of, did not I
see thee in the garden with him Then began he to curse him self and to swear,
that he knew not the man. And immediately while he yet spoke, the cock crew,
and the Lord turned back, and looked upon Peter, and Peter remembered the
words which Jesus had said unto him, before the cock crow t^ise, thou shall
deny me thrice, and Peter went forth and wept bitterly, Here do we learn
man's inconstancye and mutabilitie, but the Lord does leave this in us least we
should presumptuouslye claim any thing to our selves, and that we might rise
again after our fall, more cherefull and wary, and to learn thereby to
depend wholye upon God, and put no confidence in our own strength these
examples are to this end set forth, that we either standing should be afraid
and beware of a fall, or else that after we have fallen, we should not
despair, but retourning with Peter should bewail our sins. The Lord
knows how to use the fallings of his to his own glory. If we have sinned
with Peter, let us repent with Peter, and weep bitterlye. For the elect being
admonished after they have fallen, they do arise again, they boaste not in
their sins. they rejoice not when they have done evil, and dispyse not Gods
admonition. In that Christ looks upon Peter in the midst of his sins, it
teaches us, that God does not forget his, but admonishes the^ both within and
without. Let us mark the degrees which are in sins, and how Peter falls
from one denial into an other, and does always drown him self more depely
in. It is a goodly matter to have no fellowship with ungodly and wicked men, Let
us with speed pluck back our foot if we chance to fall in company with such
men let us withstand the beginninges, neither let us cleave to the company of
sinners. For if we do abide with the^. then can we not do it without
wonderful great hinderaunce of our salvation and innocencye: Peter partly
holds his peace, and partly denies, but not of infidelity, but of
weakness and fear. For his faith was not altogether quenched. They be like
unto Peter which do know what is right and just, and yet dare not utter it,
and set it forth when need requires. Those must diligently weigh the words of
Christ, where he says, He that shall be ashamed of me before this generation, I
will also be ashamed of him, before my father And let us understand these
things, when the glory of god, and the health of our neighbor does require
it. For it may come to pass that sometimes it is better to keep silence and to
dissemble the matter. Again, there is place where to dissemble is to betray
Christ with Judas. The Scripture when it sets forth unto us the fallinges
of the saints, it teaches not to forswear and deny, but if it happen to
have fallen of fear, it rather comfort him, and stirs him up to
repentance, when as it openly declares ye bosom of gods mercy, to such as
sin greatly. Christ uses ye crowing of ye cock which is natural, not only
for a sign of Peter his denial, but he also admonysheth Peter by the same
crowing to repent, we see yt in thing so little the providence of God does not
cease, moreover it declares the creatures are the instruments of God his
grace and power. The cock knows nothing of Peter, but is moved by his own
nature and does also crow, but God knows and appointed him for his purpose.
Let us also mark this that there is great difference between those which si^ne
of weakness and fear, and those which sin of a purposed malice. The sin of
the weak ones is not to the death, but the sin of the ungodly is committed
against the holy ghost, and by that means it shall never be forgeuen. They
which fall or slip, yea though it be most greuouslye, yet if they being
admonished do rise up again after their fall, and do unwrap them selves out of
sins, do forsake their ungodliness, and also the ungodly do wept and show
forth signs of true repentance it is manifest that those men are elect and
Godly, and that they sinned of weakness. They abide no longer in the filthe of
sins, but as soon as they come to them selves, they place their foot into the
way of ryghteousnes, they run unto God his mercy for forgiveness, and they
be made more humble wary and diligent, but they which despise the admonitions
of the godly, neither run after they have fallen to the sanctuarye of God his
grace, but rejoice and glory in their sins, heapyng one mischief upon an
other, neither can be revoked by any means, being not only conuersaunt
amongst the ungodly and enemies of the truth, but also declaring them selves
to be capitaines and Emperors against the truth, it is manifest that such men
are ungodly, and that they have sinned of a purposed malice, we may see the
examples of both kinds of these sinners, the one in David and Peter, the other
in Saul and Judas.

The high priest asked Jesus of his disciples and of his doctrine, Iefus
answered him, I spoke openly in the world. I ever taught in the Synagoge,
and in the temple, whether all the Jews assembled, and I have said nothing in
secret, why ask thou me? Ask them which hard what I spoke unto them,
behold they know what I have said, and when he had spoken these things, one
of the officers which stood by, gave Jesus a blow saying, Aunswerest thou the
high priest so. Jesus answered him, if I have evil spoken, bear witness of
the evil, but if I have spoken well, why smitest thou me? CHrist teaches in
his answer how freelye the Preacher of the word of God ought to speak
before the maiestrate and the church, when he is asked, and the glory of God
requires the same, he says therefore, I have spoken nothing in secret, that
is, I have said nothing which I would have hidden, or that I am ashamed of. My
doctrine is of god, true and sincere. I have uttered the same therefore unto all
men, because it behooves al men to know it, and it is healthful unto al men.
Furthermore I have not sought for any secret corner, but I have preached in an
open place, where the people assembled to gether. It belongs therefore unto
the pastor and minister of the word of God, to set forth the sincere doctrine
of God freely and openly unto the people he must inueigh freely and vehemently
against vices, that they which are not moved with the love of righteousness,
yet may be feared from them by shame, so that either they may do things that
be good, or else cease to do evil. For to him it belongs to reprehend
wickedness with great authority, when need so requires, For he which then
dissembleth, or denies, whither he do it of fear, or of any other affection,
he falls into the sin of Peter. It is not enough to keep faith in the heart,
and to deny with ye mouth when place requires, otherwise wherein offended
Peter? So Paul says, with the heart we believe to righteousness, but by the
mouth is confession made to salvation. Moreover he refers the judgment and
witness to the hearers, whereby he declares that if there happen any question
concerning doctrine, then the judgment and witness of the same belongs to
the hearers, and not that one or two should be hard against the Preacher, but
the whole Church. Some man will ask, why Christ did not turn his other
cheke to the^ which stroke him. which he never the less had taught himself
before? By this place we see ye the words of Christ ought not to be wrested to
any kind of outward show and hypocrisy, but to the preperation of the
mind. Finally this is a great and an high thing to have the mind so prepared
that it will not only suffer one iniurye or two but very great injuries, so
that it may advance the glory of God, and bring any commodity to our
neighbor. And if that happen not, it is better to prefer the less iniurye
before the greater. Therefore it was expedient to turn the other cheke here,
when as by that means he should have brought no other thing to pass, but have
given an occasion to have had more iniurye done unto him. All things ought to
be done of the beleuers to edification. And what was there to be hoped for in
this varlet? What was there to be looked for of this most wicked high Bishop?
Which either commands or permits to strike one being bound and not
condemned, contrary to all law and right, yea and that in that place, where
the innocents should seek for defense. There is therefore a place, where we
ought to suffer patiently, and contrary there is a place where we must resist
malice and ungodliness even to the death. Charity shall teach us these things,
and prescribe a measure in all things. A faithful spirit knows where to spare,
where to strike and where to resist. Therefore this wicked servant was worthy
to be rebuked of Christ, that he might acknowledge his wickedness, and yet for
all that Christ departed not one hear breadth from charity or patience, but
stoutlye suffers the iniurye done unto him, being ready to suffer more
grievous, Briefly al things are so to be suffered, that the glory of Christ
and the truth may be defended and our constancy may appear Now ye chief
priests, and the elders and the whole counsel sought false witness against Jesus
to put hi^ to death, but they found none, yea though many false witnesses came,
yet found they none, for many barefalse witness against hi^ but their witness was
not sufficient. but at ye last came two false witnesses, and said, we have
heard this man say, I will destroy this temple made with hands, and within
three days, I will build an other made without hands, and neither yet were
their witnesses sufficient enough. Then the chief priest arose and stood
amongst them, and asked Jesus saying, aunswerest thou nothing? What is the
matter that these bear witness against the? But Jesus held his peace,
neither answered he any thing. Again the high priest asked him and said unto
him. I charge thee by the living God, that thou tell us, if thou be the Christ
ye son of God? Jesus said unto him, thou have said it, I am he. Nevertheless I
say unto you, here after ye shall see the son of man syttyng at the right
hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven. Then the high priest
rent his clothes, saying, he has blasphemed, what have we any more need
witnesses? behold now ye have heard his blasphemy, what think ye? and they
answered and said, he is worthy of death and the men which held Jesus, mocked
him and beat him, and they spare in his face, and covered his face, smote him
on the face with their hands, saying. Prophesye unto us O Christ who it is ye
smote thee? and many other things rephrochfuly spoke they against him

HEre were occasiion to entreat of false witness, but because we study to
be brief, we do admonish judges of this one thing, that they diligently
remember this that if false witnesses do arise up against Christ, whose life
and doctrine could be accused by no means, what we then hope for? Let them
therefore observe equity and not follow affections. The ungodly do wrest the
words of Christ contrary to his meaning, and this slander is a part of false
witness, when as we do either peruerte any man's words or talk, or do
rehearse them otherwise then he spoke the^, or else enterpreate them otherwise
then he spoke or meant them Christ spoke of the temple of his body, and they
falsely enterprete it to the material temple. Even as in the old time
sacrifices were done in the temple, and peace offrynges and clensinges were
done by sacrifices, so is Christ made a sacrifice upon the cross for our
sins, pacifying god his wrath against us and sanctifying us. In that Christ
holds his peace at the false witnesses, it was not so much, because of his
meaknes, as because of his wisdom. This example ought they to follow which
are oppressed with false witnesses, and chiefly before such a judge as
estemeth and gives credit to false witnesses. For then no answers or excuses
are any thing worth, it shall be most safegarde to keep silence. I adjure thee
that thou tell me, whether thou be the Son of God? By this question it is
manifest, that the Jews confessed and knew right well that the Messiah
should be the Son of God. But they ask him this captious question to the
intent that they might cauille and maliciously accuse him in his answer, that
is, that they might take and trappe him in his talk, that he which had made
him self the Son of God, should therefore be worthy to dye, and that
according to the law. So do our papists now of days extorte of the ministres
of the word, what their opinion is of this new doctrine (as they term it) And
when they answer the^ the truth, then are they by and by put to torments, but
if they hold their peace they betraye ye truth. Wherefore the hipocrites do
seek the truth to this intent, that they may persecute it, when they know it,
and also kill him which confesses it. Hereafter ye shall see, etc. This is a
gentil and healthful admonition, as though he would say. In deed ye see me
now humble, and as it were the Son of the Carpenter, but be not offended with
this my humility, for now is the time of humility, I do not now show forth
my glory and power, but shortly ye shall see what manner one I am. He is gilty
of death. The chief priest speaks this to his accomplices, which were like
unto him self namely haters of Christ, he has blasphemed (says he) what
need we any more witnesses? They feign the^ selves, as though they had a care
for the glory of God. when as nevertheless their minds are ungodly. and
vnpure. So they say now a days. He has slaundered the holy Virgin, he has
polluted the sacraments, therefore he is an heritike, what need we any more
witnesses? So I say do they cry now of days against the preachers of the
Gospel, and for a color they pretend the honor of God and the holy Virgin,
when as only they excedingly hate the truth, and soly seek for their own
commodity. For it is not possible that they should speak these things from
the heart, and should think so undoubtedly, when as God does not confyrme a
lie in the heart of man. They which speak so do always doubt and waver, which
may easily be seen in Pharao, who one while spoke one thing, an other while an
other thing, sometimes denied and sometimes affyrmed. One while he said, who is
this Lord? By and by he says I know the Lord is just. and that I have sinned
and yet for all that in the mean time he goes forward in his mischief, etc.
We will set forth this more plainly. They which thus speak, this man has
taught that we should not call upon the blessed Virgin, Let him therefore be
taken away for he is an herityke and giltye of death. These men I say are never
certain and put out of doubt in their hearts that we should call upon Marye, or
that he should be put to death which teaches the contrary, that is to say,
that we should worship one God. For it ^s impossible that this should be
certainly persuaded in the heart of man, that he should doubt nothing of it, or
think nothing to the contrary. Therefore they be hipocrites, which pretend
^hese things, thinking otherwise inwardlye. yea their conscience repugning it,
they feign the^ selves outwardly to be good men, and would ^eme to be such,
when as they are inwardly ungodly. For although the Lord does blind and ^arden
a man, yet nevertheless he sets the truth so plainly before the same ma^s
eyes, that ^e leaves him no excuse of ignorance, but co^pelleth him to say and
acknowledge in his heart, that he does err and sin, how so ever he fights
against the truth known. They do call Christ by the honorable name of a
Prophet, and turn it to mockage. As though they would say, All men call thee
a great Prophet, or thou boastest thy self to be a prophet, prophecy therefore
unto us, etc. Let us mark the nature of the ungodly and hipocrites which
conspire against the truth. Unrighteousness accuses righteousness. Lies
oppress the truth. Envy hurts charity, and yet for all this al things are
so adorned, that they seem to have a certain show of justice and law. They
prevent him with false witnesses, they urge him with deceiptful interrogations.
The Judges ar both accusers and also witnesses. And they which are most
blasphemous, do lay blasphemye to an innocents charge, that they might seem:
to be reuengers of blasphemye. But they do al things in vain when as they
find not so much as a show of wickedness in Christ. Let us follow this, that
we may be so honestly conuersaunt amongst men and live so innocentlye, that
even fame may be affeard to lie of us. Now what greater cruelty can there be
devised: the^ this which the soldier use against Christ? An innocente is
least in the hands of most vile men, to use him according to their own lust,
yea they do sharpen and quicken their lust in him, in which soldiers there
is no godliness, no compassion, they mock him, spitte upon him, and beat
him, neither omit they any thing that serves to the infamy of Christ, or to
his injury. The same is done now a days by most cruel men, yea by no men, but
rather wild beasts, which have put away all humanity, which have deprived
them selves of the feling of nature, that is to say, which do burden miserable
men which are led for the truth of Christ, with reproaches and spiteful words,
and do mock the^ being otherwise afflicted, when as nevertheless the laws of
nature forbid that we should burden such as are punished, with more grievous
spiteful words. No man excuses Christ no man pitieth him, no man delivers
him. No man defends him, No man speaks in his cause, Nor no man remembers
the benefits paste, to say once, he has healed all diseases, he has fed the
hungry, he has taught the ignorant, he has done good to all men. Thus so
many and so great benefits done by Christ amongst these most ingrate men
were lost, Thus cruelty and envy had blotted al thinegs These things are not
done without the providence and will of God, and yet for all that they which
commit these things, do sin most heynously, and so do they also which take
not heed that these things might not have been done. The lord permits
such cruel wicked deeds to be done sometimes, to stir up our slouthfulnes and
sluggishenesse, so that sometimes we should be wakened at such enormities, and
the^ to show forth our strength and faith, yet in the mean time are we wtoute
excuse, which have given occasion to the wicked by our negligence to go
forward in their naughtines, neither are we free from so great blame. We are so
weak, so slouthful, and unfaithful that no man c commit so great wicked deeds,
whereby we are moved yea not a little. So blockish ar we altogether and with out
felinges. There are no wicked acts so detestable or terrible, which can shake
away our slepye sluggishnes from us. And seeing that things are at this point,
let us look for nothing but the utter punishment and vengeance of the Lord.
These be as certain signs of destruction, as when the heaven is red in the
morning, it is a sign that it will rain. The which things if any man see not
then is he blind, but if he see them and beware not of the^, then is he mad. We
must withstand the beginnings, A bough when it waxes hard can not so easly be
bowed Let us therefore withstand wicked acts before they grow into an use, and
possess al things, medicine is prepared to late, when as the evils by long
tarying are established.

When the morning was come, all the chief priests and Elders of the people
took counsel against Jesus to put him to death. And they led him to their
counsel, saying, Art thou the Christ? Tell us. And he said unto them. If I
tell you, ye will not believe. If I shall ask you ye will not answer me,
neither will ye let me go. Hereafter shall the Son of man sit at the right
hand of the power of God. Then said they all, Art thou the Son of God? And
he said: Ye say that I am. Then said they what need we any further witness?
For we our selves have heard it of his own mouth: Then arose the whole
multitude and led him away bound from Cayphas into the common Hall, and
delivered him to Pontious Pilate ye president. And it was morning, and they
them selves went not into the common Hall, least they should be defiled, but
that they might eat the passover. THe truth increases and shows forth it
self more bright in tribulations and oppressions. The Jews therefore get
nothing by their counsel to kill Christ, which thing yet only they sought for.
Let them which go about to extinguishe Christ with persecutions and death
diligently mark this. And thus is the Christian faith planted with blood, and
also augmented by blood. But woe be unto the^ which do oppress the truth, which
nevertheless can never be oppressed. On the contrary part lies and
iniquities although they reign for a time, yet shall they never be fyrme and
sure: and who will be affeard to persente that which can never abide? Again who
will be affeard to deffend his cause, which ca^ never be oppressed? And yet for all that we are all slepye to accomplish excellent and divine things, when as
we may see that the ungodly neither cease nor yet sleep being about their
wicked acts, but break their night slepes, and in the dawning of the day
return again to their counsels. Their industry and vigilance does put to
shame our sloughfulnes. If I shall say. The ungodly somtymes ask for the
truth, but not for to embrace it, but for to persecute it. So play our papists,
they sometimes object captious questions to the Godly, and when they go about
to give the^ a reason of their doctrine, the^ will no satisfaction serve, but
they adiudge them by and by to the death. Christ understanding this, says,
what should I tell you? If ye had bcne desirous of the truth, ye might have
learned it long a go by my doctrine and miracles. Which seeing ye have not done,
what need I to talk any more with you? Hitherto is power given unto you to
rage against my humility, but hereafter ye shall see the Son of man sitting
at the right hand of God. What to sit at the right of god is
By this Periphrasis he does euidentlye prove him self to be the Son of
God. As though he would say, Ye shall here after see that I am the son of
god. This did the Jews understand, and so they pronounced him guilty of
death, when as none can sit at the right hand of God the Father, Psalm. 109
with chief glory and majesty but only the son of God. Therefore they
thought in their own opinion, that Christ was justly condemned, according to
the law in. Deuteronomy, 13. of a false Prophet, but it was falsely understood and
interpreted: For there it speaks of the Prophet which does withdraw men
from the true God. which Christ did not. Ye say, or, thou say, is not a
word of doubting, but of affyrming after the Hebrewe Phrase.

Then when Judas which betrayed him, saw that he was condemned he repenting
him self, brought again the thyrtye pieces of silver, to the chief Priests
and Elders, saying. I have sinned betraying the innocente blood. But they
said, what is that to us? Look thou to it. And when he had cast down the
silver pieces in the Temple, he departed and went and honge him self: And the
chief Priests took the pieces of silver, and said, it is not lawful for us
to put them into the threasory, because it is the price of blood. And they
took counsel and bought with them a potters field for the buryall of
strangers. Wherefore that field is called the field of blood until this day.
Then was that fulfilled which was spoken by Ieremye the Prophet, saying. And
they took, xxx. silver pieces, the price of him that was valewed, whom being
valewed, they bought of the children of Israel, and they gave them for the
potters field, as the Lord appointed me. IN Judas is set forth a most horrible
example of Gods judgment upon those which sin of purposed malice and
unfaithfulness of which men the betrayer is a figure. God calls al men
mercifully to his grace, but they whom the devil blinds and moves do
despise him which calls them, or being allured to be in the number of the
Sons of God, do go backewarde, wrapping them selves in sins after such a
forte, that they can by no means be pulled back again. Satan does so blind
them, that they can not ponder the heynousnes of their wickedness, until he have
thrown them down hedlong into hell, and then at the length be their eyes
opened, that they may see the greatness of their wickedness, and the sharpenes of
the punishment, but yet in such a sort, that in the mean time they can not
consider the exceeding greatness of Gods mercy, neither can they run unto
the same. They are sorye in deed, not because they have offended the chief
God, but because they see their end prepared for them. And thereby comes
desperation and tormenting of the conscience, in the which they perish. Let us
therefore take heed from shedding of innocente blood, from covetousness and
wilful stubbernes, for they which are possessed with these mischievous acts
are like unto Judas, and shall come unto the like end that he did. To this are
they driven at the length, which would never obey the Lord admonishing them.
It nothing profited Judas to be in the number of the twelve, nothing to be the
Disciple of Christ, nothing to be partaker of the holy table, nothing also to
have Preached the word of truth, but for all this at the length his hipocrisye
was made manifest and also punished. So these things shall profit us nothing if
so be that we shall be unfaithful and hipocrites. It is impossible for any
manne to please God without faith. The pour of faith.
But where as faith shall be, therewit also be an edde^our to live iustlye and
innocently, and an horror of wicked acts there is God heard, neither is his
calling despised. Our title makes us not acceptable to God, but faith. Faith
has a regard of God, worshipeth God, keeps his word, fears his studieth to
keep his commandments and obeys his will. Wherefore it is nothing worth for
us to brag of faith, if we want it, for the^ are we proved to be hipocrites
and unfaithful. Moreover in the Iewishe priests is set forth the figure of
hipocrites, which do abhor to enter into the house of an Ethniche, and to
put the price of blood into the treasurye, and yet for all that abhor not
from sheding of innocente blood, strayning at a gnat, and swallowed down a
Camel. As many as do make clean that which is without neglecting to have
it pure within, are like unto these which do neglecte charity, righteousness
and faith, and clean supersticiously unto certain ceremonies, in ye which
they put the so^me of Godliness, with which me^, the traditions of men and
their own lies are of greater value, then the commandments of God, which do
either make equal or else prefer their own traditions before god his
commau^dements. But yet in this thing we judge these iewyshe priests more
just and wiser the^ the papists, because they would not receive that filthye
price into their threasory. But the other have most gredily drawn unto the^ by
violence as well stolle^ goods, as also goods naughtily and unjustly gotten.
Furthermore it is not enough to say unto Judas, See you to it. They should have
changed their sentence, when they knew their error, and not have accused an
innocent, but defended him.

And Jesus stood before the governor, who said, what accusation bring ye
against this man? They answered, if he were not an evil doer, we would not have
delivered him unto thee. Then said Pilate unto them: Take ye him therefore your
selves, and judge him after your own law. Then the Jews said unto him, it is
not lawful for us to put any man to death. That the word of Jesus might be
fulfilled, which he spoke, signifieng what death he should dye. Then they began
to accuse him, saying, we have taken this man perverting the people, and
forbiddinge to pay tribute to Ceasar, and saying, that he is. Christ a king,
and Pilate asked him saying. Art thou the king of the Jews? And he answered
and said, thou say it. Then Pilate said unto the high priests and people I
find no fault in this manne. But they wexed more fierce, saying, he stirs
the people, teching throughout all Judea, beginning at Galiley even to this
place. And when Pilate heard mention of Galiley, he asked whether the man were
of Galiley? And when he knew that he longed to Herod his Jurisdiction, he
sent him to Herod, who was also at Jerusalem at that time. HEre may we see by
the Iewysh priests and elders, what comes of sentences decyded and determined
before ye judgment be given, They had at once co^spired the death of Christ,
yea they adjudged him to death, and therefore they think it not mete, that
their judgment should be counted unjust, and that there should be any farther
inquisition made. If he had not been an evil doer (say they) we would not have
delivered him unto thee: Behold with what unshamefastness these most wicked
men do speak, going about to overcome the judge by their impudent cry. So in
these days sentences are determined and given upon the Preachers of the
gospel before their cause come before lawful judges. If he were not (say
they) an heretic, and worthy to be condemned we would not have taken him: He
has done contrary to the counsels, contrary to ye ordinances of the fathers:
He is a troubler and a deceauer, etc. By these cries they do prevent the minds
of the judges, that they should think it against equity to make any more
inquisition of those which are brought before the^, and by and by they command
the^ to be had away. The king of peace is falsely accused, of sedition and
tumulte, which study of reforming of things gets much displeasure of all
men. Under the pretense of this wicked act, not only Christ, but also almost
all the Prophets are oppressed. In that Christ was not killed of the Jews, but
of the Gentiles, that is to say, delivered to the power of the Romans. The
Evangelist declares that it was not done rashly, for Christ had foretold his
disciples that he should be delivered to the Gentiles. They join many
accusations together, and that by art and a certain craftines, of the which
some touched the Jews, and others some Pilate and the Gentiles, and all this
was done to make Christ to be hated of all me^, and to alienate the minds of
all men from him. Pilate little cared for their accusations which they brought
against Christ concerning their own law, but he reue^geth ye cause of treason,
thi^ki^g that that perteyneth to his office. I would to God ye princes which
do persecute the Gospel would observe this equity toward the godly, whom
they examine. There is no cause why the magistrate should be affeard of the
Gospel and doctrine of Christ, which abolisheth not the Magistrate, but rather
establishes it, and teaches true obedience.

And when Herod saw Jesus, he was exceeding glad, for he was desirous to have
seen him of a long season, because he had heard many things of him, and he
hoped to have seen some sign done by him. The^ questioned he with him of many
things, but he answered him nothing. But the high priests and scribes stood
forth and accused him vehemently: And Herod with his men of war despised
him, and when he had mocked him and clothed him with a white garment he sent
him again to Pilate. And the same day were Pilate and Herod made friends
together, for before they were enemies one to an other. LEt us consider here
the mekenes and obedience of our head, and capitain, who being him self
innocent, is set before unjust iuges and tirauntes for us trespassers. The
Lamb without spotte opens not his mouth when he is mocked and made a
laughing stock to a tyrant which was not worthy to hear the most sweet
words of Christ, and the doctrine of the truth, when as he was not desirous of
the truth, but rather curious of new things. Let us learn of our Master,
that if we be at any time unjustly accused, if we be mocked and despised, we
may be ready to suffer patiently all reproach for Christ and his truth. Let
us not be reuengers of our own glory and name. Let us remember that we be
worthy of everlasting reproach, for we are nothing but a lompe of sin. Let us
seek our glory in the cross of Christ, for it is the chiefest glory to be
out of estimacio^ in this world for christ's sake. There is no time of glory
here: If we can suffer reproaches with Christ, we shall also be partakers of his
glory. He which was god (says Paul made him self of no reputation taking upon
him the form of a servant, and became obedient unto the Father, even to the
death of the cross, wherefore ye father has exalted him, and brought him to
most high glory. And has given him a name above every name. Therefore they
which will be in deed glorious, must learn to suffer infamye and reproaches with
Christ, they must also follow his humility and obedience. Let no man think
that his glory is diminished, if that he humble him self and serve others.
For by this means his glory is not diminished but made more noble. How soever
the ungodly be at distance or discention in their minds one against another
yet for all that in the persecuting of the truth and of rightousnes they ca^
agree togethers.

The^ Pilate called together the high priests and the rulers, and the people,
and said unto the^: ye have brought this man unto me, as one that perverted the
people, and behold I examining him before you, do find no fault in this man,
of these things whereof ye accuse him. No nor yet Herod, for I sent you to
him, and behold there is nothing worthy of death done by him. Then Pilate
entered into the common hall again, and called Jesus and said unto him: Art
thou the King of the Jews? Jesus answered him, say thou that of thy self,
or did other tell it thee of me? Pilate answered, am I a Jew? Thine own nation
and the high priests have delivered thee unto me. What have thou done? Jesus
answered, my Kingdom is not of this world: if my kingdom were of this world
my servants would surely fight, that I should not be delivered unto the
Jews, but now is not my kingdom from hence: Pilate the^ said unto him, art
thou a king the^? Thou say that I am a king: For this cause am I borne, and
for this cause came I into ye world, that I should bear witness to the truth,
every one yt is of the truth hereth my voice. Pilate said to him, what is the
truth? and when he had said that, he went out again unto the Jews, and said
unto them, I find in him no cause at all. But ye have a custom, that I
should deliver you one loose at che passover, will ye therefore that I lose
unto you the King of the Jews? Then cried they all again, saying, not him but
Barrabas. Now this Barrabas was a thief which was in prison with the authors
of an insurrection made in the city, wherein was murder committed. The^ Pilate
spoke unto them again, willing to let Jesus lose. But they cried, saying,
Crucifye crucify him. And he said unto them the third time, what evil has he
done? I find no fault worthy of death in him. I will therefore chastise him
and let him lose. PIlate at the first shows a certain semblaunce of Justice
and equity, for that he goes about to deliver an innocente, and to pluck him
out of their hands, and he being an heathen man does bear witness of the
inno^cency of Christ, but he is unconstant and wavering like a read, and he
fowly goes against his conscience, being moved partly by fear, and partly by
gredy desire to reygne. He ought not to have suffered that he, whom he confessed
to be innocente, should be beaten of the soldiers, and much less to be
crucified. For because, that Christ says that his kingdom is not of this
world: the Anabaptists abuse this saying, and would take away Magistrates
from amongst Christians. But they should mark that Christ speaks of him
self, and appoynteth the kingdom of the spirit. Christ came not to possess
a kingdom in ye world, but to set forth an example of humility and obedience.
So in like case no Christian man ought in his mind to be desirous of a
kingdom, no though he be chosen to govern others. So Christ was the king over
the whole world, as he is also at this day, but he coueted not a kingdom, for
he came not therefore but for to Preach: and yet for all that he denied not him
self to be a king, but he desired no kingdom but only of consciences. So all
preachers and ministers of the word ought to do. For although they be appointed
over kingdoms and princes, Iere. 1. ^. Cor. 10.
yet ought they by no means to make suite for the^, as Jeremy says, but they
ought to govern consciences with the word of God. So Paul says, that the
weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to cast down
holds, by the which we overthrow the devises, and every high thing, that is
exalted against the knowledge of God, and we lead every thought captive to
the obedience of Christ, and we have in a redines vengeance against al
disobedience. We may boast in this authority, which God has given us for
edification and not for destruction. I came for this intent that I might bear
witness to the truth: as though he would say, I came not to the end to reign
but to bear witness to the truth. To bear witness of the truth, is the
Periphrasis of a Preacher. To bear witness to the truth.
So John was sent to bear witness of the light, that is of the truth. So
Christ says to his Apostels in the xv Chapter of John, and ye are my
witnesses. Also in the last of Luke thus it is written, and thus it behooved
Christ to suffer, John. 1.
and to arise again from the dead the third day, and that repentance and
remission of sins should be preached in his name amongst al nations, Luke.
24
beginning at Jerusalem. And ye be witnesses of these things not only in
Jerusalem, Act. 1.
but also in all Jury and Samaria, and finally unto the uttermost part of the
earth. The father therefore sent the son into the world, to bear witness
unto the truth, that is to say, to make him self known of the world, for he
is the truth, John the.xviiij. chap. And who soever has but even a crome of
the truth within him, the same is begotten of him, and hears his voice.
Christ is not only made equal with wicked persons, but is cast much more
lower the^ wicked persons. For the thief is loosed but Christ is killed. They
give a murderer his life, but they desire to have ye author of life crucified:
they choose a thief and reiecte a Savior. By the which we are taught not only
the maliciousness of the Phariseies, but also the inconstancye and ingratitude
of the common people. It was not long before that they cried and sange Hosanna,
and extolled him riding upon the Ass with great praises, saying, blessed be he
which comes in the name of the Lord. Now they cry as fast again, he is a
deceauer, Let him be crucified. Let no man therefore hunt for praise of the
people. Let no man glory, if the common people praise him. The wavering and
inconstante people is by and by persuaded unto a contrary sentence, so he is
cursed in deed that puts his confidence in man. Pilate bears witness more
then once of the innocencye of Christ, and says that he does find no cause of
death in him. He is therefore unjust, because he suffers an innocent to be
whypped. But he feared men more then God. A just judge ought not to punyshe
the giltles to get the favor of other me^. The Romans did put to death those
who^ they had beaten. Although it seems ye Pilate did not beat Christ to ye
intent that he would put him to death, but (...) by this means. he might
deliver hi^ from death All these things are done by the providence of God,
that Christ might suffer all the punishementes, which even the most wicked do.
Here may we judge the love of god the father which thrusts his well beloved
and only begotten son for us unto most grievous punyshmentes that we might
also learn to bear patiently what things so ever shall happen unto us.

Then Pilate took Jesus and scourged him, and the soldiers platted a crown of
thorns, and put it on his head, and they clothed him with a purple garmente,
and said, Hayle King of the Jews and they buffeted him. And Pilate went forth
again, and said unto the^, behold I bring him forth unto you, that ye may know
that I find no fault in him at all. The^ came Jesus forth wearynge a crown of
thorns and a purple garment, and Pilate said unto them: behold the man. Then
when the high priests and officers saw him, they cried sayyng. Crucifye him,
crucify him. Pilate said unto them. Take ye him and crucifye him, for I find
no fault in him. The Jews answered him, we have a law, and according to our
law he ought to die, because he made him self the son of God, when Pilate
then heard that word, he was the more afeard and went again in to the common
hall, and said unto Jesus, whence art thou? But Jesus gave him no answer.
Then said Pilate unto him speak thou not unto me? Know thou not that I
have power to crucify the? and have also power to lose the? Jesus a^swered,
thou could have no power at all against me, except it were given thee from
above. Therefore he that delivered me unto thee, has the greater sin, from
thense forth Pilate sought to lose Jesus, but the Jews cried, saying, if thou
lose this man, thou art not Ceasars friend, Whosoever makes himself a king
speaks against Ceasar. PIlate is a figure of a tyrannous and negligente
judge, bearing a certain show of righteousness, when as in deed he has not
so much regard to it. So often times we outwardly show one thing, and inwardly
in our heart mean an other thing. He would have saved Jesus so that it might
be done with Ceasars favor and the Jews. But if his heart had been inflamed
with the desire of Justice, he would not have defended an innocent so
carelessely and coldly, but stoutly and vpryghtly. A judge ought not to have a
respect to the favor or displeasure of men, but unto the rule of equity and
law. They which be soft and weak, do by little and little slip, till at the
length they declyne altogether from the right way Which we may see by Pilate,
who for that he does not constantly prosecute yt which he knew to be right, is
compelled at the length to give sentence against an innocent, his own
conscience accusing him to the contrary, in co^dempning of whom he condempneth
him self when as he says with arrogant boasting, that he has power to lose
Christ. Whom the Lord does gentelly reprehend, Romans 13.
declaring unto him that no man can do any thing but so farforth as the Lord
shall permit. And because that al power is of God, therefore a Magistrate
ought not to abuse the same power to oppress innocents with all, even as they
lust them selves. Also this is a comfort unto us, when as we know that me^ ca^
do nothing unto us though they be never so cruel, but so much as the Lord
shall permit them. This must we also mark, that the Father did lay our
sins upon Christ, therefore Christ was scourged for our sins, by whose
stripes we are healed, by whose wounds our wounds are cured. He offers his
back to them which stryke him, and his cheakes to them which buffet him.
Esaias. 53. Esaias. 20.
Let us therefore with grief remember the hepe of our sins, which Christ
suffered for in his body, being despised and put to shame, that he might
deliver us from everlasting shame and punyshmente, Let us also make ready our
back and our whole body to bear stripes for him, which has loved us with
so great a love, Jesus holds his peace, giving an example to the Godly, that
they should not greatly endeavor to excuse or deliver them selves when they
should suffer death for the truth.

And when Pilate hard that word, he brought Jesus forth, and satte down for
to give judgment, in the place which is called the paued place and in Hebrew
Gabarha. And it was the preparation of the passover almost about the sixth
hour, and he said unto the Jews, behold your king. But they cried away with
him, away with him, crucifye him. Pilate said unto them, shall I crucify your
king? The high priests answered we have no king but Caesar. And the high
priests with the elders accused him of many things. And when he was accused of
the chief priests and elders, he answered nothing. The^ said Pilate unto him,
do you not here how many witnesses they bring against thee And he a^swered him
not to one word after ye, insomuch that the governor marueyled greatly. Now at
ye feast the governor was wont, to deliver unto the people a prisonner whom
they would. And they had at that time a notable prisonner cal-Barrabas. which
was in prison with the authors of a sedicio^, in the which sedicion they had
committed murder, when they were gathered then together, and that the people
made a noise, he began to requir them insta^tly, that he might do as he had
alwayse done unto them. Therefore Pilate said unto them, whether will ye that I
lose unto you Barrabas, or Jesus which is caled Christ, for he knew full well,
that they had delivered him for envy. THe Jews desired nothing so much as
to recover their King. But now these most wicked persons do dissemble that
stoutly, to destroy Christ which told the^ that he was a king, which was that
king that was promised unto them. Of which king also there are amongst the
Gentiles which witnessed of him. For thus writes Suetonious in the life of
Vespasion, There spread thoroughoute the whole east an old and constante
opinion, that it was destimed that at that time Jury should obtain the
dominion of things. The Jews applying that to them selves which was
forespoken of the Roman Emperor, as it appeared in the end, rebelled and
slew their president. Moreover they drove away the Liuetenant of Siria,
coming to succoure the governor, and ouerthrewe the Romans standerd. Thus
far writes he. Where again we may learn also the lightness and inconstancye
of the common people: when he fed them, they would have made him a King: when
he inueigheth against their perverse manners, they desire to have him
crucified: He is therefore a fool and a mad man that sticks to the favor of
men. They prefer a thief and a murderer before Christ an innocent, which is
commonly seen now a days, yea and amongst those which are called by the name
of Christ, when as varlets and ungodly men, despisers of the truth, religion,
and all godlynes are promoted to the governance of the common wealth, and to
common offices, but they which are honest and simple men are despised. And
where such things are done, most hardest things are to be looked for to such
common wealths: and what should we hope for any other thing, when as ungodly
men are promoted? If so be ye a maid clothed with a white garment would
believe that she could keep her clothes white amongst the midst of colliers.
Should she not make her self a laughing stock to all me^? And what other
thing is an incorrupt senate, then a certain undefiled Virgin decked with
most pure silk? And if thou join unto the same corrupt and naughty men,
then is it impossible, but that the senate should be steyned and corrupted.
Pilate wondereth not so much at Christ's silence, as he does because he
defends not his own innocencye, whom he knew to be an innocente, and to be
delivered of envy.

And as Pilate was syttyng to give judgment, his wife sent unto him, saying:
have thou nothing to do with that just man, for I have suffered many things
this day in a dream for him: but the chief priests and the elders persuaded
the people, that they should ask Barrabas and should destroy Jesus: Then the
governor answered, and said unto them, whether of the twain will ye that I
let lose unto you? And they said Barrabas. Pilate said unto them, what shall I
do then with Jesus which is called Christ? They said al unto him let him be
crucified. when Pilate saw yt he auailed nothing, but that more tumult was
made, he took water and washed his hands before the people, saying I am
innocente of the blood of this just man, ye shall look to it: and all the
pleople answered, his blood be upon us and our children. Then he willing to
satisfy the people, losed unto them Barrabas, giving sentence that it should be
as they required. And he delivered Jesus to do with him what they wuld to be
crucified. SOme ascribe unto the suggestion of the devil, that Pilate is
admonished by his wife. But I think that it was done of God, because Pilate
should want no warnyng. So he admonished Pharao very often times, to see if he
could revoke him by any means from his purpose, that Gods justice might be
excused, and our malice inexcusable. God his providence and goodness never
wa^teth, it never cease, but it reuoketh them which straye. It always gives
an occasion to depart from evil and to do good. His blood be upon us (say
they) which came to pass in deed, but they speak these words in an other
meaning. They would by this saying show them selves to be innocents, so bold
a thing is hypocrisy, that it dare boast it self for an innocent, when as it
knows it self to be most corrupt. Pilate slippeth by little and little, which
knowing Christ to be most innocente, and to be delivered of malice, finding
also no fault in him, does for all that suffer an innocent to be most cruelly
beaten with stripes, to demened with all kind of evils and at the length to be
punished with death. Now he says: Take ye him and kill him. And before he spoke
otherwise. But a just judge ought not to do so, but ought to defend him whom
he knows to be an innocent, or to punish him which is conuicte of his crime.
It avails nothing to wash the hands with water, when as the conscience within
is wounded. Neither will it serve to say, look ye to it, yea he must look to
it, which condemns the just man, and adiudgeth him to death, and also
lets loose him which is guilty. If is not enough to be once or twyse
co^sta^t, unless a man continue constantly in defending of justice even unto
the end, neither ought he to be made affeard from doing right, either with
threatenings or else with flatteryes. A Judge must contempne both the hatred
and the favor of all men, he must fix his eyes only upon justice, and not to
satisfye the will of the people.

The^ the soldiors of the governor took Jesus into the common hall, and there
gathered about him the whole ba^d, and when they had striped him they put on
him a scarlet Robe, and they put on his head a crown platted with thorns, and a
read in his right hand, and bowed their knees before him, and mocked him,
saying hayle king of the Jews: and when they had spitte upon him, they took
the read and smote him on the head: And when they had mocked him, they took
away the robe from him, and put his own raiment on him, and led him away to
crucyfy him: And he bare his cross and came into a place which is named the
place of dead men's skulles and in Hebrew called G^lgatha. And as they led him,
they took one Simon of Ciren, which came out of the country, and was the
father of Alexander and Rufus, upon him they laid the cross, and compelled him
to bear the same after Jesus: And there followed him a great multitude of
people and women, which women bewailed and lamented him: But Jesus turned
back and said unto them: Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep
for your selves, and for your chrildren, for behold the days will come, in the
which men will say: blessed are the barrein, and the wo^bs that never bare, and
the pappes which never gave suck. Then shall they begin to say unto the
mountayns, fall upon us: and to the hills, cover us for if they do these things
to a grene tree, what shall be done to the dry? And there were two others which
were euel doers, led with him to be slain, and when they came to the place
which is called Caluarie, there they crucified him, and ye two other evil
doers with him, the one on the right hand, and the other on the left and Jesus
in the midst: And the scripture was fulfilled which says, he is counted with
the wicked. THe wonderful great cruelty of the soldiers is described by the
Evangelists, whether they were hired of the Jewish priests to do it or whether
they did it of their own lust, so that they are rather to be counted beasts
then men, which have so put away all humanity. Most cruel wolves exercise
their fierceness upon a most meke Lamb. neither can they be satisfied with
their outragiousnesse by any means, they beat him, they spitte upon him, they
mock him, only they devour him not. He which clotheth all things is striped
out of his clothes. He which adorneth all things is made deformed. The
meekness of Christ is to be marked which receaueth all reproach in him self
for us, bearyng his own cross to deliver us from everlasting punishmente. He
took upon him al our sins making satisfaction upon the tree for them that we
might know to whom we should fly, and on whom we should lay the burden of
our sins. Come unto me (says he) all ye that labor and are laden and I will
refresh you. Learn of me because I am meke and humble of heart. Take my yoke
upon you, and ye shall find rest for your souls. Let us cast away
therefore the burdens of our sins, and submit our necks under the
commodious and light yoke of the Lord. Let us take up our cross, and follow
our captain and Prince, by whom the world is crucified unto us, and we to the
world. Blessed is he whom the Lord exalts to so great an honor, to make him
companion with him of his cross. In that yt they bewail that ye just man is
led forth, whom before they required to have put to death, it sets forth
the inconstancye, of the foolyshe common people, and what it is to trust unto
them.

Christ seems to signify (as far as I ca^ judge) by the grene tree perfect
things, and by the dry tree, things of the Jews now decaying: As though he
would say: If ye when things be in safety, and that your things floryshe, do
thus, what will be done then when things are desperate, and when your enemies
shall oppress you? If ye dare rage against me so unjustly and furiously, when
as yet the laws be in force and of strength, what will they dare do then when
they are divided amongst them selves, and when as common laws and ryghtes
shall not be exercised by reason of wars and seditions? Others refer the
grene tree to Christ, and the dry to the Jews, as though he would say, If
they rage so against me, which am innocent, what will they commit against those
which have putrified them selves in sins. Let every man abound in his own
sense, Furthermore Christ teaches us, why we should weep, namely sor our
sins, and punishment which we have deserved by sinning, that we may prevent
and turn from us the anger of God by true repentance by flying from sin and
converting to Christ. Let us not be ashamed to be infamous for Christ's sake,
seeing we see Christ our head led amongst the wicked doers, and counted for the
ryngleader of the ungracious, which committed no sin, neither was there guyle
found in his mouth,

And Jesus said: Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. And
Pilate wrote also a title, and put it on the cross, And it was written Jesus
of Nazareth king of the Jews: This title then red many of the Jews, for the
place where Jesus was crucified was near to the city, and it was written in
Hebrew, Greek and laten: Then said the high priests of the Jews unto Pilate,
write not, The king of the Jews, but that he said, I am king of the Jews,
Pilate answered: What I have written I have written. Then the soldiers when
they had crucified Jesus, took his garments, and made four parts, to every
souldior a part, and his coat, and the coat was without seame, being wourn from
the top throughout: They said therefore one an other, let us not cut it, but
cast lotts for it who shall have it, that the scripture might be fulfilled which
says: They parted my garments amongst them, and on my coat did cast
lottes. And these things in deed did the soldiers. Jesus sets forth to us
an example of wonderful meekness and love, for being reproched with most
great infamye, and vexed with extreme evils of most wicked men, yet does he
make intercession unto the father most fervently praying for the^ which
crucified him. Father (says he) forgive the^, they know not what they do. This
did he to teach us to pray also for them which hurt and persecute us, and to
wysh them good which curse us. Mat. 5. Some of the^ knew full well what they did,
but Christ speaks so mildly, according to his natural goodness and
mildness: and he mitigateth their sin to teach us patience and charity.
other some marked not what they did: Again other some being seduced by the
high priests and Pharisees were ignoraunte, what great mischief should come
thereof. Oh the invincible goodness of Christ. Oh the incomprehensible love. Oh
the unspeakable gentilnes which could not be overcome by any evils, by any
cruelty, or fiersenes, so much as to speak one hard or ungentle word were it
never so small. Here is that fulfilled which Esaye Prophesied, Esaias. 53.
he has borne the sins of many, and he prayed for transgressors, that they
might not perish. Who will now despair of the gooddesse of God and
forgiveness of sins, when as they obtain grace and remission of sins,
which have crucified the fountain of grace? Let no man therefore dyspayre of
his salvation, though he have sinned never so grieuouslye, so that castyng
away his pack of sins he run unto Christ, by true faith and repentance.
The gates of Gods mercy are yet open, Christ rejects no man that is
desirous of salvation and of a new life. Let us remember these things
continuallye, that the fountain of Gods mercy can never be extinguished by
our sins, it can never be emptied, Joan. 1. zach. 13.
of whose fullness all men may draw, the fountain of the blood of Christ is
ever flowyng in the Church: for the remission of sins. If we be armed with
these weapons, then shall we be safe against Satan, which is busilye ^ccupied
to drive us being overwhelmed with the heap of sins to desperations. The
sanctuarye is open to all them which believe in Christ, wherein they find a
sure defense, Heb. 10.
and vnpregnable place of refuge against all temptations. In that he hangs
naked upon the Cross, and is spoiled of his garments by most vile men, it
teaches us to bear willingly pouertye, and the robbing of our goods ^lthough
they be most wicked which do put us to infamye, and spoil us of our goods.
Let us remember we entered naked into the world, and naked shall we go out of
it. Let us leave ^hese things which be of the world, unto ^he world, and
make haste in mind to our ^eauenlye Father with whom we shall dwell
^erpetuallye, and have the fruition of heauen^y things, which will endure
euerlastynglye. Let us being naked, 2. Cor. 5.
follow Christ which was naked, which will not suffer us to be naked, but will
clothe us with a wedding garment and unspeakable glory. They keep hyd of
purpose that he made him self the Son of God, to please the Romans
withal, who bare then the chief swey in all things.

And they which passed by reuyled him waggyng their heddes saying: Art thou he
that destroyedst the temple, and buyldest it again in three days? Save thy
self if thou be the son of God, come down from the cross. Likewise also the
high priests mockyng him with the scrybes and elders, said, he has saved
others, can can he not save himself? If he be the king of Israel. Let him come
down now from the cross, and we will believe him, he trusts in God, let him
deliver him now, if he will have him, for he said, I am the son of God: The
same also the thieues which were with him cast in his teeth and reviled him:
If he will that is if he favor him.
Namely one of the euel doers, which honge by him rayled on him saying, if thou
be christ save thy self and us: but the other aunsweared and rebuked him
saying fear not thou god, seeing thou art in the same condemnation? And we
are in deed rightously, for we receue things worthy of that we have done, but
this man has done no evil. And he said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when
thou comeste to thy kingdom: And Jesus said unto him, Verelye I say unto
thee, this day shalt thou be with me in paradise. IN Christ is set forth
unto yt faithful a most absolute example of all virtues, which should never be
separated from their sight, being also besides that the price of our
redemption. He took upon him for our sake all manner of reproach, he is
reviled from the lowest to the highest, no man pitieth him, no man has
compassion on him being afflicted, no man comfort him, they rage against him
most cruelly without mercy, and yet could not his goodness be overcome by
their malice. Nothing could pluck him back, from the work of our
salvation, which he had begone, nothing could withdraw him from his office.
Let us follow our head, and despise what soever is delectable and glorious in
the world, Math. 10. Luke. 21.
let us also willingly suffer reproach, following the steps of his humility
and patience. Let there be nothing so hard nothing so paynefull to fear us
away from our vocation. For in patience we shall possess our souls, and he
which abides to the end shall be saved. Let us not be ashamed to be evil
spoken of for Christ: Let us not be ashamed of the witness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, neither let us be abashed if any afflictions be to be suffered for his
sake. ^. Tim. 1.
For if we have been partakers of his cross, we shall also be parteners of his
glory. All things though they be never so hard or paynefull shall be welcome
unto us, if we shall considre that our head has suffered the same things
before. In the thief is set forth an example of Gods love and grace, which is
not denied, yea even to most great sinners, if that with a true faith they
call upon God by Christ, if they acknowledge Christ to be their Savior, if
they repent from the bottom of the heart. Let us also acknowledge our sins
with the thief, Let us acknowledge remission of sins to come by Christ, and
we shall find the like comfort at his hands. We must in the mean time
acknowledge and confess that we are worthy both of eternal death and also of
infamye for our wickedness, and we must cast our selves upon the grace of
Christ, which is our righteousness and life: when our consciences are sore
troubled, and as it were in manner desperate, we must run unto Christ, and
say, Remember me Lord in thy Kingdom. Great is his mercy which loved us and
gave his Son for us, that by him we might live. He desires not the death of
a sinner but that he may be converted and live. I expound paradise for all
kind of joy and pleasure, this day shall thou rejoice with me, and have the
fruttion of eternal pleasures. By these words is the error of the slepers
confuted, which say, yt the souls departed out of the body do sleep: The
souls of the Godly sleep not, but as soon as they be loosed from the bodies
they are in unspeakable joy with Christ.

And it was about the sixte hour, and there stood by the cross of Jesus,
his mother and his mothers sister Mary the wife of Cleophas and Marye Magdalen.
Then when Jesus saw his mother, and the disciple whom he loved standing by, he
said unto his mother, woman behold thy son. Then said he to the disciple
behold thy mother. And from that hour the disciple took her for his. WE have
now very often spoken of the most great infamye which Christ suffered, and of
the extreme sorrow wherewith he was afflicted, which declares his exceeding
great love toward us, when as nothing is more unpleasant unto man, then loss
of his fame and glory. Moreover what is more grievous unto ye flesh then to be
beaten and wounded? It is meet the refore that we love him, which of his
unspeakable love has suffered most grievous things for our sakes, so that he
might deliver us from everlasting punishment and infamye. It happens
sometimes yt in afflictions, ye presence of friends, does bring comfort and
mitigate ye sorrow. But in Christ al things are otherwise, for he receaueth no
consolation by his Mother standing by, but a more grievous sorrow, when as
neither he ca^ help his mother, nor his mother him. In the mean time his
faith and love toward his mother ceasseth not, but he dying commends her to
his well-beloved Disciple, which should thenceforth take care over her in his
stead. But in that John writes that his Mother stood by the cross, it is not
done without a reason, and a certain Emphasis, for by these words is
signified that there was a constancye of faith with an exceeding great modestye
in his Mother, which constancye might mitigate her unmeasurable sorrow, yea and
might fortify her, and stay her up. This virtue being in the beleuers makes
them, that they can commit nothing unworthily in trouble, neither can they
altogether fall, the Lord assisting the^ with his hand.

And from the sixte hour there was darkness over the whole earth unto the ninth
hour, and the sun was darkened, and about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a
loud voice, saying. Ely, Ely lama azasthaui. That is, my God, my god, why have
thou forsaken me? And some of them that stood by there when they heard it
said: this man calls Helias, and straight ways one of them ran and took a
sponge and filled it with vinegar and put it upon a reed, and gave it him to
drink, but other said, let be, let us see if Helias will come and save him.
CHrist in all his torments both of body and mind, has nothing to lighten his
pain though it were never so little: the Lord did thrust him down and drown
him in all evils, and took away from him all comfort, to the end we should
not despair if the lord sometimes withdraw his comfort from us in temptations
and seem to be a sleep. In the mean time Christ declares in him self to be
of the true nature of man, and shows the weakness of the flesh, to put
them to shame, which feign that Christ had a fantastical body, or do take
from him the felyng of pain. Also the vain and hipocritical opinion of the
Stoikes is here confuted which make their wise man to be with out grief.
Christ is not so and yet was there never any at any time either more holy than
he, or else more absolute in virtue, but he groneth, he wepeth, he is sorrowful,
and he complayneth to the Disciples of his lot, he cries that he is forsaken,
when as nevertheless in an other place he says, that he is not alone, Psalm.
xvi.
but his father is with him, yea his Disciples forsaking him. We see therefore
that this is spoken after the fashion of men, and that in our person, who took
upon him self all our infirmity, but yet without sin. The Lord teaches us
by this figure, what he requires of the^ which worship him, namely to deny
themselves wholly and to be redye to follow their captain in all things, yea
though the consolation of god be absent or withdrawn. For it is not so great a
matter to bear the cross, if a man feel pr^sent consolation. For the more he
feels consolation, the less does the burden of afflictions trouble him. It
is pleasant to all flesh to receive grace or consolation in adversities, but
wholly to deny him self, and to seek neither in him self nor without him
self any thing, but God only in all things. Here is the work^, here is the
labor: This finally declares him to be a stout soldier of Christ. Let it
not therefore be grievous to us if we be forsaken of all men, yea and of our
most derest friends. This is not one days work, but it requires a long and
continual fight, if a man will overcome him self and cleave only to God. A man
is hardened by afflictions, so that all things be they never so paynfull will
be easy. Let us not therefore despair if the Lord sometimes hide away and
withdraw his aid and comfort from us. This is no new or rare thing to those
which are exercised in the way of God and in the spiritual battle. Courses
of things are altered, so that after rain and tempests, follows most
pleasant fair weather and calmes. The Lord is never unmindful of his, how
so ever he dissemble sometimes, which is myghtie to comfort us after our
long temptation, and yt with a great increase of spiritual joy. Wherefore the
saints complain in their extreme adversities that they be forsaken of god,
when as yet for all that in the mean time they despair not, but desire help
of God so much the more fervently, as they do acknowledge them selves to be
more forsaken, nothing doubting, but that God will be present in time, and show
forth his power in their weakness. We must therefore according to the example
of Christ stand steadfast in afflictions, neither must we come down from
the cross, how so ever our enemies rage or be wood against us. We shall see
straight way God will aid us from above. He is ready to succor them which
fight and hope in his grace: And although he seem somtymes to us to defer
or to be a sleep, this is done to give us an occasion to fight, and so by that
means to overcome: These things happen unto us from our most pitiful.
Father to try our faith and to teach us to acknowlede our weakness, to fly
unto him and to require help of him. Let their doctrine therefore be put away
from the Church of Christ, which affirm Christ to have dispayred upon the
cross. But let us rather think thus, that the heavenly Physician took upon
him self al evils for us, Heb. 2.
that we might acknowledge that we have a faithful high priest, which can be
sick with them which be sick, and to have compassion of our infyrmitie.

Christ soroweth with them which are sorrowful, and the head powers out his
complaynte for the members which are sick. This voice is of the flesh, which
feleth pain, and yet does it not rebel nor despair: Innocent flesh feleth
extreme pain, a most holy body feleth most grievous torment, which is so
wonderful great that even the insensible creatures bear witness that they be
sorrowful concerning a certain horror for the death of their creator. Christ
expresses this unmeasurable grief by ^xample and grave words.

Afterward when Jesus knew that all things were finyshed that the scriptur
might be fulfilled, he said, I thirst. And there was set a vessel full of
vinegar, and they filled a sponge with vinegar and ysope, and put to his
mouth. Then when Jesus had received the vinegar, he said, it is finyshed.
THere is no member in Christ without pain and torment. Wherein we may perceive
partly the love of the father, which put his Son so forth to all evils for
us, and partly the cruelty and ingratitude of ye Jews. God has not spared his
own Son (says Paul) but has delivered him for us al. The heavenly
Physician sets before us a remedy against the disease of our first parents,
who by the provocation of the apple, would satisfy their appetite whereby
sin has flowed into us all. Christ therefore would not offend with his
tongue, that he might heal this disease: teaching in the mean time all the
Godly to temper them selves from the delicateness and pleasures of the body,
whereby the fear of god does almost grow out of use in the hearts of men. In
that he says, it is finyshed, he declares that whatsoever things were
Prophesied of him in the law and Prophets, are now finyshed. For all did
demo^strate Christ, and the shadows and old figures were put out, when
Christ the true light shined: Of ye which thing we have spoken more
aboundauntlye in other places. Let us learn here that our salvation is
finished in Christ, and let us not seek it any further in other things besides
Christ. There remains nothing which can be added unto it either by the Pope,
or by any creature. This is left that we should follow the accomplisher of our
faith constantly and stoutely, and to abide in our calling even to the end, 2.
Tim. 4. 1. Gor. 9.
that we may at the length say with Paul, I have fought a good fight, I have
finished my course, I have kept the faith, and that we run not as in an
uncertain course, but yt we may win the price.

And Jesus cried with a loud voice, Father into thy hands I commit my
spirit, And when he had said thus he bowed his head and gave up the Ghost. THe
life of al mortal men dies upon the cross, as touching the flesh, opening
unto us by his death the way of life, and devouring death by his death. An
innoce^te dies for wicked me^, a la^be without spot is made a most acceptable
sacrifyce unto the father for our sins: Let us pore wretches therefore fly
unto so healthful a death, and draw out our life there. Furthermore let us also
learn to dye daily to the the affections of the flesh: we must cast away the
world, and those things which are in the world, that being clean from the
contagiousnes of the world, and so being naked we may follow Christ naked, in
whom hereafter we must both live and dye: we must offer our selves wholly unto
him which has offered himself for us, in whose mercy we puttinge our trust,
let us commend our souls to the father which is a true God, and has redeemed
us.

And behold the veil of the temple was rent into two parts from the top to
the botome, and the earth did quake and the stones were cloven, and the graves
were open, and many bodies of the saints which slept, arose and came out of
the graves after his resurrection, and went into the hollye city, and
appeared to many. But when the Centurion, and they which were with him watching
Jesus, saw the earth quake and the things that were done, they feared greatly
saying, truly this was the son of god. For when the Centurio^, which stood
over against hi^, saw that which happened, and that he thus crienge gave up the
Ghost, he glorified God saying. Truly this man was just and ye son of God. And
all the people that came together to that sight, and had seen the things which
happened returned smiting their breasts. THe veil is rent, this is of the
kind of examples which are called pure or dombe. where examples teach and
speak with deeds and without words. The like whereof is when Ezechiell is
commanded to burn some of the clipped hears, and to cast away other some.
Also when as Tarquinius walkinge in a gardein did out of with a staff before
his so^s servant the chief tops of the poppye. So the veil being rent does
teach us that al fygures ar accomplished in Christ, and whatsoever has been
hidden or kept secret in the old testament is now expounded, the dayle being
taken away and his blood being shed entered into the Sanctu^ Sanctorum. So he
spoke by the earth quake and by other signs to declare, first the unworthiness
of the thing, which the earth could not bear whilst his creator suffered.

Secondly to shake of as it were an old garment declaring that it would one day
put on a new face by his preaching, which now suffered, and that it should be
moved by the preaching of the Gospel. Where the Gospel and death of Christ is
Preached there do the foundacions and corners of the earth tremble: the flesh
quaketh and is troubled when that it hears that his works are nothing
worth, Prolip^^.
and that the death of Christ has thoroughly paid all things. But in that it
is written that the dead did arise again, that is done by a figurative speech
of Hebrewe. For first he sets forth as it were by a general proposition,
all things that were done but yet at sundry times, then he entreats of every
particular thing, for by and by he returns to his burial. So the dead did
then rise again from death and come into the city when Christ was now risen,
which is the first fruits of the^ which sleep: and that they might testify
that they lived in deed, they appeared unto many that the Jews might the
easlyer believe yt they should also one day rise again, when as they see
Christ and their elders to have risen again. So the stones do detest the
unworthiness of the thing, and the hardness of the Jews, which do crucify
their Savior. Moreover also they do signify the Gentiles which be a hard
people, and yet for all that, they should be cloven and subdued to the Gospel:
Into the holy city. So was Jerusalem called in the old time: but it was so
corrupted with naughtiness and wickedness, that it was made rather a den of
thieves. Esaias. 1. The body of Christ (as it seems) was committed to the
Centurion and his soldiers to be watched, for the soldiers crucified him.
This Ce^^urion when he saw the wonderful things that happened, knew that
Christ was more then a man, which he testified and confessed with ^ loud voice.
These things are not written without a cause: As though the Euangelyste would
say, Though that man were a Gentile and a warrior, nevertheless he gave God
the glory. To give God the glory after the He^rewe Phrase, is to believe the
truth, to confess the true god, and to cleave unto the truth. First ^e calls
him a just man, and this is the first ^egree unto faith, and then he calls
him the ^onne of God. The smyting of the breast, has ^n admiration with grief
and shame. For they which cried crucify him, now are sorry and are ^ricked in
conscience. Whereby is noted besides ^he grief which followed of sin, also the
inco^^tancye of the people which before took the priests part, and now take
Christ's part. Pricking of conscience follows wicked acts
So ^o late at last comes shame and punishment. So in like case came it to
pass in our first Father Ada^, that he was ashamed because he was ^aked, when
as he was also nevertheless na^ed before his sin. He which bends his
mind to commit wickedness, persuadeth with ^imselfe that he can be hidden, but
it comes ^o pass otherwise, for the day of the Lord re^ealeth al things,
and also the conscience it self. 1. Cor. 3.
But put case it be not made manifest here, yet for all that it shall be reveled
at the coming o^ the lord before the whole world. Math. 10.
Time vteret^ al things, and there is nothing so secret which sha^ not one day
be revealed. After sin folowet^ shame, fear and trouble.

Then the Jews because it was the preparation of the passover, that the bodies
might not remain upon the cross on the Sabbath day (for that Sabbath day
was a high day) desired Pilate that their legs might be broken and the bodies
taken down. The soldiors therefore came and brake the legs of the first, and
also o^ the second which were crucified with him, but when they came unto
Jesus, and saw that he was already dead, they brake not his bones, but one of
the soldiers thruste a spear into his side, and incontenently there ran
forth water and blood, and he which saw it bare witness and his witness is
true: and he knows that he speaks the truth, that ye also might believe.
Exodus 12.
For these things were done that the scripture might be fulfilled, ye shall not
break a bone of him. And again an other scripture says. They shall look
upon him, whom they have persed. THe preparacion whereof is here spoken, I
take to be for the Sabbath following, and not for the eating of the lamb, for
that was almost past, but ye.vii. days lasted still, in which they did eat
unleavened bred. And this sabbath because it fell within the days of the
passover was called a great day, because it was the most solemn. The evangelist
does manifestly enough declare that all these things were not done rashly,
but that the truth might corresponde with the fygures. The Church is built out
of the side of Adam sleaping, and out of the same flows forth water to wash
the sins of the whole world. The gate is opened that there might be a
sanctuary in that place for all beleuers, and a hole made in the rock, where
as many as labor do fi^de rest, there ye heart opened yt we might nothing doubt
of love. This founteyne of Gods mercy never cease to spread abroad, of whose
fulness all they which thirst do drink and are refreshed, that it might be
made in them a fou^teine of water ouerflowing to eternal life: Let us therefore
draw water out of the fauntaynes of our savior, that we may herafter live unto
him alone, which is so wounded for us, which does open his heart unto all men,
and says, give me your heart O my children. Here shall the sheep of Christ find
the ryuers of life, and the gate thorough which they go in and out at. I
would to God the Lord would wou^d our hearts with his love, Pro. 23.
that we might ryghtly weigh and consider so great a love to yt which we ca^
never worthily enough answer, no though we should dye a. M. times for him Let
us learn therefore by the death of Christ to acknowledge our own death, which as
it was dew unto us, so also was it taken away by his death. Let us also learn
to dye unto sin, and affections, and take up our cross and follow Christ,
that when Christ shall appear, we also may appear with him in glory.

And when the even was come, because it was the preparation of the passover,
which went before the Sabbath, there came a rich man of Arimathea, named Joseph
a counceller and an honest senator, a good man and a just, he did not consent
to the counsel and deed of them, which also himself waited for the kingdom
of God, and therwithall was a disciple of Jesus, but secretlye for fear of the
Jews, he taking boldenes went unto Pilate and asked the body of Jesus. And
Pilat meruelled if he were already dead, and called unto him the centurion, and
asked him if he had been any while dead, and when he had known the truth of
the Centurio^, he gave ye body to Joseph who bought a silken cloth, and took
down the body and wrapped it in a clean silken clothe. And there came also
Nycodemus, which came to Jesus before by night, bringinge myrhe and aloes
mingled togethers about one hundredth pounds. Then took they the body of Jesus,
and wrapped it in lynnen cloth with the spices as the manner is of the Jews to
bury. And there was in the place where he was crucified a gardeyn, and in the
gardeyn a new sepulcher, wherein was never man yet laid. Then Joseph put the
body of Jesus in his new tomb, which he had hewn out in a stone, there
therefore laid they Jesus, because the Jews preparation day, for the tomb was
nere. And when he had roled a great stone to the door of the sepulcher he
departed. THis word Decurio, in the old time did signify to Latten men a
senator, and rather takes his name of Curia, that is to say, of the court,
and not of this word December which signifies ten. Iosephe is called Just, not
that he was without sin. but because he abhorring from the council of the
ungodly, consented not to the death of Christ, and because he waited for the
kingdom of heaven. So also are we just if we receive Christ by faith whom
they waited for, and if we keep our selves unspotted from this world* For
Christ is our righteousness: That man sets forth an example both of great
constancy and also of faith. For in how great a danger does he put him self,
when as he consents not or else withstandeth the enterprises of the malicious?
Who sees it not to be a present danger for any man to ask the body of Jesus
in so great hatred, and cruelty, and to burye it honorably? But faith if it
be a true faith, attempteth great and perilous things with an invincible
courage. When as then the Euangeliste says that he was a noble and rich man,
we must not regard that only in him, but the Evangelist sets forth his
courageous mind and great faith. As though he would say, although he were
such a man, yet could neither favor, nor fear nor riches make him declyne
from the truth to consent to the endeavor of the wicked. Besides that he was
so stout, that also after his death, when as others blasphemed and contemned
him, he went unto the judge nothing abashed, neither feared he to burye him,
whom all men had condemned. Let us think the same of Nicodemus, and have a
regard not of what power and riches he was, but of how great faith, and
boldenes of mind. Let us mark with how great an argument they bear witness
of their faith which do put themselves forth to the displeasure of all men and
to the danger of life for Christ's sake. If they had followed him in his life
time, they had not uttered so great faith, as when they cleave unto him being
vilelie reproched and condemned: neither are they ashamed to honor him very
noblye whom all men detested as a wicked one. They therefore which before hyd
themselves and dissembled the matter for fear, come now forth with glory, to
the example of all the faithful. It comes to pass sometimes yt they which be
very timorous, do when time serves fight more courageously and stoutely,
namely taking heart again unto them. We learn here also that riches and power
may be joined with faith, and they add a great honor to the beleuers. Riches
hinder nothing if the eye be simple and the mind faithful. To wait for the
kingdom of heaven is a Periphrasis of the faithful: He looked for the kingdom
of god, that is he was a faithful man he believed. And surely his faith was no
small faith, which durst things being yet fresh in the midst of the rage of
the furious and malicious me^, ask the body of Christ. There was in these men
a perfect and an approved virtue, which as it sticks unto god, so ca^ it
never be made ashamed or fall. In that he puts Jesus into his own
Sepulcher, he declares his vehemente love toward Jesus. For we be all such
lovers of our selves that we will not so much as lend our neighbors any thing of
ours. He roleth a stone to ye gate of the grave, yt the body of the innocent
might not be violated by the unbelievers, which is a toke^ of an earnest care
and of godliness And God uses this thing for a witness of the resurrection
wherefore god often times does dispose the works which we do, otherwise then
we purposed, In the mean it is not done without the ordinance of God that
Christ is put into a new tomb, wherein none had ever been buried, least the
envy of the Pharisees would falsely have alleged Christ to have risen by the
power of an other. But in all these things does the providence of God shine
forth, which styrreth up the hearts of the Godly to this thing, to burye the
most holy body of their Christ honorably, least it should lie or be cast forth
without renown and unburied, and that by the honorable burial the prophecy
of Esaias in the xi. Chapter, might be fulfilled, saying, and his rest shall be
glorious. Now after his humiliation and ignominye began the time of
glorification, and of a new and immortal life which Christ the first fruits
of the^ which rise again from the dead shows forth. Joan. xvii.
The grave is new, the linen white and clean that all things might signify
a certain newnes unto those which are baptized in the death of Christ, being
buried with him in his death.

Romans vi.
And Marye Magdalene and Marye Iose beheld where he should be laid, sitting
over against the Sepulcher for there followed him women which came with him
from Galiley these saw the grave, and how his body was laid. And they being
returned prepared odours and ointments, and they rested on the Sabbath day
according to the commandment: But the next day that followed the
preparation of the passover, the high priests and Pharisees assembled unto
Pilate: saying, Sir we remember that that deceauer said, while he was yet
alive: After three days I will rise again. Command therefore that the
sepulcher be made sure until the third day, least his Disciples come, and
steal him away, and say unto the people. He is risen from the dead, and so
shall the last error be worse then the first. Pilate said unto them, ye have a
watch, go and make it as sure as ye can. And they went their ways, and made
the Sepulcher sure, sealed the stone, and set watch men to keep it. IN these
women is an example of Godliness and diligente love, as they had followed the
Lord in his life time, so do they not forsake him when he is dead. They run
and watch with a Godly pensiveness, having an earnest care to annoynte his
body. This example ought we to follow, for there is no let but that we may
bestow this godliness upon Christ, but yet in his members, for that he after
this is no more with us in his body. Let not us be ashamed to serve Christ and
to be liberal unto the poor. Let it not repent us if any thing depart from
our goods, when as we may see that he has given his life for us, which does so
much commend the poor unto us, when as we may see also these women and honest
me^ to have spared no cost, for to bury the body of Christ most honorably.
For we learn here what great grief and sorrow they had which dare not
confess Christ openly for fear, and yet nevertheless they cease not to run
privily, and to watch, to admonish, and to help that they might do Christ
service at the least by some way. We which may profess the doctrine of
Christ freely without fear and danger, ought to pray for these to help the^
with our service, and succor the^ with our benefits, to chearish the^ in
co^forting the^ and exhorting, etc. Co^trarilie in the priests and Pharisees
is set forth an example of envy, for they were not yet fatisfied with the
putting of Christ to death, but also they must persecute him being now dead,
and shadow his glory. They are tossed with infernal madness, with envy,
fear and curiosity. The ungodly are inwardly vexed and fearful how so ever
outwardlye they set a face on the matter, We remember (say they) that that
deceauer, etc. Such bitter words does envy use til it come to destruction. The
Pharisaicall infidelity had persuaded to it self that the light and savior of
the world was a deceauer They be like unto those which cry also now of days
that the doctrine of the Gospel is heresy. And if so be that Christ be a
seducer and a deceauer, what need these wicked me^ to be affeard of him? Does
God raise up deceauers from death? Will god assiste those which cleave unto
lies? No truly: What are they affrayed of the^? This fear declares that they
believed otherwise, the^ they confessed by mouth, they call him a deceauer, but
yet they judge hi^ to be somewhat more noble: their conscience puts the^ in
remembrance that he was the son of God, or at the least greater the^ a man.
And if it so be that they were persuaded that he was the Son of God, why then
did they crucify him? So the ungodly do always show forth in some part that
they know and believe that thing to be true, which they impugn, persecute and
pursue. So Herod feared least John were risen again. So also an other Herod
feared least a child newborn should possess the kingdom. They make safe
and seal the sepulcher but what they brought to pass by all these things, the
honorable Resurrection of Christ does enough declare. Vain therefore ar the
enterprises of the ungodly which labor to oppress and to quench the truth.
For there is no council against the Lord, and the truth ca^ not be oppressed,
but it appears always more bright. Let no man therefore be affeard of the
power of ye world, though it be never so great, ye Lord is stronger and
mightier, he which cleaves unto him shall never be put to shame.

Here follows the historye of the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ.
ANd when ye sabbath day was past, in the even of the Sabbath, Marye Magdalene,
and Mary the mother of James and Salome, bought odours, that they might come
and embaulme him. And upon an evening of ye sabboths which dawneth of one of ye
sabboths, namely the first day of the Sabbothes, when it was yet dark, they
came to see the Sepulcher. And they came very early in the morning upon the
first day of the Sabbothes when the son was risen. And behold there was a
great earthquake, for the Aungel of the Lord descended from heaven, and came
and rolled back the stone from the door, and sat upon it: and his countenance
was like lyghtening, and his raymente white as snow, for fear of whom the
kepers were astonyshed, and became as dead men, And behold some of the kepers
came into the city, and showed unto ye high priests all the things that had
happened. And they gathered the^ together with the elders, and took counsel
and gave money largely to the soldiers, saying, Say ye that his disciples came
by night and stole him away when ye were a sleep: And if this come to the
preside^ts ears, we will persuade him, and save you harmles: So they took the
money and did as they were taught, and this saying is noysed amongst the Jews
unto this day. Then the women when they were on their way, said amongst
themselves, who shall role away the stone from the door of the sepulcher? (For
it was a very great one) and when they looked they saw how the stone was
rolled away from ye door of the sepulcher. And they went into the sepulcher,
but found not the body of Jesus, but they saw a young man, sytting on the right
hand, clothed in a white garment, and they were afraid. And the angel
aunsweared and said unto the women: Fear ye not, I know yt ye seek Jesus of
Nazareth which was crucified, he is rise^, he is not here, he is risen I say,
even as he told you, come see the place where they laid him: But go your
ways and tell his disciples and Peter, yt he goth before you into Galiley,
there shall ye se him as he said unto you.

THe history of ye resurrection of our savior Jesus christ is painfully and most
diligently written theuangelists, namely for ye use of the church. Wherein is
pri^cipally declared how yt humble and despised Jesus being crucified between
thieues is glorified after his death, and to what renowm he is exalted unto.
For neither could death hold him, Heb. 3.
which has abolished both death and also him which has do^inio^ over death, and
has made the^ free as many as through fear death were al their life time subject
to bondage. Christ's resurrection therefore is our life and righteousness, which
for this cause was diverse ways proved by the apostles, namely to confirm our
faith. For otherwise our flesh does hardly believe the resurrection of the
flesh, which seems to it self impossible and absurd: which may be seen in
thapostles whose wavering doubtfulnes could scarce be taken away, notwithstand
so many most evident demo^stratio^s god suffers his so^etimes to be tempted
and to fall, that their weakness might be made manifest to the^ selves, and also
to others but he cease not to raise up and confyrme the^ by his power, till
he fully perform, and take from them al distrust. So far is he from casting us
away for our weakness, that he also appears unto womenne, and makes them
Apostles of his resurrection. For they came of love to the sepulcher, partly to
see the Sepulcher, partly to annoynte the body of Jesus. The earth was moved
at the death of Christ, to declare that it was heavy with his creator: And it
is in like case moved at the resurrection, desiring gladlye to restore him
whom it had received, and as it were reioysinge that Christ was risen again.
Moreover the earth was moved at the se^ding of the holy Ghost, to teach us by
this figure, that by the death and resurrection of Christ thorough virtue of
the holy Ghost the whole world should not only be moved but also be renewed:
we learn furthermore that the councels of the ungodly against the truth are
vain, for how soever they go about by lies to extinguishe the truth, yet
does God bring to pass, that by those things which they have excercised to
oppres the truth the truth shall more brightly shine forth: worthily therefore
are ye Jews repudiated and blinded, which do abhor ye truth, so that they
which could not abide to be saved by the truth, should pearish being wrapped in
lies and errors. This gospel is chieflye declared unto Peter, who was in most
great he uynes, as well for the death of his lord whom he offended by denyenge
of him, as also for his denial, that he might receive comfort and know that
his sin was forgiven him. Furthermore christ's resurrection to a new life,
does stir us up to newnes of life, that we being dead to sins might henseforth
live to righteousness. They which do still lie and rotte in the filthynesse of
sins do declare that they have not yet risen again with Christ. For they
which are risen truly in Christ, do show forth the same in worthy fruits,
neither does sin reign in their mortal body. They think not upon
earthlye things, but their mind is upon heuenlye things above, where Christ
their head sytteth at the right hand of the Father. And they went out quickly
and fled from the Sepulcher, for they trembled, and were amassed, neither said
they any thing to any man, for they were afraid: And Mary Magdalene ran and
came to Simon Peter, and to the other disciple whom Jesus loved, and said
unto them. They have taken away my Lord out of the grave, and we can not tell
where they have laid him. Peter the^ went forth and that other disciple and
came to the sepulcher: And they ran both together, and the other disciple did
out run Peter, and came first to the sepulcher. And when he had stowped
down, he saw the linen clothes lyeng, yet went he not in. The^ came Simon
Peter folowinge him and went into the Sepulcher. And he saw the linen
clothes lie, and the napkin that was about his head not lyeng with the linen
clothes, but wrapped up in a place by it self. The^ went in also that other
disciple which came first to the Sepulcher, and he saw and believed. For as
yet they knew not the scripture that he should rise again from the dead. Then
the disciples went away again to their own howses. Epanodus
But Mary stood with out at the Sepulcher weping. And as she was wepi^g, she
bowed her self into the sepulcher, and saw two angels clothed in white,
sittinge the one at the head and the other at the feet there where they had
laid the body of Jesus. They said unto her woman why wepest thou? She said
unto them. They have taken away my Lord, neither wot I where they have laid
him: When she had thus said, she turned her back, and saw Jesus standing, and
knew not that it was Jesus: Jesus said unto her, woman why wepest thou? Whom
seakest thou? She supposing him to be a gardener, said unto him. Sir if thou
haste borne him hense, tell me where thou haste laid him, and I will fetch him.
Jesus said unto her, Marye, She turned her self and said unto him. Rabboni,
which is to say, Master. Jesus said unto her, touch me not, for I am not yet
ascended unto my Father, but go to my brotherne, and say unto them, I ascend
unto my Father and to your Father, to my God and to your God. Marye Magdalene
came and told the disciples, that she had seen the Lord, and had spoken such
things unto her: She told, I say, them which were with him as they mourned
and wept. And they although they heard that he was on live and that she had
seen him, believed not.

THe Evangelists do by many and diverse words beat into our heddes the
resurrection of Christ, that we might see that Christ was exalted after
death, and believe that we shall enter into life by the death of Christ, and
that also our faith and hope might be confirmed. Christ could in deed have
illustrated the hearts of his disciples with his sprite as soon as he was dead, so
yt they should have nothing douted of his resurrection, but he loves this
doubt and weakness in the^, to make them so much the more earnest in their
supplications unto God. The more a sick man fealeth his wounds and diseases,
the more is he made desirus of medicine. So likewise the more we feel in our
selves the weakness of the flesh, the more do we run unto God for aid and the
less do we brag in our own strength, which can do nothing without god:
when as therefore we feel our faith begin to fall, then have we occasion
offered us to call upon God with continual prayers. The providence therefore of
God does by little and little lead the disciples to the knowledge of the
resurrection of his son till it has fullye made them perfect. They saw the
stone rolled a wai, they found the sepulcher empty, thep saw the napkins and
the lynnen clothes laid aparte, the place wherein he lay, and finally the
angel testifyinge that he was truly risen. And this is diligently to be
marked, that the Angel says that Christ of Nazareth which was crucified is
not there, by which words their opinion is plainly confuted, which co^te^d to
have ye body of Christ every where after his resurrection and not in a place.
For what other thing do they, then deny the verity of the humayne nature in
Christ, and revoke from hell Marcyons opinion. Christ's body was not in the
sepulcher after his resurrection, when as it appeared unto Marye Magdalene,
neither was it with the eleven at Jerusalem, when as it was with the two which
went toward Emaus. No more can it be in the bread, when as according to the
scriptures it was taken up to heaven and sets at the right hand of God the
father. For Christ went from the father and came into the world, again he
left the world and went to the father. But he left not the world, in respect
that he is God, when as he is with us to the end of the world: therefore left he
the world as concerning his manhed, that is, he carried into heaven the body,
which he took of the virgin Mary into the glory of the father. This is the
foundation of the Catholic and Christian faith, and the hope of all the
elect, which whilst they deny or stir, let them take heed, what they make
of Christ, or how they are to be counted for Christians. Let them take heed
I say what foundation they stick unto. The flesh of Christ also is glorified
after his resurrection, and yet for all that is it flesh in deed, and puts
not of the nature of flesh, and although it be spiritual, yet is it not
converted into a spirit, and much less into God. A spyrite (says Christ)
has neither flesh nor bone as ye see me have: The body therefore of Christ is
in heaven, and not in the bread of the supper which could be neither
necessary nor profitable: yea it was carried up is heaven after the
resurrection in the sight of the Apostles, which was so expedient for their
faith, which faith they could never establysh by the suppenor by the presence
of his body glorified, but that they always wauered and doubted til such time
as they were confyrmed by the holy ghost. We must therefore transfer our
mind from all corporal and visible thing into heaven, where Christ sits at
the right hand of god, and believe that Christ has given his body to the death
for us. After this sort is the body of Christ eaten, not with the teeth of the
body, but by the contemplacion of faith. For faith in deed, which cleaves only
to God may use corporal things, but not as though salvation were bound to
those things, and be delivered to us thorough them, but to put in practice
faith and charity. Even so we carry about the bread and wine in the Supper, we
distribute it amongst us and we eat not to merit any thing of God by the
same as it were by a certain worshipping, but because by these outward signs
our senses are stirred up, to weigh and consider more diligently the grace of
God given us by the death of Christ and to lift up our minds to Christ the
bread of life, which for our sakes descended from heaven. For our weakness
therefore are the sacraments instituted of Christ, as it were certain signs
of the grace and benevolence of God toward us, which do stir us up to
consider the promises of God, wherein our faith is exercised. For they which
use these signs do testifye that they have faith in the promises of God, and
that they be of the number of those which acknowledge God for their God, whom
they worship in spirit, in whom they trust to who^ they give thanks, etc. And
when does god more declare and show him self to be our God and most loving
Father, the^ when he promises to give us his son and also performs it?
Roma. viii.
For how can he not give us all things with his son? Or what can he deny
which has given us his only begotten Son? John. iii.
And he has given him unto us, not to punish and condemn us, as we justly
have deserved, but that by him we might be saved and have everlasting life. For
he gave him to be ours al whole, to be our righteousness, wisdom,
hollynesse, redemption, salvation and life. What a great love is this, what a
great grace, the eternal Son of God descends and takes upon him self our
nature: that we being made new by his grace, might ascend, taking after a sort
the divine nature. He descended that we creping on ye ground might be thoroughe
him transferred and lift up to his glory. The Lord of al things takes upon him
the shape of a servant, to make us which are by nature servant, and
oppressed with most grievous bondage, the sons of God. He takes upon him
self our weakness to strengthen us with his spirit. He is made man to
transform us by his grace in a manner into Gods. He has communicated with us
in flesh and blood being made partaker of the same, that also the children,
namely we, might have everlasting fellowship with him. In fine, he would be
made like to his brethren in all things, Hebr. 3.
that we might see that we have a merciful and faithful high priest to do
all those things which we have to do with God, which makes satisfaction by
his blood for all our sins. He has taken upon him self all that is ours,
to participate unto us what so ever he him self is and has. And this is it
which he says to Magdalene, I ascend to my Father and your father, my God
and your God. See what a love the father has given us, both to be named and to
be the Sons of God. i. John. iii
For the which cause he is not ashamed to call us brethren, saying, God to my
brethren, etc. For his spirit bears witness to our spirit that we are the
sons of God. For we have not received a spirit of bondage to be affeard,
Roma. viii.
but the spirit of Adoption, by the which we cry Abba Father. God therefore
is our Father and our God, and we are his children, with whom he has made a
new couenaunte, and confyrmed it by the blood of his Son, that we might now
have fellowship and mutual perticipacion with the father and his son Jesus
Christ. These benefits so great and most ample are given unto us of God, ii.
Cor. iii. i. Cor. xiii.
but they are received of us only by faith (which self faith is also the gift
of God) and are felt inwardly in spirit. For as yet we do not behold the
glory of the Lord with open face (for partlye we know and perceive by a
glass in a riddell) and it has not yet appeared what we shall be, which is
done to our profit, yt the father should not make us fully perfect whilst we
live in this flesh, but does give us the knowledge and fruition of him self
by certain degrees, that we might learn to think humblye of our selves, and
to walk before our heavenly father in the fear of God, and to depend al
wholly upon him, we are therefore made safe, but yet in hope, which hope is not
now seen fullye otherwise it should be no hope (for how can a man hope for
the same thing that he sees? Roma. viii.
) Therefore we wait for yt by patience which we see not but only believe and
hope for. Let us be exercised in the mean time under ye cross, and so shall we
continually be made perfect by his spirit being hated and oppressed in ye world
that we may the sooner aspire unto our father and be very desirous to come to
our heavenly country. Heb 13. Titus. ii.
We are strangers in this world, we have here no abiding city, but we look
for one to come, waiting for that blessed hope and appeari^g of the glory of
the great God, and our savior Jesus Christ. i. John. iii ii. Cor. iii.
And we know that when he appears, we shall be like unto him, because we shall
see him as he is and we al representing the glory of the lord in a glass with
uncovered face, are transformed into the same Image, from glory to glory, as
it were by the spirit of the Lord. This is signified and showed before, as it
were in a certain figure, in that Christ opens him self after his
resurrection by little and little, and leasurely by certain degrees, as we see in
the women, in the travelers of Emaus, and in the disciples. Sometime he
appears in the form of a stranger and holds their eyes that they knew him
not, sometime he talks with Marye in form of a gardener, sometime he sends
his Angel unto them, sometime he offreth him self to be seen and handled
openly, and sometime he forbids them to handle him, and sometime he
appears at Jerusalem, and sometime in Galile, till he openly ascended into
heaven al doubt set aside they loking upon him, and sent his spirit fully unto
them from above. So God oftentimes deferreth and will not be seen by and by,
and being called upon sends not succoure straight way, that our hearts
might be kindled more and more and our faith shine forth more brighte. Who
understands not that Mary Magdalene was pulled away from Christ with an evil
will when as he sent her to the Apostels. For undoubtedly she would have
gladlier abiden longer with Christ, and satiated her mind with the
contemplacion and fruition of him: But it was more necessary to serve her
neyghbor, that that joy, and so wonderful comfort should also be brought to
the Apostles. Whereby we learn that we can not fully have the commodity of
the contemplacion of the Godhead whilst we live here, but we had need to serve
our neighbor by charity. Paul acknowledging this writes unto the
Philippians after this sort, What to chose I know not, Phillip. i.
for I am constrained of these two things, I desire to be loosed, and to be
with Christ, which is much and far better. Nevertheless to abide in the
flesh is more needful for you. And the woman entered into the sepulcher and
found not the body of ye Lord Jesus: And it happened as they were amassed thereat,
behold two me^ stood by the^ in shining garments: And as they were affrayed,
and bowed down their faces to the earth, they said unto them: why seek ye the
living among the dead: He is not here, but is risen. Remember how he spoke
unto you, wen he was yet in Galile saying, That the son of man must be
delivered into the hands of sinful men, and be crucified, and the third day
rise again. And they remembered his words and returned from the sepulcher, and
told al these things to the eleven and to all the rest. And as they were going
to tell it to the disciples, behold Jesus met the^, saying Al hayle. And they
came and held him by the fete and worshipped him. Then said Jesus unto the^,
be not affeard: Go tell my brethren, that they go into Galile and there they
shall see me. And it was Mary Magdalene, and Ioanna and others that were with
them which told the Apostles these things. And their words seemed unto them
fained things, neither believed they them.

Diverse ways does Christ (as I have said before) declare that he is risen
from death in deed, but yet to those, out of whose hearts the fear of the
cross had not altogether shaken of Christ, and which sought him with a fervent
faith. Charity is diligent and never ceasseth, they go often to one place and
look again being desirous to serve Christ: Whose feruentnes does put to shame
our sluggishnes. They seek one absent, being very desirous of him, we either
disdain Christ being present in the poor, or else we think scorn to bestow
a little of our money upon the^. They spare no labor nor cost, we are so
addicted to things that we can let the^ go empty away. The Lord therefore does
not frustrate the desire of these godly women, but meteth the^, saluteth the^
friendly, and offreth him self to be felt of the^, finallye he comfort
them. All these things are done, that their weak faith might be strengthened.
Let us not doubt therefore at all, but that the Lord will be with us and comfort
us, when we are in afflictions and temptacions. So that we seek the lord and
cease not till we find him. And behold two of them went the same day to a
castle called Emaus which was about threscore furlongs distant from Jerusalem.
And they talked between the^ of al these things yt had happened And it came to
pass as they were in talking and reasoning together: Jesus also him self
drew nere and went with them, but their eyes were holden that they knew him
not. And he said unto the^, what manner of talk is this which ye have
together as ye walk, and be so sad? And one of them answered whose name was
Cleophas, and said unto him. Art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem and
know not the things that are happened there in these days? To whom he
answered, what things? And they said unto him, of Jesus of Nazareth, which
was a Prophet, mighty in deed and word before god and all the people: And how
the high priests and our rulers delivered him to be condemned to death and have
crucified him. But we hoped that it had been he which should redeem Israel:
And now as touching al these things, this is the third day since these
things are done: yea and certain women also of our company amassed us, which
came to the sepulcher before day light, and finding not his body, came and
said, that they had seen a vision of Angels, which said that he is on live.
And some of them which were with us went unto the sepulcher, and found it
even so, as the women had said, but him they saw not.

THe same day, namely in the which the Lord had risen, Luke. 10.
two of these seventy disciples whom the Lord when he was yet living had
chosen, went forth: It appears that these disciples would have fled for
fear, namelye of the persecution, which they supposed to be at hand. This
historye also teaches that it was true which Christ promised, namely that he
would be present even there where as but twoe were gathered togethers in his
name. God is always present with his, yea and then when they think least, he
puts them in memory of him self, tells them what counsel is best to
take, and manifests him self unto them. More over he speaks outwardlye by
his word, by his sacraments, and finally by all his creatures, to stir up and
provoke us to praise him. God therefore is alwayse and every where present with
us an arbiter and a beholder not only of all our works, but also of our
thoughts. This teaches us to live honestly with fear and great reverence
before him. For if we be ashamed to commite vile things when men behold us,
how much more ought we to be ashamed to commit any such thing in Gods syghte?
The presence therefore of god does every where admonish us to abstain from
sins: we hoped (say they) that it had been he which should have redeemed
Israel. By these words may be gathered, that there was then a solemn and
famous opinyon among the Jews, as touching Messiah the king, which should
redeame them and renew their kingdom. For such a one had they promised the^,
eueri where both in the law and the prophets: But they applied all that to
acertein temporal kingdom and carnal setting at liberty: although our Jews
now a days deny that there was a Messiah promised, when as never thelesse the
Scribes aunsweared the wise men which sought Christ, that he should be
borne in Bethelem, and that by the prophecy of Michea. Their faith is weak and
feable, but not altogether extinguished, they talked of Jesus, they desired him
feruentlye. Christ therefore joins him self with them, and first disse^bleth,
neither opens he him self by and by unto the^, to make the^ co^fes with
their own mouth their weakness: And then at the last he declares unto them
the scriptures, and nourishes and kindles that little spark of fire which
was so depely hidden in them, which they also themselves confess, saying, did
not our hearts burn within us while he talked with us. The word must be added
unto those which are yet in doubt of their faith, according to the example
of Christ, by the which word faith is increased like as fire is when wod is
put unto it. But there must first be a faith, though it be never so small,
otherwise it is done in vain, to put wod to the fire, that is, it is to no
purpose to preach the word of God to an infidele. And whereas the faithful do
willingly hear the word of God, it can not be chosen, but that the mind
shall be illustrate and kindled by the spirit of God. And he said unto them O
fools and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken: Ought
not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory? And he
began at Moses and all the proprophetes and enterpreted unto them in all the
scriptures which were written of him, and they drew nigh unto the castle which
they went unto, and he made as though he would have gone farther. And they
constrained him saying, abide with us for it draws toward night, and the day
is far spent. And he went in to tarry with them. And it came to pass as he
sat with them, he took bread and blessed, and brake and gave to them: and
their eyes were opened, and they knew him, and he vanished out of their sight.
And they said between them selves, did not our hearts burn within us, while he
talked with us by the way and opened unto us the scriptures? and they rose up
the same hour, and returned back again to Jerusalem, and found the eleven
gathered to gether, and them that were with them, which said The Lord is risen
in deed and has appeared to Simon: And they told what things were done in
the way, and how he was known by the breaking of the bread.

Christ nourishes their faith, although it be but weak, but first he rebukes
them, to make them more attentive: He shakes away the drowsines and
forgetfulness, of the flesh, that they might give attentive head to those
things which the scriptures witness of him and draws forth the spirit which
speaks in the sriptures. But the places which Christ brought out of the
law and Prophets, are not here left out without the providence of God
(although they be here and there mentioned afterward by the Apostles) to make
us more diligently to search the^, when as we hear, that the scriptures bear
witness of Christ. For so says John in the v. Chapter. Search the scripturs,
for in the^ you think ye have eternal life, and they are they which testifye
of me. If ye had believed Moses, ye would have believed me also, for he wrote
of me. He therefore which will confyrme the weak ones in faith, and comfort
them which be heavy and faynte hearted must bring the holy scriptures, for
the word of God is the meat and life of the soul. And the sriptures do
testifye two things of Christ, first how he was humbled, and thrown down
for us and what he also suffered for our sakes: Secondlye what great glory he
was exalted unto after his passion: that we might also learn and. steadfastly
believe ye Christ suffered for us to make satisfaction for our sins. And then
that he rose again for our justification, that we might believe Christ to be our
righteousness, and that our life is restored unto us by Christ, when as we hope
we shall arise again to eternal life. But we must take heed in ye mean time
which way we may come to this life, namely by the cross and denial of our
self. For it is not lawful for us to go by any other way to the inheritance
of the heavenly glory, then that way which the only begotten son of God
went. And it behooved Christ to suffer and so for to enter into his glory: he
that does not diligently weigh this, is a fool and slow of heart, and let him
desire of god to open his mind in the holy scriptures: This is also to be
noted, that repentance and forgeuenes must be preached only in the name of
Christ: but he means by repentance and forgeuenes of sins the Gospel. For
the parts of the gospel are repentance and forgeuenes of sins. For
salvation gotten by Christ has many names, and sometimes it is called but by
one of the names, and that by the figure where one part is put for the whole,
Synechdoche*
as may appear by the acts of the Apostles. He which does not acknowledge
him self to be a sinner, can not be able to receive forgeuenes, neither can he
be desirous of salvation by Christ. But he which feels and aknowledgeth his
disease, he I say runs gredelye to Christ the Physician of the souls, and
there does uncover and lay forth his disease. True faith reioyseth to
communicate unto other such things as it has received and therefore they
return streightway to tell the other rheir new joys. Whilst they spoke these
things (and it was the same day at night which was the first day of the
Sabaoths, and the doors were shut, where the disciples were assembled together
for fear of the jews) came Jesus, and stood in the midst of them, and said
unto them. Peace be unto you: And they were abashed and affearde, and supposed
that they had seen a spirit, and he said unto them: why are ye troubled, and
why do thoughts arise in your hearts: And again he said unto them: peace be
unto you: and when he had thus spoken, he showed unto them his hands and his
side, and therwythall said, Luke says his hands and feet.
behold my hands and my fete, that it is even I my self, handle me and see,
for a spyryte has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. Then were the
dysciples glad, when they saw the Lord, and while they yet believed not for
joy and wondered, he said unto them, have ye here any meat? (For he appeared
unto the eleven as they satte at meat, and cast in their teeth their unbelief,
and hardness of heart, because they believed not them which had seen that he
was risen again) And they offered him a pyece of broyled fyshe, and a piece of
an honye comb, and he took it, and did eat it in their syghtes.

WE see again how Christ according to his promise is present with his which
are assembled and gathered together in his name For fear causes them not to
be the less beloved of Christ. And even in the faithful there is a fear and
dread, but they which are stronger in spirit ought to erect those up. For that
is it which Christ says, ye shall have oppression in the world, but in me
peace. There shall be always men therefore which shall persecute the just, so
that the flesh which is in them shall never be without dread and complaint. But
yet the godly persist in ye will of God, til it be the lords pleasure to deliver
them, how so ever the flesh in the mean time do struggle and complain. But
what need had ye glorified body of meat? He eats not to refresh his body,
and he uses not this corporal meat for necessitye, but to declare unto his
the verity of humayn nature in him: He eats not therefore for him self but
for his Apostles. So let us also do those things which serve for ye edifieng
of our neighbors, although there be no necessitye for us to do them. For we
ought to live and serve not our selves but our neighbors. But Thomas one of
the twelve, which is called Didimus was not with them, when Jesus came, The
other disciples therefore said unto hi^, we have seen the Lord, but he said,
except I se in his hands the printe of the nails, and put my finger into the
printe of the nails, and thruste (...) And after eyghte days again his
Disciples were within, and Thomas with them, then came Jesus when the doors were
shut, and stood in the midst and said, peace be unto you. After that he
said unto Thomas, bring thy finger hither, and see my hands and reach hither
thy hand and thrust it into my side, and be not faithless but believing.
Thomas answered and said unto him, my Lord and my God. Jesus said unto him:
Thomas because thou have seen me^, thou have believed, blessed are they yt have
not seen and yet have believed: And many other things did Jesus in the sight of
his Disciples which are not written in this book. But these things are written
yt ye might believe ye Jesus is the Son of God, and that in believing ye might
have life thorough his name.

IN that John says that Thomas was not with the^, and Luke mencioneth of eleven,
this may be helped by the figure of Synechdoche. For although Thomas was not
present with the^ bodily, yet his mind was with the^, neither was he
separated from the^ as Judas was, so that he was of the number of the eleven,
unto the which Luke had a respect. John the Euangeliste testifies that the
doors were shut and that Jesus entered in when the doors were shut: Neither for all
this does this absurdity and impossibility follow, which some do gather by
this place, namely that the body of Christ did penetrate the substance of the
wood, or was together with the wood in one and the self place, For the
glorified body can by no other reason enter. The Son enters through the
glass, and a voice thorough a door, and yet it follows not that two bodies
are both in one place. This is not done rashely and without Gods providence,
namely that Thomas who was very hard of belief was not with the reast of the
Apostles when he appeared, and that he obstinately gainesayth his fellows
which told him they had seen the Lord. For Christ used yt incredulity of
Thomas to support our faith withal, that ye verity of his resurrection might
the more manifestly be known. And the weak faith of Thomas bears stronger
witness of his resurrection, then does the easy and quick belief of
Magdalene. So the Lord knows how to use our naughtiness to his glory and
our salvation. Faith is the gift of God and no man can believe, except it be
given him of god. Here may therefore be gathered three sorts of men out of this
present history: Judas, Peter and Thomas. Judas is a treacherer and a
runnegate, which betrayeth an innocente. Peter denies and swears. Thomas
doubts and obstinately gaynesayeth. Here we learn first that there is a
great difference and certain degrees in sins. No man surely lives without
fault, and all we are sinners, but one sins more heynously then an other. We
must take heed therefore, that we may dye daily unto sins, and that we may
be regenerated into new men, and if it so be that we can not beware of all
sins, yet let us take heed, from the worst sins. If we be sorye and weep
with Peter, God will look back upon us and be merciful unto us. If we doubt
and waver in faith, Let us not forsake the church: Let us not cut a sunder the
unity, neither let us separate our selves from our brethren, and the Lord will
appear unto us, as he did unto Thomas, and will strengthen our weakness. But
let us beware of covetousness, misbeliefe and treason, that we most vilely
perish not with Judas, The weakness and doubting of Peter and Thomas
profited very much for this cause, that we might learn to acknowledge our
weakness and the power of God. 1. Cor. 1.
Consider brethren (says Paul) your vocation, that there be not many wise as
concerning the flesh called, nor many mighty or borne of a noble kindred, but
god has chosen the folishe things to the world, to put to shame the wise, etc.
That no flesh should boast before him, and that it might not seem to be our
power but Gods power, that we (...) boaste that men were changed (...)
learning, or by our own w sdome (...) yt we might acknowledge the (...)
benefit of God and the opera^^^ of (...) Moreover from hence may arguments be
taken for the confyrmation of our Christian faith. If any man would doubt of
the Christian faith or would affirm it to be but a deceit and a collusion,
as did Porphyrius and Symmachus most wicked blasphemers of Christian Religion.
For if the doctrine of Christ had been but a guyle, then Judas would never have
repented him of his betraying, he would nothing have been ashamed to have
returned to the reaste of the Apostles, he had nothing neded to have restored
the money and to say, I have sinned against Innocente blood. For thieues and
such as be wicked although they fall out sometimes among them selves, yet are
they sone agreed again, and they renew their friendship. But Judas dares not
return again to the Apostles, but being in despair ha^geth him self, And
what need had Peter to have wept so bitterly, neither would he also have
returned to the Apostles if his conscience had accused him of any guile? But
he was desirous of the truth and a lover of righteousness: and Thomas followed
that which is just, good and right, how so ever he wauered. In that Peter
therefore is vexed, in that Thomas seeks and earnestlye requires greater
tokens, it is a most strong argument that the doctrine and religion of Christ
is true and cleaves to the truth and not to coullours or guile. The truth
which they see and find in Christ, draws them to labor so diligently, to
come into his favor again. The nature and condition of a glorified body
suffers not to be touched or to be felt, but the Savior and lover of souls
succoureth such as are weak in faith. He offreth him self therefore to be
handled and felt of them, to confyrme in them the faith of his resurrection.
Thomas is not utterly unfaithful, but only doubts of the resurrection.
Christ therefore shows unto them the printes and skarres of his wounds, that
they might see it was the same body which was crucified on the cross, and to
declare unto the^ that he was truly rise^ from ye dead to a new life, and that
with the same body. As though he would say, behold and know that even I, I
say, which suffered and was crucified for you, am truly risen again from yt
dead, that ye might believe also that your bodies shall arise again. This does
Paul urge when he says. If thou shall confess the Lord Jesus with thy mouth
and shall believe in thy heart, Romans x.
that God raised hi^ up from the dead, the^ shall thou be saved. And again if
the spirit which has raised up Jesus from the dead, do dwell in you, F
then he which has raised Christ from the dead will quicke^ also your mortal
bodies thorough his spirit inhabiting in you. Let us learn also of our head,
to receive, norish, and patiently to bear with the weak ones in faith. My
lord and my god. This is the confession of a perfect and true faith. As though
he would say, Now I know that you art god in deed, when as you have risen again
from the dead, you at the last ought to be my God, forgive me my
incredulity, etc. Blessed are they which have not seen and yet believe, namely
yt do not see me corporally present. As though he would say: I will not always
offer my self to be handled of every body, I will take away this carnal
presence, I must be handled and touched by faith. Blessed therefore are they
which although they see not my body to have rise^ again, as you do, and
which do not handle it but yet believe in the mean time that I am verily
rise^. For Christ speaks of the present occasion* and continues his argument
of his resurrection, otherwise what so ever a man saw not and believed should be
faith. This I speak because of those which wreste the words of Christ to the
sacrament of the holy supper, and will prove by these words yt their faith is
better which believe that the body of Christ is in the bread, the^ theirs is
which say that the bread is but a sign of the body. They mark not that
Christ speaks not here of the holy supper, but to fortify the faith of the
resurrettion. He that believes that Christ was crucified and that he also arose
again, this man is blessed, although he see it not with his corporal eyes as
Thomas did. Otherwise there should be two ways to salvation. One to believe
that Christ suffered for us and rose again, and an other to believe that the
body of Christ is in the bread But there is none which understands not how
great an absurdity this is and not agreeable to faith. Here is also to be noted
that in these words, because you have seen me thou also beleuest, this word
believe is here taken not proprely but improprely. Heb. 11.
For that which a man sees, the same he believes not. For Paul says that
faith is the substance and certeinty of an invisible thing. Faith therefore is
here taken for experience, and to believe, For to try. And many other signs did
Jesus, etc. As though John would say, I have diligently set forth and written
the acts of Christ, although not al: for who ca^ do that? Nevertheless those
things which are written are sufficient for our salvation, namely such
things as pertain to the Godhed and human nature of Christ, to his doctrine
and miracles, and finally what so ever pertayneth to the true faith, whereby we
are saved, and also to obtain everlasting life. He which believes not these
things which are left, neither would he believe other things if they should be
written. These things therefore suffice the beleuers neither seek they for any
more things. For the which cause such things as the Euangeliste testifies
to be written for our salvation must be red and marked of us with great
reverence and earnest study: Let us day and night be conuersaunt in these
things and meditating of the^, that our faith may be supported, that our hope
may be established, charity may be kindled, patience exercised obedience,
modesty, and all other good spiritual gifts advanced. But they be fools
yea and ungodly, which go about to prove by these words, that it is lawful
for these Popes to devise and imagen certain other things of their own
head, to fill up the place of such things as are here left out. For John
the Euaungeliste has in brief comprehended the whole some of Christian
Religion, namelye that Christ is the true Son of GOD which for our salvation
came down from heaven, and was dead and rose again, and prepared for us
eternal life: what can they add to these things? Afterward did Jesus show
him self again at the sea of Tiberias, and on this wise showed he him felfe.
There were together Simo^ Peter, and Thomas which is called Didimus and
Nathanaell of Cana in Galile, and the sons of Zebedei and two others of his
Disciples. Simon Peter said unto them, I go on fishyng: They said unto him, we
will also go with thee. They went forth and entered immediately into a ship, and
that night they caught nothing. But when the morning was now come, Jesus
stood on the shore, nevertheless the Disciples knew not that it was Jesus.
Jesus said unto them, Children have ye any meat? They answered him, no. And
he said unto them, cast out the net on the right side of the ship and ye shall
find. They cast out therefore, and anon they were not able to draw it for the
multitude of fishes. Then said that Disciple who^ Jesus loved unto Peter, It is
the Lord? When Simon Peter heard yt it was the lord, he girded his coat unto
him, for he was naked, and spra^g into ye sea. The other disciples came by
ship, for they were not far from la^d, but as it were two hundred cubits, and
they drew the net with fishes. As Soon then as they were come to land, they saw
hot coals and fyshe laid thereon, and bread: Jesus said unto them, bring of
the fishes which ye have now caughte. Simon Peter went up and drew the net to
land full of great fyshes an hundred fiftye and three: And for all there were
so many, yet brake not the net. Jesus said unto them, come and dine. And none
of the disciples durst ask him to say, who art thou? For they knew that it was
the lord. Jesus the^ came and took the bread and gave them, and fyshe
likewise. This is now the third time that Jesus showed him self to his
dysciples, after that he was risen again from the dead.

THe nyer the Lord draws to his ascension, the more he prepares the minds
of his disciples to the office which they should have to do, establishing
first the thee certeinty of his resurrection: he had called the^ unto him
before from fishing, that they might also catch men by the preaching of the
word: He puts the^ again in remembrance of things done before, and
stirs them up by a new miracle, to remember to what an office they were
appointed, and what fruit they should bring thereby, and that not by their
own power, but by the power of God: For they had taken nothing before Christ
appeared unto them. All our labor is in vain, where as the operation of the
holy Ghost and power of Gods word is not annexed: And what soever we shall
take, what fruicte so ever shall come of our preaachinge, that all whole ought
to be ascribed to the benefit of the Lord: Let us acknowledge that the Lord
was with us and gave the succes. Let us bring sish, that is men being caught by
the net of the Gospel, out of the tempesteous sea, and that not to our selves
but unto the Lord. In the mean time is shadowed the multitude of the gentiles
which should be drawn unto Christ by the Apostles: And this is a very trim
similitude of the net to the church, as Christ teaches in the xiii. of Matthew.
Then when they had dynied, Jesus said unto Simon Peter, Simon loueste thou me
more then these? He said unto him, yea Lord, thou know that I love thee,
he said unto him, feed my lambs: And he said unto him again, Simon Ioanna,
Love thou me? He said unto him: Yea Lord thou know that I love thee: He
said unto him: Feed my sheep: And he said unto him the third time. Simon
Ioanna, love thou me? Peter was sorry because he said unto him the third time,
love thou me. And he said unto hi^. Thou know all things, thou know
that I love thee: Jesus said unto him, feed my sheep.

HEre is opened in Peter the bosom of gods mercy to sinners, who when he had
fallen heynousely, is for all that fullye restored again by the Lord, so far is
Christ from reiectyng of him, that he co^mitteh him to feed his lambs Let no
man therefore despair but get him to Christ the pledge of grace: A treble
confession is opposed to a treble denial. And therwithal is prescribed in a
figure a certain order for the pastors of the Church of Christ, which they
must follow, namely for the love of Christ to feed his sheep. Peter is
consecrated of new by the grace of Christ to ye office of an Apostle, from ye
which he worthily fell in denying through his own folly, that grace might
exceade where sin had abounded. Christ requires charity of his ministers,
Romans 5. 2. Tim. 1.
which charity is thend and mark of al laws and precepts. Out of the love of
God springs the love to our neighbor. That heart which will preach Christ
unto others ought to burn in love. For if the fire of charity do not burn
within, all other things which he shall speak and do will be but cold and
sle^der. They ought to have a certain zeal to advance the glory of God, and
the health of their neighbors, which when as the most part of the ministers
want, it is no meruel though they profit so little. For when charity waxes
cold, then must needs a heap of all wickedness follow. Hereof comes so great
idleness, negligence and sluggishnes, this is the cause why the laws of
maiestrates are so little esteemed, this is the cause also that so many wicked
deeds spread abroad, Osey. 4. Esaias 58.
and blood touches blood, because (as the prophet says) they be hipocrites,
I will not say wolves, which do possess the rome of pastors, and when as
they ought to thunder with a most loud voice against the vices of princes,
maiestrats, and of the people, they are dombe dogs, Esaias. 56.
seking their own and not those things which belong to Jesus Christ. And
certain princes adioyn unto the^ selves such teachers, namely those princes
whose ears itch, turning them away from the truth and harkening unto fables
they adioyne unto them such doctors namely as will flatter their affections,
2. Tim. 4.
and they suffer them gentlye and learnedly to talk and reason of the gospel,
so long as they touch not the sore and boil whereof they are sick. They winck
therefore at certain most vile things which are committed of those princes
neither dare they rebuke the^ according to their Apostolical authority and
christian liberty. How wany is there now of days of those which preach the
gospel in princes courts, either to those which have the chief government of
things, Esaias. 1.
that will exalte their voice like a tro^pet, and say with the prophet: The
princes ar fellows of thieues, traitors, unfaithful contemners of the glory of
god, of true religion and of Common justice? They game, they go a whorynge,
they set all their mind to fill the belie, and the mean time all Justice
decays. The turk possesses the lands of Christian religion, whilst they be
at varia^ce one with an other like a frogge and a mouse, and whilst they
cocker their filthy appetites: Rioting and pride with all kind of
concupiscence, do not only reygn in city and court, but also there be very few
which set them selves a brazen wall against them and mend again the breach of
the hedge: Jeremy. 1 Ezechiel 22
Let these men remember what love they bear to Christ and also consider how
great a treasor is committed to their keaping, namely a flock gotten by the
blood of Christ. Math. 24.
Let them diligently weigh with what punishment the Lord will punysh the
unfaith full ministers when he retourneth to take account: he will cut him in
twain (says Christ) and put his part with hipocrites Verily verily I say
unto the: when thou wast young, thou girdest thy self and did walk whither
thou would, but when thou art old, thou shall stretche forth thy hands,
and an other shall gird the and lead thee whither thou would not. And this he
spoke signifing by what death he should glorifye God, and when he had spoken
this, he said unto hi^, follow me: Peter turned about, and saw that disciple,
who^ Jesus loved, following, who also leaned on his breast at supper, and had
said: lord which is he yt betrayeth thee? when Peter therefore saw him, he said
to Jesus, lord what shall this man do? Jesus said unto him: If I will have him
tarry til I come, what is that to thee? Follow thou me. Then went this saying
abroad among the brethern that yt disciple should not die, yet Jesus said not to
hi^, he shall not die, but if I will yt he tarry til I come, what is yt to thee?
The disciple is he which bears witness to these things, and wrote these
things, and we know yt his witness is true. There ar also many other things which
Jesus did the which if they should be written every one I suppose the world
could not conteyne the books that should be written.

THat which is spoken by christ to Peter, let us think the same to be spoken
unto us al, namely yt we should follow christ unseperably, and cleave unto him
keepinge our selves safe from strange things. Let every man be vigilant in his
own office, and not curiouslye search and enquire out other men's sayings and
doyngs. And let not affection be of more force with us, the^ the government of
god. Let Gods will be the rule of our life, whereof to ask a reason of God is
most wicked. And although these things are spoken unto all men, yet chieflye
they pertayn to the ministers the word, that they should earnestly follow Christ
without any tarying setting al other things apart, being ready for his glory not
only to lose their goods but also their life. The servant is not greater the^
his lord, and there can be no greater glory then to suffer death for Christ's
sake. And the eleue^ disciples departed to Galiley to a mountain, where Jesus
had appointed the^. And when they saw him, they worshipped him, but some of
them doubted, whose unbelief after he had rebuked he said. These are the
words which I spoke unto you, while I was yet with you that al things must
needs be fulfilled, which were written of me in the law of Moses, and in the
prophets, and in the psalms. Then opened he their mind, yt they might
understand the scriptures, and he said unto them: Thus is it written and thus
it behooved Christ to suffer and to rise again from the ded the iii. day and
that repentance and remission of sins should be preached, in his name among
al nations, begi^ning first at Jerusalem. And ye are witnesses of these
things: and behold I send the promise of my father upon you: But tarry ye in
the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endewed with power from above.

THe shepherd being strike^, the sheep were scattered as says ye prophet but
afttr yt I am risen again (says Christ) I will go before you into Galile:
Marh. 26. zach. 13.
and the angel rehersynge these words says: Go tell the disciples yt the Lord
is risen again and will go before you into Galile. This to be now
accomplished, the Evangelist Matthew testifies we have declared before what it
is to preach repentance and forgeuenes of sins through the name of Christ:
Math. 26.
And the beginning was made at Jerusalem first among the Jews, for whose
sake Jesus came: Esaias. 2. ^om. 11.
yet in the mean time Let us rejoice that we also are called unto the same lot,
and let us be tha^ful, lest we be cut of again, It behooved that Christ should
suffer yt he might be made a sacrifyce to pacify god for our sins, by the which
sacrifice gods justice might be satisfied. It behooved him to arise again from
the dead to make us being raised from the death of sins, righteous unto God
the father and partakers of the life to come. And Jesus came and spoke unto his
Disciples, saying, Al power is given to me in heaven and in earth. As my father
sent me, so send I you also: and when he had spoken these things, he breathed
upon them, and said vn-them: Receive the holy ghost, whose sins so ever ye
shall forgive, they are forgiven them, and whose so ever sins ye shall
retain, they are retained. Go ye therefore, and teach al nations, baptising
them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost,
teaching them to observe all things what so ever I have commanded you. And
behold I am with you always even to the end of the world. Go ye into all the
world, and Preach the Gospel to all creatures: He that believes and is
baptized shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be dampened. Moreover
these are the signs yt shall follow them which shall believe, In my name they
shall cast out devils, they shall speak with new tongues, they shall drive
away serpents, and if they drink any deadly drink, it shall not hurt them.
They shall lay their hands on the sick, and they shall recover.

AFter Christ had manifestly proved to his Disciples his Resurrection, he
shows the^ what great glory he shall be exalted unto, yt they also might
abide under the cross, knowing that eternal glory is prepared for the^ with
Christ. He says that all power is given him as well of heaven as of earth, to
make us to understand how great a lord we have, in whose hands all things are
put. And no man has in his hands the dominion over all things, but he must
needs be god also. For god gives not his glory to an other, Esaias. 42.
as witnesses Esaias. Let us not therefore be affeard, if vile men threate^ us,
and conspyre against us, But let us fly unto the Lord, under whose tuition we
shall be safe. Luke xix. Psalm. ii.
And although there be some which do say, we will not have him to reign over us
and let us cast away their bonds from our necks, neither will yet
acknowledge such and so great a Savior and king, but go about to cut of his
kingdom, such rebels nevertheless shall be subdued under his government will
they or nil they, Phalme. ex. Psalm. 2.
and be made his fotestole. Whom the King of Kings and Lord of Lords shall
bruise with an iron rod, and shall break them in pieces like a potters vessel,
and shall reign over the^ for ever. Hitherto (says he) have I served you with
most humility, being put to reproaches and al kind of evils, now is the time
present wherein the father will glorify me with the same glory which I have had
always without beginning, that every knee might bow unto me, and the whole
world might acknowledge me to be their Savior, by whom the way to god is made
open. John. xvii. Philip. ii.
I have elected you witnesses of this thing, and I send you into the whole
world, to declare this joy to al men, namely that I descended from heaven, and
have overcome death, and opened the way to heaven for miserable mortal me^,
Math. x.
taking away death and hell. Preach not these things only to the Jews, as I
charged you first, which was to keep the fidelity of my promyses, but go now
to all nations, and call them to be companions of my glory when ye shall preach
these things through out the world, the ungodly will set upon you by diverse
snares and wiles: Ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake, but be ye of a
good courage, John. xvi.
I have overcome the world, and in me also shall ye overcome all your enemies,
for all power is given to me both in heaven and earth. I will always be present
with you and defend you against al invasions Although I shall now withdraw
from you my corporal presence which shall be profitable for you. I will yet be
with you to the end of the world. with my power, with my spirit and with my
grace. This promise is not made only to the disciples, but to al beleuers, for
the apostles lived not to the end of the world. This is ye greatest comfort yt
ca^ be in adversity, diligently to consider the power and kingdom of Christ.
Math. 16
They which lean unto this rock the gates of hell shall not prevail any
thing against them. As my father sent me. We must understand yt these things
are spoken by co^pariso^ and not by equality. As though he would say, My
Father sent me to preach and to die for the truth, do ye so likewise. But this
is the difference between Christ's death, and his disciples death and ours, In
that Christ's death is healthful to ye whole world, and pacifieth gods wrath
for the sins of the whole world, and so is not his disciples death nor ours.
Christ was sent of the father to be ye salvation and life of the whole world,
so were not the apostles sent, but to preach this salvation and life to ye
world. He gives the^ the holy ghost, that we might understand yt he which will
preach the gospel with a stout courage has need of the holy ghost. For man ca^
do nothing of his own power onles he be endued and helped by the power from
above. And he sends his ministers, not to gape for riches, to make
marchaundise, to seek for gain, to hunte for glory, to swel in pride, and to
burn in filthy lusts but to preach salvation unto me^, The father sent not
his son after that sort, neither studied Christ for such matters. He sent him
to preach the truth, Phillip. ii.
to teach the knowledge and true worshipping of God, and that he taking upon
him yt for me of a servant, might serve al me^, and might be obedient to the
father eue^ to the death of the cross, to take upon him self the hatred and
reproaches of al me^, and in the midst of these to do good to al me^, and to
save al me^. Let the^ then which are chosen to the office of preaching follow
Christ in these things, let not the^ do their own will, John. 6.
but his will yt sent the^, Let the^ desire of the father the holy ghost to
accomplish these things, Luke. 11.
who works and performs these things in the^: Whose sins ye shall forgive.
That which might be spoken impersonallye, he attributes to the person, which
is done after the Hebrew manner, who speak not seldom that impersonally
which longs to the person: and again they attribute that to the person
which is impersonal. But whereas he says whose sins ye shall forgive, it is a
periphrasis and definition of the gospel, for what is the gospel? This is ye
gospel that god the father sent his son to make satisfaction for the sins of
me^, and to forgive the^ the same: Why the^ he that preaches remission of sins
preaches the gospel. As though Christ would say, To who^ so ever ye shall
preach the gospel, and if they receive it, the^ shall their sins be forgiven
the^. For he expresses the same sentence more plainly in the last of Mark,
sayi^g: Preach the gospel to all creatures, he that believes shall be saved,
he that believes not shall be condemned. He that believes namely the gospel
preached by you. Remission therefore of sins is given to the apostles because
they preach that whereby sin is forgiven, for they preach the gospel, or the
same Christ, or grace of God by Christ, whereby sins are forgiven, This is
therefore the meaning, whose sins ye shall forgive, that is to who^ ye shall
preach the remission of sins, and they shall believe the gospel preached by
you, unto the^ are their sins forgeuen. Let us diligently therefore note this,
that that is attributed to the Apostles, which belongs only to God. For it
comes by the holy ghost, and not by ye preaching or voice of man yt the
conscience of man should be assured yt god is his father and that his sins are
forgeuen and the anger of God pacified. But because the apostle is the
instrument by the which god shows forth salvation unto men, and a certain
part (as I may term it) whereby God will have his grace preached. Christ
therefore vouchsafes thus to speak, and he attributes yt to us which
belongs only to him self because of the conjunction and communicating which
the members have with the godhead. 2. Cor. 11. 2. Cor. 3,
God works al in all, he is nothing which waters, he is nothing which
pla^teth, but god which gives the increase: god does al things, he moves the
mouth and the tongue of yt preacher, he draws and illustrateth the heart of the
hearer. It is al one saying therefore to say, whose sins ye shall forgive, are
forgiven the^, etc, and to say he which believes shall be saved, But Marks
words are more plain. For to bind and to loose are darcker then to believe
and not to believe the preachers. They are darker to us I mean, and not to ye
apostles of Christ. To bind
To bind therefore is to preach ye gospel, which gospel he yt believes not, To
lose
is bound. Contrarily to lose, is to preach the gospel, which he yt believes
is loosed from his sins, John repeated the words of Matthew in the.xvi. Chapi.
Baptize the^ in the name. etc. It seems to me that to baptize is taken in all
the new testament al most for to be admitted and accepted that no man should
obstinately urge the letter as do the Anabaptists. To baptize
Baptize the^, that is, admit the^ to Christ, and grafte the^ in the name of
the father and of the holy ghost, that is, lead the^ by water and doctrine into
the knowledge, power, and virtue of the father, the son and the holy ghost.
But we have entreated of this against the Anabaptists in an other place, and
we will speak more amply of it afterward: He that believes Salvation and
eternal life consists in election, for his hand is not shut or shortened,
that he will save none amongst the Gentiles. For God can pour faith into the
hearts of the Gentiles, Romans ii.
which they prove and show forth by works, as I judge and that not rashelye of
Socrates, Seneca, and many others. Some man will say: why they believed not. I
answer if they believe not they are not saved. The words therefore of Christ
ought to be understood thus, that they be spoken unto such as the spopell is
preached unto, who are dampened if they believe not the gospel preached unto
the^. John. xv.
For Christ says, If I had not come and spoken unto them, they should not have
sinned. This place therefore, he that believes not shall be condemned,
appertains nothing unto those which never had the Gospel preached unto them.
For although the outward gospel of Christ be not preached unto them, yet can
god save them by Christ, For as many as are saved, are saved by Christ, that is
by the mercy of God which he offered to the world in Christ. For there is none
so just or so innocent which can stand before ye justice of god. We must al
fly therefore to ye mercy of god by Christ. And signs shall follow ye
beleuers. This is a promise which must be understand by Synechdoche. For ye
Apostles wrought many signs* when need required. And it does not debilitate ye
promis of christ, Acres. v.
because there are no signs wrought now a days by the preachers of ye word.
For it was necessary the^ ye signs should be wrought, to confirm the new and
unaccustomed business preached by ye apostles whereby the whole world should be
made new. And to stir up their minds to receive the doctrine of the
Apostles. But now is the doctrine of Christ and the Apostles sealed with diverse
signs, the which signs he that believes not, neither will he believe if signs
should be presently done. We must mark the order. First the ministers of the
word are chose^ out by Christ. Then they are instructed with his word and
doctrine. Thirdly they are co^fyrmed by the spirit. Fourthly they are sent to
preach the Gospel. They which thrust the^ selves in by art or violence, they
which are not sent, which preach not, or else preach not the Gospel, which
seek for their own things and not the things which be of Jesus Christ, such I
say are not the ministers of Christ, but thieues, robbers and wolves.
Hitherto we have entreated of the glorious Resurrection of our Lord, and now
will we speak of his Ascension into heaven.
Jesus led his Disciples forth to Bethania, and gathered the^ together in the
same place, and spoke unto them of the Kingdom of God, and commanded them,
that they should not depart from Jerusalem but to wait for the promise of the
Father, whereof (said he) ye have heard of me, how John baptized with water,
but ye shall be baptized with the holy ghost within these few days: when they
therefore were come together, they asked of him saying: Lord will thou at this
time restore again the kingdom of Israel? And he said unto the^, It is not
for you to know the times and seasons, which the father has put in his own
power but ye shall receive power, after the holy ghost is come upon you, and ye
shall be witnesses unto me, not only in Jerusalem, but olso in all Iewry and
Samaria, and even to the ends of the earth. Then the Lord Jesus after that
he had spoken these things with them, he lifted up his hands, and blessed
them. And it came to pass, when he had blessed them, he departed from the^,
and while they beheld he was taken up on hihg, and was carried up in to heaven,
and a cloud took him up from their eyes, and sets at the right hand of god:
and while they looked steadfastly up toward heaven, as he went behold two men
stood by them clothed in white garments which also said, ye men of Galiley, why
stand ye gasyng up into heaven? This same Jesus which is taken up from you into
heaven shall so come, even as ye have seen him go into heaven. And they
worshipped him and returned to Jerusalem with great joy, from the mount which
is called Oliuete, which is from Jerusalem a Sabaothes days journey. And when
they were come in, they went up into a parler, where abode Peter and James,
John and Andrewe, Phillip and Thomas, Barthelmew and Matthew, James the son of
Alpheus, and Simon zelotes, and Judas the son of James. These all continued
with one mind in prayer and supplication with ye women, and Mary the mother of
Jesus and with his brethren.

MArk does compendiously and briefly touch all things describing together
things which were not done together. For he says, as the eleven disciples
sat at meat etc. It is most likely that Christ daily appeared unto his Apostles
all the whole forty days after his resurrection and commanded and prescribed
them an order whereby they shoud prech the Gospel through out the whole world.
This does he put the^ in memory of at his departure and more strongly beat it
into them. For to this end were they chosen. There is no cause therefore why we
should urge the letter, and draw this history of Mark only to the asce^tio^,
but to the whole time that was between the resurrection and ascentio^ of Christ.
But now let us come nerer to the hystory, which Luke has in the acts: Luke
deuideth his Gospel into two parts.

In the first he describes what Christ did in his life time. In the latter he
seteth forth what things were done after his ascension: He spoke unto the^ of
the kingdom of god. The kingdom of God is in a manner called the gospel
whereof he spoke unto them forty days continuallye, The kingdom of god
and commended unto them the preachinge thereof: Christ therefore speaks unto
them of the kingdom of God, of the gospel, of his grace, and of the mercy of
god, and that out of the Scriptures namely of the law and of the prophets, as
Luke said before he opened their understanding in the scripturs: But with what
word, or after what sort he spoke unto them, it is not here written but that
may be gathered by their doctrine. The Apostles were chosen out by Christ to
spread abroad the kingdom of God, throughout the world, and to dilate and
exte^d the territories of the heavenly kingdom, but they being yet after a sort
carnal, dream of a certain carnal kingdom and enquire thereof acording to the
judgment of the flesh: which carnal opinion of the restoring again of Israel
sticks also yet at this day in the Jews and in some christians. Christ in
deed seems somewhat to acknowledge the restoryng of Israel, when he says. It
is not for you to know the times and seasons etc. Which Paul also declares
in the xi. to the Romans. But together therewith drawing the^ from their
carnal sense he speaks somewhat deeper of the kingdom of god saying, but ye
shall receive the holy Ghost: As though he would say, yt is your kingdom to
receive ye sprite of god by the which ye shall be taght and led into the true
knowledge of God, so that ye may also testifye of the same before others: And
ye shall preach of me also even in that place, where ye forsook me, fled
away and denied me, so great shall the power of the heauenuenly sprite be.
They had been so long time co^uersa^t with Christ they had hard so many and so
great things out of his moth, they had seen so many miracles, and yet they
reason of a certain carnal kingdom. They hoped that some body should be sent
which should deliver the^ out of the power of the Romans. The Lord does still
revoke them back to the sprite. They were very weak still as long as Christ
was present corporally with them, yea and then also when he being glorified was
present with them after his resurrection. There came therefore no strengh to
the^ by the flesh of Christ being corporally present, as he himself
testifies. It was expedient for them, that he went otherwise the spirit
should not come. He takes therefore from his disciples what soever is
corporal and outward even in him self* to affixe them wholye to the spirit
of God. They had neade of a certain other power from above, which Christ had
promised them. Now therefore he repeteth ye promise, John. 14.
and co^ma^deth the^ not to depart from Jerusalem, till the spirit were given
them. John (says he) baptized you with water, water is the sign of doctrine
and instruction. As though Christ would say, John taught and enstructed you
after a sort, namely he brought you to me by the outward word and sign, but
that sprite of God which I have promised you, whom I will send, which shall
come, and whom ye ought to look for, he also shall baptize you within, that is,
he shall teach you and enstructe you more plainly and perfectly: Ye are
hitherto baptized with the baptism of Ihon (for the baptism of John and
Christ are all one, as touching the outward water and outward preachinge
for even as the preaching of the gospel which was done by thapostles, is caled
forgeuenes of sins which longs only to Christ, so also is the baptism of
John called Christ's baptism that is, John did the same by the commandment
and aucthority of Christ) but or ever it be long ye shall be baptized with an
other baptism, namely with the holy Ghost: The baptism therefore of the holy
Ghost whereby faith comes follows the baptism of water which I speak to
refel the error of the Anabaptists: and in that it is called the baptism of
Iho^, it is done, because he dipped me^ in water and taught them by the
commandment of christ, which were both outward signs: And eue^ Iho^ him self
does testify yt of him self saying that he only dippid men in water, but there
should come one after him which should baptize with the spirit: The meaning
therefore of Christ's words is, Math ^.
All the things which hitherto were done outwardlye, as the water of John, my
doctrine, yea even that breathing which when I rose again I breathed upon you,
are to weak to sanctify, purge and stre^gthen you within, they were only signs
of the holy ghost, which ye shall receive most perfectly, there be not a few,
which even now in these days seek and follow only the flesh in Christ and
which think that they are sanctified and purged by certain outward
ceremonies and signs: But these are but outward signs and so they continue,
neither can they move any thing in the heart of man, except the powere and
operation of the Spirit of God be joined thereunto: We must therefore most
earnestlye desire that spirit at Gods hands which may draw us illustrate,
confirm and make us perfect. This sprite because the Philosophers wanted,
therefore were their most learned wrytinges nothing else but subtle
disputations, and also cauilations, and not the true Philosophye, for they had
not within the^ the living sprite of God: Dead and cold therefore are their
writings and not inspired and illuminated by the holy Ghost: Let us then
pass over all those outward signs and fix our eyes upon the operation of the
spirit, and desire the same continually with most feruente prayers. The godly
which are endewed with the holy Ghost dare yea and enterprise great things,
the spirit does kindle and draw their hearts upward, and encourages them to
all things be they never so perilous, and to heroical virtues which proceed
from God, and are directed to God as to be humble, to deny him self, to be
pleased with him self in nothing, to suffer many things, to be meake, merciful
and liberal: But flesh seaketh his own, it laboreth for riches and glory, and
enterpriseth great and perilous things, but yet such things as hurt his
neyghbor. He lifted up his hands after the manner of one that prays, and not
of one that blesses: For this word here, he blessed the^ in greake (...), I
think is put here as a sign of farewell, as they use to wish good luck which
depart. They worshipped him namely because he was god which could ascend by his
own power: they reioysed in the mean time, because they were the legates of
such and so great a Lord. And in that it is written that they were always in
the temple, it must be under stand that they werin the temple in due time. For
sometimes they assembled together in a certain house (as appears by the acts)
for fear of the Jews. So is it said of Anna the widow that she was day and
night in the temple. This is according to the hebrew manner of speakinge that
is, she was often in the temple. In like manner the Apostles came very often
into the temple, although sometimes they were gathered to gether in some
certain house to avoid the snares of the Jews. Look in Plinis Epistles to
Traian, de more Christianorum.
They did even as many christians in these days ar compelled to do, in those
places, where it is not lawefull neither to hear nor yet to read the gospel
openly: they assemble together in some house, they read they pray, they hear
the word of God and give thancks etc. Then they come into the common assembly
with other men to avoid suspicion, bearing somewhat with ceremonies which are
not utterly ungodly. But this they do but for a time. So the apostles abhorred
not from the temple of the Jews wherein were yet the sacrifices of beasts,
which notwythstandynge were straight ways to be abolished.

They did therefore preach Christ either in the temple or else in the porch
though the superstitions of ye Pharisees remained still there. And here do
those hipocrites chifly err which seek a pretense and excuse to themselves by
this fact of the Apostles and so stick still to papistry, mingling themselves
with their wicked services, for fear of their goods, or else of their
estimation, either else of their life. They go not straight but halte on both
sides. These me^ must remember that the nature of the ceremonies which were
prescribed unto the Jews in the law of God was far differring from the
nature of the ceremonies which the popes have feigned by the persuasion and
suggestion of Satan, so that by no means these are to be conferred to the^.
And besides that they come not to the papistical services of God with that same
mind, that the apostles did to the Jewish services. For the Apostles in the
mean time preached Christ, and labored to win the Jews from their
iewishnes to Christ, but our men are affeard of them selves, and dissemble
Christ, and dare not confess him openly and freely before this wicked nation,
and so they cleave continuallye unto them, not to win them unto Christ, but
to betraye Christ and to peryshe with the ungodly or (as they persuade
themselves) to be in safetye. And again the Apostles committed nothing against
their conscience, but were present only at such ceremonies, as God had
commanded by his own mouth and prescribed for a time. Those I say they used
only for a time without any ungodliness or supersticio^: But co^trarywise these
are present to these ungodly rites against their own co^scie^ces as when they
bow their knee to ye bread of the papisticall mass, which (at the least way
in a show) they worship, they fall down before Idols and brie^^ye they defile
them selves with these vnpure customs and filthye fellowship. Let these men
diligently considre what happened to Peter as long as he was among the
soldiers, he denied Christ more and more, till he wrapped him self out of
their company, and got him to Christ with bitter weping. Awake up therefore O
my brethren, and come out of Babylon, come out I say from among them and touch
not the unclean. Let nothing keep you back. Let nothing cause you to linger.
2. Cor. 6. 1. Cor. 3,
Christ has no fellowship with Belial, the temple of god has nothing to do
with Idols and ye are the temple of God, do not profane that which Christ
consecrated with his blood: Let it not repent you if ye must forsake or loose
any thing for Christ's sake, Math. 19
the Lord will restore unto you an hundred fold, If Jacob the patriarch left
many things behind him to have the fruition of the best things in ye land of
Egypt, Genesis 45.
why should it be grievous unto us to forsake earthly things, seeing we shall be
recompensed in the world to come with such joy as the eye has not seen, thee
are has not heard, neither can the heart of man comprehend it? Esaias. 64
Judas in gaping for gold lost both his body and soul. Wherefore unwrap your
selves out of these bonds, cast away whatsoever holds you back, to
avoid the immynent danger although nakedly. Prou. 1.
Contend unto the Lord with the whole heart, why lest time serves: Contempne
not his voice, lest he mock you to scorn when evil things happen unto you.
There is an other error of the Anabaptists, which count it wicked to preach
the truth in temples which are amongst the papists, yea though the Idols and
papistical supersticions be now abolyshed out of them. But where ca^ Christ be
more commodiously preached, then in those places where the multitude of people
accustom to assemble together. This certaynely did the Apostles, either on the
holy days or else on the Sabbath days when the people were assembled
together, both to be there present them selves, and also to bring the Jews
which claue unto their old supersticio^, to Christ, which might be done most
commodiously in the temple whether the people of the Jews resorted. Neither
did they so stubburnly and disdaynefully separate them selves from the
Pharisees and the rest of the Jews as the Anabaptists now of days
accustom to separate themselves from those which do believe and cleave unto
Christ. That the souls of the Godly are received into Joys, and the souls of
the ungodly are pulled to punyshmentes, not only the holy Scriptures do
testify but also the writers of the Gentilles. And the Philosophers and Poets
do manifestlye agree with the Prophets in these things although they speak
it with other words. Here of come the fields of Elisius, and the sorrowful
lake of Acheron, and that some are counted to be received after their death
into ye number of God, etc. The soul is not of it self, but of God. Wherefore
when it is separated from the body it retourneth unto God, even as all other
things return unto the fountain from whence they came, all things flow
again to their author. These things are so in deed and so are written. And
Christ truly testifies in him self that the soul lives after the death of
the body, and that men return to their author. which thing was never before
that time set before the eyes of men, although as many as were of sound
judgment understood it. Christ proves the life of his soul by his
Resurrection and Ascencion and that glory shall come to the whole man with God.
He therefore teaches not only by word, but also declares in deed what shall
be come of the Godly after this life. He ascended up into heaven, to prepare
the way to glory for us, I we should know, whether we shall go after death,
and what so ever our minds feel and believe, all the same do we see to have gone
before in our head Christ. Christ descended once for our salvation sake, again
he ascended once, that we should not hence forth require the corporal
presence of Christ, but our hearts being lifted upward we should meditate the
heavenly life with Christ our King. Put case there were a king which would
seek for the common profit, would do Justice, and make equal and good
laws, and grant that he were a father of the country, etc. It cannot well
come to pass that every one in his kingdom can see him, for some dwell far
from him, some are blind or lame so that they can not come unto him, there are
but few which have the liberty to be familiarly conuersaunte with him, and
yet in the mean time al of the^ though they dwell never so far of have the
fruition of the common peace and tranquillity, which he has gotten and
defends by his wisdom, even as ^mplye as they which are always present
with him in the court. And if so be that the king die, yet do the citizens
rejoice in the laws and ordinances ordained by him. Even after the same sort
is it with our king Christ, it is not given to al me^ to see him corporally,
which happened to the apostles by a singular prerogative, yet may all the
godly by faith have the fruition of the grace and redemption gotten by him, yea
even those which never saw thym with their corporal eyes: and for this cause
did Christ when he should depart from his Disciples as concerning his had
promise unto them an other comforter and advocate namely the holy ghost,
which should teach them the spiritual and true knowledge of Christ. He
draws our hearts upward where Christ is at the right hand of God, that we
despising all the goods of this world might cleave only to him, and have
rest in him. Let us in the mean time serve our neighbors by charity, and
diligently plant the Kingdom of Christ in the world, namely that he may
reign in the hearts of all men. Let the eyes of our mind be always fixed in
heaven upon him which is our advocate before the father which has sanctified
our flesh in him self, which has joined our nature unto the godhed, and has
so exalted it that there might be an assured hope in us, yt we shall live with him
for ever. He is flesh of our flesh, bone of our bo^es our brother and head, in
who^ is setforth unto us the hope of immortal life. Ephe. 2.
Wherefore for as much as god which is rich in mercy, has of his singular love
whereby he loved us, yea even then when we were dead thoroughe sins has
quickened us together with Christ, and has raised us up to gether again with
him, and made us set together in heavenly places with Christ Jesus and has
sealed us with the holy spirit of promise which is the earneste penye of our
enheritance for the redemption of the possession gotten to the praise of his
glory, Ephe. 1.
let us for all these things give thanks to God, and pray that the god of our
Lord Jesus Christ the father of glory would give us the spirit of wisdom and
revelation by knowledge and illuminate the eyes of our mind, that we may know
what the hope is whereunto he has called us, and how rich the glory of his
inheritance is toward the saints, and how excellent the mightines of his
power is toward us, which believe according to the efficacy of his might and
strength, which he has showed forth in Christ, when he raised him from the
dead, and made him to sit at his right hand in heaven, above all principalitye
and power, strength and dominion and every name that is named not only in this
world but also in the world to come, and has subdued al things under his
feet and has made him the head of the church above al things, which is his
body the perfection of him which fills all in all, to whom be praise and
glory world without end.

AMEN.
Jmprinted at London hy John Day dwellinge over Aldersgate beneath Saint
Martynes.

Cum gratia and priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


