THE NVRSES BOSOM. A SERMON WITHIN THE GREENE-YARD in NORWICH. On the
Guild-day when their Mayor takes his Oath. On Tuesday June 18. 1616. Preached
by the Parson of Southwalsham. Hereunto is added, IVDAHS Penance, the Sermon
preached at Thetford before the Judges in Lent. MAR. 10. 1616.

Non legem vereor nocens, sed fortunam innocens. At London printed by JOHN
BEALE. 1617.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL Sr. THOMAS HYRNE Knight; Mayor of the City of
Norwich: Health on earth; in heaven happiness.
SIR, to give you some Testimony of my good will, I shall hazard to do I know
not what. Infinite are the books in this age: and of the greater number, we may
say with Socrates, I he paper is more worth then the matter. Of Sermons, how
many are extant? For who almost preaches, that printeth not: In so much as the
Press may say unto the Pulpit, in the words of Esau to his brother Jacob;
Plurima habeo, sint tua tibi: Genesis 32.9.
Keep that which thou have, I have enough. Yet happily, it may be the will of
God, in these last and sinful times, that our visions should be written, Hab.
2.2.
and made plain upon Tables. In so great a multitude, mine, I confess, might
have well stood out. But when I considered, it was not so much mine, as yours,
for whom it was preached: nor so much yours as theirs, before whom it was
delivered, I was at length, not unwilling, (if it got forth in the crowde,)
Mal. 3.16.
that it might be a Book of remembrance unto You, and the rest who shall
succeed: wherein you may be admonished how weighty that office is which you
bear; and what affections ought to possess you in the course of your
Government. Let me say therefore in the words of the Prophet: This commandment
is for you, and for those that come after you, Mal. 2.1.
in that place of Magistracy, even this Precept of God to Moses; Carry them in
thy Bosom. I once sent it to the care, now I present it to the eye, that one
way or other it may get to the heart. Unto this, I have added one more, to
bear it company: that these two, as the Twins of Hippocrates, may fare alike
abroad in the world, either to laugh or mourn together. Both these I send and
commend unto you, and you unto the word of his grace, Act. 20.32.
who is able to build you further, and to give you an inheritance amongst them
which are sanctified. Southwalsham, June 1. 1617.

Your Worships wel-willer, W. YOUNGER.

THE TEXTS.
NVMB. 11.12. Carry them in thy Bosom.

GENESIS 38.26. So he lay with her no more.

THE NVRSES BOSOM.
TEXT. NVMB. 11.12. Carry them in thy Bosom.
THESE words are very few, but very weighty: a short precept, yet contains
much matter: like a little Box full of sweet and precious Ointment, which
being opened and powered out, Mat. 26.7. Ioh. 12.3.
as that of Mary's, upon the head of Christ, the savor and perfume thereof
fills the whole house. The Diamond though but a spark, yet it is of great
luster and virtue; the Violet a little Flower, yet it far surpasses the
Lilly in smell; the Be, says the son of Syrach, a small creature, Ecclus.
11.3.
yet is her fruit surpassing exellent in sweetness: So this Text, though but
short, and the words of it gleaned out, as a few choice Ears from the whole
Sheafe; yet is here Epitomized and wrapped up, the whole duty of the
Magistrate unto his people, teaching him all tender affection, in relieuing
their distresses, in redressing their wrongs: I say not to carry them upon his
Wing, as the Eagle does her Young, but in his Bosom, as the Nurse her Infant,
Exodus 19.4.
and in a word, to bend his best endeavors for the purchase of their peace and
welfare.

(...) As Government is GOds ordinance not man's; So we know that himself
first established that Superiority in the Creation: that even amongst the
lights of heaven, as some are lesser and subordinate, so other some of special
eminency and magnitude, as the Sun and the Moon. Luminaria magna, Genesis 1.16.
Great lights: and of these two, the Sun, Luminare maius, a greater light:
and as the greater for light, so the greater for honor, for it was made in
Dominium Diei, for the government of the Day; which, in the execution of that
ordinance which God laid upon it, stands not immovable as the North Pole, or
as a Diamond fixed in a socket of Gold, but is in continual motion and labor,
fetching his course and conpasse about always in business and employment. I
his Prince of the lights of heaven, gives this light unto the Princes and
Magistrates of the earth, who are Luminaria magna, great Lights, that they must
not be as Stars fixed in their several Orbs, but they must be in motion,
always looking about them, standing in the gates, watching upon the Towers,
evermore studying and devising for their peoples welfare.

This we find also in the rest of the Creatures, which the Lord God created,
which as they are the more honorable, so the more operative and working. I may
reduce them all into four Degrees, and begin at the lowest, whence the rest
fetch their beginning. First the four Elements, Fire, Air, Water, Earth:
These have but only a being without Life, Sense or Reason. Yet of these we
know, some are more noble then other, some more pure, some more in operation
and working; as the Fire more then the Air, the Air more then the Water, the
Water more then the Earth. Of the second sort are things which over and beside
their being, have life, as Trees, Plants, Herbs and Flowers; and these are
distinguished into their ranks, as the Cedar in Lebanon far more noble then
the Popler in the Forest, and the Rose plant of Jericho, of better esteem
then the Woodbine of the Plain. Proceed to a third sort, and these besides
being, and life, have also sense and motion, able to move from place to place,
as Beasts, Birds, and Fishes; and these are more or less in regard: for what
is the Mouse to the Elephant, or the Dog to the Lion, or the Fly to the Eagle,
or the Kite to the Ostrich? Lastly, besides all these before mentioned, are
they, who having sense, life, and motion, have also Reason: and in this degree
are, 1. Angels, the Legates and Messengers of Heaven; and amongst these, there
should seem to be degrees of Sovereignty, Jude verse. 7.
else why should Michael be an Archangell, and Gabriel none? yea and some more
employed then others too, Luke 1 26.
else why should Gabriel be Gods Ambassador to the Virgin Mary, more then
Raphael or any other? 2. Men: and these are the wonders of Nature if they wrong
it not; for besides that goodly shape which they bear, there are two singular
privileges they are endued with beyond all earthly creatures, ratio, and
oration, Reason and Speech, And though I will not speak according to the
Philosophers Fancy, Plato.
that some are of baser metal then others, the Prince of a more golden
temperature then the Vassal: Yet we know there is Potestas supereminentior, an
higher power, Romans the 13.1. Romans 13.1.
And as Saul was higher then the people, 1. Sam. 10.23.
from the shoulders upward, Hesiod. in Theog. vt supra.
so Princes and Magistrates are appointed to be above others, and to ouerlooke
them. Ex Jove sunt Reges, said the Heathen Poet; There is no Power but of God,
said the divine Apostle: Vnde spiritus, inde potestas, Tertul. Cedunt Iouis
omnia reguo. Metam lib. 10.
says an ancient Father; he that first gave them life and being, gave unto
them also this prerogative of governing. He it is that establishes Thrones,
Scepters, Orders and Degrees of men, some to govern, others to be governed.

Indeed I grant that Adam in the estate of his innocence, Genesis 1.26.
should have had no Lordship over reasonable creatures of the like Image and
shape with himself: For man's sovereignty and Lordship was over creatures
unreasonable, Beasts, Birds and Fishes: this servitude and slaucrie therefore
whereby a man becomes subject unto man, came first from sin. Canaan was borne
a son, as well as Sem or Iaphet: Yet cursed be Canaan, Genesis 9.25.
a servant of servants shall he be. August.
And this, Culpa meruit non natura, says S. Augustine, it fell to him by
nature, not by transgression. Man after his fall became a Thorn, he could
bear no Grapes; he became a Thistle, he could bear no Figs. Neither the
Adder, or Viper, breeds but after their own kind: that rebellious
corruption that was in Adam, corrupted us all, and made us rebellious. The
Leven of Iniquity that was in him, Ex impiis egreditur impietas. Pro. 1. Sam.
24.14.
sowred the whole lump of mankind: For into how great disorders and
confusions, did not his posterity run? What sword could restrain, or what
authority bridle their rage? Therefore God in singular wisdom, used a means
to repress their violences; else reasonable men had been far worse then
unreasonable beasts, for never were the natures of other creatures more cruel,
fell, savage one to another, then the nature of man unto man: had not God put
an hook into his nostrils, and a bridle into his lips, who though he bare
himself up with insolency and eagerness of spirit, yet he might be curbed
and bridled by them of his own kind, that whereas he had shaken off the yoke
of obedience unto God, was therefore enforced obedience unto man, and of him to
stand in awe. And thus through sin came one man to have power over another,
that some might know how to rule, and others to obey.

Hence comes it to pass, that in regard of the stubbornness and insolency of
man's nature the disorder and unruliness of his affections, so many wiles,
crafts, subtilties and escapes, through corruption ingendered and festered in
him, that nothing is of greater difficulty then to govern and rule man. It
requires much art, skill, courage, and an high measure of wisdom, to keep
him in awe; Qui inter omnes animantes, Gregor. Nazian.
maxim est and moribus varius and voluntate diuersus, says a Father, who
amongst all the creatures of the world beside, is most stubbornly obliged and
wedded to his will, and most exorbitant in the manners of his life. And surely,
though we need not marvel at his providence in greater matters, when the least
things that are, are not governed without his providence; yet herein it does
wonderfully appear, that there should be such a fear put into the hearts of a
multitude, to submit and subject themselves to the yoke of one man, even so
many thousands to his power and command. Yet we see it by Art: For the horse
of noblest courage is made to obey with a slender bit: and a Ship though never
so great, and driven with fierce winds, Iam. 3.9.
yet is guided and turned about with a small rudder. Again, we see it in
Nature too. The fight of the eye, a very small thing: and the heart of man, but
an handful: yet is the one the light, and the other the life of the whole
body. This amongst other, is a special argument of the providence of God, Psalm
68.7. Secundum vulg. Transl.
who causes men to be of one mind, even so many thousands, and binds them
together in duty and allegiance, that one rule all, and all are ruled by that
one.

Hence also arises that Civil order amongst the societies of men, which
notwithstanding the sins of men, God has been very careful to preserve and
keep; and therefore has his Deputies and Lieutenants upon the earth, and
under them subordinate rulers and governors, who have the administration of
Justice and Judgment. That as in the Frame and composure of the great World,
he has set the Fire above the Air, the Air above the Water, the Water above
the Earth: and as in the structure and building of the little World, he has
set the Knees above the Feet, the Arms above the Knees, the Eyes above the
Arms; so in bodies politic he has set and placed one calling over another.
Again, as the Celestial Bodies have a double motion, one common with the
whole body of the heavens, the other proper and particular, according to the
nature of every several Star; and in our bodies a double motion also: one
whereof depends upon the whole body, and therefore is universal: the other
particular, according to the inbred nature and disposition of every several
member: So over and beside that universal command, that the Supreme Magistrate
upon earth has; whereby the whole body of a Kingdom moves, and subiecteth it
self, there is a subordinate and a derived power, whereby, as through an
inferior motion: all parts and members of the body, even unto the Foot are
ordered and governed; as of several Counties in that Kingdom, of several
Cities in those Counties, of several Families in those Cities, and of every
several person in those Families. Hence appears not only the necessity of
Laws, but also their variety, and those to be ordered, altered, and renewed
as new corruptions shall arise, or the times require.

Now for their Execution, without which the commonwealth is breathless: on
whom lies the Burden and care but upon the Magistrate? What use is there of
that Boat, which has neither Oars nor Sails? or of that book which lies by
a man and is never read on? or what pleasure of music affords that
Instrument, which is never touched? So what use or benefit is there of Laws,
when they lie as dead as their first makers, or as if they were cast into a
perpetual sleep, as Jupiter served Endymion? As the counterfeit therefore is
discerned from the pure gold by the touch: so is the good Magistrate known by
this, when he shows; 1. Courage.
First Courage; Secondly, Knowledge: Thirdly, Diligence, in the execution of
Laws. For the first he should be a courageous and stout Nehemiah: Nehem. 6.11.
Should such a man as I fly? Laws that lie dead he must put life into them,
2. Kin. 4.32.
as Elisha did into the Shunamites son, and set them upon their feet. It was
the commendation of Jeroboam, 1. King. 11.29. 1. King. 15.23.
that he was strong and courageous: This man Jeroboam was a man of strength and
courage. And surely, he that is set over others, as Jeroboam was set over
Salomons works, he had not need be gowtie in his feet, as Asa was, but he
must have ability of body to manage his affairs without check. He must not
sit still, or be as a dumb Image, or Statue; no, he is lex loquens, a speaking
Law. And though he be a God on the earth, Psalm. 82.6.
yet he must not be like the gods of the Heathen, who have eyes and see not,
ears and hear not, mouths and yet could not speak. Such are but Idol.
Magistrates, Psalm 115.6.7. Genesis 31.30.
like Labans gods; for so indeed he called them, and yet were very blocks; or
like Bell in the Story, Brass without, but clay within: Historia Bell, verse
3.
and if they deserve any worship, it is because they spend so much upon their
Tables: so many Measures of fine Flower, so many Sheep, and so many pots of
Wine every day. A shame it is, they should sit in their places for fashion
sake, as Tradesmen wear swords, or like a George on horseback terrible only
in view, and that is all. No they must deal roundly and use that severity
against offenders which is meet; that because Evils are many and rife, and the
wicked have an insatiable appetite to do wickedly, like the wind ever in
motion, like the Sea ever working, therefore to break off the arms of
wickedness betimes, to do it manfully and courageously. He that spares the
Wolf, hazards the whole Flock; and all go to ruin, where there is not a
resolute, and yet a conscionable seueritle. For I would not have a Magistrate
like Aristides, who for his over much Justice, (whether justly or no) was
banished out of Athens, or like Cassius a Praetor in Rome, Valor. Maximus.
whose Judgment seat was said to be Scopulus reorum, where there was as
little favor for an offender to be had, as the Ship has that dasheth, or
rusheth upon a Rock: these turn Justice into cruelty, and equity into
revenge, and are fitter to govern, where Minos and Radamanthus bear office,
then to be set over the people of God. Woe be unto such. Amos 4.1.
For they shall be taken away with Thorns, and their posterity with
Fishhookes. There severity therefore must be moderate and Christian, and to
their Courage they must join Knowledge too: First to know their own strength,
that is, the authority and power that is committed unto them, from whence it
is given, and for what end. Secondly, to judge aright, how evils and
misdemeanors grow, from what causes, and how to proceed in them, and so shall
they be the better able to remove them. As I remember Heraclitus when he was
sick, he examined his Physicians, concerning the cause of his sickness; and
for that they were ignorant, and could not resolve him, he sent them away, and
would have none of their Physic; For (says he) if ye be not able to show me
the cause of my disease, much less are ye able to take the cause away. And
surely many disorders get head, through the unskillfulness of Magistrates in
their places: for though they mean well, and are desirous in a godly care to
reform abuses, yet such is the nature of evil, like the Devil himself, that
it will grow too subtle and cunning for the Magistrate. 1. Kings 14. Hierome.
Evil will disguise it self like Ieroboams wife, ye shall not know it to be
evil: Ignorantia Iudicis, plerunque est calamitas innocentis, says a Father,
and so it is very true. For Joseph was punished with imprisonment by Putiphar:
Genesis 39.20. 2. Sam. 16.4.
and Mephiboseths lands were all given away by David: and yet both proved mere
innocents: and so many times, the innocent smart for it, when there is no
cause; and the nocent and guilty escape free and untouched. Sinister
informations and want of due judgment in the Magistrate, is not only a cause
of much disorder amongst wicked men, but even of much injustice against good
men. Add hereunto Diligence, 3. Diligence.
which is the (...), the only substantial thing, even al in all, as one spoke
of perfection, The only thing in every thing. Dr. Pl.
For he must not be like Polyphemus, who had but one eye, and a bad one too;
but he had need have an hundred eyes, as the Poet faignes of Argus, I mean
much vigilance in his government. Centum luminibus cinctii caput Argus babebat.
Ovid. Metam. Homer.
He must be oculatus, (...), a front and a tergo, he must look before him,
behind him, he must be every way vigilant; and in this respect is that
Apothegme just and true, that one good Magistrate is worth twenty good Laws.
And if a man did rightly judge aforehand, what diligence and paines-taking,
this Office requires, I think he would scarce have the honor, to bear the
Burden. He must stand Sentinel, and have his eye every where, that as the
heart sends forth spirit and vigor into all parts and members of the body,
and yet is not present in every part or member: So though not his Person, yet
the presence of his Power should be every where, in all parts of his
commonweal and government. And as it was said of the gods of the Pagans,
other gods were limited and tied to their several places, as Jupiter to Elis,
Diana to Ephesus, Apollo to Delos: But Esculapius, whose skill and knowledge in
Physic was admirable, he had his Temples and Altars every where, in Corinth,
in Thebes, in Athens, in Lacedaemon, in Arcadia, etc. So I say, though private
men, neither can nor ought to range beyond their proper and particular
stations: yet the Magistrate, the great Physician of the weal public, must
be every where, in all places, as the beams of the Sun, striking into every
house; in every part or disordered place, ought his power to be, for
rereformation and amendment. And as nothing paineth the Physician more, then
the difficulty and hardness of the cure; so nothing should be a greater
grief unto his heart, then when disorders shall grow above his strength to
reform, and evils and abuses ouer-master him. Hence no doubt is that of the
Son of Syrach, Ecclus. 7.7.
Seek not to be made a Judge or a Magistrate, lest thou be not able to
take away iniquity.

By all which it is manifest, what a Burden and weight lies upon the
shoulders of the Magistrate: and therefore it is no fair play, in your
Elections to this purpose, so often to lay this Burden upon one man. For I am
out of doubt, that principle of Plato is undoubtedly true: Plato.
Every good Magistrate takes his office upon him unwillingly. Moses, a man
rarely qualified, yet he groued under the Burden and weight of it. Who am I?
Exodus 3.11. Exodus 3.11. Exodus 18.
and Iethro tells him, the thing was too heavy for him, Exodus 18. and in the
fourth of Exodus 13. he shifts it off to another, Exodus 4.13.
send by the hand of him, whom thou should send: every way disabling
himself; sometime by casting doubts, that they would not believe, nor hearken
unto him, Exodus 4.1. Exodus 4.1.
sometime by excusing himself, that he had no plausible tongue, Exodus 4.10.
and yet a notable bold Magistrate, Exodus 4.10.
and full of courage in the cause of God against King Pharaoh and a notable
minister of Justice unto all his people. Steven gave this Testimony of him,
Act. 7.22.
that he was learned in all the learning of the Egyptians, and was mighty in
deeds and in words. He slew an Egyptian, Exodus 2.11.
and presently after he reproved an Hebrew; and though he was assured by an
holy instinct, that God had designed him for Magistracy and government, and yet
loath, loath ye see he was, to take this charge and Burden upon him.

To wind up this point, (lest my self also should be a Burden.) Esaias 9.6.
it was said of Christ, that the government of the Church lay upon his
shoulders: Sure I am, the Burden of the common weal lies upon the shoulders
of the Magistrate: and the carriage thereof not easily borne. A matter not of
ease, though of honor, and they find it most, who are best governors.

And the consideration of this, Mar. 12.17. Romans 13.1.7
therefore to give Casar his due, and every soul to submit it self to this
Ordinance of God, whether supreme or subordinate; which whosoever resists,
shall receive to themselves damnation. Venerandos esse Principes antiqua lex.
Euripid.
This condemns saucy and malepert fellows, who will contest with the
Magistrate, and brave him to his face, whose impudent demeanor bewrayes that
if Law were not, they would pluck the sword out of His hand, Romans vbi supra.
who bears not the sword for naught.

Secondly, Government is so Burdensome of it self, therefore every man in his
particular place and calling, is to ease the Magistrate what he can: I mean so
to conform and demean himself, that he may be a comfort to the Magistrate,
not a Burden. Which he shall do, if religiously and conscionably he walks
in that calling wherein God has placed him. And if it be true which
Hippocrates says, (...) Sect. 2. Aphor. 51.
Any thing passng the bounds of moderation is an enemy to Nature; surely any
thing that passes the bounds of Religion and Piety, is an enemy to the peace
of Christian government. He is not worthy to breath under the benefit of Laws,
who of himself is no better then Law makes him.

Thirdly, Government so Burdensome? Then it is the duty of the people for the
Magistrate, and Magistrates for themselves, to commend their cause unto God by
Prayer, that he would stand by them, and assist them with his grace, to fit and
enable them for the discharge of their duty, that like Iosuah they may be
filled, Iosuah 6.24.
and like Gedeon clothed with the Spirit: to desire with Solomon, Judge. 6.34.
1. King 3.9.
understanding hearts: that according to the commendation of David, they may
behave themselves wisely in all their ways. This is a special duty. 1. Tim.
2.1.2.
I exhort (says the Apostle) that prayers and supplications be made for all
men, especially for Kings, and those that be put in authority under them, that
we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty.

Lastly, because Government is so Burdensome of it self, Burdens and
businesses, which come to pass, either first when matters are raised and raked
out of the dust, upon former grudges and spleenes, that being invested into
their places, they say as Caesar did; when he got the sword into his hand:
(...).
Now I am where I would be. Now I am in place where I may revenge my self,
where I may pay them home. I say all former grudgings, hart-burnings,
displeasures, are utterly to be crossed and raced out of your books, and not
to take advantage of your public places, to avenge your selves upon private
wrongs. This will entangle you much, much incomber you, perhaps prove heavier
to you then you are aware: that as Shebna built his Sepulcher in one country,
Esaias 12.18.
but was buried in another: and as Leander, to win his desire, adventured to
cross the Hellespont, but was crossed by the Hellespont: so we may come short
of that success which we look for. Secondly, you load and ouercharge your
selves unnecessarily, when you are too much addicted to matters of the world,
and to your own private respect, as many do, putting their hands almost into
every Trade for gain and lucre. Thus as Abacuk speaks, Habac. 2.6.
they load themselves with thick clay, and stick fast in the mire of their
own worldliness. Concupisti? haesists, says Bernard, Bern.
Art thou covetous? then thou stickest fast, as the bird entangled in the Lime,
the more she stirs the surer she is, the longer she strives the worse she
fares. It was a good prouiso therefore, Exodus 18.21.
that Iethro gave to Moses, that He that should be designed for government
should be a man hating covetousness. Psalm. 119.36.
David prays directly against it. Incline mine heart O Lord unto thy
Testimonies, and not unto covetousness. Ne praeeminentem virum thesauri
possideant sui, and pecuniis seruiat qui praeest caeteris. Ambr. l. 2. Offic.
cap. 14. 1. Tim. 6.9.
It il becomes him who is set aloft as a Lord over others, to be a drudge and a
slave unto himself, wrapped up in his immoderate and earthly cares, which in
the end will prove but snares unto him, nay so many harlots and lascivious
Courtizans, as will woo him, and seek to win from him that love and tender
regard, which he as a true husband unto the commonweal, ought to bear unto
it. He had need be as strong as Issachar, Genesis 49.14.
who should couch down twixt two burdens.

PART. 2.
ANd this is a point no less considerable then the former, 2. That Government
is Sympatheticall, or coaffectionate.
namely, that Government is Sympatheticall, expressed in the word Bosom: to
show that there is, or ought to be a natural reference, alliance, relation,
commiscration, compassion, imprinted in the nature of the Magistrate toward
the people: which this word Bosom very significantly lays forth, Pliny.
for therein we know are the affections shrined, and designed therefore very
fitly for the place, of the peoples welfare, comfort, and safety.

Carry them in thy Bosom.) What? Carry them upon thine Head? No! For then he
had humored our Anabaptists well, who would set their feet upon the necks of
their Governors, or rather smite off their heads, as Tarquinius topped off the
fairest Poppies in the Garden. Tarqu. superbus. Liuius Decad. 18.1. Psalm.
137.7. Luke 19.14.
Their voice is as the voice of Edom, so speak they of authority, Down with
it, down with it, even to the ground. Do they say, Nolumus hunc? We will not
have this man? Nay we will not have any man to rule over us. Again, Carry
them upon thy Back? No: the Magistrate must not expose himself to the
reproaches of such as live under his government, so he may become oppressed of
his own people. The plowers plowed upon my back and made long furrows, Psalm.
129.3. Job 4.8.
says David: But they that plow iniquity shall reap the same. Job 4.8.
Neither does he say upon his fist, like a Faulknor to keep on, and let off, at
his pleasure: but in his Bosom, the safest sweetest, inwardest, comfortablest
place of refuge and defense. And how in his Bosom? The comparison lies within
an hayres breadth: As a Nurse bears her sucking Child, which as it argues the
very necessary dependence of the people upon the Magistrate; for how can the
sucking infant want or forbear the breast of the Nurse, and how pitiful were
it that it should be left destitute, having none to care for it, Genesis 21.15.
as may appear in Hagars child? Genesis 21.15. So what a confusion, what a
mischief would their grow amongst people, Judges 17.1.
that should have no governor, every man to do what seems good in his own
eyes? whereas the herds of cattle have their leaders flocks of Sheep have
their keepers, swarms of Bees have their King. I say, as it makes for the
necessity of government; so on the other side, it implies, that never was the
Bosom of a mother, more tender, open, safe comfortable to her little one; her
sucking Babe, the latest or loueliest fruit of her womb: then the Bosom of
the Magistrate to be opened, I mean his heart enlarged toward his people, to
provide for their safety, to procure their welfare, righten their wrongs, and
in a word to give them speedy, and timely refreshment in all their distresses.
Carry them in thy Bosom.

This being so; observe from hence diverse points. Moses, in that he calls
Kings, and Princes, Nursing Fathers, and nursing Mothers. Esaias 49.23.
Hence follows it necessarily, that above all things the Magistrate be
thoroughly seasoned with Religion, and neither irreligious, or popish, but that
he be truly and soundly affected: For if it be so, which they fay is true in
Nature, that what disease or infection the mother or nurse has, the sucking
child partaketh of it, and as the parent is affected, so for the most part are
the childrens inclination: surely so fares it in this; Give me a Magistrate
that is godly, religious, forward in Christian duties, and for the most part
the people will be so affected; that way which the master Be flies the rest
will follow, and nothing is more forcible and perswasiue with the vulgar,
Confessor Papa Confessor Populus. Cyprian. Iosuah 24.32.
then the examples of their governors, which if they be godly, are notable
means to draw them on to godliness and Religion. On the other side, let a
Magistrate be profane, riotous, dissolute, lukewarm, making no conscience of
frequenting the exercises of the Word, the public worship and service of God,
in keeping the Lords Sabbath and the like; the people for the most part will be
of his bent, being given over unto any wicked vice. O how woeful and dangerous
is his example! These I say are bad Nurses, their breasts are infected, their
milk poisoned, it were pity a thousand times, the people of God should come
so near into their Bosoms. Que semel est imbuta recens, seruauit odorem Testa
diu. Horat.
The very soil and moisture will change the nature of that plant which it
nourishes: a new vessel will long sanour of that liquor which was first
powered into it, and the young child receives not only the Milk, Laurentia was
his Nurse, and called, Lupa, (...) the wolf.
but therewith all the manners and disposition of the Nurse. He that suckes
Wolves Milk, shall have woluish conditions, as Mithridates spoke of Romulus.
It is said of Jupiter, that in his infancy, he was nursed up with Goats
Milk; I am sure, if the Poets lie not he proved a wanton. In the choice of a
Nurse, we aim at two things. First that she be of an whole me complexion:
Secondly, that she be of an honest condition. What should I say? Magistrates
are Nurses, let them take heed, they have no wicked vice predominant in them,
the people who are to reside in their Bosoms will draw infection. Let such a
one therefore, when he takes his place upon him, humble himself by prayer unto
God, Melius est ciaitatem regia viro optimo, quam a lege optima. Arist. lib. 1.
Pol.
and labor by all means to purge and sanctify his conscience: so shall his
milk, I mean his Government be wholesome and pure: God shall have the glory,
and the people wonderful comfort and contentment. It is far better and more
necessary, that a City be governed by a Magistrate that is a good man, then
by a good Law.

Again further, Bosom of the Nurse or Mother is a defense or shelter for the
child, where the poor infant shrowdes it self from foreign injuries and
wrongs. God has appointed Magistrates that they should be defenses for their
people, their Bosoms Sanctuaries; Archilus dixit, Iudicem and Aram idem esse:
pariter enim, etc. Eras. Apopth.
therefore it was fitly said of one, that a Judge and an Altar were the same,
Pariter enim ad vtrumque confugunt qui iniuria afficiuntur: For alike to each
of these have every man recourse, that suffer wrong. All the hope and comfort
of the oppressed lies in the mercy of the Magistrate. To their Bosom comes the
Fatherless, the Orphan, the poor Widow, there they hope to have succor and
relief for the injuries and wrongs which they have sustained; and if they
find it not under the shadow of their wings, where shall they seek it?
Remember this point: the holy Ghost uses not words and phrases in vain: you
show your selves unnatural, when you shut up your Bosoms, (...). Luke 1.78.
and have not as Zachary sang, even bowels of compassion to your people, to
relieve them in their just causes in all you may. Note well the words of the
Prophet Esaias: Seek Judgment, Esaias 1.17.
relieve the Oppressed, comfort the Fatherless, Defend the Widow: When any,
or all these, shall offer to shroud themselves under your wing, O be
comfortable, be compassionate unto them,

Again, to go yet further. Mother or Nurse has a Sympathy of the childs
estate, and by a natural instinct; knows when it is sick, diseased, pained
or any distemperature that it has, and will accordingly apply her self to
free it, or procure it any ease. So good Magistrates will be careful to
preserve their people from disorders and corruptions arising, which in time will
breed sicknesses and distemperatures in their States: For they shall have the
government pestered with lewd and pernicious people, Atheist.
who like unto scabbed sheep will infect the whole flock. As first the Atheist
most pestilent and dangerous, the Magistrate ought to repress him; in no case
to grace and countenance a bad person, but rather to shake him off, as Paul
shook off the Viper. Act. 28.3.
These are the very vermin of the earth, bred of the common sins of men, as
Flies are bred of the dung of Beasts, full of all subtlety and mischief, Act
13.8.
children of the Devil, as Paul spoke of Elimas the Sorcerer, and enemies to
all righteousness. Great care must be had to search out these, and even to
banish them out of your City, 1. King. 15.8.
as Asa put the Sodomites out of the land, or as Constantine did Dicers and
Gamesters out of his Court, and called them Sorices Palatij, the Mice and Rats
of his Palace. 2 Idle fellows.
Secondly, the Idle Fellow, inordinate walkers, dissolute livers such as live
in no calling, that are not in laboribus hominum, Bern.
but in laboribus Daemonum, that live not in the lawful vocations of men, but
are in Trading with the Devil, lurking in their vile corners, as Adders in the
nests, and are not only wicked themselves, but have even their Tabernacles of
Wickedness: the eye of the Magistrate must find them out, break their brood,
disperse them, Cato.
for in doing nothing, they soon learn to do ill, and so prove hurtful and
pernicious. Christ thought them blameworthy, who were idle in the market
place, yet they excused themselves, and a man might think their excuse
tolerable, Nemo conduxit nos: Master, no man has hired us: they stood idle
that they might not be idle, but we have some idle, that they might be the more
idle: they drink down idleness as Wine at a banquet, and sport themselves in
their iniquities, 2. Sam. 16.
as Absalom with his fathers Concubines. 2. These. 3.10.
The Apostles rule is, He that labors not, let him not cate; these cate and
labor not unless in works of darkness for therein their idleness is a
business, Otium negotium.
their very persons being the Devils closets, wherein he sits close studying and
devising all villainy and mischief, and afterward puts it in execution. Search
your City for these, even search it with lights, Zeph. 1.12.
fetch them out of their dark holes, and set them to their trades, that
according to the Ordinance of God, Genesis 3.19.
In the sweat of their brows, they may eat their bread.

Thirdly, 3. Common Drunkards.
common drunkards, the unprofitable Burdens of the earth who sell the Kingdom
of God for drink, as Esau his birth right for Pottage. Genesis 25.30.
Full spunges, funcke Ships: Their drunkenness stinkes, as the Prophet
speaks, Hosea 4.18. Hosea 4 18.
I know it was an abominable vice amongst the Grecians, with whom it was either
peccatum originale, (...).
or accidens inseparabile: a proverb of theirs still lives amongst us, Either
drink or be gone: Tolid. Virg.
but how the English comes thus bewitched, who in the days of old bare the
bell for temperance and moderation, now approaching so near to the manners of
the Sicilians, even dedicating Temples to Riot and Excess, I see not well the
cause. It may be they have learned this practice of our Dutchmen, they get our
wealth, we their vices: whether or no, I will not determine, but sure I am, we
spoil our selves here in our own country, with following the follies and
fashions of other countries. It is said of Darius that in the wars betwixt
him and Alexander, Quint. Curt.
he changed the scabberd of his sword, from the fashion of the Persians, to the
manner of the Grecians: but we do more then change the scabberd of our
swords, I mean our outward raiment and fashion of our apparel, to fashions
foreign and outlandish: For we suite our bodies with their sins, and are
easily drawn to imitate, not so much their novelties as their vices.

Solomon had a Navy that went once in three years to Tharshish in Cilicia: 1.
Kin. 10.22.
and besides Gold and Silver and Iuorie, brought home says the Text, Apes and
Peacocks. The Merchants of our times, who fetch their commodities from a far,
shall not need to freight their Ships with Apes and Peacockes, for we have
store enough of them in our own Country: Nascuntur quotidie, Lactantius.
as Lactantius spoke of the Pagan gods, we have a goodly breed of them in the
land, who do nothing else but apishly imitate the exotic and misshapen
fashions of foreign countries, and which is more abominable then that, their
sins and vices. What our Imitation is of other matters, I will not speak:
but this of Drunkenness, is too too odious. It is said of Tiberius the
Emperor, Suctonius in vita Tiberij. Congius est mensura sexsextarionem.
that he made one Nouellius Proconsull, because he drunk off three pottles of
wine with one breath, and added further unto him a fir-name, and called him
Tricongius, as noble Scipio had a Surname for his conquest in Afric. Scip.
Africanus.
If the Drunkards of our time expect any reward or promotion, I know none they
are like to have, Esaias 5.7.
unless it be the woe of the Prophet Esaias: Woe be to them that rise up early
to follow drunkenness, and continue therein till night, that the Wine does
inflame them. That this sin increases daily, I will not rashly lay the fault
upon the Magistrate, yet I think he is persuaded, that if he would do his
best, he might repress it much. Infinite outrages and disorders grows upon
it, especially in these Incorporations: (I perceive my Ship to rub upon your
Sands, Multa ebrii faciunt, quibus sobrii erubescunt. Hier. Ep. 83.
but I hasten off.) Tarquin defloured Lucrece, he was in drink: Alexander slew
Clytus his dearest friend even right out, he was in drink: Lot committed
abominable Incest with his two daughters, he was thoroughly drencht and tippled
with wine. Quid non ebrietas designat? Horat.
What villainy and outrage does not drunkenness bring forth? which the ancient
Romans wisely foresaw: therefore it was a long time ere they planted Vines. I
say no more, look unto it you that are to give account of your Stewardships;
pluck the Kan from their mouths, and rouse them from their benches, where
they sit and power in: Epist. 12.
Fundunt, infundunt, and infundendo confundunt; till they fall, as Seneca
speaks, in voluntariam insaniam, into a voluntary madness. Many poor
Artificers and Tradesmen in this City, spend their weekly earnings on the
Sabbath day, in this kind of Riot and excess, to the great dishonor of
Almighty God, and to the ruin and misery of their poor Families. The two
Daughters of the Horse-leech (on whom they dote) suck out all their thrift, the
Flemish Hop, and the Indian weed. Nourish not these, but suppress them. Let
them not come in your way, unless it be to punish them; they are abominable
and loathsome, they will cast up all in your Bosoms.

Lastly, 4. Bufie-body.
what should I say of the Busie-body, the Sycophant, and Flattering companion,
who like unto the subtle Fish changes himself into the color of every stone
for a booty, or for a meals meat at your tables? So likewise the Tale-hearer,
and Slanderer, tongued like the Serpent black and piercing, Bribers,
Brabblers, Forestallers, Extortioners, breeders of suites and actions, and many
other besides these, who will think they have great injury, if they be not
suffered to do injury. All all these, if they have grace and countenance at
your hands, they will be Serpents in your Bosoms, and they are able to make
any State or government wherein they live, no better then a Wilderness, as
Iosuah made Ai, Iosuah 8.28. Esaias 17.1.
or as a ruinous heap like the City of Damascus: they are as ill where they
live as the Pestilence. These may seem small matters unto you, and happily I
do but beat the air; but they are the breeders and leaders on of much
mischief. Haec etiamsi minima videntur, tamen magnorum sunt causa maloru^.
Chrysostom. Psalm. 101.8.
Remember the natural Sympathy the Nurse has with the distemperature of her
child: and how readily she applies her self to give it ease and redress.
Betimes (says David) will I root out all the wicked in the land, that I may
destroy all the workers of iniquity, from the City of the Lord; a course that
well becomes a Magistrate, speedy, and stout: so must these naughtie-packes and
vile persons be dealt with, else like the Vipers brood, they will tear in
sunder the womb that bear them.

Again yet further: Bosom. Shepherds we know are ever at hand with their
Flock, and the Poet calls the King or the Prince, (...). Sic Homerus
Agamemnonem.
the Shepherd of the people. The Nurse will not long absent her self from her
child, if she do, her breasts ache, and she feels much distemper: so me
thinks it should prick the conscience of a Magistrate, and his heart should
ache within him to be dissolute, negligent, and careless in his place;
Plutarch.
like Cleopatras Ape, run after a Nut or an Apple, that is, pursue either
profit or pleasure, and so neglect his duty, and leave his people at random.
Ye hear the phrase of the Holy Ghost, the people must be in the Bosom of
Moses.

Again yet further: the Bosom is the seat of kindness: Moses, be kind
unto thy people, as they are near, so let them be dear unto thee; be
cheerful and comfortable unto them in thy government. A special point, not
to look upon your people sullenly, sowrely, not to govern them with a
discontented and unwilling mind. The child will many times be froward; now if
the mother be as froward as the child, it will ask wisdom, and (by your
leave) some patience too to quiet them both: seeing God therefore has called
thee out, and put his sword into thy hand to do his business, go on with
cheerfulness and comfort, show thy self a Nurse, not a Tyrant, and govern
them not in Passion, but in Compassion: look upon thy people, as the Nurse
upon her Child, whiles it draws her breasts; who lovingly smiles upon it, and
beholds it sweetly with an eye of pleasure, Suetonius in vita Calig.
and with all complacencie of affection. Caligula that wicked man, was wont to
view his face in a glass, framing and composing to himself the cruellest, and
most tyranous looks, with which he delighted to walk abroad, that he might be
the more terrible unto his subjects: and we know such heathenish Princes, took
pleasure in the very Titles of outrage and tyranny, as to be called
Thunderbolts, Subduers, Citie-spoilers, Eagles, Hawks, Vultures, etc. These
had no Bosoms for the comfort and refuge of their people; no, they had arms
of Tyrany and Oppression. Rabanus in gloss. super illud Prou. 25. Aufer
iniquitatem de vultu Regis, etc.
Excellently spoke one, Qui praesunt populis, si firmum volunt esse solium,
semper hilaritate and gratia plenos vultus exhibeant, etc. They that will
govern their people well; and will sit sure, and have their seat established,
let them graciously and cheerfully look upon them, lest through their own
arrogancy and sullenness, they fall into the hatred of the sturdie multitude.
2. Sam. 15.5.6.
Absalom with a pleasant demeanor and countenance stole away the hearts of his
Fathers Subjects, 1. Kings 12.13.
whereas Rehoboam with his rough words marred all. And yet, set me add this
further, that because (as David says) they are gods, Psol 82.6.
and in Gods stead, (as Jacob spoke to another purpose,) Genesis 30.2.
as his Lord Deputies upon the earth, therefore they must reserve a due state
unto themselves, not to be slauishly or seruilely courteous; as we read of
Richard the third, (to omit other examples) who presently after his Coronation
comes into Westminster hall, and fitting him down upon the King's Bench, espies
one Fogge a base fellow, against whom he had born an old grudge. He calls for
him, rose out of his princely seat, took him (forsooth) by the hand, Dextram
non omnibus esse porrigendam. Pythag. Grafton.
and made semblance of great love and friendship, and of receiving him into his
favor. The common people (says the Chronicle) highly rejoiced at it, but wise
men held it a slavish vanity I never knew a Lions skin did hurt, so it were
not upon a Lions back. And surely it is lawful and commendable for Princes and
Magistrates to take that state upon them that is meet; Principatum quem geris
ornes, Pythagoras.
a Principle fit for Princes; to adorn their places with their carriage, to
show themselves as they are, not to be so slauishly dejected in mind, as that
ungracious Richard was, nor yet so blasphemously exalted in spirit as that
ambitious Herod was: Act. 12.25.
but as God has honored them with his own name, I have said ye are Gods; so
they to honor him again, Psalm. 29.1.2.
as David admonishes, Give unto the Lord ye sons of the mighty, give unto the
Lord the honor due unto his Name.

Lastly, Carry them in thy Bosom: that is, do all good offices of love unto
them. I would ever (says one) have a Magistrate to remember three things:
First, that they are men whom he gouernes, like unto himself. Secondly, these
must be governed according to some Law. Thirdly, he shall not always govern,
but as others gave place to him, so he to others. Now, as when the mother or
nurse dies, the child hanging on her breast: she desires another might be as
loving and kind to it as her self: So godly and kind Magistrates when they
must leave their places, will be desirous that they who succeed them in
Government, might succeed also in the same care, and love unto the people: and
whilst they govern, to cherish the good, to repress the evil, to encourage
the virtuous, to punish the wicked. Platt.
The Philosopher says the whole body of civil order, consists but of these
two things: rewarding and punishing. For as they must hate the sins of wicked
men, even with a perfect hatred, and chastise their persons: so, with as
perfect a love they must embrace the virtues of good men, and countenance their
persons. And this Burden of Magistracy they they may the better bear, they
must permit God to bear a part with them, to have a room in their Counsels,
as chair of Estate amongst them. They must follow his directions, and not the
affections of their own hearts: they must not rule as they list, that were
Tyranny; but they must rule as they ought, and that is Princely. If they
listen unto his Word, renouncing their own devices, then shall they have much
comfort in their government, and the judgments of their mouths shall be
righteous Judgments. David testifies that where the people are thus governed,
vice punished, virtue encouraged: Psalm. 72 3.
The Mountains shall bring forth peace, and the little Hills plenteousnesse
unto the people. No corner of the earth, no not the barrennest place, but shall
be full, full of prosperity and happiness. Demosthenes being demanded what
preserved Athens so long, and made their Princes so honorable and famous,
answered, The Citizens delight in peace, the Orators are learned and wise, the
Common people are fearful to transgress Laws, and the Magistrates delight
in doing Justice.

I have now done. Conclusion.
Only give me leave a little in a word, or rather in a little word, to conclude
all that I have spoken with use and application.

Sentences that are short, are soonest remembered, and a short nail is sooner
driven home to the head then a long. There was written upon the Temple of
Apollo, by the advice of a famous Assembly in Greece, short and small sentences
the sooner and better to be kept in remembrance; as, 1. These. 5.16, 17, 19, 20.
Envy no man: Use moderation: Know thy self: Beware of suretiship. Such we
find in Paul. Rejoice evermore, Pray continually, Quench not the Spirit,
Despise not Prophefying. And such we find in Peter. Honor all men, Love
brotherly fellowship; 2. Pet 2 17.
Fear God, Honor the King. Here is a sentence short with the rest, but as
worthy as the rest to be kept in remembrance; Carry them in thy Bosom. God
has left it unto Moses, Moses has left it unto you, as a Magistrates word,
poesy, Scripture, call it what you will: and left it to be engraven, I say not
in your Rings and Borders, but in your hearts; whence you may learn: First,
that your places are not for ease and desidiousnesse, but weighty and of
Burden: Secondly, what a Sympathy or natural affection you owe unto your
brethren, how tender to be over them, how kind to be unto them, Numb. 27.17.
to go in and out before them, to lead them forth, to bring them home, that
the congregation of the Lord be not as sheep without a shepherd.

Happy are the people that are in such a case, yea blessed are the people who
have the Lord for their God. Psalm. 144.15.
When himself takes the sovereign and supreme care over you, then may you
be assured, good Magistracy and government shall not be wanting unto you;
your peace shall be like unto a flood, and your prosperities as showers of
Gold, Ioshual: 3.15.
or like Jordan filling her banks with her silver streams: your pauings shall
shine with Butter and honey, and oil shall distill down from your highest
mountains. Peace and Plenty, Zach. 11.7.
like the two staves of Zacheries good Shepherd, Bands, and Beauty, shall
possess your dwellings. Your sons shall grow up as the young plants, Psalm.
144.12.
and your daughters shall be as the polished corners of the Temple. Your
garners shall be full and plenteous with all manner of store, your presses shall
run over, your sheep shall bring forth thousands, and ten thousands, your
oxen shall be strong to labor, there shall be no leading into captivity, no
complaining in your streets. Happy, O happy are the people that are in such a
case, Blessed, O blessed is that people who have the Lord for their God!

Brethren, what shall I more speak unto you, and yet will I speak once more?
All those hearty well-wishings, prosperities, happinesses, which the people of
God at any time desired, or God himself ever vouchsafed to bestow upon
Jerusalem, fall upon this City. Norwich.
And the Lord for his mercy sake grant, that your Magistrate this day invested
to rule, may be among the 70. ancients, like Eldad, Numb. 11.26.
or Medad; that as you are to rest in his Bosom, for your protection and
welfare, so he may rest in the bosom of God, for his favor and blessing. That
he may do worthily in Epratah, Ruth 4.11.
be famous in Bethleem, that Judgment may praise him in the gate, and Justice
advance her self in the great Congregation. And finally, that all, not only
the Magistrate, but You the Ministers of this City, painefully laboring with
wholesome Doctrine, (for you are Nurses too, 1 These. 2.7. 1. Pet. 2.1.
and the word is Milk) and all sorts and conditions of men, from the highest
to the lowest, may so run through the scuerall difficulties of your callings,
with cheerfulness and comfort, that at the winding up of your days, when
every one must render up his spirit unto God, Eccles. 12.7. Semper meditanda,
semel dicenda. Aug.
you may then have in your mouths that speech of Paul, ever to be thought on,
never to be uttered till our last gasp: I have fought a good fight, I have
finished my course, I have kept the Faith. 2. Tim. 4.7.
Henceforth is laid up for me a a crown of Righteousness, which God that
righteous judge shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but to all that
love his gracious and glorious appearing. This crown he crown us with for his
mercy sake. Amen.

FINIS.
IVDAHS PENANCE. A SERMON AT THETFORD BEFORE THE IVDGES at the Assizes in Lent.
March 10. 1616. Preached by the Parson of Southwalsham.

Non legem verecr nocens, sed fortunam innocens. LONDON, Printed by JOHN BEALE.
1617.

IVDAHS PENANCE.
TEXT. GENESIS 38.26. So he lay with her no more.
IN these words the Holy Ghost makes report unto us of a finne committed, now
forsaken and given over. And that our Discourse concerning this point may be
the more profitable, these three points are very remarkable.

1. A consideration of the Persons, who committed this sin: both noted in the
Text, the one in the first word save one, the other in the last save two; he
and her: Judah and Thamar. 2. A consideration of the nature and quality of the
sin; not Fornication which is evil, nor Adultery which is worse, but Incest
which is most abominable. 3. A consideration of Iudahs Remorse, and that is the
(...), anima, the blood, life and soul of the Text, that his conscience being,
I say, not checked, but even cuicted of the sin: he forbear her, with whom he
had committed this evil, Malum hoc maximum, this great wickedness, as Joseph
spoke unto his wanton Mistress; and to speak in the natural, proper, and
plain language of the Text, Genesis 39 7.
Lay with her no more.
First for the Persons, who committed this sin: First, Judah an honorable
Patriarch, 1. Persons. Genesis 29. vlt.
the son of Jacob by Leah: Secondly, Thamar: this, some have thought to be
the Daughter of Sem, who was the High Priest Melehssedeck, and hence was it,
say they, that Judah adiudgeth her to be burnt, because it was a Law, that if
the Daughter of a Priest did play the Harlot, she should be burnt. But this
will appear to be but a vain surmise, for though Melchisedeck lived 600.
years, yet he lived not to the days of Jacob by ten years: and Jacob being
at this time an 100. years of age, it is not like, that Thamar being of Sem,
or Melchisedeck should be now child bearing. Others are of opinion, which is
the more probable, that she was a Cananitish woman, and forsook the Idolatry
of her own country, to worship the true God.

Now concerning this pair, thus met in this action, diverse points are to be
considered. 1. Judah.
First, that Judah had given two of his sonues in marriage to this Thamar, Er
and Onan: the first of them being wicked in the sight of the Lord, (and yet
his wickedness not expressed) therefore the Lord slew him; and by him she had
no issue. Secondly, he gave his second son Onan unto her, that he might raise
up seed unto his brother; which order was for the continuance and preservation
of the stock and Family; and so the child begotten of the second brother
should have the name and inheritance of the first; which we know was afterward
confirmed by Moses: Deuteronomy. 25.1.
Hic mos fuit, crimen non fuit, August.
to use the words of Saint Augustine; this was then the manner, it was not
holden for any fault. Now this second brother doing wickedly in the fight of
the Lord, and his wickedness mentioned, verse 9. therefore the Lord slew him
also, neither by him had she any issue.

Judah having thus lost two of his sons he dissembles with Thamar concerning
the third, and here was the ground of all the future mischief: he wills her to
remain a Widow till his third son Shelah were grown up, and yet had no
purpose to give Shelah unto her: Hinc illae Lachrymae.
For he thought thus, ne forte moriatur etiam ipse; lest he die also as well
as his other brethren, (for he supposed her to be the only cause of the death
of his other two sons.) Now this seems to aggrauate Iudahs sin, who
persuades her to remain a Widow in hope of Shelah, and yet had no purpose to
give Shelah unto her. So you see, all is not right with Judah here at the very
first.

Come we nearer to the matter it self. Augustine: Malum est mulierem videre,
peius alloqui, pessimum tangere. It is ill enough to look upon a woman, worse
to talk with her, Job 31.1. 1. Cor. 7.2.
but worst of all to do the worst of all. See here I pray, how Judah treads
every step, and how wonderfully he was infatuate, besotted, blinded in this
action. For first he saw her, verse, 15. and judging her by the manner of her
sitting to be an Harlot, he went and talked with her about the bargain: to
which, there went more then a word. For ere he could strike it up, there was
first the promise of a Kid. Secondly, Et vendit quod vtrumque tuuat quod
vterque peiebat. Ovid. lib. 1. Eleg. 10.
the Pledge which she demanded for her better assurance, his Signet, his Cloak,
his Staff; and notwithstanding all this conference and communication too and
fro, betwixt them, yet he discernes her not. All which, being duly considered,
we may see how wholly he was given over unto lust; and how great a measure of
stupidity he was stricken into, turned into a very stone after he saw her,
Ovid. Metam.
as they were who beheld Medusa. When all his senses, the stars of this lesser
world, were ouercast with such a cloud, Prou. 6.32.
that his understanding could not say unto him, as the Ship-master said unto
Jonah, Jonah 1.6.
What meanest thou O sleeper? That neither his eye nor his ear, which he
carried about with him as two secret Spies, could view or discern this Jericho.
It seems his lusts had bored out his eyes, as the Philistimes did Sampsons:
Judges 16.21.
or that for the time he had a spice of the Falling sickness; Plinio shows
the nature of it, Plinius Not. hist.
that the eye being wide open sees nothing. The ear happily spoke to the eye, as
Abimelech to the folk that were with him; as thou see me do, Judges 9.49.
2. King. 25.1. Romans 1.28.
do thou the like. I Will be deaf, be thou blind: and thus, as Zedekiah,
blind, and bound, was carried perforce to Babell: So Judah to a work of
confusion, even to do the thing which was not seemly. How greatly (think
you) was this man dulled and ouerborne by his affections? Which as it may be
approved by many examples of the like nature, to set out man's nature in the
like, so we cannot have a better president then from himself in another case.
He took a wife, when he was very young; and notwithstanding to have affinity
with the Cananites, was condemned of God as abbominable, yet he marries into
their stock, and which is more, without consent of parents (which yet in his
own children he required.) And as Caesar abridged the manner of his victories
over Egypt, in three words, Venit, vidit, vicit; He came, he saw, he overcame;
So in three words, Judah huddles up his bargain with this Cananitish woman:
Vidit, accepit, cognouit: He saw her, he took her, he went in unto her. Which
shows how rash and retchlesse we are without our right guide, yea and even how
shameless in our actions, when God turns us over to our lusts, and to the
sinful affections of our own hearts. Neither was this unpunished in Judah,
thus matching himself into this accursed stock: for God blessed him not; he
grew so unfortunate in his posterity, that he might have wished with Augustus
Caesar, Suetonius O Vtinam coelebs vixissem orbusque perissem.
he had had neither wife nor child. For even the fruits of this Marriage, Er
and Onan were accursed of God. And thus will it ever come to pass, where God
is neglected, and our carnal affections bears the sway.

Thirdly, Thamar, he labors to conceal it as much as he can. For when he had
sent the Kid, to redeem the Pledge, and the Messenger could not find her, he
satisfies himself without further inquiry, Accipiat sibi, Let her take it,
says he, without more ado, ne forte simus contemptui, lest if al come to
light we be ashamed. Thus he fears man more then the God of Heaven that made
man; and the shame of men he stands in more awe of, then the dreadful presence
and Majesty of God. The credit and reputation of his name, he preserues,
prefers, Omnia si perdat, if he lose all, yea even God himself, who is all in
all; yet will he not incur shame and reproach at the hands of men; as if God
did shut up his eyes in boxes, and were in a deep slumber, as if his
all-seeing eye were not present, yea, even with them who would avoid his
presence; as if he took no account of man's iniquity, or that the holy One of
Israel would not be revenged.

Fourthly, to lay open the wound yet more. Maxim: Every voluptuous Prince is
cruel; and the more, if necessity constrain him: as here this great man,
Judah adiudgeth Thamar for this fact to be burnt; not for any such reason I
rendered before, but hereby he thought to be rid of Thamar, and so his son
Shelah might be at liberty to marry elsewhere. For no doubt had not this been
his purpose, he would not have been so forward, so resolute. He would rather
have expostulated with her concerning the Fact; For was there no orderly
proceeding to be had? Does he settle his Judgment upon the first impression
to have her dispatched? Had she been married to two of his sons, Er and Onan;
and is his favor no better, nay are his words so bitter, the words of death?
Surely yea: here is but a word and a blow. As peremptory was he, as ever was
David; 2. Sam. 11.5.
The man that has done this shall surely dye; and little thought it concerned
him so near. Educite eam, Bring her forth, Verse 24.
he spoke imperatiuely, and this was generosum, and spoken like a King; but vt
comburatur, that she may be burnt, and her complaint not entered, her cause not
heard, this was scelerosum, and spoken like a Tyrant. Nay, here is one thing
more, that fills up the measure of his iniquity, and makes him wicked above
measure; for he would have had her dispatched being great with child. Here was
nihil virtutis, besides the first syllable, nihil humanitatis besides the Name,
Pietatis omni^o nihil. Nay rather Excede pietas, Be gone piety, be gone.
Though he had not regarded her, because she had offended, yet (me thinks) he
should have respected the poor infant, who offended not: could it speak to
any other, then to the bowels that bare it? Or plead at any Bar either for it
self, or the Mother; being as yet imprisoned in the Womb, and not so soon
enlarged, as it should have been enwrapped with the slames of Death? 2. King.
8.
The tears in the eyes of Elisha I can scarce remember without tears; when so
earnestly he eyed Hazael, knowing that amongst other villainies committed by
him, he should rend in pieces women great with child: I pray, what answer
made Hazael again, Is thy servant a Dog that he should do this thing? So
brutish, so inhumane? Deuteronomy. 24.16.
How did God provide against this Rigor, when he made a Law, that the Child
should not suffer for the Father, nor the Father for the Child? When Judgment
of death passes upon a woman with child, the execution is deferred till she be
delivered. This was practiced amongst the Athenians and it was the Law of the
ancient Romans: Aelianus lib. 5.
Suetonius in vita Claudij Eras. in Paedagog.
Yet Suetonius (who wrote the lives of the twelve Caesar's) and indeed he wrote
(as Erasmus wittily, eadem liberate qua ipsi vixerunt, even as freely as they
lived,) reports of Claudius, that he spared not to put to death women great
with child. General History of Spain. Page 420.
Such was that horrible outrage of the Sicilians upon the French, mentioned in
the general History of Spain, who slew them with such cruelty that where
they knew any women of their own Nation begotten with child of the French,
they ripped open their wombes, and slew both women and children, because they
would be sure to leave none of their French seed in the Country: answerable
to this was the clemency of Q. Acts and Monuments. Page 129.
Mary's Bishops, who burning a woman great with child, her womb burst, and the
Babe sprang forth, which laboring to avoid the flame; they took and cast into
the fire again. I will say no more; but surely this was an hard doom for
Thamar, Hexapla. in Genesis page 302.
and so much the more unjust, because this punishment was not arbitrarie in
Judah, for he had no such authority; an honorable man he was indeed, but
no Magistrate there, to command the execution of any such Justice.

Judah is now at the highest. Concerning Thamar, 2. Thamar.
if we pull off her veil, we may easily see, that though it covered her face,
yet it could not cover her sin. For though Judah knew her not to be Thamar;
yet Thamar knew him well enough to be Judah: and it is more then manifest, that
she willingly committed this Incest. And say she did it not in any desire of
inordinate lust, as it is like she did not, but rather successionis gratia,
desiring only to have issue: Et ex ea familia quam delegerat, and of that
Family and I ribe too that she had chosen. Nay go further; say that she
desired issue by Judah, in hope of the Messiah, which could not be, for she was
a Cananitish woman: and the Mystery that the Messiah should come of Judah,
Genesis 49.10.
was not as yet revealed: I say though her intention was never so good, yet
does it not make the action good. For it is not enough for a man to propound a
good end, but the means whereby he is to accomplish it must be also good. The
procreation of children, a thing lawful to be desired, and the blessing of God
goes along in the vigor and strength of it, and God has set down a lawful
order for the same, and that the generation of mankind should run in a right
course; therefore it is wicked and abominable, by unlawful means to seek to
compass it: Romans 8.3.
We know the Apostles rule, Romans 8.3. therefore that which of it self is
lawful and good, it turns to sin in us, when it is compassed by unlawful
means.

Again, I doubt not but Thamar sinned even against her conscience: For she
knew she did not well to put off her widows garment, and to disguise her
self to deceive him. For she covered her face. Some say she colored and
painted her face; 2. Kings 9.33.
which though it be a trick of Harlots, and thereby many a Iezabell make
themselves meat for Dogs; yet in Thamar there was no such matter, she only
covered her face with a veil: yet is not that rendered for a reason, why Judah
thought her to be an Harlot, but why, he knew her not; which if he had,
undoubtedly he would never have committed that evil with her. And this I think
is the worst can be said of her: whatsoever the opinions of men are, Vir and
mulier aequaliter peccant per luxuriam. Raim. Lullius. cap. 77.
it appears by many circumstances, that Judah was the greater offender: he
aiming principally at lust, she at issue. Nay ex ore suo, they are the words of
his own mouth, Iustior me est: she is more righteous then I: as if he should
say, she has cause to condemn me, and not I her: and will you know the
reason? I gave not unto her Shelah my son. And so much for the Persons.

Now concerning the Nature and Quality of the sin, 2. The nature of the
sin.
Incest. It is the unlawful accompanying of man and woman within the Degrees
forbidden. Against which, God set down a large Law, Leu. 18.15.
Leu. 18. and in the 15. verse is just Iudahs case: Thou shall not discover the
shame of thy Daughter in Law, If it be objected that this Law was not extant in
Iudahs time, and therefore could be no Rule for him; Law of Nature.
Judah had that written on the Table of his heart, which God afterward wrote in
Tables of stone; whereby he knew he had not done well, and which might be some
cause of his remorse, as afterward is declared. Again, the practice of the
godly, in the times wherein he lived, and the faithful traditions of the Fathers
might discover it to be a fault. The having of many wives was a sin. For God,
for one Adam made but one Eve: Genesis 2 18. Genesis 7.1.
and God commanded there should go into the Ark no more women then men, no more
men the^ women: Noah and his wife, his sons and their wives. The first that was
known to have two wives was Lamech a wicked man, Genesis 4.19.
descended of that good Bird Cain. And even in the Patriarchs, this Polygamy
has been diversely excused, as a matter of some necessity. And though custom
for many Wives, August. lib. 22. contra Faustum. cap. 47.
yea and for Concubines too, might be pretended, yet to accompany, as Judah
here does, with any so nearly allied, either in Consanguinitie, or Affinity,
Genesis 29.30. Leah. Rahel. Ephesians. 5.3.
there was no such custom; even his Father Jacob sinned, by going in to two
Sisters. Concerning this sin, I will not speak any more, it is not to be
named but with hatred and detestation. We ought to pray unto God that he would
keep us from these sins; our Families, our Cities, our Nation. For though
God through his singular providence can turn evil into good, and out of evil
can produce good, as here of Iudahs incest with Thamar, who begat Phares, and
Phares, Esrom, and Esrom, Aram; and so ye know the period of that line, Christ:
Yet where these sins are committed, there can nothing be expected, but the
dreadful vengeance of God to be powered out. And though we find in Scripture,
as one well observes, Musculus super Genesis cap. 19.
that many virtuous women, accompanying with their husbands were barren, or at
most, hardly conceived; as Sara, Rebecca, Rahel, Anna: Contrariwise diverse
others, says he, vno illegitimo concubitu conceperunt, as Bethsheba with
David, and here Thamar with Judah; and not only vno, but primo, as Lots
daughters being virgins, with their own father: I say, though this comes to
pass, yet does it not argue, that God (who in this case blesses nature, as
it is his work, and not the unlawful action of the workers,) favors these
unlawful commixtures any whit the more, but it shows rather, that he will
reveal, discover, and bring such secret wickedness to light, which to the
wicked and unrepentant, works confusion: to them, in whom the remainders of
grace are not wholly extinguished, and whom God has a purpose to reclaim, it
works their conversion, and amendment of their naughty life; as in David was
most apparent, and here in Judah remains to be proved.

The whole Scripture (says the Apostle) is given by inspiration, and is
profitable to teach and to instruct; 2. Tim. 3.16.
and therefore not to be locked up in Coffers, as the books of the Sybils in
Rome; or as the sentences of Pythagoras, which no man might read; or as the
Jews in the time of Josiah, kept the Book of Deuteronomie, closely in
corners, where no man might find it; but Whatsoever is written, is written for
our learning. Surely the holy Ghost, from whom every little sentence and
parcel of it breaths, was not diligent without cause, so fully to express
this Incest, so fowly committed. Amongst many other reasons, out of question
these three were the principal.

First, Grandfathers, the Beaupeeres of the world. Often we find in
Scripture, men of eminent place, of great employment, of special favor with
God, yet have fallen very dangerously; as here Judah into Incest with his
daughter in Law; Genesis 19.36. Genesis 9.21. Genesis 20.12. 2. Sam. 11.4. Mat. 26.24.
1. Cor. 10.12.
Lot into the same sin with his own daughters; Noah, who saw two worlds,
into Drunkenness; Abraham into Lying; David into Murder and Adultery; Peter
deny Christ and forswear him. The Apostles rule must here take place; Let him
that thinks he stand, Ambrose.
take heed lest he fall: Labi humanum, prolabi Diabolicu^. We do freely
confess and acknowledge the infirmities of holy men, to the shame of this
flesh and blood that we bear about us, and to the glory of God. The Scripture
has not concealed them, and we ought to make a good use of them; as an ancient
Father says, Patriarchae nos instruunt, non solu^ docentes, sed etiam
errantes: we may learn many good instructions, as well from their sins, as from
their graces; as well from their faults, as from their virtues. Therefore if
these holy men of God, these Worthies of the world fell so dangerously, it
should be our daily prayer unto God, that he would hold us up, against all
the temptations of the Devil, allurements of the world, and prouocations of
our Flesh whatsoever.

A second reason why the Incest of these two is related, Inuenall.
Nil nisi Cecropides, I tell you he will be noble or nothing. In the 8. of
John, they told Christ to his face, that they were not the children of
fornication: John 8.41.
Now this serves to abate their pride and insolency, here may they see what
manner of beginning they had; here is the Rock whence they were hewn, their
generation is known to the world. Let them look back to their great Ancestor,
the Prince of their Tribe, and they shall find sufficient matter of
humiliation.

Thirdly, Iudahs Incest was yet for a further cause more then all the rest. We
know that Christ came of the Tribe of Judah; and in that golden Genealogy in
the Gospel. Mat. 1.3.
Judah is numbered amongst others in the series and Rank as Christ's Ancestor,
who begat Phares and Zara, of Thamar. Now the holy Ghost, in reckoning up the
progeny and descent of Christ, glanceth at the notorious sins of Judah, as
he does the like of David; and therefore does not only say, he begat Solomon,
of her who was the wife of Vriah: where David is detected for his Murder and
Adultery. So Rahab the Harlot is also mentioned in that line, as an Ancestor
of Christ, who was married to Salmon a Prince of the Tribe of Judah.

Truth seeks no corners, and the holy Ghost who is the author of truth, will
not conceal these gross blemishes and stains, even in those, who according
to the flesh were the ancestors of Christ. What should this mean? To have our
line drawn from incestuous and adulterous commixtures, we hold it no small
infamy and disparagement. It is noted for a dishonor unto Claudius Caesar,
Suetonius,
that his Father Drusus was begotten in Adultery. Judge. 11.1.
Iphtah the Giliadite was a valiant man, Judge. 11.1. but he was the son of
an Harlot, there is his blemish. Judah honorably descended, the Praise of the
Lord, according to the interpretation of his Name; he saved the life of his
brother innocent Joseph by his counsel, Gen 31.27.
moved no doubt even by Gods Spirit so to do: yet (by your leave) he gave
advice to sell him to the Ismaelites; he went from his brethren, ioynes
himself with the Cananites, marries into their stock, defrauds Thamar of her
husband, commits Incest with her, and cruelly adiudgeth her to be burnt. Here
is heaping of sin upon sin, as they which built Babell laid one brick upon
another; and must he be the Tribe, even the very Prince of it, whence the Holy
and blessed Redeemer of mankind should descend?

Surely yea: for in him, that is, Christ, there was treasured up all riches of
grace, Col. 2 9.
and he indeed not to be made noble by his stock or parentage, neither did
the gross infirmities of his progenitors any whit disparage him; for he
cleansed and purified all in his holy and unspotted Conception. He could have
made choice of another race, but herein, herein appeared his wonderful
humility, abasing himself in that, wherein men for the most part are wont to
be proud of, I mean blood and parentage. The whole course of his life,
Augustine.
witnessed his humility, Fecit te, fecit multa propter te; nay propter te
fecit seipsum: He made thee, he made many things for thee; nay for thee he made
himself; Phil. 2.7.
What? Of no reputation, says Paul, Phil. 2.7. he took upon him the shape
of a servant, and humbled himself unto the death, even unto the death of the
cross. He humbled himself not only in his death, but in his life; not only
in his life, but in his birth; not only in his birth, but even before his
birth; in his race, in his descent, Vt qui pro peccatoribus moriturus erat,
Muscul. in Mat.
per peccatores patres auceret generationem; says Musculus, upon the first of
Matthew, That he who was to die for sinners, derived his race from sinful men.
Non liberaretur humanum genus, nisi Christus dignaretur esse humanus, August.
says S. Augustine, he must become man, to deliver mankind: and he must pay
the price of sin, Gregor in Moralibus.
who knew no sin. Nisi ipse indebitam mortem susciperet, nunquam nos a debita
morte liberaret, says Gregory in his Morals: Unless he had suffered a death
not due, he could never have freed us from the death that was due; not due to
him, but to us most due. Neither was it necessary that his purity and
sanctity should depend upon his Ancestors, for he was holiness it self, and
all their impurities were cleansed away in his purity; their sins of Crimson,
Esaias 1.18.
he made as white as Snow; and their sins of Scarlet, as white as Wool. So
much for the second point.

We had done with Thamar before. 3. Iudahs remorse. Ovid. Metamorph.
She conceiues by Judah, Conceptaque crimina portat; as the Poet spoke of
Myrrha, and at the appointed time, her womb was eased of the Burden. Heb. 121.
Judah for his part had a burden too, a burden of sin that pressed him down,
and lay heavy at his heart; and now he goes about to lighten himself of it.
You have heard heretofore an hard discourse against Judah; his sin discovered
and laid open. Yet when I spoke hardest of him, I might have said unto you in
the language of the Shunamite unto her husband, 2. Kings 4.32.
or of Domitians Crow, upon the Top of the Capitol, (...), Suetonius.
All shall be well. For you shall now hear better of Judah then you have
heard. Blessed, O blessed is that man, who though he has spent himself in
perverse ways, displeasing unto God, can yet with Judah remember himself, lay
his hand upon his heart, be pricked in conscience with remorse for his sin;
and say, Lord I have offended thee in this or that sin, and as near as I can
(Lord) I will offend thee no more: I will be no more incontinent; no more
unchaste; I will be no more covetous, contentious, no more proud; I will be no
more false in my weights and measures; I will be no more riotous, drunk,
profane. I say again, blessed is the man that has this remorse, to renounce
his pleasures, to abandon his vices, as Judah here abandoned Thamar, and as the
Text says, lay with her no more. The fool, says Solomon, makes but a sport
of sin. Prou. 14.
Yet fares it with him as with the silly Fly, who pleases it self with the
light and burns it self with the flame: and I pray what folly is this, that
a man should purchase a small delight, with an endless pain; a short
pleasure, Breuis voluptas poena perpetua. Hierom.
with a perpetual punishment? Or that Natures corruption should strike as
great a hand with us, as the Devil does with Citizens, when he gets them to
leave their honest Trades, and turn Usurers? So, whereas the Apostle says,
God, has not called us to uncleanness, 1. These. 4.7 verse 8.
but unto holiness: we despising this, reject the calling of the Saints,
holiness; and trade with that soul spirit in all uncleanness. But Judah here
in time bethinkes and recals himself. Though he was auersus and had done
naught, yet would he not be peruersus, and be worse then naughts though his
bones had been defiled, yet would he not have them filled with the sins of
his youth; no: Job 20.11. Heb. 12 1.
he entends now to cast away that which presses down, his sin which cleaued
to him so fast, to run a new race, and to set up his rest with God. It is
said of Sertorius, Plut. in vit. Sert.
that because in his life time he had been assailed with many misfortunes,
therefore he resolved to live at the fortunate Hands: Judah, I tell you, had
rubbed out some in his children, in himself, and he thought this was not the
way to run on still; therefore he will divert his course, Acts 27.8.
and ariue at the Cape, De bona esperance, as Paul at the fair Havens; so he
at the mercies of the most highest. Now will he look up unto God, and say with
the same spirit that David; did Now verily I trust yet (for all this) to see
thy goodness, Psalm. 27.15.
O Lord, in the land of the living.

But I forget my self. Why do I stay so long in the porch, let me go up to
the Altar. Judah here tenders his Heart unto you to be sacrificed. For as David
says; A contrite heart is a sacrifice up to God. Psalm. 51.17.
We will turn it up and down, view it a little, and if we can, search the very
secrets of it. He resolves, no more to fall into this sin, his heart is
touched, and touched with Remorse. Let us examine what might be the causes of
this his remorse; and then judge of the likeliest, as we see cause.

First of all, remorse, for that he had wronged Thamar by dissembling with
her. A man were better be an open foe, then a dissembling friend, to wear a
white garment lined with purple, as Alexander spoke of Antipater. A man should
not be foris Cato, intus Nero, carry heaven in his Face, hell in his heart: But
the tongue and the heart they should be Relatiues. In men they are so, says
one; but they are not so in women. Judah cannot be free of this fault, he had
promised to Thamar, his third son Shelah, and it seems she was impatient of
the wrong. For it is rendered for a reason, why she attempted this this thing;
because Shelah was now grown up, and was not given unto her: he did but only,
Verba dare, courtiers fashion, good words she had enough, and honorable usage,
but he had no purpose in his heart to do her right. Now we know nothing gals
a man more, then when he reapes the fruit of his own dissimulation, and feels
the smart of it in his conscience; and if you think this was no cause of his
remorse, we will go further.

The consideration of her with whom he had committed this evil; his daughter
in Law: her, who had been the wife of two of his sons; Er his first son,
Onan his second? And with her to commit incest; was it not odious, was it not
abominable? Those Roman lads shall be infamous to the latest generations of the
earth, for their wickedness in this kind. Fandi, nefandi: Quis far posset
principem per cuncta caua corporis libidinem recipientem cum ne billuem quidem
talem quisquam ferat Romae. Lamprid. ad Constable sup. De Heliog.
What say you to Heliog abalus that vessel of filthiness, as his successor
Alexander Seuerus called him. Nero, that monster of nature, who knew his own
mother. Tiberius, who erected an Office in Rome (never heard of before) called
a Voluptatibus. Caligula, Commodus, and the rest. All these, the very
Antesignani of this vice, some with their Sisters; some with their Neeces; some
with their Daughters. And against one Emperor, I think I might set five
Popes: those un- Holy Fathers, Fathers indeed. One wrote of Innocent the 8.

Octo nocens pueros genuit totidemque puellas,
Hunc merito poterit dicere Roma patrem.
Which I English thus.

Eight boys, eight girls, bad Innocent begot:
To call this man Father, Rome scorn it not.
But for their notorious and incestuous vitiousnesse in this kind, Monstra and
portenta. Plat.
Platina calls them Prodigious monsters against kind. What should I say,
silence is best in that which is so much abhorring to nature. And if you think
this no cause of his remorse, we will go yet further.

The consideration of the issue and birth it self, Phares and Zara, borne, I
say not the children of Fornication, but even of Incest. How might it make him
blush and hang down his head, when he could not look upon the fruit of his
body, but he must behold the sin of his soul. He could not have seen a spot
in his face, more plain in a glass, then this soul spot of incest in the
faces of these little ones, borne unto him. Well, Bor^^as in hunc locum.
that they are thus, Non culpa est filiorum, sed sola parentum. It was no fault
of the childrens, but the sinful act of their parents. Wisd. 4.6.
And if it be true, that wisdom speaks, That the children borne of the
wicked bed, they shall be witnesses against the wickedness of their parents;
for by reason of their sin, Ecclus 41.10.
they are in reproach. Ecclus. 41: surely this might touch the conscience of
Judah with some remorse. For what wrong do they to holy Marriage when they
seek to compass the fruit of it, quite out of that order which God has set
down? Genesis 2.18.
For it is Gods ordinance, and thereinto he secretly infuseth his grace, whereof
he depriues Adulterine and spurious offspring. As appears especially in that
they are forbidden entrance into the congregation of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 23.2.
even to the tenth generation; as if God should say, They shall never enter.
Reasons may be these. First in regard of the ignominy and reproach of their
birth, as that which comes forth with shame, and proceeds otherwise then that
due course which God has set down. Secondly, because these through want of
Gods blessing, seldom prove good: though I confess the rule holds not
always; Heroum filij noxa Pro.
for Gods mercy has a prerogative, and God will have it appear, that
goodness is his gift, and that it comes not by propagation, or ex traduce from
our parents; but for the most part, such offspring, is viciate and corrupt. We
know the proverb; Malus coruus, malum onum; like bird, like egg. A third
cause of this inhibition was to extol holy Marriage, and to advance the houses
and Families of them that lived chaste, to encourage them to keep their
vessels pure, that their posterity might not be rejected, or deprived of this
blessing. For if the Adulterous brood should have had equal privilege of
honor, and entrance into the congregation, with the righteous seed, holy
wedlock should have grown into a contempt: but because God will stand by his
own ordinance, therefore he will reject such adulterine commixtures with
fastidiousnesse and disdain. Now the consideration of this, namely, the
disaduantaging of his issue wronging the fruit of her womb, and bringing upon
it that incestuous defilement and pollution, this might be a cause of some
remorse. For though God forgave the offense, yet the blot of it, all the tears
that ever he could shed, were never able to wash away. And if this were no
cause, we will go yet further.

Judah was a Prince and an honorable man: Qua semel amissa postea nullus eris.
Ouidius.
Now his birth, his worth, his reputation, to be blemished with so foul a
stain, so great a sin as Incest: a man of so high place, to fall into so
base an action, to give so ill an example, so foul a scandal; this might
touch him near, for such a one shall find dishonor, says Solomon, Prou.
6.33.
and his reproach shall never be done away. Nothing more forcible and perswasiue
with the vulgar, then the examples of great men. The lives of such stand like
looking glasses before the peoples eyes; Validiora sunt exempla quam verba:
Bern.
Their examples are of greater persuasion, then the persuasion of their words.
A great man of a good life, Et carbo and la^pas est: says a Father; he is a
Cole burning, and a Lamp shining, and sibi ardet, and aliis lucet, Gregor.
super Ezech. Hom. 1.
he warmes his own conscience, he heates himself well, and he shows a good
light unto others also. Lib. de pastore. De consideratio: ad Eugenium.
Saint Augustine makes him a murderer, who lives aloft, and lives ill. Qui in
conspectu populi male viuit, quantum in illo est, occidit: and Bernard: Seeds
prima, and vita ima: The first and forwardest in esteem and place, the basest
and beastliest in behavior and life, Monstruosares: he cries out of it. This
Incest in Judah a foul blemish in so great a man: his ill example might do
great hurt. It was bad enough that Jeroboam sinned; but is far worse, that
he made Israel to sin. Tantum est peccare Authoribus illis.
Great men's sins, are great maimes to the commonwealth; and many base sellow
will countenance himself with Vices, as well as with their coats of Arms,
which as they presume to bear without right, so having such Authors, (who
seem to sell sin upon warrantise,) are the bolder to offend without check.
It is not so great an evil, that they are evil in regard of themselves; but
that they draw evil men unto greater evil, by their evil example. The
Prophet objected it to David, 2. Sam. 12.
that by this foul sin he committed, he had caused the enemies of God to
blaspheme: And if you think the consideration of this did not touch him with
remorse, we will go yet further.

To see himself so grossly ouerseene and ouer-reached even by a woman. Judge.
9.54.
Abimelech, Judge. 9. had rather his Page should thrust him through, then it
should be said, A woman slew him. Richard Plantag. D. of York. Henr. 6.
That most heroic spirit of York, chose rather with an handful of men, to
issue out against the Queens great Army; then it should be said, A woman
cooped him up in his Castle. It goes against the heart of greatness, to be
ouer-reached or kept under, either by inferior or equal. Honor is haughty,
and dignity impatient of the least indignity; yet they who strive most to
keep their minds from baseness, cannot always keep their fortunes from
declining.

Amongst all Jacobs sons, none sinned more grievously then Ruben and Judah:
Gen 35.22.
both in Incest. The one defiling his fathers Concubine, the other his sons
Wife: Yet when all the rest conspired to kill their innocent brother; Ruben
saved him by his mercy, Genesis 37.21.27.
and Judah by his wisdom. That Judah was very politic and wise, appears in
his speech to the rest of his Brothers, Hexapla. in Genesis
concerning Joseph; What will it avail us (says he) to kill our brother,
though we keep his blood secret. I will tell you what we will do, sell him
to the Ismaelites. Now by this, as one well observes, Judah went about very
politiquely to avoid three inconveniences. First, the guilt of bloodshed, that
was a maine thing he would not be touched with; the spilling of blood.
Secondly, whereas Jacob was wonderfully affected toward him, because he was
the son of his old age, his reach was, by selling of him to these Merchants,
to work an impossibility that his Father might never see him. Thirdly, by his
course, he thought to prevent the honor that Joseph dreamt of; namely, that
the Sun, the Moon, and the 11. Stars, did reverence unto him; which his Father
interpreted of himself, his Mother, and the rest of his Brothers.

Yet this man, as deep and as politic as he was, how grossly is he here
ouer-reached even by a seely woman; as a man may say catched in a fools trap.
Imposturam fecit and passus est. Here was the deceiuer himself deceived.
Thamar had shorn his Fleece, and so for a time, Judge. 16.19.
Judah had lost his wit, as Sampson lost his strength: For whiles he thought
politiquely to avoid one mischief, in regard of his son, he fell into a
greater in respect of himself. And here is the fruit of all humane policy,
besides the sting it leaves behind, and the poor conscience set upon the
Rack, they are many times circumuented in the plots and proiects, caught in
their own snares, and overthrown in their own devises. Our age have not
wanted experience of such politicians, who having soared aloft in the highest
pitch of favor with their Prince, and have been as stars fixed in that
glorious or be of the state. They needed not have begged for honor, as Saul
did of Samuel; Honor me before this people. 1. Sam. 15.30. Genesis 32.9.
They might have said with Esau; I have enough my brother. Their height have
been like the height of Cedars: yet because they were not upright in heart,
but dissembled in their conscience with God and man; as Ahab in his repentance;
1. Kings 21.27.
some of them subtly turning their outside to one Religion, their inside to
another: Others seeking to compass their lusts through prodigious and
disasterous courses; they have been catched in their own snares, God
discovering their wisdom to be foolishness, and all their devices vanishing
away, as the foam upon the waters. And as the Gibeonites got nothing by their
craft, but perpetual slavery; so they dishonor and reproach; Dead flies,
Judges 9.
causing the sweet ointment of their honorable reputation, to putrify, and
even stink upon the earth, as sometime the bowels of Antiochus did. But thus
will it ever come to pass, that when greatness is not supported with
goodness, Mole ruit sua; it overthrows it self with the own weight. So
justly may it be said of all such polliticians, as Paul spoke of the Gentiles
to another purpose. Cum se prositeantur esse sapientes flulti facti sunt: Romans
1.22.
When they profess themselves most wise, they prove themselves most fools.

I will not precisely say, that either this, or any the former were causes of
Iudahs remorse; but now we will come to the greatest and the last: The
consideration of the sin it self as it was an offense against God. He knew
he had not done well. The horror of the fact condemned him: Genesis 3.7.
the sin presented it self before him, as the sin of Adam; the eyes of his
judgment and understanding were opened, which at the first were dimmed, and
dammed up, that now he saw the foul error he had committed, and no doubt his
sin lay at his door; Genesis 4.7.
his conscience pursues him, attaches him, condemns him. Great is the power of
conscience. He sees, he sees the greatness of his sin, he knows God is
displeased, and therefore is touched with remorse for it. I say again, Great
is the power of conscience. Eadem est index, eadem tortor, eadem Carcer. Ipsa
iudicat, ipsa accusat, ipsa damnat. It is both witness, judge, prison, iaylor.
It judges, accuses, and damneth perpetually. We need no worse enemy then a
guilty conscience; It is like an ill conditioned wife, it makes a man ever
range abroad, he never loves to be at home; he desires not the company of it:
we think it our enemy, as Ahab both thought and spoke of Elias. 1. Kings
21.20.
The rubs and checkes of conscience are full of restless terrors, as if it
were vexed with furies. And surely little rest had Judah, after sin had set
up her rest. For when sin comes into the heart, Aut Caesar, aut nullus. Apoc.
18.7.
she will be Caesar or no body; I tell you she will reign alone, and say with
Babylon, Sedeoregina; I sit as Queen.

But Judah here did by his sin, as Christ did by the evil spirit; Mat. 8.32.
he casts it out; his lustful affections he sent packing, as Christ did the
Devils into the Heard of swine; and said unto them (...), Be gone; his little
pleasure with Thamar turns him to much displeasure, Nocet empta dolor
voluptas. Horat.
and brings him out of favor with God, and all good men. Therefore here is his
resolution, he breaks off his wickedness, and comes at her no more.

Here is the first maine part of Repentance to abandon sin, as the first step
of the ladder to heaven. And I doubt not but Judah ascended the next and the
rest. For what can be more? Being truly touched for this offense, he resolves
no more to touch Thamar. Repentance being nothing else but a transmutation and
change of the mind: (...).
a turning from sin, and a returning to God. Neither is it qualitas or
habitus, but opus a work; and not every work neither, but a work of grace. In
which, Terminus a qu^t Terminus ad quem.
there is something we must renounce, and utterly go from: Something we must
recover, embrace, and have recourse unto. As Lot went from Sodom to Zoar: Genesis
19.18.
so must we go from the dotage of sin, to the knowledge of grace. We must
kill and crucify the old man, with the lusts and concupiscences thereof, and we
must quicken and raise up the new. If we have given over our members to
uncleanness as Judah had here done, we must (address our selves to the
contrary, Ephesians. 4.24.
and) make them the servants of righteousness in holiness; as the Apostle
speaks. These are the passages to the gate of life. Abandon thy sin, and
win heaven: renounce thy pleasures, Luke 16.25. (...). Psalm. 16.12.
and thou shall have pleasures for evermore. No kingdom of glory, if thou
be not first in the kingdom of grace: no kingdom of grace, if thou have
not first abandoned the kingdom of sin. First, in this, we are nats, borne;
in the other, renati, borne again; but in the third, beati, blessed for ever.
Happy is that man, whose second birth has altered and changed the first, for
he shall find peace and joy at the last.

There must be a change of life in every man, else must we pay dearly for it
at our change of death. I pray, what preserved Nineueh from destruction?
Fasting and sackcloth: No, no, says a Father, it was the Renouation and change
of their lives. It is not ciborum abstinentia, Chrysostom. Hom. 3. ad populum
Antioch.
abstinence from meats, that God so much looks after; but peccatorum fuga,
auoidance from sin. What profits it to take down the body by fasting,
says Jerome, and animus intumescit superbia, and the mind swollen and puffed
up with pride? or to be nice forsooth, Jerome ad Caelantium.
and curious in drinking a cup of wine, and yet ira and odio incbriari, make
themselves drunk with malice and contentions: or to whip, chastise, keep
down their bodies by discipline, and yet stand in the defense of public
Stews, and wallow in the profusion of insatiable lusts. It is the renouation
and change of the mind, that is all in all: which arises, not so much from
the wrath of God for the sin; as from the hatred and detestation of it,
because it is sin.

So much for the third point.

I must now draw toward an end. Application in general.
What remains but that with your patience, I set an edge upon all that which
I have spoken with use and application?

When I first chose this Text, I intended not to use it as the Popes porphirie
Stool; or out of any singularity, affecting more to speak of this, then of
any other: neither is it only this particular of Judah that I may stand upon,
but I may run through a Zodiac, an Alphabet of sins. Homo trium literarum.
Plut. Ephesians. 4.28.
And first I may say of the Thief in the words of Paul: Let him that stole,
steal no more: to the Usurer let him oppress no more: to the swearer let him
blaspheme no more: to the Drunkard, let him quaffe no more: and so of the rest.
Apoc. 3.18.
Here is eye-salue for every one. Every man's sin, even ea sola voluptas, is
his Thamar; by which he must do as Judah here does, deal with it no more. And
yet it may be I speak of this sin; because in these days, Non est
flagitium mihi creed adolescentulum scortari. Ter. Adelph.
I see it so little looked after for punishment, as if it were but a light
sin, or not a sin; as Mitio spoke in Terence. I know what I speak. The
common Lawyers have a phrase; The eye of the Law. I am sure it is but a winking
eye, it will see, and not see; for even Temporal Magistrates are much too
blame for their lenity and conninencie in this kind. The unhappy Cynicke said
once, that Great thieves hang up little thieves; but this I am sure, the Law of
Bastardie, and some others, are but as Spiders webbs, as one spoke, the little
flies are caught, and hang by the heels, but great ones burst through.
Therefore Diogenes when he saw a boy play the idle pack, he went and beat
the master; Talia doces, siccine instruis? So when we see these sins of
Adultery, Fornication, Incest, fly about as fiery Serpents, and our lusts
break forth as gusts in a Tempest. Nemo periculosius peccat quam qui peccata
defendit.
When they are impudent audacious, seeking defenses for themselves, and
out-facing us with an whoorish forehead: we must lay the fault upon the
Magistrate, and say with the Prophet; Psalm. 58.1.
It it true? Do ye judge the thing that is right, O ye sons of men? Do ye
punish sin as ye ought, and execute Law with an upright heart? How then
comes it to pass, that these sins are bolstred out, and that men are not
afraid to commit such wickedness? But from the temporal power, let me come to
the Spiritual. O tempora; Cic.
O mores: I am sorry so renowned and famous a Church as this of England, should
have no sharper censure for Adultery then a white sheet. I will not be so
bold as some reverend Divines, to make it a degree of Adultery, to appoint a
light or a sheet punishment for it. Perk. Armilla aurea mandat. 7.
But I hold it much what like the Friars chastisement; and yet the smart of it
is so sore, that, forsooth, there may be a mitigation, by a Commutation of
penance. Commutations.
Somewhat given in the nature of an Alms to redeem the sin; and given, it
may be justly be feared in im- pios vsus as in former times (I pray God it be
not so now:) For in stead of reparations of Bridges, mending Sea-breakes,
manuring Highways, maintenance of poor Scholars; the money went no man
knows whether. Thus making gold to have the virtue that Charity has, Where
money comes in fight, Justice is put to flight.

Judge Dodridge in his charge.

In Anglia qui extra matrimonium mulieribuscommiscentur, deprehensi sacerdotis
imperio, die festo in processu cleri, etc.

Lib 1. de dictis and Fact. Alphonsi.


covering a multitude of sins. Vbipugnat pecunia, ibi expugnatur iustitia.
Money many times puts justice out of countenance, when the one comes in place,
small grace has the other. What; shall I say Dolendum? Immo vero tollendum hoc:
For it is too intolerable in this sinful and vicious age. Aeneas Siluius many
years since, gave this Church a scratch on the face, in his time for this
corruption, declaring the manner of Penance then in use: says he, Si quem
poenae pudet, is auro noxam redimit: he that would not endure the shame, might
buy it off with his money. And if this sheet punishment be but to fill the
purses of corrupt men, it were better there were ordained no punishment at all;
but deal by Adultery, as the Athenians by Perjury who though they made many
severe Laws against other offenses, yet made they none against that. Some say,
it was because they thought no man so wicked as to forswear himself; but the
reason is rendered to be: for that solum Deum existimabant, Merlin in Job.
tanti sceleris, tantaeque nequitiae vltorem esse: They thought God only
fittest and no man else, to be the revenger of so great impiety. And surely
though the lenity and mercy of the Magistrate be so great, that whatsoever
punishment of right be due unto it, yet it passes away from it disguised: and
though corruption in some bad men bear sway against the due execution of Law,
yet that heavenly and vncorrupt Judge, who never yet commuted or dispensed with
any sin: who, of such great wickedness is both iudex and vindex, Genesis 39.7.
the searcher of it out, and the punisher of it; as a seuerior magister, he
will send an unquenchable fire into their bones, to burn up their lusts as the
flame deuoures stubble. And though happily they avoid temporal plagues in this
life, yet God reserues them under judgment, for the life to come, and their
damnation sleeps not. Genesis 19.4.
The Sodomites who burned with unnatural lust, God destroyed with unnatural
fire; and according to the several species and kinds of this sin, God has
several plagues and punishments, varia vitia, August.
varia etiam and supplicia. Men drown themselves in their pleasures, Facilis
descensus Auerni. Virg.
as Leander in the Hellespont, and they shall be drowned indeed in a flood of
fire and brimstone. It is an easy way to Hell: and these go the easiest of
any. For in they ere are they be aware: Prudentius.
as Prudently the Poet sang.

Tu praeceps ad mortis iter, tu Ianua Lethi
Corpora commaculans, animas in Tartara mergis;
And so it is true, and so will be found; when ignobly and basely they defile
their bodies, and satiate themselves in the sea of their brinish lusts, they
plunge themselves headlong into these black, hellish, and infernal deepes.

Well, Application in Particular.
let the use of this concern, First, Great men; Secondly, All men. Of the
first sort if there be any amongst us, present discourse, be their state and
condition what it will, let them here take a fair President from Judah; let
them repent and be grieved, turn from their iniquity, and be sorry for it.
Yea let them lay before them the judgments of God, as iron scourges to drive
them from this sin. I will not here show how it has been punished: I am
sure here is an example of one that repented. Judah lay in this sin but
three months, David an whole year, but being wounded in conscience with
remorse, how does he beseeke God, and humbly entreat, to wash him from his
wickedness, Psalm. 51.2.
and cleanse him from his sin? Those two sins of his, Murder and Adultery, had
they not been repented of, O they would have been unto his soul, as the two
Serpents at the breast of Cleopatra; Plutarch.
they would have stung him to death. How was his body heat with lusts, as a
Bakers oven with flames? yet did he quench and extinguish all with the tears
of his unfeigned repentance. Judah being here touched in conscience with like
remorse, he renounceth this sin, and gives it quite over. Alas, how do we
cover our sin, as Thamar her face, wiping our mouths after our wickedness
with the Strumpet in the Proverbs, bathing our selves in our vices, ar Poppea
in the milk of Asses; Pliny. Suetonius in vita Neronis.
and fishing after our sensual pleasures with Neroes nets, even with nets of
gold and purple, buying the basest sins at the highest price: omitting no
invention, contention, art, study, cost, to compass the unclean desires of
our own hearts? He that created the eye, shall not he see? Psalm. 94.10.
And he that teaches man knowledge, to leave this, shall not he punish? God
has ordained that his Church should be increased by an holy and pure seed,
borne of lawful matrimony: Mal. 2.15.
yet Lord; how impudent are the Adulteries of this effeminate, this wanton and
womanish age? Like Absoloms, upon the tops of their houses, open and known to
the world, to the high displeasure of Almighty God, abuse of holy Marriage, as
if it were but a painted chain, and to the shame and scandal of the whole
Nation. Plutarch tells us of a plague, that began at Ethiopia, from thence
filled Athens, killed Pericles, vexed Thueydides, and spread far. I cannot
tell what to say of plagues; but this I will be bold to speak, that as our
sins spread, so the judgments of God will spread likewise: If we lengthen
out our sins like Cartropes, his judgments shall be like Cables; if we
multiply our iniquities as the mole-hils of the earth, plagues and judgments
shall be as the mountains of God, of incomparable weight to fall upon us, and
to crush us in pieces. O consider this, ye that forget God in the breach of
holy Marriage, the blessing of Paradise, the gate of life, the entrance into
living, the seed-plot of heaven: I say not the bands to knit, but the bounds to
limit, restrain, confine man's posterity in a right and a due course. Shall
nobleness, mightiness, Greatness protect and bear thee out? Say thou be
the greatest Gentleman in the country, or in the Court, as Joseph in his
masters house; Genesis 39.9.
None is greater in the house then I: And that through excellency of wit, or
eminency of place, thou can husband the favors of Princes, for thy greatest
advantage; shall this protect thee in evil, shall it challenge any immunitie,
or privilege to sin? Nay, the greater the wickeder, as one spoke of a Dice
player, Quanto peritior, tanto nequior; the cunninger, the lewder: and as the
wormwood stalk, the bigger it grows, the bitterer it is; so the greater men
are in place, the more distastefull and foul are their voluptuous actions.

Look upon this great man Judah, though he had committed a sin, yet he dwelt
not upon it, he kept not Thamar imparkt, nor did he hurry her up and down the
country in his Coach, he gave her none annuitie, granted her no lease in
Fee-farme: He went to her but once, and his conscience smarted for it: happily
he knew that by how much the greater his person was, the greater was the
sin; and the greater sin, the greater vengeance.

Secondly, all men must be touched in conscience with the consideration of
these particulars. The soul that sins (says God) shall die the death: and
every one must answer for his own self, for his own sin; neither will it
be any plea for us, the following of great men in their evil.

Secondly, if we must needs imitate them, I will show you a more excellent way.
1. Cor. 12.31.
Observe their virtues, and imitate them in their good examples: these, let us
approve, and approving, let us practice. In Julius Caesar's time, every one
praised the hook nose, because he had one; and in the days of Commodus the
long nose bare it away: most men would be Mathematicians under the reign of
Ptolomey: brave soldiers were in account under Xerxes, and Musitions under
Nero; because these Princes were accomplished in these several delights. When
did virtue, and good Arts more flourish, then under Traian the Emperor; in
whose time they say no poor man did ever beg, no learned man did ever want?
Mean men are stirred up for the most part to follow and to apply themselves to
that which most pleases their Princes: if it be but to wear a garment, or
tell a tale after them, or their fashion. Now if we applaud or imitate them in
matters of indifferency, how much better were it, in matters of piety and
virtue? nay, how much worse is it, if in vice and sin? Imitate not Peter in
his perjury; but in his repentance and tears: nor David in his Adultery; nor
Judah in his Incest; but imitate them in their sorrow and contrition: labor to
be stricken with the like remorse: quench thy lusts, abandon thy sin, renounce
thy pleasure, as Joseph withstood his lascivious Mistress, and God will receive
thee into favor again.

Thirdly, Judah ye see had fallen into a grievous and detestable sin, yet he
has true remorse of conscience, and God in his mercy does not cast him off:
Romans 11.29.
The gifts and calling of God are without repentance: and whatsoever he has
decreed concerning any man's salvation shall stand; for his Election changes
not. The seal is surely fixed, 2. Tim. 2.19.
The Lord knows who are his; and those which are once his, are his for ever:
though they fall, yet shall they rise again: and David notwithstanding his
Adultery, shall be continued in his kingdom; and Peter notwithstanding his
perjury, shall be confirmed in his Apostleship: and Judah notwithstanding his
Incest, shall be established in his Patriarchal dignity, and remain the
famous and renowned ancestor of Christ. Yet hence observe two caueats. First,
not to be secure or presumptuous, but rather work out our salvation with fear
and trembling. Secondly, when we have seriously repented of any sin, we must
with Iudaeh never fall into the same again.

Fourthly, ye adulterers and adulteresses, Iam. 4.4.
as the Apostle speaks, who choose to be at enmity with God, that ye might
be at amity with the world: and are ready enough to fall into sin as Judah
was, but never to have his remorse in conscience to leave it: who have eyes
full of Adultery, 2. Pet. 2.14.
and cannot cease to sin, hearts full of uncleanness, Ier. 4.14.
and will not be washed; how long think you, shall God forbear, without
punishment? how long shall your faces be covered, your sins unexamined? Do ye
scoff at God, 1. Kings 13.
as Elias did at Baal? Do ye think he sleeps and must be awaked? Consider
first the greatness of this sin; which appears firstin that it is made the
punishment of another sin, Romans 1.23. Grauitas supplicij grauitatem denotat
peccati. Aug.
that is, of Idolatry. Secondly of all other sins it makes a man most
inexcusable, because God has ordained a remedy against it. Consider secondly,
how wonderful God has been in his judgments against this sin, How
fearful was the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrha, Genesis 19.24. Gehennam misit e
coelo.
when God rained down upon them hell from heaven, fire and brimstone, being
the materials of their subversion? Zimrs together with Cosbi his Midianitish
woman, how suddenly and fearfully were they slain, Numb. 25.8.
whiles they were about this sinful act? How did God make David's heart to
smart, nay, even the heart of his whole kingdom? What a strange and
extraordinary birth had Thamar, even prodigious, monstrous, and with the
wonderful hazard and peril of her life? God no doubt intending hereby to have
Judah and her admonished of the greatness of the sin, and that for the same
they might be truly humbled. Genesis 3.10.
What a grievous punishment laid God upon Adam, but for once eating of an
Apple, which a man would think to be no great sin? Upon Lots wife, but for
once looking back upon Sodom, Genesis 19.26.
which might be thought but a small offense? Yet the one, God cast him out of
Paradise, attainted his whole blood, which could never be restored but by the
blood of Christ: the other suddenly turned in, to a pillar of salt: Vbi
respexit, tbi remansit; where her fault was, August.
there was her fall, where she offended there was she punished where her
offense was committed, there God made her a monument of his vengeance before
she went further. If God will deal thus roundly with us, and take us in our
trappes, for sins but once committed, and in some respect of a lighter
nature, Lord what shall we think will he do, for our whoredoms and
adulteries? so often threatened against by God, so much detested and accursed of
God, as that which brings a man to a morsel of bread, like a fire deuoures him
to destruction, roots out all his increase, destroys the soul, shortens the
life, brings a perpetual infamy and blot upon our name, and these not once
committed, as Iudahs here was and no more, but often, more and more; nourished
with rewards, countenanced with favors, born out with greatness: Are they
ashamed, says the Prophet? No, Ier. 6.15.
they are not ashamed: but still go on with an appetite as insatiable as hell it
self. I demand with Jeremy, Ier. 5.31.
What will they then do in the end thereof? Again, look here but with half
an eye, and see what an infinite measuer of vengeance as a full cloud, hangs
over the church of Rome, as a full cloud black and fearful; where occasions
of Adultery are daily maintained, as the vow of single life in men and women:
The toleration of private Concubines, and public Stews: The permission of
marriages within the degrees forbidden, both by the Law of Nature, and the word
of God. Nay the Palace of the Pope himself; Luitpr. lib. 6. cap. 6.
Sanctorum quondam hospitium, nunc prostibulum meritricum, sometimes the arbor
and harbor of Saints, now far otherwise.

Lastly, how acceptable and pleasing unto God is an holy and chaste life: not
that forced chastity of the Papists; vbi necessitas imponitur castitati,
autoritas datur libideni, says Augustine: August. de Virg.
but when it pleases God to conser that gift to a single life, or in wedlock,
when the holy and pure use thereof is observed. How highly has it been
accounted of even amongst the Heathen? Valerius Maximus reports of a delicate
and beautiful young man, Spurina. Hippon. in marese abtecit, vt morte
pudicitiam tueretur Val. Max. lib. 6. cap 58^. Fulgos. l. 6. cap 1.
that all becut and mangled his face, because he would not be desired of women.
One of the fairest dames in Greece threw her self into the Sea, to save her
chastity. Fifty virgins of the Spartanes killed themselves, because they
would not be deflowred of the Missenians. Lucretia of Rome, forced by
Tarquinius, for very sorrow slew her self: Hippolytus shall ever be famous in
the Tragedy, for withstanding the unlawful lust of Phaedra his stepmother;
who being falsely accused by her, and thereupon pursued by his own Father, the
Chariot brake wherein he fled, and his delicate body amongst the sharp-pointed
flints was rent in pieces. What should I speak of Bellerophon, Pelius, and
others? Joseph in Holy writ is renowned for this, and admired as a glorious
star in that beautiful Sphere of the Patriarchs: Pulchrior in luce cordis,
quam in facie corporis, August.
fairer in the light of his soul, then in the face of his body, says a
Father. Genesis 39.6.
He was a fair person, and well favored, says Moses; and therefore his
chastity was the more conspicuous, eminent, Gratior est pulchro veniens e
corpore virtus.
amiable: as a Ring better becomes a fair hand, then a foul fist; or as the
Diamond has a greater grace fixed in Gold then in Iron. When we affect this
beauty of the soul, (a beam of divine goodness shed into it) whereby our
sensual appetites are subdued to reason, we may be said to be more then men:
for to live chastely is to live the life of Angels; the difference is but only
in faelicitate, Bernard in Epist.
non in virtute; we walk in the one here, the other we shall enjoy hereafter.
It is ornamentum totius ornamenti, it is the Beauty of Beauties, Genesis 29.30.
the greatest ornament of all, and it shall endure, when all corporal beauty
shall be eaten up of worms. Bonam nauem habes, sed malum gubernatorem.
Isoc-Psal. 119.37.
Let us affect this virtue of chastity, as Jacob affected Rahel: The text
says, Jacob loved Rahel, and it well appeared he loved her indeed. If thou
have never so beautiful a body, yet if thy soul be foul and unchaste, I may
say thou have a beautiful ship, but a bad Pylot. Auerte oculos tuos, turn
away thine eyes lest they behold vanity. Impudicus oculus impudici cordis est
nuntius. Aug. Job. 31.1.
An unchaste eye is the messenger of an unchaste heart: A subtle Spy, wanton
and lascivious. Job was feign to make a covenant with it, and it was to the
peril of his soul if he brake it. Let me speak once for all, and speak in
the words of the Apostle: This is the will of God, even your holiness, and
that you abstain from Fornication. 1. These. 4.3 Col. 3.5.
Mortify therefore your earthly members, Fornication, uncleanness, inordinate
affections, evil concupiscence. This is no age licentiously to wantonnize.
This is the day of grace, and ought not to be made the night of sin. Walk
honestly therefore, Romans 13.13.
as in the day, not in chambering and wantonness. But put ye on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts of it.
S. Augustine reading this very place, was converted by it. Let us think upon
this; and upon the day of our common appearance. For as death leaves us, Qualem
te inueniet Deus talem te iudicet. Aug. Job. 20.12 Apoc. 21.27. Apoc. 22.17.
so the day of judgment shall find us. If we die sinful and unclean, Christ
at his coming shall so find us, when all the sins of our youth, which have
been sweet in our mouth, will be as bitter to our soul as Aloes to our taste,
and will be as eager and fierce upon us, as the wolves in the evening. We know
no unclean thing shall enter into the new Jerusalem: Heaven is no Inn to
entertain all comers. Without shall be dogs, inchanters, whoremongers. Labor
then for true remorse, and for unfeigned repentance: Wash thy heart from
wickedness. Make thy body the Temple of the holy Ghost, and let thy soul be
the Holy of holiest, Ier. 4.11. 1. Cor. 6.19. Heb. 9.12. 2. Cor. 6.38. Ier.
31.1. 2 Cor. 7.1. Psalm. 67.7.
where Christ may enter in once for all. If we touch no unclean thing, we
shall be the sons and daughters of God. Wherefore (says the Apostle) having
such promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of our flesh, and
finish our sanctification in the fear of God. So God, even our own God, shall
give us his blessing; God shall bless us, and our race and posterity after us
and make it an holy seed. He will give us a long life in this life, and
eternity of days, in the life to come. He will marry us unto him for ever,
in righteousness, Hos. 2.19.
in judgment, in mercy and compassion. Cant. 1.1.
He will kiss us with the kisses of his own mouth, and give unto us eternal
pledges and testimonies of his love. Cant. 5.12.
We shall hear the voice of our well-beloved; saying, Open unto me my Sister,
my Love, my Dove, mine undefiled. He will set us by his own side; Nay, he
will set us as a seal upon his heart. Cant. 8.8.
We shall be the pleasure of his eye, the very joy of his soul, he will
cause his blessed Angels to keep us company, and to solace themselves with us.
Never, never was the eye of any man, more pleased in the sweetness and beauty
of a face, then God is delighted in the soul of that man, which truly
repents.

Now holy Brethren; Conclusion.
Right Worshipful, and you Honorable Judges: Judah in the end of your circuit
this Lent time, has done his Penance before you; His shame is past, his
offense pardoned, his resolution for amendment apparent to accompany with
Thamar no more. What remains, but that you clear him in your private
judgments, and account him as an honorable Patriarch, a famous and renowned
Ancestor of Christ? When Jacob his father lay upon his deathbed, he
prophesied thus of him: Genesis 49.10. Gal. 4.4.
The scepter shall not depart from Judah till Shiloh come. Shilo came at the
fullness of time; when the Scepter departed, that is, the civil policy and
government of the Jews was dissolved, and transferred to the Romans: The line
and stock of Judah so exactly recorded, so highly accounted, now dis-regarded
and confounded amongst the rest: and Shilo shall come again, Apoc. 1.7. Mat.
25.31
when he shall come with clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they that
pierced him through shall behold him. when this Judah shall stand before him as
pure, as if he had never been defiled, and this offense of His, this great
offense shall be blotted out, when he shall be honored with everlasting
honor, and be clothed with a garment of righteousness down to his feet,
when both He, and we shall stand at the right hand of Christ, Mat. 25.33
and all our iniquities shall be done away, when we shall go up with him into
heaven, and behold the glory of his blessed Saints and Angels, and we our
selves ouer-ioyed in glory: 1. These. 5.23.
Even so Lord Jesus, (fit us for thine own self, and then) come quickly. I
conclude with the prayer of the Apostle: Now the very God of Peace sanctify
you throughout, and and I pray God, that all our hearts and souls may be kept
pure and blameless, until the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

FINIS.

