THE HISTORY OF XENOPHON: CONTAINING The Ascent of CYRUS into the HIGHER
COUNTRIES.Wherein is described THE ADMIRABLE IOVRNEY OF TEN thousand GRECIANS
from ASIA the Less into the Territories of BABYLON, and their retrait from
thence into GREECE, notwithstanding the opposition of all their Enemies.
Whereunto is added A COMPARISON OF THE ROMAN MANNER OF WARS with this of our
Time, out of IVSTVS LIPSIVS.

Translated by IOH. BINGHAM.

LONDON, Printed by John Haviland for Raphe Mabb. 1623.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, HVGH HAMERSLEY, ONE OF THE ALDERMEN AND CORONELS OF
THE CITY OF LONDON, AND President of the worthy Society of CITIZENS
exercising Arms in the ARTILLERY Garden of LONDON; and to all the CAPTAINS
and Generous CITIZENS professing Arms there.
GENTLEMEN: I do not present this Translation unto you, to the end to incite
you to Military cogitations. Your forwardness that way is such already, as
rather deserves commendation, than requires any man's words of incitement or
exhortation; neither will I at this time enter into the large field of the
praise of the Art of War; especially lest I should happily incur the censure
of the old Proverb: Suum cuique pulchrum. But seeing you have taken the
laudable pains to attain to the knowledge of handling your Arms, and of the
several motions of a battle requisite for the service of the Field, wherein
many of you may justly challenge the praise of equalling, if not exceeding the
greatest number of Soldiers, that have a long time followed the wars in
foreign parts, in which also it has pleased you to use my poor endeavor; I
have thought good to adioine to your former Speculation (I hope I may use that
word, considering you have not yet come to the sight of an Enemy, nor
proceeded vsque ad sanguinem) and to present unto you in your own Language, a
Precedent of War of another nature, than you have hitherto been exercised
in, that is to say, the greatest March and Retreat, that ever was found in any
History; wherein are notable Stratagems set out of resisting a multitude of
Enemies in an open Field, of passing Mountains possessed by an Enemy, of
leading an Army through Straights, through Forests, through Woods, through Rivers,
over Bridges, of laying and avoiding Ambushes, of Marching by night, of
resisting Horse, of stilling Soldiers mutinies, of escaping Enemies
machinations, of taking in Forts, of making provision for an Army; in a word,
of all accidents, that may fall out in a long and dangerous March. In reading
whereof, besides the variety of discourse, you may observe many documents fit
for a worthy Soldiers consideration. For they are not to be heard that
contemn the experience of former Times, and think, that the policies used by
ancient Generals match or suit not with our modern Wars. From whence, I
pray, are derived our Motions, and whole manner of exercise now in use, but
from Antiquity? Neither is there any other true difference to be found betwixt
us and Antiquity, in the universal course Military, save only in the use of
Gunnes: Of which the great Ordinance succeed in the place of ancient Engines of
Battery; the smaller Pieces in place of Arrows, Slings, and Darts* Now as I
must confess, that the force and violence of Gunnes is far greater, than of
the weapons missiue used in time past; so me thinks I may truly maintain, that
their place in Battle, and elsewhere, is altogether the same: Shot must have
defense either from Pikes or from other advantage of ground, or else they are
subject to be scattered or overrun by Horse, or the like, as well as the
light-armed of old time. But hereof I shall have other opportunity to speak.
My desire is at this instant that you will be pleased to accept this
presentation, with the same mind it is offered unto you by

16 Maij 1623. Your servant to do all service, JOHN BINGHAM.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF XENOPHON, TOUCHING THE Ascent of CYRUS the
younger, out of Asia the Less, into the Higher COVNTREYS.
DARIUS and PARISATIS had two Sons, of whom the eldest was named Artaxerxes,
the younger Cyrus. And when Darius fell sick, and suspected he should not live
long, he desired to have a sight of both his Sons. The eldest happened then
to be present; he sent for Cyrus from the Province whereof he had made him
Satrapa or Ruler, and had declared him General of all the people, that upon
Musters resorted to the plain of Castolus. A city of Lydia.
Cyrus therefore iourneyed upward to his Father, taking with him Tissaphernes
as a friend, and having for his Guard 300 armed Grecian Foot, under the leading
of Xenias the Parrhasian. After the death of Darius, and crowning of
Artaxerxes, Tyssaphernes accused Cyrus to his Brother, The occasion of the
difference betwixt the Brethren for the treason, see Plutarch in vita
Artaxerxis.
as though he intended treason against him: who being easily persuaded and
induced to believe, caused Cyrus to be apprehended, with intent to put him to
death. But his Mother made intercession for him, set him at liberty, and
remised him to his government. He having been thus in peril, and dishonored,
deliberated after his departure, how to exempt himself from his Brothers
subjection, and to make himself King in his Brothers stead. Their Mother
Parisatis inclined more to Cyrus, loving him better than she did Artaxerxes,
that reigned. And Cyrus, if any were sent to him from King Artaxerxes, won them
so by his courtesies, that they departed better affected to him, than to the
King. Besides, he had that regard of the Barbarians, which were about him, that
he both made them good Soldiers, and purchased their love. As for the
Grecians, he waged them as secretly as he could, to the intent to take his
Brother altogether unprovided. When therefore he made leuies of such, as should
lie in Garrison in his Cities, he commanded the Captains of the Garrisons,
every man apart, to wage as many, and the best Peloponesians they could, under
pretense, Peloponesus was that part of Gree^e which is now called Monea.

Ionia, a part of Asia the Less. Miletus, a City of Car^a.


that Tissaphernes sought to surprise the Cities: For the Ionian Cities were
before delivered to Tissaphernes by the King, but then they all revolted to
Cyrus, excepting only Miletus. And Tissaphernes being in Miletus, and
perceiving they also would turn, and take part with Cyrus, put some to death,
some other he chased and banished out of the City. Cyrus receiving these
banished men, and gathering an Army together, besieged Miletus both by Sea and
Land, seeking to restore them to their Country. And this was also another
pretense of raising an Army. Besides, he sent to the King, and desired him,
that being his Brother, the rule of those Cities might rather be committed to
him, than to Tissaphernes; wherein he was seconded by his Mother, so that the
King perceived not, that reason was intended against him at any hand, but
imagined, that Cyrus waged that Army to war against Tissaphernes; for which
war, he was not greatly sorry, because Cyrus sent to the King the Tribute of
those Cities, whereof Tissaphernes had the command. Another Army was collected
for Cyrus, Abydus, a City lying upon Hellespont, right against Sestos.

A Darick, was a piece of gold of the value of thirteen shillings.

Cherronesus, an Island joined to the Continent of Europaean Thra^^, only by a
Neck of Land.


right over against Abydus, in this manner. Clearchus was banished from
Lacedemon, he came to Cyrus, and Cyrus, after conference and acquaintance with
him, both admired the man, and besides, gave him 10000 Daricks. Clearchus
taking the gold, levied an Army therewith, and passing out of Cherronesus,
warred upon the Thracians, that inhabit above Hellespont, thereby aduantaging
greatly the affairs of the Grecians; and so much in deed he did advantage
them, that the Cities of Hellespont willingly furnished him with money to
maintain his Army. So that this Army also was not descried to be held on
foot for Cyrus. Further, there was one Aristippus a Thessalian, a (...), a
guest, amongst the Grecians was one of another City or Nation, that a man
admitted into his house, and lodged.

Thessaly, a country of Greece. Boeotia, that part of Greece where the city
Thebes stood. S^ymphalus, a city of Arcadia. Achaia, a country of Pelopon^sus.

Pisidia, a Country of Asia.


guest to Cyrus, who being ouerpressed with his Contrymen of the contrary
faction, came to Cyrus, and requested him to spare him 2000 Mercenaries, and
three Months pay, alleging, that thereby he should be able to overcome his
adversaries. Cyrus furnished him with 4000 men, and six Months pay, desiring
him withal, not to agree with his adversaries, till they two had had
conference together. So again this Army in Thessaly was not perceived to be
kept on foot, and nourished for Cyrus. Further, he commanded Proxenus the
Boeotian, who was his friend, to bring unto him as many men as he might, under
pretense of warring against the Pisidians, that spoiled his Country; and
Sophaenetus the Stymphalian, and Socrates the Achaean, who likewise were both
his guests, to come to him with as many men, as they could make, under color,
together with the banished Milesians, to make war against Tissaphernes, which
also they did. Cyrus, after he was resolved to ascend into the higher
Provinces, gave out, that his purpose was to chase the Pisidians wholly out of
the Country, and so assembled both his Barbarian and Grecian troops, as if it
had been against them. And he commanded Clearchus, with the Army which he led,
to come unto him, and Aristippus to compound with his adversaries, and
afterward to send him that Army of his likewise. And Xenias the Arcadia, a
Country of Peloponesus.
Arcadian (whom he had appointed General of the Mercenaries, which he laid in
Garrison in the Cities) to bring unto him those Troops, leaving behind so many
only, as should be sufficient to guard the Cittadels. Likewise he sent for
those that were at the siege of Miletus, and invited the banished men to his
service, promising, if his affairs had good success, not to give over till he
had restored them to their home. They with joy accepted of his proffer, (for
they trusted him) and thereupon came to Sardes. Sard^s, a City in Lydia.

Armed, 11300. Light armed, 2300.

Megara, a City in Greece.

The Grecians that served Cyrus.


Xenias gathered together the Mercenaries in the Cities, and brought them to
Sardes, being in number about 4000 armed foot. Proxenus came with 1500 armed,
and 500 light armed foot. Sophenetus the Stymphalian, with 1000 armed. Socrates
the Achaean, with about 500 armed. Pasion the Megarean, with 300 armed, and 300
Targetiers (or Peltasts.) This last, and Socrates, were of those that besieged
Milet. These Troops came to Cyrus to Sardes. Tyssaphernes having intelligence
hereof, and conceiving that the preparation was greater than fitted the war
against the Pisidians, hasted with as much speed as he could, toward the King,
having with him about 500 Hors-men. And the King, as soon as he heard by
Tyssaphernes, of the Army that Cyrus had raised, made contrary preparation.
Cyrus with the Forces aforementioned, marched from Sardes. He marched into
Lydia, 22 A Parasang contains 30 Stadia, or Furlongs, 8 Furlongs go to a
Mile, so a Parasang is 3 Mile three quarters. 22 Parasangs amount to 82 Miles
and a half, which being divided by 3, the quotient will be 27 and a half, so
he marched every day 27 miles and a half.
Parasangs in three encampings, and came as far as the River Maeander, the
breadth whereof is Plethrum, is 100 Foot.
2 Plethors. A Bridge was laid over the River upon six Ships joined one to
another. Passing over here, he made one encamping in Lydia, having marched
eight Parasangs, and came to Colosse, a great, rich, and well inhabited City,
where he remained seven days. Hither Menon the Thessalian came to him with
1000 armed Foot, and 500 Dolopian, Aenian, and Olynthian Peltasts, or
Targetiers. From thence he marched in three encampings, 20 67 Miles and a
half. 22 Miles and a half every encamping. (...).
Parasangs, as far as Celaene, a great, rich, and well inhabited City of
Phrygia. Here had Cyrus a Palace, and a great Park, full of wild Beasts,
which he hunted on Hors-backe, whenever he was disposed to exercise himself,
and his Horses. Maeander runs through the midst of the Park, the
Fountains whereof arise within the Palace. It runs also through the City
Celaene. The great King has also a strong Palace in Celaene, under the
Citadell, upon the Spring of the River Marsyas, which River runs through the
City, and falls into Maeander. The breadth of Marsyas, is 25 foot. It is
said, that Apollo pulled the Skin of Marsyas over his head (who contended with
him about Wisdom) and hung it up in the Den, where the Spring of the River
Marsyas arises, and that thereupon, the River is called Marsyas. The report
is, that Xerxes flying out of Greece after his overthrow, builded the Palace,
and the Citadell of Celaene. In this place, Cyrus rested 30 days, and
Clearchus, the exile of Lacedemon, came unto him with 1000 armed Foot, and 800
Thracian Targetiers, and 200 Cretan Archers; and Sosias the Syracusian, with
1000 armed Foot; and Sophaenetus the Arcadian, with 1000 armed Foot. Cyrus
took muster, and numbered the Grecians in this Park, 13000 Armed, and light
armed.

37 Miles and a half. The day, 18 miles and more.

These Games were first instituted in the honor of Pan, god of Arcadia. Young
men ran naked in them. Liuius, l. 1. They were called Luper^alia amongst the
Ro^^nes, vide (...) A^cadi is, (...). 456. num^^o. 3^. 517. number. 40.


and found them to be 11000 armed, and about 2000 Targetiers, or Peltasts. From
thence, he marched in two encampings, 10 Parasangs, and came to Peltae, a City
well peopled, there he remained three days, during which time, Xenias the
Arcadian solemnized the Plays, called Lycaea, and proposed games. The games
were Golden rubbers. Cyrus was present and beheld that exercise. From thence,
in two encampings, he marched ^5 Mil^^ Eue^y day 22 m^les and a half.
12 Parasangs, and came as far as the Market of the Ceramians, a City full
of people, the last of the Country of Mysia. From thence, in three encampings,
he marched A great March if it be not mistaken. It amounts to 112 miles in
all. And to more than 37 mile a day. Epiaxa, the Queen of Cilicia.
30 Parasangs, as far as the City called the Plain of Cayster (a City well
peopled) where he stayed five days. By this time, there was due to the
Soldiers more than three Months pay, which they often demanded, gathering
themselves together before Cyrus his door. But he put them off with hopes, not
without manifest signs of coffeehouse in his countenance. For it was not
Cyrus his manner to hold up payment, when he was furnished with money. Here
Epiaxa, the Queen of Syennesis the King of Cilicia, came to Cyrus, and was
said to bring unto him great sums of money, wherewith he paid the Soldiers
their entertainment for four Months. This Cilician Queen, had a Guard of
Cilicians, and Aspendians, about her. The report went, that Cyrus was very
familiar with her. From hence, in two encampings he proceeded 37 Miles and a
half. 18 miles every day and above.
10 Parasangs, even as far as Thymvrium, a well inhabited City. Near the way
leading to this City, there is a Fountain, called the Fountain of Mydas King
of Phrygia, where the fame is, that Mydas hunted the Satyr, mingling the water
of the Fountain with wine. From thence, in two encampings, he marched 10
Parasangs, and came to Tyriaeum, a City full of people; He remained there five
days. Whilst he was there, the report goes, the Cilician Queen requested him
to show her his Army, whose request, he being desirous to satisfy, took a
muster of the Grecians, and Barbarians, in the Plain near adjoining. He
commanded the Grecians to order, and range themselves according to their wonted
manner of embattailing, every Leader directing his own Soldiers. They were
therefore ordered (...). Cl^^^chus, the Chief of the Grecian Commanders in the
le^t Wing.

A muster of the Army of Cyrus. No Cu^aces.


four in depth. Menon, and those with him, had the right Wing; Clearchus, and
his Soldiers, the left; The other Commanders, the midst. Cyrus, and the
Queen, he in his Chariot, she in her Coach, rid up and down, and first viewed
the Barbarians (who passed by, and advanced in Troops, and Companies) and then
afterward the Grecians. They had every man a Brazen Head-peece, a Scarlet
Coat, Greues, and a polished and bright Target. When he had passed by all,
staying his Chariot before the midst of the Phalange, he sent Pigres his
Interpreter, to the Grecian Coronels, willing them to command a Charge (as if
they were to give upon the Enemy) and to move forward with the whole Phalange,
who gave warning hereof to their Soldiers. No sooner therefore had the Trumpet
sounded, but they straightwayes advanced, (...).
holding out their weapons as in a Charge, and then mending their pace, and
giving a shout, they fell of themselves into a Plain, running toward their
Tents. The Grecians put the Barbarians in fear.
Both the other Barbarians were taken with sudden fear, and also the Cilician
Queen forsook her Coach, and the Market-folke, leaving their wares behind,
shifted away every one to save himself. The Grecians not without laughter,
held on forward to their Tents. The Cilician Queen wondered not a little at the
beauty and order of the Army, and Cyrus took as much pleasure to behold the
Barbarians put into such a fear by the Grecians. From hence, in three
encampings, he marched 20 Parasangs, and came to Iconium, 22 Miles and above, a
day.
the last City of Phrygia. He stayed there three days, and from hence, he
marched in five encampings through Lycaonia, 30 Parasangs. 20 Miles and above, a
day.
He suffered the Grecians to spoil this Country, as Enemy. From hence Cyrus
sent away the Cilician Queen by the nearest way to Cilicia, and with her he
sent Menons Regiment, and Menon the Thessalian himself. Cyrus, with the rest,
marched through Cappadocia, 25 Parasangs in four encampings, as far as Dana,
a great, wealthy, and well peopled City. 23 Miles and a half, and upward.
Here he remained three days, within which time, he put to death Megaphernes,
a Persian, the Kings Purple Dyer, and another Ruler of great authority,
charging them with Treason against himself. From hence they attempted to
break into Cilicia, but the entrance was so narrow, The entrance into Cilicia.
that more than one Chariot could not pass at once, and withal, exceeding
steep, and impassable for an Army, in case resistance were made. The fame
was, that Syennesis had planted himself in the highest of the Straights,
Syennesis, King of Cilicia.
to defend the passage, which was the cause, that the Army staid in the Plain
one day. The next day, there came a Messenger bringing tidings, that Syennesis
had left the Straights, after he perceived that Menons Troops were already
beyond the Mountains in Cilicia, and heard that a Fleet of Lacedemonian
Galleys, and another of Cyrus, were under sail, to pass from Ionia to
Cilicia, under the leading of Tamon. Cyrus ascended the Mountains without
resistance of any Man, and found the Tents yet standing, of those that were in
guard of the Mountains. From thence, he descended into a great, beautiful,
and well watered Plain, Cilicia.
and replenished with all manner of Trees, and with Vines. It bears abundance
of Sesamum, and Panick, and Millet, and Wheat, and Barley. A kind of Indian
Corn.
It is environed on every side from Sea to Sea, with abrupt, and high
Mountains. Descending from this Mountain, in four encampings, he marched 25
Parasangs, through Cilicia as far as Tarsus, a great, 23 Miles and upward, a
day.
and rich City of Cilicia. In that City was the Palace of Syennesis, King of
Cilicia. Through the midst of this City, runs the River named Cydnus,
Cydnus. (...).
being 200 foot in breadth. The Inhabitants thereof, excepting such as bought
and sold, left the City, and fled to the Mountains with Syennesis. But the
Inhabitants of Solos, and Issos, which stand near the Sea, held themselves to
their homes. Epiaxa, the Wife of Syennesis, arrived at Tarsus, five days
before Cyrus. But in the tops of the Mountains, that stretched toward the
Plain, Lochos, signifies here a Company: in Aelia^, it is used for a File.
two (...) (or Companies) of Menons Regiment were lost. Some say, that being
busy in pillage, they were cut off by the Cilicians; Other some, that they
were left behind not able to find the rest of the Troops, nor the ways which
they were to pass, and were lost in wandering up and down. Their number was
about 100 armed Foot. The rest coming to Tarsus, sacked the City, and the
Palace in it, in a rage for the loss of their Companions. Cyrus entering the
City, sent for Syennesis, who returned answer, that as he never yet had
committed himself to the hands of a Man better than himself, so he would not
now begin. In which mind he continued, till his Wife persuaded him to the
contrary, and till he had taken assurance from Cyrus. After that they met,
Syennesis gave Cyrus great sums to uphold his Army. Cyrus again gave him
gifts, such as he thought honorable, and much esteemed amongst Kings; As
namely, a Horse with a golden bitt, a Chain of gold, Bracelets, a Sword decked
with gold, a Persian garment, and freedom of his Land from spoil; As also,
restitution of the Slaves, which were taken in spoil by the Soldiers,
wheresoever he could find them. The Grecians refuse to go any further.
Cyrus, and the Army, remained here 20 days, for the Soldiers plainly denied
to go any further, imagining now they were led against the King, which they
said, was no part of their agreement. Clearchus was the first that went about
to force his Soldiers to proceed, but they, as soon as he offered to go
forward, cast Stones at him, and at his carriage Beasts. Clearchus art in
drawing them further.
And surely he hardly escaped stoning. But afterward perceiving it was in vain
to use force, he called his Soldiers to an assembly; and first he stood
weeping a good time, which they seeing, wondered at, and kept silence.
Afterward he spoke thus: My fellow Soldiers, wonder not that the present
state of this business touches me to the quick, for Cyrus has made himself
mine Host, being banished out of my Country, and not only done me other
honors, but also given me 10000 Darickes: which I taking, hoorded not up for
mine own private use, and pleasure, but disbursed them upon you. And first I
made war upon the Thracians, and with your helps revenged the wrongs they
did unto Greece, chasing them out of Cheronesus, whilst they endeavored to take
that Land from the Grecians. But when Cyrus called for me, I took you with me,
and went to Cyrus, to the end in his need to show my self thankful for his
former kindness and favors toward me. But since you please to go no
further, I must of necessity either forsake you and apply my self to his
friendship, or deceive his hopes, and remain still with you. For my part (I
know not whether I am in the right or not) I will rather choose you, and with
you partake such fortune as God shall send. Neither shall any man ever say, that
I led the Grecians against the Barbarians, and embracing the friendship of the
Barbarians betrayed the Grecians. And because it pleases you neither to be
persuaded by, nor yet to follow me, I will follow you, and with you willingly
undergo whatsoever shall happen. For my resolution is, that you are my
country, my friends, and my fellows in Arms, and that with your presence, I
shall be honorable, wheresoever I become: Being deprived of you, I shall
neither be able to pleasure a friend, nor to be revenged upon an enemy.
Wherefore I would have you think assuredly, that whithersoeuer you go,
thither will I go with you. Thus he spoke. His own Soldiers, and others
hearing these words, and that he purposed not to go against the King,
commended him much, and above 2000 of Xenias, and Pasions Soldiers taking with
them their Arms and Carriages, came and encamped with Clearchus. Cyrus
doubting the sequel of these things, and somewhat aggrieued in his mind, sent
for Clearchus, who refused to go unto him, but secretly without the Soldiers
knowledge willed him to be of good courage, for he doubted not, but all should
be well. Only he desired him to send for him once more, albeit he signified
before hand, that he would deny to come. Afterward, gathering together his
own Soldiers, and the other that quartered with him, and as many besides as
list to hear, he said thus: My fellow Soldiers, the affairs of Cyrus with
us, and ours with him, stand almost upon one foot, and carry no great
difference: For neither are we his Soldiers any more, because we follow him
not, nor yet is he to give us any more entertainment. I know well he thinks
himself much wronged by us, which is the cause I refused to go unto him, when
I was sent for, especially being ashamed, and touched in conscience, that I had
deceived his hopes. Further I feared lest laying hands upon me, he might
perhaps inflict some severe punishment for the wrong I have done him. I am
therefore of opinion, that it is high time for us not to sleep, nor be
careless of our selves, but to take counsel what is to be done: for if we be
forced to stay here, it is to be considered, after what sort we may stay with
most safety: If to depart, how we may most securely depart, and how recover
things necessary for our journey. For without these, neither Ge^erall, nor
common Soldier is able to atchieue any thing. As for Cyrus, where he is a
friend, he is a sure friend, and highly to be prised; where an enemy, no man
more sour, nor more enemie-like. Besides, he has Forces of Foot, of Horse,
and Shipping, which we all see, and very well understand, as being quartered
not far from his Camp. So that it is high time for any man to utter what he
thinks. Having spoken thus, he held his peace. Then arose some of their own
accord, who delivered their opinions. Other some by his subornation, showed the
impossibility of going or staying, without the good will of Cyrus. One making
semblance of hasting into Greece with all speed, advised to choose other
Generals quickly, in case Clearchus refused to lead away, and to buy things
requisite for the journey (for there was a Market, said he, in the quarter of
the Barbarians) and immediately to trusse up their baggage, and go to Cyrus,
and require Shipping, to depart in: And in case he refuse to give them, to
desire a guide to lead us through the Country as friends. If he refuse that
also, then presently to put the Army in Battle array, and to dispatch away
some, to seize upon the height of the Straights, that neither Cyrus prevent us,
nor yet the Cilicians, abundance of whose persons and goods, we have preid and
carry with us. Thus much spoke he. Then answered Clearchus in this manner: Let
no man once imagine, that I will take upon me the place of General over this
Army (for there are many things that dissuade me from it) But if you shall
think good to choose any other man, I will not fail to obey him to my
uttermost; that you may see, I know as well to be commanded, as any man else
whosoever. After Clearchus, another arose, showing the simplicity of him, that
advised to require Shipping of Cyrus, as though he had no further use for it,
and what a shallowness it would be, to require that of a General, which if he
granted, his enterprise should be quite overthrown. And if we were in any
thing to trust the guide, that Cyrus should give us, why commanded we not Cyrus
to take the top of the Hills for us? For my part, I would be thoroughly advised,
ere I went into Ships of his providing, lest he sink both us and them; and
would fear his guide, left he lead us to a place, from whence there were no
coming off. I had rather go hence without Cyrus his knowledge, if there were
any means to hide my departure from him: but that is a thing impossible, as
also I say, these are all idle conceits: for my advice, I would think it
expedient, to send fit men with Clearchus unto Cyrus, to enquire, wherein he
will be pleased to use our service, and if the action be like unto those,
wherein he has heretofore employed Strangers, to follow him, and to show our
selves no worse, then they were, that heretofore ascended to his father with
him. But if the enterprise seem greater, and of more labor, and more peril,
than other former enterprises have been, to desire him either to persuade us,
and so to lead us with him, or else to yield to our persuasions, and friendly
to dismiss us. For so both in following him, we shall follow as friends,
ready to do him service, and in returning, return with safety. What answer
he makes, I think necessary to be reported to the Army, that we may consult
upon it accordingly. This was decreed by the whole assembly, and chosen men
sent with Clearchus to make demands to Cyrus, according to the resolution of
the Assembly. Cyrus answered, that he had news, that Abrocomas an enemy of
his, was at the River Euphrates, which was about 12 encampings from thence:
That he went against him, and if he found him there, he would be revenged upon
him; if he fled away, we will deliberate then, said he, what is to be done. The
chosen men made report hereof to the Soldiers, who albeit they had a
suspicion, they were led against the King, yet decreed to hold on. When they
demanded of Cyrus an augmentation of pay, he promised them half as much more
as they had before, 20 s. and 6 d.
namely, in stead of one Darick the month, a Darick and an half to every
soldier. But all this while no man heard in public, 37 miles, and a half. 18
miles and upwards a day. Three Plethers.
that they were led against the King. From thence he marched ten Parasangs in
two encampings, as far as the River Pharos, whose breadth was 300 foot. From
thence in one encamping 18 Mile and upwards. 600 Foot.
five Parasangs, and came to the River Pyramus, whose breadth is a furlong. From
thence in two encampings, 28 Miles and more a day.
15 Parasangs, and came to Issos, the last City of Cilicia, a City situated
upon the Sea, being well peopled, large and rich. There he remained three
days. Here out of Peloponnesus came to Cyrus 35 Ships under the command of
Pythagoras the Lacedemonian. The Admiral of the whole Fleet was Tamos the
Egyptian, who brought with him 25 other of Cyrus his Ships from Ephesus, with
which he had before besieged Miletus, because that City took part with
Tissaphernes: and this Tamos followed Cyrus against him. Cherisophus the
Lacedemonian came with these Ships, Che^isophus, who afterward was one of the
Coronells.
whom Cyrus had sent for by name, and brought with him 700 armed foot, with
which he served Cyrus. The Ships anchored hard by Cyrus his Tent. Whilst the
Army rested here, the Grecian Mercenaries, which were under the pay of
Abrocomas, being in number 400 armed foot, revolted from him, and came to
Cyrus, and served against the King. From hence in one encamping he marched
five Parasangs, even to the streights of Cilicia, and Syria. 18 Mile and more.

The streights of Syria.

The River Chersos.


These were two walls, of which Syennesis, and a guard of the Cilicians had
the defense of the inmost next to Cilicia: The other next Syria was defended by
a guard of the Kings soldiers. Through the midst of these two runs the
river called Kersos, being of the breadth of a hundred foot. The whole distance
between the two walls is three furlongs, and it admits no passage by force,
the nether way toward the Sea being narrow and fenced with strong walls, and
the upper nothing but inaccessible rocks. In either wall there is a gate set.
This passage was the cause that Cyrus sent for his ships, that in them he might
transport armed foot both without and within the gates to force a way, if it
were so that the enemy sought to make good that place, which he thought
Abrocomas with his soldiers, that he had in great number, went about to do.
But Abrocomas did it not: For as soon as he heard, that Cyrus was advanced
into Cilicia, he returned with all speed out of Phoenicia to the King,
Abrocomas his army 300000. men.
having with him, as it is reported, an army of thirty Myriads of men. From
hence he marched in one encamping through Syria five Parasangs, even as far as
Myriandrum a City inhabited by the Phoenicians, 18 Mile and upward.
and situated upon the Sea. This town is a place of traffic, and many ships
of burden rode in the Haven. There he remained seven days, Xenias and Pasion,
two Coronells, forsake Cyrus without leave.
and Xenias the Arcadian Coronell, and Pasion of Megara shipping themselves,
and their goods of most esteem, sailed homeward discontented (as it was
thought by most) because Cyrus suffered Clearchus to keep their soldiers,
which refusing to go any further against the King, removed into his camp,
with intent to return into Greece. As soon as they were out of sight, the
rumor went that Cyrus pursued them with galleys, and some wished they might be
taken, as men that had used treachery: Other some pitied them, and feared their
danger in case they were taken. The lenity of Cyrus.
Cyr^s calling the Coronells together, said, Xenias and Pasion have forsaken
us. But let them know for certainty, that neither they are so secretly fled,
but that I am informed whither they are gone, nor yet that they are out of my
reach, for I have galleys enough that will easily (if I list) fetch up their
ship. But indeed it is not my purpose to pursue them: neither shall it be said,
that I use the service of any man so long, as he is willing to follow me, and
when he is desirous to be gone, arrest him, and entreat him ill, and spoil him
of that, he has. But, as I said, let them go, and understand, that they deal
worse with us, than we with them: And albeit I have their wives and children
at Tralles in custody, yet shall they not be defrauded, but have them safely
delivered into their hands, in respect of their former service to me. So much
Cyrus. The Grecians hearing the worthy disposition of Cyrus, even those that
before were slack and backward in the journey, followed him now more willingly
and cheerfully. 75 Miles, 18 miles and more the day.
From thence in four encampings he marched twenty Parasangs to the river
Chalos, a river A Plether. The gods of the Syrians.
100 foot broad, which was full of great tame fish, which the Syrians think to
be gods, and therefore suffer them not to be harmed no more than they do
Pigeons. The villages wherein they encamped pertained to Parisatis, being given
to her for her maintenance. 22 M^les and upwards a day. A Pl^ther.
From thence in 5 encampings, he marched 30 Parasangs, as far as the head of
the river Daradaces, which was 100 foot in breadth: there was the Palace of
Belesis, who sometimes governed Syria, and a very large and beautiful Park
stored with all kind of fruit, and wanting nothing that grows at any time of
the year. Cyrus cut down the trees thereof and burned the Palace. From thence
in three encampings he marched fifteen Parasangs, 56 Miles. 18 And more the
day. Thapsacus.
even as far as the River Euphrates, whose breadth is three furlongs. A great
and rich City is built upon Euphrates, which is called Thapsacus, where the
army remained five days. Cyrus sending here for the Commanders of the Grecians
told them, that his purpose was to lead against the great King, willing them to
signify so much to the soldiers, and to persuade them to follow. They calling
an assembly, declared all that was delivered unto them. The Soldiers were
offended with the Commanders, alleging they knew as much before and concealed
it, and refused absolutely to stir a foot forward, unless they had such
rewards assured them, Under the leading of Xenias.
as the other Grecians had that before ascended up with Cyrus to his father:
who notwithstanding went not to fight, but only waited upon Cyrus when his
father sent for him. The Commanders reported those things to Cyrus, who
promised to give every man five pounds of silver as soon as they came to
Babylon, (...) amongst the Grecia^s was of the value of 58 s -- 4 d. the whole
sum is-14 li. 11 s-8 d.
and to continue their whole pay until they were sent back and came into
Ionia. Most part of the Grecians yielded to these conditions. But Menon, before
it was known what the other soldiers purposed to do, and whether they would
follow Cyrus or no, called his own Regiment apart, and spoke unto them in this
sort. Menons subtilty.
My Companions (quoth he) if you will be ruled by me, you shall without danger
or labor be more esteemed of Cyrus than all the rest. What then would I have
you do? Cyrus at this instant is entreating the Grecians to follow him against
the King. This is therefore my counsel, that we pass over Euphrates before
it appear what answer the other Grecians will deliver unto Cyrus. For if they
resolve to follow him, it will seem that you that first began to pass, are
the cause thereof, and Cyrus will both thank and reward you, as the most
forward of all the rest (for he knows how to do it as well as any man) but if
they resolve the contrary, we will all return over the river back again. So
shall it come to pass that Cyrus will use us both for Garrisons, and for
Commanders, as the most obedient and most faithful soldiers of his Army, and
if there be any thing else you shall request of him, I assure my self you
shall find him your especial friend. The soldiers hearing this, yielded to
his persuasion, and passed the river before the other could resolve upon an
answer. Cyrus perceiving they were passed over, was glad at heart, and sent
Glous unto them, willing him to say in his name; Cyrus at this present praises
and commends you, but he will endeavor to give you cause hereafter to praise
him, else would he not have you think him to be Cyrus. The soldiers filled
with great hopes, wished him good success in all designs. It is said, he sent
rich presents unto Menon. This done, he passed the river, Euphrates a deep
river.
and the whole Army after him, and not a man was wet above his breasts in
wading over. The Thapsacens report that the river was never passed over on foot
before, but with shipping alone, which Abrocomas had burnt, to the intent to
hinder Cyrus in his passage. This seemed to be a miracle, and that the river
gave way to Cyrus, portending he should be King. From thence in nine
encampings he marched fifty Parasangs through Syria* and they came to the
river Araxes, 187 Mile and upwards; above 20 mile a day.
where were many villages replenished with Corn and Wine. There remained they
three days, and made provision of victuals. From thence in five encampings in
the wilderness he marched through Arabia 35 Parasangs, Arabia.
having Euphrates on the right hand. The territory of this Country was a
Plain all over, even like unto the Sea, but full of wormwood, and if any
shrubs or reeds grew there, they yielded a sweet savor like unto spices, but
there was not a tree to be seen. Of untamed beasts, the most were wild Asses,
Wild Asses. Ostriches. Bustards.
and not a few Ostriches. There were also Bustards and wild Goats. These asses
being chaced first fled on before, and afterward turned and stood at a gaze (for
they were much swifter than a horse) and again did the like when a horse came
near them. So that it was a matter impossible to take them, unless the
horsemen hunted with their horses placed in distance, and taking the chase one
from another. The flesh of them being caught is in taste like a red Dear,
saving that it is a little more tender. No man could lay hand upon an Ostrich,
and the horsemen that gave her chase soon quitted it. For she runs away flying
using her feet for course, and lifting up her self with her wings, as it were
with the sails of a ship. As for the Bustards, they are easily caught if a man
suddenly spring them: for they both make a short flight as Partriges do, and
are soon weary. The flesh of them is very delicate and pleasant. Proceeding on
through this country the Army came to the River Masca, which carries 100 foot
in breadth. A Plether.
Here was a great City, but dispeopled, named Corsote, which has the River
Masca running round about it, where they stayed three days making provision
for the Army. From hence in thirteen encampings in the wilderness Cyrus
marched 90 Parasangs, 337 Miles and a half, which amounts to 25 Miles and
upward the day
having Euphrates on his right hand, and came to the streights. In these
encampings many carriage-beasts were lost for want of food. The inhabitants
digging out and fashioning milstones about the river, carried them to Babylon
and sold them, buying with the price victuals to maintain their lives. The
Army was now destitute of victual, neither was there any to be bought
elsewhere than only in the Lydian market amongst the Barbaria^s that followed
Cyrus, where a A Capitha contains half a pecke of our measure.

A Chaenix a quarter of a pecke.


Capitha of meal was sold for four Sicles: a Sicle is valued at 7 Attick
Obolus Atticus is taken for penny farthing of our money.
Oboli, and a half, and a Capitha contains 2 Atticke Chaenices. The Soldiers
therefore fed upon flesh. These encampings were a great distance one from
another, and they fell out to be the longer because Cyrus was forced to march
on till he came either to water or fodder. And if it chanced that the way
leading through streights or mire were hardly passable for the Chariots, Cyrus
would stay with the best and gallantest of his train, and command Glous or
Pigres to take some of the Barbarian army, and draw the Chariots out of the
mire. And in case they seemed too slow, he would, The cause of long marches.
as it were in anger, command the strongest of the Persians that followed him,
to put to their hands and free the chariots. There might a man have beheld no
small piece of obedience. For casting off their skarlet cloaks (called Candyes)
in the place where every one stood, they hasted, as if a man should run for a
wager, even against the steepness of hills, being clad with rich coats, and
embrodered breeches, and some of them with chains of gold about their necks,
and bracelets about their wrests; and yet with these leaping quickly into the
mire, they hoysed, and brought out the wagons sooner than a man would have
imagined. In a word, Cyrus spared no manner of diligence all the way to haste
the journey forward, staying in no place unless there, where he must needs
furnish himself with provision, or else set down for some other necessary
cause; conceiving the more speed he made, the rather he should surprise the
King, and fall upon him at unawares; and the more he loitered, the greater
Army the King should be able to raise. For it was easy for any man that would
mark, to perceive, that the Kings dominion was strong in largeness of
Territories, and multitudes of men, but weak in length of ways, and
separation of his forces, in case war were roundly moved against him. Beyond
Euphrates, and the encampings in the wilderness, there was a great and rich
City, the name whereof was Carmanda, out of which the Army made their
provision passing over in boats, Carmanda.
which boats were contrived upon the sudden in this sort: Boats for a shift.
The skins which they used for couerings, they filled with light hay and
chafe, binding and sowing them so close that the water could not come into the
chafe, and upon those, they went over and got provision, which was wine
pressed out of Palm nuts, and corn called Millet, whereof there was great
plenty in this country. Seditious Soldiers put all in danger.
Here a controversy falling out betwixt a Soldier of Clearchus and another of
Menons Regiment, Clearchus commanded Menons Soldier to be beaten, judging him
to be in the wrong. This Soldier went to his own quarter, and complained
hereof to his companions, and they hearing what had passed, grew discontent and
angry with Clearchus. The same day Clearchus going to the passage of the river,
and there viewing the Market, rid back to his own Tent with small attendance
through Menons quarter. Cyrus was not yet arrived, but was upon the way coming
forward. It fortuned at the same time that one of Menons Soldiers was hewing
Wood, who seeing Clearchus passing by, threw his Hatchet at, but missed him,
then threw one Stones, and so another, and then many more, raising a great cry.
Clearchus fled to his own quarter, and forthwith commanded his Soldiers to
take Arms. The armed Soldiers he commanded to stay there, (...).
resting their Targets against their knees; the Thracians, and the Hors-men, of
which he had above 40 in his quarter (the most part Thracians) he took with
him, and galloped against Menons Soldiers; so that both they, and Menon
himself, were put in a fear, and some ran to their Arms, others stood still,
doubting what the sequel would be. Proxenus his turn was to come in the rear
that day, with his whole Regiment of Armed, The Coronels mar^hed by turns.
(...).
who presently thrust his Troops in betwixt them both, and laid down his
Arms, entreating Clearchus to forbear. Clearchus contrariwise was angry
because being so near stoning, Proxenus used so calm words in his extremity
of danger, and willed him to depart from between them. Whilst they stood upon
these terms, Cyrus came up, and was certified how things went, and presently
arming himself, Cyrus stilleth the contention.
and attended with most of them that were about him, he galloped in between,
and spoke thus: Clearchus, and Proxenus, and you the rest of the Grecians that
are present, you know not what you do; For if you fall to fight among your
selves, you may well think, that this day you shall cut me a pieces, and your
selves not long after me. For if our affairs go ill, all these Barbarians
that you see, will be greater enemies to you, than they, who are with the King.
Clearchus hearing these things, came again to himself, and both of them
moderating their choler, laid their Arms down in the place. (...).
Proceeding in their journey from hence, they discovered the footing, and dung
of Horses. It seemed the number of the Horse, was about 2000, which going
before our Camp, burnt the Fodder, and all other things profitable for use.
Orontes a Persian, near a ^in to the King, and deemed one of the best
Soldiers of Persia, did seek in former times to betray Cyrus, making war
against him; but being after reconciled to Cyrus, he iournied with him now, and
proffered, A fair pretense of a traitor.
that if Cyrus would let him have 1000 Horse, he would either by ambush cut off
the Scouts of the Enemy, that burnt the Country, or would take many of them
alive, and so inhibit their burnings, or at least disable them to report to the
King any thing touching the Army of Cyrus. Cyrus hearing this, held it a
matter of importance, and therefore he willed him to take a parcel of Horse
out of every Troop. Orontes thinking these Horse were ready at his call,
writ a Letter to the King, that he would come unto him with as many Horse, as
he could get; Only he desired, it would please the King, to give charge to his
Hors-men to receive him as a friend. Besides, he added in his Letters many
remembrances, and tokens of his old friendship and faith to the King, and
delivered the letter to a trusty Messenger, as he imagined; who as soon as he
received it, showed it to Cyrus. When Cyrus had read the contents, he caused
Orontes to be apprehended, and called into the same tent wherein himself was,
seven of the most honorable Persians he had about him, and commanded the
Grecian Leaders, to bring unto him some number of their armed Foot, whom he
appointed to lay down their Arms at his Tent. (...).
They as they were commanded, brought with them about 3000 armed Foot: Cyrus
then called Clearchus also into Council, who seemed to him, and to the rest,
to be of far greater reputation, than any other of the Grecians; And he,
after ^e came forth, The manner of proceeding in judgment against Orontes.
told the History of Orontes Judgment, to his friends, and how it was
carried: for secretnesse in this business was not enjoined. Clearchus reported
then, that Cyrus began after this manner: My friends, I have called you
together, that consulting with you about this Orontes, I might do that, which
is most just, both before God, and Men. My Father at the first gave him to be
under my command; afterward by commandment of my Brother, as he professes,
having in possession the Citadell of Sardes, he made war upon me; but I
pursued him with arms so near, that he thought it best to forbear bearing
arms against me, and afterward received his, and gave him my right hand in
token of reconciliation. He added, Was there any thing, Orontes, I wronged you
in after this? Orontes answered, Nothing. Then Cyrus asked him again, Did not
you afterward, being not wronged by me, as your self confess, revolt to the
Mysians, and spoil my Country to your uttermost power? I did, said Orontes.
And when you found your self too weak, did you not fly to the Altar of Diana,
saying, you repented of that you had done, and desired pardon, and gave and
took of me assurance of no further enmity betwixt us? Orontes acknowledged
this also. Wherein then (quoth Cyrus) have I wronged you, that you sought to
betray me the third time? When Orontes confessed, he was not wronged; Cyrus
asked him, Do you confess then, you have done me wrong? I must needs, quoth
Orontes. Then Cyrus asked him again, will you henceforward then be enemy to
my Brother, and friend, and trusty to me? Although I should, answered he, I
shall not seem so to you. After this, Cyrus said to those that were present:
You have heard, what this man has done, and said; Begin Clearchus, and give
first your judgment upon him. Then said Clearchus: His condemnation.
Mine advice and counsel is, that he be forthwith dispatched out of the way,
that we be not troubled with keeping him, and that he hinder us not to do good
to those, that willingly would become our friends. To this advice the rest
assented. Afterward by commandment of Cyrus, all they that were present, and
his kinsmen also, rising up, took hold of Orontes girdle, as of one condemned
to die, and men appointed for the purpose led him forth: When he came out,
those that were wont to bow to him with reverence, made then also obeisance,
albeit they knew, His execution.
he was led to die. But being conueighed to the Tent of Artapata, one of the
most trusty Mase-bearers of Cyrus, from that time forward, no man saw Orontes
alive, or dead, nor could report the manner of his death (some being of one
imagination, some of another) nor yet was there made any Grave or Monument for
him. From thence in three encampings, 45 Mile, 15 a day.
he marched 12 Parasangs, through the Country of Babylon. Ordering of the
battle.
In the third encamping, Cyrus about midnight took musters of the Grecians,
and Barbarians, in the Plain where they then were (for he thought, that the
next morning, the King would come with his Army, and bid him battle) and gave
to Clearchus the command of the right Wing of the Grecians; and to Menon the
Thessalian, the left; himself ordered his own people. After musters ended, as
soon as it was day, there came Fugitives from the great Kings Camp, and
brought news to Cyrus touching the Army of the King. Cyrus calling together
the chief Commanders, and the Captains of the Grecians, consulted with them,
how he might best order his Army for fight, and admonished, and encouraged
them in these words: I made choice of you (o Grecians) to be my Companions in
Arms, not because I wanted, or might not have had plenty of Barbarians, but I
chose you for that I esteemed you better, and more to be valued than many
multitudes of Barbarians. Show your selves therefore men worthy of the liberty
you enjoy, in respect whereof, I hold you also happy. For I would have you
know, that I prise liberty above all things I possess, and above many more of
greater worth, than those, I possess. But to the end you may understand what
fight you are at this present to undergo, I will in few words declare it unto
you. The number of the enemy is great, and they charge with a great cry.
Endure the first, and I am ashamed of the rest: and, am likewise ashamed, what
manner of men you shall find the Inhabitants of these Countries to be. And in
case you show your selves men, and be courageous, and valiant, whosoever
desires to return to his home, I will so send him away, that at his return,
his fellow Citizens shall have cause to envy his good hap. But I think so to
use the matter, that many shall rather choose to remain, and take such part as
I shall have, than to return home to their Countries. Hereupon Gaulites a
Fugitive of Samos, but faithful to Cyrus, replied; There are (o Cyrus) that
say, you make large promises by reason of the peril at hand; but in case the
success be good, you will forget all. Other some, The largeness of the
Persian Kingdom.
that although you remember, and would, you cannot perform what you promise.
Cyrus hearing these things, answered, My Fathers Kingdom stretches toward the
South so far, that for heat, no man is able to inhabit; toward the North,
that no man can inhabit for cold; the middlemost parts, are under the
government of my Brothers friends. If we get the victory, I can do no less,
than establish you my friends in the possession of them. So that I fear not
(if my journey prosper) not to have enough, wherewith to pleasure every one of
my friends, but I fear rather, I shall not have friends enough to pleasure. But
to you, o Grecians, to every one of you, I will give over and above my
promise, a Crown of Gold. They that heard these things, were much more forward
than before, and related them to the rest. Many both of the chiefest
Commanders, and also some other of the Grecians, went in to Cyrus, demanding
what should be their reward, in case they won the day; whom Cyrus sent away
full of good hopes. About that time, Clearchus asked Cyrus, Do you think
(Cyrus) your Brother will hazard a battle? Cyrus foot were 112800.
If (quoth Cyrus) he be the Son of Daerius and Parisatis, and my Brother, I
shall never obtain the things, I seek for, without fight. Here the Grecians
being in Arms, were numbered to be (...).
10400 Armed, and 2400 Targetiers, the Barbarians with Cyrus Every Myriade is
10000.
10 Myriades, Sythed Chariots about 20. The enemy was said to be 120 Myriades,
and about 200 Sythed Chariots. Besides, there were 6000 Horse under the leading
of Artagerses; they were ranged before the King. There were four Rulers, or
Generals, or Leaders, of the Kings Army; of whom, every one had 30 Myriades
under his charge; to wit, The king^ foot 900000.
Abrocomas, Tissaphernes, Gobryas, and Arbaces. But of this number, there were
no more, then 90 Myriades present in the battle, and 150 Sythed Chariots. For
Abrocomas, although he posted with all speed out of Phoenicia, came five days
after the battle. The Fugitives from the Kings Army, brought this information
to Cyrus before the battle; and those of the enemy, that were intercepted
after the battle, confirmed the same. From hence Cyrus in one encamping,
marched 3 Parasangs; his whole Army, both Grecians and Barbarians, being in
battle array: for he thought the king would have fought that day, because at
the end of this half days journey, A Fathom contains two yards.
he found a deep Trench cast, the breadth whereof was five Fathomes, the depth
three Fathomes. The trench ran up into the Country 12 Parasangs, through the
Plain even as far as the wall of Media, where the Channels begin, that are
derived out of the River Tygris, being in number four, each of them 100 Foot
in breadth, and very deep, so that Ships of burden do sail in them. They
fall into Euphrates, every one distant a Parasang from other, and every one
having a Bridge laid over it of the breadth of 20 Foot. A narrow way was betwixt
the River Euphrates, and this Trench. The great King caused this Trench to be
cast for a Fortification, as soon as he heard that Cyrus was on foot. Cyrus and
his Army passed over this narrow way, and were come within the Trench. The
great King joined not battle this day, but many Tracts of men and beasts, that
retired, might hereabouts be evidently perceived. Upon the same day, Cyrus
calling to him Silanus the Diuiner of Ambracia, gave him 3000 Daricks, because
11 days before offering Sacrifice he told him, that the King would not fight
within ten days. If he fight not within ten days, quoth Cyrus, he will never
fight; but if thy saying prove true, I promise to give thee 10 Talents, and he
gave him that gold then, because the ten days were past. Now seeing the King
did not hinder the passage of Cyrus his Army over that Trench, Cyrus, and the
rest, were strongly persuaded, that he determined not to fight, which was the
cause, that Cyrus had not so great care of his march the next day; and he
advanced the third day after sitting in his Chariot, and the most of his Army
marched confusedly, and many of the Soldiers Arms were put upon the Waines,
and upon the carriage beasts. Now it was the time, the Market was full, and the
place of encamping, where they should quarter, was at hand, when Patagyas a
Persian, one of the faithfullest of Cyrus his Train, was seen to come upon
the spur, his Horse dropping with sweat, crying out in the Persian and Greek
Language; that the King was hard by with an huge Army ready, and prepared for
fight. This news made a great confusion, and as well the Grecians, as all the
rest, imagined they should be charged in this disorder. Cyrus leaping from his
Chariot, put on his Curace, and getting on Hors-back, took his Darts in his
hand, and commanded the rest to Arm, and every man to take his place. The
order of Cyrus his battle. The place of the Commanders. Of the battle of
Grecians.

Light armed of the Grecians. Ariaeus is afterward called General of the Horse.

(...).


Then with great diligence they ordered themselves, Clearchus in the point of
the right Wing, by the River Euphrates, Proxenus next unto him, and the other
after Proxenus. Menon, and his Regiment, had the point of the left Wing of the
Grecian battle. Of the Barbarians, about 1000 Paphlagonian Hors-men stood by
Clearchus on the right hand, and all the Targetiers of the Grecians. On the
left hand of the whole Phalange, Arieus, Cyrus his Lieutenant General, and the
remnant of the Barbarians. Cyrus himself held the midst with 600 Hors-men,
which were armed with great Curaces and tases, and all of them with Caskes,
except Cyrus alone. Cyrus stood waiting the fight with his head unarmed: It is
said, that other Persians also, when they hazard battle, fight with their
heads unarmed. All the Horse that served under Cyrus, had both Frontlets and
Brest-plates; the Hors-men had Grecian Swords also. It was now midday, and the
enemy was not yet come in sight; but when midday was past, first a dust
appeared like unto a Cloud, and a little while after, a kind of blackness
spread over the whole Plain. When they came somewhat nearer, a man might
discern the shining of Brass, and their Spears, and array were easily
discovered. And on the left Wing of the enemy, The order of the Persians. The
arming of the Egyptians.
were placed Hors-men armed with white Curaces, who were reported to be under
the command of Tissaphernes, next to whom were placed the Wickar Targetiers,
and hard by them armed Foot, that carried long Wooden Targets, reaching down
to their feet. They were said to be Egyptians; then other Hors-men, and other
Archers, all according to their Nations; and every Nation was cast into a
Plesium (or square battle) full of men, and before them, the Sythed Chariots,
A Plesium. Battalions. The place of the Chariots. See my Notes upon the 11 chapter
of Aelian.
distant a good space one from another. These Chariots had on the sides Sythes
prominent, and bearing straight forth from the Axeltrees, and some from the
former Seat of the Chariot, with their points turned toward the ground, to the
end to cut a pieces whatsoever they met, and struck upon. The Kings purpose
was to send them with high speed against the ranks of the Grecians, to break
and rent them in pieces. Cyrus in a speech (heretofore delivered) exhorting,
and encouraging the Grecians, gave them to understand, it should be enough only
to endure the cry and shout of the Barbarians. But he was therein greatly
deceived; for they advanced not with a cry, but with as great silence, and
quietness, as was possible, continuing still in an equal and slow pace. Cyrus
at this time galloping up to the right Wing with Pigres his Interpreter, and
with three or four more, cried out to Clearchus, to lead the Grecians against
the midst of the enemies battle, Plutarch accounts this a fault in
Clearchus, in vita Artaxerxis.
because the King was there; for if it be overcome, quoth he, there is no more
for us to do. Clearchus seeing the midst of the battle, and hearing from
Cyrus, that the King was far without the point of the left wing of the
Grecian Phalange (for the king so abounded in multitude, that all the midst
of his battle stretched, and was extended without the left Wing of Cyrus his
Troops) would not for all that draw away the right Wing from the River, Remedy
against ouer-winging.
fearing to be ouerfronted, and encompassed on both sides: but answered Cyrus,
He would have a care, that all things should go well. In the mean time, the
Barbarians Army advanced equally, but the Grecians remaining in the same place,
increased still, and ordered their Troops, as they came on. And Cyrus putting
forth a little before the rest, viewed both Armies at a good distance, casting
his eyes sometimes upon the enemy, sometimes upon his friends, whom when
Xenophon the Athenian, being amongst the Grecians, perceived, he spurred his
Horse to meet him, and when he was come up, asked, if he would command any
thing; Cyrus pausing a little, said, Tell all your people, that the beast
sacrif^ced, and the inwards, promise us good luck. In speaking this, he heard
a murmuring, that ran along clean through the Grecian Troops, and asked, what
noise it might be, and what it meant; Xenophon told him, the Word was now given
the second time. He m^ruailed who had betrayed the Word, and asked, what the
new Word was; The Word.
Xenophon answered, Jupiter the Savior, and Victory: which Cyrus hearing, I
accept it, said he, and let it be so. After he had thus spoken, he returned to
his own pla^^. And now the two Phalanges were not above three or four
Furlongs one from another, when the Grecians sang the Paan, A Military Song.
and set forward against the enemy. The part of the Phalange which advanced,
swelled toward the Front, as it had been a wave of the Sea, and the hinder part
began to follow apace, and all shouted (as they are wont in a Fury Martial)
and all ran on at once. Alexander gave direction to his soldiers to do the
like. The victory of the Grecians.
Some also report, that they beat their Pikes upon their Targets, to the end to
scare the Horses. Before they came within an Arrows shot, the Barbarians
turned their Horses, and fled. The Grecians followed the chase with all speed,
and cried one to another, not ^o run and haste too much, but to follow in good
order. The Chariots, void of guides, were carried, some upon the enemies
themselves, some upon the Grecians, who upon a forecast opened, and let them
pass through; yet were there some that were overthrown for fear, as it is
wont to happen in a Horse race, who notwithstanding were reported to have had
no harm, nor yet any other Grecian in this whole fight, one only excepted, who
was stricken with an Arrow in the left side. Cyrus seeing the Grecians have the
victory against their adversaries, and hotly pursuing them, reioiced much, and
was now worshipped of those, Cyrus wariness in his good success.
that were about him, as King. Notwithstanding, he brake not out to follow the
c^ace, but keeping by him his Troop of 600 Horse close serred, he observed
what the King had in intention to do. The place of the K. of Persia in a
battle.
For he knew well, that his place was in the midst of the Persian Phalange,
as it is the manner of all the Persian Commanders, to lead in the midst of
their Troops, conceiving that they are there in greatest safety, both because
their strength is equally divided on both sides of them, and in case of
Commands, the Army may receive directions in half the time it should, if they
were elsewhere placed. So the King being then in his Station in the midst of
his Phalange, and yet without the point of Cyrus his left Wing, and seeing no
man to fight against him on the contrary part, nor yet against the Troops,
that were ranged before him, he wound and turned his battle to the left hand,
to the intent to ouerwing and encompasse in his adversaries; which Cyrus
perceiving, and fearing lest coming on the backs of the Grecians, he should
cut them in pieces, he galloped forth, and met him in Front, Horse in front.
and charging with his 600 overcame, and put to flight the 6000 that were
ordered before the King; and with his own hands (as the report goes) slew
Artagerses, one of the Generals of the King. An error in too ^arnest pursuit.
They were no sooner put to flight, but Cyrus his 600 pursuing hotly, were
dispersed here and there, except a few, that were left with him, who were for
the most part such, as usually sat at his Table: being accompanied with these,
he espied the King, and the Troop, that was about him, and by and by, after he
had said, I see the Man, he flew out directly against him, Cyrus his valor.
and struck him on the Breast, and wounded him through the Curace, as Ctesias
the Physician reports, who reports also, that he cured the wound. Whilst
Cyrus was thus in fight, one with a Dart hit him a sore blow under the eye. The
King, and Cyrus, and their Followers in defense of either of them thus coping
together, Ctesias (for he was present) tells the number of those, that died
about the King; and Cyrus himself was also slain, The death of Cyrus.
and eight of his best Followers lay dead upon him. Artapata, one of the
faithfullest of Cyrus Mase-bearers, was said, after he saw Cyrus fallen, to
have alighted from his Horse, and cast himself upon him. And some affirm,
that the King commanded him to be killed upon Cyrus; others report, that he
killed himself, drawing out his own Sword. For he had a gilt Sword, and wore
a Chain, and Bracelets, and such other Ornaments, as the best of the Persians
wore, being of great esteem with Cyrus for his love and faithfulness toward
him. Thus died Cyrus, The praise of Cyrus.
a man by the opinion of those that had acquaintance with him, of the most
Kingly disposition, and most worthy to bear rule, of all the Persians, that
succeeded the Elder Cyrus. For first, His childhood.
being but a Child, and brought up with his Brother, and other Children, he was
thought to surmount them all in all things. For all the Children of the best
sort of Persians, have their education at the Kings Gate, The K. of Persiaes
Gate.
where a man may learn much temperance, and where no kind of filthiness is to
be heard or seen; and the Children have daily conversant before their eyes,
those that are honored, or disesteemed of the Kings. So that being yet but
Children, they learn to rule, and to obey. There Cyrus seemed to be the aptest
to learn of all, that were of his age, and to be more obedient to the Elder
sort, than those that were far his inferiors. Besides, to be a great lover
of Horses, and to use them with great skill, and to delight, and be studious of
warlike exercise, and of shooting, and darting. When he was in the flower of
his age, he greatly loved hunting, and shunned not danger, when he came to
encounter with wild beasts. And when on a time a Bear set upon him, he feared
her not, but buckling with her, was pulled from his horse and received those
wounds, the skarres whereof he after carried about him, and yet slew her at
last. The man, that first came in to his rescue, he rewarded with royal gifts,
and made him more happy, than many others of his time. Afterward when he was
sent by his father, and made Satrapa (or Governor) of Lydia, and of the
greater Phrygia, and of Cappadocia, and was declared General of the people,
that were to assemble and be mustred in the Plain of Cast^lus, His keeping of
his word.
he gave all men to understand, that he esteemed nothing more, than to keep
faith with whomsoever he made league, agreement, or promise. Wherefore the
Cities under his command believed him in all he spoke, and particular men every
where believed him. And if an Enemy were to come in at any time upon Cyrus his
word, he was easily persuaded of his assurance and safety; which was the
cause, when he moved war against Tissaphernes, that every City willingly
chose to take part with Cyrus, rather than with Tissaphernes, Milet only
excepted: which feared him, for that he would not forsake, but gave
encouragement to the fugitives of their City. For he declared both in deed and
word, that after he had once received them into his friendship, His
thankfulness.
howsoever their number, or fortune afterward fell out to be, he would not cast
them off. Besides he made it evident, that in case any man showed him
kindness, or were malicious against him, he would do all he could, to go
beyond him in either of both. And there were, that reported this wish of his,
namely, to live so long, as to be able to overcome his friends in kindnesses,
his Enemies in revenge. Therefore many men were content to give up their
riches, Cities, and bodies into his hands, Strictness in punishment.
rather than into any man's, tha^ lived in our age. Neither could it be truly
said, that he suffered wicked and loose persons to scorn him. For that kind
of people he punished severely, and in the common ways were often to be seen
men without feet, and hands, and eyes; so that in Cyrus his government both
Grecians and Barbarians behauing themselves orderly, might walk, where they
list without fear, and carry such things with them, as they thought fitting
for their journey. By all men's confession he extraordinarily honored men
skillful in the Art Military. His esteem of Soldiers.
The first war he had, was against the Pisidians and Mysians: Himself
therefore leading an Army against those countries, if he saw men willingly
offer themselves to danger, he made them governors of the Country, which he
conquered, and honored them besides with other gifts. Whereby it appeared,
that valiant men were happiest, and cowards accounted, as it were, their
slaves. And for this cause many willingly put themselves into, and provoked
danger, especially if they imagined, that Cyrus should have notice thereof.
Whosoever it was that showed to the world any notable example of Justice, he
much rather enriched him, than those, that fished for gain out of unjust
dealing. Therefore both many other things were rightly administered by him, and
also he had an army, that might truly be called an Army. For the chief
Commanders and Captains resorted unto him no^ for moneys sake, but because
they knew, that the service of Cyrus was much more to be prised, than their
monthly pay. Now his servants that executed his commands with dexterity and
diligence, Love and kindness to his servants.
he suffered not to go unrewarded. Wherefore the ^ame went, that there was no
kind of work to be thought upon, wherein the servants and workmen of Cyrus
did not excel. Ifhe found a man to be a good husband in augmenting his own
wealth without oppression, or in garnishing the Province, which he governed,
with new revenues, he was so far from taking from him, that he gave him more
to that, he had. So that men gladly took pains, and boldly held, what they
had gotten, and none concealed from Cyrus, the things he possessed. For he
seemed not to envy them, which in open show were rich, but would often use the
goods of such, as concealed and kept them close. What friends soever he chose,
To his friends.
and found well affected to him, and judged able to effect that, which he
desired, by the confession of all men he used most obsequiously. For as he
needed friends to be fellow-workers of his designs, as he conceived: so
himself endeavored to be to his friends, the best fellow-worker of that, which
he thought, every one of them desired. I have many causes to think, he had
more presents made unto him, than any one man of that age whatsoever. All these
he distributed especially amongst his friends, having consideration of every
man's manner of life, and of their need. The things that were sent him for
ornament of his body, or else for war, or for other trimmings and
beautifyings; of these he is reported to have said, that his own body could
not use them all, and that his opinon was, that friends well adorned were a
man's greatest ornament. But it is no marvel, that being of greater ability he
overcame his friends in kindness. This rather seems a marvel, that he went
beyond them in care, to gratify and do them good. For Cyrus oftentimes, when
he happened upon extraordinary pleasant wine, would send them flaggons, with
this message: Cyrus has not tasted more pleasant wine a long time; he has
therefore sent this to you, and desires you to day to drink it out with those,
that you love best. Oftentimes also he sent half geese, and half loaves, and
such like, willing the messenger to say, the taste of these pleased Cyrus, and
therefore he would have you also to taste them. If at any time there were small
store of fodder, it was easy to him to furnish himself, by reason of the
multitude and diligence of his servants. Being then so furnished, he used to
^end part unto his friends, and willed them to give that fodder to the beasts,
upon which they rid, lest they might suffer hunger, after they had traveled in
carrying his friends. If he iournied any whither in the sight of many, he would
call his friends to him, and find talk with them of purpose, that it might
appear, who they were, that he honored. Out of which I may truly conjecture,
that no man was beloved of more either Grecians, or Barbarians, than he. Let
this also be a testimony hereof, that no man sought to fly from Cyrus (who was
but a servant) unto the King (that was Master of all) except only Or^^^es (who
also found the man, whom he thought his sure friend, more friend to Cyrus than
to himself) but many after the enmity brake out betwixt the two Brothers,
yea, some whom the King loved best, left him, The love that all men bore to
Cyrus.
and came to Cyrus, believing the rewad of Virtue was greater with Cyrus, than
with the King. That he was both good himself, and could give true judgment,
who were faithful, loving, and constant, it is a great argument, that chanced
at the end of his life; For when he died, all his friends, and such as were
partakers of his Table, died fighting over his body, saving only Ariaeus, he
was Commander of the Horse on the left Wing, and, when he perceived, that Cyrus
was fallen, fled with the whole Troops under his command. There the head and
right hand of Cyrus were cut off. But the King and his folk following the
chase chanced upon the Camp of Cyrus. The Troops of Ariaeus made stand no
where, but fled out of the Camp to the place, where they last before
quartered. The way thither was accounted four Parasangs in distance: 15 Miles.
The Gre^ian Ca^pe taken by the King.
But the King and his Army spoiled both other things, and took Cyrus his
Phocean Concubine, called the Wise, and Beautiful. For the Milesian, younger
in years than the other, being in hand to the Kings people, escaped away naked
to the Grecians, that stood armed by the Baggage; who having put themselves in
order for fight, flew many of the Spoilers, though some of them also were
slain. Notwithstanding they fled not, but saved her, and saved all whatsoever
both good^ and men, that were within their custody. Here the King and the
Grecians were 30 Furlongs asunder; Three Mile and three quarters.
th^se last, giving chase to those enemies that stood against them, as if they
had been Conquerors of the whole Army enemy; the other, rifling the Camp of
the Grecians, as if their whole Army had gained the victory. But when the
Grecians understood, that the King and his Army were amongst their Baggage,
and the King heard by Tissaphernes, that the Grecians had overcome those, that
were opposite against them, and that they proceeded forward giving chase, he
gathered together his dispersed Troops, and put them in order of battle. And
Clearchus calling to him Proxenus (for he was the next unto him) consulted,
whether it were better to send away some few, or whether with their whole
Forces they should go to succor the Camp. In the mean time, the King appeared
again, advancing forward (as it seemed) upon the rear of the Grecians: the
Grecians wheeling about their battle, (...)
prepared themselves to march on, and to receive the Kings charge that way. But
the King advanced not, but as before he passed by without the left Wing, so he
returned back again the same way, taking with him those, that fled to the
Grecians during the time of sight, as also, Tissaphernes, and his Troops: for
Tissaphernes fled not in the first encounter, Tissaphernes charge the
Grecians.
but gave upon the Grecian Targetiers by the River side, yet killed he no man
in giving on, for the Grecians opening their battle speedily, left a passage
for Tissaphernes, striking and darting at him, and his, as they passed through.
Episthenes the Amphipolitan, was Captain of the Targetiers, esteemed a man of
good direction; therefore Tissaphernes departed, as having the worst; and
making toward the Grecian Camp, met the King there, and both ioining again
their Forces, advanced forward. After they were now come as far as the left
Wing of the Grecians, the Grecians feared the enemy would charge their Wing,
and so wrapping in their battle on both sides, cut it in pieces. Remedy
against encompassing.
They therefore thought fit to draw out that Wing in length, and to apply and
set their backs against the River. Whilst they were in this consultation, the
King changing the form he was in, ordered his Phalange against them as at
first, advancing as though he meant to charge. And the Grecians seeing the
enemy at hand, and ordered for fight, began the Paean again, and moved
forward with much more alacrity, than in the first fight. The Barbarians
received them not, but fled with greater speed than before. They followed the
chase unto a certain Village, where they made Alt. For above the Village, was
a hill, upon the which the Kings Forces were rallied, and stood with their
faces toward us, being no Foot, but Horse alone, and so many as covered the
hill. A man could not see what was to be done; some said, they discerned the
Kings Standard, a golden eagle with her wings displaied as on a little Target
fixed to the end of a long wooden staff. When the Grecians advanced thither
also, the Horse forsook the Hill, not in Troops, but dispersedly, some
scattering here, some there, in the end, all vanished away. Clearchus therefore
ascended not the hill himself, but making Alt with the Army at the foot of
the hill, sent Lucius the Syracusian and another, willing them to get up the
hill, and to discover, and make report to him of that they saw. Lucius galloped
up the hill, and after he had taken view, returned and told him, that the
enemy fled upon the Spur. Whilst these things were in doing, the Sun was
almost set. Here the Grecians made a stand, and rested themselves, laying down
their Arms; (...).
and withal, they wondered they saw not Cyrus, nor any man that came from him;
for they knew not, that he was dead, but imagined, that either he followed the
chase, or else hasted forward to take in some place of importance, and they
consulted, whether it were better to remain still in the place where they
were, and to cause their baggage to be brought to them, The Grecians return to
their Camp.
or to return unto the Camp. At last, they resolved to depart, and about
supper time they came to the camp, and so the day ended. When they came there,
they found the most of their other goods rifled, and especially the meat and
drink, and the wainesladen with flower and wine, which Cyrus had prepared to
relieve the Grecians, Cyrus his provision for the Grecians.
in case the Army should at any time be driven to penury, and need. They
were, as was said, 400 waines, which the Kings Army spoiled, so that the most
part of the Grecians were supperlesse, as also they wanted their dinner that
day: for the King came in sight before the Army could rest themselves, and take
their dinner. Thus therefore they passed that night.

Finis Libri Primi.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF XENOPHON, TOUCHING THE Ascent of CYRUS the
younger, out of Asia the Less, into the Higher COVNTREYS.
IN the book next before-going, is declared how Cyrus at such time, as he
warred against his brother Artaxerxes, levied his forces out of Greece, and
what happened in the journey, and how the battle was fought, and after what
manner Cyrus ended his life, and how the Greeks thinking themselves masters of
the field, and Cyrus to be alive, returned to their camp, and took themselves
to rest. As soon as it was day, the chief Commanders gathering together,
marvelled that Cyrus neither sent unto them, nor came himself to give
direction, what was to be done. Therefore they thought good to trusse up their
baggage, that was left, and to put themselves in arms, and march forward, and
join their forces with Cyrus. Whilst they were busy herein, by sunrising
came Procles, For Demaratus see Herodot. lib. 6.175. and Pausani^s in
Laconicis. l. 3.171.30. Ariaeus his message to the Grecians.
sometimes governor of Teuthrania, a man of the posterity of Demaratus the
Lacedemonian, and Glus the son of Tamon. They brought word of the death of
Cyrus, and that Ariaeus, with the other Barbarians, being put to flight in the
battle, were retired to the camp, from whence they dislodged the day before:
and said further, that Ariaeus would stay for them that whole day, if they
thought good to come unto him, and the next day set forward toward Ionia, A
country of Asia the less.
from whence they first began their journey. The chief Commanders, and the
rest of the Greeks hearing this news, were much perplexed. Clearchus hereupon
said: Would God Cyrus had lived. But seeing he is dead, carry word to Ariaeus,
that we have vanquished the King, and that no man, as your selves are
eyewitnesses, fights or lifts up his hand against us; and had you not
come, we were even at this instant marching against the King. But say to
Ariaeus, if he please to come and join with us, we will install him in the
Kings throne. Clearchus his answer.
For they, that are conquerors, have also power to dispose of the government of
the Kingdom. Having spoken thus much, he sent away the messengers, and with
them Cherisophus the La^edemonian, and Menon the Thessalian: For Menon
himself, being a friend and guest to Ariaeus, desired to go. So these men
departed, leaving Clearchus behind with the army. The army in the meanetime
victualled it self, in the best manner it could, Firing to dress their meat.
with the carriage-beasts, cutting the throats of Oxen and Asses. And going a
little further to the ground, where the battle was fought, they gathered up
arrows, which were many in number (which also they compelled the run-awayes
from the King to pull out of the ground) and wicker targets, and wooden
Egyptian targets for firewood. There remained also in the camp a multitude
of targets and empty waines, with which they sod their meat, and so fed that
day. By this time was the marketplace replenished with people, when messengers
came from the King, and from Tissaphernes. The other were Barbarians; amongst
them was one Phalinus a Greek, who followed Tissaphernes, and lived in good
account with him. For he professed skill of embattelling an army, and of the
use of arms. These coming near, and calling for the Grecian Coronels, said,
that the King having gained the victory, and slain Cyrus, The kings message to
the Gr^cians.
commanded the Grecians to deliver up their arms, and to repair to the Kings
gate, and submit themselves to his mercy. This was the effect of the message.
The Grecians took the message in evil part. Notwithstanding Clearchus
answered, that it was not the manner for conquerours to deliver up their arms.
But you the Coronels, said he, give answer to these men, as you shall think
best, and most fitting our affairs: I will streightwaies return to you. For
he had at that present a sacrifice in hand, and one of the Serieants came for
him, to the end he might look upon the intrailes of the beast. Answer of the
Grecians.
Then Cleanor the Arcadian, the eldest Coronell spoke, and said, he had rather
die, than deliver up his arms; and the next after him Proxenus the Theban
replied: I wonder, quoth he, whether the King require our arms as a
conqueror, or by way of friendship, and as a gift. If he would have them as a
conqueror, why does he rather ask them, than take them by force; If by way of
persuasion, let him tell us, what we, that are Soldiers, shall have left,
after we have gratified him herein. Hereunto Phalinus answered: The King
thinks himself master of the field, Reply of Phalinus.
because he has slain Cyrus; and who is he, that now contendeth with him
about the kingdom? He thinks also, that you are his, for that he has you in
the midst of his territory enclosed with impassable rivers, and is able to
bring such a multitude against you, as you shall not be able to put to the
sword, though they were by him delivered into your hands. Then said Xenophon
the Athenian: Phalinus, you see we have nothing left us, besides our arms and
valor. As long as we keep our arms, we shall have use of our valor;
delivering them up, we imagine, we shall not long be owners of our bodies or
lives. Think not then, Phalinus, Xenophon.
that we are so unadvised, as to yield up our only riches, by the help
whereof we purpose to make trial* if we can possess your riches also.
Phalinus hearing this* f^ll into a great laughter, and said: Young man you
look like a Philosopher, and speak not vnpleasingly. Know notwithstanding,
wise man, as you are, that your valor will not ouermatch the Kings power. The
report is, that some other spoke to c^rrie favor: namely, that as they had
been faithful to Cyrus, so would they do the King good service, if he pleased
to be their friend: For whether he were disposed to employ them otherwise, or
else in the wars against Egypt, they would undertake to bring it under his
subjection. By this time came Clearchus, and asked, whether they had yet given
answer to the messengers, or no, Phalinus told him that the Coronels answered
one one, another another thing. But I pray, said he, let us hear your answer.
For my part, quoth Clearchus, Clearchus his answer.
I am glad to see you, Phalinus, and so I think are the rest of us here
present. For you are a Grecian, and we being so many in number, as you behold,
and in this estate, would willingly be advised by you, what were best to be
done in that, which is propounded unto us. Therefore we desire you, for Gods
cause, to declare unto us, what course in your opinion will be safest and most
honorable for us: which also being reported in time to come may bring you
reputation: namely, that Phalinus being sent a messenger from the King unto the
Graecians, with commandment to deliver up their arms, gave such and such
advice. For you know, that the counsel, which you give us, cannot, but be
related in Greece. Thus much insinuated Clearchus, being desirous, that
Phalinus the Kings messenger should advise the Graecians not to deliver up
their arms, that thereby they might gather heart, and receive the greater
encouragement. But Phalinus withdrawing himself a little, and streight-waies
returning, spoke thus contrary to Clearchus his expectation: If amongst 10000
hopes you had but one, The advice of Phalinus.
to save your selves by bearing arms against the King, I would counsel you
not to deliver up your arms. But seeing there is no hope to escape danger
against his will, I counsel you to seek your safety by whatsoever means, you
can. Hereunto Clearchus replied: Well then this is your opinion: But from us
return this answer to the King; that, if we may be thought worthy to be his
friends, we shall be better friends having arms, than delivering them up to
any man else; if no remedy be but war, we shall better make war with arms,
than without, after we have rendered them up. We will, quoth Phalinus, deliver
your answer; But we have futher in charge from the King to say unto you: That
as long, as you stay where you are, you may expect truce; war, if you march
forward, or depart. Say hereunto, I pray, whether you will stay, and have
truce, or else I shall carry tidings of war unto the King? Clearchus
answered: Carry tidings with you, that we are of the same opinion that the King
is of. What opinion is that, quoth Phalinus? To have truce, said Clearchus, if
we stay; war, if we depart, or march forward. But he signified not, what he
meant to do. The doubtful answer of Clearchus.
So Phalinus and those in his company departed. Pr^cles and Cherisophus were by
this time returned from Ariaens, but Menon remained still with him. They
brought answer from him, whereby he signified, that there were many Persians in
all respects better, than he, who would never endure, that he should be King.
But if you resolve, said they, to depart with him, he wills you to come this
night; if not, he means to march away early in the morning. Clearchus said;
we must do as you advise, if we go unto him. If not, we are to resolve upon
that, which shall be thought most convenient for us. But neither signified he
to these men, what he purposed to do. After this, about sun set, he called
the Coronels and Captains together, and spoke to them to this effect: Even now
when I asked counsel of the gods by sacrifice, whether we should go against
the King or no, the intrayles assented not; and not without ca^se: For, as I
now understand, the River Tigris, a River nauigable, lies in the midway
betwixt us and the King; which River we cannot pass without shipping. Shipping
we have none, and being destitute of victual we may not remain here. But the
sacrifice was fair, and allowed of our going to the friends of Cyrus. This
therefore must be our order. We must for the present away every man to his
lodging, and there sup with such as he has. When the horn gives sign to
rest, let every man make ready to depart. At the second sign lay your baggage
upon the carriage-beasts; at the third follow your leaders; and in our march
the cariage-beasts are to be placed next the river, the armed without them. The
Coronels and Captains hearing this, departed, and did so. And thenceforward
Clearchus commanded, and they obeyed him, not because he was chief by
election, but because they saw, he only was able to command, the rest without
experience. The length of the journey from Ephesu^ in Ionia to the place of the
battle were 93 encampings, 2000. Miles and above.
535 Parasangs, 16030 furlongs. From the place, where the battle was fought,
to Babylon, 382 Miles and a quarter.
were by estimation 3060 furlongs. Here Metocythes the Thracian, when it was
dark, fled to the King with 40 Horsemen, which were under his command, and
with 300 Thracian foot. The rest Clearchus led according to the appointment
made between them, and the whole army at the first encamping came up to
Ariaeus and to his army about midnight, (...).
and laying down their arms in order, the Coronels and Captains of the
Grecians resorted to Ariaeus; and both the Grecians and Ariaeus and the chief
men about him took an oath to be friends, and confederates, and not to betray
one another. The Barbarians swore also to be faithful Guides to the Grecians
in their return homeward. This oath was taken killing a Boar, a Bull, a
Woolfe, and a Ram; and the Grecians dipped the point of a sword, the Barbarians
of a spear in the blood of these beasts, being powered out into the hollownesse
of a Target. After they had taken mutual assurance, Clearchus said to Ariaeus;
Ariaeus, seeing it so falls out, that your journey, and ours is all one, tell
me, I pray, your opinion, Ariaeus his counsel for the way of their return.
whether we are to return the same way we came, or else can you direct us any
better way. He answered: If we return the same way we came, we shall for want
of provision all perish with hunger. For in ^7 encampings, adua^cing hither, we
found nothing in the country to relieve us, and that little that was left, was
consumed in our passage. We are therefore resolved to return by a way of more
circuit, but able enough to furnish out all manner of provision for us. And for
our first encampings we had need to gain in them as much ground, as we can,
that the Kings army may be cast a great distance behind us. For if we get
before him but two or three days journey, he can by no possibility be able to
overtake us: with a small army he will not dare to follow us; with a great he
can make no speed, besides that it is like to be destitute of Victual. This is
mine opinion, quoth he. Which suggestion of his served for no other purpose but
for a speedy shifting and running away. But fortune afterward was a better
guide for us. As soon as it was day, all set forward, having the sun on the
right hand, imagining that by sunset they should reach to Villages of the
Babylonian Territory. Neither were they deceived in their imagination. About
evening they thought they saw the enemies Horse; and both the Grecians, which
were out of order, ran to their places, and Ariaeus (for he rode on a Wagon,
because of his wound received in the battle) alighted and put on his curace,
as did the rest likewise, that were in his Company. But while they were arming,
the scouts brought tidings, that they were no Horse, but only carriage-beasts
at pasture, and streightwaies every man easily coniectured, that the Kings
Camp was some where not far of. Howbeit Clearchus led not against the enemy,
both because our Soldiers courages began to fall, and also because they had
been fasting that whole day, and now it grew something late. Yet turned not
out of the way, left he might seem to fly, but holding on right forth, by
sunne-set he reached to the villages with the Vant-guard, and there quartered.
The timber of the houses of some of the villages was broken down, and carried
away by the Soldiers of the Kings army. Therefore they, that came first,
lodged themselves reasonably well; the last being benighted, every one took up
his lodging, as fell out; and calling one upon another made a great noise; so
that the Kings army heard it. Whereby came to pass, that the enemy next at
hand fled out of their tents. This appeared the next day For neither was there
carriage-beast, nor camp, nor smoke at hand to be seen. The King also (as it
should seem) was terrified with the access of our army, which he declared by
the next days work. Yet in the process of the night a fear seized upon the
Grecians themselves, and the tumult and hurliburley was such, as is wont, when
men are possessed with fear. A Panicall fear amongst the Graecians.
Clearchus in this distress called Tolmides the Elean (whom he had with him,
the best Crier of those times) and after silence enjoined willed him to make
proclamation, that the Coronells signified, whosoever in general could bring
forth the author of this tumult, should have a talent of silver for his reward.
By the proclamation the Soldiers perceived, that their fear was vain, and
their commanders in safety. As soon as it was day, Clearchus commanded the
Grecians to fall into the same order, they held, when the battle was fought.
And where I before wrote, that the King was put into a fear by our access, it
hereby appeared to be so, because the day before he sent an Imperious
commandment to deliver up our arms, The King makes an ouerture of Truce.
and now this day he employed messengers about a truce. They after they came to
our out-guards asked for the Coronels. The out-guards advertised Clearchus
hereof, who was then viewing the order of our embatteling, and he willed them
to say to the messengers, that they should stay, where they were, till his
further leisure. After he had so ordered the Army, that the whole Phalange
appeared in a fair thickness, well compacted together, and no unarmed man in
sight, he called for the messengers; and both himself taking with him some of
the best armed and gallantest Soldiers of the Troops, and willing the other
Coronels to do the like, he advanced to meet them. Meeting together, he
demanded the cause of their coming. They said, they came about a ^^uce, and
had full power to deliver the Kings pleasure unto them, and to return their
answer to the King. Clearchus answered: Tell the King now from me, that there
is no other way, but first to fight. For we have no dinner, neither dares any
man speak a word to the Grecians about Truce without offering them meat to
eat. The messengers hearing this, posted away, and returned presently. Whereby
also appeared that the king was at hand, or at least some other man, that had
authority about this negotiation. They said, the King allowed the motion, and,
if the Truce were concluded, would send guides to conduct them to sufficient
provision. Clearchus asked whether the Truce should stretch to all in general,
or to those only, which were to go between. They answered, to all, till your
propositions be related to the king. After these things spoken, Clearchus fell
to counsel with the Coronels. It seemed good to all to embrace a Truce
forthwith, and quietly to go to the place, where the provision was, and there
to take it. I am of your mind, quoth Clearchus; but I would not signify so
much to the messengers, but linger a little to put them in fear of our
refusal of Truce; and I think our Soldiers are in the like fear. The
Grecians accept the Truce.
When he judged it time, he told the messengers, he accepted the Truce, and
willed them to lead immediately to the place, where provision might be found:
which they did. Clearchus, albeit he purposed to accept Truce, yet marched on
with his Army in order of battle himself following in the Rear. He chanced
upon Ditches and draines full of water, which were not passable without
Bridges. Yet framed they a passage with Palm trees, of which some were
already fallen to the ground, othersome they felled themselves. A man might
hereby perceive the sufficiency of Clearchus his command, The diligence and
sufficiency of Clearchus in his command.
who carrying in the left hand a Pike, in the right a Trunchion, in case any man
appointed to work seemed to slack, choosing a fit man in his place, he
chastised and put him off, and withal thrusting into the dirt himself, set
his hand to the work. So that it seemed a shame to all, that had the work in
hand, not to make haste, and be earnest in it. The work was by him laid upon
the Soldiers of 30 years of age. But the elder sort undertook it also, when
they saw Clearchus so busy about it. And he hasted the more, suspecting, that
the Ditches were not at all times so full of water (for it was no time of the
year to water the Plain) but that the King had let the water in, to the end
that the difficulties of the journey might seem to the Grecians greater and
more in show, than they were in deed. Marching on, they came to the villages,
in which the guides assigned their provision. There was much Wheat, Palm nuts.
and Wine of Palm to be found, and Vinegar boiled out of Palm nuts. Those
Nuts of Palm, such as are not to be seen in Greece, were reserved for the
Servants; but the Masters had other chosen out from the rest, of wonderful
beauty and greatness: The color of them nothing differs from Amber, and
being dried some of them were usually set upon the Table for dainties. The Wine
is pleasant, but raising pain in the head. This was the place, (...).
where the Soldiers first fed upon the Marrow of the Nuts of Palm, and many
wondered at the kind and property of pleasantness of them. This also bred
extraordinary pain in the head. The Palm, when the head is taken out, waxes
wholly dry. Here they rested three days; and hither Tissaphernes and the Kings
Wives Brother, and three other Persians with many attendants, came from the
great King. When the Coronels of the Grecians met them, A dissembling speech of
Tissaphernes.
Tissaphernes by an Interpreter began thus: I (o Grecians) have my habitation
near Greece, and seeing the dangers and misaduentures, which you are fallen
into, to be without issue, I besought the King* that he would be pleased to
give me some means, whereby, if possibly I could, I might deliver you into
Greece in safety. For I imagine the doing hereof would be acceptable to you,
and to all Greece beside. In this mind I made suit to the King, alleging he
had good cause to be gracious in my suit, for that I first brought news, that
Cyrus raised an Army against him, and withal brought him aid, and alone of
all, that were ordered in battle against the Grecia^s, fled not, but brake
through them, and joined with him in their Camp whither the King came, after he
had slain Cyrus; and with those, that are now in my company (who are most
faithful to the King) followed the chase upon the Barbarians, that served
Cyrus. Whereupon he promised me to advise. But he commanded me to go to you,
and demand the reason, why you took up arms against him. I would counsel you
therefore to make a mild answer, that I may more easily compass the good,
which shall lie in my power to do for you. After this the Grecians withdrew
themselves to consult and give answer: and Clearchus in the name of the rest
said: We neither assembled our selves to make war, The answer of the
Grecians.
nor did we take this journey in hand against the King. Cyrus found many
pretenses, as you very well know, to engage us and bring us hither. When we saw
him in distress, we were ashamed, before gods and men, to betray him, having
in former times addicted our selves to his service. Now Cyrus is dead, we
neither oppose against the Kings government, nor is there cause for us to
infest his Countries, or to seek his death, but we would without offense of
any man return to our country. If wrong be offered us, we will by the help
of God defend our selves, as well as we can. If on the other side any man show
us favor, we will not, to our power, be behind in kindness. Thus much
Clearchus; which Tissaphernes hearing, The conclusion of truce, with the
conditions annexed.
said: I will report these things to the King, and to you again, what the
Kings pleasure is. Let the truce continue, till I come. We will exhibit you a
market. The next day he came not, so that the Grecians were in a perplexity,
and knew not, what to think. The third day he came, and said, he had obtained
power of the King to preserve the Grecians, albeit many gainesaid, and urged,
that it stood not with the Kings honor to suffer those, that had made war
against him, to depart quietly. He added at last, you may now take assurance of
us, if you will, to make the country your friend, and that without fraud we
shall lead you into Greece, exhibiting all the way a market of things
necessary for you, and that where you have it not, you may lawfully take
provision of the country, as you find it. You on the contrary side must
swear that you will pass through the country peaceably, taking only meat and
drink where you have no market; where you have, buying and paying for such
things, as you stand in need of. These points were concluded, and Tissaphernes,
and the Kings wives brother gave their oaths and right hands, The assurance of
truce.
to the Coronels and Captains of the Grecians, and took the like of them.
Afterward Tissaphernes said, I must for the present depart to the King. When I
have my dispatch, I will come with my baggage ready both to guide you into
Greece, and also to return to my government. The Grecians and Ariaeus encamping
near together, waited for Tissaphernes more than twenty days. In the mean
space Ariaeus his brother, and many other of his friends came to him, and to
the Persians with him, some encouraging them, other some bringing the Kings
right hand, Ariaeus practiced to return to the Kings obeisance.
and assurance, that he would forget, that they had served Cyrus in his war,
and all things else, that were past: after which it might easily be perceived,
that Ariaeus and his army made small account of the Grecians, in comparison of
that, they did before; so that this also was not greatly pleasing to the most
part of the Grecians, who came to Clearchus, Suspicion of the Grecians.
and the other Coronels, saying: Why stay we here? know we not, that the King
would give any thing to have us destroyed, to the end that other Grecians may
hereafter be put in fear of bearing arms against him? And now he keeps us
here, because his army is dispersed, which being again assembled, he will in
all likelihood set upon us. It may be also, he is intrenching or raising a
wall somewhere to block up our way. For he would not willingly have us return
into Greece, and report, that being so few in number, we have vanquished his
forces, even before his own gates, and now depart homeward in scorn and
derision of him. Clearchus confident in the truce.
Clearchus answered them, that so discoursed; The things, you speak, are
likewise in my mind. But I conceive withal, that if we now depart, we shall
seem to depart as men, that seek war, and besides do against the truce.
Furthermore, no man will furnish us with a market, nor shall we have corn in
any place. Then who shall be our guide? Further I know not, whether we have any
other River to pass. For it is impossible to pass over Euphrates, the enemy
opposing against us. And if we chance to fight, we have no Horse, whereas the
enemies Horse are many* and much esteemed: so that albeit we get the victory,
whom shall we kill? If we be beaten, not a man of us can escape. If therefore
the King should harbor so much as a thought to make us away, I cannot see why
in so many advantages he should swear, give his right hand, and adjure the
gods, and so eleuate his bands of assurance both with the Grecians and with the
Barbarians. He spoke many other things to this purpose. About this time came
Tissaphernes with his own Forces, making semblance to march homeward, and with
him Orontes and his Forces, which last led with him the Kings daughter, whom he
had lately married. From thence the Grecians proceeded in their journey,
Tissaphernes being their guide, and exhibiting a market of all things needful.
Ariaeus also having with him the Army of Barbarians that served Cyrus, Ariaeus
joins with the Kings Forces.
marched with Tissaphernes and Orontes, and lodged in the same Camp. The
Grecians being jealous hereof, marched alone by themselves with their guides.
They ever encamped a Parasang or little less one from another, Three miles
three quarters.
and they observed and watched one another, as enemies are wont, which
straightway bred a suspicion between them. Sometime going for wood to the same
place, and gathering fodder and such like, they fell to blows, which also set
them at further ods. After three days encamping they came to the Wall of
Media. The Wall of Media.

The height 33. yards. The breadth 6. yards and more. The length 75 miles or
thereabout.30 Miles, 15 mile a day. Draine^ of Tygris.


It was built of Brick mortered with asphalt, being in thickness 20, in
height 100 Foot. The length was said to be 20 Parasangs. It was not far distant
from Babylon. From hence they marched eight Parasangs in two encampings, and
passed over two great Draines, one upon a Bridge, the other upon Ships joined
together. These Draines came out of the River Tygris, and from them were sewers
derived to water the Country, being at the first greater, then less, lastly
little Draines, such as they use in Greece when Panick seed is sown. From
thence they came to the River Tygris, near to which stood a great City well
peopled, named Sitaca, being distant from the River 15 Furlongs. The Grecians
encamped by the City near a fair and large Park, Sitaca

A mile and three quarters.


wherein grew plenty of all manner of Trees. The Barbarians passed over the
River, and were out of sight. After supper Proxenus and Xenophon chanced to
walk before the place of Arms, when there came one and asked the out-watch,
where he might find Proxenus or Clearchus. (...)
He sought not for Menon, albeit he came from Ariaeus Menons guest. When
Proxenus told him, he was the man, whom he sought; Ariaeus and Artaosus,
Ariaeus his message.
quoth he, that were faithful to Cyrus, while he lived, and are now your
friends, have sent me unto you, and advise you by me to keep good watch to
night, lest the Barbarians assault your Camp. A practice of the Barbarians.
There is a great army in the Park. Besides they counsel you to put a good
guard upon the River Tygris, because Tissaphernes is determined this night to
break the Bridge, if he can, to the end to hinder your passage, and to enclose
you betwixt the Bridge and the Draine. After they heard this, they led the man
to Clearchus, A true conjecture about the message.
and imparted the message unto him. Clearchus was much troubled and in extreme
fear with the news. But a young man then present, after he had well ruminated
the matter, said: It hangs not together, that Tissaphernes should go about to
charge us, and to break down the Bridge. For it is evident, that charging us
he must either overcome, or be beaten. If he overcome, what need the Bridge be
broken? For admit, there were many Bridges, yet should we have no where to save
our selves by flight. If he be beaten, whither shall his Army fly, the Bridge
being broken, and most of the Army being beyond the River, how shall they
succor one another, but by the Bridge? After Clearchus heard this, he asked,
what quantity of Land lay betwixt Tygris and the Draine? He answered, that the
territory was large and had many villages and great cities in it. Here-hence
they perceived, that the Barbarians sent the man underhand, fearing that the
Grecians would not pass the Bridge, but remain in the Island having for their
Fortification the River Tygris on the one side, and the Draine on the other,
taking their provision out of the Country, where it was both plenteous and
very good, in which also many Laborers inhabited. Besides the place would be
fit for retreat, in case they were disposed to make inroades upon the Kings
dominions. After this they gave themselves to rest, and yet were not unmindful
to send a Guard to the Bridge. But neither did any man assault the Greekish
Camp, nor yet, as the Guard brought news, did any of the enemy come to the
Bridge. As Soon as it was day they passed the Bridge in as good order, as was
possible; which Bridge was laid over the River upon 37 Ships. A Bridge upon
Ships.
Some of the Grecians in Tissaphernes Camp gave intelligence, they should be
charged in their passage over. But nothing of this was true. During the time of
their passage Glus and others were seen to observe, whether they passed over
or no: and when they saw them passing, they spurred away with all speed. From
Tygris they marched 20 Parasangs in four encampings as far as the River
Fyscus. 75 miles, every day 18 and more. Fyscus, a River. Opis.
It has a Bridge upon it, and near it a great City inhabited, the name
whereof is Opis, hard by which the bastard-Brother of Cyrus and of Artaxerxes,
leading a great Army from Sufae and Ecbatana to the Kings aid, met the
Grecians, and causing his own Army to stay, beheld the Grecians in their
march. Clearchus led his men two in a rank, and oftentimes made Alt in his
going on. (...). The army must take up five mile in length, being 10000, and
betwixt every rank six foot. 112 miles, every day 18, and more.
As long as the Front of the Army stood still, so long the whole Army stood
also still; so that both the Grecians held it a great Army, and the Persian
was astonished at the sight thereof. From hence they marched in six encampings 30
Parasangs in the Wilderness through Media even up to the Villages, which
appertained to Parisatis Mother of Cyrus and of the King. These did
Tissaphernes permit the Grecians in derision of Cyrus to ransacke, and take out
of them, what they list (excepting only the bodies of men.) Much Corn, and
many Sheep, and other goods were found there. From thence in five encampings in
the Wilderness they marched 20 Parasangs leaving the River Tygris on the left
hand. 75 miles, every day 15.
In the first encamping beyond the River was a great and rich City called
Caenae, Caenae, a City. Zabatus a river 400. footbroad.
out of which the Barbarians transported Bread, Cheese, and Wine upon
flote-Boates made of Skins. After this they came to the River Zabatus, which
was four Plethers broad, and there remained three days, Distrusts betwixt the
Grecians and the Barbarians.
and still they increased their iealousies, but no manifest deceit or lying in
wait of one against the other was perceived. Therefore Clearchus thought it
best to confer with Tissaphernes, to allay, if he could, these distrusts,
before they broke out into open hostility. And he sent a special messenger
unto him to signify, that he desired to speak with him, who readily
answered, he might come, when he pleased. At their meeting Clearchus begun,
and said: I know well, Tissaphernes, Conference betwixt Tissaphernes and
Clearchus.
that we have sworn and given mutual right hands not to infest, or annoy, one
another. I see notwithstanding, you keep narrow watch upon us, as upon
enemies, and we perceiving it do as much upon you; But when, according to my
poor understanding, The speech of Clearchus.
I looked into the matter, and could not find, you sought to wrong us, and
knew for certain, that to wrong you was furthest from our thoughts, I desired
conference, that thereby we might, as much as was possible, take each from
other this diffidence. For I am not ignorant, that men fearing one another,
whether out of sinister delations, or of jealousy, to the end rather to
prevent, than to suffer, bring remediless evils upon them, that neither
seek, nor think the harm, which they imagine is intended. Conceiving
therefore, that such errors are easily laid asleep by familiar conference, I
come to you to signify that you distrust us without cause. For first and
chiefly, our oaths forbid us to be enemies, which whosoever neglects, I
cannot account him happy, in what estate soever he flourish; considering that
neither speed, nor darkness, nor strength of place, can assure a man from the
vengeance of the gods. All things are subject to them, and nothing exempted
from their power. This is mine opinion concerning the gods, and the oath, to
which we have mutually bound our selves. Now for you, I hold you, for the
present, of all mortal things our greatest good. For with your help all ways
are open, all rivers passable, nor can we be destitute of provision; without
you all ways full of darkness (for we know no foot of them) all rivers shut
up, all gathering of people together fearful; and solitariness most of all,
because it is full of difficulties. And say, we were so mad to seek your life,
what should we thereby else do, than by killing a man of such desert toward
us, bring the forces of the great King upon us, who would be your revenger?
Besides, for mine own particular, I will in a word declare of how many, and
how great hopes I should deprive my self, if I should go about to wrong you.
J sought the friendship of Cyrus in imagination, that he, of all that lived,
had the greatest ability to do good, to whom he pleased. Now I see the
authority and country of Cyrus in your hands, over and above that, which you
had before, and the Kings forces, which Cyrus used for war deuolued to you
alone. This being so, who would be so senseless not to desire your friendship?
I will add the things, which put me in hope, you will not refuse, nay rather
endeavor to be our friend. I know the Mysians are troublesome unto you, whom
with the forces, I have, I make no question to humble at your feet. The like I
know of the Pisidians. Besides I hear, that many other nations are always
malicious and repining at your felicity. As for the Egyptians, whom you
principally bear upon the spleen, I see not with what aides you can better
revenge your selves upon, then with the army under my command. Your neighbors,
if you please to befriend any, you are of ability to do it munificently of
your self; in case they molest you, you may chastise them, as a master, and
that much the rather by our service, who will follow you not for pay alone, but
more for thankfulness, in regard you have preserved and brought us home safe
to our country. When I consider these things, it seems so wonderful unto me,
that we should be distrusted, that I would feign hear his name, who is so
powerful in speech, as to persuade, that we lie in await for you. These were
the words of Clearchus to Tissaphernes. Tissaphernes answer.
Tissaphernes answered in this manner: It is a joy to me, Clearchus, to hear
your wise and discreet discourse. For seeing you understand these things to be
so, you cannot wish me ill, without being an enemy to your self. But that you
may learn, you cannot justly leave and forsake the King, hear on the contrary
side. If we had any intent, to ruin you, whether do you think, we wanted
means, having multitudes of horse, and foot, and weapons to cut you in pieces,
without any danger of ours? Imagine you, we wanted fit ground to fall upon you?
Pass you not with much labor many plains, that are friend to us? See you
not, what mountains you are to march over, which if we take before hand, your
passage is shut up? How many rivers are there, where we may make choice, and,
as it were, cull out that number of you, with which we list to fight? There are
also amongst them some, that you cannot pass without our friendship and
assistance. But say we had the worst in all these, yet has fire the command of
all fruit, that arises of the earth. Which if we burn, we shall oppose hunger
against you in the field, with which you shall never be able to fight, were you
never so valiant. How then having so many advantages, and all without our own
peril, should we amongst the rest choose such a kind alone, as is impious
against the gods, abominable before men, and such a one as befitteth them, that
know not what to do, and are circumuented with distress, and overwhelmed with
necessity, and which is beseeming loose persons, who care not so they may
effect their designs, though it be with perjury against the gods, and with
unfaithfulness toward men. We, Clearchus, are not so void of sense, or
destitute of reason. When we might have cut you off, why did we not? It
proceeded out of my love, that I might show my self an entire friend to the
Grecians, and by my well deserving descend into my government strong with those
forces, with which Cyrus ascended, being assured of them, by reason of the
entertainment he gave them. You have declared how many ways, you may stead
me. But I know my self the chief and principal. It is not lawful for any,
but the King, to wear his Tiara upright upon his head; But with your presence
and assistance, perhaps another man may carry it upright in his heart. Having
spoken these words, Tiara was an attire that the Persians wore on their heads.
he seemed to Clearchus to deliver that, he thought. Considering then, quoth
Clearchus, we have such cause to be friends, are not they worthy to taste
extreme punishment, who by sinister suggestions endeavor to make us enemies? If
you, quoth Tissaphernes, and the Coronels and Captains please openly to come
unto me, I will tell you, who they are, that informed me. By these words, and
courteous entertainment, Tissaphernes prevailed to make him stay, and bear him
company at supper that night. The next day Clearchus, after his return to the
quarter, Clearhus ouerreached by the cunning of Tissaphernes.
declared publicly how well he thought of Tissaphernes, and related, what he
heard from him; and said, That it was fit, that they, whom Tissaphernes
desired, should accompany him to Tissaphernes his camp: and likewise that
they, who as traitors, and bearing no good affection to the Grecians, had
slandered them with false suggestions, might have their due punishment. He
suspected Menon to be the talebearer, knowing he often resorted to
Tissaphernes with Ariaeus, and that he opposed against him in his command, and
sought to supplant him, to the end that gaining the leading of the army, he
might show himself a friend to Tissaphernes. For Clearchus would have the
whole army to cast their eyes upon him alone; and sought to remove all, that
seemed discontent therewith. Some of the Soldiers spoke against the sending of
all the Coronels and Captains, and said, No trust was to be given to
Tissaphernes. But Clearchus labored eagerly to the contrary, till he brought
to pass, that five Coronels and twenty Captains were allowed to go; two
hundred Soldiers followed them, Five Coronels.
under color to buy victual. When they were at Tissaphernes his door, the
Coronels were called in, to wit, Proxenus the Baotian, Menon the Thessalian,
Agias the Arcadian, Clearchus the Lacedemonean, and Socrates the Achaean. The
Captains staid at the door. Not long after, at one and the same sign hands
were laid upon those within, The Coronels taken prisoners by Tissaphernes.
and those without were cut in pieces, and some of the Barbarian hors-men
scouring the Plain, killed all the Grecians, they lighted upon, free, and
bond. The Grecians perceiving these things out of the camp, marvelled at their
manner of riding up and down, and doubted of the sequel, till Nearchus the
Arcadian came running with his entrails in his hands after a wound received,
and told what had happened in the camp of Tissaphernes. Hereupon all the
Grecians affrighted snatched up their arms, imagining the Persians would
presently invade their camp. But there came no more, than Ariaeus, Artoasus,
and Mithridates, men of chiefest credit with Cyrus. The interpreter of the
Grecians said, He saw and knew Tissaphernes his brother amongst them. About
three hundred Persians followed them in Curaces. These, when they came near,
willed, if there were amongst the Grecians any Coronell or Captain, he should
come forth, and hear the Kings pleasure. Thereupon after assurance given,
Cleanor the Orchomenian, and Sophenetus the Stymphalian, both Grecian Coronels,
issued out; and with them Xenophon the Athenian, to learn what was become of
Proxenus. Cherisophus chanced then to be absent, being gone to a certain
village to make provision. Coming within hearing, Ariaeus said: Clearchus (o
Grecians) having falsified his Oath, False pretenses of a foul action.
and broken the truce, has his judgment, and is dead. Proxenus, and Menon,
are in great honor, because they revealed his treason: and the King demands
of you your Arms. He says they are his, because they belonged to Cyrus his
Servant. The Grecians answered hereto by the mouth of Cleanor; O Ariaeus, the
most execrable of men, and all ye, that were Cyrus his friends: Blush you not
before the gods and men, that having sworn to us to have the same friends and
enemies, you now seek to betray us with Tissaphernes a most godless and
faithless man? and after you have made away them, to whom you gave your Oath,
you go about to destroy the rest, and come with our enemies against us.
Ariaeus answered, Clearchus sought first to entrap Tissaphernes, and Orontes,
and all of us, that were with them. The falsenesse discovered.
Hereunto Xenophon replied: If Clearchus have against his Oath broken the
truce, he has his judgment. For it is just to punish perjured men. But
Proxenus and Menon having behaved themselves toward you as friends, being our
Coronels, let them be restored unto us. For being friends to both, no doubt
they will advise you, and us for the best. The Barbarians having long conferred
together, departed without giving answer hereto: but the Coronels so caught in
the snare were delivered over to the King, and ended their days, being made
shorter by the head. A description of Clearchus his natural disposition.
Of whom Clearchus by consent of all, that had acquaintance with him, was held
a man of martial disposition, and extremely desirous of war. For as long, as
war continued betwixt the Lacedaemonians and Athenians, he remained at home.
Peace being made, he persuaded his City, that the Thracians wronged the
Grecians. And using all means he could, obtained of the Ephori a Commission to
be General and to go against them, and shipped himself with purpose to invade
those Thracians, The Island in Thrace bordering upon Hellespont.

A town lying upon the same Sea.

The narrow Sea beside Constantinople. Lacedemon.


which inhabit above Cherronesus and Perinthus. But after his departure the
Ephori changed their minds, and sent to call him home from Istmos; which
message of theirs he obeyed not, but continued his navigations to Hellespont.
Whereupon the Magistrates of Sparta condemned him, as a disobedient Subject,
unto death. Being now a banished man, he iournied to Cyrus, whose friendship,
after what sort he gained, I have written elsewhere. Cyrus gave him 10000
Daricks, which he spent not in idleness, but waging an Army therewith, made
war against the Thracians. And first he vanquished them in a battle,
afterward harried and spoiled their Country, and continued that war, till
Cyrus stood in need of his Army. Then he departed with intent to follow the
service of Cyrus. These therefore were the actions of a man that delighted in
war; who, when he might have lived in peace without shame or damage, chose
to be in war; might have rested in idleness, gave himself to labor, and
war; might without danger have enioied riches plenteously, bestowed them
rather upon war. Such was his disposition to war, and he spent as willingly
upon war, as if it had been upon love, or other pleasures. It appeared also,
that he was of a warlike inclination, because he loved danger, and led his
people as well by night, as by day against the enemy; and demeaned himself
wisely and circumspectly, His diligence.
when he was in peril, as all, that followed him, confess. Besides, he was
said to be an excellent Commander according to his manner. For, His skill.
if any man else, Clearchus knew how to make necessary provision for his army,
and to supply the wants thereof in time of need: and how to breed an opinion in
his Soldiers, that Clearchus his command was not to be disobeied. This he
effected by his soreness, and austeritie, Severity.
being stern in visage, and harsh in voice, and always using extremity in
punishment, and sometimes with choler, so that the time was, when he repented of
his hastiness. He chastised his Soldiers of set purpose; thinking an Army
unpunished to be of no use. This saying of his is also reported; That a
Soldier ought rather to fear his Commander, than his Enemy, in case he were
to stand well to his guard, or to abstain from spoiling his friends, or to go
without refusal against an enemy. Therefore the Soldiers heard him
willingly, and required no other Commander in time of danger. They said, that
sternenesse then seemed cheerfulness in his countenance, and soreness a kind
of strengthening against the enemy. So that now it was no more austeritie,
but, as it were, a preservative. When they were out of danger, and might follow
other Commanders, many forsook him. For he had nothing in him to win favor;
but was always sour and cruel, so that Soldiers affected him as children
do their Schoolmaster. Neither had he any man, that followed him for love;
but whosoever were put under his command either by the city, or else by
necessity and want, they were wonderfully obedient to him; and after they had
overcome the enemy under his leading, his means were great to make his
Soldiers serviceable. For they marched against the enemy with great assurance,
and the fear of punishment kept them in good order. Such a Commander was
Clearchus. It was said, he had no great desire to be under an other man's
command. He was about fifty years old, Ambition.
when he died. Proxenus the Boeotian sought even from his childhood to become a
man fit for great employments, Proxenus.
and out of this desire he gave entertainment, and addicted himself a scholar
to Gorgias the Leontine; His industry being young.
and after he had conuersed with him a time, thinking himself now both able
for government, and also that being in estimation with the greatest, he should
not fail of means to prefer himself, he went and joined with Cyrus in the
same actions, imagining thereby to purchase a worthy name, and great power, and
plenty of riches; His ends.
and albeit his desires were such, notwithstanding it appeared evidently in his
carriage, Modesty.
that he wished not by ill means, but fairly and justly, and no otherwise to
come unto them. He was able to manage matters of importance, and worth, but yet
could neither raise reverence, Remissness.
nor fear in his Soldiers minds toward him. Nay rather he reverenced them,
than they him; and showed clearly, he more feared their hatred, than not to
have them obedient to him. He thought it sufficient to be, and seem to be, to
praise a well-deseruing soldier, not to commend him, that did amiss. The
honester therefore, and better sort of Soldiers were well affected toward him;
the other sought to circumuent him, as being easy to be overtaken. He was
about thirty years old, when he lost his life. Menon the Thessalian made open
show, Menon.
that he greedily coueted riches, and coueted rule thereby to wax worthier,
His desire of wealth.
and coueted honor to bring in gain. He insinuated himself into great men's
favor, to shelter his faults from punishment. To forswear, to lie, and
deceive, he held the next way to effect his desires: Impudency.
simplicity and truth he accounted all one with dullness, and want of
understanding. It could not be perceived, that he loved any man. To whom he
made most show of love, him he sought to beguile. In his common discourse,
Deceitfulness.
he used not to deride an enemy; but scoffed always at them, with whom he
conuersed. He never lay in wait for enemies goods, because he judged it hard to
finger that, which was kept, but imagined, that he alone knew, that because the
goods of friends were under no straight custody, they might easily be
surprised. Perjured and wicked folk he feared, as men armed, and abused at his
pleasure upright, and well-minded men, scarce esteeming them for men. Menon no
otherwise rejoiced, in deceit, forging of lies, and deriding his friends, than
another man would in godliness, truth, and just dealing. He esteemed him, that
was no circumuenter, to be unnurtured, and to want education. Calumniation.
In seeking great men's favor, he thought there was no other way, than by
accusing them, that stood in their special grace. He endeavored to make his
Soldiers obedient with society of villainy. He looked for respect, because in
many things he had ability, and will to do wrong. If any man forsook him, he
said he dealt kindly with him, for that he had not made him away. But the
things concerning him, that are not so openly known, may seem to be fained.
Every one knows these, that follow. Being in the flower of his age he obtained
of Aristippus the leading of the strangers in the army; and in the flower of
his age he grew into the familiarity with Ariaeus, Impudicitie.
who was a Barbarian, and delighted in young boys; and having yet no hair on
his face, he fell in love with Tharipus, that had a beard. When the other
Coronels were made away, because they bore arms with Cyrus against the King,
he escaped being in that same fault. Death.
Yet after the death of the other Coronels was he punished and put to death by
the King; not losing his head, as Clearchus and the other, (which seems to be
the fairest and most honorable kind of death) but he is reported to have come
to his end, as a wicked man, being put to continual torments by the space of a
whole year. Agias the Arcadian, and Socrates the Achaean, lost their heads at
the same time, whom no man ever scorned as slack and sluggish Soldiers, nor
blamed as disloyal and untrue friends. They were each of them about forty
years old.

Finis Libri Secundi.
THE THIRD BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF XENOPHON, TOUCHING THE Ascent of CYRUS the
younger, out of Asia the Less, into the Higher COVNTREYS.
WHat was done by the Grecians in their Ascent with Cyrus, until the battle
fought, and what befell them after the death of Cyrus returning homeward in the
company of Tissaphernes according to the truce, is declared in the former
discourse. After the Coronels were apprehended, and as many of the Captains
and Soldiers, as followed them, slain, the Grecians were forced into great
streights and perpiexitie, especially when they considered, that they were at
the Kings Gates, and round about them both Nations and Cities enemy, and from
thenceforward no man would store them with provision, and that their distance
from Greece was more than 10000 Furlongs, About 1250 mile.
that they had no guide of the way, that their return was shut up betwixt
impassable Rivers, and were betrayed also by those Barbarians, that ascended up
with Cyrus, and left alone, having not so much as a Hors-man on their side, so
that it was manifest, that albeit they gained the victory, they should not be
able to slay an enemy; in case they were beaten, no one of them should remain
alive; weighing these things in their minds, The distressed estate of the
Grecians.
and thereby being full of grief, few of them tasted Food that evening, few
kindled Fires, and not many took Arms the whole night; and every man laid
himself down to rest, there, where he chanced to stand, being unable to
sleep for sorrow, and for desire of his Country, Parents, Wife, and Children,
which he made account never to see again. In this distress they reposed
themselves. Xenophon.
There was in the Army one Xenophon an Athenian, who followed the Camp, being
neither Coronell, nor Captain, nor Soldier, but was sent for from home by
Proxenus, Invited to serve Cyrus.
that was his guest of old. He promised Xenophon, if he would take the pains
to come, to make Cyrus his friend, who as he esteemed would be more to be
prised of him, than his own Country. Xenophon reading the Letter conferred
with Socrates the Athenian about the journey; So^rates his counsel to X^noph^n.
and Socrates misdoubting, that to be Cyrus his friend, would turn him to
displeasure with the City (because Cyrus seemed to join willingly in war
with the Lacedaemonians against Athens) advised Xenophon to repair to Delphos
and ask counsel of the god concerning his journey. To the Oracle of Apollo.
Xenophon therefore going thither, demanded of Apollo, to which of the gods he
should offer prayers and sacrifice, that thereby he might prosper, and do
well, and be preserved from all dangers in the journey which he conceived in
his mind. Apollo answered, he should sacrifice to the gods, to whom he ought
to sacrifice. Mispropounding his question.
After his return to Athens, he communicated the Oracle with Socrates: who,
when he heard it, blamed Xenophon, because he demanded not, whether it should
be better for him to travel or to stay at home, but (as though he had already
resolved to go) demanded, how he might best accomplish his journey. But seeing
you have propounded your question in this form, quoth Socrates, you are to do
that, which the god commands you. Xenophon therefore sacrificing, as the god
had commanded, took shipping and sailed away, and found Proxenus and Cyrus at
Sardes (who were now ready to take their journey upward) and was forthwith
presented to Cyrus. Proxenus earnestly requested him to stay; and Cyrus did the
like; but added, that as soon as the Army was dissolved, he would immediately
give him leave to depart. The journey was noised abroad to be against the
Pisidians. Xenophon therefore followed the war being thus deceived not by
Proxenus (for neither he, nor any other of the Grecians, except Clearchus, knew
of Cyrus his intent against the King) but when the Army came into Cilicia,
there was no man so simple, but he easily perceived, that they were led against
the King. And albeit they feared the length of the way, and were unwilling to
proceed further, yet the most part in regard of mutual respect one to another,
and of the love they bore to Cyrus, continued on the journey: amongst whom
Xenophon was one. Xenophons grief.
And being now in this distress, he was sorrowful with the rest, but yet
taking a little nap he fell into a dream. It seemed to him, that in a thunder
the bolt fell upon his Fathers House, His dream.
and that the whole House was therewith set on fire. Being affrighted, he
started out of his sleep, judging that the dream was good in part, because
being in travel and danger he saw a great light proceed from Jupiter: In part
he feared it, because it seemed to come from Jupiter being a King, and to shine
in a circle; imagining he should not be able to get out of the Kings Country,
but be environed on all sides with some one distress or other. Now what the
signification and effect of such a dream was, might be easily perceived by the
sequel. For it fell out, that, straight after that he awaked, His discourse in
mind.
he entered into this cogitation with himself: Why lie I here? The night
passes away; and it is likely that the enemy will fall upon us, as soon as
the day appears. If we come into the Kings hands, what shall hinder, that
having first seen with our eyes all manner of scorns, and next felt all kind
of torments, we die not afterward a shameful and villainous death? Now no man
makes preparation for defense, nor so much as once thinks upon it: but we
lie still, as though we were in security. What Commander therefore do I
expect out of any other City to direct us? Or what age do I look to attain
unto? If to day I betray my self to the enemy, I shall never be an hour
elder. Hereupon he presently arose, His resolution. His speech to the Captains
of his own Regiment.
and first called together the Captains of Proxenus his Regiment. Then he
spoke thus: Worthy Captains, the consideration of our estate will neither
^uffer me to sleep (which I think is you^ case as well as mine) nor yet to lie
still and give my self to rest. Our enemies, until they imagined they had
brought their designs to a wished end, forbore to offer open hostility. Of us
on the other side there is no man that casts in his mind, how we may best
come to fight, and defend our selves against the enemy. For if we yield and
subject our selves unto the Kings power, what hazard shall we not incur? He cut
off the head and hand of Cyrus, and fastened them to the Gallows, who was his
Brother both by the same Father and Mother, and already dead. We then, who
have here no kindred, who took up arms against him, who sought to establish
his servant in his Throne, and to make away the King himself, if it lay in our
power, we I say, what may not we expect to suffer? Will he not use all means
possible to lay upon us extremity of punishment, thereby to strike a fear
into other, that they presume not to war against him? Surely we are to try
our uttermost endeavors, that we fall not into his hands. For my part I ceased
not, even while the truce endured, to bemoane our case, and to esteem the
King, and such as followed him happy, seeing with mine eyes, how large and
goodly a country they enjoyed, what plenty of provision, what a number of
attendants, how many carriage-beasts, what quantity of gold, and of apparel
they possessed; and on the contrary side, comparing the condition of our army,
that enjoyed nothing of value, but what was bought with money (which I knew but
few had) and was debarred of other means of provision, by reason of their oath
and agreement. Casting, I say, these things in my mind, I feared then the
truce more, than I do now the war. And considering the enemy himself has
broken the truce, I think, that both their insolency and our suspicions are
come to an end. For now all the advantages, whereof I spoke, are laid in the
midst, as it were, betwixt us both, as rewards for those, that shall behave
themselves most valiantly. The gods are Judges, and give success to battles,
who in all reason will be on our side. Our enemies in forswearing themselves,
have broken their faith unto them: We contrariwise, having many fair
advantages offered us, constantly forbore to take them for our oaths sake made
to the gods. So that, me thinks, we ought to go forth to battle with much
more courage and assurance, than they. Further, our bodies are more able to
endure cold, and heat, and labors, than theirs, and, by the favor of the
gods, our minds more noble. Besides, they will be more subject to wounds, and
death, than we, in case the gods (as they have done heretofore) vouchsafe to
give us victory. But it may be, that other men harbor these cogitations, as
well as we. For the love of God let us not expect, that other come and
encourage us to be brave and resolute, but let us begin to excite other to
valiance. Show your selves gallantest amongst Captains and most fit to command
amongst Coronels. My self, if you shall be pleased to lead me, will follow;
if you appoint me a leader, will not excuse my self by want of years, but
rather conceive that youth may strengthen and preserve me from many mischances.
Apollonides a harsh counselor.
Thus much he spoke. All the Captains hearing it, willed him to proceed,
except one Apollonides, a man that clattered rudely in the Boeotian idiome. He
said, they spoke idly, that sought to persuade, that there was any other hope
of safety, than in the Kings favor, if it might be gained, and withal began
to reckon up the distresses, we were in. Xenophon in the mean time
interrupting him replied: O strange man, that you are, who neither seeing know,
nor hearing remember. You were present, when the King, proud of his victory,
after the death of Cyrus sent unto us, commanding to deliver up our arms. When
we refused, and marched forward in arms, and encamped close by him, what did
he not to procure truce, sending Ambassadors, and demanding cessation of
hostility, and offering to furnish the army with provision. But after the
Coronels and Captains (as you now would have us) in confidence of the truce,
went without arms to confer with them; are they not now scourged, wounded,
and scorned, and yet cannot die poor men, albeit, I persuade my self, they
infinitely desire it? All this you see, and say notwithstanding, they speak
idly, that advise to stand upon our defense; and would have us to sue to the
King anew to obtain his favor. For my part (Companions) I hold this fellow
not only unfit henceforward to be admitted into our society, but also worthy
to lose his Captains place, and no otherwise to be employed, than as a
carriage-beast; because in bearing this base mind, he both shames his
country, and besides disparages the whole Grecian nation. Hereupon Agasias the
Stymphalian replied: This fellow has nothing in him at all, that savors of
Boeotia, or Greece. For I have seen both his ears, which are boared through,
like as are the Lydian slaves. And indeed they were so. Assembly of the army.
(...).
Therefore they drove him away. The rest going about the camp, where they
found a Coronell alive, called forth the Coronell, where he wanted, the
Lieutenant Coronell, and where a Captain was alive, the Captain. When all
were assembled, they set down before the place of Arms, and the Coronels and
Captains, that came together, were about a hundred in number. Jerome the
Eleans speech.
This fell out almost at midnight. Then Jerome the Elaean, the eldest Captain
of Pro^cenus his Regiment, began to speak after this sort: We (worthy Coronels
and Captains) seeing the desperate estate of our present affairs, have
thought good, both to meet here our selves, and to call you together, to the
end to advise upon some good course of proceeding. Xenophon, quoth he, I pray
relate to the assembly the things, which you delivered unto us. Xenophons
speech.
Xenophon hereupon began thus: We all know, that the King, and Tissaphernes
have laid hands upon as many of us, as they could, and that they lie in wait
for the rest to cut them off. Therefore mine opinion is, that we leave nothing
undone to avoid the snares of the Barbarians, nay rather to become their
masters, if it be possible. And you cannot be ignorant likewise, that being so
many, as you are here assembled, your demeanor will bring forth effects of
great consequence. The eyes of the whole army are cast upon you. If they
perceive, that you faint in courage, you must expect the like from them. But if
you appear resolute against the enemy, and stir up the rest, and hearten
them, you know well, they will follow, and endeavor to imitate your example.
And doubtless it is reason, you should carry brauer minds than they; you are
their Coronels, Taxiarchs are the Captains of the light armed.

Lochagi the Captains of the armedfoot.


you their Taxiarchs, and Captains. In time of peace, you enjoy more wealth
and honor, than they; and now in time of war it behooves you to surmount the
multitude, and as need shall require, to go before them in counsel, and
pains taking. For the present, first I think, you will much advantage the
Army, in making choice of new Coronels and Captains in stead of them, that are
lost. For without rulers nothing that is good or profitable can be administered
(in a word) any where, but especially in matters of war. For as good order
seems to preserve, so disorder has overthrown and undone many. After you
have appointed so many Commanders, as are needful, if then you call the
Soldiers together, and confirm their minds, you shall not do it out of
season, as J think. Now you perceive as well, as I, how heavily, and drowsily
they go to Arms, how drowsily to the Watch; In which case, as long, as they
remain, I know not, what use may be had of them night or day. But if a man
stir up their minds, and represent, not only what they are to suffer, but to
do also, it will greatly enhance their courage. For you know, that it is
neither multitude, nor strength, that gives victory in war, but which side
soever go (by the favor of the gods) into the field with brauer and gallanter
resolutions, they for the most part prevail. It comes besides into my mind,
that whatsoever he be, that seeks by all means he can to save his life in
wars, he commonly dies a vile and dishonorable death. But they which know,
that death is common and unavoidable to all men, and that strive to die with
honor, I see them much sooner reach to old years, and spend the remainder of
their life in happiness. Which we should do well to consider, especially in
this hard time, and both our selves be courageous, and also excite other to
valor, and forwardness. So much he spoke, and held his peace. After him
Cherisophus spoke and said: Cherisophus.
Heretofore I knew you (Xenophon) thus far, that you were reported to be an
Athenian. Now I commend both your speech and actions, and could wish, we had
many such, as you are. It would be a common good to all. It remains, that we
slug not at this instant, but depart every man to his quarter; and you that
want, choose your Commanders. When they are chosen, come and bring them into
the midst of the camp, and present them unto us. Then will we assemble the
rest of the Soldiers. And let Tolmides the Crier come likewise unto us. Having
thus said, he arose, because he would not hinder the dispatch of things
needful to be do^e. Then were the Coronels chosen: New Coronels.
Timasion the Dardanian, in stead of Clearchus; in stead of Socrates, Xanticles
the Achaean; Cleanor the Orchomenian, for Agias the Arcadian; Philesius the
Achaean for Menon; and for Proxenus, (...).
Xenophon the Athenian. The day almost appeared before the election ended, and
the Commanders came to the midst of the Camp, (...).
and it was decreed, that a watch should be set before the Camp, and the
Soldiers of the whole Army called to the assembly. When the rest of the
Soldiers were come together, Cherisophus the Lacedemonian arose, Cherisophus
his exhortation.
and spoke to this effect: My companions in Arms, we are fallen into great
straights, being bereaved of such Coronels, (...).
Captains, and Soldiers. Besides, the Army of Ariaeus, which before were our
confederates, has betrayed us. Notwithstanding it becomes valiant Soldiers
to lift up their heads, and to make way through these evils, and not to faint,
but endeavor, as much as in us lies, to save our selves by obtaining a noble
victory against the enemy, and if we fail thereof, to die an honorable
death, and not to come alive into their hands, lest we suffer such things, as,
I pray God to turn upon their own heads. Next Cleanor the Orchomenian stood
up and said: You see (fellow Soldiers) the perjury and impiety of the King,
Cleanor.
you see likewise the falsenesse of Tissaphernes, who pretending he was a
Neighbor to Greece, and that he would at any price be a means of our safety,
and hereupon himself giving his Oath, himself his right hand, deceiving us
himself, has apprehended the Coronels, and not fearing Jupiter the protector
of guests, (...).
inuiting Clearchus to his Table, and thereby circumuenting the rest, has put
them all to death. As for Ariaeus, whom we would have made King of Persia, to
whom we gave, and from whom we took assurance by oath, not to betray one
another, he also neither fearing gods, nor men, nor reuerencing Cyrus, that is
dead (being most of all other, whilst he lived, respected and honored by him)
reuolting to his greatest enemies, goes about to work us mischief, who were
Cyrus his friends. But the gods will revenge our wrongs upon such men. It
behooves us, having these things before our eyes, to be no more ouerreached by
them, but with our Swords in hand, and fighting valiantly, to expect,
whatsoever it shall please the gods to lay upon us. Then Xenophon stood up,
having apparelled himself as bravely, as he could, for the war; conceiving,
if God gave victory, that the fairest furniture was most befitting victory;
if he should be slain, it would not be amiss to end his days in his best
ornaments. He spoke in this manner: Cleanor has discovered unto you the
perjury and faithlesnesse of the Barbarians, Xenophon.
which, I think, is also well known to your selves. If therefore we purpose
again to treat with them by way of friendship, we must needs do it with
great distrust, setting before our sight the miserable case of the Coronels,
who upon trust permitted themselves to their hands. But if we seek revenge by
Arms for that, wherein they have wronged us, and hereafter prosecute all
manner of war against them, we have, by the favor of the gods, many and
fair hopes of safety. Whilst he was speaking these words, one of the
Soldiers neesed: The superstition of the Gentiles.
which when the rest heard, all of them at one instant worshipped god: and
Xenophon said; Seeing whilst we were speaking of safety, a good foretoken of
Jupiter the savior presented it self unto us, I hold it fit to make a vow to
that god, that when we come into a Country, that is friend, we offer a
health-offring unto him; and sacrifice withal to other gods according to our
ability. You, that are of the same mind, hold up your hands. They held up
their hands every man, and made a vow, and sung the Paean. After all things
appertaining to the worship of the gods were duly ended, he thus began again:
I was even now saying, A warlike song which they used when they went to charge
the enemy.
that many and fair hopes of safety presented themselves unto us. For first
we have performed our Oath^s, which we made before the gods, whereas our
enemies, as perjured persons, have broken both the Truce and their Oaths.
Which being so, there is no question but we shall find the gods (who are of
power sufficient both to humble the mighty, and on the sudden to preserve
the lowly, in what danger soever they be) adversaries to our enemies, and
assistants to us. Next I will put you in remembrance of the noble acts of your
ancestors, that you may know, Brave exploits of ancestors, a great incitement
to valor. Darius the Father of Xerxes sent his General Datis with a great
Army which was overthrown by the Athenians at Marathon. The Persians were
slain to the number of 6300. Herodotus lib. 6. But Justin reports that there
were slain 200000. Herodotus lib. 7.
it behooves you by their example to be valiant, and that valiant men are by
the gods preserved from all dangers and distress. For when the Persians and
their alies came with a mighty Army to destroy Athens, the Athenians being
not afraid to meet them, fought with them and had the victory. And making a
vow to Diana, to offer unto her so many Goats, as they killed enemies, when
there were not so many to be found, they made a Decree to offer yearly 500,
which number they offer also at this present. Afterward when Xerxes, raising an
Host without number, came against Greece, even then also our Ancestors overcame
their Ancestors both by Sea and Land, whereof the Trophies erected are tokens.
But the greatest testimony is the freedom of the Cities, in which you were
borne and bred. For you worship no man as Lord, but the gods alone, of such
Ancestors are you descended. I speak not this, as though you degenerated from
them. For many days are not past, since ordering your selves in battle in the
Field against these their posterity, by the favor of the gods you overcame
them being many more in number than your selves. And at that time you showed
your selves valiant to the end to make Cyrus King. Now when the fight is for
your own safety, A man is nearest to himself.
you ought to be much more forward and resolute. Besides you ought to be more
confident now than at that time; for then having had no trial of them, albeit
you saw their number infinite, yet you durst charge them with brave Grecian
minds; now finding by experience that, though their number were never so
great, yet they had not the heart to abide you; Experience of an enemy.
why should you be afraid of them? And let it not trouble you, that Cyrus
Soldiers have forsaken you, that before took your part. They are greater
cowards, than the other, you have already beaten. It is true, they have left
you, and are fled to them, and for my part, whosoever begins first to run, I
had rather see them with the enemy, than on your side. But if any of you faint
in mind, because the enemy has many, you have no horse, let him consider,
Horse in the field.
that ten thousand horse are no more than ten thousand men. For no man was ever
slain in battle by the biting or stroke of a horse. Men they are that
perform, whatsoever is done in fight. As for us, our mounting is much more
firm, and steadfast, than theirs. They hang upon their horse, and are not only
in fear of us, but to be shaken off also from their horses, and fall to the
ground. We contrariwise have sure footing, and shall be able with more
assuredness, to strike any man, that approaches us, and to direct our aim
with more certainty. One advantage the hors-men have, that they may more
securely run away, than we. But in case you fear not to fight, but mislike
only that Tissaphernes will not be your guide, Scarcity of provision.
nor the King prepare a market for you, you shall do well to consider, whether
is better, to have Tissaphernes your guide, who every where seeks to entrap
you, or to take guides of your own choice, who if at any time they prove
false, offend against their own souls and bodies. As for provision, whether
is it better to buy a poor pittance for much money (which now, being out of
pay, will grow scant amongst us) out of a market, which they shall furnish, or
having the victory, to use what measure every man thinks fittest for his own
turn. But if you know these things to be so, and fear notwithstanding the
passage of rivers, Passage of Rivers.
thinking it will be deceitful and dangerous for you, consider if the
Barbarians have not herein also notably played the fools; For all rivers,
albeit far from their springs they have hard passage, yet at their heads a
man may go over without wetting his knees. But say we can neither pass the
rivers nor find guides, yet are we not to despair. For we know the Mysians,
whom we cannot esteem better, than our selves, inhabit many and great, and
rich cities in the Kings territory, Seating in a strange country.
and that in despite of the King. As much we know of the Pisidians. As for the
Lycaonians, our selves have seen, that having won many strong places in the
Plain, they do at this day enjoy the fruits of the Kings country. And I would
think it fitting, that we also should make no semblance of returning home, but
so demean our selves, as though our purpose were to inhabit here. For I know
the King would give the Mysians many guides, A golden bridge is to be made for
an enemy to run away. See Diod. Sicul. l. 1.21. and the Lexicon, in (...):
for the tree and fruit see Pliny, l. 13. c. 17. page 234.
and many hostages for assurance of their departure, and would open them a way,
yea, if need were, send them away in Chariots. The like I assure my self, he
would do to us most willingly, if he perceived, we prepared our selves to seat
here. But I fear, in case we once learn to live idly, and in plenty of all
things, and grow into acquaintance with the fair and tall wives and virgins of
the Medes and Persians, left after the manner of the Lotophages, we forget the
way homeward to our own country. The fruit is so pleasant, that they that
taste it, are loath to ret^rn to their own count^y.
Wherefore it seems unto me fit and reasonable, that we endeavor first to
return into Greece, to see our kindred and acquaintance, and to show the
Grecians, that they willingly are poor, considering, they may, if they please,
send the needier sort of their Citizens hither, where they may abound in all
manner of riches and plenty. For whatsoever is good in the land it will be
theirs, that win the victory. Now I will declare unto you, how we shall march
with most security, and how, if need be, make our strongest fight. And first,
Unnecessary carriage.
I hold it necessary to burn our Wagons, that our cariages be not our
masters, and that we may have full liberty to march, where it is fittest for
the Army. Then to burn our Tents, which it will be troublesome to carry them,
and they profit nothing either to fight, or for provision. Besides to leave
behind us our unnecessary stuff, and to take with us only such as for war,
or for meat, or drink we stand in need of, to the end that most of us be in
Arms, and as few, as may be, busy themselves with unnecessary carriage. For
you know that they, which are overcome, leave all they have to the spoil of
others: being Conquerors, you must esteem the enemies to be your cariers and
purueiors. It remains to speak of that, which I take to be of most
importance. For you see, that the enemy durst not make open war against us,
till they had laid hold upon our Coronels, imagining, that so long as we had
Coronels, and were obedient unto them, we were able enough to go through stich
with the war. After they had gotten our Coronels into their hands, they
thought, Care of the Comm^nders. (...) of Soldiers.
they might easily overthrow us through default of command and of order. It
behooves therefore the Commanders, that now are, to be more careful, than the
former Commanders, and the Soldiers to be more orderly and obedient, than
before. And in case any man o^ey not, if you decree, that whosoever is present
with the Commander, shall have authority to cha^tise him, the enemy will be
much deceived in his hopes. For they shall see in stead of one Clearchus ten
thousand, who will give no man leave to play the coward. But it is high time to
make an end. For it may be the enemy will presently be here. Whatsoever then
of these things, you shall allow, let it be dispatched out of hand. If any
other man, albeit but a private Soldier, conceive of a better course, let him
speak. For we all in common stand in need of safety. Then said Cherisophus:
If ought else be needful besides the things, that Xenophon has mentioned, it
may be done hereafter: Those things, he has spoken of, it seems fit, they
should be decreed. All, that are of the same opinion, let them hold up their
hands. They all held up t^eir hands. Then Xenophon standing up again,
proceeded further, and said: Fellow Soldiers, hear now what in mine opinion
you are to expect. It is clear that we are to march thither, where we may
find provision. I hear there are good and plentiful Villages not above
twenty Furlongs hence. I will not therefore marvel, as fearful Dogs are
wont, to follow and bite, if they can, such, as pass by, and to run away from
those that turn again upon them, A square hollow battle fit for a march when
it is feared, the enemy will charge round about. (...).

Commanders of the Front, flanks and rear.


if the enemy do the like pursuing our Rear. But then I hold that our march
will be the safer, if we cast our selves into a Plesium, that the baggage and
loose multitude may be conveyed in more security. If now therefore it be
agreed upon, who shall lead the Plesium and order the Front, who the Flanks,
who the Rear, we shall not be driven to consult, when the enemy approaches,
but only execute that, which is concluded. If any man can advise us better, let
us give ear to him; if not, let Cherisophus have the leading, because he is a
Lacedemonian, two of the eldest Coronels command the Flanks, I and Timasion,
as the youngest, be in the Rear. And from hence forward, after we have made
trial of this form, we will upon all occasions take counsel, what is best to
be done. If any man can direct us better, he has liberty to speak. When no
man spoke against the motion, he said: They that allow of that, which is
propounded, hold up their hands. So it was decreed. Now, quoth he, you are to
depart, and put the decree in execution. And whosoever he be amongst you, that
desires to see his kinsmen and friends, let him remember to show himself a
man of valor. For otherwise there is no hope thereof: and he, that desires
life, let him endeavor to overcome. The Conquerors have power to slay, the
conquered are to expect naught else, but death. And if he covet riches,
victory must be the means to obtain them. They that are Masters of the
Field, are Masters of their own, and of their fortunes also, whom they subdue.
As Soon, as these things were spoken, all arose and departing, set fire on the
Carts, and Tents, and on the things, that might well be spared. Some they parted
with their friends, the rest they burned; and so went to breakfast. Whilst
they were at breakfast, came Mithridates with about thirty Horses, and called
out the Coronels to parley. He spoke thus: Mithridates fained speech.
I, o Grecians, was (as you know) faithful unto Cyrus, as long as he lived,
and now am a well-willer of yours, and therefore cannot, but remain in great
perplexity. If then I could see, you took any safe course, I would come unto
you my self, and bring my followers with me. Tell me then, I pray, what your
purpose is, as to one, that is your friend, and wishes you well, and resolved
to proceed with you in the same journey. The Coronels consulting together
resolved upon this answer, and Cherisophus delivered it: Our purpose is, if we
be not impeached, to return home, and to pass through your Country endammaging
it as little as may be: and if any man hinder us, to open the way with our
Swords. Mithridates sought to persuade, that without the Kings will and
pleasure, He discouers himself by accident.
it was impossible to depart in safety. Whereby we understood, there was no
great trust to be reposed in him. Besides it was observed, that one of
Tissaphernes his familiar friends was in his Train to see, what was done. And
thereupon it seemed good to the Coronels to make a Decree, Messengers from the
enemy.
that hereafter no Messenger should be admitted from the Enemy as long, as we
were in the Country. For with their intercourse they corrupted the Soldiers,
and corrupted one Captain, to wit, Nicharchus an Arcadian, who in the night
time fled to the enemy with about twenty men. When breakfast was ended,
passing the river Zathe, we marched in good order, Zathe a river. Order of
march in an open country.
having placed the carriage, and loose multitude, in the midst of the
battle. We had not marched far, before Mithridates appeared again, with 200
horse, and 400 archers and slingers, which were very nimble and light. He, as a
friend, came close up to the Grecians. Being near, some of his horse and foot
began upon the sudden to shoot, Fair words turned into a storm of hostility.
other to sling, and so wound the Grecians. The rear of the Grecians were
feign to endure all, yet could not annoy the enemy. For the Cretan bow carries
not so far, as the Persian; and the Cretan archers wearing no arms of
defense, were glad to hide themselves within the body of the armed; and the
darters were not able to reach the slingers of the enemy. Xenopho^ therefore,
having the rear, An error of Xenophon.

Advantage of missiue weapons.


thought good to advance and follow the enemy; and thereupon fell out with the
armed and targetiers of the rear; but could not lay hand upon any of them. For
the Grecians had no horsemen, and their foot in so short a race could not
overtake the foot of the enemy, (which had the start so far before) and it
was not safe to give chase far from the body of the Phalange. Besides, the
barbarian horsemen, as they fled, shot backward from their horse, and wounded
many that gave chase. And as far as the Grecians advanced, so far must they
afterward retire, still maintaining the fight; so that the whole day they
marched not above 25 furlongs, and yet by Sunne-set they came to the villages.
There again were they much discomforted, and Cherisopus and the eldest
Coronels blamed Xenophon, in that he pursued the enemy so far from the
Phalange, and put himself in danger, and yet no whit endangered the enemy.
Xenophon hearing it, said, that they reprehended him not without cause, and
that the action it self testified with them. But I was forced, quoth he, to
do, as I did. For I saw, that standing still we were sore distressed, and not
able reciprocally to offend the enemy. And when we fell out, it was, as you
say. For giving chase we little hurt them, and yet retired with great
difficulty. The gods be thanked therefore, that I went not out with many, but
with a few. So that I did no great harm, and yet have found out that, which we
stand in need of. For now we see by trial, that the enemy shoots and slingeth
further, than either the Cretans, or our Darters can reach; and when we fall
out after them, Necessity mother of invention.
we may not go far from the Phalange. If but a little way, let the
Soldiers be never so nimble, he shall never be able to come up to a footman,
that is distant from him as far, as a bow can shoot. If therefore we will
debar them from annoying us in our journey, we must quickly provide slingers
and horse. I hear there are Rhodians in our Camp, of whom the most part are
reported to have skill in slinging, and that their slings reach twice as far,
The Rhodian slings.
as the Persian slings. For the Persians use stones, that fill the hand, and
therefore sling not far, the Rhodians leaden bullets. If therefore we
inquire, which of them have slings, and reward them; and deliver to other money
to make new slings, Means to procure readiness to serve.
and besides grant to them, that will serve in that kind, some other
immunities, it may be, we shall find amongst them, that will be for our
purpose. Besides I se^ horse in the Camp, some of mine own, some left by
Clearchus, and many, that have been taken from the enemy, and are now become
cariage-beasts: If we make choice amongst these, and give the owners
cariage-beasts in exchange, and distribute the horse to horsemen, peradventure
they also will trouble these runners. These things were decreed, and the same
night 200 slingers, and the next day 50 horsemen were furnished out, (...).
to whom were given cassocks and curaces, and Lucius the son of Polystratus
an Athenian was appointed their Captain. The Grecians taking their rest that
day, and rising more early the next, marched forward. They were to pass a
valley, (...).
in which they feared the enemy would charge them, and being now gotten to the
other side of it, Mithridates appeared again, leading with him 1000 horse, and
4000 archers and slingers. For being insolent, because in the former encounter
he with a few came off without harm, and yet, as he imagined, very much
annoyed the Grecians, he required and had so many of Tissaphernes, promising,
if he obtained them, to deliver the Grecians into his hands. The Grecians were
past the valley 8 furlongs or thereabout, A vain promise upon an unsure
ground. A ^ile.
when Mithridates passed likewise with his forces. The Targetiers and armed of
the Grecians that were to fall out, were before hand appointed, and the
horsemen had charge given them, not to be afraid in following the chase,
because a sufficient number of foot was to second and attend them. By this time
Mithridates wa^ come up to the Grecians, and the Persian slings and bows
bestowed their flying weapons thick amongst them, when a sign was given by
trumpet, and immediately the chosen foot sprung out together, and likewise the
horse upon the spur. The enemy endured not the charge, but speeded, all he
could, into the valley. In this chase many of the Barbarian foot died, Omnia
repentina terren^.
and about 18 horse were taken alive in the valley. The Grecians without
commandment mangled and dismembered the dead carcases, that the sight hereof
might henceforward strike a greater fear into the enemy. After this conflict
the enemy retired, and the Grecians marching on the rest of the day securely,
came to the river Tygris, upon which stood a great desolate city, the name
whereof was Larissa. The Medians inhabited it of old time. The walls were 25
foot broad, Larissa a City. Breadth 8 yards one 25. part. Height 33 yards, one
100 part.

Circumference, miles seven, and a half. 6 yards 2 foot. 200 yards. 400 yards.


and a hundred foot high: and the circuit of all two Parasangs. It was builded
of brick, and the foundation of stone laid beneath the wall, was 20 foot
deep. The King of Persia (when the Persians gained the Empire) besieging, and
assaulting it, could not win it by any means. But the Sun hiding his head
in a cloud appeared not, till the inhabitants forsook it, and so it was taken.
Near to the City there is a Stone-Pyramis, the breadth whereof is 600 foot,
the height 1200, into which many Barbarians conueighed themselves out of the
neighbor-villages. From hence in one encamping they marched six Parasangs, 22
mile and a half.
as far as a great desolate castle hard by a City. This Cities name was
Mesphila; the Medians sometimes inhabited it. Mesphila a city. 16 yards, three
50 parts. 33 yards, etc. 22 miles and a half.
The foundation was of hollow carved stone, and had 50 foot in breadth, 50 foot
in height. Upon it was raised a stone wall 50 foot broad, and 100 foot high.
The circuit of the wall was 6 Parasangs. It is said that Media the Kings wife
fled hither, when the Persians wrung the Empire out of the Medians hands; and
that the Persian King could not take it, either by time or force, till Jupiter
sent a madness amongst the inhabitants, and so it was overcome. From thence
they marched 4 Parasangs in one encamping. Here Tissaphernes appeared with his
own horse, 15 miles. Tissaphernes with horse.
with the forces of Orontes (who had with him ^he Kings daughter) with the
Barbarians that ascended with Cyrus, with those, that the Kings brother brought
to the Kings aid, and with as many other, as the King gave him. So that the
Army seemed huge and mighty. When he came near, he ordered some of his
troops against the rear of the Grecians, some against the flanks: yet durst
he not charge, Horse against the rear and flanks of the Plesium at once.
nor had in mind to hazard battle. He commanded only his Soldiers to sling
and shoot. When the ^hodians, that were here and there dispersed amongst the
Grecians, began to sling, and the Archers after the Scythian manner to shoot,
and no man missed his mark (for he could not, though he would, in such a
multitude) both Tissaphernes quickly retired out of danger, and his troops
likewise. The rest of the day the Grecians marched on, and the Persians
followed; but yet forbore to skirmish any more. For the Rhodians slinged
further, than the Persians could sling, and further than most of their archers
shot. The Persian bows are great, so that the arrows, that were gathered up,
served the Cretans to good purpose; For they used them much, and endeavored by
raising their compass to send them a great distance. It is like they were
heavier, than the arrows of the Cretans.
In the villages thereabouts, both many Bow-strings were found, and much Lead,
which they converted to the use of slings. And so this day, after the Grecians
had quartered in the villages, which they happened upon, the Barbarians
departed having the worst in the skirmish. The next day they sat still, and
made provision of victuals; for there was plenty in the villages. The next day
after, they marched forward through the Champeigne, and Tissaphernes followed
skirmishing. Here they perceived, that a Plaesium, or hollow battle with
equal sides, was no good form to march in, (...).
the enemy following in the rear. For in case the wings of the Plaesium
thronged together, either by reason of the straight way, or compulsion of
mountains, or of a bridge, the armed foot must needs be brought out of order,
and march at small ease, being partly thronged, partly forced out of the place,
they held, and in this disarray there would be no great use of them. And when
the wings were again opened, they, that were so disordered, must needs be
broken asunder, and the midst of the wings empty, and the soldiers
discomforted, especially the enemy being at their heels. And if a Bridge were
to be passed, or some such straight, every man would haste desiring to be over
first. So that the enemy had then a fair opportunity to give on. The Coronels
perceiving this, framed six Companies, every one consisting of an hundred men,
and appointed Captains over them, (...).
and Penteconters, and Enomotarches. These Captains, when the wings closed and
thronged too near in marching, staid behind and kept without the wings for
fear of disordering them. (...). It is to be understood that these new
Companies were led every one in file, and being joined together they made six
files. If then the breach in the Plaesium were small, they inserted the six
files rank-wile to make it up, if wider, they doubled again the ranks of the
Companies and so filled it with half files: if very wide, they doubled the
half files and filled it up with Enomoties. The remedy for light armed against
forcing of the enemy. The heavy armed unfit for quick and ni^ble service. The
higher ground com^andeth the lower.

Care of the wounded.


When the sides of the square battle opened too wide, they filled the midst,
if the space were narrow, by Companies, if a little wider by fifties, if very
wide by Enomoties. So that the midst was always shut up and full. If a bridge
or other straight were to be passed, there was no disorder, because the
Captains every one led over his Company apart, and when a Phalange was
needful, sleeued up one by another. In this manner they marched four
encampings: the fifth brought them to the sight of a Palace, and of many
villages about it. The way leading to it was over high hills, which began from
a mountain, under which a village was situate. The Grecians were glad to see
the hills, as was reason, the most part of the enemies forces being Hors-men.
But when marching out of the Champeigne they had gained the first hill, and
descending from thence raised their battle up against the second, the
Barbarians were forth with at hand, and cast weapons at them down from the
higher ground, being compelled with stripes to sling, and shoot; and they
wounded many, and had the better of the Grecian light armed, and shut them up
within the battle of the armed: so that this whole day the Slingers, and
Archers did little or rather no service, being glad to hide themselves amongst
the unarmed multitude. And when the Grecian armed, being hardly laid unto,
sought to fall out, they had much ado to climb the hill in their armor,
whereas the enemy retired with ease. Again, when they retired to the rest of
the armed, their danger was as great. Whereupon the Coronels thought good not
to move the army from the third hill. Notwithstanding they led certain
Targetiers from the right flank of the square battle toward the mountain.
After these had gotten above the heads of the enemy, the enemy forbore to
press upon such, as descended, fearing to be cut off by our Soldiers, that
enclosed them on both sides. Thus marched the Grecians, the rest of the day,
some by the way upon the hills, other some right over against them on the side
of the mountain, till they came to the villages: where they appointed eight
Physicians, because many of the Soldiers were hurt. Here they stayed three
days, both to favor the wounded, and also for that much victual was found,
meal, wine, and barley, which last was laid up for horses in abundance. All
these things were stored and laid up for the ruler of the Province. The fourth
day they descended into the Champeigne; where when Tissaphernes had overtaken
them with his forces, Experience the mistress of alterations in matters of
war.
he taught them by necessity to encampe in the first village, they reached
unto, and to march no more fighting. For many were unfit to fight by reason of
their wounds, many by carrying the wounded, and no less they, that had the
arms of both charged upon their backs. After they had taken up their lodging,
the Barbarians coming to the village offered skirmish, in which the Grecians
had a great deal the better. For it was much easier to sally, and so repress
the enemy, than to march fighting with them, as they followed at their backs.
When it was night, the enemy was to depart. For the Barbarians, fearing to be
assailed by night, 7 Miles and a half.

The manner of the Persian encamping.


never encampe less than sixty furlongs from the Grecians. Their manner of
encamping is dangerous also in the night. Their Horse are tied, and for the
most part fettered, left being loose they might happen to run away. And if any
tumult arise, a Persian must saddle, and bridle, and put on his Curace, and so
get upon his Horse. All which are hard to be done in the night, especially in a
tumult. When the Grecians perceived, that the enemy purposed to depart, and had
given open notice thereof, they proclaimed in the hearing of the enemy, that
the army should make ready to march. The Barbarians hereupon staid awhile; but
the night beginning to draw on, they went their ways. For they hold it not
expedient to march, and come to their quarter by night. After the Grecians saw
plainly, that they were departed, they also trussing up their baggage, began to
march, and iourneied sixty furlongs; 7 Mile and a half.

The Grecians march by night.


and the space between the armies was so great, that neither the next, nor the
third day the enemy could come up to us. The fourth day the Barbarians
advancing forward by night, seized upon a high place, by which the Grecians
must pass of necessity; namely, upon a mountain, under which the way lay,
which led into Champeigne. The Persians by night seize upon a passage.
When Cherisophus saw the height of the mountain possessed by the enemy, he
called for Xenophon from the Rear, willing him to bring his Targetiers with
him, and come to the Front. Xenophon brought not the Targetiers with him (for
he saw Tissaphernes and his whole Army appear at their backs) but himself
speeding came, and asked Cherisophus, why he sent for him. You may see, quoth
he. The hill hanging over our way, is before hand taken by the enemy; and we
cannot continue our march, unless he be beaten from thence. But why brought
you not your Targetiers with you? Because I thought it not good, quoth he, to
leave the Rear unguarded, especially the enemy being in sight. But it is time,
quoth Cherisophus, to advise, how we shall drive these folks from the hill.
Means to dislodge the enemy, that possesses a straight.
Here Xenophon marked, that the top of the mountain was over the head of our
Army; and that from thence a way led to the hill, where the enemy stood, and
said: Me thinks, Cherisophus, it should be best for us with all speed to gain
the top of the mountain; which if we once have, they cannot keep their ground
over the way. I will go, if you please to stay with the Army; if you please
to go, I will stay here. I give you the choice, quoth Cherisophus. And I
because I am the younger, quoth Xenophon, will choose to go. Only he
required, Iuniores ad labores.
that he might have Soldiers of the Front to accompany him; for it was too
long to wait for any from the Rear. Cherisophus sent with him the Targetiers
of the Front, and those, that were in the middle of the hollow square battle;
he willed also the chosen 300 men, which he had about him in the Front, to
follow Xenophon. Then they hasted, all they could, to get up the Mountain. The
enemy upon the Hill perceiving that their intent and proceeding was to
possess the height of the Mountain, began in emulation forthwith to post
thither. There was a great cry in the Grecian Army, a great cry in the Army
of Tissaphernes, each inciting and animating those of their own side. Xenophon
riding from one to another, exhorted the Soldiers: Now Companions you strive
for Greece, now for your wives and children, now taking a little pains, we
shall clear the rest of our journey from fight. Soteridas the Sicyonian
answered: You and I, Xenophon, stand not upon like terms of marching. You
ride, I am on foot, and by reason of the weight of this Target, have much ado
to get up the Hill. Xenophon hearing this, alighted from his Horse, and taking
from him his Target, thrust him out of his Rank, and marched on with all speed
possible. He had on at that time a hors-mans Curasse, w^erwith he was heavily
laden, yet proceeding, he exhorted the foremost to mend their pace, and those in
the Rear (who had much ado to march) to hasten after. The other Soldiers
beat and threw at, and reviled Soteridas, till they compelled him to take his
Target again, and to march on. Xenophon mounting again to Horse, rid as
far, as the ground would give him leave. When it began to be rough, and not
passable for a Horse, he hasted forward on foot. By this time they had gained
the top, The top of the Hill gained.
and prevented the enemy, who upon sight thereof, forsook their ground, and
fled every man, as he could. The Grecians made good the top. Then the Army of
Tissaphernes and Ariaeus departing diuerted another way, but Cherisophus
descending into the Plain, quartered in a Village, that had plenty of good
provision in it. In this Plain were many other rich Villages situate by the
River Tygris. When it was now night the enemy suddenly showed himself in the
P^aine, Carelessness of Soldiers in seeking prey. The enemy burns his own
country.
and cut in pieces some Grecians, that were dispersed here and there ^unting
after prey. For many Herds of Cattle, transported over the River, were here
intercepted. Tissaphernes, and they that were with him, di^ all they could to
fire the villages; and many of the Grecians were much discomforted therewith,
conceiving they should hardly recover victual, if the villages were thus burnt
and destroyed. Cherisophus had sent out some of his people to succor their
companions against the enemy, who returned, as Xenophon descended from the
Mountain. With these Xenophon meeting, rid from rank to rank, and said: You
see, fellow Soldiers, that the enemy confesses the Country is none of theirs.
For in the truce they capitulated with us to preserve the Kings Country from
burning, now they burn it themselves, as if it were not their own. But do,
what they list, if they have victual for themselves in any part, they shall
soon see us there for our portions. But Cherisophus, quoth he, me thinks, we
should do well to give aid, as to our own Country, against these burners. I
am not of that advice, quoth Cherisophus, but rather I would burn for company
to make them the sooner give over. When they came to the camp, the rest busied
themselves about provision, Consultation about their march.
the Coronels and Captains assembled together in counsel. Here was disputing
and aduising, what to do. On the one side were high Mountains, on the other a
river so deep, that the water covered the ends of Pikes, wherewith the bottom
was sounded. While they were in consultation a Rhodian came unto them, and
said: I will undertake to carry you over by 4000 at once, A bridge o^red.
if you furnish me with such things, as I want, and give me a Talent for
reward. Being asked, what things he wanted; I want, said he, 2000
water-budgets, and I see here many Sheep, Goats, Kine, and Asses, whose skins
being flead, A bridge without boats or Ships.
and blown, will easily give us means of transportation. I shall need also
the bands, which you use about your cariage-beasts. With these I will bind
your water-budgets, and fit them one to another, and hang stones upon them, and
let them down like ankers, and laying them upon the water, and fastening them
on both sides, I will throw Rise upon them, and then earth; and that you shall
not sink, you will easily perceive, in that every budget will be able to
bear up two men; and the Rise and earth will keep the budgets from tottering,
and make them lie firm and stable. When the Coronels heard this, the invention
seemed witty, but the thing it self not possible to be performed, by reason
there were many hors-men on the other side of the river, who would hinder the
foremost, and not suffer them to proceed in their work. Therefore they retired
the next day in the way, they came (which led to Babylon) to the unburned
villages, setting afire the villages, where they last quartered, so that the
enemy offered not to charge, but became lookers on, wondering what way the
Grecians meant to take, and what their purpose was. The Coronels and captains
assembled again, and calling together the captives, enquired of the countries
round about, what they were, and of their nature and quality. They reported
that toward the South the way led to Babylon and to Media, and was the way by
which they came; Two provinces of Persia. Mountains near to Armenia.
toward the East to Susa and Ecbatana where the king was said to pass the
summer and spring; over the river to Lydia and Ionia; over the mountains and
toward the north to the Carduchans; who, they said, inhabited the mountains,
and were a warlike people, and refused to obey the king; and that the king
sometimes sent against them an army of 12 Myriades of men, Every Myriade 10^00,
the whole number 120000 men.
of whom none escaped and returned back by reason of the roughness of the
country, and that since the Satrapa, or ruler, of the next Province, made
truce with them, they had free intercourse of trade one with another. The
Coronels hearing this, set apart by themselves those, that took upon them
several knowledge of these things, not declaring what way, they meant to hold.
But their resolution was to pass over the mountains against the Carduchans.
For the captives said, after they were come beyond the mountains, they should
enter into Armenia, a large, and rich country, of which Orontes was ruler, and
from thence find the way open and ready to go, whither a man would. This
conclusion being had, they sacrificed to the gods, that they might have no
impeachment, when it was fit to set forward (for they feared the tops of the
mountains might be anticipated) and commanded, as soon as supper was past,
that every man should have his things in a readiness, and give himself to
rest, and after follow in the journey according to direction.

Finis Libri Tertij.
THE FOVRTH BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF XENOPHON, TOUCHING THE Ascent of CYRUS the
younger, out of Asia the Less, into the Higher COVNTREYS.
WHat happened in the Ascent of Cyrus till the battle, and what after the
battle in the truce, which the King and the Grecians (that ascended with
Cyrus) had concluded: and after that the King and Tissaphernes had broken the
truce, what war was made upon the Grecians, an Army of Persians still
pursuing them, is already discoursed. Now when they had proceeded thus far,
and found, that the River Tygris was impassable by reason of his depth and
greatness, and that there was no other way to follow, Tygris.
because the Carduchan Mountains being abruptly steep, lay directly hanging
over the same River; It seemed good to the Coronels, to continue their march
over those Mountains. For they understood by the Captives, that, after they
had once trauersed the Carduchan Mountains, they might pass over the
Fountains of Tygris in Armenia, if they list, if not, they might fetch a
compass about them; and the Fountains of Euphrates were said to be not far
off from the Fountains of Tygris, and that there were some straights in the
way. Therefore they marched toward the Carduchans, partly in hope to steal
away unespied, partly to prevent the enemy, in case he went about to seize
upon the tops of the Mountains, and stop their march. It was now about the
last watch, and so much night left, as would give space to pass over the
Plain. The Grecians even then rising and upon a sign beginning their march,
came by break of day to the Mountains foot. Cherisophus led the Vaunt, taking
with him his accustomed Troops, and all the light Armed; Xenophon and the
Reare-Commanders brought up the Rear with the Armed alone, having never a
light-armed man with them. For it seemed, the rear was without danger to be
charged in the ascent. Cherisophus attained the top of the hill, Disposing of
the light-armed where need was.
before any enemy perceived it, and he leading on the rest of the army,
followed toward the villages, which were situate in the valleys and windings
of the mountains. The Carduchans forsaking their houses, The Carduchans
and taking with them their wives and children, fled to the mountains. Great
plenty of provision was found here, and the houses garnished with many brazen
vessels, which the Grecians left untouched. Besides, they gave chase to none of
the Carduchans, of purpose to see, if they might gain a friendly passage
through the Country, especially seeing both the Carduchans and Grecians were
enemies to the King. Yet being in necessity they spared not the provision,
which every man fortuned to find. The Carduchans, albeit kindly entreated,
would neither hear of parley, Obstinacy of the Carduchans.
nor yet showed any other token of friendship. Whilst the rear of the
Grecians descended from the height of the mountains to the villages, it being
now dark (for by reason of the straitness of the way, the whole day was spent
in ascending the hill, and descending to the villages) some of the Carduchans,
albeit but a few (for the Grecians fell upon them at unawares) gathering
together charged the Grecians, and killed some of them, The peril of the
Grecians.
and hurt other some with stones and arrows; and if many of them had been
assembled, they had no question cut off the most part of the army. That night
therefore they lodged thus in the villages. The Carduchans on the other side
lighted many fires in a circle on the mountains, and so they looked one upon
another. By day break, the Coronels and Captains of the Grecians came to
counsel, and decreed, Good order in passage of straights and of mountains.
that the carriage-beasts necessary, and such, as were best able to endure the
hardness of the way, should be led on by their owners, the rest left behind,
and that the slaves lately taken, and remaining in the army, should all be cast
off. For the carriage and captives being many, made the march very slow, and
cumbersome. And many of them, that rode, were such, as fought not, and the
multitude of people being great, double provision and carriage was requisite in
comparison of that, they should otherwise have needed. Execution of the order
taken.
These things being so decreed, proclamation was made for the execution. Having
dined, they marched forward, and the Coronels staying in a straight of the way,
wheresoever they found any of these things not cast off, took it away. The
Soldiers were very obedient, unless any man being in love with a boy, or a
woman of the fear fashion, conveyed them away by stealth. And so for that
day they proceeded in their march, one while fighting, and another while giving
themselves to rest. The next day fell a sharp storm, and yet a necessity was
laid upon us to continue our march, because our provision failed. Cherisophus
led the Vaunt, Xenophon brought up the Rear, and the enemy pressed us sore;
and the Country being full of straights, they came up close, and plied us wirh
arrows and stones out of slings, so that the Grecians sometimes giving chase,
sometimes retiring, were forced to march on slowly. It fell out often, that
Xenophon sent word to that Vaunt to stay, especially at that time, being
roundly put to by the enemy. Cherisophus, Why the Front oftentimes made Alt.
that at other times upon the receipt of such messages made usually Alt, made
not Alt then, but led away apace, and commanded the rest to follow. So that it
appeared, there was some great occasion, and yet there was no leisure to send
and know the cause. The march seemed to the bringers up to be a plain running,
and there was then slain Cleonymus a brave, and valiant Lacedemonian, being
stricken into the side with an arrow through his target, He had no Curace on.
and Soldiers coat; and Basius an Arcadian pierced in the head. When they were
come to their quarter, Xenophon attired, as he was, stepped forthwith to
Cherisophus, and blamed him, he made not Alt, whereby he forced them in the
Rear to fight in their flight; and now, quoth he, we have lost two gallant
and worthy Soldiers, and were neither able to bring them off, nor yet to bury
them. Cherisophus answered; Look up, quoth he, to those mountains and behold
how impassable they are. There is no way, but that steep one, you see, and
upon it you may discern the huge multitude, which have taken, and do guard
the passage. The cause of my speeding, and not staying for you, was to try, if
by any means I might prevent their seizing upon the height. For the guides
affirm, there is no other way but this. But I have two guides, quoth Xenophon;
For when they ceased not to molest us, I laid an ambush, Ambushes laid in a
march, and why.
whereby both we found way to breathe, and also killed some of them, and some
other we endeavored to take alive, for this cause especially, that we might
use such, as knew the Country, for guides: and immediately bringing forth the
men, they examined them apart, whether they knew any other way, than that,
which was in sight. One of them, albeit he were diversely put in fear, would
not confess. When they could get nothing out of him, that was to purpose, they
slew him, the other looking on. He, that remained alive, said, that his
Companion would confess nothing, because he had bestowed a daughter of his in
marriage to a man dwelling thereabout. But I, said he, About the passage.
will teach you a way, through which the very carriage may easily pass. Being
demanded, If that way had no impediment or encumbrance, he answered, There was
a top of a hill, which unless it were possessed, it would be impossible to
proceed further. Hereupon it was thought good, How to give upon an enemy that
possesses a straight upon a hill.
to call for the Captains of the Targetiers, and of the armed Foot, and to
impart unto them the estate of the present affairs; and to ask, if any would
show himself a gallant, and willingly undertake the journey. There offered
their service, Aristonimus an Arcadian of Methydria, and Agasias another
Arcadian of Stymphaly. Callimachus a Parrhasian Arcadian, Emulation in service.
and this Agasias were always at emulation and strove one with another in all
imploiments. He offered himself upon condition he might be permitted to take
with him the voluntaries of the whole army; For I know, quoth he, that many of
the youth will follow, if I have the leading. Then they asked, if any of the
light-armed, Taxiarches of the light-armed.
or Taxiarchs would bear the armed Company. Aristarchus the Chian, a worthy
man, and one that in the like case had often heretofore done good service to
the army, presented himself. It was now late, and the Soldiers were commanded
to sup, and presently to march away. The ordering of a guide, that is enemy.
The guide was delivered bound unto them, and order given, that if they took
the top of the hill, they should make good the place that night, and as soon,
as it was day, give a sign with the trumpet, and descend and charge the
forestallers of the known way, and the rest of the army beneath ascend, and
join with them in as great speed, as was possible. This order being taken,
there marched out to the number of two thousand. How to divert the enemies
thoughts, and to coceale our intentions. (...).
In the mean time fell much rain. Xenophon, having with him the
Reare-commanders, led toward the known passage, to the end the enemy might be
intentive upon that way, and those that were appointed to take the top, might
the better pass by unespied. When the Rear was come to a hollow bottom,
through which they must needs pass ere they came to ascend the steep hill, the
Barbarians tumbled down round stones, of which every one was of weight
sufficient to load a wagon, and many other great and little stones, which
rolling and beating upon the rocks, came bouncing with such force, as if they
had been sent out of a sling, and made it impossible to come near the way.
Some of the Captains seeing that way shut up, sought to find another. This
continued till it was dark. The Grecians when they imagined, that their
departure could not be discerned, went hence to supper. For the Rear had not
dined that day. The enemy ceased not the whole night to send down stones,
which might easily appear by the continual sound and noise of the fall. In
the mean time those, that had the guide, The Grecians gain the height of the
mountain.
fetching a compass, fell upon the enemies guards, as they sat by the fire;
and killing some, and giving chase to the rest, themselves maintained the place
that night, as if they had gained the top. But they were deceived; for there
remained yet a little knop above them, near which the straight it self was,
where the enemies guards did sit. There was indeed a passage from thence, that
led to the enemy. That night therefore they spent there. As soon as day
appeared, they advanced silently, and in good order against the enemy. They
were near, before they could be descried, because of a mist, that fell at the
same instant. When they saw one another the trumpet sounded, and the Grecians
giving a shout, advanced against the enemy; who received not the charge, but
forsaking the way, and flying, lost some few of their people. For they were
light-armed. The rest of the army with Cherisophus, hearing the sound of the
trumpet, made all haste to ascend by the common way. Some of the Coronels took
by-pathes, every one, as it came to hand, and climbing, as they could, drew one
another up by the pikes, and so they were the first, that joined with them,
that had won the top. Xenophon, with half the Rear, followed the way, that
the guide had shown to the first (for it was the easiest for the
carriage-beasts) the other half he ordered after the carriage-beasts. The
carriage in the midst.
Marching forward, they chanced upon a hill hanging over the way, which was
held by the enemy; by reason whereof they were driven to a necessity, either
by force to dislodge the enemy from the place and cut him off, or else to be
secluded from the rest of the army. The soldiers might have followed the way,
that the rest held, and so have freed themselves from danger, but the carriage
could be led no other way. Exhorting therefore one another, they charged up the
hill, ordering their Companies every one in File, Raising of forces against a
hill. (...).
not incompassing the enemy, but giving them room to fly, if they were so
disposed. The Barbarians seeing them ascend each one, as he could make shift
for himself, did neither shoot nor sling at them, as they approached the way;
but presently forsook the Hill. This Hill the Grecians took, The Hill taken.
and seeing another before them held likewise by the enemy, they resolved to
go against that also. Notwithstanding Xenophon reputing in his mind, that, if
he should leave the Hill already gained without a Guard, the enemy seizing
again upon it, might distress the carriage in passing by (for the carriage by
reason of the straights were extended into a great length) he left upon the
Hill the Captains Cephisodorus the Son of Kephisophon an Athenian, and
Archagoras a banished Argiue; Securing of that Hill.
himself with the rest continued his march against the second Hill, which also
was taken after the same manner. There remained yet another Hill more steep,
than the two former, even the same, that the night before, was by the first
ascenders won from the enemies Guards, that sat by the fire; to which when the
Grecians approached, the Barbarians forsook it without fight; which made the
Grecians wonder, and imagine, they feared to be round encompassed and charged
on all sides; but the truth was, that descrying from the top, what was done
behind, they hasted away to fall upon the Rear. Xenophon, and the youngest
sort of Soldiers had gotten up the Hill, and he commanded the rest to follow,
till the last Captains were come up, and then he willed them to march forward
in the way, and when they came to even ground to lay down their Arms. (...).
At this instant came Archagoras the banished Argiue, and brought news that
they, whom Xenophon left behind, were beaten from the first Hill, and that
Cephisodorus, Amphicrates, and as many other, as leaped not from the Rock, and
saved themselves amongst the rest of the Rear, were slain. The Barbarians
having wrought this feat, conveyed themselves toward the Hill opposite against
the top, where Xenophon was; and he by an Interpreter treated with them about
truce, and about recovering the dead bodies out of their hands. They answered,
Conditions of recovering the dead bodies of the Grecians.
they were ready to deliver them upon condition, the Villages might be spared
from fire: to which Xenophon accorded. In the time while this parley was in
hand, the rest of the Army passed by, and were freed from danger of the place.
The enemy stayed there; and when the Grecians began to descend from the top to
the place, where the foremost had laid down their Arms, (...).
they in great number and tumult ran upward, and having gained the height, from
whence Xenophon descended, rolled down stones, and broke a leg of one of the
Soldiers. Xenophons Target-bearer was then away with his target, which
Eurylochus the Arcadian borne at Lusium, a heavy armed Soldier, perceiving,
came running unto him, and retiring by little and little protected both
himself and Xenophon with his Target. So they all came up to the vant which
stood in order of battle. Now were all the Grecians come together, and they
quartered in many fair houses having large proui^ion, and plenty of all
things. There was much Wine kept in Cisternes, The Grecians caref^ll of the
bu^i^ll of their dead.

Honor of burial.


plaistered with mortar. Afterward Xenophon and Cherisophus so wrought with the
Barbarians, that they recovered the bodies of the dead in exchange for the
Guide, whom they delivered up; and they buried them with as great honor, as
was possible to be given to worthy and valiant Soldiers. The next day we
marched on without a Guide. The enemy fighting with us, and taking the
straights, which lay in our way, endeavored to hinder and shut up our march.
But when they opposed against the Vant, Mutual assistance of the Vant and the
Rear.
Xenophon from the Rear ascending the Mountains and gaining the upper ground
removed all the impediments, the enemy could cast upon the way: when against
the Rear, Cherisophus ascending took the upper ground likewise, and freed the
way for them, that came behind. So they always succored and had mutual care
one of another. Sometimes also the Barbarians, after the Grecians had got up to
the heights, annoied them spightfully in their descent. They were light-Armed,
and coming close up they might easily shift away at their pleasure, because
they carried no other furniture, then Bows, and Arrows, The Carduchans good
archers. Their bows and arrows length.

The force of their ^^ot.


and Slings. They were excellent Archers, and had Bows well nigh three Cubits,
Arrows more than two Cubits long. When they shot, they drew the string
applying their hand somewhat toward the nether end of the Bow, and ^etting
their left foot forward. With their Arrows they pierced both Curaces and
Targets. The Grecians putting thongues to the midst of them, sent them back
again at the enemies in stead of Darts. The Cretans were very useful in
these places; Stratocles the Cretan was their Commander. They quartered that
day in the Villages, Centrites a river. (...).
which lay upon the Plain near the River Centrites, the breadth whereof is 200
Foot, and this River parts Armenia and the Carduchans Country. Here the
Grecians rested. The River is distant from the Carduchan Mountains about some
six or seven Furlongs. Three quarters of a ^^le, or thereabout.
They quartered here with great pleasure both in regard of the plenty of all
things, which they found, and also because they gladly remembered their travel
ouergone. For in seven whole days, in which they marched through the Carduchans
Country, they were put to continual fight, and suffered more distress, than
whatsoever the King and Tissaphernes could work them. Being therefore freed
from that danger they slept and took their rest with great content. As Soon,
as it was day, they might discern beyond the River Armed horse, that seemed
ready to hinder their passage, and Footmen ordered upon the banks above the
Horse to stop their entry into Armenia. The Chaldeans.
These were Armenians, Mygdonians, and Chaldeans Mercenaries to Orontes, and
Artuchus. The Chaldeans were said to be a free Nation and warlike. (...).
Their Arms were long wicker Targets and Spears. The banks, upon which they
were embattelled, were distant some three or four Plethers from the River; A
Plether 100 Foot.
and no way over but one could be discerned, which led up to the higher ground,
and seemed to be made with hand. The Grecians sought to pass that way. But
making trial, and finding the water to reach up above their breasts, and the
River rough with many great, and slipperie stones, and perceiving, that they
could not hold their Arms in the River, which by reason of the swiftness, and
violence of the stream, would force them out of their hands, and in case a man
carried them on his head, he should remain naked against the enemies missiue
weapons, they returned and encamped near the River. The place, where they
rested the night before, they might easily see to be full of Armed Carduchans.
It caused great melancholy amongst them, both because they saw the hard passage
of the River, and the enemy opposing against their passage, and also the
Carduchans pressed to fall upon their Rear. Remaining therefore in great anguish
of spirit, this day, and the night following, they spent in the place. Xenophon
is the mean time dreamed, that he was bound in fetters, Xenophons dream.
and that they broke and fell off of their own accord, so that being loose, he
was at liberty, to go where he list. Early in the morning he went to
Cherisophus, and told him, he hoped all should be well, and communicated his
dream with him, who was much delighted therewith; and as day appeared, all the
Coronels assembled, and offered sacrifice, and at the very first the sacrifice
promised good success; and the Coronels and Captains departing to their
quarters commanded the Soldiers to dine. Whilst Xenophon was at dinner, there
came running unto him two young men (for every man knew, they might have free
access unto him both at dinner and supper, and that they might in sleep awake
him, and impart any thing, that should seem to tend to the good of the march)
and told him they chanced to be a gathering sticks for firing, and that amongst
the Rocks, on the other side the River, they espied an old man, and a woman,
and young maids laying up (as it were) bundles of Clothes tied together in a
hollow Cave of the Rock. Which when they saw, and conceived withal, there was
no danger in the passage, considering the enemies Horse could not by any means
come there, they pulled off their Clothes, and taking their drawn Daggers in
their hands, they entered into the River in purpose to swim over, if they could
not otherwise pass. But going on they found themselves over, before they had
wet their priuities; so that taking with them the garments which were hidden
they returned, and came safe to this side back again. Xenophon hearing this,
drank a health, and commanded the Cup should be filled to the two young men,
and to pray to the gods (who had revealed the dream and passage) to finish the
remnant of all, that should appertain to the good of the journey. As Soon as
the health was ended, he led the young men to Cherisophus, and declared unto
him the news, which they brought. Who hearing these things, drunk also a
health; after which commanding the Soldiers to trusse up their baggage, and
calling the Coronels together, they advised about the best means of passage,
and of repulsing them, that opposed the Front, The passage of a River.
and of avoiding the danger of those, that were like to fall upon the Rear.
The resolution was, that Cherisophus should lead the Vant, and pass over
first with half the Army; the other half should remain behind with
Xenophon, and the carriage, and unarmed multitude, should be conveyed in the
midst. When these things were thus determined, they began to march. The young
men led the way having the river on their left hand. The way which tended to
the Foord, Half a mile.
was about four Furlongs in length. As they marched forward on one side, the
enemies Hors-men embattelled marched against them on the other. After they were
come to the Foord, and bancks of the river, (...).
they laid down their arms; and first Cherisophus crowning himself, and
stripping off his apparel, took up his arms and commanded the rest to do the
like; and directed the Captains every one to cast their companies into a file,
(...).
and to march some on his right, some on his left hand. The South saier offered
sacrifice at the rivers side; and the enemy, albeit they plied us with bows
and slings, yet could they not reach over unto us. The sacrifice was fair, and
the Grecians sang the Paean, and gave a shout. The women also shouted, for
there were many whores in the camp. (...).
So Cherisophus passed over, and they with him. Then Xenophon taking to him the
lightest of the Rear, ran back again with all speed to the passage, which led
to the Ascent of the Armenian Mountains, making countenance, as if he meant to
pass over there, and cut betwixt the horse, that guarded the banks, and the
rest of their companions. But the enemy seeing Cherisophus his forces easily
wade through the River, Half the army over.
and Xenophon with his Soldiers speedily returning back, fearing to be shut
in betwixt both, fled, as fast as they could, from the river to the way, that
led upward; and as soon as they came there, held on toward the mountain.
Lucius, that commanded the horse, and Aeschines, that led the targetiers about
Cherisophus, when they saw them so cowardly run, followed hard, and gave chase.
The Soldiers cried out to them not to give over, but to ascend the mountain
together with the enemy. After Cherisophus had gained the passage, he followed
not the horse, but presently upon the banks side led against the foot, that
held the higher places; who being above on the higher ground, and seeing their
horse flying, and the armed Grecians making head against them, forsook also
their ground, by the rivers side. When Xenophon perceived now all things on the
other side of the river, to be in good plight, he returned speedily to the
forces, that were passing over. For the Carduchans were seen by this time to
descend the mountains, and to come into the Plain, as though they purposed to
charge the Rear. By this time had Cherisophus taken the higher ground, and
Lucius following the chase with a few, won the carriages of the Rear of the
enemy, and withal rich apparel, and much plate. The carriage and unarmed
multitude of the Grecians passed over the river with all diligence. There were
4 Enomoties in every company. (...).
And Xenophon turning toward the Carduchans opposed his armed against them; and
directed his Captains every one to order his Company into Enomoties, and to
face to the left hand, and to lead up and to join the Enomoties together in
front; and that the Captains and Enomotarchs should make head against the
Carduchans, When they ordered then companies into E^o^oties, this was the
manner, they doubled the front to the left hand, every Enom^tarch leading up
his Enomot^e, and ioining to the other in front; so that the battle was 25
deep, and the Enomotarchs stood all in front.

Light armed in the river to fauou^ the passage of the followers.


the bringers up be behind next to the river; The Carduchans, when they saw
the Rear left by the unarmed multitude, and making show but of few, singing
certain songs after their country manner, fell on, and charged. In the mean
time Cherisophus, having set his own affairs in safety, sent the Peltasts,
and Slingers, and Archers over to Xenophon, willing them to do, what he
commanded. When Xenophon perceived, they passed the river, he dispatched a
message to stay them, where they were, till they saw him and his troops enter
into the water, and then to meet him on both sides, and make as though they
purposed to return over again, the Darters with their fingers in the thongs
of their darts, the Archers with their arrows nocked; yet should they not come
much further, than they were in the river. And he gave order to his own
people, that as soon, as they were within the reach of slings, and had beaten
with their pikes upon their targets, to sing the Paean, and run forth against
the enemy. And when the enemy was put to flight, and the trumpet sounded a
charge from the river, the bringers up, facing about to the pike, should lead,
and the rest follow, and with all speed get the passage, every one in the order
he held, to the intent they hindered not one another; And added he would account
him the best Soldier, that first could gain the other bank. The Carduchans
seeing but a few now left behind (for many appointed for the Rear were
shifted away, some being careful of the carriage-beasts, some of the baggage,
some of their whores) fell on boldly, and began to sling and shoot. But when
the Grecians singing the Paean ran out against them, they forsook their
ground. For they were armed, as the mountain fashion is, Armor for a steadfast
fight.
sufficiently to skip up and down, and run away, but not to come to hands in a
steadfast fight. The trumpet now gave the sign, which made the enemy fly the
faster, (...). Facing about.
and the Grecians facing about to the contrary side hasted, all they could, to
pass the river; which some of the enemies seeing, came running again to the
river, and hurt a few with their arrows; but the most of them might be
discerned to continue their flight, a good while after the Grecians had gained
the other bank. Some of our people, that first charged the enemy, and being
too valiant, Following the chase too ho^ly
and following on further, than at that time was fit, got over a good while
after the other, that were with Xenophon; and some of them also were wounded.
The Grecians, being all passed over about noone-tide, put themselves in order
and marched through Armenia no less than five Parasangs, 18 miles and 3
quarters in the afternoon.
the country being all plain, and arising sometimes in little hillockes.
There was no village near the river, by reason of the wars against the
Carduchans. The first village, they came to, was both great, The calamity of
war.
and had also in it a royal Palace for the Viceroy of the country; and the
houses, for the most part were built with Turrets, and were stored with plenty
of provision. 18 miles and 3 quarters in a day.
From thence they iourneied forward ten Parasangs in two encampings, till they
came over the springs of the river Tigris. From thence they continued marching
15 Parasangs in 3 encampings, As much a day.
as far as the river Teleboas, Teleboas a river.
which is a fair river, but not large. About this river are many villages; and
the place is called West Armenia. Teribazus the Kings favorite was governor of
this country; Terib^zus governor of Armenia,
who, if he were present, no man else might set the King on horseback but he.
This man came riding forth unto us, having hors-men about him, and sending an
interpreter before signified, Desires parley.
that he desired to parley with the Commanders: The Coronels resolved to hear,
what he would say. So they came and met him, and being within hearing, they
asked, what he would have with them. He said his desire was to make truce with
the Grecians, to the end, Makes truce with the Grecians.
that neither he should wrong them, nor yet they burn the houses of the
country, but only take such victual, as they needed in their march. The
Coronels agreed hereunto, and so the truce was concluded. From thence they
marched through the plain country 15 Parasangs in 3 encampings. 18 mile three
quarters a day.
Teribazus followed with his forces, keeping aloof about ten furlongs. A mile
and a quarter.
They came to a Palace, which had many villages about it full of large
provision. While they encamped there, fell abundance of snow by night. It was
therefore decreed in the morning, Snow causes quartering in villages.
that the Companies and Coronells should quarter in the villages. For they
neither saw enemy, and it seemed to be good and safe against the snow. Here
they had all things fit for use, namely sacrifice, wheat, old wine of excellent
sauo^r, raysons, and all kind of pulse. Some, that wandered from the Camp, The
plentifulnes of Armenia.
reported they saw an army, and many fires kindled in the night. Therefore it
seemed good to the Coronels not to suffer the soldiers to lie here and there
dispersed, but to bring them together again into one camp. Quartering when an
enemy is feared.
So they came together again, and thought it best to lie in the field. Whilst
they held this course, the snow fell so vehemently in the night, that both
arms and men were covered with it. The cariage-beasts also seemed, as though
they had bin fettered with the snow and had much ado to arise; Inconveniences
of Snow.
and the Soldiers, that lay upon the ground, upon whom the Snow fell, and slid
not off, became miserably distressed. Now when Xenophon arising up unarmed
began to cleave wood, straight ways one, and then another stood up, and taking
the hatchet from him, fell a cleaving likewise. Hereupon other in semblable
manner arising kindled the fire, and anointed themselves. For they found much
matter of ointment there, which they used in stead of Oil Olive, as namely,
Hogs grease, Oils of Sesamin, of bitter Almonds, and of Turpentine. There was
found also sweet ointments made of the same stuff. After this it seemed best
and most convenient to quarter again in villages under the roof of houses;
and the Soldiers with cheerful cries and great delight entered into the
houses, and there took their provision; only those, that at the last
dislodging out of houses had set them on fire, were punished with lying abroad
in hutts, Disorder in Soldiers punished.
and with such other ill lodging. From hence Democrates the Temenite, having
Soldiers with him, was by night sent out to the mountains, Scouts to discover.
where the straglers reported they saw fires. For in former employments he was
thought to bring certain news concerning things discouerable, either that
they were, or were not. He going forth and returning said, he could descry no
fires, but he brought in a prisoner having a Persian bow, and a quiver, and a
weapon called S^garis, such as the Amazons bear. A kind of weapon headed like
a hatchet.

Teribazus his falsenesse.


This prisoner being demanded, what countryman he was, said, he was a Persian,
and came from Teribazus his Camp to seek provision. Being asked again, how
great the Army was, and why assembled; he answered, that Teribazus was there
in person with his own Army, and with the mercenary Ghalibians and Taochans,
and was determined to set upon the Grecians in the streights, that were on the
mountain tops, where there was but one way. The Coronels hearing these things
found it good to assemble their troops, and leaving sufficient guards for the
Camp, Prevention of danger by seeking the enemy first.
and Sophonaetus to be their commander, they forthwith marched on, taking the
prisoner for their guide. They had now passed the mountain, when the Peltasts
advancing first, and discovering the enemy, gave a shout, and ran in upon their
Camp, not staying for the armed. The Barbarians hearing the noise, forsook
the place wherein they were, and ^led immediately; The enemy defeated.
notwithstanding some of them were slain, and 20 horses taken; and withal the
Tent of Teribazus, in which were beds with silver feet, and plate, and some
that said, they were Bakers, and Butlers. These things being so happily
achieved, the Coronels held it best to return with all speed unto the Camp,
lest perhaps some enterpise might be made upon those, that were left behind,
Diligence in avoiding danger.
and forthwith by trumpet giving a sign of retreat, they dismarched, and came
to the Camp the same day. The next day they thought it good to proceed with
all celerity, before the enemies Army could again be rallied, and possess
the streights. Therefore they trussed up their baggage, and having many guides,
marched forth through deep Snow, and the same day getting over the tops, where
Teribazus purposed to have charged them, they set down and encamped. From
thence in three encampings in the wilderness they reached to the river
Euphrates, which they waded through not wetting themselves further than the
Nauill. The Grecians wade over Euphrates.

18 mile and more a day.


The fountains of this river were reported not to be far off. From thence
they proceeded 15 Parasangs in three encampings through much Snow, which
covered the plain country. The third encamping was laborious and hard, the
north wind blowing stiff against us, and scorching and befreezing the limbs
of the Soldiers: whereupon one of the Soothsayers said, Miserable idolatry.
he would offer sacrifice to the wind to appease it, which being accordingly
performed, there was no man, but held opinion, that the fury of the storm was
much stilled and abated. The Snow was in this place a fathom deep; Snow a
fathom deep.
so that many carriage beasts, and slaves were lost, and as good as 30
Soldiers. They maintained fires the whole night, by reason that there was
great quantity of wood in the place, where they encamped; and yet they, that
were benighted found no wood; neither would those that first were quartered,
give the late comers access to the fires, unless in recompense they imparted
unto them wheat, or some other victual, such as they had. So was there amongst
them a mutual communication of their commodities. After the Snow was melted,
there appeared great pits upon the earth, where the fire was made, by which a
man might easily judge of the depth of the Snow. From thence they marched
through Snow the whole next day, and many of the Soldiers were taken with the
disease called Boulimia. Xenophon bringing up the Rear, and raising those
Soldiers, that lay upon the ground, was ignorant what the disease meant, till
one, who had experience, told him, that it was a plain Oxe-hunger, Oxe-hunger,
(...)
and that they would immediately stand up, if they had any thing to eat.
Therefore going to the cariage-beasts, if he saw any drink, or victuals, he
distributed it either by himself, or by such as were able to run about, to
those that were pinched with hunger, and they had no sooner eaten, but they
stood up, and marched. In this march Cherisophus about twilight came to a
Village, where he found women and maids drawing, and carrying water before a
Fort. The Interpreter told them in the Persian tongue, that they came to the
Viceroy from the King. They answered, the Viceroy was not there, but about a
Parasang from thence. Three mile and three quarters.
Cherisophus, because it was late, entered with the water-bearers into the Fort
unto the Governor, where he, and as many as the place was capable of,
quartered that night. The rest of the Soldiers, that could not reach to the
iournies end, lodged that night without meat or fire, so that some of them
perished there. There were of the enemy, that gathered head, and followed the
Rear, and taking the cariage-beasts, Distress of the Grecian soldiers.
such as were unable to travel, fell foul together about the division of
them. Some also of the Soldiers, whose sight was perished with the Snow, or
had their toes rotted off with the cold, were left behind. Remedy against
Snow ^or sight. For the feet.
The remedy against the Snow for the eyes was the wearing some black thing
before them, while they marched: for the feet, continual moving and resting no
where; and in the night time putting off their shoes from their feet. As many
as slept shod, the strings of their shoes were imprinted in their feet, and
their shoes fast frozen to them. For there were some, that after they had
worn out their old shoes, made themselves country shoes of raw hides newly
drawn from the Ox. Some therefore of the Soldiers were left behind enforced
by such necessities; who casting their eyes upon a piece of ground that was
black, by reason the Snow was gone, they imagined it was melted there. And it
was indeed melted by a Spring, that sent out vapors in a woody valley not
far from thence. Thither they turned, and said they would march no further.
The soldiers unable to march. Their danger.
As soon as Xenophon, that had the Rear, perceived it, he prayed them, and
used all art and endeavor to persuade them not to remain behind, alleging
that the enemy being assembled in great number followed at their heels. At the
last, when he profited nothing, he began to be angry; they bid him kill them,
if he would; for they were able to go no further. Hereupon it was thought
best, to put a fear, if it might be, into the enemy that followed. The
darkness was now come, and the enemy approached with much tumult and
controversy amongst themselves about the prey they had taken. There they of
the Rear, as many as were in health, rising up, ran upon the enemy: the
other, that were weary, shouting as entirely as they could, beat their pikes
upon their targets. The enemy scared.
Wherewith the enemy being affrighted cast himself into this Valley through the
Snow, and thence forward was not so much as a word heard from any of them the
whole night. Xenophon and the Soldiers with him marched on, and he told them
that were weary, that he would send some to visit them the next day. They had
not gone four furlongs, but they happened upon other Soldiers, that rested in
the way upon the Snow, being also covered with it, and had put out no watch or
guard. He made them stand up, and they gave him to understand, that the Vaunt
moved no further forward. Himself therefore passing by, and sending the ablest
of the Peltasts to the Vaunt, willed them to bring word, what the impediment
was. They brought word, that the whole Army rested in the same manner.
Therefore they that were about Xenophon, setting out such guards as they could,
lodged that night without fire or supper. When it was toward day, Xenophon sent
the youngest Soldiers about him unto the sick, commanding to raise them from
the ground, and to compel them to march on. In the mean space were certain
men dispatched away by Cherisophus, to inquire how it was with the Rear; who
saw them gladly, and delivered the sick men unto them to be conueighed to the
Camp. Themselves marched on, and after 20 furlongs march came to the Village,
Two mile and a half.
where Cherisophus quartered; and all being come together, they resolved they
might safely quarter in the Villages thereabout. Cherisophus remained where he
was. The other casting lots for the Villages they saw, Lots for quartering.
every one went and took possession of his own. Polycrates an Athenian
Captain asked leave to go before, and taking with him the light-armed, and
hasting to the Village, that fell to Xenophons lot, found within it all the
inhabitants, and the Comarch, or chief Ruler of the Village, and 17 Colts,
that were fed as a tribute for the King, and the daughter of the Governor, who
had been married some nine days before, whose husband was then absent hunting
the Hare, and so came not to be taken in any of the Villages. The houses were
under ground, Houses under ground.
and the door of them like the mouth of a Well, but broad and large beneath.
The entry for carriage beasts was dug, men ascended by ladders. In the houses
were goats, sheep, oxen, and birds with their young ones by them. Plenty of
provision in them.
All the beasts were fed within doors with fodder. There was besides wheat and
barley, and pulse, and wine (in great vessels) made of barley. Beer, or rather
Ale.
The barley filled the vessels to the very top, and there lay upon it Reeds
without knots, some great, some little. If a man were thirsty, these Reeds were
to be taken into the mouth and sucked; and it was a strong drink, if unmingled
with water, and very pleasant to them that were acquainted with it. Xenophon
took the Comarch unto him, and that night set him at his own table, and
willed him to be of good cheer, Xenophons courtesy to the Comarch.
assuring him he should not lose his children, and that if he would show
himself a friend to the Grecians in leading and directing their Army, till
they came to another Country, he would at his departing fill his house with
all things fit for use. The Comarch promised he would, and in token of love,
showed the place where wine was stored under the earth. So the Soldiers being
thus lodged, passed the night in abundance of all things they could desire,
having the Comarch in their custody, and his children before their eyes.
Banqueting of the Grecians.
The next day Xenophon taking the Comarch with him went to Cherisophus, and
passing through the Villages in his way, visited them that were lodged there,
and found them banqueting and merry in every place; neither would they suffer
him to depart, until they had set dinner before him; and in all houses the
tables were furnished with lamb, kid, porke, veale, foul, and with much
bread, some made of wheat, some of barley. If any man of courtesy would drink
to another, he drew him to the vessel, (...).
to which he was to stoop, and drink supping like an Ox. They gave the
Comarch leave to take what he list, yet took he nothing, unless he espied by
chance any of his kinsmen, whom he carried away with him. When they came to
Cherisophus, they found all the Soldiers in the houses crowned with hay
garlands, and Armenian boys clad in Barbarian apparel waiting upon them; to
whom, when they would have any thing done, they were feign to make signs, as
to deaf men. After Cherisophus and Xenophon had been merry together, they
asked the Comarch by an Interpreter, what the Country was. He answered it was
Armenia. Again they asked him, for whom those horses were bred and kept; Horse
bred up for the King.
he answered, they were the Kings tribute. The next Country, he said, was the
Chalybians country, and showed them the way that led thither. After this
Xenophon brought him home to his house, and the old horse (which he had taken)
he gave him to be reserved for a sacrifice. For he heard, that he was
consecrated to the Sun, and feared he would die, The Persians sacrificed
horses to the Sun.

The horse of Armenia.


because he fainted in the journey. He himself took to him one of the Colts,
and distributed the rest to the other Coronels and Captains. The horse of that
Country are less than the Persian horse, but much more deedy, and full of
metal. The Comarch also taught them, Remedy for beasts that travel, against
the Snow.
as often as their horse or cariage-beasts were to be driven through the Snow,
to bind little bags about their feet; for without these bags, they fell up to
the belly in Snow. When the eight day was come, Xenophon delivered the Comarch
to Cherisophus to be their guide, but left all his household to him, except only
one of his sons, who was lately come to man's estate. Him he delivered to
Episthenes the Amphipolitan to be kept upon condition, that if he guided the
Army well, he might take his son home with him at his return. Besides they
conueighed into his house as many things as they could, and so rising with
their whole Camp, they marched forward. The Comarch guided them unbound,
because of the Snow: and now they were in the third encamping, The error of
Cherisophus about the Guide.
when Cherisophus waxed angry with the Guide, because he conducted them to no
Villages. He answered, that there were none thereabout. Cherisophus beat him,
but bound him not, by reason whereof he shifted away by night, leaving his
son behind him. This was the only difference and distaste betwixt
Cherisophus and Xenophon during this whole journey. For the Guide was ill
entreated, and yet not looked unto, nor made fast. Episthenes was in love with
the boy, and carrying him home into Greece, found him always after exceeding
faithful and trusty. After this they marched forward seven encampings; five
Parasangs every day, even as far as the river Phasis, which is a plether
broad. 18 mile and more a day. 100 foot. 18 mile and more a day.
From thence they marched 10 Parasangs in two encampings. The Chalybians,
Taochans, and Phasians showed themselves on the top of a hill, from whence the
descent into the Plain lay. Cherisophus after he perceived the enemy on the
height of the hill, made Alt about thirty furlongs off, Three ^ile and three
quarters. (...). In a march how to bring the troops to a Ph^l^nge.

A counsel how to dislodge the en^^y from a mountain.


being loath to approach them with his army led in a wing, and he gave the word,
that the following Companies should slee^e up by the first, to the end the army
might be formed into a Phalange, or broad fronted battle. When the Rear was
come up, immediately he called a Court of Coronels and Captains; and spoke
thus: ^he enemy, as you see, has taken the top of the mountain; It is time
for us to advise, how we shall most commodiously come to fight with them. Mine
opinion is, therefore, that we first command the Soldiers to dine, and then in
the mean space consult, whether it be best to pass over the mountain to day
or to morrow. And mine opinion is, said Cleanor, that after dinner we presently
arm, and with all celeritie go against them. For if we linger this day, the
enemy, that beholds us now, will wax bolder, and other animated with their
boldness, will join unto them. After him Xenophon spoke, and said: I conceive
thus; that if we must needs fight, we are to prepare our selves to fight with
the greatest advantage, we are able. But if we desire to pass the hill with
least trouble, we ought to consider, how to receive fewest wounds, and lose
fewest men. The hill, which we see, is more than 60 furlongs in length, 7 miles
and more.
and men no where appear to hinder us, but only upon the way, of our march.
It is better therefore to endeavor privily, to steal, if we can, and to lay
bold of, and, as it were, A double disadvantage.
to snatch away by prevention a piece of the void mountain, than to fight both
against a strong place, and against men ready, and resolved to try their
fortune. For it is much more easy to mount a steep passage without fight,
than to trauerse a Plain beset on every side with enemies; and a man not
fighting shall by night better discern any thing before his feet, than by day,
if he be in fight; and rough places are more even to his feet, that fights
not, than plain ground to him, whose head is in danger. And it seems to me
not impossible to steal some part or other of the hill, in regard, that we
have both the benefit of the night not to be seen, and may use such circuit in
ascending, that the enemy shall never perceive us; A show different from our
intent.
and if we make a show, as though we meant to pass the way, we are in, we
shall find the rest of the mountain more clear and void of resistance,
because it is likely, he will make good the place, which he holds, with all
his forces. But what do I talk of theft before you Cherisophus. For I hear
that you Lacedaemonians, as many of you, as are of the equals, (...).
meditate from your childhood how to steal; and that it is no shame, but a
praiseworthy thing to steal such things, as the law forbids not to steal,
and to the intent, you steal and conceal your theft with more cunning, the
law ordains, that if you be taken with the manner, you shall be well whipped
for your pains. Now therefore it is a fit time for you to show your education,
and to beware that in stealing the mountain we be not taken with the manner,
lest we be beaten with many stripes. Cherisophus replied: And I likewise hear,
that you Athenians steal the riches of your State most artificially, albeit it
be no small danger for him that steals; and that the best of you, if the best
desire to bear rule in the State, are guilty of this crime. So that it is good
time for you also to show your education. I, quoth Xenophon, am ready after we
have supped, to go with the Rear, and seize upon the top of the mountain;
Guides I am provided of. For our light-armed took some of the thieves that
followed to surprise us; and I hear, that the mountain is not impassable, but
is fed with Goats and Neat. So that if we take any part thereof, we shall find
also a way for our cariage-beasts; and I hope, the enemy after we have once
gained the height, and are in even ground with them, will no longer maintain
the place, the rather because they have no great mind to descend now unto us
into the Plain. Yea, but what need you go, quoth Cherisophus, and leave the
Rear. Rather, if no man be willing to go of himself, let us make choice of
some one or other. Hereupon Aristonymus the Methydrian came up, and presented
himself with armed foot, and Aristaeus the Chian with light-armed, and
Nicomachus the Oetaean likewise with light-armed; The sign.
and the sign was agreed upon, namely, to make fires, after the top was taken.
All things being thus concluded, they dined. Then Cherisophus led the Army
forward toward the enemy some 10 furlongs, A mile and a quarter.
as though he had a purpose to continue his march that way. When they had
supped, and it was night, those that were appointed proceeded on, and took the
top of the mountain; the rest of the Army remained in the place, where they
were. The enemy perceiving that the top of the mountain was taken, watched and
made fires all the night. By break of day Cherisophus offered sacrifice, and
led the Army in the way, they marched before, and they, that had won the
hill, and the height thereof, made head against the enemy, who in greatest
number remained upon the ordinary way that lay toward the top, The Grecians
beat the enemy.
but a part of them advanced against the Grecians, that had gained the height,
who came to hands, before the whole Army joined; in which conflict the
Grecians had the better, and followed the chase upon the enemy. In this mean
time the Peltasts of the Grecians that were in the Plain, ran up the hill to
their companions, that had the victory. Haste without disorder.
Cherisophus with the armed followed as fast as he could, without disordering
their troops. The enemy, that lay upon the way, when they saw their companions
beaten on the height of the hill, abandoned the place, and fled. Many of them
were slain: and they left behind many wicker targets, which the Grecians
cutting in pieces with their swords made for ever after unprofitable, and of no
use. When they came to the top of the mountain, they offered sacrifice, and
erecting a Trophey descended into the Plain, A Trophey is a monument of
victory.
and into Villages stored with plenty of all things. After this they marched
toward the Taochans, 30 Parasangs in five encampings. Their victuals here began
to wax scant, because the Taochans inhabited strong holds, 22 mile and a half
a day.
into which they had conueighed all their useful provision: they crept into a
Hold, that had neither city, nor house in it, and in it men, and women, and
many beasts were gathered together. Cherisophus presently marched against it,
and so disposed his troops, that when the first was weary, The order of an
assault.
another straight succeeded, and then another. For they could not with their
whole forces beset the place round, because it was prerupt in all the circuit.
When Xenophon came up with the Rear both Peltasts and armed, Cherisophus told
him he was welcome. For the place, said he, must needs be forced, because
henceforth we shall have no provision for the Army, if we omit this Hold.
Hereupon they advised in common; and when Xenophon asked what impediment there
was, why it might not be entered, Cherisophus answered: There is no other way,
but this one, that you see; and when any man proffereth to ascend, they tumble
down stones from the high rock hanging over, and upon whomsoever the stones
light, thus is he served; and withal showed many Soldiers that had their
legs and sides crushed, and broken a pieces. But when the stones are spent,
quoth Xenophon, what other impediment shall we have? For we see but these few
oppose against us, and of them but two or three armed men. And the space, which
is so dangerous, is not above three half Plethers; 150 foot. 100 foot.
and thereof about a Plether is beset with a thicket of great Pine trees, after
which the Soldiers standing, what hurt can they have, either from stones
thrown, or tumbled down? There remains then but half a Plether, 50 foot.
which must be passed running in the time, whilst the stones cease. But, quoth
Cherisophus, we can no sooner move toward the thicket, but the stones come
rolling down in abundance. So should it be, quoth Xenophon; for so they will
the sooner be spent. But let us, if we can, haste thither, from whence least
way remains afterward to run, and from whence, if we be disposed, we may
retire with most ease. Then Cherisophus and Xenopho^, and Callimachus the
Parrhasian Captain (for he had the leading of the Captains of the Rear that
day) began to advance. (...).
The rest of the Captains remained in safety in the place where they were.
Turns of Captains in marching.
Then about 70 Soldiers got to the trees, not thronging together but one by
one, each of them heedfull to avoid the danger, as he could. Agasias the
S^ymphalian, and Aristonymus the Methydrian, who were also Captains in the
Rear, and some other stood behind the trees; for it was not safe for more
than a Company to shelter themselves there. A 100 men.
Here Callimachus put in practice a device of his own. He ran two or three
steps from the tree, behind which he stood, and when the stones came rolling
down, he quickly retired. Upon every stepping forth of his, were spent more
than ten wagons of stones. When Agasias saw, what Callimachus did, and that it
was in the sight of the army, fearing he would be the first, that should enter
the hold, neither signifying any thing to Aristonymus, that stood next him, nor
yet to Eurylochus the Lusian (who were both his Companions) nor to any other,
he put forward, and outwent all the rest. Callimachus seeing him pass by
caug^t hold of the circumference of his Target. In the mean time Aristonymus
the Methydrian, and Eurylochus the Lucian came by (for all these were at
contention and strife amongst themselves, which of them should be esteemed the
most valiant) and in this emulation they entered the place. An honest and worthy
emulation.
No sooner had one of them entered, but the tumbling down of sto^es was staid.
A grievous spectacle was thence-forth there to be beheld. The women, after they
had cast down their children from the Rock, threw themselves after; and so
did the men. There also Aeneas the Stymphalian Captain seeing one, that had on
a fair garment, running to cast himself down, laid hold upon him to save
him. But the other drawing him on, both tumbled headlong down together, and
immediately died of the fall. In this place were few men, but multitudes of
Oxen, Asses, and Sheep taken. From thence they marched through the Chalybia^s
Country 50 Parasangs in seven encampings. 28 mile and more the day. The
Chalybians. Their valor. Their arms.
That Nation was the valiantest of all, that the Grecians passed through, and
such as durst come to handie blows with them. They bore Linen Curaces, that
reached down to their bellies, and in stead of wings had thick ropes wound
and fastened together. They had besides Greaues and Head-peeces, (...).
and on their Girdle a short Sword like a Lacedemonian Cemiterie, wherewith
they slay them, whom they overcome; and cutting off their heads return to
their friends singing and dancing, especially if it be in the enemies sight.
(...).
They have furthermore a Pike of about fifteen Cubits long, armed at one end
with a head of Iron. They remained in Towns, and when the Grecians passed by,
they followed them still skirmishing. Afterward they removed into strong
places, and conueighed their provision thither. So that the Grecians could get
nothing there, but were feign to feed upon the cariage-beasts, which they took
from the Tacchans. From thence they departed to the River Harpasus, Harpasus a
river.

400 foot. 18 mile and more a day. The S^ythinians.


a River of four Plethers breadth; and then through the Scythinians Country 20
Parasangs in four encampings. It was a plain Country, and in it they found
villages, in which they remained three days making provision of Corn. From
thence they proceeded in four encampings 20 Parasangs, 18 mile and more a day.

Gymnias a city.


and came to a great, wealthy, and well inhabited City named Gymnias. The
Lieutenant of the Country sent the Grecians a guide to lead them through the
enemies Country. Himself coming unto them told them, that he in person would
within five days bring them to a place, from whence they should see the Sea;
if not, he refused not to be put to death. When he was come into his enemies
Country, he willed them to burn and destroy the Land. Whereby appeared, that
no good affection, he bare them, but the loss of the enemy was the only
cause, he came unto the Grecians. The fifth day they came to the holy
Mountain, which was called Theches. Theches the holy Mount. The Gr^cians see
the Sea.
As Soon as they first came to the top of the Mountain and saw the Sea, there
was much shouting and hollowing. Xenophon and the Rear hearing it, imagined
that some enemy gave upon the Vant. For there were, that followed them out of
the Country, which they had fired, and of them some were taken, others slain,
by the Rear, which laid an ambush for them, and they got besides 20 wicker
Targets covered with raw and hairie hides of Oxen. When the cry grew more and
more, and those, that came after, still ran with all speed to the other, that
cried in the Vant, and as more trooped together, the cry the more increased;
Xenophon conceived it was not without great cause. Therefore getting to
hors-backe, and taking with him Lucius and the Horse, he speeded on to succor.
They heard straight way the voices of Soldiers comforting one another, and
crying, The Sea, the Sea; whereupon they ran all forward, both they, that came
in the Rear, and also the cariage-beasts, and Horses. When all were come to
the top of the Mountain, they fell to embracing both of one another, and also
of the Coronels and Captains, and that not without tears, and presently, it
is not known by whose commandment, the Soldiers carried together stones, and
raised up a great heap, and laid thereon a number of Targets covered with raw
Ox hides, and of staves and of wicker targets taken from the enemy. The guide
himself cut asunder the wicker targets, and persuaded the rest to do the like.
After this the Grecians sent away their guide having given him a Horse, a
silver bowl, a Persian suit of apparel, and 10 Daricks. Above all other
things he desired the rings, 6. li. - 10. s.
they wore, and had a great many given him by the Soldiers. And so showing
them a village, wherein they might lodge, and the way, that led to the Macrons,
as soon as the evening approached he departed, holding on his journey by night.
From thence the Grecians marched forward through the Macrons Country 10
Parasangs in three encampings. 12 mile and more a day.
The next day they came as far, as the river, that divides the territories of
the Macrons, and of the Scythinians; on their right hand they had a very steep
mountain hard to ascend, on their left another river, into which the river,
that divides the countries, did run; and through that river they must needs
pass. It was beset with thick trees, albeit not standing very closely
together. Passing over a river.
These trees the Grecians cut down, when they came to the river side, making as
great diligence, as they could, to rid themselves out of the Country. Macrons.
The Macrons. armed with wicker targets, with pikes and coats made of hair,
stood imbattelled on the adverse side of the river, encouraging one another,
and casting stones into the river, which notwithstanding reached not the
Grecians, nor hurt any man. There one of the targetiers came to Xenophon, and
told him, that he had served as a slave in Athens, and added, that he seemed to
know the language of the enemy, and I think, quoth he, that this is mine own
country; and, if you think good, I would feign speak with them. You may do it
freely, quoth Xenophon, if you lift; and know of them first, what people they
are. They answered, they were Macrons. Ask them again, quoth he, why they
oppose against us in arms, and desire to be our enemies. They answered,
because you go about to invade our country. The Coronels willed the
interpreter to say, they came not to offer wrong, but having made war against
the king, they returned into Greece, and would feign come to the Sea. The
Macrons asked the Grecians again, whether they would give assurance of that,
Assurance of a Truce.
they said; Who answered, they were ready to give, and take assurance.
Hereupon the Macrons gave to the Grecians a Barbarian spear, and the Grecians
a Grecian spear to them. For they said, that this was the manner of assurance
amongst them. But both parties called the gods to witness. After assurance
given the Macrons helped the Grecians to cut down trees, and leuelled the way
to further our passage, and came and conuersed with the Grecians furnishing out
such a market, as they were able, and led them forward three days journey,
till they had set them upon the Colchan mountains. The Colchan Mountains.
There was in that country a high Mountain, but yet passable, upon which the
Colchans had ranged themselves in battle. At the first the Grecians ordered
their troops against them in a Phalange, as if they purposed to invade the
Mountain in that form. The manner of ascending a mountain. Companies drawn
into one File apeece.
Xenophon advised them, that laying aside the form of a Phalange, the best
course would be to put themselves into single Companies drawn out in File. For
a Phalange, said he, will soon be broken by reason of the inequality of way,
which in some part of the Mountain will be easy enough, in other parts hard
to ascend. And it will quickly discourage the Soldiers, to see the Phalange
disordered, in which they march. Furthermore if we advance in a large Front,
the enemy, that exceeds us in number, will ouer-front us, and use his
multitude to most advantage; if in a narrow Front, it will be no marvel to see
our Phalange cut in pieces with the number of missiue weapons and with
multitude of men, that will fall upon it; which coming to pass in any part,
the whole Phalange will be distressed. Therefore, as I said, I hold it best to
order our selves in companies stretched out in file or depth, every company
having such distance from other, The distance betwixt company and company.

Ouer-fronting the enemy.


that the out-most companies may ouer-front, and be without the points of the
enemies wings. So shall we both gain the advantage of ouer-fronting their army,
and marching on the companies being in file, our best men shall first give on
upon the enemy. And let every company make choice of the fittest way for
ascent. Now for the spaces betwixt each company it will not be easy for the
enemy to enter them, the companies flancking every space, nor yet to cut off
a company advancing in such depth. And if any company chance to be
distressed, the next company is to succor it. And in case any one of the
companies attain the top of the Hill, assure your selves no enemy will keep
his ground. The advice was approved by all, and they drew their companies
every one into a File. Xenophon going from the right wing to the left, said to
the Soldiers; These, o Soldiers, whom you see, are the only hindrance of our
passage thither, whither we haste with so great desire. If it be possible, we
must devour them raw. When every man was in his place, and every company in
File, the companies of the armed amounted to about 80 in number, and every
company contained well-neere 100 men. 8000 Armed. Ordering of the light-armed.
The Targetiers and Archers were divided into three parts. One part marched
without the left Wing, another without the right, the third in the midst.
Then the Coronels commanded the Soldiers to pray. When they had prayed, they
sang the P^an, and so advanced forward; and the enemy made head against them.
Cherisophus, and Xenophon, and the Targetiers with them, being without the
points of the enemies battle marched on. The enemy perceiving it, sought to
meet them, and some of them drawing to the right, some to the left hand, they
rent their Phalange asunder, and left much void space in the midst. When the
Arcadian Peltasts, whose Captain Aeschines the Acarnan was, saw them
distracted, and severed, they imagined they fled, and ran on with as much
speed, as they could. They were the first, that gained the Mountain. The armed
Arcadians commanded by Cleanor the Orchomenian followed at their heels. The
enemy stood firm in no place, after they saw them come running on, but fled,
some one way, some another. The Grecians win the Hill.
So the Grecians ascending the Mountain quartered in many Villages replenished
with all things necessary. In other things there was no cause of marvel, only
there were many Bee-hiues, the Hony-combes whereof whosoever eat, they became
every man mad, Strange honey.
and scoured upward and downward, and none was able to stand upon their feet.
They that eat but a little were like drunken, that eat much like mad, and some
like dead men; and there lay so many upon the ground, that a man would have
thought an overthrow had been received from an enemy: which caused much
discouragement amongst the Troops. The next day there was no man found dead,
and they came to their right sense about the same hour, they fell into their
malady. The third and fourth day after they arose, as if they had received some
medicine. From thence they marched seven Parasangs in two encampings, and came
to the sea side to Trapezond a Grecian city well inhabited, which is situate
upon the Euxine Sea, being a Colonie of the Sinopeans planted in the Colchan
Country. They remained about 30 days in the Colchan country spoiling and
preying it. The Trapezuntines exhibited a Market to the Camp, and gave the
Grecians gifts of hospitality, viz. Oxen, Meal, and Wine, entertaining them
kindly. They transacted likewise for the next neighbor Colchans, especially
for those, that inhabited the Plain, from whom also were sent gifts of
hospitality, which were for the most part Oxen. Here the Army prepared the
sacrifice, which they had vowed (for a sufficient number of Oxen was sent unto
them) to Jupiter the savior, and to Hercules, Superstitious, but yet zealous
minds.
who had so well guided and protected them in their whole journey. They prayed
likewise to other gods. Besides they ordained Games of exercise in the
Mountain, where they encamped, (...). Games.
and chose Dracontius the Lacedemonian (who being yet a boy fled his Country
for killing another boy with the stroke of a Cimitery against his will) to
order the running, and to be president of the Games. When the sacrifice was
ended, they gave the beasts skins to Dracontius, and willed him to lead to the
place which he had appointed for the race. He showed them the place, where they
stood, saying: This Hill is the fittest place to run in, choose what part
thereof you will. They replied: Who can wrestle in so rough and wooddie a
ground? The more, quoth he, will be his pain, that takes the fall. The boys,
that were prisoners, did for the most part run the Furlong. More than 60
Cretans, A race of a furlong.

A race of 24 furlongs, or three mile: some say of 12 fu^longs. (...),
consisting of 1. P^gillatto. 2. Cu^sus. 3. Saltus. 4. Discus. 5. Lucta.



ran the race called Dolichon. Other wrestled, and fought with fists, and used
the Quinquertian exercise; so that it was a pleasant sight to behold them. For
many put themselves into the Exercise, and much emulation arose by reason their
companions looked on. The horses also ran, and they were appointed to gallop
down the steep hill to the Sea with high speed, and again to return up to
the alter. So many of them tumbled from the height downward one upon another;
and when they were to return upward, they had much ado, though never so
leisurely, to raise themselves against the huge steepness of the place. Here
you might hear great cries, laughter, and encouragements of one to another.

Finis Libri Quarti.
THE FIFTH BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF XENOPHON, TOUCHING THE Ascent of CYRUS the
younger, out of Asia the Less, into the Higher COVNTREYS.
IT is formerly discoursed, what the Grecians did in ascending with Cyrus up to
the higher Countries, and in their return as far as the Euxine Sea, and how
they came down to Trapezond a Grecian City, and sacrificed (according to
their Vows made for their safe return) as soon as they came to a Country
that was friend. Afterward meeting together, they consulted about the remnant
of their march homeward. Antileon the Thurian was the first that stood up, and
he spoke in this manner: I, my companions, have hitherto wearied my self in
trussing up baggage, in going and running and bearing Arms, and keeping order
in marching, in guarding, and in fighting. Now, seeing we are come to the Sea,
my desire is, laying these travels aside, to sail forth the remnant of my
journey, and as Ulysses did, lying down, and stretching my lims out at full
length, to sleep till we come into Greece. Their resolution to go by Sea.
The Soldiers hearing his words gave an applause, as if he had spoken well;
and afterward another, and almost all, that were present, repeated the same
words in general. Then Cherisophus stood up and said: Anaxibius, that has the
command of the Navy, is my very good friend. Wherefore, The Lacedemonian
Admiral.
if you send me to him, I shall return, as I conceive, with Galleys and Ships
sufficient for your transportation; your selves, since you are resolved to go
by Sea, stay here, till you hear of me again. I will return as soon as I
can. The Soldiers hearing this, were exceeding joyful, and decreed that he
should presently take his journey. After him Xenophon stood up, and spoke to
this effect: Cherisophus is sent away, and we must remain here till he
returns. I will therefore advise with you, what will be our best course, Safe
forraging.
till he returns. For neither is our market plentiful enough, nor yet have we
wherewith to buy, excepting only a few, and the Country is enemy, and we in
danger to lose many Soldiers, if to bring in provision, we straggle out of our
Camp carelessly, and without guard. Therefore mine opinion is, that it will be
expedient for us to make incursions into the Country, to the end to furnish
our selves with things needful, but not to wander abroad negligently, left you
come in danger; and these things I would have left unto our care. It was so
decreed. You may, if you please, hear besides, what I am further to say: Some
of you, no doubt, will go out to bring in prey. I hold it therefore best,
Notice whither.
that whosoever is disposed to issue forth, signify so much unto us, and
withal whither he purposes to go, that we may see both how many issue out,
and how many remain at home, and also make our selves ready for all events,
and that if it be needful to give aid, we may know, whither to address our
selves. And that if any, that have no great experience, undertake an
enterprise, the matter be referred to our deliberation, to the end we may
enquire, of what power and strength they are, In what place.
against whom the enterprise is intended. These things also were so decreed. I
pray think upon this likewise, quoth he, that because we have taken away the
enemies riches, they also will do, what they can, to prey upon us, and upon any
fit occasion lie in wait, and seek to entrap us; Se^tinels about the Camp.
I think it therefore meet to put out Sentinells round about our Camp. For if
we divide our selves into small parties, and so guard and scout, it will not be
so easy for them to hunt us. Furthermore, consideration must be had of this:
If we were assured, that Cherisophus would return, bringing sufficient
shipping with him, it would be needless to speak that, which I am about to
speak; but seeing his return is uncertain, I am of opinion, that we ought
here also to make provision of shipping. Provision of shipping.
For if he return, and there chance here to be more ships, than we need, we
shall sail away with greater ease. But if he bring none, then may we use them,
which we have provided here. For I see ships often times passing by. If then
requesting long ships of the Trapezuntines, we take these passengers, and keep
them, laying aside their Ruthers, till the number arise great enough for our
purpose, it may be, we shall not fail of such a transportation, as we desire.
These things were also decreed. You may be pleased also to consider, whether it
be not reason upon common cost to maintain such, as we shall find in the
ships, so long, as they shall remain here through our occasion, and to give
them wages, that as they profit us, so also they may profit themselves by us.
This was in like manner decreed. I conceive further, quoth he, if shipping
sufficient fail, it will be expedient for us, to command the Cities of the
Seacoast to make the ways, by which we are to pass, plain and even, (for
they are reported to be rough, Reparation of Ways.
and hard to march in) and I make no question, but they will easily assent,
both because they are in fear, as also because they would gladly be rid of us.
Here the Soldiers cried out, that there was no cause to speak of preparing
the ways. Xenophon marking their indiscretion, made no decree hereof, but
persuaded the neighbor Cities to make the passages ready, alleging they
would sooner be gone, if the ways were prepared. They had also a ship of
fifty owers from the Trapezuntians, over which they appointed Captain
Dexippus, who dwelt not far from Lacedemon. Dexippus a runaway.
He not much regarding the provision of shipping, sailed away, and fled out of
Pontus with the ship. Afterward, notwithstanding he suffered just punishment,
being put to death by Nicander the Lacedemonian, for seeking to raise a
commotion in Thrace against Seuthes. They had besides a ship of thirty owers
over which they made Captain Polycrates the Athenian. Who when he took any
ships, brought them to the Camp, where the merchandise was taken out, and
keepers set to preserve it safe for the owners. The ships themselves were
retained for the journey. Whilst these things were doing, the Grecians went
abroad to seek the prey of the Country, and some of them sped, other some
missed of their purpose. Miscarrying of careless forragers.
Cle^netus leading forth his own and another Company to a place rough and
dangerous, was slain himself, and many other with him. When there was no more
provision to be got within such a distance, as that the Soldiers going out a
foraging, might return to the Camp the same day, Xenophon taking guides from
the Trapezuntians, led out half the army, into the Country of the Drylans,
the other half he left to guard the Camp. The Drylans.
For the Colchans, being driven from their own houses, were many in number,
and sat down on the top of the hills. The Trapez^^tians guided them not to the
place, where provision might easily be made, because that part of the Country
was their friends; but against the Drylans, from whom they had suffered
hostility, against a mountainous country, and hard to pass through, the
inhabitants whereof are accounted the most warlike people of all, that live in
Pontus. After the Grecians were come into the high country, the Drylans
setting afire all the holds, that seemed easy to be forced, went their ways;
neither was any thing found in the country, but a hog, or an ox, or some such
other cattle, as escaped the fire. There was a Fort, that was called their
mother City, or Metropolis, A Fort of the Drylans.
whither they all fled. Round about it was a hollow bottom strongly deep, and
the access to the Fort was hard. The Peltasts speeding on some five or six
furlongs before the armed, passing the bottom, and espying there many sheep
and other riches, went on against the Fort; and were seconded by many
Speare-men, (...).
that followed to make provision for the Camp; So that the number of those
that passed over the bottom, was more, than two thousand men. When they could
not force the place (for there was a deep di^ch cast about it, and sharp
stakes fixed on the ascent of the rampire, and many wooden Towers raised) they
began to make their retreat, and the enemy fell out upon them. Now when they
could not well retire (for the descent from the Fort to the bottom, Rashness
to advance further than a man may well come off.
was capable of no more than of one man at once) they sent to Xenophon, who led
the Targetiers. The messenger said, that the Fort was replenished with much
riches, but they could neither take it, by reason of the strength thereof, nor
yet come off without danger, because the enemy was fallen out, and fought with
them, and the place, through which they were to come off, was narrow. Xenophon,
when he heard this, leading on to the brinke of the hollow bottom, commanded
the armed to lay down their arms: (...).
Himself passing over with the Captains, advised, whether it were better to
bring off those, that were already in the Fort, or to pass over the armed
also, which he led, to try if the Fort might be won: For the Captains held,
that the retreat could not be made without the loss of many, and that the Fort
was not impregnable; to whose opinion Xenophon assented, the rather because of
the sacrifice. For the soothsayers signified, that they must undergo a fight,
but the issue would be good, and such as was to be desired. Therefore he sent
back the Captains to bring over the armed; himself remained behind, and
gathering together the Peltasts suffered none to send a missiue weapon at the
enemy. After the armed were come up, he willed the Captains to order their
Companies, every one, as they thought fittest for fight. For the Captains
stood near together, betwixt whom there was always an emulation about manhood
and service. The Captains did accordingly; and Xenophon gave commandment to
all the Peltasts to go with their fingers inserted into the thongs of their
darts, and the Archers with their arrows nocked, and the light-armed,
Commandment is nothing without execution.
with their leather bags full of stones, that they might be ready when a sign
was given; and he chose out fit men to see these things executed. When all were
in readiness, and the Captains, and Lieutenants, and they, that accounted
themselves nothing inferior to them, had taken their places, and looked one
upon another (for it was a gallant sight, to behold the army standing so
imbattelled in the field) they began the Paan, the trumpet sounded, the army
gave a shout, and the armed ran on with all speed. Now the missiue weapons
began to fly at all hands, darts, arrows, bullets and stones out of slings,
and many stones from hands. (...).
There were also that threw fire. The enemy oppressed with multitude of missiue
weapons, forsook both the Rampire and the Towers; so that Agasias the
Stymphalian, and Philoxenus the Pelenian, laying down their weapons, (...).
ascended the Rampire in their coats alone, and one drawing and helping up
another, and many entering the Fort seemed now to be taken, and the Peltasts and
light-armed ranging up and down, fell a spoiling all they could. Xenophon
stood at the gate keeping out the armed. For there appeared other enemies upon
some strong heights of the mountains. Not long after a cry arose within, and
the Grecians fled, some with things taken in the Fort, some being wounded, and
the throng about the gate was great. Those, that ran out of the gates, being
asked what the matter was, said, There was a Citadell within, and a multitude
of enemies which fell out, and charged the light-armed, and Peltasts. Whereupon
Xenophon proclaimed by T^lmides the crier, that whosoever would have his part
in the prey of the Fort, should enter. Many therefore entered, and beat back
those, that salied out, and again shut up the enemy into the Citadell. The
Grecians spoiled and carried away all, (...). Act. c. 9. v. 40.
that was found without the Citadell. But the armed laid down their arms
partly by the Rampire, partly at the way that led to the Citadell. Xenophon and
the Captains in the mean time cast their eyes about to resolve, whether the
Citadell were possible to be taken, or not. For so all should be safe,
otherwise the retreat must needs be full of danger. After they had viewed it,
they held it impregnable. The manner of the retreat.
Thereupon they put themselves in order for retreat, and every man pulled up
the stakes of the Rampire as they came in his way. The unserviceable were sent
out with the prey, and most of the Armed, every Captain retaining only such,
as he trusted. As Soon as they began to retreat a multitude of enemies armed
with wicker Targets, and Spears, and Greeues and Paphlagonian head-peeces
salied out of the Citadell. Fight in a street.
Many other climed up on the Houses which stood on either side the street, that
led to the Citadell; whereby it grew dangerous to give chase toward the Gates
of the Citadell. For they threw down mighty Timber logs from above, and made
it unsafe either to stand still, or go off; and the night approaching brought
terror with it. Fighting in this sort, and irresolued what to do, some God
gave a means of safety. For suddenly a House on the right hand, it was
unknown by whose kindling, burst out into a flame. (...). Fire to favor a
retreat.
The House no sooner fell, but the enemies, that were gotten up to the Houses
on the right hand shifted away. When Xenophon saw this work of Fortune, he
commanded the Houses on the left hand to be likewise fired; which being made of
Wood caught fire quickly, whereby the enemy forsook the Houses on that side
also, and the Army was annoied only by those in Front, who, doubtless were
like to fall upon the Rear, in their retreat and departure. Here Xenophon gave
order, that all, A means to retreat.
who were without the reach of missiue weapons, should bring Wood, and lay it
betwixt the enemy and them, and when the store was sufficient, it was set on
fire. The Houses were also fired, that stood next the Rampire of the Town
ditch, that the enemy might be busied on all sides. So by the help of fire
betwixt the enemy, and them, they made a hard retreat. With this fire were
consumed the whole City, the Houses, Turrets, Rampire, and all things else,
except the Citadell. The next day the Grecians having gained sufficient
provision retired toward their Camp: but because they feared the way, that led
toward Trapezond, as being steep and narrow, they laid a false ambush. There
was in the Camp a Mysian by nation and name, A false ambush.
who taking unto him four or five Cretans remained in a woody plat of ground,
making semblance to the enemy, as though he meant to hide himself. Their
Targets being of Brass cast glimmering light here and there through the Wood,
which the enemy descrying feared as much, as if it had been a true ambush. In
the mean time the Army was descended into good ground, and the Mysian,
thinking they had now gained way enough, gave the word to his companions every
man to shift away amain, and immediately he and his consorts fled. The Cretans
forsaking the ordinary way (for they said the enemy might outrun them and
take them prisoners) and conueying themselves into Woods, and tumbling down
through steep and rough Forests, came safe to the Army: but the Mysian flying
in the ordinary way, cried out for succor. He was rescued and brought away
wounded, and the Soldiers, that rescued him, retired by little and little,
casting Darts, having also amongst them a few Cretans, who shot at the enemy.
So they came all safe to the Camp. When neither Cherisophus returned, and no
more provision was to be found for the Camp, they decreed to proceed on their
journey, They continue their journey by Land.
and put on shipboard the sick, and those that were above forty years of
age, and children, and women, and vessels unnecessary for the journey; and
shipping likewise Philesius and Sophonetus the eldest of the Coronels, they
committed the charge of all to them. The rest went on by Land. The way was
prepared and made plain and even; and in three days march they reached as
far as Cerasunt a Grecian City standing upon the Sea, being a Colonie of the
Sinopeans situate in the Colchian Country. Here they remained ten days, and
took a muster of Arms and of the number of their people, and found 8600 men.
So many were left of the 10000 or thereabouts, that ascended with Cyrus into
Persia; the rest were consumed by the enemies hand and by Snow, and some by
sickness. Here also they divided the money, that arose out of the sale of
Captives, Tithes amo^ngst the Gentiles.
and the Coronels took into their hands the tenth part, which was severed as
an offering to be made to Apollo, and Diana of Ephesus* every one keeping and
preserving a share for the gods. Neon the Asinean was appointed to receive the
portion, which should have been delivered to Cherisophus. Xenophon careful to
discharge the trust reposed in him.
Xenophon therefore making ready the offering for Apollo, bestowed and
hallowed it in the treasury of the Athenians at Delphos, and inscribed thereon
both his own name, and the name of Proxenus the Baeotian, who was put to death
with Clearchus. For Proxenus was Xenophons Host. The offering for Diana of
Ephesus, because himself was like to incur hazard at such time, as he
departed out of Asia toward Baeotia with Agesila^s; For this departure, see
Xenop. in vita Agesilai. 657. and Hist. Graec. lib. 4.513. B.
he left with Megabyzus Dianaes Priest, and willed him in case himself escaped
the danger, to make restitution to his own hands; if he miscarried, to
consecrate it to Diana, and bestow it in such sort, as in his opinion should be
most acceptable to the goddess. But af^erward, when Xenophon was banished his
country, and dwelled now at Scylunt, Scylunt.
which Town was built by the Lacedaemonians near to Olympia, Megabyzus came to
Olympia to see the Games, and restored to Xenophon the money left in his
custody: and Xenophon receiving it bought a portion of Land for the goddess
in a place designed by Apollo, through which the River Sellenus runs. At
Ephesus also there runs a River Sellenus hard by Dianaes Temple, and either
of these Rivers nourishes both other fish, The land conse^rated to Diana.
and fish with shells. But in the Scyluntine portion of Land there are beasts of
all sorts fit to be hunted. He built a temple also, and an altar with the
consecrated money; and from thenceforth gathering always the tenth of the
fruits growing on the land, he offered sacrifice to Diana; and all the Citizens
and neere-dwellers, as well men, as women, are partakers of the feast. The
goddess allows them that come, meal, bread, wine, and iunkets, and a
portion of the flesh of those beasts, which are either taken from the
consecrated ground, and sacrificed, or else killed in hunting. The sons of
Xenopho^, and of other Citizens exercise the hunting against the time of the
feast; and other men also hunt with them, such as are desirous of the sport.
There are taken partly out of the Holy Land, partly out of Phaloe, wild
Boares, Goats, and Red-deere. The place lies in the way, as you go from
Lacedemon to Olympia, distant about twenty Furlongs from the Temple of
Olympian Jupiter. There are in the consecrated ground, groves and mountains
stored with trees sufficient to nourish hogs, and goats, and sheep, and
horses; so that the carriage-beasts of such, as come to the feast, are largely
provided for. About the Temple it self there is a grove of fruit trees of all
kinds, that are fit to be eaten, after they wax ripe. The Temple it self, as
much, as a little one may resemble a great, is like to the Ephesian Temple, and
the Image made of Cypres, like to the golden Image at Ephesus. By the Temple is
a pillar erected and inscribed with these words: The ground consecrated to
Diana. He that has the possession and use of it, let him pay the tenth of
every years increase, and with the ouer-plus repair and maintain the Temple.
In case he neglect this, the goddess will take order for her own. From
Cerasunt they, that were before shipped, held on their course by Sea, the rest
made forward by land. When they were come to the borders of the Mosynecans,
they sent unto them Timosithe^s a Trapez^^t^^e (who was their guest) to demand,
The Mosynecans.
whether they should pass through their country, as friends, or as enemies.
They trusting to the strength of their country, answered; It would be all one
to them, which they did. Timositheos after this answer returned, gave the
Grecians to understand, that there were other Mosynecans dwelling further off,
that were enemies to those, whereupon it was thought good to send unto them to
see, if they would enter into fellowship of war with the Greci^^s.
Timositheos being sent, returned, bringing with him the chief Magistrates.
After their arrival, Aid against a common enemy.
they and the Grecian Coronels assembled together, and Xenophon began in this
manner, Timositheos being his Interpreter. We, o Mosynecans, because we want
shipping, are desirous to pass into Greece on foot. They who hinder us, as we
understand, are your enemies. You have now an opportunity presented unto you,
if you lift to embrace it, by entering into society of war with us, to be
revenged of them for all the wrong, they have any time here^ofore done you, and
to make them henceforth your vassals. If you at this present let us pass by
without taking the opportunity, consider with your selves if ever hereafter,
you are like to have the like forces join with you in league. The chief
Magistrate of the Mosyn^cans answered* he was desirous to effect the
proposition, and to join in society of war with the Greci^^^. Go to then,
quoth Xenophon, wherein will yo^ employ us, if we become your conf^derates? and
you, what aid can you give us to further our passage? They replied, We are of
strength enough to enter our common enemies country on the further side, and
to send you shipping and men, both to assist you in the field, and to be guides
of your journey. Upon this taking and giving assurance they departed. The next
day they came with 300 boats, every boat made of one piece of wood. (...).
In each boat were three men, of whom two landing laid down their arms in
order, one remained behind in the boat; And they which remained in the boats
sailed away straightwaies, the other stayed behind, and embattelled themselves
in this manner: They stood a hundred deep, (...). The order and arms of the
Mosynecans.
like as the stage-dancers are wont, filing themselves one opposite to the
other, having all Wicker Targets covered with white hayrie oxe-hydes, the
Targets in form like to an Iuie leaf. In the right hand each man held a dart
of about six cubits long, armed with a head before, the stele being round. They
had coats, that covered their knees, (...).
and were as thick as a hempen cord, that you bind a couerlet withal. Upon
their heads they had leather head-peeces like to them, which the Paphlagonians
wear, (...).
in the midst whereof arises a Cone resembling the form of a Tyara. They
bore iron hatchets besides. After this one of them beginning, all the rest sung
and marched forward by measure, and passing through the ranks and arms of the
Grecians, forthwith advanced against the enemy toward a Fort, which seemed
easy to be won. It lay before the City, which is called the Metropolis, or
mother City, and is held in chief estimation amongst the Mosynecans, and for
it they warred one against another. For they, who enjoyed it, had their feet
upon the necks of the other Mosynecans. They said, that the present
possessours had no right nor lawful possession, but being common to all, they
had done wrong in entering and detaining it to themselves alone. Some of the
Grecians also followed them, not by order or appointment of the Coronels, but
in greediness of pillage. The enemy held himself coy a while, but when he saw
them near the Fort, he sallied out, and putting them to flight killed a great
number of the Barbarians, and some of the Grecians, thatascended with them; and
followed the chase, till he might see the army of the Grecians ready to come to
reskue. Then turning about he retired; and cutting off the heads of those, that
were slain, showed them to the Grecians, and to their enemies, and withal
danced, singing a kind of measure. The Grecians were much grieved, that by
this action the enemy was emboldned, and that the Grecians in good number were
seen to fly, which they never did before in all this journey. But Xenophon
calling the Soldiers together, spoke unto them in this sort: Be not dismayed,
(O Soldiers) with that, which is happened. The good of it is as great, as the
evil. For first of all you now know certainly, that those, that shall be our
guides, are enemies to them, unto whom of necessity we must be enemies. Then
those Grecians, that seemed to contemn our order* and thinking themselves to
be able to ^o as much with the Barbarians* as with us, feel the smart of their
own folly, and will hardly hereafter be brought to leave our company. But you
must prepare your selves to show the Barbarians your friends, that you are
better men, than they, and to let the enemy know, that they have at this
present to do with another sort of people, than with those, who fought
disorderly with them of late. This day therefore they rested. The next day
after they had sacrificed, and the sacrifice portended good fortune, they
dined, and ordering their companies in file, (...).
and placing the Barbarians on the left hand, they advanced against the enemy,
having the Archers betwixt the companies* that were in file, somewhat more
backward than the front of the armed. For some of the light-armed of the enemy
ran forth, and cast stones; which quickly were repressed by our Archers and
Peltasts. The rest advanced leisurely first toward the Fort, from which the day
before the Barbarians and Grecians were put to flight. For there the enemy
stood embattelled, and made head against the Grecians. And first they fought
and made good the place against the Peltasts, but when the armed approached,
immediately they turned their backs. The Peltasts followed with speed, giving
chase upward toward the mother City or Metropolis, the armed moved forward in
order. When they were come up to the houses of the Metropolis, the enemies
joined and fought all together, and threw darts: and having thick and long
pikes, such as a man could hardly weild, with those they endeavored to defend
themselves hand to hand. When the Grecians gave no ground, but jointly pushed
forward, the Barbarians fled, and all of them forsook the Fort. The Fort taken.
Their King that was in a wooden Tower built in the Citadell (whom in common
they nourish, as long as he remains there, and guardeth the place) sought not
to escape away, nor they that were in the Fort before taken in, but were burnt
together with the wooden houses. The Grecians rifling and spoiling the place,
Bread a year old.
found in the houses treasures of bread heaped and hoorded up, as the
Mosynecans reported, the last year, according to the manner of the country.
The new corn with the straw lay by it self, the most part whereof was eared.
There was found also pieces of Dolphins salted, and laid up in vessels, and
also the fat of Dolphins, Fat of Dolphins Chestnuts.
which the Mosynecans use as the Grecians do oil, and many and great
chestnuts in garrets, which have no manner of cleft in them. They boil these,
and use them in stead of bread. Wine was found likewise, which being unmingled
seemed sharp by reason of the sowrenesse, being mingled it had a good savor,
and was pleasant in taste. The Grecians having dined here marched forward
delivering up the City to the Mosynecans their confederates. Of other Forts
belonging to the enemy, which they passed by, some of the weaker sort were
forsaken, other some willingly yielded, and gave themselves into the Grecians
hands. The most part of them are of this kind. 10 English mile.
They stand distant one from another 80 furlongs more or less. When the
country people cry out one to another, they hear it from City to City by
reason of the height and hollownesse of the country. After they were come to
the borders of their confederate Mosynecans, they showed them boys (rich men's
children) that were fed and fatted with sodden Chestnuts, which boys were
exceeding tender and white, and not much less in breadth than in length, having
their backs various, and all the foreparts rased and marked with diverse forms
of flowers. They sought also openly to use the whores, which the Grecians
brought with them: For that is their manner. All both men and women are white
of complexion. The barbarousnesse of the Mosynaecans.
They that were in this journey, held the country more barbarous, and more
differing from the Grecian rites of living, than all the rest they passed
through. For they do openly and before a multitude, that which other men do,
and dare not do but in private; and being alone they demean themselves, as if
they were in company. They speak to themselves, laugh to themselves, and
dance, wheresoever they become, as though they sought to please other men's
eyes. Through this country both friend and enemy the Grecians marched in eight
encampings, and came to the Chalybes. These are a people but few in number, and
in subjection to the Mosynecans, and live the most part of them upon iron
works. The Tibarenes.
From thence they passed to the Tibarenes, whose country is more champaine,
and has Forts situate by the Sea side, that are not very strong. The Coronels
resolved to fall upon this country, to the end to gain some riches for the
Army. Therefore they took not the hospital gifts which the Tibarens sent, but
bade them stay till they had taken counsel by the sacrifice which they offered.
After they had offered many, at last all the Soothsayers told them plain, that
the gods allowed not of the war. Therefore they accepted the gifts of
hospitality, and marching as through a country, that was friend, they came to
Cotyora, a Grecian City, a colony of the Synopaeans, situate in the Tibaren
territory. Thus far the Army marched on foot. The retreat of the Grecians was
1352 mile and a half to Cotyora.
The length of the descent of the way from the place in the Babylonian
territory, where the battle was fought, to Cotyora, was 122 encampings, 620
Parasangs, 10820 furlongs: of the time eight months. They stayed at Cotyora 45
days. During this abode they first sacrificed to the gods, and then made
shows every one according to the manner of his country, and proposed games of
exercise, and took their provision partly out of Paphlagonia, partly out of
the territory of the Cotyorites. For they neither exhibited a market, nor
received the sick within their gates. About this time came Ambassadors from
the Sinopaeans, fearing the danger that might befall the Cotyorites, both in
regard of their City (for it was theirs, and paid them tribute) and of their
territory, which as they heard was spoiled; and coming into the Camp,
Embassage of the Sinopaeans.
they spoke thus by the mouth of Hecatonymus, who was their Spokesman, and
reputed a good Orator. The City of Sinopis (o Soldiers) has sent us unto you,
partly commending you, that being Grecians you have overcome the Barbarians,
partly to congratulate with you, Accuses the Grecians of wrong.
that you are returned safe out of so many perils and dangers, as we are
informed you have been in: But we that are Grecians desire of you, that are
also Grecians, that your coming may be profitable and not prejudicial unto
us, considering to this day we never did you any wrong. These Cotyorites are
our Colonie, and we are the men that conquered their Territory from the
Barbarians, and gave it to them to inhabit and manure. For which cause they
pay us a tribute imposed upon them, as do likewise the Cerasuntians and
Trapezuntians; so that what wrong soever you do them, we imagine we suffer it
our selves. We hear then, that entering into the City by force some of you
quarter in the houses, other take what they think good, out of the Country
against the owners wills. If you hold on this course, we shall be forced to
crave aid of Corylas and the Paphlagonians against you, and of any else that we
can make our friends. The defense of Xenophon.
Here Xenophon standing up spoke thus in the behalf of the Soldiers: We (o
Sinopaeans) are come into these quarters joyful and glad, that out of so many
perils we have preserved our lives and arms. For to bring away spoil
enriching our selves, and withal to fight with the enemy, was impossible. And
now after we came to Grecian Cities, in Trapezund, we bought such things, as
we stood in need of (for they gave us a Market) and whereas they honored us,
and sent us gifts of hospitality, we did our best to honor them, and not only
abstained from the Barbarians, that were their friends, but also harried and
wasted to the uttermost of our power, those Barbarians, against whom they led
us. They whom the City sent in friendship with us, as Guides, are present here,
ask them, I pray, how we behaved our selves toward them. But whithersoeuer we
come, and have no Market either in the Territory of Barbarians or Grecians, we
take things necessary, not out of insolency, but forced by necessity. We
accounted the Carduchans, Chaldeans, and Taochans enemies (albeit no Subjects
to the King, and yet men to be feared) because they gave us no Market, and we
could not want needful provision. The Macrons, albeit Barbarians, in regard
they furnished us such a Market, as they could, we dealt friendly with, and
took nothing from them by force. If the Cotyorites, who you say are yours,
have not the like friendship, they may thank themselves: For they behaved
themselves not as friends unto us, but shutting their gates, neither received
us into their City, nor yet gave us a Market without. The cause hereof they lay
upon your Governor. But where you say, that we entered, and now lodge in the
City by force, the truth is, we requested them to receive our sick men into
their houses. When they opened not the Gates, we, offering no other violence,
entered there, where they would have kept us out. The sick men lodge indeed in
their houses, but yet they live of their own without charging their Hosts a
penny. And we set guards upon the Gates, left our sick men should happily be at
the mercy of your Governors, and not in our power to take to us, when we are
disposed. The rest of us, as you see, are orderly encamped in the Field, ready
to gratify thos^ that deser^e well at our hands, and to defend our selves
against such, a^ offer us injury. But where you threatened, that you would make
Corylas and the Paphlagonians your friends to join with you against us, Know,
that if we must needs* we care not to war against you bot^ (for we have
already ^ought with ^umbers far exceeding yours) but, if we list, we can as
well gain the friendship of Corylas and the Paphlagonians, as you. For ^e are
given to understand, that he would feign become owner of your City, and of the
Fortresses ioining to the Sea. We can then by furthering his desire, make him
our friend.After these words the fellow Ambassadors of Hecatonymus declared,
that they were thoroughly agrieued, with that, which Hecatonymus had spoken,
and one of them stepping forth said: We come not to denounce war, but to
show, we are your friends; and we will honor you with gifts of hospitality,
if you please to come to the Sinopaean City. For the present we will enioine
our people here to furnish you with what they are able, because we see, all is
true, which you have spoken. Afte^ this the Cotyorites sent gifts of
hospitality, Cotyora a City.
and the Grecian Coronels entertained the Sinopaean Ambassadors with feasts and
bankets, and they conferred about many things with all friendship and good
liking; and sought to inform themselves in other things, but principally in
the remainder of their journey, and in such matter, as concerned them both.
This was the end of that day. The next day the Coronels called the Soldiers
together, Consultation about the remainder of then journey.
and it was thought expedient to consult in the presence of the Si^opaeans
about the rest of the way into Greece. For if they were to set forward on foot,
the Sinopaeans seemed to be good guides (for they had much experience of
Paphlagonia) if by Sea, they might stand them in stead, seeming alone able to
furnish out shipping enough for the whole Army. Calling therefore the
Ambassadors unto them, they consulted together and prayed them being Grecians
to assist them being also Grecians with their best affections, and advice. Then
Hecatonymus standing up =excused himself in that, he spoke concerning the
making of the Paphlagonian friend, and added it was not his meaning to make
war against the Grecians, but albeit it were in their power to enter into
friendship with the Barbarians, yet would they in love prefer, and much more
esteem the respect of the Grecians. When he was required to deliver his
opinion, after he had made his prayer to the gods, he begun in this sort: If I
shall advise you that, which my mind persw^deth me to be best and fittest for
you, I pray the gods I may have many good and prosperous fortunes: If
otherwise, let the contrary befall me. For I take this, if any other, to be of
that kind of counsel, which is accounted holy: and if I shall now give you
good advice, many of you will love and commend me; if ill, as many will detest
and curse me. This then I am assured of, if you journey by Sea, the trouble
will be ours, in regard that we must furnish you out shipping. If you hold on
by Land, you your selves are the men, that must make way with your Swords. I
will notwithstanding deliver those things, which lie in my knowledge. For I am
well acquainted with the Country of Paphlago^ia, and with their Forces. Both
this and that Country have large Plains and high Mountains, and I know the
way which you must of necessity hold, and to say truth there is no other way
then to pass along, where the Mountains on both hands lift up them^elues with
huge and ex^^eding lo^tie hor^es* which a few men having taken and possessed*
may ^^^ily maintain, neither is there any multi^ud^ so great, that can
dislodge them, or gain the passage. This will I make manifest to any,
whomsoever you shall be pleased to send with me. From hence there follow large
Champaignes, and the inhabitants are furnished with such a power of Horse, as
the Barbarians themselves esteem to be better, then all that serve the King:
and albeit the King sent for them, yet they absolutely refused to go, their
Governor carrying too lofty a mind to be under any other man's command. But
admit you can by stealth and prevention gain the Mountains, and likewise beat
their Horse and Foot, which are in number above twelve Myriades, yet are you to
pass over Rivers: 120000.
First Thermod^^^ a River of three Plethers in breadth, 3^0 Foot.
which I conceive you will hardly get over, especially a multitude of enemies
opposing against you on the further side, and many likewise pursuing you
behind. The second Iris of three Plethers of breadth likewise. 300 Foot.
The third Halis two Furlongs broad, which cannot be passed without shipping,
1200 Foot.
and who will furnish you with Ships? I may say the same of Parthenius, to
which you must come, after you are over Halis. For my part therefore, I say
not, that the journey will be hard, but I say, it will be altogether
impossible. But if you take your selves to Sea, you may without difficulty
sail hence to Sinope, and from thence to Heraclea. From Heraclea you may go
on easily enough either by Land or Sea. For there is sufficient shipping at
Heraclea. After he had thus discoursed, some suspected, that his speech tended
to gratify and retain the frienship of Corylas (for he was his Guest) other,
that he did it in hope to gain reward for his counsel; some other, that he so
discoursed, because he feared lest the Sinopaean Country should sustain loss
and spoil, if the Army continued their march by Land. The Grecians decreed to
hold on their journey by Sea. Resolution to go by Sea.
This conclusion being made, Xenophon said: You see (o Sinopaeans) that the
Army is ready to hold the way, which you advise them to Yet must you
understand thus much, that we are so determined to take Sea, if we shall find
such sufficiency of shipping, that not one of us shall need to be left
behind. But in case some of us be to sail, other to remain here, assure your
selves, we will not go, nor stir a foot from hence. For this we all know,
wheresoever we shall be the stronger, we shall be both able to save our selves
from danger, and to command such things as shall be needful for us. Where we
are found the weaker, our condition will be no better, then if we were Slaves.
When the Ambassadors heard this, they advised them to send Ambassadors to the
Sinopaean^; and they sent Call^machus the Arcadian, Aristo the Athenian, and
Samolas the Achaian. So they took their journey. Now at this time, when
Xanophon considered (...) himself, and saw, that there were present in Pontus
many armed Grecian^, many Peltasts, many Archers and Slingers, and Horse, all
of them very sufficient, by reason of their long use in arms, and that the
like power could not be raised with a small expense* (...). Intention of
planting a Colonie.
he esteemed it a thing honorable to add so much territory and power unto
Greece, by pl^^ting a Colonie there. The Colonie he imagined would be great,
when he weighed in his mind, their own multitude, and the number of the
inhabitants of Pontus round about. Hereupon calling to him Silanus the
Ambraciote, who had been Cyrus his Diuiner, he asked counsel of the gods by
sacrifice, before he acquainted the Soldiers with the matter. Silanus fearing
the sequel hereof, and that the army might happily remain there, spread
abroad in the army, that Xenophon had in purpose to stay them, and to build a
City, and to purchase himself a name, and great power and government. Silanus
himself was desirous to return into Greece with all speed. For he kept by him
unspent the 3000 Daricks, A Daricke, a piece of money with Darius image upon it:
the value of the piece 13. s. A slight of those of the contrary opinion.
which Cyrus gave him, when sacrificing he foretold the ten days, before the
end of which no battle should be offered by the King. When the Soldiers heard
hereof, some were of opinion, it was good to stay, other of the contrary.
Timasion the Dardanian, and Thorax the Baeotian told certain Heraclean and
Sinopaean Merchants, which were in the Camp, that unless they gave pay to the
Soldiers, to provide things necessary for Navigations, it would be danger, lest
so great forces should remain in Pontus. For this is Xenophons advice, quoth
they, and he exhorts us as soon, as shipping comes, to say to the army out
of hand: We see you now (o Soldiers) destitute both of means to provide for
Navigations, and also to buy and carry with you, any thing to gratify your
friends at home. But if it please you to make choice to inhabit some part of
the country, that lies here round about in Pontus, and give free liberty to
any man, that is disposed, either to depart to his own country, or to remain
here, shipping is ready now, and at your devotion, and you may on the sudden
fall upon what part you are resolved. The Merchants hearing this, made report
to their Cities. Timasion the Dardanian dispatched away with them, Erimachus
the Dardanian, and Thorax the Boeotian, to signify as much by word of mouth.
As soon as the message was delivered, the Sinopaeans and Heracleots sent
immediately to Timasion to spare for no money, but at what price soever to
bring to pass, that the army might ship it self and sail away from thence.
He willingly heard their answer, and after spoke thus in the assembly of the
Soldiers. Timasions speech, that desired to go to his own country.
There is no reason (fellow Soldiers) to harken to any stay here, nor to
prefer any thing before your return into Greece. I understand, there are
some, that ask counsel of the gods about this business, and yet never make
you acquainted with it. But if you will hear me, and after the new Moon be
pleased to sail away from hence, I promise to give every one of you a Cyzicene
the month, and will bring you to Troas, A Cyzicen^ is 18. s.
from whence I am banished; and my country will, no question, give you good
entertainment, being glad of my return; and I will bring you thither, where
you shall have good store of spoil; For I know Ae^is, and Phrigia, and Troas,
and all Pharnabazus his government; the last, because it is the place of my
birth; the other, because I have served there under Clearchus and Dorcyllidas.
Then Thorax the Baotian (who ever contended with Xenophon about the Coronels
place) stood up presently, and said: That if they were disposed to go out of
Pontu^, they might (...) in Chero^esus, a fair and rich country; in which he
that would, Thorax the Bo^otian.
might stay and inhabit, he that was otherwise minded might return home. But
it was ridiculous, seeing there was land enough and plentiful to be had in
Greece, to seek to nestle and plant themselves amongst the Barbarians. And in
the mean time, while you come there, I, quoth he, as Timasion has done, do
promise you pay. Thus he spoke, not being ignorant, what had passed betwixt
Timasion and the Heracleots and Sinop^ans concerning taking ship, and sailing
out of the Country. All this while Xenophon held his peace. Then two Achaeans,
Philesius and Lyc^ standing up, said: It was not to be suffered, that Xenophon
had both privately persuaded the army to stay there, (...).
and without their knowledge asked counsel of the gods about their stay, and
now, when the matter came in public question, was mute, and would say nothing.
Hereupon Xenophon was enforced to stand up, and speak thus; Xenophons speech.
I for my part (O Soldiers) as you see, ask counsel of the gods as often, as
I can, both concerning you, and concerning my self, that I may speak, advise,
and do that, which may be most for your and mine own honor and profit. And
now I have sacrificed about this very business, to know, whether it would
prove better for me to speak to you, and to enter into it, or altogether to
forbear, and not meddle withal. Silanus the soothsayer answered me, that the
inwards, which is the matter of most importance, were fair (for he knew, that
by reason of my continual vsance to be at sacrifice, I my self was not
unskillful therein:) But he added, that a deceit and ambush against me, might
well be discovered in the sacrifice: for he knew very well his own resolution
to accuse me to you. And he gave out in the Camp, that I advised with my
self to effect these things without your consent. For my part, if I saw you in
want, the scope of my thoughts should be, to bring to pass, that after you had
taken one City or other, he that was disposed might presently sail away, he
that was otherwise minded might remain here, till he had provided some matter
of profit for his friends. But now since the Heracleots and Sinopaeans will
both send you shipping, and there are, that have promised you pay after the new
Moon, I hold it a thing of no small moment, that you have means to bring you
in safety to the place you desire, and withal to receive pay for your journey.
And not only I my self desist from my former opinion, but also tell them, who
come to me otherwise-minded, it will be better, if they also change theirs. For
being many together, as now we are, you will be both honored and esteemed of
all, and besides want no furniture of things needful; because in your strength
will be included power also of possessing the riches of him, that is weaker
than your selves. But if you divide your selves, you will neither be able to
make provision of victual, nor yet depart hence in the safety you desire. So
that I am of your opinion to continue our journey toward Greece. And in case
any man remain behind, or forsake the Army before it be wholly in safety, I
hold him worthy to be punished as an offender. Whosoever is of this opinion,
let him lift up his hand. All held up their hands. Silanus hereupon cried out,
and went about to persuade, that every man of right ought to have liberty to
depart at his pleasure. But the Soldiers would not hear him, nay they
threatened, if he were taken shifting away, he should pay for it soundly.
Afterward, when the Heracleots understood that the Army was resolved to sail
away, and that Xenophon had agreed thereto, they sent shipping, but the money
that they promised to Timasion and Thorax for pay, they sent not. From that
time forward, they who promised this money, were much perplexed, and began to
stand in fear of the Army. And taking to them the other Coronels, in the
number of whom were all, but Neo the Asinite, Cherisophus his Lieutenant (for
Cherisophus was absent) and communicating with them, what they had negotiated,
they came to Xenophon, and told him they repented of their former opinion, and
now they thought it best for the Army to sail to Phasis, and to take into
their hands the Phasian territory. The son of Aeetas reigned over the
Phasians at that time. Xenophon answered, he would propound no such thing to
the Army: you, if you please, may call an assembly, and make the motion your
selves. Timasion the Dardanian delivered then his opinion, which was not to
call an assembly of the Army, but every Coronell to deal with his Captains,
and to seek to persuade them severally to be of that opinion. So they parted,
and labored to put this resolution in practice. In the mean time it came to
the Soldiers ears, and Neo gave out, that Xenophon having drawn the other
Coronels to his party, plotted how to deceive the Army, and bring them back
again to Phasis. The Soldiers took it in very ill part, and gathered
together, and stood in rounds, and it was to be feared, they would do as they
did before to the messengers of the Cholcans, and to them that had the
ouerseeing of the provision of the Market, of whom they stoned all, that
escaped not to the Sea. When Xenophon perceived it, he thought it fit to warn
a public meeting with all speed, and not to suffer them to come together of
themselves; and he commanded the Crier to summon the assembly. No sooner heard
they the Crier, but they came together with all speed. Here Xenophon accused
not the Coronels in that they came unto him, but spoke in this manner: I hear
(O Soldiers) that there is a man who accuses me, and gives out, that I seek
to deceive you, and bring you back again to Phasis. Hear me therefore for
Gods sake; and if I shall seem to wrong you, my self will hold my self
unworthy to depart hence, before I suffer punishment for my deserts. But if you
find them, that slander me, to be in the wrong, use them I pray you, as you
shall think they deserve. You know, I make no question, in what quarter of
heaven the Sun arises, and where he sets, and that in case a man were to
go into Greece, he is to journey Westward; if back again to the Barbarians,
toward the East. Can any man then deceive you, as though the Sun should arise
and set in a contrary quarter of heaven? Besides, we see that the North wind
carries us out of Pontus into Greece, the South inward toward Phasis. And it is
a common speech amongst you: The North wind blows, we have now a fair
passage into Greece. If then a man sought to deceive you, he were to put you a
board, when the wind blows South. Yea but I mean to ship you, when it is
calm. Well then, shall not I sail in one ship, you in a hundred at least? How
can I then either compel you against your will, or lead you on by deceiving
you? But say you were beguiled and bewitched by me, and so brought to Phasis.
We shall then land there, and you will easily perceive, that you are not in
Greece, and I shall be but one man, that deceived you, you near 10000 that are
deceived, and all in Arms. How then can any one man cast himself into more
certain danger, then by such counsel about himself and about you? But these
are the speeches of ^oolish men, and of such as envy me, because I am honored
by you. And yet they envy me without cause. For which of them do I hinder
either to speak, if he can, that which is for your good, or to fight for you,
if he be disposed, or to watch and be careful for your safety? Do I oppose
against any man in the election of Commanders? Nay, I give way to all; on Gods
name command he that will; only let him do that which shall tend to your good.
I have spoken enough concerning these things. If any of you think, that either
himself or other are deceived by these words of mine, let him come forth, and
show wherein. Now because you have heard enough hereof, depart not hence, I
pray, till you be partakers of a matter, which I see is begun in the Army
already, and i^ it creep further, and shall be found such, as is reported, it
will be time for us to take advice concerning our selves, that we seem not the
vilest and most execrable creatures that ever were, both toward the gods, and
toward men, and toward our confederates, and toward our enemies, and at last
grow into an universal contempt of all men. The Soldiers hearing this,
wondered what it might be, and bid him tell it out plainly. Then he began
again: You remember that in the Barbarian mountains there were certain
Villages allied in friendship with the Cerasuntians, from which mountains there
were that descended, and sold us beasts for sacrifice, and such other things as
they had. I think some of you also went to the nearest of those Villages to
buy necessaries, and afterward returned to the Camp. Clearatur^ a Captain of
ours, understanding that one of the Villages was small, and unguarded, because
it was reputed to be comprehended within our League, acquainting none of us
with his p^^pose, went against it in the night, thinking to make boot of it.
His resolution was, in case he surprised the Village, no more to retu^^e to the
Army, but entering the ship, in which his companions ran along the shore, and
putting into it, what he had rifled, to sail away and get him out of Pontus.
His companions and he, as I now understand, were resolved upon this point.
Assembling therefore such, as he had brought to his lure, he led them against
the Village. The day prevented his march, and the inhabitants flocking
together, and sending missiue weapons, and striking and wounding from the
higher ground, slew Clearatus, and many other. Some of the Soldiers got to
Cerasunt. These things fell out the same day we marched hither on foot. Some of
those, that came in the ship, were yet at Cerasunt, not joined with their
companions. After this, as the Cerasuntines report, there came from the same
Village three ancient men, which desired to have access to us in general.
When they found us not there, they told the Cerasuntines, they wondered much
what we meant, to come in that manner against them. The Cerasuntines answered,
it was not the fact of the whole Army. They were glad thereof, and said they
would come to us by ship, and inform us how things were carried, and give
liberty to such as would, to bury the dead. Some of the Grecians, that saved
themselves by flight, were yet at Cerasunt, and perceiving whither the
Barbarians intended to go, were so bold, as not only to cast stones at them
themselves, but incited other to do the like. So the men died, being three in
number, Ambassadors stoned to death. After this fact the Cerasuntines came unto
us, and certified us of all that had happened; and we the Coronels hearing it,
were much grieved, and advised with the Cerasuntines, how the dead bodies of
the Grecians might be buried; and sitting without the place of Arms, we heard
upon the sudden a great uproar and cry, Strike, strike, throw, throw; and by
and by we might see a great number running together, some having stones in
their hands, other some stooping to take up stones. The Cerasuntines, which saw
what was done in their City, for fear fled to their ships. There were also
amongst us, which were not without fear. I went out and asked, what the matter
meant. Some knew nothing, and yet had stones in their hands. At last I hit upon
one that knew, who told me that the Commissaries for victual had infinitely
abused the Army. In this mean time one had spied Zelarchus, a Commissarie,
going toward the Sea, and presently cast out a great cry. The other as soon as
they heard it, ran against him, as if a wild Boar, or Heart had presented
himself. The Cerasuntines, when they saw them run, imagining they were bent
against them, took th^mselues to their heels and tumbled into the Sea. Many
Grecians did the like, and as many as could not swim, were drowned. Now what
think you of these men? None of them committed any offense, but feared that a
madness had fallen upon us, as it uses upon dogs. If therefore these things
shall be so carried, see in what case our Army will be. First, the whole body
will not be Masters to make war or peace with whom they think meet, but
every private man that will, may lead an Army whither and against whom he
list. Then in case Ambassadors come to us for peace, or for ought else, they
that will, may by killing them, debar you from hearing what message they
bring. Besides, what respect can your Commanders have amongst you, when
whosoever chooses himself Coronell, and list to say, Throw* throw, shall be
able to put to death, whom he pleases, Commanders or private men, and that
uncondemned, especially having followers to execute his commands, as it now
came to pass? Further consider, I pray, what these Coronels of their own
choice have done for you. Zelarchus the Commissarie, if he have wronged you, is
by shipping escaped without punishment; if he have not wronged you, he is fled
from the Army fearing he should suffer death injuriously, and without sentence
or judgment. And the stoners of the Ambassadors what have they done? Forsooth
they have brought to pass, that you alone of all Grecians can have no safe
being at Cerasunt, unless you come thither by force. As for the dead bodies,
which heretofore were offered to burial by those that slew them, now we cannot
safely bury them with a Herald. For who will go as a Herald, (...).
that has himself been murderer of Ambassadors? Yet have we desired the
Cerasuntines to have a care of their burial. You your selves be Judges,
whether these things be sufferable or no, lest in the midst of these
villainies every man be driven to provide a guard for his own security, and
seek to seat his tent in high and safe places. But if you conceive that such
facts, are the facts of wild beasts, and not of men, take into your
consideration, how they may be remedied. Otherwise how shall we with a good
heart sacrifice to the gods, when we commit such impieties? or fight with our
enemies, when we kill our selves? or what City, as friend, will receive us,
when they see such lewdness in our conversation? or who dares furnish us with
provision, when we are found in such horrible crimes? If we hope for praise,
who will praise us, that carry our selves in this manner? This I am assured of,
if any other should run into the like behavior, you your selves would be the
first, that should condemn them as wicked and detestable men. After this all
standing up said with one consent, that the authors of these facts were to be
punished, and that order was to be taken to prevent the like offenses in future
time, and whosoever committed them, was to be adjudged to death; and that the
Coronels should appoint Judges, who should have authority to call in question
all offenses since the death of Cyrus. The Captains were chosen to be Judges.
(...).
The Army also was hallowed by the admonition of Xenophon, and by the advice
of the Soothsayers. It was further decreed, that the Coronels might be called
to account for the time past; and being called to account, Philesius and
Xanticles were condemned, for purloyning twenty pound of the money arising out
o^ the custom of sh^ps: Sophenetus, because being chosen to that office, he
refused to execute it, was condemned in ten pound: Some charged Xenophon that
he had beaten them, and brought as it were an action of injury against him.
Xenophon standing up bid the first accuser tell, where he was beaten. He
answered, there, where we almost died for cold, and where there was abundance
of Snow. Xenophon said, if the Winter were such, as you affirm, and victuals
^ailed and wine was so scant, that we could not refresh our selves so much as
with the smell thereof, and many fainted under their travel, and the enemy
was at our heels, if in such a season I iniuried you, I confess, I was more
wanton then an Ass, who, as they say, by reason of their wantonness are never
weary. Yet, I pray tell me, upon what occasion were you beaten? whether did I
ask you any thing, and because you gave it not, did I beat you, or required I
again any thing of mine own, that you had? or fought with you about love
matters? or did I abuse you, when I was in Wine? None of all these, quoth he.
Xenophon asked again whether he were one of the Armed. No, quoth he. Are you
one of the Peltasts? Neither, quoth he, but being a freeman borne, I drove a
Mule by the appointment of my Camerades. Xenophon here remembered him and said:
Are you he, that carried the sick man? The same, quoth he, for you forced me to
do it, and to cast away the baggage of my Camerades. This casting away, quoth
Xenophon, was in this manner. I gave it to other to carry, and after to restore
it to me; and receiving it safe, as soon as you showed me the sick man, I
restored it to you again. Hear, I pray, how the matter stood, for it is worth
the hearing. There was a Soldier left behind, being not able to continue his
march: I knowing the man to be of our company, compelled you to carry him,
lest he should perish. For, as I remember, the enemy followed us close; He
confessed all this to be true. Therefore when I sent you before, coming up
with the Rear, did I not find you digging of a pit, as though you meant to
bury the man? and did not I commend you therefore? But when the Soldier bowed
his leg in all our presences, did not all cry out, He lives? and when you
spoke at your pleasure, and flatly denied to carry him, I beat you, I confess;
for it appeared, you knew, he was not dead. What then, quoth he, did he not
die* after I showed him to you? For we must all die, quoth Xenophon, must we
therefore be thrown into a hole alive? Here the whole assembly cried, that the
man was not beaten enough. Then he desired some other to stand up and declare
the cause, why he was beaten. When no man arose, Xenophon spoke thus: I
confess (o Soldiers) I struck many for forsaking their Ranks. It may suffice
them, that they owe their safety to you, who always marched, and when need
was, fought in order. They forsooth would be in better case than you, and
leaving their place run before to harrie and spoil at their pleasure. If all
had done the like, we had all been lost and cast away long ere this. I must
confess, I once beat one and forced him to march, who for sloth would not
stand up, but would needs betray himself to the enemy. For on a time after I
my self had in the extremity of Winter a good while set me down on the
ground* staying for some, that had not trussed up their baggage, I found my
self scarce able to rise, scarce able to stretch out my legs. Taking therefore
herein experience of my self, I no sooner perceived other men to squat down,
and give themselves to sloth, but I forced them to arise, and to march on. For
I p^^ceiued, that motion and manly stirring engend^ed war^^h, and nimblenesse
in the ioints, where sitting still on the other side, and quietness congealed
the blood, and endangered the toes to rot off, which many of you know to be
true by experience in your selves. Another that res^^d on the ground and
loitered behind, and both hindered you of the V^^^, and us of the Rear to
march on, I struck with my fist, l^^t the ene^^e should have strooken him with
his Spear. Now they are in sa^et^e they may call me to answer for any thing,
wherein I have wronged them. But if they had fallen into the enemies hands,
what remedy could they have had of their sufferings, were they never so
grievous? My speech is simple. For if I have punished any for his own good, I
desire to undergo the same sentence, that Fathers should for their Children,
Masters for their Scholars. Physicians also both burn, and cut, for the
health of their Patients. But if you conceive, that all these things proceeded
from me out of a wanton humor, consider, I pray, that, by the help of the
gods, I dare do more now than at that time, and that I drink more Wine now,
than I did then. For I see, you are now in fair weather; but when there is a
storm, and the Sea goes high, mark you not that the Master of the Ship in
the Prowe, the steeres-man in the Poupe are angry with the passengers for the
lest stirring in the world? For small errors at that time overthrow all. But
your selves also deemed, that in beating these men, I swarued not from right.
For you stood not with Beans, but with weapons in your hands, Beans they used
for voices to absolve or condemn in many Cities.
and it was in you to have succored them, if you had thought good. But you
neither succored, nor with me punished any man for forsaking his Rank, and by
suffering them to be disobedient, you gave the greater power to their
misdemeanors. For I think, if you shall be pleased to make a true estimate,
you shall find the same men to have been then the most disorderly, and now the
most deboshed. Boiscus the Baeotian wrestler striued then, all he could, under
pretense of sickness, not to carry his Target: Now, as I understand, he has
robbed many of the Cotyorites. Therefore, if you be wise, you will deal with
him after another manner, than they do with Dogs. Dogs, that are cursed,
men use to tie up in the day, and let loose in the night: Him it were not
amiss to let loose in the day, and to shut up in the night. But, that which I
most wonder at, is, that you remember and pass not over with silence any thing
be it never so small, wherein I seem to have given you offense. If I have
succored any man against cold, or saved him from the enemy, or relieved him
in sickness, or in want, no man once remembers it. And if I have commended
any man for a thing well done, or according to my ability honored him for his
valor, neither do you remember that. And yet it is honest and just, and holy,
and pleasant, that remembrance be had rather of that which is good, than of the
bad. After this the assembly broke up, and repeated in mind, what had passed,
and all things came to a fair end.

Finis Libri Quinti.
THE SIXTH BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF XENOPHON, TOUCHING THE Ascent of CYRUS the
younger, out of Asia the Less, into the Higher COVNTREYS.
FRom henceforth during their abode there, some eat and lived of things, that
were brought to the Market, other of the spoil they purchased out of
Paphlagonia. The Paphlagonians likewise sought tricks and advantages against
the straglers, and by night attempted to entrappe and molest them, who lodged
any distance from the Camp. By reason whereof they grew into greater enmity
one against another. But Corylas, who at that time had the rule of Paphlagonia
sent to the Grecians Ambassadors, who were furnished with fair Horse and brave
apparel. They delivered, that Corylas neither desired to wrong the Grecians,
nor yet to be wronged by them. The Coronels answered, they would propound the
matter to the assembly, but they feasted them, and invited such as they thought
fit to bear them company; and sacrificing some of the Oxen taken in prey, and
other beasts, they made them a plentiful banquet sitting upon Carpets, and
drinking out of horne-Cups, which they found in the Country. After the healths
were drunk and the Paean sung, the Thracians first arose and danced in Arms
to the Flute, and capred aloft and nimbly, The Thracian dance.
and used Swords. At the last one struck another in such sort, that one of
them fell, and every man conceived, that he was deadly wounded. But the stroke
was artificially given, at which notwithstanding the Paphlagonians cried out,
as men are wont to do in fear. After he that struck the other taking the
spoil of his Arms, departed singing a Thracian Song, which they call Sitalca.
Other Thracians taking the body of him, that fell, carried it out, as if he had
been dead, whereas indeed he had no manner of harm. The Ae^ian and M^^netian
dance. (...).
Next after them the Aenians and Magnetians arose and danced the dance,
commonly called the Seed-dance, in their arms. The manner of the dance is
this: One of them laying by his arms sows the land, and drives on his Oxen
in the plow, looking often back, as though he were afraid. The thief
approaches. The other as soon as he sees him, snatcheth up his arms, and
fights with him before the Plow. All this is performed in measure to the
Flute. At the last the thief binds the Plowman, and drives away the Oxen;
and sometime the Plowman binds the thief and fastneth him to the Oxen, his
hands tied behind him, The Mysian dance.
and so drives away. After this a Mysian came in, bearing in each hand a
Target, and sometimes he danced, making semblance, as if he opposed against
two, sometime he used the Targets, as it were against one man, sometimes he
whirled about in a circle, and tumbled over his head, holding the Targets still
in his hands: So that it was a pleasant sight to behold him. Lastly, he danced
the Persian dance, clapping his Targets together one against another; The
Persian dance.
and kneeled down, and straightwayes stood up again; and all this he did by
measure to the sound of the Flute. The Mantinaean dance.
Then the Mantinaeans, and some other Arcadians stood up armed as seemingly, as
they could, and moved in measure, the Flute sounding a point of war, and sung
the Paean, and danced, as the manner is in supplications to the gods. The
Paphlagonians seeing this, wondered that all dances were performed in arms: The
Mysian, to increase their wonder, after he had gotten the assent of an
Arcadian, that had a dancing woman, in his possession, brought her in, arming
her as gorgeously, as he might, with a light Target in her hand. She danced the
dance called Pyrrhice with great agilitie and nimblenesse. Hereupon there arose
a great clapping of hands, The Pyrrhice. It was a Lacedemonian dance in arms,
invented by one Pyrrhicus a Lacedemonian. Athenaeus 630. E.
and the Paphlagonians asked whether women also were their companions in fight.
To whom answer was made, that the women were they, who beat the King of Persia
out of the Grecian Camp. This was the end of that nights sport. The next day
they brought the Ambassadors to the Army: and the Soldiers decreed, that the
Paphlagonians should do them no wrong, nor they any to the Paphlagonians: So
the Ambassadors departed. The Grecians, when they imagined they had sufficient
store of shipping gathered together, The Grecians take ship.
went aboard, and sailing forward that day and night with a fair gale, they
left Paphlagonia on their left hand, and the next day they came as far as
Sinope, and cast anchor before Harmene, a Port of the Sinopaeans. Sinope.
The Sinopaeans inhabit a part of Paphlagania, and are a Colonie of Milesians.
They sent hospital gifts to the Grecians, 3000 Medimnes of meal, A M^dimne is
about a bushel. ^mph^ra, a me^sur^ of 30 gallons, or thereabouts.
of wine 1500 Amphores. Thither came Cherisophus with some galleys, which he
had provided. The Soldiers expected him, and were in hope, that when he came,
he would bring them some good ^idings. He brought them only news, that
Anaxibius the Admiral, and the rest commended them much, and that Anaxibius
promised they should have ready pay, if they would come out of Pontus. The army
remained at Harmene five days. The nearer they seemed to come to Greece, the
more careful they were to get, and to furnish themselves with something before
they came home. They were of opinion therefore, that if they did choose one
General, One General*
that that one should have a more uniform, and a more absolute command over
the Army, both by night and by day, than if the command were in many hands. And
if any thing were to be kept secret, it might be better concealed; if to be
prevented, it should receive the less hindrance. For there needed no
conference, and the resolution of one might quickly be put in execution,
whereas heretofore all things passed by plurality of voices of the Coronels.
Being in this conceit, they turned to Xenophon, The affection of the Army to
Xenophon.
and the Captains coming to him, told what the affection of the Army was, and
every of them, out of their love, persuaded him to take upon him the command.
Xenophon himself was desirous of the place, thinking that both his honor
might hereby grow greater, and his name more esteemed both with his friends,
and City; and it might fall out that he might be occasion of some good to the
Army. These thoughts lifted him up to desire the Generall-ship. But when he
weighed in his mind, that no man fore-knew the event of things to come, and
that hereby he might hazard his former reputation, he began to be in doubt; and
being not able to resolve, it seemed best to counsel with the gods. He called
therefore to him two Priests, and sacrificed to Jupiter, the King of gods,
Jupiter.
who by the Oracle of Delphos was appointed his Counselor in matters to come;
and he believed that the dream, which he saw, when he first was chosen
Coronell of the Army, proceeded from Jupiter. And he remembered, that when he
went out of Ephesus to follow Cyrus, (...). Bird-gazers.
an Eagle croaked at his right hand sitting on the ground, which the
sooth-sayer, that accompanied him at that time, said to be a great augury
portending more, than the estate of a private man, and that it was illustrious,
but yet notwithstanding laborious. For birds use not to molest the Eagle by
falling upon her, save only when she sits on the ground. Further, that no
great profit was signified by the token; because the Eagle takes her prey
rather, when she is on wing. The god therefore, when he sacrificed, foretold
apparently, that he was neither to seek after the Generals place, nor yet to
accept of it, if it were offered him. This was the issue of that business. Now
the Army being assembled, it was the opinion of all, that one General was to
be chosen, and their choice inclined to Xenophon; who when he saw, if they went
to the election, their resolution would be to give him the place, he stood up,
and spoke thus: Jupiters answer. Xenophon refuses to be General.
I (o Soldiers) if I be a man, have cause to be glad of this honor, which you
offer unto me, and to give you thanks, and to pray to God, that any occasion
may be ministered, whereby I may be able to do you service. But to choose me
your General, a Lacedemonian being present, seems neither for your, nor yet
for mine own avail; in as much as, if hereafter you shall happen to stand in
need of them, you will be disappointed of your hopes that way. Besides, I
think it not safe for my self to enter into that course; for I do see, that
they never gave over the war against my Country, until they made the whole
City confess, that the Lacedaemonians were also their Commanders; after which
confession, they laid down their Arms, and proceeded no further in besieging
the City. If then these things being so, I shall seem, as much as in me
lies, to weaken their authority, I cannot be ignorant, how quickly I shall be
brought to acknowledge mine error. And whereas you are of opinion, that less
sedition and disobedience will grow out of the command of one, than of many,
understand from me, that whomsoever you choose you shall not find me
discontent or disobedient. For I hold it for a general maxim in war, that
whosoever he be, which behaueth himself seditiously against his Commander,
behaueth himself seditiously against his own safety. But in case you choose
me, I shall not marvel, if a discontent arise in some minds both against you,
and against my self. After Xenophon had ended his speech, many more arose, and
said, that he ought not to refuse the Generals place; And Agasias the
Stymphalian replied, that it was a thing ridiculous, that the Lacedaemonians
should not as well be angry, if at a Feast another than a Lacedemonian were by
the Guests chosen for their Governor. For if things run in this course, quoth
he, it shall be unlawful for us to be Captains, because we are Arcadians.
Here a murmur arose through the whole assembly approving the speech of Agasias.
Xenophon perceiving, that more was to be said, added thus much: That you may (o
Soldiers) understand the depth of this business, I swear unto you by all the
gods and goddesses, that after I was informed of your minds and inclination, I
by sacrifice enquired, whether it would be behouefull for you to bestow upon
me, and me to accept this command, or otherwise; and the gods so answered in
the sacrifice, that it might easily appear even to a man of small skill, that
I was not to take the place upon me. So they chose Cherisophus. Cherisophus
being chosen proceeded into the midst and spoke thus: You know (o Soldiers)
that, albeit you had chosen another, you should have found no opposition in me.
But it falls out well for Xenophon, that he is not chosen. For Dexippus
accused him not long since to Anaxibius, all he could, my self being present
and stopping his mouth. He said, he thought, that Xenophon had rather be joined
in command with Timasion, who was a Dardanian, and one of Clearchus his
Soldiers, than with him, who was a Lacedemonian. But since you have made
choice of me, quoth he, I also will endeavor to do you all the service I can.
And you against the morning every man so order his affairs, that he may be
ready to sail away, if the wind be fair. Our journey shall be to Heraclea;
and being there we will advise, what is further to be done. The next day they
set sail with a fair wind, and ran along the Coast by the space of two days
following. In sailing they came by Iasons shore, where the Ship Argo is said to
have anchored, and by the mouths of these Rivers; Peninsula that is joined to
the continent with a neck of Land only.
First of Therm^don, then of Halys, lastly of Parthenius, by which after they
had passed, they arrived at Heraclea a Grecian City, and a Colonie of the
Megaraeans, situate in the territory of the Maryande^s, and came to anchor
near the Acherousian Cherronesus. There Hercules is reported to have descended
to the dog Cerberus, of which descent the marks are yet shown, the depth of
the place being more than two Furlongs. A Medimne is about one of our bushels.
Amphora was a vessel that contained thirty gallons and a half. 200. Foot.
Hither the Heracleans sent hospital gifts to the Grecians, to wit, 3000.
Medimnes of barley meal, 2000. Amphors of wine, 20 oxen, and an hundred
sheep. The river called Lycus, having two Plethers in breadth, conueieth his
stream through this Territory. Here the Soldiers assembled together,
consulting about the remainder of their journey, and whether it were better to
proceed out of Pontus by land or by sea; and Lycon the Achaian stood up and
said: I wonder (o Soldiers) at the Coronels, that they go not about to make
provision of victual for the Army. For the hospital gifts will not serve us
above three days, neither is there any place, whither we may go out, and
furnish our selves. Therefore it seems good to me, that you demand no less,
then 3000. Cyzicens of the Heracleans. Another said, that a months pay (no
less then 10000. Cyzicens) was to be demanded, A Cyzicen was in value about
18. s.
and that while we sat in counsel to know their answer, Ambassadors were
forthwith to be dispatched to the City, and thereupon further advice to be
taken. Hereupon they first propounded Cherisophus for an Ambassador, because
he was their General; some also named Xenophon. They both opposed strongly,
and were of opinion, that no extortion was to be used to force any thing from a
Grecian City, being also their friend. Therefore when they seemed unwilling,
the Army sent Lycon the Achaean, Callimachus the Parrhasian, and Agasias the
Stymphaliaen, who going to the City delivered the decree of the Army; and
Lycon is reported to have used threatening words, if things were not performed
according to the desire of the Army. The Heracleans hearing the propositions,
answered, they would consider; and presently they gathered their goods out of
the fields, and appointed a market within the City, and the gates were shut,
and arms seen upon the walls. The authors of these troubles accused the
Coronels, as though they were cause of the ill success. Their words were, that
it was a shame, that one Athenian should have command over the Peloponesians
and Lacedaemonians, Sedition of the Arcadians and Achaeans.
especially such a one, as had brought no forces to the Army. That they had the
pains, and other the profit; and even till this present were the workers of
the common safety. For the Arcadians and Achaeans were those that bore the
burden, Their number was 4500.
the rest of the Army was nothing (and in truth the Arcadians and Achaeans were
more than half the Army:) If they were wise therefore, standing close to
themselves, and choosing Commanders out of their own people, they should go
forward in the journey apart, and endeavor to enrich themselves by some means
or other. The Army divided. (...).

Every one had 450 under his command.


This was decreed; and those Arcadians and Achaeans, that were under the
command of Cherisophus, forsaking him and Xenophon, associated themselves to
the rest, and they all chose ten Coronels out of their own body, and decreed,
that whatsoever the plurality of voices of these ten should resolve upon, it
should stand good and effectual, and be put in execution. The Generall-ship
therefore of Cherisophus was dissolved within six or seven days, after he was
chosen. Xenophon notwithstanding would have proceeded in the journey with them,
thinking it more safe so to do, than to travel every man by himself alone:
But Neon understanding by Cherisophus, that Cleander, the Governor of
Bizantium, was determined with his Galleys to make over to the Haven of Calpe,
persuaded him to keep his own forces by him, and to journey apart; and
further, counseled him to conceal it from the rest, to the end, that they and
their Soldiers alone might be transported in the Galleys; and Cherisophus
partly discontented with that, which had passed, and partly out of a hatred
against the Army, gave him liberty to do, as he thought best. From that time
forward Xenophon sought to sail away, Xenophons zeal without knowledge.
and to depart from the Army. But sacrificing to Hercules the Guide, and asking
of him counsel, whether it should be better for him to follow the war with
the remnant of Soldiers under his command, or to depart, the god signified by
the sacrifice, that he should continue his command, and not depart. So the Army
was divided into three parts. The Arcadians and Achaeans being more than 4500.
all heavy armed; Cherisophus having 1300. armed, and 700. Peltasts, who were
the Thracians, that followed Clearchus: Xenophon 1700. armed, and 300.
Peltasts, and he alone had horse amounting to the number of forty. The
Arcadians getting shipping of the Heracleans, sailed away first, of purpose,
that falling suddenly upon the Bithinians, they might prevent the rest, and
make the greatest prey. They landed at the Haven Calpe, The Haven Calpe.
which lies in a manner in the midst of Thrace. Cherisophus marched on foot
through the Country, beginning at Heraclea, and as soon as he entered into
Thrace, he led along by the Seacoast, for he was now sick. Xenophon taking
shipping, landed in the confines of Thrace, and of the Heraclean Country, and
marched through the midst of the Land. Thus therefore have we declared, in
what manner the command of Cherisophus was wholly dissolved, and the army of the
Grecians distracted into parcells. The several marches of the army being
seue^ed.

Of the Arcadians.


The course, that every one held was this. The Arcadians after they had landed
by night at the Haven of Calpe, advanced forthwith to the next villages situate
about fifty Furlongs from the Sea: When daylight appeared, every Coronell led
his Division or Regiment to a village. If the village seemed any thing great,
the Coronels allotted two Divisions to it. They agreed also upon a hill, to
which they were all to retire, and because they fell upon the Country suddenly,
they took many prisoners, and brought in many sheep. The Thracians, that
escaped, assembled together, and many being taken prisoners shifted out of the
Grecians hands, because they were Peltasts, the Grecians armed; and being now
gathered together in good number, they first charged the Division of Smicretes,
(...).
one of the Arcadian Coronels, as he was retiring to the place appointed, being
heavy laden with prey. The Grecians both marched, and fought at the same time,
till they came to a hollow bank't brook, where in their passage they were put
to flight by the Barbarians, Smicretes, and his whole band were slain. Another
regiment of one of the ten Coronels, whose name was Hegesa^der, had but 8. only
left alive by the Barbarians, which 8. were saved, with Hegesander himself.
The rest of the Captains came to the hill, some with much ado, some easily. The
Thracians encouraged with this good hand sell, made outcries one to another,
and flocked together in multitudes by night, and as soon as it was day, they
ordered many horse and Pel^asts in a circle about the hill, where the Grecians
encamped; and still more and more came running together, and without danger to
themselves, charged the Grecian armed (for the Grecians had neither Archer, nor
Darter, The Thra^ians besiege the A^cadians.
nor Horse) but the Thracians running forth, and spurring their horse close up
to the Grecians, cast darts at them, and being charged retired and easily saved
themselves by flight, and some of them gave on in one place, some in another,
so that many of the Grecians were wounded, no one of the enemies hurt. Being
thus not able to move out of the place, where they stood, they were also at
last debarred from water by the Thracians, and reduced to that extremity, that
they were feign to sue for composition. In the treaty all other things were
easily agreed upon, but the Thracians would give no pledges, as the Grecians
required, which was the stay of further proceeding. In this plight were the
affairs of the Arcadians. Cherisophus marching forward along the Sea coast
without danger, Of Cherisophus.
was by this time come to the Haven of Calpe. Of Xenophon.
But Xenophon held on through the midst of the Country, and as he marched his
Hors-men scouting before chanced upon Ambassadors going, it was not known
whither; who being brought to Xenophon, he asked them, whether they could tell
him tidings of any Grecian Army els-where. They related unto him all that had
happened, and that at this instant they were assaulted, X^nophon has news of
the dist^esse of the Arcadians.
and hardly laid unto upon the hill, and that all the Thracians of the country
had encompassed them round. The Ambassadors were put in safe custody, to the
end to use them for Guides, when need required. Afterward setting out 10
Scouts, he called the Soldiers together, and thus spoke unto them: The
Arcadians (O Soldiers) are some of them slain, His counsel for their relief.
the rest being retired to a hill, besieged and assaulted. For my part, I am of
opinion, if they perish, we can find no safety, the enemy being so many, and
so much encouraged with the happiness of this success. It is therefore best
to give them aid with all speed, that if they be alive, we may join with them
in fight against the enemy, and not be left to run the danger alone. And for
the present, let us march on till supper time, and then set down with our
Camp. And while we march let Timasion with the horse scout before, casting an
eye toward us always, and giving advertisement of all occurrence, that we be
ignorant of nothing that may concern us. He sent out likewise some of the best
footmen of his light-armed toward the flanks of the Army, and the tops of the
hills, willing them to give intelligence of what they saw. He commanded also to
set fire upon all, that was apt to take fire. For, quoth he, we cannot escape
any way, the distance back again to Heraclea being great, and the march
forward to Chrysopolis great, and the enemy near at hand. The way is shortest
to the Haven of Calpe, whither we imagine that Cherisophus is come, at least if
he be in safety. And yet are we not to hope for any shipping to carry us from
thence, and resting there we shall not find so much as a days provision. Now
in case those, that are besieged were lost, it would be more dangerous for us
to hazard with Cherisophus his Soldiers alone. But if they be succored, and
freed from this danger, and all of us assembled together, we shall in common
dispute our safety the better. You are therefore to march on with resolution,
either now honorably to die, or else to perform a most noble act, and worthy
of eternal memory, namely, to save so great a number of Grecians, that are in
ieopardy to be cast away. And it may be, that God has so disposed of this
business, to humble these high-minded men, wise in their own conceits, and to
honor us, who in all our actions take our beginnings from the gods. You are
then to follow your Leaders, and to give heed to that which is commanded you.
Having said thus much he led on. The horsemen dispersing themselves as much as
was convenient, Furning the enemies country to make show of a great Army.
put all in a flame, as they went forward: and the Pel^asts having gained the
tops of the Hills, burnt all that would take fire, as did the Army also, where
they found any thing left unburned. So the whole country seemed to be on a
light fire, and the Army to be great. When it was time, they ascended up to a
hill, and quartered there. From thence they might discern the enemies fires
(for they were not distant above 40 furlongs) and themselves kindled as many
fires as they could. Five mile.
When they had supped, the word was given to quench and put out all the fires,
and having placed their guards, they gave themselves to sleep. By break of
day they made their prayers to the gods, and ordering their troops for fight,
marched forward with all speed. Timasion and the horsemen having with them the
Guides, and spurring on, were, before they were aware, upon the hill, where the
Grecians were besieged, but neither saw friends nor enemies forces (whereof
they advertised Xenophon and the Army) only they found a few old women, and
men, and some sheep and oxen left behind. And first, that which happened,
seemed a marvel: Afterward they understood from them that were left, that the
Thracians departed away in the evening, the Grecians as soon as it was day;
The siege raised.
but whither they were gone, no man knew. Xenophon upon these tidings dined,
and trussing up his baggage marched away with intent in all haste possible to
join with those that were at the Haven of Calpe. In their march they might
perceive the tract of footing of the Arcadia^s and Achaeans in the way which
led to Calpe, Xenophon ouertaketh the Arcadians.
and meeting together they gladly saw one another, and saluted as brethren. The
Arcadians asked Xenophons soldiers, why they put out their fires. For we
thought, said they, at the first, when we saw no fires, that you marched
against the enemy by night, and the enemy, as we conceived, fearing the same,
arose with their Camp. For i^ was about that time, that they departed. But
when you came not forward, They join in marching.
and the time was now past, we imagined, that hearing our distress, you hasted
all you could to the Sea side for fear. We therefore thought it good not to
leave you, and thereupon came also hither. So this day they enca^ped upon the
Sea shore near the Haven. The place, which they call the Haven of Calpe, lies
in that Thrace, which is in Asia. There are two Thraces, one in Europ^, the
other in Asia. In European Thrace stands Constantinople, in the other was the
Haven of Calpe.

The barbarous cruelty of the Thra^tans.

A description of Calpe.


Thrace it self begins from the mouth of Pontus, and stretches to Heraclea
on the right hand as a man saileth to Pontus. The distance betwixt Byz^^tium
and Heraclea is as much, as a Galley can fetch up with oars in a very long
day. In the way there is no friend or Grecian City, but Thraci^ns or Bithynians
alone, who, if they lay hands upon any Grecian either cas^ ashore by
shipwreck, or coming thither by other occasion, are reported to use them with
all despite and villainy. The Haven of Calpe lies in the midway to them that
sail from Heraclea to Byzantium, or contrariwise from Byzantium to Her^clea.
The land bears out into the Sea; and that part, which stretches into the
Sea, is a craggy rock, o^ the height (where it is least) of 20 fathoms. The
neck of land, that joins to the Continent, 40 yards.
is at least four plethers in breadth, 400 foot.
and the space of land within the neck sufficient to give habitation to 10000
men. The Haven lies under the rock, having the shore trending to the West.
The Haven.
Within it there is a plentiful fountain of sweet water running along the
Sea, but so that the place may command it, and it brings forth both much
other timber hard by the Sea, and besides much that is fit for the building of
ships. As for the mountain that ouershadoweth the Haven, as it runs 20
furlongs into the mid-land, it is pure earth without stones, but toward the
Sea, more than 20 furlongs, Two mile and a half.
it is rough with many and all kind of great trees. The rest of the Land is
beautiful and large, and there are many Villages in it, and well inhabited.
The country brings forth barley, and wheat, and pulse-corne of all sorts,
and Bucke, and Sesamum, and figs sufficiently, and many Vines pleasant in
taste, and all other kinds of fruit, excepting only Olives. This is the nature
of the Soil. The Army encamped by the Seaside. In the Town they would not
quarter, being of opinion, they were fraudulently brought thither by some, that
had an intention to plant a Colony there. For the most part of the Soldiers
sailed out of Greece to follow this war, not for want of means to live by,
but hearing of the bounty of Cyrus, some brought to his service men that had
consumed their estates, The quality of the Grecians that followed this war.
some other run away from their fathers and mothers, and some left behind
them their children, as minding to enrich them at their return. For they
heard, that all that followed Cyrus gathered mountains of wealth. Being people
of this condition, they desired to return into Greece in safety. When the day
of assembly of the Army for this purpose was now come, Xenophon sacrificed
about the issuing of it out of the Camp, because they must needs be led out to
make provision. His purpose was also to bury their dead. The sacrifice being
favorable, the Arcadians also followed, and they buried the most part of the
dead, every man where he fell; for it was now the fifth day since they were
slain, so that there was no possibility to conueigh them from thence. And
bringing some together out of the highways, they buried them according to
their means, as decently, as they could; and for those, they found not, they
raised a great empty monument, and kindled a Funeral fire, and laid upon the
monument Crowns of flowers. Having performed these Rites, they returned to the
Camp, and after Supper gave themselves to rest. The next day the Soldiers
assembled. Captain Agasias the Stymphalian, and Captain Ieronymus the Elian,
and other the eldest of the Arcadians were the cause of this assembly. A decree
not to separate their Forces hereafter.
They made a Decree, that if any man hereafter propounded to separate and
divide the Army, he should be punished with death; and that the Army should
depart out of the Country in the manner it was wont, and that the former
Coronels should command. The death of Cherisophus.
Cherisophus was already dead by drinking a medicine in his ague, and Neon the
Asinite was substituted in his place. After this Xenophon stood up and said: It
seems (fellow Soldiers) that the rest of our journey is to be performed by
Land, in regard we have no shipping; and having likewise no provision,
necessity forces us to be ready to march. We therefore the Coronels will
offer sacrifice; As for you, you are, if ever heretofore, to prepare your
selves to fight, inasmuch as the enemy has gathered courage. So the Coronels
sacrificed taking to them Arexion the Arcadian Southsaier. For Silanus the
Ambraciote had stolen away in a Ship of Heraclea, which he hired. They
sacrificed about their departure, but the entrails of the sacrifice were not
fair. They stayed therefore that day. There were some, that durst give out,
that Xenophon intending to plant in that place, had persuaded the Southsaier to
say, that the sacrifice allowed not of their departure. Hereupon Xenophon
caused Proclamation to be made, A means to still suspicion.
that the next morning every one that list might be present at the sacrifice,
and if there were any Southsaier amongst them, he commanded him to come and
view the entrails, and so sacrificed in the presence of many. When they had
now thrice sacrificed about their departure, the entrails assented not. The
Soldiers were ill apaid herewith. For their provision which they brought with
them, failed, and there was no Market to be had. Hereupon, when they again
assembled, Xenophon spoke thus: The sacrifices, as your selves are
eie-witnesses, are not favorable to our departure, and I see you are destitute
of victual, wherefore I hold it necessary to ask counsel by sacrifice about
this matter alone. Then one of them arising, said: It is not without cause,
that the sacrifice crosses our departure. For, as I heard of one, that by
chance came by Ship hither yesterday, Cleander the Governor of Byzantium, is
about to cross over to us with Ships and Galleys. Hereupon it seemed good to
all to remain in the place. But yet they were forced by necessity to fall out
into the Country for victual and provision for the Camp, and sacrifice was
offered hereabout three times, which notwithstanding opposed their going out.
They came then to the Tent of Xenophon and told him of their wants. I may not,
quoth he, lead you out, unless the sacrifice be favorable. The next day they
sacrificed again, and because they were perplexed, and the business touched
all, well-nigh the whole Army encircled the sacrifice. And now there was no
more sacrifice left. The Coronels therefore, albeit they led not out the Army,
yet did they call an assembly; and Xenophon said: It may be the enemy is
gathered together, and we shall be driven to fight by necessity. If therefore
leaving our baggage in this place of strength, we issue out prepared for fight,
and then offer sacrifice, perhaps the sacrifice will give better allowance. The
Soldiers hearing this cried out, that there was no need of leading them out,
but willed them to renew the sacrifice with all speed. There were now no Sheep
to be had, and they were feign to buy Oxen out of the Waine to offer in
sacrifice. And Xenophon desired Cleanor the Arcadian to gather up his spirits
and be in a readiness, if the sacrifice portended any good: but this sacrifice
was also cross. Neon was Coronell of that part of the Army, which Cherisophus
commanded. He, when he saw the Soldiers discontented with their wants,
desirous to gratify them, finding an Heraclean, who affirmed that he knew
Villages at hand, from whence provision might be had, made proclamation, that
every one, that would, might go abroad for provision, Neons rashness.
and proffered himself to be their Leader. There issued therefore out of the
Camp to the number of two thousand, with Darts, Bladders, Bags, and other
Vessels. After they came into the Villages, and were dispersed in rifling, And
ill success.
the Hors-men of Pharnabazus fell upon them (for they gave aid to the
Bithynians, Pharnabazus Lieutenant in Phrygia to the King of Persia.
desirous with the Bithynians to hinder the Grecians from entering into Phrygia,
if they could) These Hors-men killed no less, than five hundred Grecians, the
rest fled up into a Mountain, and one of them, that fled, brought news hereof
to the Camp. Xenophon because the sacrifice was not agreeable that day, taking
an Ox out of the Waine (for there was no other to kill) offered it, and went
to the rescous, A difference of age in Soldiers.
taking with him all the Soldiers under fifty years of age; and bringing
those off, that were left alive, returned to the Camp about Sunset, and sat
down to Supper, being full of grief and sorrow for that, which had happened.
Upon the sudden some of the Bithynians, The enemy beats in the Grecian guards.
through the thickets falling upon the out-Guards, killed a few of the Grecians,
and chaced the rest to the Camp, and a great cry being raised, the whole Army
ran to Arms. It seemed not safe to pursue the enemy, or to move the Army by
night, the Country being full of thickets. They watched therefore that night
in Arms, putting forth Guards sufficient to fight with the enemy, if need
were. So was the night spent. In the morning the Coronels led into a stronger
place, and the Soldiers followed with their Arms and baggage, and before it
was Dinner time they cast a Trench all along the Face of the Camp, which led
into the Country, Fortification of the Camp.
and strengthened all the Rampire with Palizadoes, leaving only three Gates to
pass in and out the Camp. In the mean time came a Ship from Heraclea
fraughted with Barley-meale, and with beasts for sacrifice, and with Wine.
Xenophon rising early in the morning, sacrificed about issuing out of the
Camp, and the entrails of the first beast offered were fair. The sacrifice
being ended, Arexion the Parrhasian southsaier espied an eagle of good fortune,
and willed Xenophon to lead out the army; and the Coronels pass^ng over the
trench, (...).
laid down their Arms, and made Proclamation, that the Soldiers should first
dine, and then issue out of the camp with their Arms, leaving the many, and
the Captives behind. All the rest issued, The Grecians issue out of the Camp.
except Neon. For it was thought best to leave him Commander of those, that
remained in the Camp. His Regiment being left behind by the Coronels and
Captains, were ashamed to stay, seeing the rest marched out, and putting the
guard of the Camp into the hands of the Soldiers, that were 45 years of age,
they followed after the Army. So these remaining behind, the other marched
forward. They had not gone 15 Furlongs, when they happened upon the dead,
lately slain under the command of Neon, They bury the dead. (...).
and staying the Rear of their Wing by the first dead, that they lighted upon,
they buried all, that lay next by the wing. When they had buried the first,
they moved forward, and staying again the Rear against the first, that were
unburied, they after the same sort buried as many, as the Army had lying by it.
But after they came to the way, (...).
that led from the villages, where they lay in heaps, they gathered them
together, and so buried them. And being now past midday, they advanced and
took what provision every man saw without the villages, and conveyed it within
the Phalange; when suddenly they might discern the enemy, being many Horse and
Foot upon the mountains over against the Army, (...).
ordered in a Phalange. For Spithridates and Rathines were come thither with
forces sent from Pharnabazus. When the enemy espied the Grecians, Two mile
wellneere.
they made Alt about 15 Furlongs off: Hereupon Arexion the soothsayer of the
Grecians sacrificed, and the entrails were fair at the very first. Then said
Xenophon: I think it best (o Coronels) to choose out certain Companies, and to
order them in the Rear of the Phalange for seconds, Seconds.
that, if need be, there may be some to give aid to the Phalange, and that the
enemy being disordered, may fall upon them standing in order, and ready for
fight. All yielded to this opinion. You then, quoth he, lead on against the
enemy, that we make no stay after we see, and are seen of them. If you think
good, I will go and take some of the Rear Companies, and separate them for
this service. Ordering of the seconds. 100. Foot, that is, 20 paces
Geometrical.
Hereupon they marched on leasurely: But Xenophon taking three Companies of
200. apeece from the Rear, sent one to follow the Phalange on the right hand,
about a Plethers distance, Samolas the Ach^^^ was the leader thereof, another
he separated to follow in the midst, the command whereof Pyrias the Arcadian
had, the third on the left hand, under the command of Phrasias the Athenian. As
they marched, they chanced upon a great Forest and hardly passable, A doubt to
enter a wood.
where they made Alt, being ignorant, whether they might get through it or no;
and the word was given for the Coronels and Captains to come up to the Front.
Xenophon maruelling at the s^ay of the march, and hearing the word, that was
given, galloped up to the Front with all speed. When they were come together,
Sopho^etus, the eldest of the Coronels said, he thought not fit, that such a
Forest as that should be trauersed through. Xenophon quickly answering him,
spoke thus: My companions, you know, Xenophons resolution.
as I think, that I never willingly brought you into any danger. For I see,
that you need no glory, that may be purchased with valor, but rather stand in
need of safety alone. The case now stands thus, that we cannot depart hence
without fight. For if we go not against the enemy, he will follow and charge
us in our retreat. Consider then, which of the two is the better, to go
against them with arms in our hands, or facing about, to see them fall upon
our Rear. You cannot be ignorant, that to dismarch from an enemy, was ever
held dishonorable by a man of valor; as contrariwise, that to pursue, gives
courage even to a coward. For my part, I had rather follow with half the
number, we have, than dismarch with twice so many. I know also, that there is
none of you fears, they will stand our first charge, if we seek them:
Whereas no man is ignorant, that they dare and will be ready to follow upon
us, if we retire. If any man conceive it a matter of danger, to have the
Forest behind us in our fight, I hold it rather an advantage to be sought
for. To the enemies I could wish, that all places might seem easy to shift
away, that they may have occasion to turn their backs. For you, you ought to
learn of the place it self, that there is no sa^etie, but in victory. But I
should not a little marvel, if any of you could once imagine, that this
Forest is more fearful for us to trauerse, than other places, which we have
already passed. For how could we have gone through the plain country, if we
had not overcome the enemies Horse; or over the mountains, if so many Peltasts
had pressed us? Admit now we come safe to the Sea, how great a Forest is the
Sea? Where if we remain, we shall find neither shipping to transport us, nor
victual to nourish us. And we shall no sooner arrive there, but we must
immediately issue out of our Camp to seek provision. Is it not therefore
better to fight with the enemy now we have dined, than to morrow fasting? The
sacrifice is fair, and the presage of the event fortunate, and the entrails
of the beasts portend good luck. Let us march against them, and since we are
come into their sight, let us not give them leave either to sup with content,
or to sleep, where themselves are disposed. Hereupon the Captains willed him
to lead on, and no man gainsaid it. Leading on, Passing a Wood.
he gave the word, that every man should pass the Forest in the very place,
where he was. For he conceived, that the Army should more easily pass singling
themselves, as the way fell out, than if they clustr^d and thronged at a
Bridge, which might be in the Forest. When all were through, he rid along the
Phalange, and said: Remember (o Soldiers) what battles you have, by the help
of the gods, gained together against your enemies, and what they have suffered,
that fled from the enemy, and withal call to mind, that you are at the gates
of Greece. Follow Hercules your guide, and exhort one another by name. It will
be a pleasure for him, that does or speaks any thing worthy of a brave mind,
to leave a memory of his worth in any place, where he will. These words he
spoke riding in haste along the Front; The Grecians move against the enemy.
and withal led on the Phalang^, and ordered the Peltasts on either wing
thereof, and so went against the enemy. He also commanded them to carry their
pikes on their right shoulders, till he gave a sign with the trumpet; then
charging them to follow leisurely, (...). The demeaning of their pikes.

Their Peltasts repulsed.


and no man to give chase running. Then was the word given, Jupiter the savior
and Hercules the guide. The enemy kept his ground, trusting to the strength of
the place. When they came near one to another the Grecian Peltasts giving a
shout, ran forth against the enemy without command, and were encountered and put
to flight by the Bithynian horse and foot. But when the Phalange of the armed
marching speedily came up, and the trumpet sounded, and they sang the Paean,
and afterward gave a shout, and charged their pikes, (...). A charge.
the enemy forsook the place and fled; and Timasian with his horse, which were
not many in number, killed as many as he could. So the left wing of the enemy,
upon which the Grecian horsemen followed, was quickly dispersed; but the right
being not so much pressed in the chase, stood still upon a hill. Whom when the
Grecians saw remaining in the field, A second charge.
they thought they might safely charge them, and without all danger. Singing
therefore the Paean, they advanced against them. But the enemy presently took
themselves to their feet. The Peltasts gave chase, Chase given by the Peltasts.
till that wing was also scattered. Few of them were slain, because of the
multitude of the enemies horse, who put the Peltasts in fear of following too
far. The horsemen of Phar^abazi^ stood yet united together, to whom the
Bithynian horsemen gathered, and from a hill beheld, what was done in the
field. Which when the Grecians saw, albeit they were sore traveled,
notwithstanding they thought it convenient to seek them, as they could, lest
happily taking heart, they might be again emboldned. Therefore embattelling
themselves, they led against them. The enemy seeing them coming cast
themselves down the steep places no otherwise, than if horsemen had followed
them in chase. A Forest received them that fled, which the Grecians were not
acquainted with. Wherefore night drawing on, they returned, and when they came
to the place where the battles first joined, they erected a Trophey, and so
about Sunne-set retired to the Sea; for the Camp was about 60 furlongs off.
Henceforward the enemies began to look to themselves, 7 mile and a half.
and removed as far from thence as they could, as well the inhabitants, as
their goods and substance. The Grecians lay still expecting Cleander, and the
Galleys, and Ships, which they thought would come. And going forth every day
without fear, having with them their cariage-beasts and slaves, they brought
in wheat, barley, wine, pulse-corne, bucke, and figs. For the Territory bare
all fruit plentifully, Olives only excepted. And as long as the Army kept
within the Camp, any man might go forth to spoil, and deteine that he found
for his private use. But a decree was made, that when the whole Army went
abroad, whatsoever was taken by any man going apart, it should be to the use of
the generality. Now was there plenty of all things. For provision came from
the ^recian Cities on every hand, and they that arrived there by ship, came
willingly on shore, because they understood a City was there planting, and
that it was a good Haven; and many of the enemies being near borderers sent to
Xenophon (for they heard that he was the planter) demanding upon what
conditions they might be received into his friendship; whom Xenophon showed to
the Soldiers. Cleander Governor of Byzance, now Constantinople.
About this time Cleander came with two Galleys, but with never a ship. It fell
out so, that at his arrival the Army was abroad, and some gone into the plain
country to prey, other to the mountains, and had gotten together many sheep;
and fearing they would be taken away, they spoke to Dexippus (who stole the
ship of 50 o^res from the Army, when it lay at Trapezond) and prayed him to
keep them, and to retain part for himself, Dexippus his fraud and wrong.
and restore the rest to them. He presently beat away the Soldiers that stood
thereabout, albeit they told him, that the prey pertained to the generality,
and im^edia^ly went to Cleander, and informed him that they sought to steal
the sheep. Cleander commanded, that whosoever he was that went about to take
them away, should be brought unto him. Dexippus laid hold upon one, and began
to lead him toward Cleander, He lays hold upon a Soldier.

Rescous of the Soldier.


whom Agasias by chance coming that way, rescued, because he was one of his
company. The rest of the Soldiers, that were present, cast stones at Dexippus,
calling him Traitor. Many Mariners of the Galleys, being affrighted, ran to
the Sea; and Cleander himself shifted away. Cleanders fear and threatening.
Xenophon and the other Coronels pacified the Soldiers, and told Cleander, it
was no matter of danger, and that the decree of the Army was cause of that,
that happened. Cleander incensed by Dexippus, and of himself discontented,
because it might be perceived, that he was in fear, said, he would sail away,
and cause proclamation to be made, that no Grecian City should receive them,
as being common enemies to all; for at that time the Lacedaemonians commanded
all Greece. This seemed a hard and dangerous thing to the Grecians, and they
desired him not to do so. He said, he would relent upon no other condition,
than that the caster of the first stone, and the party that made the rescous,
should be delivered into his hands. Agasias.
Agasias was the man he sought, who had been a friend to Xenophon even to the
last; which was the cause that Dexippus accused him. The Commanders knowing not
what to do, called an assembly of the Army. Many made small account of
Cleander: Xenophon thought the business to be of no mean consequence, and
arising spoke thus: Fellow Soldiers, The Soldiers contemn Cleander.

Xenophons spee^h to the contrary.


if Cleander departing hence, carry that mind toward us, which he professes,
I take it to be a matter not to be contemned. For now the Grecian Cities are at
hand, and the Lacedaemonians are rulers of Greece; and every Lacedemonian of
power sufficient to work any City to what he list. If therefore he first shut
us out of Byzantium, and signify to the rest of the Governors not to receive
us into their Cities, as being disobedient to the Lacedaemonians, and notto be
governed, this rumor will come to the ears of Anaxibius the Admiral, so that
it will be hard for us either to stay here, or to sail away. For at this time
the Lacedaemonians have the Souereigntie of Greece, both by Sea and Land. It is
not fit therefore, that for one or two men's sakes, we the rest be debarred from
Greece, but we are rather to obey, whatsoever they command. For our Cities,
from whence every one of us is, are under their subjection. I therefore (for I
understand that Dexippus informs Cleander, that Agasias would not have done
this, unless I had bid him) I, I say, clear both you, and Agasias of this
fault, if Agasias will say, that I am the cause thereof, and I condemn my
self, and will willingly undergo all extremity of punishment, if it may
appear that I were the beginner either of casting of stones, or of any other
violence. I say further, if any man else be accused by Cleander, he ought,
whosoever he be, to yield himself to Cleanders judgment. So shall you be free
from all fault. But as matters go now, it will be hard, if thinking to receive
praise and honor in Greece, we in stead thereof shall not be in the case that
other are, but be excluded out of all Grecian Cities. After this Agasias stood
up and said: I (o Soldiers) swear by the gods and goddesses, that neither
Xenophon, nor any other willed me to take away the man; but when I saw an
honest and worthy Soldier of mine led away by Dexippus, whose traitorous
dealing toward you, you well know, I thought it a matter not to be suffered.
And albeit, I confess, that I rescued him, yet would I not, that you should
deliver me up. I my self, as Xenophon advises, will yield my self into the
hands of Cleander, to use me at his discretion. Neither would I for this cause
have you make war with the Lacedaemonians, nor have any man impeached to save
himself, where he list. Only I desire you to make choice of some of your
selves to send with me to Cleander, who in case I omit any thing, may speak
and do, what they think available in my behalf. The Army gave him leave to
choose whom he thought good, The Soldier rescued, and the rescuer yielded up
to Cleander.
and he chose the Coronels. So Agasias and the Coronels, and the man that was
rescued went together toward Cleander; to whom the Coronels used this speech:
The Army (O Cleander) has sent us unto you, and desire you, if you think them
all guilty, to use your own judgment in punishing all: if one or two, they
are willing to put them into your hands to be judged by you. If therefore you
lay the fault upon any of us, we here present our selves unto you; if upon any
man else, we desire you to name him. For no man shall be withheld from you,
that will acknowledge our command. Then Agasias stepped forth and said: Agasias
in his own defense.
I am the man, Cleander, which took this Soldier from Dexippus, who was
leading him away, and willed stones to be cast at Dexippus. For I knew this man
to be a worthy Soldier, and that Dexippus being by the Army chosen Captain of
a Galley of 50 oars, which we craved from the Trapezuntians to gather other
ships to save our selves in, both run away from us, and also betrayed the
Army, with which himself was saved. Exceptions against Dexippus.
And by his means we not only defrauded the Trapezuntians of their ship, but
incurred the imputation of unjust men, and as much as lay in him we all
perished. For he heard as well as we, how impossible it was marching on foot to
pass over the rivers that lay in our way, and to come in safety into Gre^ce.
He therefore being such a one, I took the Soldier from him. But if you,
Cleander, or any about you, that was no runaway from us, had apprehended him,
you may well conceive, I would have forborne to do, as I did. And I would have
you think, if you take away my life, you shall put an honest man to death for
a cowards and a scundrels sake. Cleander hearing this said: I commend not
Dexippus, if he behaved himself, as you have related; Violence not to be used.
notwithstanding admit Dexippus were never so vile, yet violence was not to be
offered unto him, but he was to be brought to judgment, as you are at this
time. Now therefore you the Coronels may depart, leaving this man behind you,
and when I give you notice, return to assist the Court in judgment concerning
these offenses; and I have neither cause to accuse the Army, nor any other man
in private, in as much as himself confesses, that it was he, that made the
rescous. Then he that was rescued, spoke thus: Lest you should think
(Cleander) that I was apprehended as an offender, I neither struck any man,
nor threw stone; I said only that the sheep appertained to the generality.
For it was decreed, that when the Army went abroad, all boot taken in private
should be delivered up to the use of the generality. This was all I spoke, and
for this Dexippus laid hands on me, and would have carried me away, that all
men's mouths being stopped, he might have had his part, and preserved the rest
for those, that contrary to the decree went about to deceive the Army. Hereunto
Cleander answered: Seeing you are so acute and witty, stay you here also, that
we may advise what to do with you. So went Cleander to dinner; but Xenophon
assembling the Army, counseled them to send to Cleander, and to make
intercession for the prisoners. Hereupon they decreed, that the Coronels, and
Captains, and Dracontius the Lacedemonian, and other that were fit,
Intercession of the Army for the prisoners.
should go to Cleander, and by all means entreat for their delivery.
Xenophon therefore being come to Cleander spoke thus: You have (O Cleander) in
safe keeping the men, you desired, and the Army has referred unto you, not
only to dispose of the prisoners, as you please, but also of themselves in
general. Now they desire and entreat you, to bestow the men upon them, and not
to put them to death, because in former times they have done good service to
the Army. Obtaining this favor at your hands, they promise in regard thereof,
if it shall please you to accept the command over them, to make manifest, how
modest they are, and how dutiful to their General, and (the gods being
propitious) how fearelesse of the enemy. Further they are humble suitors, that
you would be pleased to come unto them, and to make proof of Dexippus, and of
them, and of other, whether shall be most respective and dutiful to their
Commanders: Cleander hearing this, said he would streight-waies give them
answer; and I release unto you, quoth he, the men that are in durance, Cleander
releaseth the prisoners.
and will my self come unto you, and conduct you into Greece, if the gods
permit. The reports which are spread abroad of you, are much differing from
that, which I my self now hear, namely, that the Army should be in mind to
revolt from the Lacedaemonians. The Coronels much extolled him for his bounty,
Accepts the place of General.
and departed, having the prisoners restored unto them. Cleander offered
sacrifice about the journey, and used Xenophon with all kindness, and
contracted hospitality with him, and when he saw the Army orderly do what
was commanded, he much rather desired to be their General. The sacrifice gain
say it.
But when he had sacrificed three days, and the sacrifice assented not, he
called the Coronels together, and said: The sacrifices allow not, that I should
be your General. Yet be not you therefore out of comfort. For, as it seems,
you are the men that are appointed to lead the Army home. Go forward. When
you come where we have to do, we will entertain you in the best manner we
can. Hereupon the Soldiers offered him the sheep that pertained to the
generality, which he received and gave back again. So he sailed away. But
the Soldiers dividing amongst themselves the corn, and other things, which
they had gathered together, marched on through the country of Bithynia. And
when they found nothing in their right way (for they held on as if the country
had been friend) it seemed good to return back a day and nights journey.
Doing this they took many slaves and sheep; and the eighth day came to
Chrysopolis a City in the country of Chalcedon, and stayed there seven days
selling their spoil.

Finis Libri Sexti.
THE SEVENTH BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF XENOPHON, TOUCHING THE Ascent of CYRUS
the younger, out of Asia the Less, into the Higher COVNTREYS.
WHat the Grecians did in their Ascent with Cyrus until the battle, and what,
after Cyrus was slain, in their journey till they came into Pontus, and what
marching on Foot, and sailing out of Pontus, till they had passed the mouth of
Pontus, and came to Chrysopolis in Asia, is described in the former discourse.
After this Pharnabazus fearing that the Army would invade his government sent
to Anaxibius the Admiral (who then happened to be at Byzantium) and desired
him to transport it out of Asia, Anaxibius the Lacedemonian Admiral.
promising him in that respect to do, whatsoever he required at his hands.
Anaxibius sent for the Coronels and Captains to Byzantium promising to give
them pay, if they would come over to him. The other Coronels said, Draws the
Army over to Byzance.
they would advise, and return him answer. But Xenophon answered, that he
purposed to leave the Army, and sail away. Xenophons purpose to leave the
Army.
Anaxibius commanded him first to come over with the Army, and gave him
liberty to depart afterward at his pleasure; which Xenophon assented unto. In
the mean time Seuthes the Thracian sent Medosades, Seuthes King of Thrace
sends to Xenophon.
and desired Xenophon to be a means and furtherance to the transportation of
the Army, adding he should not repent himself in so doing. Xenophon answered,
that the Army without all question was to come over, and in regard thereof
Seuthes need not give any thing either to him, or to any man else. After the
transportation, quoth he, I am to depart. Let him therefore address himself
in such sort, as he thinks best, to those, that remain behind, and shall be
most for his purpose. So all the Army came over to Byzantium. Anaxibius gave
them not pay according to his promise, The Army at Byzance.
but made proclamation, Anaxibius seeks to deceive the Army.
that taking their Arms and baggage, they should depart out of the City, as
if he had a purpose to send them away, and to take muster of them. Hereupon the
Soldiers we^^ disco^ten^, because they wanted money to make provision for
their journey, and they made no great ha^^e in trussing up their baggage.
Xe^^ph^^ being become now a Guest to Cleander the Governor, went to him and
saluted him, having in mind ^o take shipping presently. You shall not do so,
^oth he: If you do, you will be blamed: For already they lay the fault upon
you, that the Army is so slow in departing the City. Yet am not I in fault,
quoth Xenophon: For the Soldiers wanting victual and money for their journey,
are in that regard loath to leave the City. Yet would I counsel you, quoth he,
to go out, as though you meant to march with them, and when the Army is out
of the Gates, to depart, whither you list. Let us go then to Anaxibius* quoth
Xenophon, and take order accordingly. Coming to him they told, what they had
resolved. He willed them so to do, and that the Soldiers should presently
issue with their baggage; and further to signify, that whosoever appeared not
at the musters, and view to be taken, should thank himself, if any thing fell
out contrary to his expectation. The Army goes out of Byzance.
Hereupon the Coronels first went out, and after them the rest; and now were
all out but a few, and Ereo^^^s stood at the Gates ready to shut them and put
in the bar, as soon as all were gone. Anaxibius calling then the Coronels and
Captains to him, said: For provision, you may take it out of the Thracian
Villages. There shall you find plenty of Barley, and of Whea^, and other
victual. After you are furnished, march on to Cherronesus, where Cynisous
shall give you your pay. Some of the Soldiers ouer-heard these words, or else
some of the Captains reported them to the Army. The Coronels asked Seuthes,
The Army finds the deceit of Anaxibius.
whether the Country were enemy, or friend, and whether they were to march
over the holy Mountain, or in circle through the midst of Thrace. During this
conference the Soldiers snatching up their Arms ran with full speed to the
Gates, (...).
minding to enter within the Walls. Et^onicus and those with him, when they saw
the armed come running, Returns to Byzance discontented.
shut the Gates, and made fast the bar. The Soldiers beat at the Gates
crying, they were extremely wronged, thus to be thrust out to the enemy, and
threatened to break the Gates asunder, if they opened them not of their own
accord. Other some ran along by the Sea side, and climbed up the wall by the
great stones, that were laid betwixt the Sea and the wall, to break the
violence of the waves. There were of the Soldiers, that remained yet within
the City, who when they saw the stir about the Gates, Break open a gate.
cut asunder the bars with axes, and set the Gates wide open. Xenophon
beholding what was done, fearing left the Army should fall to spoil, The
fear of the City.
and work inestimable damage to the City, to him, and to themselves, ran
amongst the rest, and in the crowd was carried within the Gates. As soon as
the Byzantians perceived, that the Army had entered the City by force, they
fled out of the marketplace, some toward the ships, some to their houses. They
that were within the City fled out, and some put the Galleys afloat, hoping to
find safety in them. All accounted themselves lost, none otherwise, than if
the City had been taken by the enemy. Anaxibius fled to the Sea, taking a
Fisher-boat, and recovered the Castle, from whence out of hand he sent for
succor to Chalcedon, thinking the Garrison of the Castle insufficient to make
the place good against the Army. The Soldiers, when they saw Xenophon, said
to him: Now (o Xenophon) it is in your own hands to make your self a man; you
have a City, you have Galleys, you have riches, you have so many men; now, if
you please, you may do us good, and we will make you great. You say well,
quoth Xenophon, (...).
and I will follow your counsel; only if this be your desire, put your selves
in order of battle without delay. Both himself gave this command, and he
willed the other Coronels to give direction to imbattell the Soldiers, thereby
to still and appease the vproare. (...).
They putting themselves in order, the armed stood in short time fifty deep,
and the Peltasts ran to both wings. The place was fit to embattell in, called
Thracium, being void of houses, and an even plot of ground. After they had laid
down their Arms, and were still, Xenophon called the army together, and made
this speech unto them: I marvel not (o Soldiers) that you are angry, and
think you have cause of discontent in regard of the deceit, that is used
toward you. But if we give reins to our anger, and seek revenge upon the
Lacedaemonians, that are present, and put the City, that is blameless, to
sack, cast in your minds, what will be the issue. And what kind of war this
will be, they may judge, that have seen, and remember the events of things
lately passed. For we, the Athenians, entered into war against the
Lacedaemonians, and their Allie^, being owners of no less, than four hundred
Galleys, which were in part abroad, in part in our Arsenall. And albeit that
the City had much riches, Xenophon stilleth the commotion.
and a yearly reuenew arising from the Citizens, and from strangers, no less
than 1000. talents, and besides was mistress of all the Islands, and possessed
many Cities in Asia, many in Europe, and amongst the rest this Byzantium it
self, where we now are, yet were we overcome, as you all know. Now then what
can we expect to befall us, the Lacedaemonians and Achaeans being linked in
society, and the Athenians and all their confederates, that then were, being
of the party; Tissaphernes, and the other Barbarians on the other side of the
Sea our enemies, and the great King most of all other, whose kingdom we sought
to bereave him of, and to take his life, if we could. All these things being
so, is any man so simple to conceive, that we shall have the upper hand? For
Gods sake let us not be frantic, nor cast away our selves shamefully in
becoming enemy to our fathers, friends, and kinsfolk. For they live all in
the Cities, which will make war against us. Which war will not want a just
ground, considering we sought not to possess any Barbarian City, albeit we
won them by force, and now we put to spoil the first Grecian City, to which
we are arrived. For my part, I wish my self 1000. Fathoms under the ground,
before I see so shameful an act committed by you; and I would counsel you,
being Grecians, to seek things right and just not by force, but by obedience
to them, that are rulers of the Grecians: which if you cannot obtain, yet is
it not fit, that because we are wronged, we should therefore deprive our selves
of Greece. And now I am of opinion, that we are to signify to Anaxibius, that
we come into the City, not to use any violence, but, if it might be, to
obtain some friendship at his hands: If not, to show unto him, that we depart
not being deceived, but obeying his command. Messengers to (...).
These things were decreed, and they sent away Hieronymus the Elaean, and
Eurylochus the Arcadian, and Philesius the Achaean to deliver the message. In
the mean time, while they remained in the place, expecting their messengers
return, came Cyrotades a Theban, who was no banished man from Greece,
^^^otades o^fe^e^h himself Gener^ll.
but went from place to place desirous to have the command of an army, offering
himself to any City or Nation, that needed a General. He then coming to the
army, told them, he would lead them to that part of Thrace, which was called
Delta, where they should enrich themselves with the spoil of the Country: and
if they would accept him for their General, he would bountifully bestow meat
and drink upon them. The Soldiers at the same time heard his proposition, and
the message of Anaxibius, who returned answer, The army goes out of the City
and follows him.
that they should never repent themselves of their obedience to him: for he
said he would signify it to the Magistrates of his City, and be ready to
gratify them to the uttermost of his power. Hereupon the Soldiers took
Cyrotades for their General, and went out of the walls. Cyrotades appointed
to be with the army, the next day bringing with him sacrifice, a soothsayer,
and meat, and drink for the army. When they were departed the City, Anaxibius
shut the gates, and made Proclamation, that whatsoever Soldier he found in
the City, he would sell him as a slave. The next day Cyrotades came with
sacrifice, and a soothsayer; 20. men followed him laden with barley meal,
other twenty with wine, three with oil, one that bore as great a burden of
Garlic as he could, another of Onions. Laying these things down, as it were
to be divided amongst the soldiers, he sacrificed. Xenophon in the mean
sending to Cleander, desired him to get leave for him to come within the walls,
and to take shipping to sail from Bizantium. Cleander came unto him: With much
ado, quoth he, I have obtained that which you desire. For Anaxibius said: it
would not suit well, that Xenophon should be within the walls, and the Army
without so near to the City; Xenophon departs from the Army.
especially the Bizantians being at division amongst themselves, and ill-minded
one against another. Notwithstanding he willed you to come in, if you minded to
sail away with him. Xenophon saluting and bidding the Soldiers farewell,
entered the City with Cleander. Cyrotades found no good success in his
sacrifice the first day, nor did he distribute any thing to the Soldiers. The
next day he brought the beast to the Altar, and stood crowned, as though he
meant to sacrifice. Timasion the Dardanian, and Neon the Asinaean, and Cleanor
the Orchomenian told Cyrotades, it would be in vain to sacrifice in hope to be
General of the Army, unless he gave provision to maintain them. He bid,
that the provision should be divided amongst them; Cyrotades his provision too
scant.

He renounceth his command.

The Coronels of diverse minds.


when he could not furnish out so much as would serve every Soldier for one
days provision, he took his sacrifice with him, and renounced the Generals
place. Neon the Asinaean, and Phryniscus the Achaian, and Timasion the
Dardanian remained with the Army, and leading it to the Thracian villages
about Byzantium encamped there. The Coronels were divided amongst themselves,
Cleanor and Phryniscus wishing to lead the Army to Seuthes (for he had won
them, giving the one a horse, the other a woman) Neon to Cherronesus,
imagining, if they were under the Lacedaemonians, he should be chief Commander.
Timasion the Dardanian was desirous to pass it over again into Asia, hoping
thereby to be restored to his country, which the Soldiers likewise desired.
Much time being spent herein, many of the Soldiers selling their arms in the
country thereabout forsook the Army, other dispersed themselves into the
neighbor Cities. Anaxibius was filled with joy, hearing that the Army went to
wrack. For that coming to pass, he conceived he should gratify Pharnabazus.
Anaxibius now sailing from Byzantium encountered at Cyzicus Aristarchus the
successor of Cleander governor of Byzantium. He told Anaxibius, that Polus,
his successor in the Admirals place, was only not arrived at Hellespont.
Anaxibius willed Aristarchus, if he found any of Cyrus his Soldiers at
Byzantium, he should sell them for slaves. Clearchus sold none; nay rather
those that were sick, Cruelty of Anaxibius and Ar^starchus against the
Soldiers. The faithlesnesse of Pharnabazus.
he in pity made much of, and compelled men to take them into their houses.
But Aristarchus hasting to Byzantium, as soon as he came there, sold no less
than 400 of them for slaves. Anaxibius sailed to Parium, and sent to
Pharnabazus expecting an answer according to their composition. He, after he
perceived, that Aristarchus was come Governor to Byzantium, and that Anaxibius
was no more Admiral, regarded Anaxibius little, and practiced the same with
Aristarchus concerning Cyrus his Soldiers, that he had before concluded with
Anaxibius. Hereupon Anaxibius calling Xenophon unto him, Anaxibius sends
Xenophon to the Army again.
willed him with all his cunning to sail to the Army, and keep them
together, and to gather as many as he could, of those that were dispersed, and
leading them to Perinthus to transport them into Asia with all speed. He gave
also a Galley, and a letter to Xenophon, and sent an express messenger to
command the Perinthians to furnish Xenophon with horse, and send him with all
speed unto the Army. So Xenophon sailing away came to the Army. The Soldiers
entertained him with joy, and streightway followed him willingly, being in hope
to pass over out of Thrace into Asia. Seuthes hearing that Xenophon was come,
sent Medosades by Sea unto him, and entreated him to bring the Army into
Thrace, promising whatsoever he thought would tempt him to give way unto his
request. Seuthes desires to have the service of the Army.
Xenophon answered it was impossible to be done. Medosades, after this answer
was given, rode away. When the Grecians were come to Perinthus, Neon separating
his Regiment from the rest of the Army, encamped apart, having about 800 men.
All the rest of the Army set down together hard by the walls of Perinthus.
The Army at Perinthus a City in Thrace.
Xenophon in the mean time practiced all he could, to get shipping for the
speedy transportation of the Army into Asia. Whilst this was doing,
Aristarchus the Governor, arriving from Byzantium with two Galleys at the
persuasion of Pharnabazus, Aristarchus hinders their passage into Asia.
commanded the Sailors not to receive so much as one Soldier aboard. And
coming to the Army, forbade them to pass over into Asia. Xenophon told him,
that it was the commandment of Anaxibius, and he sent him purposely about this
business. Aristarchus replied, that Anaxibius was not Admiral, and I, quoth
he, am Governor here; if I take any of you upon the Sea, I will sink you.
Having said thus much, he entered within the walls of the City. The next day he
sent for the Coronels and Captains of the Army. They being now near the
walls, it was told Xenophon, that if he went into the City, Xenophons danger.
he should be apprehended, and either suffer there, I wot not what, or else be
delivered into the hands of Pharnabazus. He hearing this sent in the rest; for
himself, he said, he would ask counsel of the gods by sacrifice; and
departing he sacrificed, demanding whether the gods would be pleased, His
sacrifice.
he should lead the Army unto Seuthes, or no. For he saw he could not safely
pass over into Asia, especially since the man, that forbade the passage, had
Galleys at command; and he liked not to be shut up in Cherronesus, and to have
the Army brought to extreme want of all things. Besides, in the place where
they were, they must obey the Governor, and yet be destitute of provision.
About this business was Xenophon. The Coronels and Captains returning from
Aristarchus, brought word, that he willed them now to depart, and come again
in the evening. Hereupon the fraud seemed more apparent. Xenophon therefore,
when he saw the sacrifice to be fair both for him and the Army to go to
Seuthes without danger, taking Polycrates the Athenian Captain with him, He
posteth into Thrace.
and a man from every the Coronels (except Neon) such a one as every one
trusted most, rode that night to the Camp of Seuthes, which was 50 furlongs
distant; and coming up to the Camp, 6 Mile and a quarter.
they found fires, and no man near them. And first they imagined, that Seuthes
had removed his Camp, but when they heard a noise, and Seuthes his Soldiers
calling one to another, they conceived, that Seuthes had caused the fires to be
made before his night-guards, that in the dark the Sentinels might not be
seen, Fires before the Guards.
and yet those, that had access to the Camp, might not be hidden, but plainly
discovered by the light of the fires. Which when he perceived, he sent the
Interpreter, which he brought with him, to signify to Seuthes, that Xenophon
was there desirous to speak with him. They asked, whether it were Xenophon the
Athenian, and whether he came from the Army? and when he answered, he was the
same, they returned dancing. A little while after came about 200 Peltasts, and
taking Xenophon and his company with them, they led them to Seuthes. He was in
a Castle carefully guarded, and the horse round about the Castle were bridled.
For in the day time he fed his horse, by night he had them in a readiness for
fear. It is reported that Tereus one of his ancestors having a great Army in
this country, lost many of his Soldiers, and was lighted of all his baggage
by these men. They are the Thynes, The Thynes.
who are said to be the most warlike of all the Nation, especially by night.
When they came to the Castle, Seuthes willed Xenophon to come in with any two
he should choose. Being within they first saluted, and then according to the
Thracian manner drunk horns of wine one to another. Xenophon with Seuthes.
Medosades was then present with Seuthes, whose service he used in all
Emb^ssages. Xenophon began then to speak: You sent Medosades to me (O Se^thes)
first to Chalcedon, entreating me to be a means to transport the Army out of
Asia, and promising, if I brought it to pass, to require my service, as this
Medosades signified unto me. Speaking thus much, he asked Medosades, if it were
not true. Medosades said, it was so. Then came Medosades to me the second time,
after I came from P^rion to the Army, promising, if I brought the Army to
you, that you would otherwise use me as a friend and brother, and also give me
the Towns you possess by the Seaside. He asked Medosades, whether he spoke
not this also. Yes, quoth he, I spoke it. Go to now; report what answer I made
you at Chalcedon. First, His propositions to Seuthes.
you answered, quoth he, that the Army was to come over to Byzantium, and that
in respect thereof there needed not any thing to be given to you or to any man
else; and you said, you were to depart as soon as you came over; and it fell
out as you said. But what answer made I at Selymbria? You said it was not
possible to be done, because the Army was to march to Perinthus, and there to
be transported into Asia. Now am I here, said Xenophon, and this Phryniscu^ one
of the Coronels, and this Polycrates one of the Captains, and without the
Castle are the most trusty friends of all the other Coronels (except of Neon
the Laced^monian) To give credit therefore unto our negotiation, it will be
good, that you call for them to be present here within. And you Polycrates ^ell
them from me, that I would have them leave their arms without, and you
likewise leave your sword there, and so come in. Seuthes hearing this, said, he
distrusted no Athenian: for he knew they were his kinsfolk, and he reckned
them in the number of his faithful and well-affected friends. When they that
should, were come in, Xenophon asked Seuthes, wherein he purposed to use the
service of the Army. Seuthes spoke thus: Mesades was my father, under whose
government were the Mela^dop^ans, the Thynes, Why Seuthes desired the army.
and the Thranipsans. When the affairs of the Odryssians began to be troubled,
my father being driven out of this country fell sick, and died, and I was
brought up as an orphan by Med^ous, that now reigns. After I grew to a few
years, I could not endure to sit, and look upon another man's table. Wherefore
being at his table, I humbly besought him to afford me such forces, as he
could, that I might be revenged upon them, that had eiected us out of our
patrimony, and not always live like a dog waiting at his table. Hereupon he
gave me those men and horse, which you shall see as soon, as it is day. And
now I spend the time with these spoiling and driving preies out of my fathers
country. But if you join with me, I hope (the gods being friends) easily to
recover my kingdom. And this is the cause, wherefore I crave your aid. What
then, quoth Xenophon, can you give the army, the Captains and the Coronels, if
we come? Speak it, quoth he, before this company, that they may make report to
the rest of the army. He promised to a common Soldier a Cyzicene, The offers
of Seuthes to the army.
two to a Captain, four to a Coronell, and as much land, as he desired, and
yoakes of oxen, and a walled town situa^e by the Sea. But if endeavoring this,
we bring it not to pass, and some fear arise from the Lacedaemonians, if any
of us come unto you, will you receive him into your country? He answered: yea
I will hold them as my brothers, and place them in seats, and make them
partakers of all I shall possess. But to you, Xenophon, I will give my
daughter, and if you have a daughter, I will buy her after the Thracian manner,
and will give her Bisanthe lying upon the Seacoast to dwell in, which is the
goodliest country I have. Hearing these things, and giving and taking hands,
they rode away, and before day, came to the Camp, and every one returned
answer to them, from whom he was sent. When it was day, Aristarchus called
again the Coronells and Captains, who thought it not good to come at
Aristarchus, Aristarchus sends for the Coronels, who refuse to come.
but to call an assembly of the army. All came together, except the Soldiers
of Neon, who were about ten Furlongs from the rest. Being assembled, Xenophon
arose, and spoke thus: We cannot (o Soldiers) sail over, whether we would, by
reason that Aristarchus with his Galleys hinders us; so that it is not safe
for us to go aboard. He also commands us to make way through the Holy Mount by
force, and so to come to Cherronesus: which if we do, he faith he will no more
sell us for slaves, as he did in Bizantium, nor yet beguile us, but will surely
give us our pay; nor shall we need to look about us, as we do now, being
destitute of necessary provision. Seuthes promises, if you will come unto him
to use you kindly. I would have you therefore to consider, whether you will
stay here, and debate of these things, or march away to a place, where you may
refresh your selves with victuals. I am of opinion, seeing we neither have
money to go to market, nor are suffered to take victual without money, that
we were best to return to the villages which were allotted us, and having
there such things, as we want, The army goes to Seuthes.
to hear the propositions of such, as desire your service, and to choose that,
which shall be most expedient for your selves. You, that like hereof, hold up
your hands. All held up their hands. Go then, quoth he, and presently trusse
up your baggage, and when you are commanded, follow your leaders. After this
Xenophon led, and the army followed. And albeit Neon, and other from
Aristarchus endeavored to persuade them to return, yet they would give no
ear. When they had now marched about thirty Furlongs, Seuthes meets the army.
Seuthes met them. Whom when Xenophon saw, he desired him to draw near, that
in the hearing of the multitude they might confer about some things, which
tended to the good of the army. Being come up, Xenophon said: We are now
marching thither, where we may find food. There, after we have heard, what
you, and this Lacedemonian will say, we will resolve upon that, which shall
seem best for us. If therefore you will lead us to a place, where we shall
have plenty, we shall be the more beholding unto you, and think you make us
your guests. I know, quoth Seuthes, where many villages stand not far
asunder, which abound in store of provision, and are no further off, than we
may well reach by dinner time. Lead then, quoth Xenophon. They came to the
villages in the afternoon, and the Soldiers assembling, Seuthes used this
speech: I desire you (^ Soldiers) to take entertainment of me. I promise every
one of you a Cyzicene for his monthly pay, and to a Captain, and a Coronell as
much, 18 Shillings. Seuthes to the Army.
as is usually given. Meat and drink you shall have of the ^ountrey, as you
have now. Whatsoever is taken from the enemy, I will challenge, as mine own,
that disposing of it, as I shall think best, I may make up your pay. We of our
selves shall be of force sufficient to give chase to the enemy, that flies:
with your help we shall easily overcome those that resist. Xenophon then asked
him, how far from the Sea he desired the army should march. No further than
seven days journey, quoth he, and oftentimes self. After this it was
permitted, that any man, that would, might speak. Many said, that Seuthes
propounded things not to be contemned. For it was Winter, and no man, though he
would never so feign, could get home by Sea, and wanting money to buy things
necessary, Reasons why the Army should follow Seuthes.
they were not able to remain in a friends country, and in the enemies it was
safer to stay and be nourished in the company of Seuthes, than being alone,
especially so many commodities offering themselves. Besides, to have pay was a
thing found, ere it could be looked for. Xenophon added, if any man be of a
contrary mind, let him speak; if not, let a decree be made hereof. When all
were silent, they gave their consent, They agree to follow him.
and a decree was made accordingly. Xenophon therefore presently informed
Seuthes, that the Soldiers would take entertainment of him. After this the
rest quartered, every man, as the lot fell to his company, He inuiteth the
Coronels and Captains to supper.
but Seuthes called the Coronels and Captains to supper in a village hard by.
Coming to the door, where they should sup, they found one Heraclides a
Maronaea^; he insinuated himself to each of them, who, he thought, was able,
and had to give Seuthes; and spoke first to certain Parians, that came to make
a league with Medocus the King of Odryssians, bringing with them gifts for him,
and for the Queen. He told them, Gifts to the King.
that Medocus lived in the country, that was twelve days journey from the
Sea, and that Seuthes with the help of that army would be master of the Sea,
and being their neighbor, would be able both to pleasure, and hurt them. If
you be wise therefore turn the gifts, which you bring, to Seuthes, and it will
be better, than, if you presented them to Medocus, that dwells so far off.
Thus he persuaded them. Then he came to Timasion the Dardanian (for he heard,
he had cups and carpets taken from the Barbarians) and said: It was the manner,
when Seuthes bid any to supper, that the guests invited, offered presents unto
him. He, quoth Heraclydes, if he become great in this kingdom, will be able
either to restore you to your country, or else to make you rich here. Thus
admonished he every one, before they entered to supper. He came likewise to
Xenophon and said: You are both of the greatest City, and of greatest name
with Seuthes; and it may be, that Seuthes will think you worthy to possess
cities and land in this country, as many of your countrymen have done
heretofore. It is fit therefore for you to honor Seuthes with the richest
presents. For I know, the royaller your presents be, the more gratuitie you
shall obtain at his hands. Xenophon hearing this was displeased in mind. For
he brought no more out of Pari^^ with him, than a boy, and money to defray his
charges. When the greatest men of Thrace, that were then present, and the
Coronels and Captains of the Grecians, and the Ambassadors sent from Cities,
were entered into supper, they set down all in a ring. Then were three-footed
kettles brought in for them all. The manner of sitting and service at supper.
They were about twenty in number, full of flesh cut in pieces, and of great
loaves of leauened bread, pierced through and fastened to the flesh. The tables,
as the custom is, were set nearest to the strangers. Seuthes first of all
taking the loaves next him, broke them into small pieces, and the flesh
likewise, and threw the pieces to whom he thought good, reserving to himself
no more tha^ a taste. The other, that had the tables standing by them, did the
like. There was amongst the rest an Arcadian, Aristos by name, a notable eater.
He not regarding that which was cast unto him, taking a loaf of the bigness
well-nigh of a pecke in one hand, and a piece of flesh on his knees, fell a
eating. Horns of wine were carried about, and every man took them. Aristos,
when he that filled the wine came, and offered it to him, seeing Xenophon
forbear eating, go, give it him, quoth he, for he is at leisure, and I not.
Seuthes hearing the voice, asked the filler of wine, what he said, who when he
told him (for he could speak Greek) the whole company fell a laughing. The
cups now walked thick about, and a Thracian upon a white horse came in, and
taking a full horn, said: Seuthes, I drink to you, and give you this horse,
whose back when you are upon, you may easily take, whomsoever you chase, and
retiring, need not fear any enemy. Another brought in a boy, and drinking in
the same sort, gave him to the King. Another, garments for his wife. Timasion
drunk to him, and gave him a silver cup and a carpet worth ten pound.
G^esippus the Athenian standing up, said, That it was an ancient and a very
good custom, that they that had, should for honors sake give to the King; and
the King to them, that had not. So should I, quoth he, have wherewith to
present and honor the King. Xenophon doubted with himself what to do. For he
was honored, sitting in the next seat to the King, and Heraclides willed the
wine-filler to reach the Horn unto him. He was now well tippled, and therefore
stood up boldly taking the Horn in his hand, and said: I (o Seuthes) give my
self unto you, and all these my Companions, to be your faithful friends: and
I give none of them against their wills, but all so minded, that every one will
strive to do you more service, than my self. And now they are here wishing
nothing more, than to beemploied, and to undergo peril for your sake; with
the help of whom (if the gods will) you shall both recover and also enjoy your
Fathers Kingdom; and not only it, but many Horse, many men and fair women,
whom you shall not need to spoil, and take from them, what they have, but of
their own ^ree will they will bring gifts unto you. Seuthes standing up
pledged him in a full Horn, and drunk it out, and he cast here and there the
flesh that was before him. After this the Cerasuntines came in, who use Flutes
and Trumpets made of the raw Hides of Oxen playing in measure, as the use is
upon the Instrument called Magade. Seuthes himself stood up and casting forth
a martial cry, See Iul Poll. page 187. lin. 12.
leaped forward nimbly, shunning, as it were, a dart, that seemed to be cast at
him. Iesters also came in. When the Sun was now ready to set, the Grecians
arose from their seats, signifying, it was time to dispose the watch, and to
give the word. The Watch.
They desired Seuthes to take order that no Thracian entered the Grecian quarter
by night; because, said they, there are some Thracians, that are enemies, some,
that are friends, both to you, and us. When they went out, Seuthes also stood
up nothing less than like a drunken man; and coming abroad, he called the
Coronels to him, and said: The enemy yet knows not, that you are entertained
by me. Surprising the enemy.
If therefore we go against them, before they fear to be caught, or provide
to defend themselves, we shall easily gain both prisoners and plenty of
riches. The Coronels commended his advice, and willed him to lead on. He
replied, that they should make themselves ready, and stay, where they were.
When it is time, quoth he, I will come unto you, and taking you and the
Peltasts with me, by the help of the gods, I will be your guide. Xenophon
said: Consider, I pray, The order of matching in the night.
seeing we are to march by night, whether the Grecian manner be not best. In
the day time the light-Armed, or Horse, according to the nature of the place,
have the Vant of the Army; in the night the use of the Grecians is to give the
leading to the slowest. For so the Army is easiliest kept together, and it is
soonest espied, if they break. But being severed, they often fall one upon
another, and through ignorance do, and suffer hostility. Seuthes answered,
You say well, and I will follow your order, and give you old men the most
experienced in the Country for Guides, and my self bring up the Rear with
the Horse. For I can soon be first, if need be. They gave for the Word Pallas,
because of their kindred. After this was spoken, Pallas is in Greek Athenaea.
From hence did Athens take the name, and Seuthes was of the blood of the
Athenians by Progue, whom Tercus King of Thrace, one of Seuthes his ancestors
married.
they took their rest. About midnight Seuthes came unto them with his Hors-men
being Curaciers, and with the Peltasts in their Arms, and after he had given
them Guides, the armed Foot marched first, the Peltasts followed, and the
Hors-men came in the Rear. When it was day Seuthes galloped up to the Front,
and much commended the Gr^cian manner. For I my self, quoth he, marching in
the night, albeit but with a few, have oftentimes had my Horse distracted from
my Foot. Now are we by break of day all together in one place, as it ought to
be. But it is best, you stay here, and rest your selves, I will scout abroad.
Speaking thus much, he galloped along the Hill, following a way, that lead
forward. When he came to much Snow, he began to look about, whether there were
any footsteps of men coming forward or backward. When he could discern no
tract, he straight returned and said: All will be well (o Soldiers) if God
will: For we shall fall upon the enemy and take them at unawares. But I will
go before with the Horse, to the end, that if I see any man, I may stay him,
lest he escape from us, and give warning to the enemy. Follow you, and if you
f^ll farr^ behind, direct your selves by the tract of the Horse. After we are
over these Mountains, we shall come to Villages, that are many in number, and
rich. About noone he was upon the top of the Mountains, and discovering the
Villages, he came upon the spur to the armed Foot, saying: I will send the
Horse down into Champeigne, and the Peltasts into the Villages: follow you, as
fast as you can, that, if any resistance be made, you may come in to succor.
Xenophon hearing this, alighted from his Horse: When Seuthes asked him, why he
alighted, when most haste was requisite; I know, quoth he, you shall not have
need of me alone, and these armed will more willingly run, if I lead on foot.
After this Timasion joined with him having forty Horse or thereabout. Choice
of soldiers by the age (...) speed.
Xenophon commanded them, that were 30 year old, taking with them their arms
alone, to come out of the body unto him; with whom he posted on. Cleanor lead
the rest of the Grecians. When they were come to the villages, Seuthes
galloping up, said: It is as you said, Xenophon, we have caught the men. But my
horse have left me, and given chase one one way, another another, and I am
afraid, lest the enemy gathering together, make head, and work us some
mischief. Some of us must stay in the Villages also. For they are full of men.
But I, quoth Xenophon, will take the top of the mountain with those I have.
Command you Cleanor to stretch out his Phalange along the champeigne by the
villages. When this was done, they gathered together into the champeigne about
1000 slaves, 2000 oxen, and 10000 other cattle. The prey.
There they quartered that night. The next day Seuthes burning all the
Villages, and leaving not so much as a house, to the end to strike a terror
into other of that Nation, and to signify what they were to expect, if they
yielded not, departed thence. And he sent Heraclides to sell the prey at
Perinthus, thereby to raise pay for the Soldiers. He and the Grecians encamped
in the Plains of the Thynes, who forsaking their houses fled to the
mountains. The Snow was great, and the cold such, that the water frose, which
was carried for supper, The cold of the Country.
and the wine likewise in the vessels; and the nosthrils and ears of many of
the Grecians were si^dged with the rigor thereof. And the cause was then
perceived, why the Thracians wore fox-skins upon their heads and ea^^s, and
(sitting on horseback) coats not only upon their breasts, but also upon their
thighs, and put on gowns, that reach to their feet, and refuse the use of
cloakes. Seuthes sending some of the prisoners to the mountains, gave them to
understand, that unless they descended to inhabit their houses, and
acknowledged him for their King, he would fire their Villages also, and their
corn, and cause them die of hunger. Hereupon the women, and children, and old
men came down; the younger sort quartered in the Villages at the foot of the
mountains. Which when Seuthes had intelligence of, he commanded Xenophon to
follow him with the youngest of the armed foot. And beginning to march in the
night, they came to the Villages by break of day. The most part of the enemy
escaped away, by reason that the mountain was near. Seuthes executes his
rebels.
As many as were taken Seuthes killed with darts. There was one Episthenes an
Oly^thian, a lover of boys, who seeing a fair boy now first come to man's
estate, that had a Target, and was ready to be executed, ran to Xenophon, and
beseeched him to be a means to save the fair boy. Xenophon stepped to
Seuthes, entreating him not to kill the boy, and told him withal the fashion
of Episthenes, Episthenes.
and that he once raised a company with no other intent, than to see, if any
were fair amongst them, that with them he might show himself a brave man.
Seuthes asked: Episthenes will you die for him? He holding out his neck,
Strike, quoth he, if the boy bid, and I will hold it for a favor. Seuthes
asked the boy, whether Episthenes should be stricken in his stead. The boy
would not suffer it, but humbly sued, that neither of them might be put to
death. Then Episthenes taking the boy in his arms, Now, quoth he, Seuthes, you
and I must have a pull about this boy: For I will never let him go. Seuthes
smiling gave him leave to do what he list. He thought it best to encampe in
that place, lest they of the mountains should be relieved with victual out of
the Villages; and himself descending into the Plain, quartered there.
Xenophon having with him his chosen Soldiers encamped in the uppermost Village
near the mountains; and the rest of the Grecians not far off, in that part,
which the Thracians call the mountainous country. Many days passed not,
before the Thracians descending from the mountains practiced with Seuthes
about pledges and agreement; and Xenophon came unto Seuthes, and told him that
the Camp was seated in dangerous places, and that the enemy was near at
hand. I had rather, quoth he, encampe elsewhere, than in these streights,
where all are in peril to be lost. Seuthes willed him to be of good cheer,
showing him the pledges, which were brought unto him. Some also descending from
the mountains, entreated Xenophon to be a means of peace. He was content, and
bid them be of good comfort, and promised they should have no harm, as long as
they would be obedient to Seuthes. All that they did, was to no other end, than
to spy and discover, what was done in the Camps. So ended this days work.
Spies of the enemy.
The night following the Thynes descending from the mountains gave a Camisado.
The householder of every house was the leader. A Camisado by the Thynes.
For otherwise it would have been hard to have found the houses of the
Villages in the dark, which were set round about with great Palizados because
of the cattle. When they were come to the doors of every house, some threw in
darts, other some laid on with clubs, which they were said to carry to the end
to break off the heads of the pikes, some fired the houses, and called
Xenophon by name, willing him to come out, and die, unless he had rather be
burnt. The fire was now seen upon the roofes of the houses, and Xenophons
heavy armed were yet within, ready notwithstanding with their Targets, Swords,
and Head-peeces. And when Silanus the Macestian, who was 18 years of age, gave
a sign with the Trumpet, presently they also, that were lodged in other
houses, The Thracians Peltasts.
leaped forth with their drawn swords in their hands. The Thracians fled
immediately, casting, as their manner is, their Targets at their backs; but
whilst they climbed over the Palizadoes, some hung by the Targets, and were
taken, some slain by mistaking the goings out. The Grecians followed the
chase. Yet there were of the Thynes, which returning back in the dark,
wounded with darts such as ran by a house that was on fire, aiming out of the
dark against the light; and they wounded Hieronymus, Enodias, and Theagenes,
all Captains, yet was no man slain. There were some that had their baggage
burnt. Seuthes hasted to rescous, with the first seven horse he could recover,
having a Thracian Trumpeter; and as soon as he perceived what was in hand, he
caused the trumpet to sound all the way he came, which also struck a fear
into the enemies minds. When he came to the Grecians, he took them by the
hands, and said, that he thought he should have found many more slain.
Xenophon desired, that the Hostages might be delivered unto him; and that
Seuthes would be pleased to go with him against the mountain, or else to give
him leave to go with his own forces alone. The next day Seuthes delivered the
Hostages to Xenophon being old men, and the best, as it was said, of the
Mountainers; and joined his own forces to Xenophons. Seuthes had now thrice as
many folk, as he had before. For the Odrysans, hearing of his good success,
came in numbers to serve him. The Thynes, when they saw from the mountains
many armed, many Peltasts, and many horsemen, descended and humbly sued to
compound, and promised to do, whatsoever they were commanded, and to put in
good assurance. Seuthes calling Xenophon, told him what they said, and added,
he would make no atonement, if Xenophon would be revenged of their Camisado.
Xenophon answered, he had sufficient revenge, in that he saw them now slaves,
which were before free. But he would counsel Seuthes hereafter, in taking
Hostages, to take those that were able to do him most harm, Fit Hostages.
and to leave the old men at home. So all the Thracians of the country came
under Seuthes his subjection. Constantinople which lies in the European Thrace.
They marched from thence against the Thracians, that lie above Byzantium, and
inhabit the Territory called Delta. This country was never subject to
Mesades, but it had been under Tereus the Odrysian, that lived many years
ago. Heraclides came hither having with him the price of the spoil, and
Seuthes causing three pair of Mules (for there were no more, the rest being
yokes of Oxen) to be brought forth, calling Xenophon, offered them unto him,
the rest he parted amongst the Coronels and Captains. Xenophon made answer,
that he would be content with that, which he should bestow upon him hereafter:
now, quoth he, give to the Coronels and Captains, that follow you with me. So
Ti^^si^^ the Dard^^i^^ had one pair, Cleaner the Or^h^menian one, and
Phryniscus the Achaya^ one. The yo^es of Oxen he distributed amongst the
Captains. The month was now out, and yet the Soldiers had no more than
twenty days pay. Want of pay.
For Heraclydes said, he could sell the prey at no greater price. Xe^^ph^^
therefore being discontent told Heraclides, that he seemed not to regard
Seuthes so much, as he ought. For if you did, quoth he, you would have come
with full pay, although you had taken it up at interest, and if not otherwise,
even by selling your own clothes. Hereupon Heraclides grew angry, and feared
to be turned out of Seuthes his friendship, and from that day forward sought to
bring Xenoph^^ in disgrace with Seuthes. The Soldiers also laid the fault upon
Xe^^ph^^, that they wanted their pay; and Seuthes was displeased with him,
because he was so earnest a suitor in the behalf of the Soldiers. And whereas
he wonted to say, that as soon as he came to the Seaside, he would deliver
to Xe^^ph^^, Byza^the, and Gani^, and new castle, hence forward he never spoke
word of any such thing. For Heraclides calumniated that also, Heraclides his
calumniations.
alleging it was not safe to deliver such holds into the hands of one, that
had an Army. In the mean time Xenophon advised with himself, what was best
to be done in following Se^thes in war against the upper countries. But
Heraclides bringing in the other Coronels unto Se^thes, counseled them to say,
that if need were, they could lead the Army upon service as well as Xe^^pho^,
and promised he would take ship, and within few days bring in two months pay;
only he desired them to go forward in Seuthes his service. Timasion answered,
if you would give me five months pay, I will not serve without Xenophon.
Phryniscus and Cleanor said the like. Whereupon Se^thes gave hard words to
Heraclides, The credit of Xe^^phon with the Coronels.
for that he had not brought in X^nophon. So was Xenophon sent for alone.
Xenophon perceiving the subtlety of Heraclides, and that it was to bring him
into suspicion with the other Coronels, took unto him all the other Coronels
and Captains, and went to Se^thes. When all were agreed to proceed in the
service, they marched forward through the country of the Thracians, that are
called M^li^^ph^gi, as far as Salmydesson, leaving Pontus on their right hand.
Here many ships sailing into Pontus are shaken and cast on shore, the place
being shallow and muddy. The Thracians inhabiting that part, setting up marks
and bounds along the Sea, take every man within his precinct the wreck of that
which is cast on shore. Before they had parcelled, and bounded out the ground,
they are said to have killed one another striving about the prey. Many beds,
many chests, many books are found there, and many such other things, as
Saylors use to conueigh in wooden vessels. After these places were brought
under Seuthes his government, the Army returned. Now had Seuthes a greater
Army of his own, than the Grecians were. For many more of the Odrysians were
come down unto him, and always as he subdued any country, the people of the
country joined themsel^e^ to his service. They encamped in the Plain above
Selybria, 6 Mile and more.
about 50 Furlongs from the Sea, and no pay was yet seen to come. So the
Soldiers were^ore offended with Xenophon, The Army displeased with X^n^phon
about pay.

The General of the Lacidemonians in Asia the less.

The Army waged by the Lacedaemonians. 13. Shillings.


and Seuthes much estranged from him, and so much indeed, that when he came to
speak with him, Seuthes would make, as though he had much business. About
this time, two months being scarcely spent, came Charminus the Lacedemonian,
and Polinicus sent from Thymbro, and brought news that the Lacedaemonians were
minded to make war upon T^ssaphernes* and that Thymbro had ^lready taken ship
to prosecute that war, and had need of this Army, and added that every
Soldier should have a Daricke the month, every Captain two, every Coronell
four. As soon as the Lacedaemonians were come, Heraclides hearing, that they
addressed themselves to the army, straightwaies told Seuthes, that it came well
about for his affairs. For the Lacedaemonians, quoth he, stand in need of the
army, and you need it not. Seuthes hearing this, willed the messengers to be
brought in. When they said, they came about the army, he answered, he
willingly yielded it into their hands, and desired to be friend and confederate
with the Lacedaemonians; He then invited them to be his guests, and feasted them
royally. But he neither invited Xenophon, nor any other of the Coronels. When
the Lacedaemonians enquired, what Xenophon was for a man, he answered, that in
other things he was not ill, but he loved the Soldiers too much, Seuthes his
opinion of Xenophon.
and for that cause fared the worse. They replied: But is he not one, that can
sway the Soldiers, which way he thinks best? Heraclides answered, Yes* Will
he not then oppose against us, if we seek to lead the Soldiers away? If
making small account of him, you call them together, quoth Heraclides, and
promise them pay, they will not stay here, but haste away with you. How shall
we then assemble them, quoth they? We, quoth Heraclides, will bring you unto
them to morrow morning betimes; and I know, that as soon, as they see us, they
will gather together willingly. This day so ended. The next day Seuthes and
Heraclides brought the Lacedaemonians to the army, and the army assembled
together. The Lacedaemonians said: Our City is resolved to make war upon
Tissaphernes, who has wronged you. If therefore you will go with us, you
shall both revenge your selves upon your enemy, and also have every one of you
a Daricke the month for your pay, a Captain twice, a Coronell four times as
much. 13. Shillings.
The Soldiers gladly heard this news; and by and by there stood up an
Arcadian accusing Xenophon. Seuthes remained there to hear what the issue
would be, and he stood within hearing, having an Interpreter with him, albeit
he also of himself understood the most part of that, which was spoken in
Greek. Then the Arcadian said: We (o Lacedaemonians) had been with you long
ago, if by Xenophons persuasion we had not been brought hither, Xenophon
accused for the pay due to the Soldiers.
where lying in the field this sore Winter, we neither night, nor day, have
taken rest. He in the mean time has the fruit of our labor. Se^thes has
privately made him rich and defrauded us of our pay. So that if I, that speak
first, If I, said he, might see him stoned to death, and punished, for leading
us into this country, I should account my self satisfied of my pay, and not
be grieved hereafter with any thing, that is past. After him stood up another,
and then another. Hereupon Xenophon spoke thus: Xenophons defense.
What may not a man expect, when I am accused by you of that, wherein my
conscience witnesses with me, that I have been most desirous to do you good.
I was now returning home, when hearing, that it was not well with you, nay
rather, that you were brought to all extremity, I returned to do you service,
and to assist you in any thing, I could. After my coming, Seuthes sending many
messengers unto me, and promising many things, in case I persuaded you to come
unto him, you know, I refused and led you thither, from whence, I thought, you
might with most facility be transported into Asia. For I held it the best
course, and knew you most desired it. But when Aristarchus with his Galleys
intercepted our passage, I thereupon called you together, as it was needful,
to consult, what was to be done. You would not then hear Aristarchus, that
commanded you to march into Cherronesus, but yielded to Seuthes, that desired
to entertain you; and it was not one, but all of you, that desired to go with
Seuthes, and all of you made the decree. Say then, wherein I have wronged you,
having led you to the place, whither you all desired to go? But when Seuthes
began to defraud you of your pay, if I then commended him, or allowed of his
dealing, you have good cause to accuse and hate me. But if before that time I
was most in his favor, and now furthest out, is it right, that preferring you,
before him, you should accuse me for that, which is the cause, that he and I
are at difference? But you will say, now I have gotten from Seuthes, that,
which was yours, I may cast a fair color before your eyes. Is it not then
manifest, that if Seuthes have given me any thing, he has so given it, that
he meant not to lose it, and yet pay you your due? I should think, that in
bestowing on me the less, his purpose was to hold the greater from you. If
your opinion be such, you may if you please, make the negotiation betwixt him
and me void, by demanding your pay. For it is plain, that if I have been
bribed, he will demand the bribe again, in case, I perform not the contract.
But my conscience tells me, that I am far from intercepting any thing of
yours. For I swear unto you by all the gods, and the goddesses, that Seuthes
has not performed to me, that he promised me for mine own particular. He is
present, and hears, and knows whether I forswear my self or no. And, that
you may marvel the more, I have not received so much as other Coronels, nor so
much as some Captains. And why have I done this? Mine opinion was, the more I
suffered poverty with him, the more he would be my friend, when his ability
was greater. Now I both see him in prosperity, and know, what disposition he
is of. Some will say: Shame you not to be so childishly deceived? Truly I
should be ashamed, if I were ouerreached by an enemy. But it is more shame for
a friend to deceive, than to be deceived. And if there be any caution to be
used toward a friend, I know you all have carefully endeavored, not to give
occasion of withholding from you that, which he has promised you. We have
neither wronged him in any thing, nor fore-slowed his affairs, nor for fear
left any thing undone, that he has commanded. But you will say, assurance,
that he should not deceive, though he would, was then to be taken. Hear, I
pray you, that which I would never say against him, were not you too unjust and
unthankful toward me. For you may remember, in what case you were, when I led
you to Seuthes. If you were disposed to go into Perinthus, did not Aristarchus
the Lacedemonian shut the gates against you, and keep you out of the City?
Encamped you not in the field? Was it not the midst of Winter? The market,
you had, how was it furnished? What money had you wherewith to buy? You must
remain in Thrace; for the Galleys lay at anchor forbidding your transport.
Remaining there, you must be in the enemies country, where there were many
Horse and Peltasts. You had armed Foot indeed, with which approaching the
village we might have seized upon corn, though not much; but chase we could
not give, nor take slaves, nor cattle. For I was with you, and neither saw many
Horse, nor Peltasts. In this necessity if I joined Se^thes unto you, who had
both Horse and Peltasts, when you wanted both, had I not deserved well, albeit
I had procured you no pay? For after you were assisted with them, found you not
more plenty of come in the villages, because the Thracians were driven to a
speedy flight? And you failed not of captives and cattle; nor saw we an
enemy, since we had Horse, whereas before he followed us boldly with Horse and
Peltasts, and suffered us not to disperse in little troops, or to take
provision in any quantity. If therefore he, that wrought this security for
you, had added no pay unto it, this would have been the greatest wrong, you
had suffered; and for this were he in your judgment unworthy to live? But now
how depart you? Spent you not the Winter in plenty of all things? And for
ouer-plus, had you not that, which was given you by Seuthes? You have all this
while lived upon the enemy, and neither seen any of the Army slain, nor
miscarrying alive. Besides, if you have done any thing praiseworthy, against
the Barbarians in Asia, you hold your reputation still, and have added a new
praise by ouercomming the Thracians, against whom you warred in Europe. Truly I
affirm, you ought to give thanks to the gods, as for a benefit, for that, for
which you are now angry with me. And this is the case, you stand in. Consider
further how it is with me. I when I first departed for my country, departed
from you with your good liking and commendation, and as one, that for your
sake, had reputation amongst the rest of the Grecians. Besides, I was in credit
with the Lacedaemonians. For otherwise they would not have sent me to you
again. But now I go away accused by you to the Lacedaemonians, and for you am
in hatred with Seuthes, whom, having followed with you, I hoped to have found a
ready receiver of me and my children, when need should have been. And yet
you, for whom I am hated of them, that are much more mighty, than my self,
for whom I cease not, no not even now, to do all the good, I can, you I say,
that are thus affected toward me, have me neither running away, nor forsaking
you. But if you do that, which you threaten, know, that you shall put to death
a man, that has broken many a sleep for you, that has done many exploits,
and been in many perils with you, and both in part, and in the whole (by the
help of the gods) has erected with you many a Trophie against the Barbarians,
and taken care, that no Grecians should hold you for enemies; so that now you
may go without controlment, whither you lift either by Sea or Land. Howbeit
because you have the world at will, and may fail whither you of late desired,
and they, that are of most might, stand in need of you, and you are offered
pay, and the Lacedaemonians the men, that now are esteemed most powerful, are
come to be your leaders, you have found a time to take away my life. This was
not your mind, when you were in distress; O you men, that are so kind
rememberers of your well deseruers. Then you called me father, and promised
always to be mindful of me, as of your Benefactor. But yet you must not
imagine, that these men, which are come for you, are destitute of reason and
understanding. For, as I conceive, they will not think the better of you,
seeing in what manner you behave your selves toward me. After he had spoken
thus much, he kept silence. Then Charminus the Lacedemonian stood up and said:
I see no just cause, Charminus excuses X^nophon.
you have, to be angry with this man: my self can give him this testimony,
that when I, and Polynicu^ asked Seuthes, what Xenophon was for a man, he had
nothing else to blame him in, but that he loved his Soldiers too well, for
which cause he was in less esteem with the Lacedaemonians, and with him. Then
Eurylochus the Lusatian borne in Arcadia standing up, said: I am of opinion (o
Lacedaemonians) that you may do us much kindness, if you will be pleased to
effect this first work of a General to procure our pay of Seuthes, will he,
or nill he, and not to lead us away before we have it. Polycrates the Athenian
stood up, and spoke for Xenophon: I see (o Soldiers) Heraclides here present,
Heraclides the with-holder of the pay.
who taking the prey, which we got, and selling it, neither gave the price to
Seuthes, nor to us; but stole it, and keeps it himself. If we be wise
therefore let us call him to an account. For he is no Thracian, but a Grecian,
and has wronged Grecians. Heraclides hearing this was put in a fear, and
coming to Seuthes; If, quoth he, we love our selves, let us be gone out of
their fingers, and getting on Hors-backe they spurred to their Camp. After
this Seuthes sent his Interpreter Ebozelmius to Xenophon entreating him to stay
behind with 1000 Armed, Xenophon in danger from the Laced^monians. (...).
and promised to deliver unto him both the Sea Forts, and also the other
things, which he offered unto him, and willed the Interpreter to tell him in
secret, that he heard of Polynicus, that if the Lacedaemonians once got him, he
was sure to die by the hands of Thymbro. The same news was sent to Xenophon by
many of his Hosts, and that he was accused, and was to take heed. He hearing
this took two sacrifices, and offered to Jupiter the King, demanding whether
it should be better for him to remain and rest upon the conditions propounded
by Seuthes, or to depart with the army. It was answered, he should depart.
Afterward Seuthes removed his Camp further off. The Grecians quartered in
Villages, wherein they might make their best provision to go to Sea, which
Villages were given by Seuthes to Medosades. Medosades angry with the Grecians,
complains.
When Medosades saw the goods of these Villages consumed by the Grecians, he
grew displeased; and taking with him an Odrysian one of the chiefest of them,
that came down to Seuthes, and about fifty Hors-men, he came and called
Xenophon out of the Grecian Camp; who came forth accompanied with some of the
Captains, and with other, such as he thought good. Then, quoth Medosades, You
offer wrong (Xenophon) in wasting our Villages. Therefore we forewarne you, I
from Seuthes, and this man, from Medocus, the King of the upper Country, to
depart hence: otherwise you shall not carry it so. For if you harrie the
Country so, we are resolved to defend our Country, as against enemies.
Xenophons answer.
Xenophon, hearing these things, said: I would hardly answer your accusation,
were it not for this young man's sake. We, before we were your friends, ranged
this Country at our pleasure, wasting what we thought good, and burning what
we thought good. And you, when you came Ambassador to us, rested in our Camp
without fear of any enemy. Your selves were not in the Country, and when you
came into it at any time, you remained in your quarters with your Horse
bridled, as in a Country of enemies, that were too strong for you. Afterward
you became friends to us, and by our means got the possession of the Country:
and now you seek to chase us out of the Land, which by our furtherance you
conquered by force (for as you know the enemy was not of strength sufficient
to drive us out) and not only give us no gifts for our well deserving, but as
much, as in you lies, suffer us not to quarter here at our departure. And
speaking these things you neither reverence the gods, nor this man, who sees
you now suddenly made rich, whereas, before the time you joined with us in
friendship (as your self confessed to me) you led your life in robbery. But
why speak you these things to me? For I have no longer the command: You, men
forsooth worthy to be admired, have delivered over the Army to the
Lacedaemonians, not calling me to counsel, that as I offended them, in bringing
it to you, so by rendering it up to them again, I might be reconciled, and win
their favor. When the Odrysian heard these things, he said: The rehearsal of
these passages (o Medosades) strike me under the earth; and had I known before
hand, what your propositions would have bin, I would never have followed you
hither. For King Medocus will have no good opinion of me, if I should join
with you in chacing away your benefactors. Then Medosades (for he was grieved
to see the country spoiled) desired Xenophon to call the two Lacedaemonians. He
taking with him such as he thought meet, went to Charminus and Polynicus, and
said, Medosades would feign speak with you: and desire you (as he did me) to
depart the country. Now I conceive, you may, if you please, be a meane^to
recover the Armies pay, by telling him, that the Army besought you to procure
it from Seuthes either with or against his will; and said, that when they had
received (...), they would willingly follow you, The two Lacedaemonians are
means to recover the Soldiers pay.
and that they seemed to have good ^ight to that they demanded, and that you
promised them not to depart before they recovered their right. The
Lacedaemonians answered, that they would speak, both what they were info^med,
and any thing else, which they thought to the purpose, and presently they went
forth, taking such with them as they liked of Charminus coming where Medosades
was, said: Have you any thing to say to us, Medosades? If not, we have to say
to you. Medosades then very humbly, I, quoth he, and Seuthes desire this, that
being friends we suffer no ho^tilitie at your hands. For what harm soever you
do to these country folks, you do it to us, whose sub^^cts they are. The
Lacedaemonians answered, we are ready to depart, as soon as they, by whose
means you enjoy the land, are satisfied for their pay. If no^, we come to
assist them, and to punish such, as wrong them contrary to their oath. If you
be the men, we will begin to do right upon you. Then said Xenophon: Are you
content, Medosades, to give them in whose country you are, seeing you say they
are your friends, authority to determine, whether you, or we, shall leave the
country. He would not hear of that, but desired the two Lacedaemonians to go
to Se^th^s about the pay, and thought that Seuthes would not deny it. If not,
Xenophon sent to Seuthes about the pay.
to send Xenophon with him, and promised to set to his helping hand. Besides he
desired forbearance of burning the Villages. Thereupon they dispatched Xenophon
away, with such other men, as they thought convenient. When he came to Seuthes,
he used this speech: His words to Seuthes.
I am come to you (o Seuthes) not as a suitor for any thing, but only to show,
you have no cause to be angry with me, for that I labored to obt^ine the
Soldiers pay, which you cheerfully promised at their first coming to you.
For I thought it was no less profitable for you to give it, than for them to
take it; and I knew, that these men, next after the gods, were they that set
you in so conspicuous a place, making you King of a large Territory, and of
much people, that whether you do good or evil, it cannot be kept in secret.
And I am of opinion, that it is a matter of great consequence in such a man, as
you are, not to seem to send away your benefactors ingratefully, and without
recompense, and of as great to be well spoken of by 6000 men; but the greatest
is, not to derogate credit from your own word. For I see the word of false men
wande^^th up and down vain, and weak, and void of honor. But such as are
known to speak truth, obtain as much by request, as other men do by force,
and in corrections their threatenings are as powerful, as other men's
punishments, and in promises they are believed no less, than they that give
assurance. You should do well also to call to mind, what you gave us, when
you made us your confederates. I know you gave nothing; A Talent is valued at
175 li. sterling, and 50 Talents are 875^ li. sterling.
but being believed to say true, you animated so many men to follow you, and to
purchase you such a kingdom, as is worth not 50 talents (as much as is thought
to be due to these men) but manif^^d times more. First therefore sell not for
that little money, that is due to the Soldiers, your credit, whereby you have
purchased this Kingdom. Then I would have you consider, how highly you
esteemed the compassing of that, which you have obtained. I make no doubt if it
were undone, you would wish it effected, rather than to possess much more
riches than is demanded. For my part I hold it a greater affront and shame, now
not to continue the possession, than at first not to have gained it, by how
much it is harder for a rich man to endure poverty, than not to have been
rich, and to fall from a Kingdom to a private estate, than at first, not to
have reigned. Do you not know, that they, who are now your subjects, obey you
at this time not for friendship, but for necessity? and that they would
attempt their freedom again, were they not held in by fear. Whether then
think you, they will more fear and respect you when they see these Soldiers
ready to stay, if you desire them, or quickly return, if you need them, and
that other besides hearing their good report of you, will attend your service,
when you shall please to use them; or if they conceive, that other will refuse
you, because they believe you not, and these now here bear a better opinion of
them, than of you? Nay they were brought under your subjection, not because
they were fewer in number than we, but for want of good Commanders. Therefore
there is danger also in this, lest they choose some of them Commanders, who
think they are wronged by you, or else the Lacedaemonians, who are of more
power, to whom the Soldiers will doubtless be more zealous in service, if they
compel you to render to them the arrerages of pay, and the Lacedaemonians will
sooner consent, because they stand in need of the Army. This also is not
obscure, that the Thracians brought under your subjection will more cheerfully
take Arms against you, than with you. For if you prevail, they must become
your slaves, as they must be free, if you be overcome. And accounting the
Country your own, whether think you it will be better preserved from spoil
if these Soldiers receiving their claim depart in peaceable manner, or if
they stay here, as it were in an enemies Territory, and force you to levy
more, than they are, against them, which must also be fed upon the Country?
Now for Money, whether imagine you, will be the greater expense to pay them
that you owe, or this debt still remaining due, to wage other Soldiers by aid
of whom you may ouer-master these? But the debt seems a great sum to
Heraclydes, as he told me himself. Whether then is it not much easier now to
take it up and pay it, than it was to take up the tenth part of it before we
came unto your service? For it is not the quantity, that makes much or
little, but the ability of him that gives, or receives; and your yearly
revenue is now more, than the worth of all, you possessed before. These things
did I forecast in mind, as your friend, that both you might seem worthy of
that, which the gods have bestowed upon you, and I not leese my reputation with
the Army. For you know well, that at this present I can neither harm an
enemy, nor succor you hereafter, though I would never so feign: Such is the
affection of the Army toward me. And I take your self, and the gods, that
know all things, to witness, that I have neither received any thing of you in
regard of them, nor demanded ought of theirs to my private use, no nor any of
those things, you promised me. And I swear further unto you, I would never
have taken gift of yours, unless the Soldiers had received that, which is
their own. For it would be a shame for me, having been so much honored by
them, to procure mine own advantage, and neglect theirs. But Heraclides
esteems all things trifles, save only money, howsoever it is gotten. I
contrariwise (o Seuthes) think, that a man (especially a Ruler) can have no
fairer possessions, than Virtue, Justice, and Generositie. The possessor of
these is enriched with many friends for the present, and enriched with other
that hereafter will seek for his friendship; and in good fortune he has them,
that will rejoice with him; in ill, that will be ready to assist and help
him. But if by my deeds you perceived not, that I was your friend from my
heart, nor yet knew it by my words, remember notwithstanding the words of the
Soldiers. For you were present and heard, what was spoken by them, that sought
to bring me into hatred; who charged me to the Lacedaemonians that I made more
account of you, than of the Lacedaemonians, and for themselves likewise, that I
more regarded your welfare, than theirs. They said I had received gifts of
you. And when they accused me of these gifts, do you think, they saw in me an
ill affection toward you, or rather a desire to do you service? I am of this
mind, that whosoever receives gifts, he ought to love and esteem of him,
that is the giver. Before I came to your service, you entertained me kindly in
countenance, and in words, and hospital gifts, and made no end of promises:
now you have compassed your desire, and are as great, as I can make you, seeing
the small estimation the Soldiers have me in, you dare contemn me. But I
firmly believe, time will teach you, that this money is to be paid, and that
you will give no cause of complaint to those, that have so well deserved at
your hands. Only this is my desire, that when you pay it, you would have a care
to restore me to the same place with the Soldiers, wherein you found me at the
first. Seuthes hearing this, cursed him, that was the cause, why the Soldiers
were not paid long before (every man imagined he meant Heraclides) For I,
quoth Seuthes, will pay the arrerages* and never had in mind to defraud the
Soldiers of the least part of their due. Then spoke Xenophon again: Seeing it
is your pleasure to make payment, let me entreat you to do it by my hands, and
not to see me in worse case with the Soldiers for your cause, than I was, when
I came to your service. Seuthes answered: You shall not by my means. Seuth^s
assenteth to pay the Soldiers.
But if you will stay with me and hold with you 1000 Armed, I will give you the
Towns, and other things I promised you. Xenophon told him, It could not be, as
matters stood. But I pray, quoth he, send us away. I know, quoth Seuthes, it
will be safer for you to remain here, than to depart. Xenophon again replied:
I thank you for your care of me, but I cannot stay. Howbeit wheresoever I
become, the more estimation I have, it shall not be the worse for you. The
pledges of the Thracians that gave the Camisado to Xenophon before.
Then, quoth Seuthes, I have no money, but a little, viz. one Talent, which I
will deliver unto you, but you shall have 600 Oxen, 4000 Sheep, and 120
Captives. Taking these, and the pledges of them, that wronged you, go your
ways. Then Xenophon smiling, said: If these suffice not to make up the pay,
whose Talent shall I say I have? But seeing I cannot depart hence without
danger, is it not better to stay here, and take heed of stones? For you heard
their threatenings. So he remained there. The next day Seuthes delivered that
which he promised, and sent men to drive the cattle. The Soldiers in the
mean time gave out, that Xenophon was gone to remain with Seuthes, and to
receive the things which were promised him. But when they saw him come, The
Army satisfied.
they rejoiced, and ran to meet him. Xenophon as soon as he saw Charminns and
Polynicus, You, quoth he, are the men that have preserved these things for the
Soldiers, and I deliver them into your hands, dispose you of the sale, and
deliver the price to the Soldiers. They taking and appointing men to sell
them, raised money for the Soldiers, Xenophon banished his country for
following Cyrus, who was a friend to the La^edemonians.

Lampsacus a City in Asia the less.


but not without imputation of much corruption. Xenophon came not near, but
openly made ready to go to his country. For it was not yet signified unto
him, that he was banished, but some especial men of the Army came unto him,
desiring him not to depart, till he had conducted the Army, and delivered it
unto Thymbro. From thence they sailed over to Lampsacus, where Euclydes the
Phliasian Soothsayer, the son of Cleagoras, who painted the dreams in the
Lycaum, met Xenophon. He was glad to see Xenophon in health, and asked him, how
much gold he had. Xenophon not greedy of riches.
Who swore he had not enough to bring him home, unless he sold his horse, and
other things, which were about him. Euclydes believed him not: but when the
Lampsacens sent hospital gifts to Xenophon, and Xenophon offering sacrifice to
Apollo, desired Euclydes to be at the sacrifice, Euclydes then looking upon the
Sacrifice, said; he believed now that Xenophon had no money: and I know, quoth
he, if hereafter you happen to get any, you will have an impediment, if no
other, you will be an impediment to your self. Xenophon confessed this to be
true. Euclydes proceeded: An Epithet given to Jupiter, signifying favorable or
gentle.
Jupiter Milichius, quoth he, will hinder you. He further asked him, whether he
had sacrificed, as I, quoth he, am wont for you at home, and burn the whole
beast. Xenophon said, he had not offered to that god all the time of his
travel. Euclydes advised him therefore to sacrifice unto the god, and your
affairs, said he, will prosper better. The next day Xenophon marching on to
Ophrynium sacrificed, A City in the country Troas.
and burnt whole Hogs, after his country manner. The same day came Bito^ and
Euclydes to pay the Army; and they were Xenophons guests, and they released
and restored to Xenophon (refusing to take the price of the redemption) the
horse, Xenophons horse released, being pawned. 32 li. 10 s.
which he had pawned at L^mpsacus for 50 Daricks, suspecting he pawned him for
need, because they heard that he delighted in him. Then marching through the
Territory of Troy, and passing over I Would, they came first to Antandrum, and
then held on along the Sea side of Lydia to the Plain of Thebe. From thence
marching forward by Adramytti^m and Cert^nium (not far from Atarna) to the
Plain of Caycus, they reached to Pergamus a City of Lydia. Here Hellas the
wife of Gongylus the Eretrian, mother of Gorgy^^ and Gongylus entertained
Xenophon for her guest. She told him, that Asidates a Persian was in the
Plain. If you go by night, quoth she, with 300 men, you may take him, his
wife, and children, and much riches. She gave him for Guides her cousin
germane, and Daph^agoras a special friend of hers. Xenophon therefore having
these with him offered sacrifice. Agasias the Elaean soothsayer being present,
said, that the entrails were fair, Xenophon upon an exploit.
and that Asidates might be taken prisoner. They went to supper, and after
supper Xenophon taking the Captains to him, that were his best friends, and
had always been faithful unto him, and therefore desiring to do them a
kindness, proceeded on his journey* There went also with him, whether he would
or no, other about 600 Soldiers. But the Captains posted away before to
prevent them of partage, as though the money had been ready to their hands.
Coming to the place about midnight, they suffered the slaves, that lay near
the Castle, and many other things to slip away, their care being only to take
Asidates and his company. When they could not take the Castle by assault (for
it was high and great, and had many bulwarks and defendants expert in fight)
they went about to sap the foot thereof. The wall was of the thickness of
eight bricks. Sapping of a Castle.
By break of day it was pierced through, and when it was light one of the
defendants struck him that stood next, through the thigh with an Oxe-goad, and
further with their arrows they made it dangerous for any man to approach to
the Tower, or come in sight. When those in the Castle made an outcry, and put
out fire for a sign, Itabelius with his own forces, and with the Garrison of
Co^ania, being armed foot, A sign for succor.
and with about 80 Hircanian horsemen (which were in the Kings pay) and other
Peltasts about 800 came to rescous. Other also out of Parthenion, other out of
Apollonia, and the neighbor Cities, being horsemen. Now was it time to think,
how our Retreat should be made. Therefore taking the Oxen and other cattle,
and the captives, and couching them within a hollow square, they hasted away,
(...). Xenophons retreat.
not so much thinking upon the riches, as that (if they should depart, leaving
that behind them, which they had gotten) their Retreat might seem a plain
running away; besides that, that the enemy would grow into heart, and the
Soldiers be discouraged. Now they retreated fighting, as it were, for the
prey. When Gongylus saw the Grecian^ so few, and the enemy, that pressed them,
so many in number, he by compulsion of his mother issued out with his own
forces to be partaker of the fray. And Procles out of Alisarna, and
Teuthranias, who was descended from Demaratus, came likewise to rescous.
Xenophons soldiers being ouerlaid with arrows and Ilings, casting themselves
into a Ring, A Ring. (...).
to the end to oppose their arms against the arrows, with much ado passed
over the river Caijcus, wellnigh half of them being wounded. Amongst the
number of whom was Agasias the Stymphalian, who continued the fight against the
enemy during the whole Retreat. Thus they came safe home, having 200 captives,
and cattle sufficient for sacrifice. Xenophon sacrificing the next day, led
out his Army by night, that he might go as far as he could into Lydia, and
give no cause of fear to the enemy by being so near, but make him negligent
upon his guard. Asidates hearing that Xenophon had the second time sacrificed
about him, and that he was marching with all ^is Army, went out of his Castle,
and lodged in the Villages not far from the City Parthenium. There Xenophons
soldiers lighted upon him, Assidates taken prisoner.
and took him prisoner, and his wife, and his children, and his horse, and all
that he had. So that the former sacrifice took effect now. Afterward they
returned back again to Pergamus; and thenceforth Xenophon had no cause to
complain of that god. For the Lacedaemonians also, and Captains, and Soldiers
consented to give him an extraordinary share, Xenophon rewa^ded with a large
portion.
of horse, and oxen, and other things; so that he was thereby able to gratify
a friend. Not long after came Thymbro, and took the Army, and joining it to
the rest of the Grecian forces made war against Tissaphernes.

These were the Governors of the Kings Provinces, that we iournied through:
Artymas of Lydia, Artacamas of Phrygia, Mithridates of Lycaonia and Cappadocia;
of Cilicia, Synesis; of Phoenicia and Arabia, Dernes; of Syria and Assyria,
Belesis; of Babylonia, Roparas; of Media, Arbacas; of the Phasians and
Hesperites, T^ribazus: The Carduchans, Chalybes, Chaldaa^s, Macrons, Choicans,
Mosynaecans, Coitans, and Tibarens, are people under no man's subjection.
Paphlagonia is ruled by Corylas, the Bithynians by Pharnabazus, the Europaean
Thracians by Seuthes. The total number of the Ascent and Descent is 215
Encampings, 1150 Parasangs, 34255 Furlongs. 4281 mile, and more.
The time of the Ascent and Descent one year and three months.

FINIS.
A COMPARISON OF THE ROMAN MANNER OF WAR, WITH THIS OF OUR TIME; OVT OF THE
END OF THE FIFTH Book of IVSTVS LIPSIVS, De Militia Romana.
WE have considered 5. things in the Roman warfare: their Musters, their Arms,
their degrees and distribution of Bands, their Embattelling, and their
Discipline. To make a true comparison betwixt our manner of war and theirs,
we must weigh the one with the other in equal balance of all these
generalities, and observe by the consequents and advantages, which of them is
to be preferred before other.

Therefore to speak first of Musters, Musters.
it is no doubt but that they used an excellent course in making choice of the
best and most honest men. Which notwithstanding will hardly at this day be
imitated by us, as our fashions and government are; unless happily it be in
some Free-estate. But they amongst us are few, or else but weak. And the
Venetian alone, which is of means and ability sufficient, for certain
private regards debarreth her people for the most part from service: I except
the service of the Sea. Kings and Princes will not be tied to this Roman
form, and have their causes. It would be hard to rate their Soldiers after
such a Subsidy or Assessment; and scarce safe to allow them the like liberty
of Arms. But of things of this nature we have discoursed in our Politikes. Now
I hold thus much, that every Prince may to his great commodity, devise
another course than is in use now adays in Musters. It is not unknown what
the Turk does in his Ianizars. I would have many or few Legions (according to
ability or revenues of State) be levied of fit men, and bound and framed to
service from their youth, till a prefixed time. There is an Art of handling of
Arms, and the profession of the name, or the countenance or apparel changed,
make not by and by a Soldier. But I refer you again to my Politikes, and
the notes, which I purpose to set forth.

The next thing is the degrees and division of Bands, after they are levied.
Ordo.
O how good was this amongst the Romans in all respects? The distribution of
the parts apt: the greater body of the Legions, the principal members the
Cohorts, the Lymmes, the Maniples themselves. Look into the placing of
Leaders, and Captains, Ensigns, Lieutenants, there is nothing too much,
nothing wanting, all for use, nothing ^or pomp or burden. Let that, which I
have spoken, be considered of. Much may be borrowed from thence for the good of
service in General, much also for the good of the Treasury.

Arma.
Arms come in the third place. Here they say, We go by the worst. They make
sport when we enter into speech of these matters; they tread down and spurn
with their feet, Slings, Darts, Arrows, only in regard of these our Guns: and
boldly give out that no Roman army had ever been able to endure these
thunderbolts and crackes, especially if they had been beaten with the greater
and more violent kind of Ordinance. These, and more than these are their
vaunts, which a man skillful of Antiquities would not be to seek to answer and
refute.

First, where they so lightly esteem of all these flying weapons, I scarcely
believe they well know their might. How much do Slings differ in effect and
force (for their form is very different) from our small shot? this at the
first hearing seems a thing worthy of laughter; but examine it with me. Both
the bullets be of Lead: neither is there much diversity betwixt their
greatness or shape; nor yet do the Slings much give place in power or
violence. I must believe those, which have seen it, and which were in the
ancient wars even then, when these Engines were managed with Art and use.
They therefore write, that which may equal, if not prefer them before Guns.

Concerning violence, it is so forceable in a Sling unladen with skill, that
the very bullet has been often molten with fire conceived in flying. This
appears by the testimony of Lueretius, Ovid, Lucan, and Statius. Do you not
happily credit Poets? Let the Philosopher come. Seneca affirms, that Motion
does extenuate the air, and extenuation inflame it: So does a bullet thrown
out of a Sling melt, and distilleth by the attrition of the air, as by fire.

The like is found written in Aristotle: And yet it loses not his force, but
being so on fire pierces the body. Virgill.

With molten Lead his Temples twain disparted stand,
His lims extended lie upon the yellow sand.
It kills with one blow. And I marvel not that David, being both young and a
Slinger, did overthrow the monstrous Goliath with this weapon. And that you may
at once, and fully know the virtue thereof, hear what Diodorus Siculus says
of the inhabitants of the Isles Baleares. They throw stones (for you know that
these also, not only Lead are delivered out of Slings) much greater than other
Slingers, and with such stiffenesse and strength, that the blow seems to come
from some Engine. You see he compares it with an Engine. And he adds
further, that it pierces Targets and Caskes, and all defense of Armor. I
deny that there can be greater force in small shot, and perhaps there is not
so great, except in Muskets only. Now the Slings are much better in one
respect, that they reach and hurt a great way further. Which of our small
Pieces carries his force point blanke, above 200. or 300. foot? It faints or
straieth from the mark, if you aim further off. But the bullet of a Sling
has carried his full strength 600. foot, as you may find it clearly
expressed in Vegetius. The archers and slingers set up for a mark Besomes,
that is, bundles of twigs, or grass, so that being 600. foot distant from the
mark, they hit it with arrows and with ^tones thrown out of a Sling. He
joins it here with arrows, and gives the distance, I spoke of, to either of
them. But there are other, that prefer it before arrows, and hold that the
sling-bullet outfli^th them. You shall read in Strabo: That a Sling carries
further than a Bow: In Dio; The Slingers ouer-reaching the Archers did hurt
all, yea the armed men. This he reports in the expedition of Marcus Antonius
against the Parthians; who notwithstanding, as all agree, were well armed, and
special good Archers: and yet Slingers were too good for them. Which Xenophon
also writes plainly in the acts of his contrymen the Grecians. For the
Rhodian Slingers, says he, reached further than the Persian, and than many of
the Archers. Therefore they reached far.

But went they near the mark? All testify they did, especially the Islanders
of the Baleares; and that they learned this certainty in throwing even from
their Cradle.

Also you may read in the Bible, that seven hundred or thereabouts, of the
Inhabitants of Gabaa were so good marke-men with a Sling that they could hit
you a hair. Enough of Slings.

Some say that Gunnes do more terrify by reason of their sound. I grant it.
But whom do they terrify? Birds? For I cannot think that true Soldiers will
be moved with their sound or fiery sight; unless perhaps at the first. And
truly I am of opinion, that if the Romans had joined battle with us, they
would at the first have feared the show and reports of our Pieces: But at the
first only. After they had discerned the truth they would have been the same,
they were wont; especially so armed, they would by covering themselves with
their Targets have weakened or made vain the stroke of the Bullet.

And for great Ordinance I see no reason to repute it so terrible, in as much
as those, that have had the experience, clearly confess, that they never saw
battle broken by this kind of Artillery. A plain Hillocke, or Rampire, or
top of a Trench in the way breaks the force of this so terrible Engine. These
things are known to Soldiers; and excepting at the siege of Towns, this
Engine serves rather for a show, than to work great masteries in the wars.
I omit the disaduantages which follow it, and forbear to oppose and bend
against it the Roman Engines. This matter requires a larger discourse, and is
to be reserved for some other place.

I come to Darts, which they likewise sport at. Yet have they this commodity,
that they are fit for ready and speedy service, and at all times and places.
It is not so in Guns, which have a time both to be charged and also discharged,
and hinderance from rain and other casualties. And do not Darts outreach
them? I observe that they are matched with Arrows by Homer, in whom Ulysses
glories thus of himself: I cast a Dart as far, as other do an Arrow shoot.

Although this attributed to Ulysses is not commonly true, and the Arrow flies
further of both. But how much? The proportion is expressed in Statius: As far
as Arrows fly at thrice, and four times with a Dart you throw.

He measures out a Theater for Plays and describes it: And it was so much
ground, says he, as you can reach with casting a Dart four times, and
shooting an Arrow thrice. Therefore an Arrow reached further than a Dart by a
fourth part of distance. And if that flew six hundred foot, then this four
hundred and above. So that I have good cause to smile at the asseueration of an
Italian Writer, one yet skillful in these things, who constantly denies that
any Arm is of force sufficient to throw a Stone or other weapon forty Paces.
Peace man, and believe a thing so common in all antiquity. And had these Darts
any force? You have seen in the kind of Dart called Pilum: whereof I have
entreated in my third Book. Will you hear of another kind?

Tragula.
The Spaniards, Gauls and sometimes the Romans, used a Dart called Tragula. Of
it does, I know not what Writer report in Suidas: Cotta fought with a weapon,
that is termed Tragula, which he threw so violently, that through Curace, and
sides, he fastened to the earth, as with a nail, whomsoever he hit. A Gods
name what Arms were these? how grown in strength either by Nature, or by
Skill gotten through exercise? Arrows.
I will say nothing of Arrows. Both they were in estimation within the memory
of man, and peradventure they are now altogether given over not upon the best
advice. I find in Plutarks Crassus, that the Parthian Arrows forced all kind
of Armor: In Agathias the Historian, that Arrows shot by the hand of one
Aligernus a Gothe, passed through a man's body, Target, Curace, and all. And that
you will marvel at, if they fell upon a stone, or other hard thing not easy
to be broken, they shiuered it to fitters with the violence of the blow. Look
your self, if you please, in Procopius, what he writes every where of the
Archers of his age. I only take this out of him: That an Arrow was put off with
that force, that neither Curace, nor Target, could make resistance. This may
suffice for light-weapons, which notwithstanding are the principal in our
wars. They try the whole encounter, and straight either gain or lose the
Field. True and lasting fights are only now to be read of. I speak not all
this because I hold the ancient weapons better, than those we now use, but only
to show that they are not to be contemned, and that some of them are to be
taken up at this day, and to be mingled with ours. This would be a gallant and
profitable manner of service, if it were handled by men ripe in exercise,
otherwise these weapons are not worth a pin.

Now for the fashion of arming the Romans, what can be alleged, why it should
not be the best of all other? Armor.


A man was armed from head to foot, his legs not uncovered, and had a large
Target, a principal defense both for Horse and Foot. The Target.
I affirm that there is no Armor of more use, than the Target. But our sloth,
or rashness, has cast it clean out of doors. Some neighbors yet retain
it, as the Polish Hors-men, and Turks. We, as I said, have slothfully laid it
down, or else carelessly; as though we were safe by contempt of things serving
for our defense. Yet I urge it not, because I see such as have written of
war, acknowledge this fault, and exhort to amendment. Surely the most of our
men are unarmed, and what else, but to be compared to velitarie bands? open to
hurts, and therefore fearful, because nature, careful of her self,
compels to fear. I speak not of Pike-men, Pikes.
whom we arm according to the laudable custom of the Macedonians. And yet we
have few of them, I mean we Netherlanders, or French. The Spaniards have, I
confess, who also by a proverb do term the Pike Queen of weapons. The
Swisses most of all, who in times past were famous in this kind of fight, and
the true Phalangites. But now they begin to use them more sparingly, and to
mingle other kinds of light weapons with them.

And what is mine opinion? I deliver it not, because Polybius has spoken
sufficiently for me, where he compares the Roman and Macedonian Arms of
purpose. What can I bring more wise, or more sound, than is by him alleged?
Notwithstanding this is my judgment: That the Romans good and pliable to
imitate all good things used few Pikes, and in Marius and Caesar's time they
gave over those, that the Triarij did bear. The cause was, for that it is no
convenient weapon for a battle marshalled and distinguished into Maniples. It
ought to be a large and coherent body, where Pikes are of force; being divided
they are unprofitable. Further, but few Pikes serve to much purpose in a great
body, seeing the first Ranks only can charge them, and the rest give no
further help, than by thrusting on with their bodies. Moreover, such a battle
immovable for the most part, and uniform, is strong only in Front: it can
hardly turn upon the sudden and not break. Lastly, he that carries that
weapon, has almost no use of any other (yet the Macedonians had also a
Hurling-staffe) and specially he cannot fitly bear or wield a great Target.
The Romans considered these things, and perhaps more than these. And albeit
they often endangered Phalanges, and sometimes with their own danger (as
Paulus Aemilius is said to have quaked at the sight of a thick Phalange
coming on with their Pikes charged) yet did they more esteem their own
weapons, and judge them better for all kind of service. For they themselves
were able to fight in all kinds, in Front, in Flank, and behind, and also
were able all to serve, as occasion served. As in a body it is best, when all
parts are active and every one fit for his office; so is it in a battle: for,
as Liuy says, The Phalange is immovable and of one kind, the Roman battle
consisting of many parts, easy to be divided, easy to be joined and knit
together, if use require. Add that the Romans could range and unite themselves
in rough and uneven grounds, the Phalange, which consists of thickness and
depth, could not to any purpose. And therefore if a ditch, hill, hedge, or
other thing came in the way, it was presently disioyned, and the manipular
Battalion insinuated it self into the void spaces, and so overthrew the
Phalange. And yet I deny not, that Pikes are of good use in our customs and
fights, especially against horsemen, whose charge they notably sustain and
repulse. But what need is of them in the Roman manner of arming? when the
Velites for the most part gave the first charge in the Front, and made the
horses stand off; if they could not, the Legionarie soldier with his Darts did
easily stay, or put them to flight. This weapon was heavy and powerful,
whereof every Soldier carried a couple; so that they might very well put the
horse to retreat with defense of their great Targets, or else with threatening
the point (as I conceive) of the other Dart, especially being knit together
shoulder to shoulder and close. This I am sure of, that the Roman battle was
seldom broken by the impression of the horsemen only, which is commonly seen
at this day. What? will you say not by the Parthians? Yes. But mark that I
spoke of impression. The Parthians did for the most p^rt ouerwhelme the Romans
with their arrows afar off, and never came to the shock. Therefore they
overthrew them not, but by little and little wounded and wasted them by coming
on and retiring after their manner. The same would befall our Pikemen through
the enemies shot, were they not answered with like weapons, and with horsemen.
Wherefore I thus resolve concerning Pikes, that they were not necessary for
the Romans, and yet are profitable for us, and so would be, although we should
take up the Roman armor in part. I have seen some that would have them
mingled, and would have maniples armed partly with Swords and Targets, partly
with Pikes. Let Commanders and men of experience consider thereof.

The fourth thing is Embattailing, which if I should account perfect and sound
at all hands in the Roman manner of raunging, Acies.
Reason would be on my side. In the Front were the Hastati, the weakest; next
after them the Principes, more strong; then the Triarij, strongest of all, that
the enemy might be weakened and spent by degrees. The horsemen were placed on
the Flanks, to save the Battle from enuironing and encompassing: and if the
enemies horse charged the Romans front, then were the Roman horse to give on
their flank. I need not repeat many things, I have discoursed before. But this
is of greatest mark, and a principal matter for victory, that the Battalions
have their spaces and intervals, and the Velites in them or before them. So
that the Statarie Soldier serves the Velites for retreat, that they may
without danger entertain, or forsake the skirmish at their pleasure. Go to,
say the whole Band of the Velites is defeated and of no use, what inconvenience
is it? The Ranks stand entire, and the Velites being wisely kept unmixed and
divided from them, the Statarie Soldier thinks not that he has lost any
thing by the overthrow of the Velites. Therefore they enter the fight fresh and
whole, and nothing impaired in body or mind, and to be short, with
assuredness and certainty of retreat into the intervals. Consider you
Commanders, this is a great secret, that your Soldier be bold and confident,
fight with hope of victory, being compelled retreats without fear of
ignominy or danger. So was it amongst the Romans by reason of their triple
battle of their Hastati, Principes and Triarij, which last undertook the
maine danger with assurance of their own strength. There were the Commanders,
there the Standard, there the old Soldier, and in sum there was Victory
because Valor was there. Pack away you Turks with your Ianizars, which usurp
a manner of resemblance, but a false resemblance of the ancient discipline. If
it were a true one, we had not now been. For I rest out of doubt of this, if
the ancient were joined to these our newfound Arms, and withal the true
marshalling of Bands and kind of embattailing used, the old and new World
would shortly be subject to one man. O secret truly heavenly, which men rather
guess at than understand, and which gouernest this world with a wonderful
temper, bridlest, or aduancest the wicked, and liftest up or throwest down the
good, even as they depart from or come to thee. I display not my wings nearer
to this Sun, lest I melt, or be consumed; but I cry with a f^ee voice, He
that will attain to Glory or Empire, let him turn to the ancient Discipline.
For surely if our light Soldiers (so I call shot) were mixed between the
Maniples and before the Maniples of the armed with intervals and distances for
retreat, and that against the horse and armed foot; what battle durst assail,
nay what battle could resist us? For in regard hereof our men should be
always fit to charge, fit to retire for a second charge. All which
notwithstanding is to be done with long use and exercise, lest they trouble us
in the doing. I call you to witness, you Commanders, that I speak truth.
Imitate it then in good faith, but against them that oppugn the Faith.

There are many things in particular concerning ordering of Battles, whereof we
might give a taste, but precepts we cannot now give; and these depend upon a
wit truly martial, that is, fiery and high. He that can, let him conceive; he
that cannot, let him yield and be beaten. Thus much I admonish, that herein may
be found out a large field of Stratagems, and that no other means has gained
more victories or trophies. Whatsoever is unlooked for troubles the enemy,
provided that it disorder not thy own. Let that be a certain and infallible
rule. For every small invention is not by and by to be embraced or of
efficacy, but only such a one, as is squared out by circumspection and heed.
He ought to be an Argus, that is a Commander, and to have eyes in his back,
forhead, head, and feet. And yet all things are easy to be ordered, where this
common good order has his being. Give me Cohorts, give me Maniples so placed
one to second another, so ordered, so wonted to join, or disioyne, I will
always undertake to have the body of a battle in readiness, such as your
self or occasion require.

Discipline.
Discipline is the last. Alas of what should I make comparison? Would I could
find any color or show to begin. But howsoever the ancient Discipline be
esteemed, at this day there is none at all; and so those that have been
Soldiers will confess. O shame, o dishonor. The Barbarians and Scithians go
beyond us herein, and have some ordinances, we none.

What should I then compare? Should I praise, or exhort men to the Roman
discipline? It is not only good, but the best of all, that have been, that
shall be, given from heaven for an example. Let wise men meet, and sit in
council, they cannot in conceit, in writing, comprehend a fuller, a better.
Exhort I then to the use thereof? As our men and manners are I dare not. It is
enough, if in general I induce any form of Discipline; without which there
can be not only no perfection or success, but scarcely any name of service.
Other are robberies, which men exercise without law, right, or measure. I would
be loath to call ours by that name (neither indeed ought I, the cause being
good) but in good sooth we touch not the line of the other. I have made three
parts of Discipline; Duties, Exercise, and Laws. They are severally to be
considered, and whether there be any good in them to serve our purposes.

Duties extend to Guards, Ministeries, Works, and to those things whereof I
have entreated at large. Duties.
For Guards, we have some show, and that not ill digested. Guards.
Yet do I believe, that in time past there have been better or safer: as the
Stations before the gates of the camp, the Guard-tallies, the continual
Round, the relieuing of Guards, the differences and diu^sion of hours, and
such like, which an industrious General may mark and put in practice.

Ministeries.
Ministeries are either out of date amongst us, or else voluntary and without
law. Yet who can deny, but that such like may with comeliness be used toward
the Coronels and Commanders without vexation of the Soldiers, being parted
amongst them by turns?

But Works are the chief and most profitable, Works.
yea the most necessary part, not only for victory, but also for safety. And
yet why is entrenching of the Camp altogether cast off? We set down open and
without any certain order, and when we will seem more circumspect, we enclose
our selves with our carriage, both an invention and term Barbarous. But see me
the Roman Camp, so formed, so quartered out; how beautiful is it in sight,
apt for use, strong against all incursion and force of the enemy? How many of
our own and stranger-armies have been cut in pieces, or put to flight by
carelessness herein? And even of late those gallant Christian forces at the
Donaw, whom the most cruel enemy surprised on the sudden. Say I beseech you if
the Roman Camp and Guards had been there, would this have happened?

But they like not, or rather are ashamed to be Laborers. Should a Soldier
put his hand to the Spade? It is an ignominy. Away, hire them that list to fall
to such drudgerie. These be their words. But whose? You would think them of
the blood Royal at the least, or else men of great riches. Yet look upon
them, you shall perceive them most abject of all other, whom Need and Despair
have compelled to service. My fellow, art thou ashamed to do that, which many
excellent men, yea Senators have done? This petty conceit, wherewith they
cover their sloth, will pack away with one only warning or Proclamation of a
Prince. No man will hold that reproachful, which shall be done in common,
which shall be done by the better sort, and sometimes by commanders them^elues,
for example sake: Polybius comes to my mind; who writes, that a man is
counted Most wise of all living creatures, but he esteems him most foolish:
Because other things if they once offend, take heed. The Fox will hardly be
brought again to the snare, nor the Woolfe to the pi^-fall, nor the Dog to the
staff. Only man from age to age does fail almost in the same things. Let me
apply this to us and our affairs. What profit is more apparent, than of these
Works? What more common in Writings and Books? Yet we neglect them, and had
rather cast away our selves, than our opinions.

And concerning Works, how profitable are they without the Camp, being the
only means and remedy, never deceiving against great Ordinance, and to make
your approches without peril to any City. Works are of wonderful effect to
block up Towns, to defend your self in them against the enemy; and with
Works you may perform that, which otherwise is not to be done with great
Bands of men. They have likewise their place in the battle, either to fortify
your self suddenly on any side against the enemy, or to train and draw him
on, or else to make an orderly retreat. You shall read that trenches were cast
by Sylla, against the sudden circumuention of Mithridates huge Army and
infinite multitude of Horse. And that the like was done by Caesar upon another
reason and occasion. What need words? The effect will prove the saying of
Domitius Corbulo true, that An enemy is to be overcome with the spade, that is,
with Works. Would God we had minds to try, and to lead the Soldier hither
by little and little, and that one would not be faulty herein by the example
of another.

Exercise.
The second thing in Discipline is Exercise. That also is neglected of us. Where
are our Field-teachers? Where is our daily meditation of Arms? And when no man
professes an Art, which he has not learned, men think they perfect in war
alone, as soon as they come to it. The Drum is struck, they run together,
their names are entered in the muster-booke, they disguise themselves in
apparel, they look grim upon the matter, they play the Ruffians, and bouse it
out in drink, straight way they are become Soldiers. Are these things to be
laughed at, or pitied? Go, go, you that be wise to our forefathers, and by
their example fashion your Soldiers in all manner and kinds of Arms. For
neither the length of age (as Vegetius says) nor number of years do teach
the Art of War, but continual meditation of exercise. An unexercised
Soldier is always raw, though he have served never so long.

Laws.
The Laws are last. Come hither my Commanders, show me your Laws, that I may
match them with the Roman Laws. Why are you so silent? Have you none, or few?
Those that you have are they void, and without effect? Truly this is our life:

Lust rules in stead of Law, and the Sword challenges the place of Right. Who
at this day punishes Theft? Who Rapes? Nay who Murder? For Whoredom and
Adultery are now counted brave exploites, and worthy to be rewarded with a
Crown. If I speak of abstinence and frugalitie in Diet, I shall be scorned
with the tongue out; of swearing or perjury, I shall be thrust out of doors by
the head and shoulders. Shamefastness and honor, whither are you gone? How
are you banished from the most part of our Europe-seruice. I protest again, my
complaint and accusation is not against the good. I write against you, you
spots and wems of noble Mars, which make the wars a refuge and sanctuary for
your villainies. I have sufficiently declared, that the Romans held another
course. There Justice, Chastity, and Innocence, dwelt in Camp, and their
Soldiers were in no place fierce and violent, but against the enemy. I rip
not up those things, which I a while ago spoke of. But truly they are such, as
albeit many will debase in speech, yet can they not but extol them in mind.
And yet who is so haire-braind that dares control them? They do not so, but
say that those times are gone; that this age requires other manners. O good and
sweet conceits. As though men were other now, then they were wont, or another
reason governed, and that which is just not just in all ages, and so that which
is unjust. The matter is, they are hardly laid unto being enioined to
abstinence from outrage and vices, to turn their hands against Enemies, not
Citizens, to reserve their strength for Mars, not for Venus; in sum not to
consume their entertainment or pay in dicing, lewdness, and gluttony.
Concerning which pay, it comes fitly to my mind to admonish, that the ancient
warriers would be sure to take heed not to commit all to the Soldiers hands;
but, as Vegesius says; It was divinely ordained, that half should be
sequestered to be laid up with the Ensign, and reserved there for the
Soldiers, lest it might be consumed by their Cabin-mates in lavishness and
idle expenses. O excellent, and as he terms it, Divine Ordinance, carrying
with it a double profit, and that most evident; namely, to make the Soldier
more continent, and sparing, less given to wantonness, banqueting, and
company, and to make him fight with greater courage in defense of the Ensign,
According to man's nature (as the same Author notes) which ever has more care
of that wherein he sees his Wealth lie. Which thing I also observe to have
been practiced by a Grecian General, named Iphycrates. Polyenus writes of
him, that in paying his Soldiers, he withheld every month A fourth part, and
retained it for a pledge, lest they should easily forsake the Army. And so he
had both his Companies full, a^^ his Soldiers rich. Who sees not that this
may or rather ought to be practiced in our loose manners, seeing that otherwise
our Soldiers being, as it were, gloriously prodigal, continue, though serving
never so long, always poor and needy, and would be always ready to sterue,
if they had not liberty to spoil. These things, and the like, might easily be
imitated by us, if we had a little higher minds, and as the Poet says, our
hearts seasoned with Noble honesty.

Now it is known how Rewards and Punishment excite and bridle, which whole
kind is omitted by us through carelessness and indulgence. Rewards. Punishment
If the rewards of Promotion were again brought to their right course, it
would do much good, and that without any expense of the Treasury. I speak of
this kind, as when a Soldier for his virtue ascends by degrees, and a
difference is betwixt the Captains themselves. If some little advantage were
adioined to their places, how would it inflame the lower sort of Soldiers?

Lastly Crowns, and Chains, and those other things particularized by me,
together with public commendation and praise would transport ingenuous minds
not only to danger, but to death it self. Notwithstanding I would not have
punishment omitted. Virtue cannot rise, where Vice accompanies it with equal
pace. And Soldiers are to be held-in with a sharp and severe kind of
chastisement.

From whence are so many Rebellions and Mutinies, Threatenings and Weapons bent
against their own Commanders? From want of punishment, and from too much
liberty. And albeit other causes be pretended, these are the true and inward
causes. Let them be repressed with punishment, and a Soldier learn more to
fear his General, than his Enemy.

I have enough weighed these things in the true Balance of Comparison,
especially being so unequal. I exhort again that they be put in practice.

But whom do I exhort? I wish he, that has interest, and whom I mark out
with these eyes of my mind, were present, and had the hearing of all, that
has been discoursed. But that rests in the Divine Providence: hear he, or
hear he not, right and reason will hear, and approve the practice, revenge
the slighting and contempt of them.

FINIS.

