A RELATION OF THE Late Seidge and taking of the City OF BABYLON BY THE TURK.

As it was written from thence by Zarain Aga, one of his Captains, to Caymaran
(his Brother) Viceroy in Constantinople.

Setting forth all the principal passages of this Siedge; With one Unparreled,
Cruel, Furious and Bloody assault, made by the Turks, wherein were slain in
12 hours. 130000 of them, and above 20000 Persians.

Translated out of the Turkish, into the Italian Language by the Drugerman to
the State of RAGOVZA. And Englished by W. H.

LONDON, Printed by I. Raworth, for N. Butter, and N. Bourne. 1639.

THE INTRODUCTION, Describing the City of Babylon from its Original, and how
often it has been translated from one Monarch to another; it being now come
again into the hands of the Turk.
IT is not Fortune to which the Roman Orator, as he 2. Ad Heren. Fortunam
Insanam esse and caecam and Brutam perhibent Philosophi: Caecam quia nihil
cernit quo sese applicet; Insanam quia incerta and instabilis est; Brutans quia
mu^tis incommodis conflictatur.
learnt from the Philosophers, gives the attributes of Blindness, Madness,
and Brutishness; because it sees not whither it applies it self, is
unconstant and variable, and is encountered by many inconveniences, no humane
policy by which the Aristot. 5 polit. cap. 8.
Statists of the world would prescribe infallible rules for preservation of
settled Kingdoms and Republiques to Eternity; but the divine providence which
governs the estate of things which (administering, and ruling all things not
simply alone, but by disposing of the means, and secondary causes) makes that
necessary by consequence, which because not foreseen seems contingent and
fortuitous to the Moale-eyes of blind mortality.

Old Babylon the metropolis of Assyria, for strength might compare with any
City in the world; Its first Foundresse Semiramis, Quem morem vestis exindegens
universa te^t. Ius^. L. 8.
A woman of more then masculine wit and courage, (whose Garb in wrapping her
head in Lawne the Persians at this day imitate) first surrounded it with walls
of 32 Celius A^que lectionum. L. 8. Cap. 12.
foot thick and 50 Cubits high betwixt the Turrets; the Towers themselves
being raised 10 Cubits higher, And so left it as a piece, (in the opinion of
that age) impregnable.

If any City might boast of its bigness, this might claim that glory, It
being the Babiloniaamplissima stomnium urbium orbis cogni^. Iovius Lib 33.
biggest of the known world, And the walls Celius loc. citato.
355 A Stadium is 135 paces.
Stadia in compass. Or according to Plinius his description, L. 3. c 2^
The breadth of the walls being 50 foot, the height 200, each foot containing
more by 3 fingers breadth then our ordinary measure, And in Circuit LX. M.
paces.

To omit that conjecture of Aristotle, who Polit. 3. c. 2.
thought it might have an equal dimension with all Peloponesses, because when
it was first taken, the farthest part of the City knew not till 3 days after
what had happened: If any City might brag of its Elegancy and commodious
situation, it was this; Euphrates bringing his Channel of a stadium broad
through the midst of it, Cel. L. Citato Curtius et alij.
and that so arched over, and adorned with pensill Gardens, that afar off, it
appeared like a Wood upon the top of a Mountain: and the land about being so
fruitful, that it commonly produces 200 for one, and sometimes 300: Herod.
lib. 5.
If any City might glory in the happy and pregnant wits of its inhabitants, it
was this, where Astronomy was first taught, and the Art of working in needle
works of diverse Colors was first invented. If ever City might glory in the
puissance of its Kings, this was that City, wherein the Scepter was first swayed
by Phulbelochus, Anno mundi 3146. under whom flourished the Persian
Historiographer. Metasthenes who reigned 48. years. Next by Phylazzer or
Tegbath Phylazzer, Anno mundi 3194. and reigned 23. years. After him by
Salmanazar, Anno mundi 3217. who reigned 10. years and subdued all Phaenicia,
Tyrus only excepted, and carried away the King of Israel and the 10. Tribes
into Media. Next by Sennacherib, Anno mundi 3227. who reviling the good pious
Hezekiah by a railing Rabshekeh had a hook put into his Nostrils, forced home
again, and was slain Adoring his Idols in the Temple by his own Sons, when
he had reigned 7 years. After him by Esarhaddon (called by Josephus
Asarocoldus, Anno mundi 3233. who reigned 11 years: And lastly by Berodach,
surnamed Ballad. Anno mundi 3242. who at the revolution of 12. years,
transferred the Kingdom to the Assyrians, and afterward reigned 18. years,
yet the strength of its walls, numerous and ingenious inhabitants, and the
puissance of its Kings could not conserve it in its former splendor, it being
forced to change the ancient government, and receive new Lords and Laws, first
by Cyrus the Persian, and after by Alexander the Great, who was poisoned there
by a Quacksalving Mountebanke, Thessalus by name (m) who had so cunningly
tempered his potion, Justin. 1.12.
that no vessel of Earth or glass, brass or Iron, nor any thing else but an
horses hoose could contain it unless it had been mingled with Cold water,
which for a time abated the violence, though soon after contracting its power,
it raged more violently, in which vehicle it was exhibited unto him: Kings have
there Fates, and the great Macedon, which would be thought Immortal as God,
thus by the hand of a base Veneficus knew himself to be a man, and dyed like
one of the ordinary princes, but his limited time was come. One of the Persian
Wisemen called Pythagoras, Plutarch. in vita Alexandri.
warned him to leave Babylon and ferry over the River unto Byrsia, and his
Counsel he had followed had not Anaxarchus the Philosopher met with him and
told him that his Predictions were false, and also uncertain; adding withal
Si fatis Constant ignota mortalibus: Justin. Loc. Citat.
Si natura debeantur Imutabillia. And so convincing his understanding, betrayed
him to the treacherous Assasinace. The utter ruin of this great City attended
the Fate of this great King, for soon after his death, it was in part
demolished, by the fury of the Persians, in part suffered to perish, by the
negligence of the Grecians: and almost exhausted and unpeopled by Cael. L.
Citat.
Seleucus, who to that intent built Seleucia within 300 Stadia, that is 44
English miles thereof; and the Parthians who to the same purpose built
Ctesiphon in Chalonitis (Juxta tertium ab ca Lapidem) But then failing of their
design, Vologesus the King ( nuper says Pliny L. 6. c. 26
since the Incarnation of our Savior it is certain) built an other City near
it, called Vologeso-Certa, and thereby so impoverished it, that it might have
been said of Babylon truly (which a Greek Comic Poet spoke of Megalopolis in
Arcadea, scoffingly, (...), The great City is become a forsaken wilderness.)
Thus the glory of the Eastern buildings became as an heap, till the year of
Christ 578. when it was rebuilt by the Caliph Bugiapher, with the expense of
200000. talents of Gold, and called Bagdat; yet that splendour was soon
Eclipsed again, by Alacho, brother to Chyta the Tartarian king Anno 640, who
expelled The Abasian family Caliph Mustiadzen the 54th. of that house then
ruling; and the family of Chita was again not long after, beaten out by
Tangrolipix of the Zel-Zuccahian line, whence it descended to the house of
Ottoman, Anno 1031 under whom it remained until the year 1625, when it was
subjected to the Persians by their puissant Prince Abas, who after 14 years,
were forced from it by the now Turkish Sultano, whose process for the recovery
thereof, by the great pains and charge of our English Relator, is derived to
us out of the Archiva of Raguza, formerly called Epidaurus, a City and
Republique in Dalmatia, but tributary to the grand Signior, in the letters
following:

The Relation of the late Siege and taking of the City of Babylon, By the Turk.
THe desire you have to know of the true Success and proceedings of our whole
Army, incited me to write 3. former letters. In my first I related unto you
what occurents happened in our voyage, particularly of that most This Persia^
Commander would usurp both the Name and Office of our Savior, and is therefore
justly by styled the Turk base and wicked.
false and wicked man who intitling himself Jesus the great Prophet, was (not
very far from Babylon) so audacious and hardy as to join Battle with the
Invincible Army of the Arbiter of the whole universe Here is base flattery and
detestable blasphemy, the Turks parrasit^, thus entitle him and he asumes it.
the most mighty Emperor Sultan Amurath, the right hand of the Omnipotent God,
and how the said bloody fights ended by the death of the said false Prophet and
all his Army. Discito justitiam moniti nec temnite Iesum.
(3)

In my second, I wrote you how that approaching near the walls of great
Babylon, we were assaulted by the Army of Han Lord of Persia: and how dreadful
the Battle was: as also how a great part of our Army then perished: and how
the aspect of the awefull countenance of our most majesticall Emperor, at least
forced the Enemy to retire, one part of his Army flying into places far off,
and the other part seeking refuge within the walls of Babylon.

In my third, I signified unto you, that the Babilonians hearts failed them at
our approach; when they beheld the vaste and great Channel and Trenches made
by our Army, to divert the river Euphrates annother way; the great pains of
our supreme Lord, the admirable diligence of Hussaim Bassaw; the incomparable
virtue of Mahomet Bassaw; the courageous valor of Mustapha Bassaw, and the
general and cordial fidelity of the whol^ Imperial Army, all which presaged
the following Victory; as also of the four Batteries planted, in each of which
were 50. Pieces of Ordnance, in all 200 pieces, wherewith we continually
battered the great Babylon, without giving the Enemies any leave to take the
least respit: As also of the great Assault and Trenches made against the strong
Castle of Venlo, by the Noble favorite of our Emperor Silixtar Bassaw; there I
also wrote unto you how we then numbered our Soldiers, and how many we found
wanting, namely: the number of such as perished in the fore named Battles, in
the raising of the 4 Bastions, and in the assault, amounted to 73,589 light
Horse, with their Riders, amongst whom the old Dants Bassaw sanctified by our
holy faith, who appeared always like thunder and lighting to the Enemies
terror: That is, were slain; the Turks superstition, accounting them as Saints
and Martyrs which dye by War in their Princes service.
with many other Lords and great Captains of the Countreies of Greece, Albania
and Morea, which we hope that, (like so many Cherubins) the chiefest of the
Angels have conducted their souls to Heaven, into the Bozome of Mahomet our
Prophet, whom the great God has so washed with the water of Martyrdom,
suffered by them for their faiths sake.

There were lost also in the same actions, 35000 footmen, in part Janissaries,
and in part a new sort of Soldiers named Simeani; amongst whom was Beleaver
Bostanga Bassaw, who that very same day on which he was preferred to the
dignity of Bassaw, before he could enjoy terrestrial Rule, conducted to heaven
these his Soldiers, being drawn to enjoy those Celestial waters, the which
GOD has granted to the Faithful, through the intercession of our great
Prophet. There is no cheat like that which clothes it self in the habit of
Religion.

This the Iugling Mahomet promised Azoara 2, and is it this day by them firmly
beloved.


After which, I also advised you how that the great Ingeneere of Afrique had
caused more than 1000 Barques to be built: And how that 25 Canons of
unmeasurable greatness, were laid upon skins blown full of wind like
bladders, and so were supported, and swame on the River Euphrates, but to what
end no one knew.

I further advized you of the great preparations and toil in making the great
frame for the Bridge over the River, and how that the said River being diverted
another way, we presented the aforesaid Cannons before the strong walls of
Babylon, and then laid the Bridge, at one instant fortifiing it with strong and
long bars of Iron, that upheld it in all those places, which are held
necessary, and how our designs took effect and a great part of the wall of
Babylon by uncessant Battery was broke down, and how the said Artillery
together with an Infinite number of our men the diverted River by force,
returning suddenly into its Ancient Channel were carried away thereby. And not
only so, but that the River also broake into the City of Babylon, through the
breaches in the wall, which our Emperor perceiving, commanded the aforesaid
Barques, full of Soldiers to row into the City, (6) as you have had in my
former large information.

After this there came a commandment from our Omni Potent Emperor, the bridge
being finished) that we should fill up the trenches by us made: It was a
strange command and dangerou^: but (^elc^ piet ^iura regn^nai cupiditas, The
Sultan is more ambitious to enlarge his Dominions, the to preserve his men, and
cares not for loss of the last, so he may gain the first.
and that about the distance of a mile from Babylon, we should begin a great
trench of the length of a mile, in a direct line, but about, miles in its
wandering turnings and windings and so larg that 30 men in file might
commodiously march forward therein. This done, the whole Army was divided into
four several Squadrons, one of them being appointed to each of the abovesaid
4 bastions. The leading of the first Squadron was given to the great Vizier, by
the Emperor called Alla, which in Turkish is as much as to say, God and
Father. The second Commander was the most valiant Mustapha Bassawe. The
Conductor of the the third, was the most virtuous Mahomet. The fourth chief
leader was (the abstract and quintessence of all honor and virtue) his sacred
Majesty, the great Emperor himself, who was contented so to do, contrary to
the advice of his chief Counselors, and of all the three Champions, according
to the directions of the Ingeneere of Affrique, into whose hands the Invincible
Majesty of our Emperor had given all his power and authority, his Majesty
himself, in this design, contenting to be commanded by his own slave.

Over the fifth part of the host, the great Solicitor had Command, and he
remained to guard those borders, whither it was reported the (7) unbeleiving
Persian was retired with the residue of his forces. Yet he is a Mahometa^, and
what ever is pretended it is not reli^ion but desire of Rule that makes the
quarrel between the Turk and him.


After this manner, having put themselves in order of battle, by the
Commandment of the great Legislator, order was given that in every several
Regiment, the most eloquent man amongst them chosen, should by a Marshall
speech animate the Soldiers to fight resolutely using these or the like words.

Most valiant Champions, most happy slaves of the Emperors Majesty, Here is a
contradiction in the ad^ect. Slavery is no happiness, and Turkish slavervis
the worst of miseries, but such as never k^e^ liberty take it for a blessi^.
this is the day which you so long desired, this is the end for which you have
undergone so many miseries; this is the day that our Empire shall be
established to the faithful of God, and fatal to such as believe not the law
of Mahomet, at which words their courages were doubled, and every one
unanimously, like so many enraged Lions, were disposed and desirous in that
very instant to dye, or else to recover the Sepulture of our Prophet, IMAN
ASEN, which is in the City of Babylon, to the end, that it might not remain in
the hands of misbelievers. And being thus resolved, we then marched forwards
on the Bridge, which we before had made, being also greatly spurd on by hearing
the terrible confused noise of those our men, who were as aforesaid entered into
Babylon in barques. So hastily Trumpets and Drums sounding, we passed over
the Bridge, And a deep large Ditch, and even under the walls, almost hand to
hand, began a most fierce assault, in which time it was the preasure of GOD,
that the River of Euphrates upon that side of the City, where the Bridge was
built, was on the sudden almost quite dried up, and did take its course on
the other side, the which being by us perceived, Commandment was given, that
with great quantity of Sacks of Flax, and Sacks of Wool, Earth, dead bodies
of men, and beasts and such like What Barbarism it is to account the bodies of
the deceased men no better then Rubbish.
Rubbish, thrown into the said dried channel, by multitudes of men in short
time, we made it plainly equal with the other ground, for the space of two
miles in length, even under the very walls of the city: the most valiant
Ianisaries and Simeenis, stormed upon the city with continual tempests of
Musket shot, and gave not the enemy leave to come in sight, whilst those other
forces which were brought up through the meandrous trench aforesaid, swiftly
ran with scaling Ladders, each of them being then armed with two Pistols, and a
short crooked sword hanging by their sides, called Semitars in this sort they
attempted to scale the walls, and to ascend, but the defendants within, not
sleeping a whit, with hot mixture of Pitch, and Tar, Rosen, Brimstone, and
multitude of stones overwhelmed us, and with certain Artillery, so monstrous
big, that in one of their mouths a man might commodiously lie, these being
charged with chains, and nails, bullets and Iron bars, etc. Swept our men
away, we on the contrary side, attempting with good Canon, to beat down their
walls to the ground, which at last likewise took effect; but this advantage
was accompanied with a greater difficulty, for the defendants had fortified
within, and built another very strong brick-wall, near the which they had made
a very deep and large ditch, all covered over with boards, in the manner of a
trappe door, or draw bridge, which they kept level, until there had entered
into the City about 2000 Ianisaries, and perceiving the light horse to enter
also, they let fall the trappe door to our great peril and damage, for such
was the fury of our holy inspired soldiers, to press forwards the sooner and
more effectually to show their man hood and valor, that the hindemost forced
the foremost to fall down headlong into the aforesaid deep prepared Ditch,
insomuch that in a short time, what with our men, and with our Horses, the
Ditch was then filled, And leuelled with the ground. The Defendants saw it, and
began again to distribute their shot and to thunder with the above said
widemouth petards, But we being arrived even under the said wall, and as it
were at hand blows, our multitudes at the last overcame all their oppositions,
and forced them to retire to the other side of the City, leaving these battered
walls to our discretion, upon which we displayed our Emperors most happy
banners, and they likewise on the other side did display those of PERSIA.

Thus we gained the one half of the City in the space of twelve hours, or
thereabouts. The Defendants in this Assault having lost above twenty thousand
men, and we on our side 130000, amongst whom the great Vizier was eternised by
his glorious death, who after he had with incredible valor, undaunted Courage
that self same day, cast eighty several darts against the Enemy, was at last
by a usquet shot smote into the forehead, whose death our army taking notice
of, called thrice vnitedly, upon the name of GOD Nulla ^ens tam fera nemo
hominum est tam Immanis cuius meatem non imbu^rit Dei Opinio. Cic. Tus. Quaest.
All men know that there is a God, but not how to serve him, superstition is of
a larger growth then Atheism.
and did also most humbly recommend his Soul to his Deities acceptance with
fervent and hearty Prayers, etc. After this manner we having at last overcome
the Defendants, did afterward rest the Lords and Masters of the one half of
the City, whereupon the^ Camp for that day reposed; and the very next morning,
the Emperor sent for his most faithful Mustapha Basbaw to come unto his
presence (who was called Silixtar, which is as much to say girt-Sword) he
accordingly presenting himself, first caused him to be arrayed with three
several rich Garments, and with his own hands girt his Sword about him, and
then assigned to him his Treasury, saying, unto him: Take into thy custody my
right hand the Privic Seal and show thy self my valiant (a) Wolf, Conveneunt
rebus Nomina, The Wol^, ie Annimal fero^ non generos^ rapax nunquam turatum.
let me see how thou will behave thy self in guiding of mine Army in the
remainder of the victory. The great Bashaw (without the least answer casting
himself down upon the ground) most humbly kissed the Emperors hand, and
presently with much have took horse, gallopping amain toward that part of
the City which was by us already overcome, where lighting from his horse he was
received of all the Army with great triumph. The almighty God the recompencer
of our true valor which overcommeth all oppositions, infused into all our Camp
unspeakable jollity, prosperity, and supplied us with abundance of all things
necessary for life, etc.

Numerus Ternarius turcis Saceritidem and decimus.
Now the 30th day (b) since our first arrival under the said City which was
Friday nearly approaching; all the chief Commanders of the Army began to put
all things in a readiness, being resolved on the next morning to give the last
assault unto the remainder of the City (yet being in the possession of the
Babilonians, and in which was the Castle Venlo) being one half of the whole,
well fortified, with about 16000 Defendants, who seeing how things passed,
amounted their Artillery, some part to the left side of the City, and the other
part to defend the Walls without, on that side which out-faced the Battery of
the great Bashaw. Thus being provided, and all things in order, they attended
our coming with great acclamations, loud noises and sounds of warlike
Instruments, showing more courage then ever they did before, etc.

But the Reader has by the way to understand that before the coming of the
Turks under Babylon. The Persians had sent away all unprofitable and
unserviceable persons (as old Men, women and children) unto other retired
Cities and strong holds of Persia, there being left for guard of the City only
40000 able garrison Soldiers, over which were four principal Commanders;
namely the first and chiefest was called Obet Han, the second Mentisen Ebas,
the third Asmaean, and the fourth Sacker. Now it happened that the three
aforesaid last named Commanders by certain passages had some suspicion that
their chief General Obet Han was corrupted by the great Turk, and held
private correspondency with him; whereupon with an unanimous consent they
imprisoned the same Obet Han in a Tomb, but he soon after clearing himself
was again set at liberty.

This night all the aforesaid Commanders called a Council, wherein after much
conference being propounded what medicine was best to cure so desperate a
disease.

The opinion of the said Obet Han was, to deliver up the remainder of the City
upon any indifferent terms. But the other three chief Captains were so
far from consenting thereto, that they plainly told him, if he would not hold
out, even unto the last man, all the Persians in the City would rise up against
him, and cause him most shamefully and disgracefully to loose his life.

Whereupon he (knowing, that they jested not, and fearing so great a storm
would ensue) at midnight gave a secret sign to our Camp, that he would yield
and give himself into the pious hands of our Emperor, which he accordingly
did, the great Turk promising him gracious entertainment A valiant man cannot
be a Traitor, but Cowardice and Treason commonly walk hand in hand, and such
was Han.
upon which security he feigned to his Countrymen that his desire was, the next
morning to be the first which would withstand the fury of the Turks first
assault; whereupon they (no way dreaming of his intention) commended his
forwardness, and encouraged him to behave himself valiantly; so betimes the
next morning he issued forth of his hold with 3000 Soldiers as if it were to
withstand us, but instead thereof he went straight forwards with the said
Soldiers unto the lodging of our great Vizier, who with much humanity
entertained him, and advised our Emperor of what had happened who hearing the
process, caused the said Obet Han to come before his presence (who immediately
presenting himself) Here the old Rule is crossed, Amo Proditionem proditore
ode.
our Emperor clothed him with a plain red Velvet gown, lyned with
Zebelines, and a very rich Pendant, which his Highness had worn in the front
of his Turbant, and also a Dagger named Hangiaw, and unto all the other 3000
Soldiers which accompanied him he gave very great pay. So that those which
were Heretics even unto that Must he needs be a Mussulman that is subject to
the House of Ottoman? Quis l^g^t hoc, and in ^chinnor non solvitur?
hour, became believers of the most happy truth of Mahomet. The aforesaid
donatives and presents were given unto the aforesaid Obet Han, because he had
always underhand kept correspondency with our Emperor which was (as
aforesaid) almost revealed: but the Omnipotent God preserved him in safety, to
the end his honorable actions by future Writers might be published in (e) holy
paper to the whole World. It might be charta Sacra and so pass.


After which we heard in the Persians fortifications a great tumult and
confusion, and in that instant, certain of the Defendants desired a Parley,
the which being by us perceived, some were sent to know their minds, which
being understood, they returned and opened it to the Emperor and his Council,
who concluded that the following day there should be on both sides a cessation
from Arms, and likewise ordered that the following night, at the dark
Posterne door of the Castle all the Persian Soldiers upon agreement should
issue forth with as much Baggage as they would carry, and keep their way
through the ordinary street toward Persia. And to this end order was given,
that the Camp of Silixtar great Bashaw should make them way and retire from
these Frontiers, but there arose a suspicion, and it was the common bruit
amongst our Soldiers that the Persians fled, and that in a tumacious manner
without rendering the least Obedience to our army (though persuaded thereunto
one while by admonitions, another while by menaces) which this their
intolerable obstinacy caused our men to rush all in an Impetous fury toward
those parts, where the Persians were, who knowing full well in what
desperate case they were (Death threatening them on all sides) prepared
themselves for their best defense, which preparation caused a rumor, and the
rumor so affrighted the Turks which were Iodged in that part of the City
already won, (fearing some great aid was come from the King of Persia to
succor the distressed Babilonians) that thereupon they forsook all the holds
they had before conquered, and fled. Insomuch, that had not the Captains of
the Ianizaries assured them of the truth, and encouraged them immediately to
return (all that was gotten with so great an effusion of guiltless blood) had
been all in a trice lost again.

In this bloody Fight was a most horrible slaughter on both sides, and a
mortal destruction fell upon all those Persians which (as aforesaid) had
issued forth, the most part of them were slain (the ground drinking in their
Heretical blood with the blood of many holy Imperials; insomuch, that but 300
of our Enemies escaped death that day) who (being taken Prisoners alive) and
said that the faithless Promise of our Emperor had deceived them; But we
answered them that though our Emperor had given them his faith, not to molest
them in their passage, yet this his pleasure was not proclaimed through the
Camp, therefore we were not bound to observe it: where upon, presently after
they were brought to a place near the Dudiglien or Tent of the great Vizier,
and were all beheaded. This tragedy being seen by the Persians, which kept the
Castle, made them prepare for their defense, unto whom our Emperor engaged his
faith and promised them to proclaim it through the whole Camp, according to
their own hearts desire; nevertheless, they remained obstinate: and
notwithstanding, that all day long they were persuaded to accept thereof, they
would not consent thereto, for which cause there came out a Comaund, that the
next day following, both in the Ditches, and without, a general assault should
be made, which was accordingly performed; and we approaching to the outward
ditch of the Castle, which was a pike long in depth, and another in breadth,
which hindered our entrance into a broader green; we endeavored with a great
quantity of beams and timber to fill up the ditches, and, as it were, to make
a kind of a Bridge, whereby our design might take effect. But whilst we were
thus seriously employed about this work, the defendants from the out walls of
the Castle with their musket shot, and from their Bastions with their
Artillery, made great havoc of our men; yet nevertheless, in the space of an
hour we had laid our beams, and made a kind of Bridge, by the which our
Soldiers thronged over to the aforesaid green, where being come, we found
another Ditch half as deep, and as broad as the other, through which passed a
river, and whilst some of our men earnestly attended with their musket shot,
not giving leave to the defendants once to show themselves upon the walls of the
Castle, others of our renowned best Soldiers, by their scaling Ladders mounted
up the walls, a mine was sprung, the violence whereof not only blew up all
those which had passed the aforesaid bridge, but also the very bridge it self,
and not only so, but as it happened, this mine fired another mine, which was
under the second ditch and wall, which unsuspectedly taking fire, blew up many
of the defendants, who were on the outwals, and the stones of the said 2 mines,
also greatly damnified all those of our Camp, which were in the 3
quarter-conquered-City, and as many as were near thereunto; being one of the
most horrible and dreadful sights which has been seen by any mortal,
since the Creation. This miserable accident being over, those of our men
(which were left alive, took quiet possession of the doors of the Castle
first, and afterward, by plain force, of the Castle it self, there remaining
in it alive only 300 Persians, and those unarmed, and without any thing left
vvherevvith to defend themselves (save that each of them had a short crooked
svvord by their sides, called Simytars) their powder and all their materials
for defense, being spent, stood upon their guard and fought so desperately, that
in the terrible conflict, many of our Just Imperials lost their lives: But at
last our multitudes overcame them, and put them all to the sword. Thus after
the above said manner, the great destroyed Babylon became wholly ours. But as the
valor expressed by our Soldiers, is beyond believe, so was also the courage of
the defendants, which will add unto us an eternal fame, so strong a Fortress
being never heretofore taken by force, neither ever any Soldiers more obedient
to their Superiors than ours were; neither ever any Emperor, King, or
Potentate from the Creation so liberal in gifts, as this our God of the Earth
was.

I (thanks be to God) remain yet alive, but wounded by a Musket shot in the
thigh, when we became masters of the Castle door, and thus wounded, I write
this relation unto you, being until this present day, in the behalf, and by
direction and order from our terrestiall God; daily visited by Selictar Bassaw,
whereby, notwithstanding the wound, greatly molesteth me, yet I have comfort
and heartely rejoice, that my body is marked for the holy faiths sake, and I
shall not too much emulate, the felicity of our dead: since that the pious God
knew well the ambition I had to dye in defense of our most holy faith, and in
service of my Emperor, who so often shows such evident signs of his affection
toward me, as I my self could neither expect or desire; wherefore my longing
is to meet with an opportunity, whereby I may give a testimony, that, after
God, he is my soul. As for the rest, there remain yet alive unto me four
horses and 3 servants (whom God bless and send them good fortune) that they
may deserve their stipends, and leave fame to their children. As for the
victuals for our Camp (by the Providence of God) we found great store in the
City, and also by the diligence of our Emperor, we have great abundance of
all things, making continual feasts with roaring of Artillery and praying to
God for the prosperity and happy success of our Almighty Emperor, as you also
ought by the Emperors command, to give notice to all his subjects that they
observe the like.

In this City we found 145 Canons for battery, the which carried shot of 50 and
70 pound weight; 92 mortar pieces, in the which any man might stand most
co^veniently, but little or no wealth at all, because all before our coming was
carried away from thence, nothing remaining but what was necessary to maintain
the life of the above said 40000 Soldiers, there left in guarde of the City.
There were also sufficient victuals found to maintain 40000 souls for the
space of 2 years: We found also 200 Runtars of powder, and the City wholly
destroyed, which we are about to refortifie. If any other matter of moment
shall happen, I will exactly inform you. Thus praying that whatsoever you
desire may be fulfilled, in as much as it aymeth to the prosperity of our
Emperor and his Crown, Farewell.

From the Camp.
FINIS.
The Copy of a letter sent to a private Merchant of London, from Ragouza.
THis foresaid Relation is here of all held for a certain truth, this State
having sent the self same news to the Pope and Viceroy of Naples, and to many
other Christian Princes, and has also been confirmed to be true, by a 100
several Carryers, wherefore be pleased to make much thereof, assuring you if
you knew how I labored to get out the Copy of the Original, out of the
private News book of this State, kept in the hands of their chief Secretary,
you would questionless esteem it so much the more: My pains in translating
it (though not small) yet far less than the procuring of the Original by
which above said description, I take notice of 3 points, viz. 1, of the proud
blasphemy of the great Turk, in Intituling himself the right hand of God,
Arbiter of the Universe, and God on Earth. 2, Of their foolish superstitions
and idle opinions, to believe that all those their Soldiers that dye in fight
must necessarily thereby gain Heaven. 3, Of their bestiall precipitated
resolution and vain glory of the great Turk, that so he may gain and
accomplish his ambitious desires, regards not to see before his face the
Bucherlike slaughter of multitudes of his men, and bravest Soldiers, etc.

Read this Relation to as many as your discretion thinks fit, but I desire you
to let no Copy be taken thereof, that it may not on the sudden become
common: And thus I humbly rest

Your obed: Ser: to command. WILL: HOLLOWAY.


