The reckoning and declaracion of the faith and belefe of Huldrike zwyngly /
bishop of ziiryk the chief town of Heluetia / sent to Charles.v. that now is
Emproure of Rome: Holding a parliament or Counsayll at Ausbrough with the chief
Lords and learned men of Germanye, The year of our Lord M.D.xxx. In the month
of July.

Come ye to me all that labor / and are laden: and I shall refreshe you.

Mathe. xi. The veryte will have the victory: Press ye it down never so
strongly.

Translated and Imprynted at ziiryk in March. Anno Do. M.D.XLVIII.

The Preface of the translatour, unto the reader.
WHen I had chanced upon this Rekening of the faith of this so excelently
learned and godly flok feder, eue^ the good heerdman / that set his life for his
sheep, and had seen it not yet unto this day to be confuted nor dampened of any
christen l^rned man, but as it was then openly exhybited unto the Emprours
Majesty, and to his noble learned counsel, so stondeth it still yet vntowched
with any just contradiccion of holy scriptures: I could not but think this
his faith to be christen and catholyk, word thy for the glory of god and profyt
of his church to be translated into many tongues, that many might read it
with fruit. Wherefore s^th^^ England (as they say) be many hyghly learned
Byshopes and lawers in the speculatiue, but few in pract^k divinity sharp in
natural, but dull in spiritual judgment: me thought it convenient, the book
to be translated into their mother tongue, that yet at the least the learned in
christ might judge thereof and say their minds. And for because therbe many
lay men of better judgment and knowledge then the speculatyue priests and
prelates for all their latin and greek to, therefore, here haste thou it (Oh
lay reader) which only know but the Englisshe tongue, that eue^ thy self
myghtest also with thy English Bible frelye try and judge it, as the apostle
byddeth the prove all things, and hold yt at good is. i. The^sala. ^.
And Ihon^ bydddeth the prove the spirit^ whether they be of god. But se that
the scriptures be ever thy towche stone and (as Ag^sten teaches) faith and
love to try all me^nes wrytinges. And beware thou beeste none of them unto
whom (a^ is said Psalm lxxii^) all things stynke, but only those which their
selves through malice and arrogancy speak or write, yea and that so prow^lye:
Many there are also among this say sort which be yet w^ake ignorant, and in
doubt what they shall believe: and in ye more doubt, for that they hear such
deuers^^e of preching one against another, such co^tr^^iccion among them that
should be learned and wise. They se also daily new articles of their faith,
made of new bishops in their new books of new institucions: they se them
confyrmed with non autorite of the old faith and old Scriptures, but
violently thrust in with autorite of new acts and sword, as though hitherto
the church of england had from the beginning erred in the faith, destituted so
long and many years these new articles and latelyer found faith, which new
inconstancye and inconstant nouite / now making to morrow marryng, this year
enactyng the next vnactynge, this day to be kept work day, the next year the
same to be kept holy and idle, and such like of rokes, hares and pertriche. The
simple people (I say) s^yng this inco^sta^cy, no merueyle though they can not
tell whom nor what they may believe Not long a go it was heresye and treason
to, the scriptures to be had in English, and now (god be thanked) the hole
Bible is prynted often and turned and read of many lay men, yea and that with
privilege. And yet they which made the testament in English once treason and
heresy, and for having and readyng it they brent and prysoned many a godly
innocent soul, now alowynge the ^ame with pen, hand, and mouth for godly
and profitable to christ's Church, never unto this day have they found the
time to repent them openly of their open abhomynable blody murder nor yet in
open pulpettes to recante their own false doctryn and open iniqu^te. But the
Lord ^e to it, and be their judge requiring this tyranny at their hands. i
Parai. xxiiii.
Amen. To stablishe therefore (good christen reader) thy faith, and to setle it
in peace (all waueri^g set a perte) thou haste here the rekeninge of this godly
learned Byshopes faith confermed with the most meghtye old and ferme
testimonies not of men's acts and counsels / but of the everlasting holy
scriptures / that where as hitherto for the diversity of men's opinions and
sundry prechyng and teching without gods word / many have been in doubt and
ygnorau^ce: now if thou diligently read this little book / thou shalt be
certifyed and taught plainly and truly the faith in one God and iii. persons
in trinite. And how the second person consists of god and man. Thou shall
se his godly and infallible providence? the fall and restoryng of man / in
which the mercy and justice of god is declared. Thou shall clearly understand
the incarnacion of Christ the sone of god / theffect and frut thereof unto thine
unspeakable conforte: the iustificacion only by faith into christ: gods
eleccion / orygynall sin / what it is: and how by christ only it is done
away. What is to be thought of infantes dying before they be baptized. Here
thou have it clerly what is the church, how many sacraments there be, with
theffect and right use of them / of the supper of the Lord / what Ceremonies
may stand and which ought to be abolyshed. Of Images, of the office of
preaching and mynisters of the word: of the offices of Kings and rulers, of
purgatory, of the fruits of the gospel preached, of the fruit of man's
doctrine. The good pastors excuse, his desire and godly exortacion to the
Emprour and to all princes, which god engraue into their hearts Amen. But when
the Pope had seen this godly Bisshoppes faith and religion so to prospere and
prevail, and his euangelyke doctrine so wide to spread, that neither his
furious dro^ken champion Eccius, nor yet his fleckisshe slow beast Cocleus
durst not once more pen against the majesty of zwynglie his most eloquent
Heroical style, rare erudicio^, and most excellent diuyn^ lernyng, then he
hyered certain Lantsknyghtes to kill him. which smyten through with a morispyke
said. My body have ye slain, but my soul sley ye can not. Then his body
quartered and brent on the morrow his heart was found vnperisshed in the
ashes, of the which many a learned man is risen, in whose books, sermones and
sessons zwyngly yet lives here in a blessed memorial, and his soul lives in
heaven in the glorious fruicion of the blessed Trinite / to who^ be honor and
praise for ever Amen.

The Preface of the Bishop to the Emperor.
WE, which preach the Gospel in the Cities towns and villages of the
christen congregacions desyrously looked and waited every hour most noble
Charles, sacred (Ceaser unto equite, ryghtuousnes and judgment) when (like as
it was demanded of other) yt of us also thacompt and rekenyng of our faith
which we have and profess should be asked for. And whyl^s we thus stood up ready
to give this rekenyng: ^here came tidings, yea tidings rather then any
certain truth, that many other churches had now all ready prepared the
tenoure and some of their faith and religion to offer it up unto you. But here
now we are in great perplexite and doubt: for on the one part the love of
the truth, and careful zeal and study for the common peace, do excyte us to
do the same thing which we se other men do. And on the other side, the haftie
and so soden occasion of your departing thence, does fete us: for that we hear
say also, that all things should be done swyftly and with great speed because
of yours so spedye preparyng to depart. Besides this we that be the prechars
of the said christen cite and country are scatred now so far a sondrye
through the towns and villages / that in short space we can not come all
together to delybre and counsel / what thing we might write most co^uenyente
unto your hyghnes. A none after this / yet when we saw the confessyo^ of other
men, yea and the confutacion of their adversaries also, which not with
sta^dyng they were yet prepared are any thing was demanded of them? I thought
it expedient for me alone without any prejudice of my cou^trye men, with speed
to declare and set forth thacompt form and rekeninge of my faith and belefe,
for if i^ any other thing a man may be slak, yet verily here in this cause it
requires great speed, lest this matter through negligence omytted, we for our
scilence might have been suspected, or else for our negligence seemed to be
proud and arrogante. Lo, here therefore (O most mighty Emproure) I offer unto
your hyghnes the su^me of my belefe, on this condition, that I do also
testifye not to commytte nor permyt the judgment of these articles alone, but
also of all that ever I have written, or through the goodness of god shall write,
to no one man, nor yet to no few me^, but unto the hole church of christ
into this end / that it be enspyred with the holy ghost and so pronounces
out of the prescript veryte of gods word.

The first Article.
First of all / I both believe and know / that there is but one god / one
alone for all sufficient: and him self to be naturally good / true / almighty,
just, wise, His confession of the unite and trinite of God.
the creator and curate of all things visible and invisible, and even the
same my god to be the father, the sone, and the holy ghost, three parsones, but
one only in substance. I believe as concerning the unity of the godhed and the
trinite of these names or persons in all things according unto the
exposicio^ of the Creed of Nicene and Athanasu. I believe and know it fermly,
His faith of Chr^ste the ^one of god and man.
that the sone took unto him ye hole nature of man which consists of body
and soul receyuyng it verily of the immaculate and perpetual virgyn Mary, so
that this hole and perfect man thus assumpte into the unite of the person of
the sone of god be not so assumpt that the man should constitute a peculyar
person as is every other name? but so was the man head taken up unto the Godhed
to be the person of the sone of god / inseparable / indivisible / and
indissociable. Of the.ii. natures.
For albeit that both the natures that is to wit the divine and humayn so
held their properties that either of them in him be seen and espied verily and
naturally: In one person.
yet do not these distinct properties and works of these two natures disseuer
and dissociat the unite of the person: no more then in a man the mind and the
flesh make two persons For like as these two, are naturally greatly distinct
/ so are they endewed with distinct properties and operacions. The distinct
properties and operacions of the.ii. natures in christ divide not the person.
And yet is not the man co^stituted of these twein, two persons, but one: even
as is god and man one christ, the perpetual sone of god from everlasting but
the sone of man from the time appointed and determined, one person, and one
Christ perfect God, perfect man / not so that of the one nature the to^her be
made, or be myxt together, but that either of them both abide in her own
property, and yet is not the unite of the persons through this sondrye
properties disseuered. And thus, this same pe^sone one Christ, very God and
man, as towchynge the property of his manhod, he wayled, he cried, and wept in
his cradle, he grew and waxed / and increased in wisdom / desired to eat and
drink, Luc^. ii.
he suffered heat and cold / he was beaten, did sweet, was wounded and
slain, feared and was heavy. etc. yea he suffered al things pertainyng unto the
punisshment and pain of sin, but as concerning the self sin, he was most
gylifes and farthest of. But as towchynge the property of his divine nature,
he with the father and holy ghost tempereth rules both high and low, he
pearceth althynges / he sustaynethe and nourissheth althynges. He gives sight
to the blysom, fotynge to the lame / he calls the dead out of their graves he
smy^eth down our enemies with a word, and even he him self when he was
dead, resumed his life ascended unto heaven, The diverse propert^es^ christ a^
c^mo to the hole person because of the inseparable unite of bot^ the natures
in him self.
and sent ^s the holy ghost as his own spirit. And all these things does
one and the self same Christ, one person of the sone of God evermore
contynuing, how diverse soever and dystincte he be as toutchyng the nature and
properties of his godhed and manhed. So that ofte^tymes for because of ye
perfait perfeccion and unite of the person / those things which only
belong unto the godhed be attrybuted unto the manhed: and those that pertayne
unto the manhed be spoken of the godhed. He said himself to be the sone of
man descended from heaven, when yet his body had never ben there. And Peter
says yt christ suffered death for us when it was only his manhed that suffered
it, Ion^. vi.
But because of the inseparable unite of the person / it is said verily. That
the sone of god had suffered / and the sone of man forgave sins. For even
Christ which is the sone of god and man one person / as concerni^ge the
property of his divine nature and godhed / forgyueth sins, As when we say /
this man is wise / which consists of body and soul / but as concerning his
body / there is no wisdom in it at all / but his body is rather poison and
impediment both unto wisdom knowledge and all understanding. Again / we say
the same man to be wounded / when only it is his body that may receive the
wound / and the soul can not be towched. Because of this manner of speech /
yet noman says that two persons be made of one man, when thus (as ye may se)
unto either part in man his own propertye be referred and attributed /
neither can they say that both ye natures / that is to wit the body and
soul be both mixte and confounded together / when that thing is spoken by the
hole man because of the unity of the parsone / which because of the propertye
of the one part alone / parteyneth but to the one part. Paul says, when I am
syke / then am I most strong. Who is here syke: Paul. And who is it that is
also so strong* Paul. But is not here great repugnance and contradiction in
Paul to be both syke* and hole / both at once? No verily. For Paul though he
be but one parsone, yet is he of two natures. Wherefore* when he says I am
syke, verily the same person speaks which is Paul: but that same syknes is
not appropriated unto both his natures, but only unto his body. And where he
says also. I am strong, albeit the parson of Paul speak it, yet is it his
soul only which is in the syknes of his body so strong. So we say the sone
of God is dead, even the very same which for that so perfyte unite of his
person is both god and man, but yet as concerning only his humanite and
manhed, he dyed. Thus, not I alone do believe, but so did all the catholyke
faithful both old and new believe both of the Godhed, of the persons and
humane nature taken and assumpte of the sone of god our sauyoure Christ. And
thus believe they that now profess and aknowlege the truth unfeignedly.

The.ii. Article.
Secondarily, I know and believe that the most high godhed, which is my god,
Pete falls fre libertyi.
has constituted and decreed freely of all things, so that his counsel
depends not of the occasion of any creature, for to ordayn and decree any
thing either first discussed and debated by reason, or fetched at any
ensample is a token of the breach and imperfection of man's wisdom. God
therefore which from everlasting unto everlasting beholds althynges with
one clear and present look, The providence of God.
needs not any reasonynge or to tarry and depe^de of any fact. But he is all
alyke and ever wise, prudent, good. etc. and so does he freely decree and
dispose all things what soever they be, for all are his. Out of this his
unsearchable goodness, Of ma^s ^reacio^.
although he should make man in ye beginning whom he knew well that he should
fall: yet had he then of everlasting also decreed, that his sone should be
cledde with the nature of man to repair and restore the fall For by this way
his goodness is made manifest over all. For in this his goodness, is contained
both his mercy and justice. In the goodness of God reiu^eth his mercy and
justice.
His justice he expressed when he casted out the transgressors of ye plesau^t
Paradyse, byndynge them unto the heavy burden of mortal myserie and fetered them
with innumerable dyseases, laynge a law upon him which he was never able to
bear, His justice.
and yet is ye law right holy and good. And here is he now become twyse a
miserable mortal wretch, learned not only his flesh to have had fallen
into misery, but also his mind, for fear of the law now tra^sgressed to be
grievously vexed and troubled. For when as toutchyng the spirit, he saw the
law to be holy, just and the messa^ger of the mind of god, as that same
thing which commands nothing else the^ that which equite persuades, and
with ye same eye also seeing him self in nothing to fulfill the mind of ye
law: No^^ fulfylleth the law but only Christ.
and so in his own judgment condemned, all hope of that felycite clean cast
away, he fled like a desperate man from the sight of god: lokynge for nothing
else then to suffer and perpetually to bear the heavy pain of everlasting
torments. And hitherto was the justice of god declared manyfestly. His mercy.
But when the time should come to show ye goodness of god which goodness of
everlasting he had decreed to show as well as his justice: then god sent his
sone to take our nature in every behalf save in yt at it is prone and dysposed
to syn, Christ^^ inca^nacion.
to thente^te that he now being a brother and like unto us might be a mediator
to be offered up for us, to satisfy ye justice of god, which it behooved to
co^tinewe both as holy and inuiolate, The sweet veins of the ^ospell
as his goodness and mercy pure and unspotted: that the world ^hulde be
assured both of his Justice to be ^eased, and also of his present benygne
mercy to be offered us. For sith he gives us; and for us, Roma. viii.
his own sone: how can it be but that he gives us with him, and for his
sake, all things? What thing is it, of which for his sake we be not suer of,
which so humbled him self, that not only he would be like fellow with us,
but also himself wholly to be ours who can meruell enough at the riches
favor and grace of the goodness of god, whereby he so loved the world, Iho^. iii.
that is to wit man kind, that he would lay forth his own sone to ye death
for the life of it: These (I think) are the lively fountaynes and sweet veynce
of the gospel. This (believe I) to be that only one alone sufficient medicyne
for the syke soul, The only ^wet and sufficyent medicin of the soul.
whereby she is restored to God and to her self. For nothing else may assuer
her of the favor and goodness of god, but god himself. It is he that has so
lyberally, so plentuously, so prudently powered forth his hole grace and favor
into us, that now there is no more left that we can desire, unless any man were
so bold as to require of him more then enough, and above so high a
redoundaunte plentuousnes.

The.iii. Article.
One way a^one.
Thyrdlye, I know no notherway, no another host nor sacrifice for sins to be
purged / then christ. For not Paul himself was not crucified for us. Unto our
reco^cylynge and felycite, eue^ Christ.
There is no another pledge of the goodness and mercy of god so certain and
undoubted / nothing so farm and fast as is god. Neither is there any other
name under the son in which we must be saved then in the name of Jesus
Christ. Wherefore, here are forsaken and left both the iustificacion and
satisfaccion of works / and also the expiacion and intercession of all saints
either in heaven or in earth living of the goodness and mercy of god.
Iustificacion and sat^sfaction through wor^es ar^ here fallen
For this is that only mediator between god and man / even Christ Jesus both
god and man. Thus therefore stands ferme and fast the eleccion of god. For
whom he has chosen / he so chose them before the creacion of the world / that
through his own sone he would purchase and posses them. The e^ect^on of god
stands fast. Ephe. i.
For as he is benign and merciful / so is he holy and just. Wherefore all
his works resemble and savor of his mercy and right wysnes so yt his
eleccion expresses them both For it came of his merciable goodness to chose
the^ who^ he would have: and it was his ryghtwysnes to purches him his elect
and to Join them to him by his sone / made for us ye host and sacrifice to
satisfye the justice of god.

The.iiii. Aarticle.
Of Original sin
Fourthly, I know that old Gra^dsyre ou^ first parent was through that love
of him self hitherto brought (the devil, through envy entysynge and
mynistring that pernycious counsayl) that he desired to be like unto god. This
great crime / when he had committed it: he did eat that forboden and deadly
apple whereby he became gyltie death / now made the enemy of his own God. This
man therefore when god might now by his justice have utterly lost and dampened
him: yet of his mercyable goodness he took a more easy way with him, that is to
wit, he changed this deadly everlasting pain of both body and soul into a
transytory condycion or state: that is, he made him but a bo^de serua^te whom
he might have perpetually said in torments. Bond ar so called because they be
p^serued when their takers might kill them.
This bond condycion of seruytute, sith another ye man himself, nor yet any
man, borne of him may avoid and take away (for what can ye bond man beget but
a bond man) he threw and thrusted al his posterite throuhe ye deadly taste of
thaple also into bondage. And here this is my mind as touching Orygynall syn:
sin is called verily yt that is committed against the law. For where as is
no law, thereis no tra^sgression, and where as is no tra^sgressio^, To. iiii.
there is no syn properly so called, taking sin for that iniquite, crime,
ungodliness, actually committed and gyltie death. I knowledge therefore that ou^
first parent sinned yt actual and oryginall syn which is verily sin,
iniquite, crime and ungodliness. But they yt are borne of him syn^ed not like
manner to Adam. For which one of us his posteryte devoured and eat any forbode^
apple in paradyse? wherefore we must needs grant, Romans v.
yt oryginall syn, as it is in the children of Ada^ is not a syn properly and
actually committed against the law. But may be called properly our birth sore,
or natural syknes, and also our natural sinful co^dycion and sinful seruyle
state. Our sore or syknes it is called, because as he through ye love of
himself fyl: even so do we fall. It is called also our sinful co^dycion and
state, because ye like as he became a servant and bond unto death, eue^ so
are we borne the bond servants the children of wrath under the power of
death, albeit I care not greatly though men call this sore, syknes and
condition syn, after Paul: yea such syn: so yt who so ever be borne in it,
they be thenimies and adversaries of god. For to this state, ye condition of ye
co^cepcion and birth bri^geth the^: and not any actual perpretacion and doing
of syn: but in that yt this syn our first pare^t once committed it. wherefore
ye crime and syn once committed of ada^ is the very cause of thopen treason
against gods majesty and of our death and enemyte betwyxt god and us. And this
is verily sin. But the syn^e which cleaves unto us at our concepcion is
verily that naturalis on full sore and decease / it is that condition and state
yea it is that necessite to dye. Which so^e and condition had never hapened
unto us by our birth only / had not t^is sin viciated and pollu^ed our
co^cepcio^ and natiuite. The sin therefore and not our birth is the cause of
our mis^rable calamite Our natyuite is no another couse then is that thing
which follows of the principal cause. Adam his crime is the cause of our
calamite
This my sentence I confyrme with auctorite and ensample. Paul To. v. says.
If that by ye sin of only one man death got the mastry over all men. etc.
Even so did grace with the gift which is ryghtwysnes / reign into life by
only one man Jesus christ. Here we se sin taken properly: for it was only
Adam by whose fault death hangs over our heads. In the.iii. chap. also / he
says. Alla^e sinners and destytute of that glory of god: that is to say / all
have lost that glorious symylitude and beutifull image of god wherein man was
first created an innocent perfyte without spot or tymple. Here is sin taken
for the sore or syknes / for our sinful condition and natiuite whereby we lost
our similitude / so that all men be called sinners / yea and that are they be
borne / that is to say / all are in the co^dicio^ and state of sin and death
before they sin auctually. Which sentence is constantly co^fyrmed by Paul's
words again Roma. v. saying But death obtained the mastrie and went through
even from Adam unto Moises yea and that through even those which had not sinned
as had Adam transgressed. Lo, here ye se death eue^ upon us infantes although
yet we have not sinned as did Adam. And wherefore? for he has sinned. But we /
sith we have not syn^ed as did he / wherefore should death devour us? Verily
because he died for his sin / and he thus dead / that is to say adiuged to
death the sentence laid upon him / did beget us. We therefore dye / but
through his fault / and thorewe our own condycion and sore or disease (or else
if thou had lever so call it) through our own sin / so that thou take
sin for not auctuall, an ensample. A man taken in battle, Out of the syn
sprynggeth the condycion.
deserves by his unfaithfulness and enemytie to be kept and holden a bond man:
of who^ as many as be borne are become servants and bond men borne as they
say in their masters house. They be bo^de, not through their own fault or
gylt, but through the co^dycion which follows ye fault. For their pare^tes of
whom they be borne, deserved this bondage through their own sin. As for
their children, they have not this sin but the pain and punysshment of the
syn, that is to wit, the condycion, the seruitute and prison. These things if
it like you to call sin because they be inflycte for the sin. I will not
agaynesay. But as for origynall sin by the reason of the co^dycion and
contagion I knowledge it to be borne and conceived in all that be gotten of
thaffect and desire of man and woman. And us to be naturally the children of
wrath I know it, but by the grace which has restored the fall through the
second Adam christ I doubt not to be received among the children of god, It
is but a sole hardy rashness to dampne infantes depertyng vncristened with water.
and that by this way which follows.

The.v. article.
Fyfthlie, hereby it is manifest that if we be restored in Christ the second
Adam unto life as we were given over in the first Adam unto death, that then
be we to fool hardye to dampne any children borne of christen pare^tes, yea or
yet the heathen men's children (though they dye without baptism or
cyrcu^cision) for if Adam were able to lose all mankind by one sin, and
christ by his death has not reuyued and redeemed all mankind from that plage
given thorughe Adam, then was there not like health given through christ
neither can it be like true (which God forbid) that as in Adam all were dead,
even fo in christ all be restored to life. But how so ever men diffyne of the
children of the infydeles: thus verily do we constantly affirm through the
virtue and power of the health given by christ, that they pronounce and speak
without the book: which judge the^ to be dampened standing both the said cause
of our reparacion, and also the fre election of god: which election follows
not faith, but faith follows thelection. Of which thing we shall treat in
tharticle following. For who so are elect of euerlasti^ge, are elect doubteles
before their faith. They ought not therefore to be so temerariously dampened of
us, which yet for lack of age have not faith. For although as yet they have
not faith, yet is the election of god hyd from us, with who^ if they be elect,
we be to hasty to judge yt we know not. But as touching the infantes of the
christen me^ we diffyne otherwise. That is thus. The infantes of the christian
people are of the church and of the people of god, parts and me^bres of his
congregation. Which thing thus we prove. It is promised by the testymonies
all most of all the prophets, that the church of the gentyles should be
gathered together and unity unto the church of the people of God, And Christ
himself said they should come from the east and weast and sit down to eat
with the God of Abraham Isaac and Jacob. Mathe. viii.
And again. Mark. the last.
Go ye your ways into the universal world. etc. Now unto the church of the
Jews pertayne as well their infantes as the Jews them self. No less, then
m^s^e cure infantes pertayne unto the church of Christ as we our selves and
as some time did the infa^tes of the Jews. For if they do not, the^ were not
the promise ferme and ratefied for then we should not as well as Abraham sytte
down with god. G^nesi. xvii.
Which Abraham with the^ that after the flesh were borne of him were nombred
into the church. But and if our infantes should not be as well nombred and
told into the church with their parents as were the infantes of the Jews,
christ should not be indyfferente but more parcyall in his promise to the jews
then to us, denyenge us that benefyt which he gave unto our fathers the Jews,
and so it should appear all the prophesyinges of the calling of the Gentyles to
be void. Wherefore the infa^tes of the christian sith they be no less of the
vysible church as the waxen, it is ferme and fast that they be as well of the
nombre of them who^ we judge to be elect as their pare^tes. Wherefore I judge
them to do ungodly and presumptuously which dampne thynfantes of the christen
when so many aperte testymonies of scripture deny it preaching the church of
the gentyles to be now not like, but also more ample and large then ever was
the Jews Which all shall ye se now more manifest, whiles we declare our faith
as concerning the church what it is.

The.vi. article.
Of the church therefore, this is our mind. Of the church of the electe^
The church, is taken dyuersly in scripture: Sometime for these elect which by
the will of god are predestined and ordained unto life eu^rlastynge. Ephe. i.
Of which church Paul speaks where he says. It has neither rymple nor
spot. Ephe. v
This church is only known unto god. For he after Solomon, only knows the
hearts of me^. Notwithstanding they that be the me^b^es of this church (when
they have fay^h) they know themselves to be elect and the members of this
first church. But the other members they know it not. Thus is it written in
the Acts. Act. ^iii.
And as many as were ordained unto euerlasti^ge life believed. They therefore
that believe, are ordained to life everlasting. But who believe, noma^ knows
but the self beleuer. This man therefore is assured himself to be the chosen
child of god. For he has the earnest penye of the spirit as says the
apostle: whereby he is betrouthed and co^seygned to know himself very fre and
made the son of the famylie and not to be bo^de. Ephe. i.
For the spirit can not diceiue. Which if he tell us fermly that god is our
father, The felicyte of faith is to know our selves the ayers of eternal, life.
and that we so assuered call him boldly father, being also certefied that we
shall go unto his everlasting heretage: then is it ferme and fast that the
spirit of the sone of God is powered into our hearts. It is therefore undoubted
suer him to be the chosen child of God that thus is assured and persuaded of
the spyrite, for they that believe are ordained and predestined unto life
euerlasti^ge. There were, and now be many elect, which as yet have not
faith. As was Mary the mother of god, Ihon^, Paul, while they were yet
infa^tes and young: were they not elect? ye and that before the creacio^ of the
world. And yet their election knew they not another by faith nor reuelacion.
Mathewe, zachena, the thief, and Maudse^, were they not elect before the world
was made? And yet they knew it not until they were illumyned with the spyrite
of god and so drawn of the father unto christ. Of this therefore it is
gathered, this first church unto god only to be known: and that only these
which have a ferme and fast faith know themselves to be the me^bres of this
chu^che. Again, Of the universal and sensible church.
the church is taken universally yt is for all that be named christen and have
professed to follow Christ, of whom the most part aknowlegeth christ
sensybly by confession and partycipacion of the Sacraments, but yet in their
hearts they either abhorte him or else know him not. Of this church we think
the^ to be, as many as profess christendom. In this church are even the evil*
And so was Judas of the church of christ: and all that slypte from christ
and turned their backs. For Judas was as well believed of the apostles to be of
christ's church as Peter or Ihon^, and yet was he nothing so. But Christ
knew well enough who were his, and who were the deuyls. This sensyble and
known church (although) it agree not together in this world (are all that
confess christ with mouth, yea though there be many reprobate persons among
them.

For Christ painted it by that godly allegorye of the.x. virgyns, of whom some
were wise and some foles. This church also often time is called elect and
chosen, although it be not this first church without spotte but after the
judgment of man iudgyng the church of god to be elect even so is this known
church for their sensyble outward knowledgi^ge called also elect in our
opynion. For we judge them also faithful and elect which profess Christ at
baptism and be called christen. So spoke Peter sayng unto thel^ct which be
scatred through Pontum. etc. ^. Pet. i.
Where under the name of the elect he vnders^andeth all that were of the
churches unto whom he writes, and not t^e^ only which are properly chosen of
the Lord, for as these were unknown unto Peter, The third ^a^ynge of the
church.
so could he not write unto them. At last. The church is taken for any
partyculare company or congregation of this universal and sensyble church, as
the church of Rome of Ausb^ough, Lyence. And yet is ye churc^e othe^wyse taken
and many ways which it needs not now to recyte. Here therefore I believe that
there is one church of the^ which have the same one spyrite that assures
the^ that they be verily the children of the family of God, and these are the
first fruits of the churches. This church I believe err not in the truth,
that is to say in these first pryncypall articles of the faith upon the which
our christen relygion stands and is founded. I believe also the universal
sensyble church to be one, while it holds this true confession spoken of
before. And I believe them to be of the same church who soever by christen
profession obeyth it according unto the written word and promise. I believe
Isaac, Jacob, Judah, being infantes and all that were of the sead of Abraham,
and also those infantes whose parents in the prymatyue church at the prechyng
of thapostles turned unto christ to be of this church. For Is^ac and other of
the old fathers, except they had been of the church, they had not received ye
bag and cognysance thereof. Sith they were then of the church being infantes,
then a^ well thereof must our infa^tes and little ons be of the church to.
Wherefore I believe and know, The fathers and motheres and churc^e acknowledge
them infa^tes to be of the church.
that thynfantes co^seigned with the sacrament of baptism be of the church.
For the infantes acknowledge it by the mouths of their godfathers and own
fathers to in yt they be offered of their parents unto ye church, yea rather
the promise, which is no less made unto our infa^tes but more largely and
oftener the^ to thynsantes of the old fathers offer them unto ye church.
These are the pryncypall grou^des and foundacions as touching the infantes to
be baptized and commended unto the church, against the which all the da^tes
and engynes of the Catabaptistes, that is to say of them yt will have us
christened again, may nothing preuayll. For they are not only to be baptized
yt believe, Gene. xvii.
but they that are of the church by the reason of the promise of gods word.
For else should none of the apostles have baptized any man, when none of ye
apostles were sure of the faith of him yt outwardly aknowleged and obeyed their
prechynges. For Simon ye iuggler and charmer, Ananias and Judas to, and many mo
were baptized when they obeyed and took the name of christian men, and yet had
they not faith. Again, Isaac yet an infant was circumcised, when he neither
said he would be of the church nor yet believed: but the promise told the^ yt
he was of the church of god. Since then our infantes be in the same place that
thynfantes of the Hebrews were, The promise is to Abraham, I. will be the God
of thy sede.
therefore does ye promise concerning them made unto our church both name them
and confess them to be of the church. Wherefore verelye / as well does
baptism as circumcission (we speak of the sacrament of baptism) nothing else
require then the one of these two either the aknowlegi^ge or name gyuyng, or
else the covenant or promise: which all shall be more clear by these that
follow.

The.vii. article.
Seuently, I believe, yea I know it verily / that all the sacraments, The
sacraments give not grace.
neither give they grace, nor yet bring it nor dystribute any grace at al. In
which assercio^ peradventure I shall seem to bold to affirm (most mighty
Emperor) but yet my sentence stands fast. For grace, for as much as it is
given and made us by the holy ghost (I speak latynely, using this word Grace
for forgyuenes indulgence, absolucion, and a free benefyte) so does this gift
peerse and enter only into our spirits. Now, the holy ghost needs another
gyde nor caryer, for he himself is the brynger and power and might whereby
althi^ges are borne, having no need to himself, to be borne, neither have we
red in any place of scripture, that sensible things, as are the sacraments
should certainly bring with the^ the holy ghost. But if the sensible things
be at any time brought with ye spirit, the^ was it the spirit that brought
them with him, and not econtrarie, the sensible brought the spirit. For when
the vehemente wind was brought, and with the wind was brought the tongues:
the spirit brought them, and not they the spirit. So did the wind bring the
quails, Number. xi
and took away the locustes: but never were quails or locustes so swyf^e as
to bring the wind with them. Exo. x.
So when the wind being so great, that it might eue^ hills have taken away,
going over Hell as: yet was not the Lord borne in that blaste. And to be
short, Johan. iii.
like as the wind blows whether his natural course lies, we hearing his
voice, and not knowing whence he comes n^r where he falls even so is it
with every man that is borne of the spirit, yt is to wit that is invisible
and insensybly lygh^ened (...) of the spirit and drawn of god the father. The
verite has spoken these things. Whe^fore it can not be that through thie
dopynge into the water, nor by this draft / nor y^ morsel nor that anoyntyng
that the grace of the spirit be brought into us, for if it be so, then were it
known, how, where, by whom, and into whom the spirit were brought. For if
the present effect of grace were bound unto the sacraments in the which it
should now be brought and work, then were al they graceless which had not
received the sacraments albeit they be el^cte and chosen which election is by
the grace of god in Christ Ephe. i. Neither does Materia or subiectum hinder
the course of the spirit as our diuynes skold and dyspute it / for that the
matter must first be disposed or the grace of baptism or of the thanks
gyuynge (as they say) be given him which must first be prepared unto it.
For after them, he that receives this grace by the sacraments, either he
himself prepares him self, or else is he prepared of the spirit^, if he
prepare him self, then may we of our selves do that same thing which grace
going before (which they call gracia preuenie^s) should do, and so is gracia
preuenie^s put out of office. The sacraments represent the analogy of the
thing i^uisibly done by the spirit.
If he be prepared of the spirit to receive this grace, then I ask whether
this be done by the inducynge of the sacrament or without the sacrament, if it
be done by the means of the sacrament, the^ must man be prepared unto one
sacrament by another, and so shall we never come to the first sacrament but
proceed into infinite sacraments, for no man can be (after this ways)
prepared to a sacrament without another former sacrament, and if we be
without a sacrament prepared unto the receyuyng of the sacramental grace the^
must the spirit be present with his benygne grace before the sacrament be
given and grace received before the sacrament be mynistred. Of which we gather
(which thing I do gladlye admytte in the sacraments) that the sacraments be
given into an open testimony of that pryuate grace which is first present in
every private man. Sacraments are testimonies, by which we show us to the
church to have received forgyuenes of our sins.
So is baptism given before the congregation, unto him which before he
receive the sacrament either he confessed the relygion of Christ, or else he
has the word of promise whereby it is known, him to pertayne unto the
church. And for this cause, when we baptize one waxen, we ask him whyther he
believes. And if he answer ye, then he receives baptism. Wherefore it is
plain that he had faith or he received the sacrament of baptism. And thus it
appears manifest that faith is not given by baptism And if an infant be
offered to be christined, it is asked whyther his parents offer him to be
baptized, and when they answer by the witnesses that so is their will: then is
the child baptized. Where it is plain yt the promise of God preceded (whereby
they be rekened to be of the church as well as thynfantes of the Hebrwes. For
when these men which are of the church offer their infantes, they prese^te
the^ because they be christen men's children and so rekened by the promise of
god to be among the me^bres of the church. By baptism therefore the church
openly receives him which was first received by grace, wherefore baptism
brings not grace, but it testyfieth to the church that grace is given before
to him yt is baptized. I believe therefore (oh Ceasar) the sacrament to be ye
sygnificacion of an holy thing, even of grace and forgiveness before granted
us. I believe yt visible figure or form of baptism, that is to say, that
visible exemple to be ye form of that invisible grace which is made and given
by the benefyte of god, which example represents in a manner a certain
analogy and proporcion of the thing done by the spirit, The sacrame^^s
represe^t the analogy of the thing inuisiblye done by the spirit.
I believe the sacrament to be an open testimonye. As when we be baptized, the
body is washed with the most clean Element, but by this it is sygnified, that
we, by the favorable and gracious goodness of God are received into the
feloweshyp of the church and people of god, among whom we profess to live
puerly and innoce^tly. Thus does Paul expound this sacrament and mystery of
baptism. To. vi. Wherefore, the person now baptized, testifyeth himself to
be of the church of god, which must now worship his lord god in thyntegrite
of faith, and in pure living. And for this cause, the sacraments, which are
holy ceremonies (for the word comes unto the element, and the Sacrament is
done or made (are religiously to be reuere^ted, that is, to be had in high
estimacion, and entreted honorablye. For albeit they may not make and give
grace, yet do they associat us vysiblie unto the church, into which before we
were inuysibly received. Which thing as it is pronounced and promulged
together with the words of Gods promise in the action of the words and
sacrament so is it with high relygion, fear, and reverence to be honored.
For if we should any otherwise think and believe of the sacraments: that is to
wit, that they outwardly adhibited and admoued, should pourge us within, then
were there now common again among us the very Iudaisme and ryte of relygion
of the Jews. Which by their diverse and manyfolde unctions, oyntmentes,
oblacions, washynges burnt sacryfices, and banketes before their aulters and
images, believed their sins to be pourged, and grace (as it were) boughte and
gotten. Which thing the prophets, especyallye Isay and Jeremy, did always
most constantly entreat and confute: teaching, that the promises and benefyts,
as grace and forgyuynes were given by the mere mercy and lyberalite of god: and
not for the deserts and merytes of any outward ceremony. Also I believe, these
catabaptistes, in that they deny the infantes of the faithful their baptism,
shamfully to err, and not only in this point, but also in many other, which
there is now no time nor place to speak of. Against who^ with great perell,
but yet with gretter healpe of god, I my self first did both teach, preche
and write, that men might the sooner and better avoid both their folisshnes and
malice. So that now, through the goodness of God that contagio^ is greatly
remytted and swaged among our nation. So far of is it, that I at any time
received ought of yt sedicious faction, either preached it or defended it.

The.viii. article.
Eyghtly, I believe that in the holy Supper of thanks gyuyng, Of the holy
supper of the lord.
the very body of Christ is present at the eyes and contemplacion of our
faith. That is to wit, that they which give thanks unto the Lord for that
benefyt given us in his sone, aknowlege him to have had taken unto him very
manhed, in it verelye to have suffered, and verelye to have had wasshen away
our sins in his blood, and so every thing done by Christ to be as it were
present unto them at the eye and conte^placion of their faith. But that the
very natural body of Christ either should be essencially corporally and
really in the supper, or eaten with our mouths and teeth in the form of
bread as the papists dream or in the bread as some men imagen, which yet
sytte and look bak unto, and for the pottes full of flesh out of Egipte. This
we do not only deny, but we affirm it constantly to be an error which is
plain against the word of God. Which thing by gods help (most noble
Emperor) I shall make it as clear in few words unto your Majesty as the
son.

First bringyng for me the word of god, secondarely, pressynge as it were
with engynnes unable to be resisted against our adversaries: that is, with
arguments taken and grounded of the scriptures. And last of all declarynge
the old diuynes to have ever ben in this same our sentence. Thou therefore in
the mean time (oh holy spirit the creator) be present, and illumyne the minds
of thine, fill the breasts who^ thou haste created with grace and light.
Christ himself the mouth and wisdom of the father God almyghtie thus says.
Ioa^. xvi
Pore men shall ye ever have with you but me shall ye not have always. Here is
only the presence of his body denied to be ever with us: but as touching his
godhed he is ever present with us. For so is he ever every where according to
his other saying, I will be with you until the worlds end, Mathe. the last,
that is as touching his godly power and goodness. Austen is of this our
sentence in his.l. tretyse upon Ihon. Nether can our adversaries by any
cauyllacion prove ye humanite and manhed of christ to be where soever is his
godhed, or else to say that his person should be divided, for so to say, were
to take away the very manhed of Christ, for nothing may be every where but
the godhed. The manhed to be in one place and the godhed every where, does not
deuyde the person, no more then the sone to have assumpted the manhed, deuideth
not the unite of the essence. Yea it should be more able to separate the unite
of thessence, while one person adsumeth unto him a creature, which the other
in nowyse take not, then the humanite to be in one place and the diuynite
every where should deuyde the person: when even in the creatures we see the
bodies to be bound to one place, and yet their power and virtue to be spread
excedyngly wide. As is an ensample in the son whose body is but in one
place, and yet is his virtue and power stretched over all places.

And the mind of man wrandreth even above the stars and sercheth the depest
of the earth, while his body is but in one little place Again yet says christ,
yet again I leave the world and I go to the father. Here is this word,
LEAVe, as before was this word, HAVE / so that our adversaries can not say and
gloss it out addyng we have him not visiblye. For when he spoke a little before
of the visyble subtraction and withdrawyng of his body, he said thus, for a
little while ye shall not se me, etc. who would here conte^de of this saying
(ye shall not se me) his body to be present, but yet inuysible? verelye none,
except such as would iugle with his sayings and his presence and absence
bodily. Wherefore should he fle men's sight which would be here, and showed
himself so often unto his disciples after his resurrection / But it is
expedient (says he) that I go my way. Johan. xvi.
But and if he were here still, it should not be expedient that we should not se
him, sith as often as his disciples doubted of his bodily presence he exhibited
and offered himself manyfestly that neither sense nor mind should not suffer
any lack of him nor he diceyued, but fully and certainly adsuered of his
presence, himself saying unto them: feel and touch me, and fear not. For it
is I my very self. And unto Mary he said. Touch me not. Albeit he showed
himself to her visibyle. And when he was now going hence and should commend
his disciples unto his father he said. the text has pusillum,, for post ^ac.
After this time I shall not be in the world. Here is a verb substantyue,
after this I am not in the world, as well as is in these words. This is my
body. So that another here can our adversaries say, that there can be no trope,
which deny that verb substantyues may receive any trope. But the thing it
self needs no such euasio^s, for it follows But these are in the world,
which Antithesis and contraposicion teaches playnelye, himself as concerning
his manhed, not to be in the world after that his disciples should be in it.
And to know when he went his way (not as they rather feign and lie expou^dynge
it that he should but make himself invisible) thus says Luke. Luke the last.
And when he should take his leave at them: he went his way from them and was
taken pv into heaven. He says not, he vanysshed out of their syghtes or made
himself invisible. Of which thing Mark thus writes. The Lord after that he
had spoken unto them: he was taken up into heaven, and sytteth on the right
hand of God: he says not he tarried here still, and made his body invisible,
again, Luke in the acts when he had said these things, they beholdynge him,
he was borne up and elevated, and the cloud took him out of their sight.
Acts, i.
The cloud covered him, which cloud it had been no need of, if he had but only
have had withdrawn the syghte of himself and so to have had been here still
present only invisible, neither had it have been neade to have so ben borne up
and elevated. And even there in the same place, it is written. This same Jesus
which is taken up from you into heaven even thus shall he come, as ye have
seen him go hence into heaven. What can be more clear and manifest then these
words? From you (says he) he is taken up, wherefore he can not se still with
them after his manhed, another visiblye nor inuisibly. But when we shall se him
come again, even as he thus went his way, then shall we know him to be
present in deed both bodily and visibly. But so long as he thus yet come not
again, we must needs believe that as concerning his humayne nature, that is
his ma^hed, he sits on the right hand of the Father until he come again
to judge the living and the dead.

And as for them that deny Christ's body to have a place, saying that it is
not in any place / let the^ look how openly they go bli^dfolde against the
truth. For he was in the kryb, upon the cross, and in Jerusalem when his
parents sought him, in the sepulcre, and without the sepulcre, for the angel
said, he is risen, he is not here, behold the place where they had laid him.
And yet least they will say, his body to be every where, let the^ hear this.
The doors shut, Jesus came and stood among them, what need were it for a
body to come and to go from place to place, that is in all places? what need
was it for him to say I shall go before you into Galile sith his body was
there already, if such a body should be every where, and that but inuisiblye?
He should have left out these words, he came and I shall go before you, and
have said, I being every where present will show my self visible here and
there, etc. But away with these tedious sophistical vanites, which take away
from us the verite, both of the humanite of Christ, and also of holy
Scripture. These testimonies prove euydently christ's body to be nowhere
present but in heaven to speak orderly and right according to the scriptures
of the nature and properte of the body of christ adsumpt and taken unto the
person. And as touching the conference of scriptures that apere contrary, what
soever they tell us of the myraculouse power of god, yet ought we never so to
wreste them, to make us believe that God does any thing contrary to his own
word, for that were his impete^cye against his power and not with his power.
Also, that the natural body of Christ is not eaten with our mouth, himself
declares it when he said (the Jews stryuynge and murmuri^ge upon the bodily
eating of his flesh) The flesh, whose eating ye mysse understand profytethe
nothing at al, Only the spirit gendreth spiritual things.
that is to eat it naturally, but to eat it spiritually by faith it profyteth
much for it gives life. What soever is borne of flesh, it is but flesh,
and what is borne of the spirit, is spirit. Now if the natural body of
Christ be eaten with our mouth, what else but flesh is it that comes of
that natural flesh so eaten / and least this argument seem but light to some
me^, let us hear the the other part, what so ever is borne of ye spirit, is
spirit: ergo what soever is spirit, it must be borne of the spirit: if the^
the flesh of christ be so holsom and such salvation unto the soul, it must
needs be eaten spiritually and not carnally, that is to say with faith and not
with our teth. And this pertayneth unto the matter and substance of the
sacraments that the spirit is begote^ by the spirit, and not by any bodily
thing, as we touched it before. Paul warns us of this thing in that he
says. ii. Cor. v.
Albeit he knew christ sometime after the flesh, yet now he knows him
no more concerning the flesh. By these places we are constrained to confess,
that these words. This is my body, must needs be taken not naturally but
sygnificatiuelye sacrame^tallye and in sign as are these. This is the pasouer
or passing fore bye: spoken of the pascall lamb. For that same lamb so eaten
yearly in that solemn feste holden, was not the self passing foreby, but it
did sygnify that passage and oyntynge of the Hebrews sometime done. Unto this
agreith well, the succession and imitacion, for the supper succeeded the lamb.
Which thing teaches and warns us that Christ did use like words in a
like phrase, for the succession observes the imitacion. Unto this agrees the
self same co^posicion and order of the words, the time also speaks and
co^senteth to the same and makes all for it, so the old passover is but
remembered and the new thanks gyuyng is instituted, also the very property of
all the memorialles and remembraunces, all make for this same sense, which
calling them the name of the same thing whereof they make the memorial or
remembrance. So did the Athenienses call thalleuacion or the easmente of their
common debt, not as though yearly their dettes should be eased or paid: but
because they celebrated that thing perpetually that Solon had in time past
made, and the self same celebracion or feast they orned and honested with the
name of the self thing. And even so the things which are the signs and
memorials of the very body and blood of christ are called his body and
blood. Now here follows arguments. Like as the body can not be fed with any
spiritual thing, no more can the soul be fed with any bodily thing. But and
if the natural body of christ be eaten, the^ I would wit whither it feed the
body or the soul, it fedeth not ye body / ergo it fedeth the soul / if it
then fedeth the soul, the^ does the soul eat flesh, and so is it false that
the spirit is borne only of the spirit. Secondarely I ask, what thing is
it, that the body of christ naturally eaten, makes it perfyt effectuously / If
it remytteth syn as one part witnesses, ergo the disciples got remission of
their sins by eating it in the mau^dye: and then christ dyed for them in
vain But if his body eaten dispenses and distributeth the virtue of Christ's
passion, One and the s^^uesactio^s myndes^ the Eucari^tye to take awa^e sins
and to d^s^e^ceh the r^misyo^ of sins (...) on the cross.
as the same part says / then was the virtue of the passion and redemption
disposed and distributed before it was begone. And if it fedeth the body that
it should be healed to rise again (as a certain other ma^full folisshly
affyrmeth) then much more should it heal our body and lift it up again
from syknes. But Ireneus otherwise understands this sentence, yt is to wit,
our bodies to be fed and nourysshed with the body of christ to rise again
deifyed unto life. For his minds, that the hope of our life to come and
resurrection, is stablyshed by the resurrection of christ, behold this faier
manner of speech. Thyrdly, if the natural body of christi was given the
disciples at his supper: then must it needs follow that they eat it even as it
the^ was their being and living: but then was it a passible and a body that
might suffer / wherefore they eat a body that might be wounded and suffer
death, A preue^tynge of our adversary objection
for then was it not yet gloryfied. But yet when they say, that they eat the
same body, but not as it was passible, but even such one as should be after his
resurrection: then object we thus: ergo Christ had then two bodies at once,
one that was not yet glorified by his death and resurrection, and another that
should be gloryfied: or else was that same one self body at the same time both
passible and impassible. And so sith in his agony his ma^hed feared the death,
it might be gathered that he suffered not, but that the body endewed with this
gift of impassibilyte, used and enjoyed it. Wherefore it may be thought that
it suffered not, but apered to have had suffered death, which opinyon of these
blind sophisters open us the way unto Marcions heresye. There may be yet
(most noble Emproure).vi. C. mo arguments made against these papists, but we
shall be content with these at this time. Now that the old Doctors (which
shall be the last part of this article (do agree with us, I shall confyrme my
saynges with these two witnesses First with Ambrose, Ambrose.
saying in his commentarye upon the first pystle unto the Corinthia^s. upon
these words cap. xi. Show and give thanks for the death of the lord. etc,
thus. For because we be delivered by the death of the lord, we reme^brynge
this thing in eating and drynkyng do signify his flesh and blood which
have been offered up for us. etc. Here speaks Ambrose of the meat and drink
at that maundye, wytnessyng that we sygnifie these same things which were
offered for us. Also with Austen we confyrme our saying, ^usten.
which in his.xxx. treatise upon Ihon, affirms that the body of christ must
be in one place, where the prynted books have for oportere, that is, for it
must needs be, they have, it may be in one place, but they prynte it false.
For in the Master of the Sentences and in the old written books and in the
decrees canonycall out of which the prynte was fetched and this sentence of S.
Austen translated again into them, it is red oportet, it must be in one place.
whereby manifestly we se the old doctoures, not to have had understood it of
the natural eating of christ's body, but of the spiritual eating what so
ever they have spoken sole^pnelye of the Supper. For when they knew that the
body of Christ must needs be in one place, and that at the right hand of the
Father in heaven, they never were so vngentel to pluk his body down thence to
break it again and chawe and cha^me it with the stynkynge teth of men. Also
Austen, writynge against Adimantum, in the.xii. ca. says. Origin
That these three sentences, the blood is the soul, this is my body, and the
stone was Christ, were spoken in a sign to sygnify one by the the other and
after a long process he says. I may interpret that presepte to be laid in
a sign, for the lord doubted not to say. This is my body* when he did but
give the sign of his body, these are Auste^s words. Here is lo, the key
wherewith we may unlock all the dar^ke words of the old doctors of this
sacrament Even that thing which only was but the sign of his body / to be
called ye body it self. Let them go now they that lift, and condemn us of
heresy, so long as they may se themselves to condemn by the same broyd even
the che^e pyllers of the old doctors and diuynes / contrary to the decrees
of the Popes. Of these words it is full manifest that the old doctors and
diuynes did always speak sygnificatiuely and in the significacion thereof when
they attrybuted somoch unto the eating of the body of Christ in the supper*
All the old doctors spoke in a similitude and represe^tacion when they spoke
of the use and fruit of the eating of this Sacrament.
that is to wit, not that the sacramenta^l eating might pourge the soul, but
faith in god through Jesus Christ, which is the spiritual eating did pourge
it, of the which faith and spiritual eating, these outward things are ye
significacion and shadow. And as the corporal fode susteyneth ye body, as
does wine refreshe it and make it glad, so does that faith stablysshe our mind
and certyfieth it of the mercy of God in that he gave us his sone: as he
refressheth our mind with the blood of him, when our faith certyfieth us
that our sins which so burned our conscience be quenched in his blood. Now
therefore let us be contented with these places, albeit a man might compyle
right great books to declare and confyrme that the old doctors were of our
side. Neither let not the book now lately made of Eccius of the sentence of
the old doctors move and peruerte any man whose sentence the good man
promyseth himself to defend so plainly yt al men may se it. For we shall se
shortly the confutacion of this book by our brother Decolampadius a man
excellently learned, Decola^pad^us.
which from the begi^nynge of this strife has taken upon him to affirm and
declare the sentence of the old doctors in this matter. And we which also are
in this sentence have (I think) performed it plentuouslye in many books
written unto diverse men, what soever in this matter may be desired and required
for a more plain exposicio^ and co^futacion of our adversaries.

The.ix article.
For the nynth article, I believe that the Ceremonies which hurt not the faith
by any supersticion, nor be contrary to the word of god, may be suffered
until the day star of truth be more and more yet sprongen and give us
light, albeit I wot not whether some such may be found to be tolerated for
a time for charities sake. But thus do I believe, that by the same mastres and
teacher even charity say I, sith such ceremonies can not be used and stand
without great offense, that then they should be abolysshed and taken away
although they reclame and bark against it which are of no faithful mind.
For christ forbode not Mary mawdelen to power forth her oyntmente upon him
although the covetousness and infydelite of Judas did swell against it
proudlye. But the Images which stand forth to be worshypped, I reaken them
not among these ceremonies, Images where perell is lest they be worshypped
ought to be taken away.
but to be of the noumbre of those things which dyrectlye fight against the
word of god. But such as are not setforth to be worshipped, or where there is
no perell that they should in time to come be worshypped, so far of am I that
I would dampne them, that I aknowlege that science and craft in paintyng and
karuynge to be the very gifts of God.

The.x. article.
For the tenth, I believe the office of interpretynge scriptures or preaching to
be right holy, as an office among all to be most necessary. For to speak
orderly we se among all men the outward prechi^g of the apostles and
Evangelists or byssoppes to have had gone before the faith / which faith we
ascribe only unto the holy ghost. For we se (ahlasse) a great many hearing
the outward preaching of the gospel, but they believe it not: which comes
for lack of the spirit. whyther so ever therefore these preachers be sent,
there is it a token of the grace of God, that he will make the knowledge of him
manifest unto his elect and chosen. Preachers to be banished and brent is ^
token of gods present plages.
And unto whom these preachers be denied, there is it an euyde^t token of his
wrath to be at hand, as every man may gather of the prophets and of the
example of Paul which was sometime forboden to go to some men / and in the
mean reason called and sent to other men. Yea both laws and princes may have
no greater a present healpe to defend the common justice then by preaching.
Prechi^g defe^deth both laws justice ^ princes.
For in vain is it commanded that, that just is, unless they unto whom it
is commanded have a consyderacion of that at Just is, and so love equity and
mynister the same. And unto this love and consideracion do the preachers as
mynisters prepare and excyte men's hearts, but the spirit is as the auctor
both of the teacher and also of the hearer These manner of mynisters which
teach comfort, fere, and take cure faythfullye ouerseyng and visitynge the
people of Christ with the word, we acknowledge reverence and embrase But this
office which baptiseth / and in the supper do hear about and distrybute the
body and blood of the Lord (for thus we call the holy bread and wine of the
supper / even the thing signyfied for the sign) visyte the sike and feed the
pore with thy riches, and in the name of the congregation, ye and these
mynisters also which read, interpret scriptures, teach and instruct other
or profess that they them selves or other might be so informed and taught
that in time to come may be very pastors and true curates over the
congregation we love, ^^iuris inutile pondus.
reverence and kiss. But as for these myterd mynisters and crosyerde cl^rkes
which rableme^t is borne to consume and devour fruits we believe that they be
unprofitable dunge sakes and dyrtie burde^s of the earth and to be even the
very same in the body of the church / that they deforme crooked bu^ches and
crouched shulders upon a ma^s bak.

The.xi. article.
For the.xi. article / I know that Princes and rulers justly consecrated and
promoued unto their office to sit in the stead of God / no less the^ do the
preachers. For as the precher is the mynister of the celestial wisdom and
goodness, as he that should teach faithfully and bring forth errors into
light to be known / even so is the prince or ruler, the mynister of goodness
and justice. Of goodness, as when with faythfulnes and modestlye like god he
both hears and delybreth with counsel upon the causes of his subjects. Of
justice, as when he breaks the audacite of the wicked and defends the
innocents. These gifts if a prince once have them, I believe his conscience
can fear another enemy nor nothing else. But and if he want them / albeit he
show himself terrible and be dreaded, yet believe I yt in nowyse can his
conscience be absolved that he be dewlye consecrated and put in the office.
Notwithstanding yet believe I that a christen man ought to obey such manner a
tyrant unto that occasion of the which Paul speaks if thou may be at
lyberte, use it rather: which occasion yet believe I to be showed of god only
and not of man, ye and yt not darkely / but so apertly as was king Saul cast
away and David received to be his successor. Also as concerning tribute,
custom, and tol to be given to princes for the defense of ye realm I consent
consta^tly with Paul. R. xiii

The.xii article.
In the.xii. I believe that fained loud ^ye of Purgatory fire to be a thing
so contumelious and injurious unto the free redemption given through Christ, as
it has been lucrose and profitable to auctors and inuentor^ thereof. For if it
be necessary that our sins must needs be purged with such fyery torments,
then were Christ dead in vain, then were grace and favor void. Which
what can be invented more pernicious in all christen religion? either what
christ have they which will be called christen and yet fere they this fire,
yea smoke rather then fire / but hell wherewith Ixion and Ta^talus, the
unfaithful rebels and stourdye adversaries to god are punyshed for ever / I
do not only believe but I know it also. Mathe. ^xv.
For the verite, when he speaks of the universal judgment he affyrmeth
that after that judgment some shall go into fire everlasting. Wherefore
after the general judgment there shall be fire perpetual. By which saying,
the Catabaptistes may the feblyer pretexe and cloak their error with this
their Perpetuum (whereby they teach, Everlasting.
Hell fire is everlasting.
that their perpetuum dure no longer then unto domes day. For here speaks
christ of the perpetual fire to burn after that judgment to torment the
devil with his angels with the ungodly that contempne god, with those
myscheuous tyru^tes which oppress the truth with lies, not healpynge of faith
and mercy their pore neighbors being in necessite. These said articles
constantly I believe I teach, and defend, not by mine own words but by the
scripture of God. And I promise and profess (god willing) so to do while I
live: except any man can as apertly and plainly (as we have now done) the
same, say forth and confyrme the contrary by the very holy scriptures truly
understood. For unto v^ it is nolesse joyous and plesaunt then true and
just, to submytte these our sayings unto the holy scriptures and to the
church that iugeth by the spirit according to the Scriptures. We might have
had declared these things all plentuouslyer, and more at length: but when the
occasion would not suffer it, we are contented with these as they are, which
we think to be such articles as me^ may lightly carpe and touch at (as it is
now a days the common manner) but yet shall there noman confute and pluck
them quyte away. But yet who soever will tempt it to touch the^ away he shall
not escape quyte himself, for yet have we more armor in store which we shall
bryngeforth, but for this time we have suffyci^ntly proved our part. Wherefore
(most mighty Emprour) and ye other princes, Lords and nobles, An exhortacion
unto the Emprour and his Noble princes.
the lega^^s and heads of the common weal / I beseech and pray you by Jesus
christ the lord and our brother, for his mercy and ryghtwysnes sake / for his
judgment when he shall render unto every man as he is worthy / which sees
all men's councele and minds / which distroubleth and subuerteth the
purposes of evil Princes, ungodly delyberynge and against God decreynge and
enactyng, and wickedly co^maundyng, even our god (I say) that exalts the
humble and casts down the proud, I desire you (I say) that ye neglecte not
nor conte^pne not the pore selye symplenes of me now monysshynge in time. For
often times have even the very rude deluers herbs and worte sellers spoken in
time that it behooves. Yea and the verite himself has chosen weak and simple
persons to promulge and preach himself Besides this, remember that your
selves be but men which your selves may both dyceiue and be dyceyued also of
other. For every man is a liar. And except a man he otherwise taught by
thynspiracion of god then himself either may know or desire, there is no hope
of him / but that through his own craft and council he shall cast himself
down hedelynge. For full truly verily said the prophet Jeremy. Behold, the
word of the Lord have they cast away, what wisdom then may be left them?
Wherefore sith your selves be the standerd berers of justice, there ought no
man so clearly and so redelye to know and have the will of God as you. Which
where else can it be fetched the^ out of his scriptures? Abhor not therefore
their se^tences which cleave unto the word of god. For this thing we se
commonly chances, yt the more the adversaries to ye word repugne and fight
against it, the more it comes into fight and falsnes is cast forth. But and
if there be any among you (which I know full well there be) which boldlye
and stoutly deforme and accuse me unto you to be of no knowledge nor learning,
yea I wysse, and to be full of malice to, so: yet consider this thing with
your selves. First whether we that follow this way of the gospel and the
right use of the sacrament of thanks gyuyng have ever insti^uted and ordered
our living, that there can any good man hitherto doubt whether we ought not
to be had in estimacion and place of good and faithful me^. Also whether that
even from our cradles, have we ben so far from wit and lea^nynge, that all
hope of erudicion ought to be cast away from us: Surely yet do we of neither
of these things glory nor boste our selves, when Paul himself affyrmeth to
be the same that he was by the grace of god. Notwithstanding yet if our life
has chanced to be a little prosperous and iocounde, yet did it never fall to
tarry in lust and shameless fylthynes, neither yet did it degener into cruelnes,
pride, or co^tumacy so that the testimony of our living has so astoned the
councels of our adversaries / that they have revoked and repelled them from
their purposes against us. As for our learning and erudicion although it be
greater the^ our enemies either may bear resyste or without conscience can
cotne^pne, yet is it far inferior in our opinion, the^ these that so fool
hardely persecute us, judge it to be. But yet that we may atayne unto our
purpose, we have so labored now not a few years and read both the
scriptures and other humayne letters, that what we now teach it is not
vnaduysedlye nor rasshlye done, for we may lawfully praise the grace and gifts
of god so lyberally diuyded unto our congregacio^s. Dubtelesse so have our
congregacions which hear the Lord by us, received the word of God, that
now all lying and false dealing are repressed, pride and wantones are broken,
rebukynge, chiding, The fruits of the Gospel preched.
and dyuision are gone away from among us. Which all verily if these be not
the fruits of the holy ghost, what else are they?

But thou (oh most myghtie Emprour, and all ye princes and nobles) consider
what good fruit the visare of man's doctrine has brought us forth. The
fruit of man's doctrine
These redeemed and boughte Messes, as they have increased the libidinouse
prodigious lusts both of princes and of the people, so have they brought in
and ampliated the filthy concupiscence and superfluous pride of the Popes and
Bishops, and augmented the insaciable glotonous vomyting mawes of the mess
sayers. Yea what myschife is there that these bought and sold messes have not
kyndled? For the riches heaped together through these messes who is able to
scatter, except they be stopped and stra^gled even in their veins. I beseech
god therefore to reform this thing otherwise, and better then ye all entende,
whom gladly we call the best and most mighty, most noble christen defenders
of the faith. etc. we so call you and believe it so to be. But god bring it so
to pass, that ye would effectuouslye once endeavor your selves to cut away
the rotes of this mass and of al^ the errors and superfluous ceremonies of
the church, and also that ye once would ernestly labor, yt this proud Rome
with all her dyrte and dunge which she has thrusted into this christen
world, and namely into your Germany might be forsaken and cast out. And what
soever power ye have hitherto stretched forth and executed against the pure
gospel / now bend the same against the pernicious enforcementes of the
wicked papists: that unto us, justice which through your idle negligence is
banysshed, and that innocencye which is obscured and deformed with lies and
false crafty colors, might be brought us again. There is enough and to much
cruel tyranye excecuted already, except to command against the truth, to
dampne, yea to tormente and slay, to steal and rob / and to banyshe, be not
cruel tyranny and tyranous crueltye. This way therefore sith it has not well
succeeded with you, ye must suerly seek and go to it by another way. If this
council be of the Lord, beware ye fight not against god, but if it be of any
other, it will fall in her own folyshenes. Wherefore se that you suffer the
word of God freely to be spredde and to spryng forth (Oh fo^nes of men) who
soever ye be in whose power it lies not to let and forbyde no not so much
as a grass to grow and wax. ye se it su^fycientlye this fruit of the
gospel plentuouslye to be wa^red with the celestial showers, neither may it
not be so repressed with any hate of men that it will be withred Consider ye
not what thing your self most couette, but what the world requires, and
asks in the preaching of the gospel. Take it in good worth, what soever
this thing is, and show your selves by your councels and reforcementes to be
the children of God, and in gods stead.

At z^ryk the iii.. day of Iulye Anno Domi. M.D.XXX. Unto your Majesty and
unto all faithful men, your obedyent and obsequious subject Huldrycke
zwinglius: by the grace, election, and sendynge of God, pastor and Bishop of
zhryke, wyssheth peace.

AMEN.
The complaining Prayers of the pore persecuted married priests with their
wives and children chased out of England into sundry places of Germany:
cryinge unto God in their hard desolate exyle and grievous affliction thus.
How now happens it (oh Lord) that thou stand so far of, Psalm x.
and art hyden from us in this time of our troubles anxte and heuye dystres? we
thy afflycte little flock are chased and scatred abroad by the wealy pride of
the ungodly: oh would God they were once take and trapped in their own
co^spirisons which they so craftelye conspire. This ungodly makes but a
gaudye at the fulfyllynge of his myscheuous entente, the blasphemous thieves
which rob the little fearful flock and blaspheme thy name are praised and
exalted of men. psalm. x.ii
Help lord, for holiness is lost / faythfulnes is banyshed from the children
of men. They are but vain lies which one speaks to another, it is but
flatery and glauerynge speech that every heart imageneth. The Lord once cut
out all glauerynge tongues out of these proud mouths, which say / let us
stablyshe our tongues with our own auctorite let us stycke to our (...)
^ippe, and then who shall be lords over us? For the calamite of the oppressed
and waylyng of the afflycted / I will arise now (says the Lord) and restore
them to health and reuyue the^. How long (lord) wylt thou forget us? wylt
thou forget us for ever? Psalm. xiii.
How long will thou hyde thy face from us, how long shall we reuolue
thoughts in our heuie minds? How long shall this laborious heaviness wast our
hearts, How long shall this enemy be exalted over us. etc. Help lord, and
se to their wyckednes. For the ungodly have bent their bows and fastened in
their arowes privily to smite the pure i^nocent hearts. Thy fear is not before
their eyes. They have conspyred amongst the^ selves blody myscheif, Psalm*
lxiii.
eue^ their secret snares pryuely for us to be set saying have done, who shall
se us. The anticristen deuilishe dragon, now at last reveled, Apo. xii.
by cruel persecucio^ chaseth thy church out of England into the deserte, he
spouteth out of his mouth great and mighty waters after us to drown us,
straightly co^maundyng that noman should socour nor help us. Let thy earth
therefore (oh lord) open her mouth and preach us out the savior, oh sone of
god and man devour and dry up these troublous waters open thy mouth with
incessante intercession now before thy father into our sauegarde and salvation
defending thy church unto our present consolacion. Now ye Dragons whelps
and sede of the serpent, which now sorbyde the merciful christen breasts to
fulfill the godly works of charity, Ma^he. xxv.
even to feed the hungry, to give drink to the thyrstie, cloth the naked,
visit the syke, comfort the careful comfortles tossed and hunted from place
to place, chased from cite to cite into unknown countries among chorlyshe and
fyerce ba^barous people (a less for that we dwell altolong among these
boisteous rude men, Psalm. C.xx.
we are weary of our lives thus to wandre among the haters of peace, which
when we would have rest, they rustle their harnes to battle. But what shall
the dragon with his seade say when they shortly stand before their terrible
judge Christ whom yet in his members they cease not to slaye, what shall they
say when they hear him pronounce his sweet sentence to his chosen church.
Come ye my blessed into my kingdom / For when I was hu^grye, ye fed me, when I
was thyrstye ye gave me drink. etc. What shall ye say when our Savior
pronounce against you this terrible and dampnable sentence. Avoid from me ye
cursed into perpetual pains of hell prepared for you for the devil and his
angels. For when I was hungry, thyrstie, naked sorrowful, harbourles* etc.
Your selves, not only would ye not feed me, nor give me drink, ne cloth nor
comfort nor harbor me in any one of these my little sely members, but ye
bytterly commanded all the English hosts in Anwerpe, in no wise to suffer us
to come into their howses for any releyse and socour. Oh crull seade
serpe^tyne when wylt thou fear god more then man. Wylt thou dissemble with god
and dampne thy own body and soul for a transitorye commandment or pleasure
of any mortal man. Fear thou not, haste thou not a soul, is there no hell,
is thy soul mortal, is there no wo^lde of souls after this, is there no God
to who^ hertes, reins and thoughts are laid wide open. Suerlye at your
departing, and as soon as your souls shall be cyted to apeare before your
judge Christ, Sapie^c. iiii. and. v.
ye shall seal the most bytterest remorse of conscience and also at your
general judgment with most horrible fear shall ye be so smyten, Luck.
xxiii.
that ye shall bid the mountains to fall down upon you to cover you from the
fearful face of your judge. Then shall we stand against you i^ great co^stancy
for that ye have thus cruelly persecuted Sapi. v.
us. Which thing your selves beholdi^ge you shall be troubled with horible
fear, waylynge for the anguishe of your minds saying within your selves,
being sorrowful (but all to late) lo these are they who^ once we had in decision
and reuyled spytefully: our selves then mad, had went their synes and
learning to be madness and heresy, so puttyng them to death most cruelly and
shamefully: but se how they be noumbred among the chosen of God, and we our
selves the^ were heretykes and erred from the way of the truth, the light of
the iustifyinge by faith only, shyned not upon us: but we wearied our selves
in our own wicked vile works, but ye way of the lord we knew not. Repent
ye therefore in time if ye will not be dampened, for it is gods cause and his
word which you persecute and we defend with peril of our lives. Wherefore
we daily pray in faith that h^ would co^uerte you or else take you away that
his church might breath a little in rest. If there be any fear of God in you
ye shall repent, or else our prayers are promised shortly to be herd of him
which stereth us up with his spirit thus to pray. Psalm ^i.
Amen.

Quod impii cupiu^t, irritum fiet.

Imprynted by me Richard wire.


