A TREATISE CONTAINING DIVERSE Benefits and Privileges, and the power and
authority granted to the Patentee, who has his Majesty's License or Grant of
Charter Warren under the great Seal of England.

Collected out of diverse of the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom, and viewed
and allowed by Sir HENRY YELVERTON Knight, his Majesty's Attorney General, for
all those who take the Grant.

To be delivered to them at the Office thereof, kept at the house of Sir HENRY
BRETON Knight, one of the Commissioners for making of the said Graunts, in
DRVRY Lane.

Anno Dom. 1617.

The Collections for the authority of the Free Warrens.
ALl civil and well governed common wealths have ever and do necessarily
nourish and mainetaine all things that tend to these two things, Profit and
Pleasure, the one for the essence, the other for the honor of it; and all
Princes and their Subjects of worthy and generous spirits, have had a vigilant
eye by law and order to the preservation of those creatures that are created
for pleasure, being for the solace and liuelihood of man, and provided for him
in his first creation, as necessary for the recreation of his mind, clothes for
his outward ornament, or well tasted dishes for his pallet: For if man should
have nothing but adesse, merely for nature to subsist, how poor and dejected a
creature should he be, and how much inferior to many beasts in these outward
things? Therefore has the Creator provided from the beginning both the
creatures and the means for man's delight, yet with a difference to man therein
for some of his servants to exceed the rest, that they may have suppeditaments
and ornaments of life, ad been and melius esse, for recreation sake, which have
been ever by the best spirits desired: For how base and unworthy a mind should
that man have, being borne or advanced to good possessions and fortunes, that
should subject himself to the drudgerie and slavery of the earth in mere
matter of getting and coveting, as if he were the true child of Adam, only in
that necessitated quality of digging his living out of the earth, whereunto he
was by God cursed, and so should in nothing else be elevated to more worthy
consideration of better things instituted by the Creator? For as the all
disposer by order and government upon earth has appointed in every Monarchy
(being the best government) degrees of honor and difference of ranks and
qualities amongst men, so he has to them in their several places and
estimation thereunto annexed all such other outward supplies of pleasures and
delights as are fit for such men, as Dear, Stagge, Cony, Pheasant, Partridge,
and the like; yet so as the wisdom of this and other ciuilized Kingdoms has
been such, as it has given a more absolute power and privilege therein to the
King, then to any man, though they are called to be ferae naturae, they are
said more properly to be the Kings then any man's, as by way of interest by
reason of his prerogative, of giving the subject liberty to enclose and
contain them in each man's several ground, by Parkes and Warrens, etc. and to
give an interest and property to man therein to hunt, hawke, and chase them by
license in each man's own possession, and to distreine others from it, as shall
appear from time to time by the laws of this Kingdom collected in this short
discourse. But because it is the common humor of men to cast there eye only
upon that thing that tends to matter of profit, or at least much more then
pleasure and other contentment, and for that these manner of privileges of Free
Warren, and the like, being the Kings Graces and deriuatiues from the
prerogative of the Crown, are not so well and usually understood, but
conceived to be mere matter of pleasure, and not of benefit or profit, being
not in the common use among men; it having been a thing so deintie and
precious to be had heretofore, and so rarely granted, that subjects of the
greatest and wisest sort of all ranks have been special suitors in all ages,
to the Kings and Queens of this kingdom to obtain it, as may appear by
several graunts from time to time. And that no man may be ignorant, as well of
the benefit and profit, and present necessary use of it, as well as the
pleasure of it; I thought it not unfit to set down a summarie, or brief
repetorie of some of the Laws of this Kingdom, and the use and practice
thereof from time to time in this case; whereby it shall appear, that by
comparing our present with the times past, by the number of Parkes and increase
of game of all sorts, and the present state of this Kingdom, there will be
much more use and necessity hereof in these times to all men, then in former;
and doubt not but to give satisfaction that the profit and use hereof shall be
great to all men for whom it is fit; who have Manors, Wastes, Commons, Park,
or Warren, and the like, not licensed by his Majesty or his predecessors
grant: For that to those who have Wastes, Lands, and Grounds barrened by Corn,
or so by nature, the profit thereof may arise as the occasion shall be, and to
those that have Parkes and Warrens unlicensed, his Majesty's Writ of Quo
warranto may and does justly lie, being no more reason that any Subject should
usurp a privilege proper and of right belonging to the King, then he theirs;
and without this privilege or grant what recompense men usually have upon
every Action of Trespass brought for killing Dear, Conies, or the like,
every man's experience teaches him to his loss. Why then, what encouragement
can any man have to plant or reduce to seueraltie Warren or Park upon his
waste or lands fit for it, which may happlie be very profitable, when being
not licensed upon any spoil, killing or taking the Game, he cannot justify
his Action against him for the same, nor recover damage; but as in an ordinary
Action of Trespass, for coming upon the ground, which how poor a recompense
it is for a man's loss, men do daily feel. All which shall sufficiently appear
by the collection of the Laws herein: So as I may conclude, that whosoever
shall obtain this grant from his Majesty, by virtue of his Majesty's
Commission, being at the humble suit, and for the contentment of many of his
Subjects, shall so join and furnish himself with pleasure and profit, that it
may be truly said of him to hold a good course, according to that, Omne
tulit punctum qui miscuit vtile dulci. And it shall appear that this privilege
and prerogative and interest of the Kings, is not only in Parkes, Warrens, and
in beasts; but also in foul and fish in the waters and air, in those
creatures the property whereof is unknown: Co. 7. ^o. 16
Volatilia enim quae sunt ferae naturae, alia sunt regalia, alia co^munia, and
sic aquatiliu. A Swan is a royal foul, and all those the property whereof is
not known, belong to the King by his prerogative; so are (...) and Sturgions
royal fish, and belong to the King by prerogative; but a Subject may have a
property in Swans marked with use upon his private wastes, and a Subject may
prescribe to have a game of Swans within his Manor, as well as a Warren or
Park. And it is resolved that in some things which are wild by nature a man
has right of property, and in some of them he has a right of privilege; and
that there are three manners of rights of properties, to wit, property,
absolute, property qualified, and property possessory; property absolute a
man has not in any thing which is wild by nature, but in those only which
are tame by nature; property qualified and possessorie a man may have in
things which are wild by nature, and may atteine thereunto two ways; by
industry, and by reason of their disabilitie and of the place; by industry, as
by taking of them and making them tame; but in those a man has but a qualified
property so long as they remain tame, for if they get their former liberty
and have not animum reuertendi, the property is lost by reason of impotency and
of the place. As where a man has young Hernshawes, Goshawkes or the like,
which are by nature wild and do Air in his ground, there he has a
possessory property in them, for in that case the owner shall have Trespass,
for breaking his Wood and taking away his Hawks, etc. of such a price; But
when a man has wild beasts, ratione priuilegij which grows by the Kings
grant or prescription, as by reason of a Manor, Park, etc. he has no
property in the Dear, Conies, Phesants or Partridges without the Kings grant:
For in a Trespass he shall declare for entering into his Park, Warren, etc.
and so many Dear, Conies, Hares, Phesants, Partridges, etc. and shall not stay
him; for he has no property in them, but they belong to him ratione
priuilegij, for his game and pleasure so long as they remain in the place
privileged, and the heirs shall have them, and not the Executors. By this it
appears that if a man have none of these properties in any wild beasts by
nature, he cannot maintain Action for taking them away, and so is the Book
expressly: For a man cannot prescribe to have all Phesants and Partridges
building, breeding, and using within his Manors, but must prescribe or plead
that he has a Free Warren of them within his Manors.

A man may have a Warren in another man's ground by prescription, Stathamtith
Warre^ 43. E. 3
but not by grant from the King in another man's ground; the King cannot grant
a Warren to one, but in his own demesne lands.

If any take a Partridge out of my Warren, my Writ shall be, Quod cepit
leporarios perdices, Cuniculos, etc. and of all other beasts of the Warren:
And if the Trespassor be found guilty of any one of them, I shall have damage
for every one of them, Pari ratione for Conies and Dear.

If a man be condemned for hunting in a Warren, 15. H. 7. 16.
the Fine shall be greater then in a Trespass.

If a Trespass be brought against one for entering into his warren, and for
taking his Conies, 10. H. 6. 16.
if the plaintiff have no Warren by the Kings grant or prescript, Bro^^^
action for ^^st. 48. temps E. 2.
the defendant shall not be found culpable.

It was agreed that a man may enclose his land, but he ought not to make any
Park therein for the keeping of any wild beasts without the Kings license;
for if he do, it shall be seized into the Kings hands.

Rastall s^t. M^^tmaine St. 27. E. 1. De l^be^tatibus perq^rendis.
By this Statute it was ordained that such as would purchase new Parkes, should
have Writs out of the Chauncery to inquire upon the points accustomed in such
things, and that the Inquests of lands or tenements that be worth yearly more
then xx. shillings by extent, be returned into the Exchequer, C. fo. 310.
and there they to make fine for the having of the Park, if the Inquest do
pass for him that purchased them: and from thence it shall be certified unto
the Chauncellor or his Leiftenant. And that he took a reasonable fine
therefore, according to the quantity of the thing, and after to deliver them;
in like manner be it done of them that purchase and hold in chief. And if any
will purchase any Warren or other liberty, they shall be sent into the
Exchequer, and there shall make their fines: and from thence shall be sent to
the Chancellor for that they ought to do therein.

10. H. 7. 30.
An Action of Account will lie for the Dear and profits of the Park, and no
man has interest to take any Dear in a Park but the owner. And Guardian in
Soccage shall render an account of the Dear: and in St. de magna charta,
Gardians shall uphold and maintain Parks and VVarrens, and shall render them to
the heir when he comes to full age, full stored, at least in such wise as he
found them, which is intended as well of the game as the enclosure. And before
the Statute of Westminster, the first, an Action of Trespass would lie for
taking of Dear in an others soil, and damages should be assessed according
to the offense by the discretion of the Jurors; the enclosure of a ground makes
it no Park, but the content comprised within the inclosesure in the Park; and
the common form of granting a Park is to enclose so much land, and thereof
to make a Park, which is by the Kings Grant and License only.

An Action upon the Statute for trespassing in a Park, 18. H. 6. 21.
whereby to recover the penalty of the Statute, will not lie, but where one
has a Grant from the King, or Prescription. For where one of himself does
imparke a ground, he can have but a general Action of Trespass for entering
into the same, and what damage and recompense the plaintiff shall have in that
case, every man's experience teaches him.

If the King license a man to imparke two hundred acres of ground, Brook (...)
76. 23. H. 8.
and he do enlarge the same afterward with a hundred acres more; this is no
Park, Quere

If any be atteinted for Trespass in any Park, Rast. forest 18 St. West.
cap. 20. 3. E.
at the suit of the party, great and large amends shall be awarded according to
the Trespass, and three years imprisonment, and after shall make Fines at the
Kings pleasure (if he have whereof) and then shall find good surety that he
shall not commit the like Trespass; and if he have not wherewith to make Fine
after three years imprisonment, he shall find like surety; and if he cannot
find like surety, he shall abjure the Realm. And if any guilty thereof be
found fugitive and have no lands sufficient (whereby he may be justified) so
soon as the King shall find it by Inquest, he shall be proclaimed from County
to County, and if he come not, he shall be outlawed; and if none thereupon do
sue within a year and a day, the King shall have the suit. And if such
trespassour take tame beasts in a Park or other thing; let the common Law be
executed upon him, as upon one for theft and robbery.

Trespass, De male factoribus in parcis, 21. H. 7.
lies only for Trespass done in Parkes by the Statute of Westminster 1. Com.
124.
and not for Trespasses done in Forests, and this Statute shall be taken strict.

Dyer fo. 238.
Wye, and others were condemned upon the Statute of Westminster, the First,
cap. 20. For the taking of a Sorerell, and ten Raskals in a Trespass. And the
defendants being in the prison in the Marshalsey after three years were
compelled to find sureties of London and Southwarke, whereof two were Gentlemen
and yomen, by Recognizance every surety in ten pound, and the defendant
himself in forty pound to the King, that he should not offend against the
Statute in any Park or Warren which was not licensed.

Brook Trespass 106. 5. H. 5. 1.
Judgment in a Trespass of entering into a Park to course, although nothing
was killed, was thus; xl. shillings for the costs and damages, and that the
defendant should be imprisoned three years, and to pay a Fine to the King; and
at the three years end to find sureties that he should not offend again:
and if he cannot find sureties, then to foriure the Land.

22. H. 6. 59. Fitzh. 69.
A man shall not have an Action of Trespass for taking or killing his Dear,
unless he be a tame Dear; but an Action will lie for breaking into his Park
being licensed, and taking away his Dear precij, etc.

Cook. lib. 9. fo. 7
If a general Action of Trespass be brought for trespassing in Parks, the
plaintiff shall not have Judgment upon the Statute: And therefore the Action
must be brought upon the Statute of Westminster 1. although the Statute give no
form of Action.

Rastall fo. 7. St. 1. H. 7. c. 7.
If any person hunt in any Park, Warren, or Forest so licenced, by night, or
with painted faces, visors, or other disguisements; If information thereof be
given to any of the Kings Council, or Justices of Peace, they may thereupon
make warrant to the Shiriffe, to bring such person suspected before him who
makes the warrant, or any other of the Kings Council or Justice of Peace
within the same County, who may examine such offendour, and of others in that
behalf likewise offending. And if the person examined wilfully conceal the
said huntings; or privy person with him defective therein; then such
concealements shall be felony, and be determined as other felonies: And if he
confess the truth, then such offenses done by hunting shall be against the King,
but a Trespass fineable, to be assessed by the Justices of the next general
Sessions in that County to be held: And if any rescous be made in hindering the
execution of such warrant, whereby such warrant cannot be executed, such
rescous is felony: And if any be convicted of hunting with painted faces,
visors, or otherwise disguised, to the intent that they should not be known,
or in time of night, the like punishment shall be laid upon him, as if he were
convict of felony.

If any Forrester, Keeper, or Warrener, Stamford. fo. 14 St. 21. E. 1.
shall find any wandering within his liberty, in any Forest, Chase, Park, or
Warren, and such offendour (being by him or them required to yield to the
peace) will not, but continues his offense, or flees, or defends himself with
force and Arms; although any such Forrester, Keeper, or Warrener, or any other
coming in their company and ayding such Forresters, Keepers, or Warreners, do
kill any such offendour, he shall not receive any punishment for the same; But
if any Forrester, etc. bearing malice to any man, will lie within his liberty,
and will pretend against any passing through his lihertie that he had an
intent to offend, and upon such malice do kill him; this is felony.

A Prouiso is there contained, Rastall husbandry and tillage 7.
that this Statute of converting tillage into pasture, shall not extend to any
lawful Park, meant, licensed, or ancient Warrens now used with Dear or
Conies, Fo. 238. 6. St. ^. Eliz. cap. 2.
or to any other Parkes heretofore lawfully used as Parkes, and now disparked,
or to any other grounds that heretofore have been by any of her Highness
progenitors, or hereafter shall fortune to be made Park or Warren by license
of our Sovereign Lady the Queen her heirs and successors, with sufficient
clause of dispensation for converting of tillage into pasture, and shall be laid
for the mainteining of Dear and Conies without couin, and not for the keeping
of any other cattle or beasts, then milch Kine for themselves or their Keeper,
for provision of their houses, or for Horse, or Gelding, Mares, Colts, or Swine.

St. 3. Iacobi c. 13
If any in the night or by day wrongfully do enter into any Park or Ground,
used or kept for breeding of any Dear or Conies, and do unlawfully hunt,
drive, or chase out, or take, kill or sley any Dear or Conies, against the
will of the owner, and shall be thereof convicted at the suite of the King, or
of the party grieved; he shall suffer imprisonment of his body by the space of
three months; and also shall yield and pay to the party grieved his treble
damages and costs, and to be assessed by the Justices, before whom he or
they shall be convicted after the said three months expired, and shall find
sufficient sureties for his good abearing, etc. for the space of seven years
after, or else shall remain and continue still in prison, without Bail or
Maineprise, until they so do find sureties. And it shall and may be lawful
to and for the party grieved to take his further remedy against all and
every such offendour for his loss and damage, and to recover the trebble
value of the same, as well before the Justices of Oyer and Terminer, Justices
of Assise in their circuits, and Justices of the Peace and Jail Delivery, in
the Sessions, or else where in any of the Kings Courts of Record at
Westminster; And upon true satisfaction of the trebble damages or upon
confession thereof by the party offending, before the Justices in open
Sessions, in the County where the offense was committed, it shall be at the
liberty of the party grieved, to release at his pleasure the suretieshippe of
the good behavior at any time within the seven years, or before.

No person not having lands of ten pound dear yearly value, or worth in
goods and chattels, St. 3. Iacobi c. 13
two hundred pounds, shall use any Gun, Bow, or Crosse-Bow to kill any Dear or
Conies, or shall keep any Buck-stall, or Engyn, Hayes, Gabents, Pursnet,
Firrets, or Conny-dogs; except such as have any ground imparked with Pale or
Hedge, used for keeping and breeding of Dear and Conies; the increase of which
Conies shall amount to the clear yearly value of forty shillings to be
letten at least, or Keepers or Warreners in their Parkes, Warrens, or Grounds,
belonging to their charge. And if any such person so offend, any one seized of
lands, in Fee, Fee-tayle, or for life, of the yearly value of one hundred
pounds, may take to his own use for ever, any such Gun, Bow, or Crosse-Bowe.

Justices of Oyer and Terminer, St 3. Iacobi c. 13
Justices of Assise in their circuits, and Justices of Peace and Jail
Delivery in their Sessions, shall have authority to inquire of these offenses
done in their grounds, and award Process thereupon, as well upon Indictment
taken before them, as by bill of Complaint, Information, or any other Action;
in which suit or Action, no Essoine, Protection, or wager of Law is allowed.
And if any be bound, as aforesaid to the good behavior, if at any time within
the seven years, before the Justices of Peace of the said County where the
offense was committed, or some of them in open quarter Sessions, do
acknowledge his offense, and confess himself to be sorry for the same, and
satisfy the party grieved for his Act: Then the same Justices have power in
that their open Session, or any other, if it seem good to their discretions to
discharge the party so bound, and his Recognizaunce and Bond.

Provided, that this Act of 3 Iacobi, do not extend to any Park, or enclosed
ground, made, or hereafter to be made or used for Dear or Conies; without the
Grant or License of the King, his heirs or successors.

FINIS.

