SPECVLVM CHRISTIANVM OR A CHRISTIAN SVRVEY for the Conscience.

CONTAINING, THREE TRACTATES OF THAT EMINENT, GRAVE, and learned Divine,
Master HIEROM ZANCHIVS.

1 Of the end of the World. 2 Of the pers^uerance of the Saints. 3 A summarie
Abridgement of his Praelections.
Englished for the good of Gods Church, and for a warning to wicked and
impenitent men.

By H. N.

Lege, intellige, dilige. LONDON, Printed by GEORGE ELD. 1614.

TO HIS VERY REVEREND, GRAVE, AND learned Tutors, his good and loving friends,
M. Doctor S^^nton, Doctor in Divinity, Deane of the Cathedral Church of (...):
And M. John Knewstub Bacheler in Divinity, a vigilant Pastor, and R^^tor of the
parochial Church of C^ck-field in Suffol^e, H. N. p^a^^th grace and peace,
health and happiness in Christ for ever. ()
GRateful testimonies of thankefulnes and love are both Christian and
commendable; and exemplified by Ioh. 11. 3. 5. 35. 36.
Christ himself, by S. Paul, To 16. 4. 2. Tim 1. 16. 17. 18.
and other most excellent instruments Ingratum fi dixeris, scelestum dixeri^.
in the Church of Christ. This consideration did (as it were) kindle the cole,
and excite mine affections, to combine you both in this one signification of my
thankful remembrance: you are ancient and kind friends in faith and love, and
in the fellowship of that famous Society of S. John's College in Cambridge; and
trained up ( ab originibus) in one Nurcery of good literature in the
Northern-parts, happily founden by Master doctor Lupton, in the Town of
Sedberge, his own native soil; from whence have been transplanted, and in
due time, many have sprung up, and so become goodly fruitful plants, and some
Cedar-trees, in the Church of England: my self likewise was brought up
successively in the same School, and, after, under your wings and comfortable
Tuitions in the same worthy Vetus verbum; Illa (...), totiu^ ^^^e Ora^^^um
(...).
College, whereof I was an unworthy member, and do bless GOD that ever I
knew the walls thereof: And withal, in retaliation of duty, so long as I
live, I will instantly and jointly pray, as Moses wished to Joseph (and his
seed) That Deu. 33. 16.
the good will of him that dwelt in the bush, may come both upon it and you.
My mediocritie in any service for Gods Church (if there be any in me) is
totallie your own: and therefore I will very joyfully and cheerfully by
allusion, or rather by a little inuersion, borrow leave, and tender this my
grateful testimony, with that form of words, wherewith P. Orosius did
dedicate his Story to Saint Augustine, his Master and Tutor; Totum (quod in
me) vestrum sit, quod a vobis ad vos redit; or as Carneades Cyrenaeus
thankefullie protested of Chrysippus (one of Zeno his disciples) a most Si apud
Di^os Dialectica ^a^^retur, n^n temere alia esset, quam quae a Chrysippo
inuenta ^uit.
acute Philosopher, after the diligent reading of his books, which were in
number 75. as some report, Si Chrysippus non esset, ego non essem, I was yours
when I was but a Neophyte; and now by the grace of GOD I am that I am; and am
still yours, and do wish heartily, that I might become (being now
hoare-headed) as the German Son of such shining and burning lights in the
Church of GOD, whose gifts and labors are condignelie of note, and price in
the hearts of many.

I have englished these Treatises of that grave and learned Divine, Master
Hierome Zanchius; and in this regard I took them in hand, for that in Not
unlike to that (...) (whereof Athaneus lib. 11.) for variety and use.
Argument and matter they are exceeding effectual, befitting this sinful and
sottish Age, or rather this degenerating downfall of all sorts of men. They
are fruitful in many considerations; to prevent curiosity; to abandon
security; to rowze up the drowsy Christian; to detect the Temporizer; to
kindle zeal; to work vigilancie; to enforce repentance; to minister
consolation; to teach the wise; to hearten the weak; to confirm faith and
hope of Heaven and Happiness; to dant ungodliness; in such sort as he that
runs may read in capital letters, and he that reads with judgment and
conscience, may find singular edification.

When I had made an end, I resolved in this kind to salute you both; which, as
it comes with an honest heart, so I persuaded my self it would be accepted
with the right hand. I pray you censure; and, if there be no let, yield your
approbation. Of you twain I have just cause to vouch, as Master I. Calvin
sometime Prae^* in Epist. ad Romans
writ upon the like occasion to Simon Grynaeus, (two eminent Divines in the
care of Gods Church) Quorum iudicio si omnes plurimum iure deferant, ego nihil
non defer debeo. And so remaining yours et animo and vsu; I do recommend you
both, and your godly endeavors for the furtheranc^ of the Gospel of Christ, to
his most gracious and abundant blessing, for his great Name sake.

Amen. Hougham cum Maston. Maij 20. 1611. Your Worships unworthy Pupil and
loving friend, H. NELSON.

CERTAIN PRAELECTIONS OF (THAT WORTHY DEFENDER OF the Christian Faith) Hiero.
Zanchiv^, upon these words, 1. Ioh. 2. 18. Little Childr^^ it is the last time.
BECAUSE this present place does seem to require that I speak somewhat of the
end of the world (for such as have written of the end of the World, do make
allegation even of this Text) and this question has and does at this day put
many to bus^^^s: therefore I will b^i^^^y make manifest what my sentence is
touching the same. And this question verily I will clearly discuss in six
capital (...)* The first shall be, Christ shall be* Fourthly,

As touching the first (...) point* Three sorts of (...) have d^nied that this
world shall have an end. The first were the Philosoph^rs* chiefly the
P^r^patecia^s; for these were of opinion, That thi^ World neither eue^ had
beginning, nor ever should have endi^g* and therefore Mankind, as even at this
present, so in the same tenor and course, perpetually to live in the World.
But this crew therefore held this opinion, for that being destitute of the
light of the word of God, in the inquisition of the truth they were led only
by the blind wisdom of the flesh, for, the natural man does not perceive
the things that are of God: and to refute their reasons it is not worth the
labor, for we have nothing to do with those Philosophers.

Others, who deny that this world shall once have an end, are certain
Atheists, and mockers of things divine; of whom Peter, This know first, 2. Pet.
3. v. 3.
that in the last days shall come mo^kers, which will walk after their own
lusts, and say, where is the promise of h^^ coming? For since the Fathers
dy^d, all things continue alike from the beginning of the Creation. But th^se
men's blindness, or madness rather, is refelled by the (evident) certainty of the
word of God.

S. Augustine t^m. 2. ep. 42. ad fratres Mandarenses does thus dispute. Al
other things which the Holy Spirit in the Scriptures by praediction foretold,
came to pass accordingly; as the first coming of Christ; the destruction of
Jerusalem: And the same Spirit in like manner has foretold of the future end
of this world, and of Christ's second coming: Therefore certainly it shall come
to pass. The argument indeed of these mockers does Peter thus con^ute. ver. 5.
For this they willingly know not, that 2. Pet. 3.
the heavens were of old, and the earth that was of the water, and by the
wa^^^* by the word of God. ver. 6. Wherefore the world that then was, perished,
^uerflowed with the water. ver. 7. But the heau^ns and earth which are (...),
a^^ kept by^he same word in store, and reserved unto ^ire against the day of
condemnation, and of the destruction of ungodly ^en. Thus much Peter. The
meaning of which words I will make plain, because those mocking spirits do
endeavor from the continuing state of the world, to prove the perpetuity
thereof, and do deride the word of God; Peter does overthrow their
argumentation by this reason. The world, as by the word of God it was of the
waters, and by the waters; so also by the same word of God, when indeed it
seemed so good unto the Lord, being drowned with the same waters it perished
and came to an end; and after by the same word of God it was restored again.
This History was most apparent, and a thing most famous, and of most
certainty unto the whole World. Therefore by the same Word of God, as in the
first turn by water, so secondarily by fire, when it shall so please the Lord,
it may be dissolved, and have an end. The Lord foretold the future end of the
world, and that himself would come the second time: therefore this World must
have an end, and the Lord will come. For now are reserved these Heavens and
Earth unto fire for the day of judgment and perdition of the ungodly:
wherefore from the continuing state of the world the consequence holds not;
That the world is incorruptible and shall never have end. For that also before
the Flood it lasted long, and yet afrer (for all that) perished, and even by
such things as from whom it had it original, and was supported, (that is) by
the waters; so by fire, an other Element of the World, the same world shall be
destroyed.

The third sort who vouch the perpetuity of the world, are some, who are
neither absolute Philosophers which are destitute of the sacred writings,
neither yet scoffers and contemners of celestial things, but both men fearing
God, and most expert of holy writ; of which kind amongst others, was Philo
Iudaeus. He left a book written with this Title* (...) ^ Of the corruptible
state of the world: in which treatise he labors to make good, by sundry
arguments, that the world is incorruptible, But if Philo had (in this sense)
understood the world to be incorruptible, for that neither it should utterly
be dissolved into nothing, nor yet changed into a worse estate, we likewise
would have condiscended unto him. For we likewise acknowledge out of the word
of God the renouation of the world, and in the future a new Heaven and a new
Earth. And so certainly seems Philo to have holden by his explanation,
whereby he declares what he meant by the name of corruption: For thus he
holds in the entrance of his book page 645. (...) etc. For corruption is
called an exchange into a better state. It is likewise called the total
extinguishing of a thing in being, which then necessarily is termed a thing
without existence, For as of nothing nothing is made (that is naturally) so
neither can nothing be dissolved into nothing.

Philo had read the Psalms and Prophets who writ of this matter: but if he
followed any other ^e^s^, the godly Christians, do not accord with him. For
the testimonies of Scripture are most clear touching the end of the world
Psalm. 102, In the beginning thou l^^ds^ the foundation of the Earth and the
Heavens are the work of thy hands: they shall peris^, but thou endur^st, they
(...) shall wax^ old as does a garment, and as a v^stimen* thou shall charge
th^^, and they shall be changed, but thou art the same and thy years shall not
fail* Mat. 5. Til Heaven and Earth shall pass away, one jot or title shall
not p^rish of thy la^. 2. Pet. 3. That day of the Lord shall come as a thi^fe in
the night, wherein the Heavens shall pass away with a noise, the Elements shall
melt away with fire, and the Earth and all things therein shall be burned.
Again* the Heavens by burning shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall melt
away with heat; but we look for new Heavens and a new Earth, according to his
promise. Thus Saint Peter. Therefore this first Capital point is to be
vouched, That this world (as in case now it is) shall finally come to an end,
(that is) be changed into a better condition, and God only to be utterly void
of all variablenes or change.

To what purpose then tends this doctrine? S^. Peter teaches. 2. Ephesians. 3.
Seeing (says he) all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of men ought
we to be in holy conversation, and duty of piety, expecting and ha^ting unto
the coming of the day of the Lord. The Argument is this in effect. The Heaven
and Earth shall be renewed at the coming of Christ: How much more therefore
ought we to be renewed, who press on to meet Christ at his coming? Therefore
we are to endeavor for a perpetual renouation, and to adhere in heart to God
only, who alone is utterly unchangeable: as for other things, they ought to
be had in contempt, because they all shall be changed, and shall all finally
have an end. For this purpose out Apostle made mention first of the vanity of
this world; then he added, Now are the last times, that is, where in is instant
the coming of the Lord Christ. And why these things that contemning the world,
and then avoiding those Antichrists, we being fortified in the Apostles
doctrine, might watch and live sobe^^y and justly, always prepared to go meet
Christ at his coming.

The second Capital point is; whether we can attain to know when the end of
the world shall be? It is a case manifest whether we be all led with a desire
to know when the end of the world shall be. For this affection even the Saints
were taken withal, the Prophets and Apostles. Of Daniel it is manifest in Cap.
12. After that he heard of the Angel, that is, of Christ, touching Antichrist,
and what things should be accomplished in the end of the World, he asked the
Lord, saying verse. 8. O Lord what shallbe the ^^d of these things? as for the
Apostles, it apeareth Mat. 24. Act. ^. Lord, when shall these things be?
Therefore it is a natural inclination in all to desire the knowledge of
things to come; specially when the end of the world shall be: Now the question
is whether this can be known of us? The Lord Jesus taught that it no way can
be known, when he said, Of that day and that hour no man Mat. 24
knows, no, not the Angels of Heaven, but the father only knows; that is,
the certain time, wherein these things, by me foretold to you, shall come to
pass, the father only know eth, yet in all ages there have been some, and
that in the Church of Christ, who have given out it might be known, some
indeed certainly, and they have presumed to determine thereupon a certain
number of years, (such is man's presumption) from the first unto the second
coming of Christ; others probably and in such sort, as that in searching this
time they did contend, that no great error could follow, and therefore they
used sundry conjectures, whereby they assayed to determine, in some fort, how
much time as yet remained until the next coming of Christ. Although verily
there be great difference between the ^^merity of the one sort* and curiosity
of the other; yet as the one is utterly to be disprooued and condemned, so the
other (for my part) I cannot give approbation unto. For true p^ety requires
that we be certain indeed that the end of the world shall be, and that the
Lord will come, but when that is, what either day, or month, or year, or age,
both it shall be and he shall come, we must of necessity confess ingenuously
our ignorance, and that by no means it can be known according to the doctrine
of Christ. And therefore according to the Commandment of Christ, let us watch
and pray, expecting daily and hourly our Lord Jesus Christ, being always
prepared with our lamps burning with the light of faith, and filled with the
oil of good works to go out to meet him. But let us now consider what have
been the judgments of men touching the time of the end of the world, and the
coming of the Lord.

In the times of the Apostles, some there were who said; although the day and
hour of the Lords coming could not be known, yet that the day of the Lord
and end of the world could not at that time be far off; others, that this was
newly revealed; others said, that this was the Apostles doctrine; others did
endeavor to persuade this by reasons and conjectures: but the Apostle did
surprise such; saying, I beseech you 2, These. 1.
even by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our assembling to him
that ye be not suddenly moved from your mind, nor troubled, neither by
spirit, nor by word, nor by letter, as it were from us, as though the day of
Christ were at hand. The Apostle teaches that these Impostors used three
practices for persuasion, that the Lords day was hard at hand: First,
Revelations, for that they certainly know this by the spirit of Revelation:
Secondly, reasons and conjectures; therefore he says, or by w^^^: Thirdly,
counterfeit letters and restimonies of the Apostle. But what says the Apostle?
that ye be not suddenly moved away, as though the day of the Lord were at
hand, for that unless (...) departure come first, etc. he taught that first
there must be a general Apostasy, or (as others will have it) a defection of
the Roman Empire, and Antichrist to be revealed with (...) Kingdom, before
the day of the Lord shall come. But how long after the coming of Antichrist
shall succeed the end of the world, and the day of the Lord, 100. 1000. or more
years, the Apostle has not taught: but why? for that neither himself knew,
according to that of that day and hour etc. Behold Man. 24.
what was bruited abroad in the Apostles ages, even amongst the believers,
touching the end of the world! And that these men were deceived, the thing it
self teaches. After the Apostles times there were not wanting (even) some,
who did limit a certain number of years until the second coming of Christ,
and end of the world. Amongst the profane Gentiles it was vulgarly bruited, as
a Divine Oracle, That the Christian Religion, after Christ began to be
honored, should continue only for the space of 365. years, and then presently
to have an end. Saint Augustine relates this. Tom. 5. de Ciuitate Dei. lib.
18, c. 53, and shows how false this was, cap. 54. And because after the end
of Christian Religion upon the Earth, forthwith an end of the world shall be;
therefore some Christians, persuaded by this Oracle, were of opinion, That after
these 365. years were expired, presently the end of the world should be. But it
is apparent, how foully these likewise were deceived.

In Cyprians time, who flourished after Christ, about the year 250. it was
credibly held, that the end of the world was at hand: this is cle^^e out of
Cyprians Epistles. And, which is more, in a little Treatise ( ad For^^natum) in
an exhortation to Marty^dome, (if it be Cyprians) in the beginning page 244.
these words are read: Six thousand years are (...) complete since the Devil
did impugn man. Although the book be not Cyprians, yet is it plain, what was
the opinion held in the Church, with many, touching the end of the World, at
what time this book was published; that is to say, That then were 6000. years
begun to be accomplished, and so consequently, the end of the world instantly
to draw near. But how foully they also erred, the thing it self declares.

In Lactantius his time, who was famous about the year after the birth of
Christ, 317. what opinion was maintained in the Church, (...) evident by his
Institutions lib. 7. cap. 25. The whole expectation (says he) s^^l. of the end
of the World, seems not above the space of 200. years.

In the time of Augustine, Hierome, and such others; that many were of opinion
the end to be hard at hand, appears by Aug. his books. To. 5. de ciuit. D^^.
lib. 18. c. 53. he reports some to have determined from the Ascension of the
Lord unto the end of the world 400. years; others 500. others 1000. But
Augustine does de^ide them all, and refutes them by the saying of the Lord
Christ, Act. ^. It is not yours to know the seasons, which the Father has
reserved in his own power. Mat. 24. Of that day and hour etc. A certain
Bishop also in Augustins time, by name H^sychius, did seem to hold; That
although none could know of the day and hour of the Lords coming, as the Lord
had ^a^d, yet a set time and space of years might be limited, from the
coming of Christ in the (...), ^ntill his second coming: and therefore (...)
Christians to find out this time. And of this point he writ to Augustine, To.
2. Ep. 79. Besides other places of Scripture which he abused for this opinion,
that place of Daniel, cap. 9. of 70. weeks, was one. For that place might be
understood of the time intermediate between the coming of Christ in the
flesh, and his second coming: or at least by proportion it might be collected,
That as from the time of the forms prophecy of Daniel until the first coming
of Christ, there went between 70. weeks of years, so likewise from the time
of the first coming unto the second, there should interpasse 70. weeks of
years. From thence therefore there might be gathered the certain time until
the end. But Augustine teaches, that the place of Daniel can in no wise be
understood of the second coming of Christ. He that lists, let him read the
other Testimonies of scripture which Hesychius abused for the (...) of his
opinion: and then let him read Augustines answers to the several places,
Epist, ad Hesychium 80.

To that which the Lord spoke to his Apostles, Act. 1. It is not for you to
know the times and seasons, etc. this answer Hesychius returned; That only was
spoken to the Apostles: for he would not have them to know, for that he would
not have them witnesses of the consummation of the World, but only of his
Passion and Resurrection; but yet his will was, that else we should
acknowledge the time of the end of the world. And to this effect he wrested
even that answer of Christ to the Pharisees, wherein he reprehended them,
saying; You know how to discorne the outward appearance of the sky* but you
know not the time of your visitation. This Bishop did interpret this sentence
of the time of the second coming of CHRIST whereas Christ spoke of his first
coming. Summarily, Augustine concludes* That by no place of Scripture it can
be gathered, when the time of the end of the world shall be, or that
Christians may make inquiry, seeing it is written and spoken to all, It is not
for you to know the times, or that it can be known of any mortal man, seeing
it is written, Of that day and hour, that is, of the Lord return, no man
^noweth.

So Grogorius Papa, from the corrupt conditions of his time, and the strange
wonders seen in his age, was often accustomed to say; That his Age was not
far distant from the end of the world. But he likewise was much deceived.

Now I proceed to the men of our own Age. Many, and those learned and
religious men have thought, ^^though no ^^t time can be appointed between the
first and second time of Christ, yet by probable co^^^ctures it may (howsoever)
be known and discerned. The thing itself has not yet declared, whether their
opinion be (...) or ^^, but such, as long after succeed us, shall understand
whether these devout and learned men were erroneously led, yea or no. For my
part I do only endeavor to prove, that these conjectures alleged by them
were very weak: and so by them that no proof or determination can be made of
the end of the world. We will produce the principal and examine them.

The first conjecture of these men is taken from 6000. years, wherein they say
the world shall endure. For the Hebrews have left written in their books
(specially in the (...)) that this was the praediction of Elias the Prophet,
The world to continue 6000. years: 2000. vain: 2000. the Law: 2000. the
Messiah: and if any time came short of them, it was wanting for our sins.

Irenaeus likewise lib. 5. cap. vi^. concludes, That the world shall continue
only 6000. years: and he collected this his commentation, not from the
Hebrews, but from the proportion of six days, wherein the world was created,
after which six days was the Sabbath, that is, the day of rest. This indeed
(says he) is both a narration of things past, and a prophecy of things to
come: For one day signifies a thousand years, as the Scriptures do testify;
and 2. Pet. 3. One thousand years before the Lord are as one day. Therefore as
the World was consummate in the Creation thereof, within the compass of six
days, and then Rest; so in the end thereof it shall be consummate within the
space of six (...) years: then shall follow true and perpetual rest*

Also Lactant, Firmianus. it. 7. c. 14. says, That the World shall be
consummated in the compass of 6000. years: and he borrowed this opinion,
together with Irenaeus, even from one and the same fountain. Which said
opinion touching the durance of the World for 6000. years* many (likewise)
entertained of many. whereupon also Gregorius Papa. to* ^. in c. 9. (...). 1.
Reg. col^^^. 1415. The world (says he) was created in six days, and shall be
determined in six Ages. They add further, That the 6000. years shall not be
fully complete: and that (partly) they confirm by the prophecy of Elias:
partly by the speech of Christ, Mat. 24. Unless those da^es should be
shortened etc. For although he there speak of the ruin of Jerusalem, yet
likewise they contend that it may be understood of the time of the consummation
of the world. Seeing these things stand so (say they) 2000. were before the
Law: 2000. after the law: (and that according to the computation of the
Hebrews) and of 2000. under the Messiah, are now run over 1560. and there is
in remainder 440. and of them also some shall be subtracted, therefore that
the world cannot endure longer, at the furthest then about 400, years. This is
their first conjecture.

But who may not see how infirm it is? First, Elias hi^ prophecy, whereupon
they rely* (...) not authentical. Indeed it is available against the Jews,
who do admit that prediction, to prove that the Messiah is come, seeing there
be now run out 5560. years, but for demonstration of the end of the world, it
auailet^ nothing at all. Likewise, the ratiocination of Irenaeus, and
Lactantius is too-too infirm, and feeble: therefore justly does Augustine
confute it. Besides, I say, it is against the word of God. For the Lord says*
That none can (surely) know when the end of the world shall be: As for that
day, etc. If then this their sentence touching 6000. years were true, we might
easily know when the end of the world would be: but this were against the word
of Christ. Therefore this opinion of 6000. years for the world to endure, is
untrue.

The second conjecture is collected from the four Monarchies of the world.
Daniel 2. and 7. The case thus stands. The four Monarchies are described, so
that one does succeed another. The first is the Monarchy of the Chal^eans and
Assyrians; the second of the Persians; the third of the Graecians; the fourth
of the Romans. Those four Monarchies being ruinated, that is, three of them
utterly desolate, and the fourth, as into several parts, divided into several
Kingdoms: Dan. cap. 7. prophecieth, That a little hor^e shall arise amongst
those ten other former horns. that is, one Kingdom more potent and strong
then the rest, which shall utter great things etc. And when that Kingdom
signified by one horn, shall come to a consummate power, so that it will
think it self to alter times and laws, then presently shall be the
judgment, and Christ to reign for ever. And this horn which shall arise out
of the Roman Empire, they interpret to be the Turks Kingdom. Thus therefore
they gather: Three Monarchies are utterly extirpate* the fourth Monarchy also
is extinct, because it is divided into diverse parts: Now the horn (that is)
the Turkish Empire, began to break out about the time of Hera^lius. ^or at that
time Mahome^ began to reign; And this Kingdom of Turks is now welnigh grown
to the greatest height, he preuailleth against the Saints, and in a manner he
does make account, that he has power to change laws and times: When this shall
come to pass, then shall come the Ancient of days. Therefore the time is but
short until the second coming of Christ shall be.

My answer is this. If they understand, that less time now remains then
before, that is most true: If also that which is remaining, they shall affirm
to be very little, in comparison of the eternity of the Kingdom of Christ,
this like wise we will assen^ unto as most certainly true. But if they should
understand a little remainder of time to be behind, that is, that there is yet
behind, either a hundred, two hundred, or three hundred years, etc. I say
that nothing can be concluded from these places of Daniel, which are diversely
expounded by interpreters. For, that I may follow the usual interpretation;
first he describes in the second chapter the four Monarchies; and concerning
the Empire of the Romans he prophecieth five things, first he sets out the
power thereof, That verily, as iron, it should surprise all other Kingdoms:
then, the di^ision thereof, that is to say, it should be divided in it self:
thirdly, the cruelty and fierceness thereof, that without regard of
consanguinitie or alliance it should not respect the bands thereof, by reason
of cruelty; fourthly, the variable calamities and ruins, that is, that it
should be afflicted with sundry Massacres, and specially intestine (or
homebred) dissensions and wars: Fifthly, the continuance thereof, that
although being divided into many parts, as it were ^wo feet into ten fingers,
it should be broken in pieces, in respect the ^eere were of clay: yet because
the plants thereof were of iron, it should endure even to the second coming of
the King of Heaven. But after that Daniel had thus disputed of the Roman
Empire, presently he adioineth a prophecle of the Kingdom of Christ, I say,
That Christ should so, dai^ely ruinate all those Kingdoms, and he alone should
reign for all eternity. And he prophecieth of the double coming of Christ;
of (...) which was in the flesh, with the preaching of the Gospel; and of that
which shall be in glory. And of the first he says: And in the days of those
Kings the God of Heaven shall set up a Kingdom which shall (...) be
demolished: He does not say, After the days of those Kings, but in the days
of those Kings etc. For the Kingdom of Christ was raised (...) up, on the
Earth, when as yet the Romans reigned and did govern the world, and endured
almost six hundred years: (the Romans ^^a^ing rule even unto the times of
(...) us) and does still and shall continue even to the end of the world.
Afterward he says of the second coming of Christ, when he shall deliver up
the Kingdom to God his father all enemies being put under his feet: finally
whereas thou ^^dst see that the stone cut out of the mountain without hands,
does break in pieces Iron, Brass, Clay, Silver, Gold; the great God did
intimate to the King what should follow after these things. Thus the Prophet.
And thus reads and expounds that most learned man Oecolampadius, citing
withal Saint Hippolitus, who says, (...), The stone which shall quell and
crush the Image in pieces is Christ, who fills the Earth, coming from Heaven
and bringing judgment to the world.

But in this place is put down no praescription of time, from the first until
the second coming of Christ: wherefore out of this prophecy which is in the
second Chapter of Daniell, nothing can be concluded concerning the end of the
world, whether it shall be from that time within a hundred. or two hundred or
more years. Although (as others would have it) the more sincere explanation of
that place would be if it should be understood not so much of the vprising of
the person of Christ, as of his Kingdom and the progress thereof, throughout
the whole world unto the end thereof, and of the endless continuance of the
same: for so it is interpreted of Daniel himself in the same Chapter. But by
this tenor, what can then be collected touching the definite time of the end of
the world? the Kingdom of Christ, as it was propagated by the preaching of the
Gospel throughout the whole earth so likewise withal did it ouerturne the
Empire of Rome, that is, the fourth Monarchy, with the Idolatries thereof, as
also now the Image of that Monarchy the Kingdom of Autichrist, it does and
shall continue to overthrow to the end of the world, until it be totally
abolished. For it is infallible that the end of the world shall not be, before
the whole Kingdom of Antichrist be abolished, as the Apostle teaches, These.
2. 2.

But who is able to determine of the time, when the Kingdom of Antichrist
shall totally come to an end? He that can effect the one, may likewise
perform the other.

Besides, some there be who would have the prophecy of Daniel in no case to
be understood of the second, but only of the first coming of Christ; and so
also that which in the 7. chapter; and therefore this to have been the
counsel (or purpose) of God, to give signification to Nabuchadnezar what
Kingdoms should succeed, and which should be the last of all, that is the
Kingdom of Christ and that to continue perpetually, all others being ruinated.
But how long it should endure upon the face of the Earth, is not here debated;
neither that God intended by Daniel to give notice unto us thereof, seeing it
was not his pleasure, no not by his son, to reveal it. According to this
interpretation, nothing can be de^uised more fondly, then out of this
praediction of Daniel to go about ^o conclude any determination, touching the
final end of this world.

Finally some there be who would so expound the chapters of Daniel, as that in
no respect they will have him speak of the Roman Monarchy: but what all others
have interpreted thereof, they will have understood of the Kingdom of the
Selucians; specially for this reason, because the Church of the Jews was
neuermore hardly and extremely entreated by any other then by that Kingdom
before the coming of Christ, and most of all by Anti^chus Epipha^es, whom they
understand by the last horn. Dan. 7. And these expositors have reasons of no
small consideration for this their interpretation. Read the Annotations of
Tre^^elli^s, and (...). And if we approve this exposition, what need have we to
borrow any conjecture from Daniel, of the time of the end of the world, whereas
he had not the least thought of this matter? And out of this, an answer to the
7. of Daniel is apparent, where they would, under the name of the last horn
that the Turks Empire must be understood.

For first of all it may be denied, and that not without cause, that by that
last horn is not signified the Empire of the Turks. For the ancient Fathers,
both Greek and Latin by that horn understand Antichrist with his Kingdom:
and (here I report the judgment of the Fathers) that he indeed shall come
toward the end of the world, and that suddenly he shall rise up among the ten
horns, that is, ten Kings; but when he shall come, that it can not be known of
us: therefore that we ought not to preu^t Gods counselin searching out when
thesethings shall come to pass. Let us h^^re St. Hippolitus expounding this
place of Daniel, (...) Wherefore touching the Leopard the prophet foretold how
there should be 4. heads to him that had the dominion, and so it came to pass,
and the Kingdom of Alexander was divided, into four principallities: so even
now we must expect how the ten horns shall come out even of this same (that is
the Kingdom 1. Empire of Rome) when the time of the beast shall be
accomplished. And alittle horn which is that Antichrist, Shall out of them
suddenly appear, and Justice shall be taken from off the Earth, and the whole
world shall melt into a consumption. Wherefore we must not anticipate the will
of God, but patiently persevere and pray, that we fall not into those times,
neither be unbelieving but that these future things shall be fulfilled. For if
those first things, according to the praedictions of the Prophets, were not
effected, then we cannot expect these: but if they were fulfilled in their due
times, accoiding to the prophesies; accordingly also these things shall
plenarily come to pass. Hierome also does expound this place, of Daniel, of
Antichrist, and he manifests what he means, by Antichrist; and this says
he is the judgment of al writers Ecclesiastical: his words are these. Ergo
dicamus etc. Therefore let us affirm that which all Ecclesiastical w^^^ers
have delivered in the consummation of the world, when the Roman Empire is to
be destroyed, that there shall be ten Kings who shall divide the Roman world
between themselves; and the eleventh a little King to arise, who shall conquer
three Kings of the ten, that is the Kings of Egypt, Africa, and Aethiopia, as
by the process we will more manifest: which being slain even seven other
Kings shall submit their necks under this Conqueror: And behold says he the
eyes were as the eyes of a man in the horn, least, according to the opinion of
some, we should repute him either to be the devil or some Ghost, or else a
singular man whom Diabolum vel Doemonem.
the devil should possess bodily; and a mouth speaking proud things. For he
is the man of sin, the son of perdition, so that he dare sit in the temple
of God making himself as God. Master Bullinger, a most grave writer, does
accord in judgment with the Fathers, touching this interpretation of this
horn: but yet out of histories demonstrating that Antichrist is come already,
that the three other horns are broken down, and that he is increased by the
subjection of those others, and his kingdom to be enlarged, and to have his
seat at Rome.

But what if we should with Mr. Calvin, a most acute and learned interpreter,
by the name of this horn understand (as many indeed of his followers do)
Julius Casar himself, and others his successors Augustus, Tiberius, Caligula,
Claudi^^, Ner^, and other Casars, and the very Empire of these Caesar's? what if
we shall vouch with others, by that horn to be signified Antiochus Epiphanes;
for he did most cruelly of all others aflict the polliticall state of the
Jews, and subvert the religion, and erect idolatry, as is plainly made
manifest in the first book of Macchabees, as that we stand in need of no
other interpreter, wherein was a true type of Antichrist? But what from thence
can be gathered touching the end of the world? Daniel as yet has treated
nothing of that other coming of Christ, seeing he is wholly employed in
explaning those Monarchies which are to prevent his first coming.

The third conjecture is drawn from the time that Anrichrist, being revealed,
should reign, The Scriptures seem to deliver (say some) that Antichrist shall
reign three years and a half. To this purpose is referred, that formerly
mentioned time of Daniel (a time, two times, and half a time) But the place is
more perspicuous in Apoc. 11. It is given to the nations (that is Antichrist
and his members) and they shall read down the City 42. Months; and 42.
Months do amount to three years, and an half. After this time granted to
Antichrist over the Saints be run out, John teaches, Apoc. 17. that a Lamb
shall come who shall kill Antichrist. Thus therefore they reason, Antichrist
being manifested shall practice his tyranny over the Saints three years and a
half, and after shall Christ come; Those years as (they expound) are the
years of Iubelee; So that one year shall signify fifty natural years: and
so three years and an half shall amount to 175 years. The Pope is
Antichrist, and has hi^ now revealed already about 45. years. Therefore there
remains as yet about the Lords second coming, until a hundred and thirty
years, and so some certain time of the end of the world, may be gathered
out of the Scriptures.

I answer that this conjecture is very feeble and infirm. For first, the name
of three years and an half, the Fathers do account for natural years, and
they said that Antichrist should reign so many natural years before the
coming of Christ; wherefore this is a poor collection, that they expound it
of the years of Iubilee.

Further, although I do not deny the Popes Kingdom to be the Kingdom of
Antichrist, for that therein many things are defended, which diametrically are
repugnant to the doctrine of CHRIST; and therefore I will not gainsay, that the
Pope, while he does defend that Kingdom which warreth with the Kingdom of
Christ, and does obstinately oppose himself to the doctrine of Christ, to be
Antichrist* This opinion neither gives any advantage to the Papacy, nor is
held by any spirit of opposition, nor yet written positiuely, but only vnpo
probability, and in reverence to the ancient Fathers.
yet it cannot be denied (as a thing probable) but that toward the end of the
world there shall be One Man in the Church of Christ, who shall exceed all other
Antichrists in malice and power. etc. and who shall work miracles. And one
might well contend, That the prophecy of John, as also of Daniel, touching three
years and an half, wherein he should reign as is said, should be
understood of that Man: As that neither he should dissent utterly from the
judgment of the Fathers; nor yet oppugn that which all our writers with one
consent do teach and make demonstration of concerning the coming of
Antichrist revealed in the Pope of Rome, to the time of the end of the world,
is a fallacy (or sophistication) from aequiuocation, seeing Antichrist sometime
is taken for every one who does obstinately oppose himself to the doctrine of
Christ, sometime for the whole Kingdom of Antichrist; sometime (by an excellency
of speech) for one villain, of all the rest most notorious, which shall sit
upon the throne in Antichrists Kingdom toward the end of the world.

Lastly, although we yield that prophecy of John to be understood of the
Kingdom of Antichrist now revealed, yet for all that it cannot be inferred out
of that number of 42. months, that there as yet are in remainder about 130.
years, for that those years are the years of Iubilee. For this
interpretation of years, that they are indeed the years of Iubilee, any may
easily reject; and justly contend, that a number certain is put for a number
uncertain. And so does Master Bullinger interpret it; that such a time might
be set down by the Angel, which indeed was certain to God, but to us
uncertain. And in very d^ed in my judgment also that time cannot be
other-wise expounded. For if the number were certain unto us, we might
withal know when the end of the world shall be: but this cannot be known;
because of the word Christ, Of that day and hour no man knows; therefore no
certainty can be concluded out of this place of the Revelation, touching the
time of the end of the world.

In like sort the fourth conjecture has reference to that, which they derive
from the time which is se^ down in Daniel, cap. 12. From the time of the
oblation of the daily sacrifice, and the abomination of (...) set up, shall be
days. 1290. Blessed i^ (...) that expects, and attaineth to 1335. days.
Although (say they) this number seems to prophecy of the wars of the
Macchabees, yet also there is some notice therein of the end of the world.
Therefore by days they will have years understood, which were in remainder
from Daniels times to the end of the world. For there are first, 1290. years*
then more, by addition, 1335. all these, put together, do amount to 2625.
years. Now from the (...) wherein Daniel did publish this prophecy, to the
first coming of Christ, did run out 600. years, o^ there-abouts: therefore
there ^^maineth yet from the Nativity (...) Christ, until the end, 2026.
years: now then (in th^^ year, 1560.) out of those 2625. years, are spent,
1560. therefore as yet there remains until the worlds end about 425. years.

I answer. From hence also nothing can be concluded. First, there is no
agreement at all with the Prophets praediction, that these things should be
understood of the wars of the Maccbabees, which went before the coming of
Christ; and therefore neither of the profanation of the Temple, which fell out
under Antiochus. For it appears manifestly, That the Prophet in the end of
his prophecy did foretell of those things which were to come to pass in the
Church, after the last destruction of the Temple, and the abrogation of the
whole Mosaicall Lyturgie (as the Prophet foreshewed in the end of the 9.
chapter) until the end of the world: which thing even Christ, quoting this
very place Matthew, 24. does clearly teach, when he says; When ye shall see
the abomination of des^lation which is spoken of by Daniel the Prophet (...)*
Therefore the Prophet speaks of the desolation or destruction of the Temple,
which followed the abrogation of the daily sacrifice, that is, of the Mosaicall
service, Christ himself being interpreter* and not of that profanation, which
fell out under the tyranie of Antiochus. Add further, that Daniel in his 8.
chapter to the one which was to fall out under Antiochus he assigns days 2300.
but to the other, 1290. So it is made evident, that the time whereof Daniel
here speaks, did begin from that last abominable, and perpetual
demolition of the Temple, which was effected by the Romans, and to continue
unto the end of the world; wherein Daniel, together with others, shall arise
out of his resting place, that is, the grave, wherein he quietly lies, and
shall live again with his lot, that is, in everlasting beatitude after the end
of all days. The case so standing, it is a good consequent, That no part of
that time, of which the prophet here speaks can have reference to these years
which were praecedent the coming of Christ. Wherefore they do not carry the
matter skilfuly, who out of these 2. numbers, 1290. and 1335. do so make up the
years, 2625. as that they refer, 600. to the time which went before Christ's
manifestation in the flesh. And then from thence they gather the surplusage, to
be from the first to the second coming of Christ 2026. years. Certes, if
those 2. numbers be to be distinguished, and then after joined together, and
days be taken for years; it will be behoofeful to acknowledge, that from the
abomination of the daily sacrifice, that is, of al Mosaical sacrifices, and the
deuastation, until the last coming of Christ, do run between 2625. years.
Moreover, whereas they distinguish those two numbers, as being indeed different
the one from the other, and after conioine them, that has no foundation to
rely upon. For there be some, (and those men of good respect) which hold the
same thing to be meant by both the numbers, (that is to say) That the Church
of God for a long time was, and should be afflicted unto the end of the world,
but yet it was to hold out in perseverance manfully, and a deliverance to be
expected: for that when no such matter at all was thought upon, as the riddance
from those evils, then the Church upon the sudden (as it were) in the
intercourse of time should be delivered from all these afflictions. Add
withal that which may be affirmed (as many suppose) that this number here (as
before) is put down a certain for an uncertain; which thing the Angel
seems to insinuate, when, speaking of the same time, he puts down a
different number of days, first, 1290. then, 1335. For if from the time of the
daily sacrifice abolished there were but unto the end only 1290. days,
wherein the Church should be afflicted; how does he presently add withal,
him to be futurely blessed, who in this endurance of evils shall persist
courageous until the days 1335. Certes, I do see no other cause, but that
his purpose was to signify, that the same time of some was judged longer, of
some of less continuance; and, in that respect, the whole Tract of Time to be
to us uncertain.

I pass over this, That the Fathers and some others do construe this place,
as that other cap. 7. of three years and a half, wherein that last Antichrist
was said by the Ancients should reign; for those days 1290. are the same (in
their opinion) with a time, times, and half a time, because they amount to
three years and a half. Finally, some there be who would have here a
repetition and explanation of that, which also before in the end of the 9.
Chapter he had said, viz. of that time, within which the daily sacrifice being
utterly taken away, the Temple likewise should be destroyed by the Romans,
never again to be re-edified; that is, within three years and a half more or
less, for so long time was that war protracted, and finished: after which
presently ensued the horrible vastation both of City and Nation. And thus they
read the words of the Angel; And touching the time wherein I said the daily
sacrifice should be removed, and the obhomination of desolation erected, are
1290 days; so that this (they say) is the true sense thereof: O Daniel, thou
have desired to know when the final end of all things shall be, I have showed
thee that the end is sealed and closed up; neither that to thee nor any other
mortal man shall be made any other revelation, then as is already revealed:
But concerning the end of the Sacrifices, Policy, and Government of the Jews,
as also of the War to be waged against them, whereof also I have treated in
the 9. chapter, if thou will learn the certainty when this shall have an end
or final determination, I can commonstrate unto you a most certain
supputation, (that is to say) That it shall be finished within 1290. days, nay,
within 1335 days. Thus hold these men. Therefore out of Daniel can no certain
time be observed, touching the end of the World; but only that this time is
determined with God, but yet unknown to us; and that in this time the Church
should be strangely afflicted. For, Daniel making enquiry for this end,
answer was made, Go thou Daniel, for the words of this Book are made up and
sealed, until the time of the end: Many shall be purified, made white and
tried, and the wicked shall do ^ickedly. Dan. 12.

The fifth conjecture, 1. Tim. 4 For the Spirit says, that in the last days
shall be per^lous times, men, lovers of themselves* etc. I answer, That even
when the Apostle did foretell these things, there were many such in the world*
therefore he says, But thou also a^oid such; for of such are they which enter
into (...) houses etc. But now there be more such. I answer. Augustine does
like wise give the saine answer to this Argument, drawn out of this place of
the Apostle, in Epist. ad Hosych.

Other conjectures also are alleged: But such as I have remembered are the
principal; and we have manifested, that no certain conclusion can be
determined touching the end of the world. We therefore conclude, That for the
time of the end of the world, either in what day, or month, or year, or age,
it shall be, or that the Lord Christ shall come, it can neither be
comprehended by any certain knowledge, or any firm conjectures of any mortal
man: and the reason is; for that God will not have it known, but only to
himself, according to that, Of that day and hour etc. This we know indeed,
that the end of the world approaches daily nearer and nearer; but when it shall
be we can not know. This is my determination of this question; which I
clearly know; to be both godly, and consonant to the Scriptures, and
profitable: although I make no doubt (that I may freely speak my mind) but
that in those numbers of days, which are prefixed by Daniel and the Apocalypse
before the end of the world, are included many mysteries, touching the last
times; which things he may comprehend, who is endowed with a peculiar instinct
of the holy Spirit; neither would I make doubt, but that he might pronounce
sentence both of the end of the world, and of those things which shall come to
pass about those times. But this gift is not granted to me: He that has it,
let him impart it. I will not despise his prophecy: I will try all things,
and in the mean time retain that which is good.

From hence consequently arises the third capital point. Whether it be
lawful to search out the certain time, that we may know when the end of the
world shall be. I answer, I am not of that opinion. For if God will not have
it to be known, then he does violate the will of God, who trauelleth and
searches certainly that he may know it. Besides he says expressly, It is
not yours to know the times and seasons etc. If it belong not to us, we may
not lawfully inquire to know. Therefore God, that he might manifest to the
world howmuch this curiosity discomenteth him, he has effected, that so many
as from the age of the Apostles hitherto have desined any certain time of the
end of the World, they have been euicted of error. I speak of the ordinary
inquiry of all; if any extraordinary be called to the intelligence of these
mysteries, I do cast no lets in the way, only let every one be cautelous,
that he deceive not himself, and tempt the Lord. Surely Curiosity is
fruitless, but Sobriety most profitable. And as they are commended who love
the coming of the Lord; so I find both Daniel and the Apostle to be
rejected, when they did propose curious questions; When shall these things be
etc.

The fourth Chapter is: why God will not have us know the end of the world? I
answer, even for the same reason why he will not, that any should know when
he must die: Verily, that we should always watch, and p^ay, and always have
our loins gl^^ up and have our lamps in our hands filled with oil^, and
burning, as if the Lord were to be expected hourly. The Lord himself
alleges this cause. Mat. ^4. after he had said of that day etc. And by the
example of the deluge, which ca^^t suddenly upon the world in the days of
Noah he had concluded that such like and so sudden should be the coming of
the Son of Man; forthwith he annexeth this exhortation, saying. Wa^^h
therefore, for you know not when the Son of Man shall come: giving
instruction in these words, that this is the cause why he would not have us
know the certain time of the end of the world, that is to say, That being
certain the Lord will come, and uncertain of the time when he will come, we
might continually watc^ and pray, daily and hourly being in expectation of
him: Therefore Augustine says in Epist. ad Hesychium, The Lord was willing we
should know his first coming, for that the knowledge thereof was both
necessary and profitable for us: whereupon the Lord reproves the Jews, Luc.
12. saying; Ye can discern the face of the sky, but do ye not discerue the
day of your visitation? for that who does not acknowledge the first coming of
the Lord, cannot prepare himself for his second coming. But he would not have
the day and time of his other coming to be manifested, for that it was not
expedient for us; lest verily we should say with the evil servant, Luc. 12. My
Master does defer his coming, so let us feast and beat our fellow-seruants
etc. The Lord will not have us promise much time to our selves before his
coming, but daily to expect him, for that he would have us always in a
readiness. Therefore in the same chap. Mat. ^4. in the end he adds, saying;
But if that evil servant did say in his heart, My Master will defer his
coming, and shall begin to smite his fellow-seruants, and shall likewise eat^
and drink with the drunkard^; the Lord of that servant shall (...) in a day
when he looks not and in an hours when (...) knows rat, and shall cut him
off; and give him his portion with hypocrites; there shall be weeping and (...)
^f^eeth. Now we perceive the cause why the Lord would not have us know that
time, certainly for our own salvation; lest promising a long time to our
selves, like those servants, we should eat and drink with drunkards, etc.
Therefore praeposterously, and contra^ie to the will of God they do, who
pamper their belli^, and delight in gluttony (...) withal do curiously
dispute, when the Lord shall return.

The fifth Capital branch is, touching the signs which are praece^^ne^ before
the end of the world, and the coming of the Lord Christ, and of the use
thereof. For although we can know no certainty, concerning the time wherein
the Lord will return, for that his will was otherwise* notwithstanding, sundry
signs do fore-^^nn^ the Lords coming, and (so) the end of the world* whereby,
both that the Lord will certainly return, and that he is not (...) distant,
shall be made manifest to the godly, and honest hearted men.

But I will not recite all these signs; only I will point out certain places
of Scripture, where these things are to be read. Mat. 24. which also are
rehearsed Mar. 1^. Lu^. ^1. so like wise to the same effect, L^c. 17. so
somewhat of the pau^it^^ of the the t^^e believers. Luc. 18. Romans 11. of the
calling (or conversion) of the Jews. Likewise other things* ^. Tim. 4. 2. Tim.
3. 2. Th^s. 2. But further, some certain distribution of these signs is to be
holden: some do run long before the end of the world, and some are more
ne^rely praeccdent. To the first kind apper^^ineth that security of the men
of this age, which is portrayed Mat. 24. Luc. 17 and elsewhere; As in the (...)
of Noab, etc. Again, As it was in the days of Lot, etc. Again, hereunto
pertains that reuolting from the faith, which is described ^. Tim. 4. The
Spirit speaks evidently, that in the last times some shall depar^ from the
faith, etc. which also else where is remembered. Likewise, here unto belongs
that corrupt state of the world, which is painted out by Paul, 2. Tim. 3. In
the last days shall perilous times be at hand, etc. for^en shall be ^onars of
themselves etc. Hitherto likewise belongs that defection or Apostafie, and
reuolting of the Kingdom of Antichrist, which is read 2. These. ^. These signs
long ago were begun, and (that a far off) did fore-runne the day of the Lord,
and the end of the World, and so do fore-runne and continue their course,
until upon a sudden the Lords coming shall overtake us. But to the other
sort, which are more nearly praecedent does belong that mystical conversion
of the Jewish Nation to Christ, which shall come to pass about the end of the
World; and which the Apostle sets out Romans 11. For I make no doubt, but that
the Apostle speaks hereof, when he calls this a mystery. Hereunto also
appertain those things which the Lord records. Mat. 24. Their shall be
signs in the Sun and Moon, and the Stars shall fall down etc. although
also there be difference between that sign which is Romans 11. of the
conversion of the Jews, and those which are read Mat. 24 of the darkning of
the Sun, and falling of the Stars etc. for that shall come to pass before
the Lord comes, but these things even at his very coming; and that shall be
praecedent before the end of the World, but these things appertain to the very
end of the world, when indeed (as it is 2. Pet. 3. said) the heavens shall
pass away with a noise, and they burning shall be dissolved, and the Elements
shall melt away: for I do believe, that this renouation of the Heavens and the
world is praesignified in those words of the Lord Christ, The Sun shall be
darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light, the Stars shall fall from
heaven, etc. Thus much shall suffice of the signs.

But in this place two doubts do arise: the first, how that can accord which
the Apostle writes, Romans. 11. of the conversion of the Jewish Nation about
the end of the world, with that voice of Christ. Luke 18. When the Son of Man
comes, shall he find faith on the earth? For if then little faith shall be
found in the earth; how then shall a full multitude of Jewish people be
converted, viz. by the faith in Christ? Therefore there shall be little and much
faith upon the earth. I answer; Augustine says Disting^e tempora. etc.
distinguish the times, and the Scripture will accord: Those two shall not fall
out both at one time, but in some distance of time. I believe therefore, that
these: two places may thus he reconciled; first, that principal^ and last
Antichrist, which shall come about the end of the world, and which shall excel
all others in hypocrisy, craft, power, and di^b^^i^^ll sleights (for in him,
as the Fathers testify, shall dwell Sath^^as, or all plenitude See D.
VVhittakers confutation of this opinion, and disallowance. De Romans Pont. page
568.
of Satanicall malice, as in Christ dwells all fullness of Divinity, bodily)
I say that last Antichrist shall subvert all things, and shall seduce all
(except a few of the Elect) partly by his hypocrisy; partly by his lying
miracles, 2. These. 2. insomuch that, as John speaks in the Apoc. 13.
Revelation, he shall make the (...) to come down from heaven, in the fight of
men; partly also by his power and violence. Therefore in this manner, when the
Son of Man shall come* that is, about his coming, certes little faith shall
be found upon the earth: but when that principal Antichrist shall be
destroyed with the Spirit of Christ's mouth, and by the efficacy of the Word of
God he shall be discovered to all men who he is (not Christ but Antichrist)
then (happily) the Jews shall know their Messiah, be converted unto him, and
be saved. Therefore (Antichrist reigning) scarsely shall any faith be found
upon the earth, but being destroyed very much.

The other question is, If so many signs shall go before the end of the world,
whereby shall be manifested to holy men that the Lord is not far off, How then
have thou formerly concluded, that it cannot be known to any, when the Lord
will come; and when the end of the world shall be? I answer: These things are
not repugnant. For, notwithstanding the signs shall give notice to the godly
that the Lord is not far off, yet from thence cannot be collected the
certain time wherein he will come Behold! many signs which do fore-run the
coming of the Lord, are long ago accomplished: yet, how great licentiousnes
and security? how much corruption of religion and manners? how many and great
heresies? The Lord says; As in the days of Noah etc. Mat. 24. and Luc 17. And
the Apostle, In the last days men shall be lovers of themselves, But how great
a Lethargy amongst men has been so long since the Apostles time? But who could
either in the Apostles time, or now can define, how much time remains until
the Lords coming? Further, the Apostle says, The Spirit speaks manifestly;
that in the last days some shall depart from the faith: but this Oracle, was
it not become to be fulfilled in the Apostles time? And certainly, those were
the last times, as John does bear witness, saying: it is the last time. Yet we
see how long do continue those last times; likewise how lately the Kingdom of
Antichrist was revealed; and what it is. What for that it begun to be reueiled
in Bernards days? In Psalm. Qui habitat, 6. Ser. page 413. At nunc quidem.
etc. But now indeed (says he) we have peace from Pagans; peace from
Heretics, but there is no peace from false children. Thou have multiplied the
Nation O Lord Jesus, but not magnified our joy; all are Christians, and yet all
seek their own, not such things as are Jesus Christ's: likewise the duties of
Ecclesiastical dignities are transformed into filthy gain and the business of
darkness: neither in them is sought the salvation of souls, but the excess of
riches: for this they are shaven, they frequent Churches, they celebrate
Masses, they sing Psalms: at this day most impudently there is contention for
Bishoprics, Archdeaconries, Abbotships, and other dignities: and the revenues
of Churches are wasted upon the practice of super^^uities and vanities; it
remains that the Man of sin be reueiled, the son of perdition, the Ghost
(that walks) on the day, but even at noonday, which is not only
transfigured into an Angel of light, but also exalted above all that is called
God, or that is worshipped. Thus Bernard.

Lo! one of the principal signe^ going before the end of the World, (that is
to say) the manifestation of the Kingdom of Antichrist! yet who either could
or can affirm when the Lord shall come? Therefore by those tokens which run
(...) long before, although they notify, that the Lord indeed will come and
that he is not far off, yet notwithstanding it cannot be determined, to what
length of years this extends, that he is not far off. So, (...) those
signs which fore-run by sou^^ nearer distance, it may be gathered that the end
of the World is more near approaching then before, and that the Lord will come
quickly; yet neither of what space this (quilckly) will be, it cannot before be
know^^. In the Apocalypse likewise it is said, cap. 3. Behold (says the Lord) I
come quickly; and yet he is not come.

The conclusion is this; that although many signs shall be forerunners, and
praecedents to the day of the Lord, and end of the World; yet will it not
thereupon be any consequent, That it can be known by any signs when the Lord
will come. Neither is that the use of signs, that by them we may know the time
and set day: but there be other uses.

And in my judgment there be three uses of these signs, and these, serving
against three grievous perils in this business. The first peril is, Lest any
should utterly resolve that there should be no end at all, or return of the
Lord. Against this danger the Lord in the Scriptures has delivered, and
commanded that we should so believe, that this world shall have an end, and
that the Lord Christ will certainly come again. To this effect do tend the
tokens foretold from the Lord, scilicet^ That when we shall see them come to
pass, we may become more certain, that the Lord (as he did prognosticate)
will certainly come. The first use then of the signs is, that by them, as by
seals, the promise touching the coming of Christ should be ratified, and our
faith therein confirmed.

Another peril is; Though we certainly believe that the end of the World
shall be, and that the Lord shall come, yet lest we should deny him as yet to
be far off, and to make delay. For this imagination is the cogitation of the
evil servant, and makes a man secure in his sins. Against this danger the
Lord would have us always to resolve, that the day of the Lord is not far
absent. To this effect tend these voices, Phil. 4. The Lord is at hand: also
Mat. 24. of the evil servant, who imagines that the Lord will not come
quickly, he says; the Lord of that servant will come in a day when he hops
not, and in anhoure when he knows not, and will cut him off etc. as though
he should say, his Lord will sooner return then that evil servant expected.
Luc. 12. And be ye likewise prepared: for the Son of Man will come at an hour
when ye think not. For this purpose serve the signs foretold by the Lord.
Verily, for that whereas we perceive, yea from the beginning, and do daily
see many of them accomplished already, and to come to pass, we should therefore
think that the Lord is not far off, and (so) watch and pray. Wherefore the
Lord, when he had foretold the signs, he (consequently) added the use of the
praediction thereof, saying; when ye shall see all these things, Kn^w that he
is nigh, even in the doors. Therefore this is the second use of these signs,
That indeed by the sight thereof we might know the Lord not to be far off,
but quickly to return; yet so, as that we may never define how far off this
(quickly) shall be.

The third peril is this; lest that, because the good servant must remember,
that it may so fall out that his Master may come quickly, he should rashly
define how long or how short time that (quickly) will be, and should appoint
any certain time when his Lord will come. For that determination of a certain
time, besides, that it is presumptuous, it is likewise repugnant to the will of
God, and pernicious. Against this rock, the Lord will have us to acknowledge
and confess, that we cannot know this time, and that it is only known to
God. Again, he would have us know, that it is not our office either to search
out, or to know the times and seasons which the Father has put in his own
power. Hereunto also appertain the signs, that is to say, That when we shall
see many of them to be originally accomplished from the time of the Apostles,
neither yet presently the Lord to be come, that (...) yet we presume to
define (though we see the rest) of any certain time of his coming, but that
we should know that this only is seen to the Lord: and therefore, for that
we are ignorant when he will come, we should always watch and pray. Wherefore
the Lord says, Matthew, 24. If the householder knew at what hour the thief
would come, he would (doubtless) wa^ch, and not suffer his house to be dug
through: as though he should say, he would (doubtless) watch that hour only,
wherein he knew the thief would come, but for that he knows he will come,
and is ignorant in what hour, therefore he awaketh the whole night, and
stands upon his watch: be yie also therefore prepared (that is, always) for
at an hour when yet think not will the son of man come; as if he had said*
If ye know that certain time wherein he would return, ye would watch only
about that time, and address your selves to meet me: but for that ye are
ignorant when I shall come, at midnight or cock-crow, or in the morning, and
yet ye know certainly that I will come, therefore, ye ought continually to be
prepared, and in readiness. These therefore are the three principal uses of
the tokens foregoing the end of the world, and the coming of the Lord; first,
that by seeing of them we may firmly know that the Lord will come: next, that
by the sight thereof we may know that he will come quickly; thirdly, that by
seeing of them we do not yet determine how long this (quickly) shall endure;
for that many of them are come to pass, and yet the Lord comes not. Besides,
no signs do bend that way, that by them we may be enabled to define the
certain time of his coming, and of the end of the world. Therefore the Lord
did first prognosticate the signs, Matthew. 24. and then, le^t any man should
yet think, that he could gather how much space of time remained touching the
Lords coming, he added, Of that day knows no man. We see therefore that this
sequel has no coherence. The signs are foretold that do fore-runne the end
of the world: therefore when they formerly come to pass, and are accomplished;
we may not thence observe how much time certainly remains until his
coming; for that there be other uses (as is manifested already) of the signs,
then that by them we either can or ought to conclude the certain time of the
world. But by all these we may easily collect what a Christian man may do in
this question, touching the end of the world. Now then out of things already
spoken let us discuss the duties of a Christian man to be observed in this
question of the worlds ending.

The sixth Capital branch is; what things are to be observed of a Christian
man, in this question touching the end of the world.

We must firmly believe that this world shall finally come to an that the
Lord shall return, and that the world shall be renewed: wherefore seeing there
must be a renouation of the Heaven and Earth, we are to give regard, that we
likewise be daily renouated, as Peter teaches. 2. Pet. 3.

When this end shall come, we are not curiously to inquire, both for that it
cannot be known, according to the voice of Christ, Mat. 24. as also for that
we are forbidden in that saying, Act. 1 It appertains not to you to know the
times. etc.

Although we know not when he will come, yet in the mean while we are to
desire his coming, according to that Mat. 6. Let thy Kingdom come. And this
is likewise acceptable to God, as the Apostle testifies 2. Tim. 4. henceforth
is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord (that just judge)
shall render unto me at that day, and not only to me, but also to all such as
shall wish for his coming.

Albeit we know not when; yet ought every one continually to have in
remembrance, that the Lord may sooner come then the world supposes. For this
is the difference between the good and evil servant, Luc. 12. The evil one
says, My Lord will defer his coming etc. but the good one says, I know not
verily when my Lord will come but I do daily expect him: for he will come (as he
prophesied) as a thief in the night, that is, upon the sudden. Again albeit
(that I may in the interim yield this) that he will not come speedily to judge
the whole world, yet it may be he will come to morrow to exact of me a private
account of my life.

Because we know not when the Lord will come, we are to watch and pray
perpetually, and our lamps are so to be kept furnished with faith and good
works, as if he were to come to morrow, according to that of Christ, Mat. 24.
Watch therefore and pray, for you know not what hour your Lord will com^*
Wherefore, at no hand are we to imitate that evil servant, who for that he
does promise to himself that his Master will defer his coming, he is drunk
with the drunkards, and smites his fellow servants. Luc. 12.

If we be tempted to impatience for that the day of the Lord comes not
quickly, or because the Lord does so long defer his coming, let us follow
the counsel of the Apostle Pet. 2. Epist. 3. Let us fasten our eyes, not upon
the passage of this temporary life, but upon aeternity it self, where all
time, be it never so long, does vanish to nothing: and let us be advised,
that a thousand years with the Lord a^^ but as one day, according to that 2.
Pet. 3. Moreover be not ignorant of this one thing (beloved) that one day with
the Lord, is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day, Let us
therefore understand that this delay is nothing.

If further we shall be assaulted, either of our own curiosity, or questioned of
others, why the Lord does so long defer his coming? let us answer as Peter
instructs, that he does therefore defer, for that he looks that all
should repent, and that he is not delighted with the perdition of men.

If Question be propounded, whether the Lord will sooner or later come? let us
follow the doctrine of CHRIST, and return our answer, We cannot tell: for
this is the safer tract. For if thou shall say, the Lord will not come quickly,
he will yet defer, this is the property of the evil servant. Luke, 12.
Matthew. 24. and it begets either security to ^arnall, or despaite to godly
men, who desire the coming of Christ: if thou say he will come quickly, this
indeed is the part of the good servant, to think that the Lord will come
quickly, and daily to expect him. And this cogitation will quicken thee to
study for composing thy self, and for to meet the Lord: but it is a rash
affirmation of that thou know not. But if thou do answer thou can not
tell; and therefore because thou know not, that we must watch and pray; thou
shall do the office both of a good and humble servant, and so shall pass the
more safe way. For this is the third, accorning to Christ's Gospel, Watch ye
therefore, for ye kn^^ not. etc. Augustine also says in the Epistle to
Hesychius, and puts down three orders or servants: One says; Let us watch
and pray, for that the Lord will come quickly: another says, Let us watch and
pray, for that the Lord will come indeed slowly; but our life is but short the
third says, Let us watch and pray, for we know not when the Lord will come.

But notwithstanding we know not when the general end of the World shall be;
yet let us remember that the end of our (little) world is near every one of
us: for we cannot long live; Let us continually watch and pray: Neither
imitate that evil servant, who says My Lord will delay his coming. The Lord
grant that all these things may leave a deep impression in the depth of our
hearts.

Amen. ()
HIEROME. Whether I eat or drink, or whatsoever I do: I do always suppose
that I hear the voice of the trumpet sounding; Ariseyee dead, and come unto
judgment.

AUGUSTINE. The last day is unknown unto us, that we might attend upon every
day.

APOC. 22. 12. Behold, I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give to
every one as his deeds shall be.


THE CONFESSION of HIEROME ZANCHIVS touching the perseverance of the Saints in
faith.
NOW intending my explanation and confirmation of my sentence (touching the
perseueraance of the Saints in Faith) in the entrance, that all ambiguitie may
be removed, which (secretly) rests in words of different signification;
these three words which are incident to this question ( Faith, Grace, Saint)
are principally to be unfolded, and what thereby must be understood. In the
next place, lest any man should suppose that there is of such matter
controversy amongst us, where indeed there is none; such things are to be
removed out of the way, which seem, and are not controuerted amongst us. Then
finally, wherein this controversy consists, and what my opinion is thereof,
shall be declared, and the testimonies of Scriptures, Fathers, and learned men
of our Age, whereby I do defend this my judgment, shall be alleged.

CHAP. I. Of Faith.
FAITH (so much as 1 Faith for the doctrine of faith, and for the a^^ica cie of
the Spirit, by which we believe the doctrine.
for the understanding of this controversy is worthy explication) is taken
abusiuely, and by a Metonymie, for that Doctrine which we embrace by Faith,
and make profession of; but most usually in proper signification for the gift,
whereby we understand that Doctrine and entertain it. For Doctrine* as 1. Tim.
1. that thou sight a good fight, re^^^iuing faith and a good conscience, the
disputation is not here intended of this signification of faith: for it is
acknowledged of all men, that they are said to fall from the faith, who cast
off the Doctrine once received, ^r else, from whom, by the just judgment of
God, the Doctrine is taken away.

But Faith, in the other signification, is divided into true and justifying 2
Faith without hypocrisy, and hypocritical
faith, and not-true, and notiustifying faith; which is sincere and without
dissimulation; and that which is hypocritical. 1. Tim. 1.

This hypocritical or dissembled Faith is double; one, which not only
Hypocritical faith is double
they who dissemble do know to be in hypocrisy, but commonly others also do
perceive not to be sound by their perseverance in notorious sins: such is
the faith of them, of whom Tit. 1. They confess that they know God; but by
(...) deeds they deny him. Of this kind was the faith of those who followed
Christ for the bread, John 6. and such was the faith of Judas, specially, after
he begun to intend treason against Christ.

The other is so semblable to ture faith, as not only they who have it, do
not acknowledge it to be hypocritical, but others also by the green
flourishing blossom of an honest life, fructifying from thence, do altogether
adiudg it to be sincere and true. Only God, the fearcher of the heart, who
cannot be deceived, and who perceives what is in man, does see it to be
hypocritical. Such like was the faith of many Disciples, who after the space
of many months they reputed themselves sincere believers in Christ, yet so
soon as others heard that word touching the manducation of Christ's flesh, they
fell away from Christ. Ioh. 6. And the reason was, for that they imagined, that
Christ had spoken of the flesh of Christ to be eaten with the mouth and
carnal manducation: such was the faith of them, of whom Ioh. 2. Many believed
in him, seeing the signs which he did; but Jesus did not commit himself unto
them, for that he knew them all, and understood what was in man.

To these two sorts is granted To hypocritical faith is added power of
miracles.
sometime from God a certain force of the holy Spirit, whereby some of those
impious men, besides that vehement persuasion which they have of Christ, and
his power, being eue^ (sometime) moved therewith, they prophetie and do work
miracles: such likewise were they of whom Mat. ^. Lord, Lord, have we not in
thy name cast out Devils? This power some do call the faith of miracles. But
for that it seems to me to be rather a singular efficacy and force of faith,
both true and hypocritical, sometime, and to some, granted in working
miracles, rather then any special faith; therefore I do constitute (only)
two kinds of faith, and of hypocrites. Faith of hypocrites both temporary and
dead.


Both which Faith is dead and temporary: Dead, for that as concerning the
first, it never moves men to the hatred of sin, and love of righteousness,
neither to lead an honest and Christian life: for they confess God in words,
but in deeds they deny him. But the other, although at the first they receive
the word with a certain joy, and do bring forth a certain flourishing
blossom of Christian living; yet never do they bring full and ripe fruits:
but in some presently, in other some shortly after, all this moisture of faith
is dried up, either exhausted by the great heat of bearing the Cross for
Christ's sake, or else suffocate with the thorns of this world. And therefore
both of them is even temporary, because both finally, as I said, utterly
withers away, and altogether cease. In this present question of the
perseverance of Saints in faith, do I speak of neither of these, neither did
I ever, but only of true faith.

Now true and unfeigned faith is indeed only one, although for the power of
miracles annexed in some, and in some otherwise, it is by some set down as
twofold; one common to all the Elect, which also by Paul is called the faith of
the Elect; and that is it whereby the Elect are justified, and live: whereof
the Scripture says, The lust man shall live by his faith. The other special;
and True Faith.
that is it whereby specially some of the Elect are not only justified, but
also work miracles, prophecy, and do re-edifie the Church, by other sundry
gifts of the holy spirit, every one according to the measure of this faith
granted unto him. Hereof* Mat. 17. If ye shall have so much faith as is a
grain of mustard seed, and shall say to this mountain, remove hence, it shall
be removed. And Romans 12. As God has measured to every man the measure of
faith: again whether prophecye according to the measure of faith. Of this
faith likewise in that respect it does not only justify, but likewise
prophecy, and show forth miracles, and by diverse gifts redintegrate the
Church, I do not speak in this controversy. For many upon certain causes are
dignified from the Lord, for a limited time with this efficacy of faith in
doing miracles, and fort-telling things* to come but at certain times withal
they are despoyled of it, and yet* then not destitute of the virtue of faith,
whereby they are just and live. For this faith, as it does justify, has even
all the same properties, which justifying faith has (which is) common to all
the Elect.

Therefore, that we may speak 5 True faith habitual ^ and actual.
of this common faith: True and justifying faith, which is common to all the
Elect, is taken also in a double manner; sometime for the very habit of faith,
or for that efficacy and virtue infused by the holy Spirit in to the hearts of
the Elect, out of which that Act (that I may so speak) whereby we do actually
believe in Christ, is produced, and (as Schoolmen speak) drawn out. For, as
I shall forthwith manifest. Faith indeed is a virtue or certain force, and
therefore a quallity infused by the holy Spirit.

Sometime faith is taken for the very act of faith, whereby seriously thinking
and reposing our selves we believe in Christ.

And although I cannot in sillables demonstrate all these things in the
Scriptures, yet the very same distinction, although in other words, the
Scriptures do manifestly teach. And first that faith very frequently is taken
for the act of believing, no man does make doubt: for this holy writ teaches
when it says, A man is justified by faith, receives remission of sins:
understands the worlds were made; Certainly such as are of years, cannot
attain, remission of sins without actual faith. Sometime it is taken for
the habit or efficacy inhaerent in the hearts of the elect, as the Scriptures
do make evident* as who^ they say, The just man does live by his faith;
likewise, without faith it is impossible so please God. The just certainly,
even when they sleep, and do think of Christ with no actual faith, yet they
live by faith and do please God. Faith also is called in Scripture, Science,
the knowledge of God, and a full persuasion; and these are refiant in the mind,
even when actually we do not think on Christ. And Science is placed by the
Philosophers in the praedicament of Quality. Besides, in very children, in
whom there can be no act of thought, sense, fiduce, yet all learned men do
yield in them to be the very spirit of faith, and efficacy thereof.

Bucer does apparently accknowledge this in many places, as in Ep. and Ephesians.
Cap. 1. as also he delivers this destinction of faith (into Habit and Act)
Lib. de reconcilia. Eccles. controuers de reconciliand articul. iustific. page
170. and 126. He puts down these express words, To believe in habit, and
to believe in act, and both to be effected by the inspiration of the spirit.
And in Ep. ad Romans c. 9. q. de. lib. arb. he does not dislike the Schoolmen
do call that the habitual gift of grace which the Apostle calls the inward
man. And who will deny faith to be the gift of God, and a faculty infused by
the holy spirit, whereby we believe in Christ? Therefore that faith sometime is
taken for the Act, sometime for the Habit it is without all controversy.

This true faith is distinguished into strong, which is called great; and weak
which is called little fatih in the Scriptures: for in some it is strong and
great, in other some infirm and little; nay in the same man 6 Faith strong and
weak great and small.
sometime weak and very feeble* some time more firm and strong. It was weak
in Peter, when walking upon the waters he did begin to sink, and then the Lord
said unto him, O thou of little faith why did thou doubt? also when he denied
his Master: and therefore it is sometime so infirm, as that in scriptures it
is called not only (...), that is, little faith, but also sometime it is
called by the Lord in Scriptures (...), that is incredulity Man. 17. Why could
not we cast the Devil out? the Lord answers, propter (...) vestram, for your
unbelief. Marc. 9. Lord help our unbeleefe: so also the last Chapter it was strong
in Peter when after the resurrection of the Lord, with great confidence he
preached Christ, fearing nothing: finally he would rather dye, then not to
confess and preach Christ. And indeed the weaker the faith is by so much the
more often and grievously; and the stronger it is by so much the less often,
and in a less measure, the Saints 4 True says is lively and perpetual,
do offend: for all the sins of the Saints do proceed of the debility of faith.

But whether it be weak or strong, great or small, always true faith, (besides
others) has two essential and inseparable properties, without which it cannot
be caled true and iusiustifying faith. The one is life: the other is
perpetuity. For first, it is necessary that it be lively, exciting the life of
Christ in the belieuer, that is, which does kindle in the heart of a faithful
man new and heavenly motions, new and caelestiall cogitations new and heavenly
desires, finally, new and celestial affections, conformable to the law of God,
and often expelling terrene cogitations. Which thing is signified in the
Scriptures by the name of purification of the heart, and of mortification of
the flesh, and vi^ification of the spirit, and crucifing, and burial of the
old man* and renewing and resuscitating of the new man; withal, in the other
parts, that it be powerful, and working through love, toward God and our
neighbors. This property in every place the holy Spirit enforces in the
Scriptures, but more specially in the epistles of James and John, it teaches
purposely this property to be so essential to ^aith, that unless this be
present, it can in no case be called true and justifying faith. Of this first
property there is no contention amongst.

The other essential property of true faith is, That it be pe^oetuall, and
that it never utterly fail in the Elect. This property I am able to
demonstrate by many testimonies of Scriptures, and Fathers, and our own
Doctors: but those which I shall consquently annex, let them suffice for my
present confession.

The faith of Abraham was not only a living faith, but also perpetual, as
James (besides others) does manifest. For although it was tossed with many
tentations, yet did it not at any time totally quail. This quality of the
faith of Abraham does demonstrate both Moses in the story of him, as also the
Apostle, Romans, 4. Now whosoever are justified, are justified by no other
faith then that whereby even Abraham the Father of all faithful was justified,
as the Scriptures every where do teach. Hereupon he is called the Father of
the faithful; because whoseuer are the son of the promise, and do believe
that faith may be imputed unto them for righteousness, they both do believe
in the same Savior Christ and God as Abraham did, and by the very same, that
is, like faith as he did, and it is requisite that they should so believe.
There-vpon the Lord Jesus denied the Jews to be the sons of Abraham, who
boasted themselves to be Abraham's sons: and for what cause? because they did
not the works of Abraham, that is, for that they neither believed in him, nor
with the same faith that he did. James also does convince such as have a dead
faith, without works, not to be justified as Abraham was justified; and why
so? for that they were n^^ endued with the same, that is, like faith as
Abraham; faith, I say ^^^king by love. As James therefore does euict that not
to be true and iustifiing faith, which is dead, for that it is not like to
Abraham's faith in this quality, which is, that it have life; it is likewife
euicted, that such a faith as is not perpetual but temporary, is not a true
and justifying faith: and why? because it is not like to the faith of Abraham
in that other essential property, which is, that it be perpetual. And that
perpetuity is as an essential property to justifying faith, and (faith)
leading to life ^ternall, as life is; from hence is made manifest: for that as
they cannot be saved not having faith; so neither can they who have not the
same perpetual. For temporizers are neither grateful to God, nor in state of
salvation; and whosoever shall persevere unto the end, he only shall attain
salvation. Therefore it cannot be a true, justifying, and saving faith, except
it be both living and permanent. And I pray you how can it be, or be called, a
living faith, and which brings eternal life, unless the same be always
living, but at last dead or utterly vanishing?

In the Parable of the seed is explaned the nature of true and false faith. To
faith (not true) are ascribed two properties; one, that it is not lively, that
is, that although it receive the seed of the word with joy, and do produce an
apparent flourish even of an honest life, yet does it bring forth no true
fruit, and that for this reason, because the seed falls into the ground
which is either rocky, and therefore therein it cannot take root; or thorny,
and therefore the seed cast thereinto, and now converted into the bud, is
suffocated before it can bring forth any fruit^ at all. Another property which
is there ascribed to faith (not true nor justifying) is this; That it is not
perpetual, but temporary: Therefore the qualities of true faith must needs be
contrary, that is, that it be living and perpetual. And these like-wise are in
the same place explaned, viz. in that part of the ground which retained the
seed sown; and thereupon brought forth much fruit perpetuity therein is
intimated, for (...) that ground retained the seed sown therein, neither was
it suffocated of thorns, nor with^red with the heat of the Sun; and life, in
that it brought forth much fruit. Whereas consequently in the interpretation of
this Parable the Lord spoke of the true believers, some to bring forth 30
^ould, some 60. some an hundredth, he signified in all the Elect and true
believers, faith to be both living and perpetual; but yet in some more strong
and lively, in others more infirm and languid. For although true faith be not in
all the Elect of equal strength and life; yet is it necesssarie that in all the
Elect it be living and perpetual, else it cannot be called true and justifying
faith. And (in good sooth) I do not see, how it can be no consequent; if faith
(not true) be temporary, then true faith is not temporary; And if it be not
temporary, then is it perpetual; for so much as that which is perpetual, is
contrary to temporary.

Now will I insert testimonies out of the Fathers.

Aug. ad Iul. Com. as as he is quoted in Decret says; Charity which can
fail, was never true: so Am^. in, 2. Corintbians. 6. therefore neither is
^aith true, if it can fail.

The same Aug To* ^. in I^^. Enang. Tract. 106. C^* 513. To believe truly, is
immovably (...), stably, strongly; that nowthou can not return to thine
own, and relinquish Christ. Thus he, Therefore it is not true faith, unless
it be vnshakeable, firm, stable, strong, so that it never fall away from
Christ. And what is this, but faith to be perpetual?

Luther. in Post^ll. maior^b. in Sexagesimam in Euang. Luc. 8 de semin^. The
fourth sort of hearers, who permanently do retain the word of God, and bring
forth fruit, he calls true Christians; and all the rest that are temporary,
he terms not sincere, and not true. Therefore temporary faith is neither
true not sincere faith.

Br^n. in like manner upon the same Gospel, speaking of te^pori^ers, says,
That such do not truly believe: Therefore temporary faith is not true.

Bucer in Luc. 1. page 141. Piety, which knows an end, is not true Piety:
Therefore neither faith, which has an end, is true faith.

Id^^ in Mat. and sect. 2. (...), (...) side, says; Only the Elect do truly
believe in Christ; the reprobate believe, but it is for a time, and therefore
not truly: and their faith, because it is temporary, neither to be true
faith, nor to justify, or make the sons of God.

Idem in John. 2. sect. 3, upon these words ( but Jesus did not commit
himself unto them) first teaches, that those who in that place are said to
have believed in Christ, were temporizers; then of temporizers, Those (says
he) were such which believe in the name of Christ, yet he did not commit
himself unto them, for he knew what was in man: for he knew them to have
nothing less, then a true and sound faith in it felfe. Thus he. Therefore
temporary faith is not true and soundfaith

Idem in lib dereconcilia: Eccles. incontrouers* de iustif. in the
significatitions of this word ( credere to believe) first he concludes, that
it is wrought in us by inspiration of the Holy Spirit, that we do believe:
Then, that this inspiration does happen diverse ways* first, sometime in such
manner, as that we believe some part of the word of God, but not all, again,
sometime such, as that we do believe all, but not always, but for a certain
time: And he teaches, neither of these to be the inspiration of a true faith
fol. 138 128. 139. But the other inspirations of true faith (which he there
recites and explaineth) he conioyneth them all with perpetuity; and
therefore teaches, That it is no true faith unless it be perpetual. And
fol. 139. expressly he says, That Faith (not true) which the Lord calls
temporary, is called by Paul ^aigned, and by James dead faith: and that this is
not of the same rank with a lively and true faith, which does in verity
apprehend the life of GOD in Christ. By which words Bucer teaches, that faith,
which is temporary, to be hypocritical and dead, that is, neither living nor
true faith. Therefore true Faith must be perpetual.

Idem in Ephesians. c. 1. upon these words ( ye are sealed by the holy Spirit of
promise) he calls temporary faith a picture of faith; again, dissembled
credulity; and says it is called of James dead faith: and therefore not to
be true faith. As likewise a dead man is not a true man: for that by this
addition ( scili^^^ of dead) it destroys the nature of faith: as also when
we say a dead man, by this addition (of dead) is extinct the nature of man.
But (says he) Paul speaks not of the image of faith, but of true faith,
when he speaks of a saving faith, and which proceeds from the Holy Spirit.
For although that image of faith does sometime strongly grow on so that it does
pa^ forth fruit; yet, (the Sun arising) at last those fruits are extinguished,
as does appear in them who seek carnal liberty by the Gospel, and do
never make consideration of the Cross which is there taught: this faith is
hypocritical credulity: James calls it dead faith; which condition being
added destroys the nature of faith, as when we say, a (dead) man, by that
addition the nature of man is done away. These things Bucer. Therefore if faith
be not perpetual, it cannot be true and living faith.

Idem in ep. ad Ephesians. ^. 4. Tract. d^ Eccles. in the entrance fol. 111. ^ee
puts down a threefold faith; first, justifying, and therefore true and
perpetual faith; then faith utterly dead; thirdly* the mean between both,
this (temporary) faith. And he does demonstrate these two last not to be a
true says* neither men thereby to be justified: Although (says he) there be
some to be found, who place a certain (...) faith between that which
justifies, which works by Love, and is expressly called a living faith, and
that which is utterly dead, that is, not working any good. And, indeed, there
is a certain temporary faith noted by Christ, which although it does not
endure, and profit so far to fructify, yet it puts forth into bud: This
faith, is an assent unto the Gospel: which i^ therefore inspired even into
reprobate men, that they in some sort should glorify God in their words and
deeds, and should commend him to the prayers of the Saints; and withal be
stripped naked of all excuse of ignorance. Such was the faith of Cain; (for he
also offered sacrifice) of Saul, A^hab, Judas the T^aitor, and of all others,
who are so far illuminated of God, that in some sort, and for some time, they
embrace and taste of the sacred word of God with joy, and are made partakers of
the heavenly gifts, and the holy Spirit; and yet by relapse they fall into
impiety, and therein perish in obstinacy. Notwithstanding whatsoever life or
work is seen in their faith, yet these men remain (endued with a temporary
gift, and a lame faith) so long as they want a justifying faith, without
Christ; therefore (are they) in death and under Gods wrath; and al those
motions of faith, in them of what quality soever, and benefits in appearance,
are indeed the good works of the good God, as whereby also he is beneficial
unto mankind by evil men to the amplifying of (...) glory in his infinite
bountifulnesse^ but to those men they are evil works and sins, who do them
yet of an impious mind, because they proceed wickedly, rejecting the blood of
Jesus Christ, and justification by him offered. Yet hence is the difference
between them, who through this faith, though but vanishing and not
regenerating, do confess the Lord Christ in word, and do not apparently deny
him in deed; and them, who howsoever they say that they believe in word, yet
in deed do trample under foot the Lord Christ, and hold his blood as
profane; for that the one sort are tolerated (...) the externe fellowship of
the Saints, until they do plainly discover their impiety; but not the
other, for that they make themselves manifest in their impiety. Yet neither
sort are true members at any time of the body of Christ, for that they live
not in Christ. In these words of Bucer, amongst other things, it is manifest;
first, That if says be temporary, it is not true and justifying: therefore
true and justifying faith is perpetual: secondly, That Saul and Judas had
never true and justifying faith, for that their faith was but temporary:
Therefore that is false which one taught, and committed to writing, That Saul
and Judas were justified as well as David and Peter: thirdly, That neither
temporizers, nor notoriously wicked, ever were true members of the Church; and
therefore the Elect only, and such as are endued with true faith, are the true
members of the Church.

Musculus in Ioh. cap. 8. page 62. upon these words ( if ye abide in (...),
then are ye verily my Disciples) says he; He joins soliditie and stabilitie
with verity. That which is true is solid; that which is false is vain and
fained* and so cannot be stable, specially if it come liable to examination.
That which is gold, remains gold; that which seems and is not will long
(...), for that (...) cannot long retain the false app^rance of gold. Sound
grain do^^ endure the flaile, and the fan; but the chafe with a little
ventila^i^^ will be scattered into the air. A natural color is more
permanen^ ^ counterfeit is easily descried. A t^^^ friend will not relent even
in adversity; but a false dissembler will change with every wind. Great is
the stabilitie of truth on every hand* for the germane Disciples of Christ are
solid and firm, neither are they easily altered by sorrowful lots; but such
as are dissemblers, are not constant, no not in time of peace.

(...) loc. de Patientia. ca. Quod sit patientia page 757. Faith temporary is
not true faith.

Therefore clearly I have made demonstration, That perpetuity is such an
essential property of true faith, as that unless it be perpetual, it cannot
be, or be called true faith.

A description of true faith.
FAITH therefore is a virtue or efficacy, and the same lively and perpetual
freely infused into the hearts of the Elect (that is, ours) from the Father for
Christ his sake by the Holy Spirit: whereby we being persuaded, that
whatsoever is proposed in the writings Prophetical and Apostolical* to be
the word of God, we embrace totally the Law and the Gospel with an in^ubi^^^e
and constant assent, as the true word of God: and in such sort we do receive
them, as that by the Law we do verily acknowledge our sins, feel the wrath
of God, despair of our own strength, and are affected with a sound desire of
the Mediator, who may take away our sins, pacify Gods anger, minister
strength to us for avoiding of sin, and the observation of Gods Law: and by
the Gospel we may truly acknowledge Jesus to be very Christ, God and Man, one
Mediator, and together with the Father and the Holy Spirit, common to both,
our ^^uiour, and the same for perpetuitie^ and so acknowledged do (...) him;
and in all our necessities do call upon him; our whole confidence and hope of
the remission of our sins, salvation and life eternal, being settled and
defixed upon him alone; and being perpetually affected with the love of him, we
may continually bend our studies for to do his Law, and that partly, that his
Name may be for ever glorified by us, partly, that we may testify our selves
to be the children of God, by perpetual obedience, partly, (to conclude) that
so many as possibly we can, we may bring, not only by our tongue, but also
by the sanctimonie of our whole life, unto Christ, and confirm such as are
won more and more in his faith. This is my description of faith; and that
plenarie; and composed of all his causes and principal effects: the singular
parts whereof are in a manner formerly proved.

First; that it is a virtue or efficacy, and therefore a certain habit, as
formerly is manifested in the first partition of faith; where faith was divided
into Habit and Act. And it is vulgarly held in opinion, That Faith, Hope, and
Love, be termed Virtues Theological. And not only Bucer, but likewise many
other, do often so define faith, as they call it to be a gift of God, and a
work of the Holy Spirit, in the mind of the Elect, whereby they believe the
Gospel of Christ. Therefore there is a discrepance between the gift whereby we
believe, and the very motion of the mind and action of believing. Nay more in
Disput. Ratis^onensi page 443. the same Bucer does ratify that definition of
faith, wherein it is said, That Faith is a virtue celestial and freely
infused. Again, page 445. he concludes the definition of faith, saying*
Faith therefore, whereby we believe God and are justified, what can it be else
but that efficacy celestially inspired, that doctrine and testification of the
holy Spirit, whereby we embrace and willingly receive the proffered promise of
remission of sins. Virtue likewise is it called of the Philosophers, which
makes his subject good: so Tull^^ de finibus; Virtue is that efficacy,
whereby the thing whereof it is a Virtue, is made perfect. Now Faith truly
makes him good and perfect whose heart it possesses: for i^ makes men ^ust,
it purifieth the heart etc. Therefore it is a virtue.

Secondly, living and perpetual. These likewise being two qualities essential
to Faith, and expressing the nature thereof, were before demonstrated, cap. de
fide.

Thirdly, infused. This is added, that difference may be put between virtues,
either by nature ingraffed, or attained by study, and those which are given
from Heaven above.

Fourthly, from the Father. This is annexed, to give notice from whence, as
from the first fountain, faith issues, that is, from our Father: for he is
the fountain, as of Divinity so of all virtue, and all good. James 1. Every
good giving and every perfect gift is from above, descending from the Father of
Lights.

Fifthly, for Christ his sake. For no good thing is conferred upon us but ^or
Christ. And he by his Passion me^^^ed to the Elect, as salvation and life
eternal, so also Faith whereby they receive salvation a^^ life.

Sixthly, by the Holy Ghost. That the immediate and officaci^^s cause efficient
of faith in us may be expressed, and that it may be vanderstood that the
outward preaching of the word suffices not, and the force of our free will as
the Pelagia^ supposed, but that the inward operation of the holy spirit is
necessary to beget faith in us. For as the love of God is spread abroad in our
hearts, not by free will which arises out of us, as says Augustine, but by
the spirit which is given unto us: so also faith is infused into our hearts by
the holy Spirit and not by freewill.

Seauenthly, freely. That all our merit may be excluded, and that faith may be
acknowledged to be a free gift of God, as the Scriptures do in every place
testify.

Eighthly, into the hearts of the Elect. For true faith is peculiarly ^^uen to
the Elect, as both Augustine and Bucer do teach every where according to the
scriptures, thereupon it is called by Paul, the faith of the Elect. Neither
does it only possess the mind, but principally the heart.

Ninthly, that is ours. That is adjoined, That every of us might believe that
he is of the number of the Elect, and that we should not repute our selves
secluded out of their society.

Tenthly, whereby we are persuaded, that that which is proposed etc. This is
the first effect of Faith infused, that it should persuade that to be the word
of God, which indeed is the word of God: heerevppon it is termed of the
Gr^cians (...), of persuading. For we cannot receive and assent unless we be
first persuaded that it is the word of God.

Eleuenthly, The whole, both Law and Gospel, this is the matter of faith,
whereupon it is occupied. For faith does believe not only the Gospel* but
also the law to be the word of God, and it* does receive and embrace as well
the Law as the Gospel.

Twelfthly, as the word of God. For although it be preached of men, yet faith
entertaineth it not as of men, but as it is the very word of God as the Apostle
says*

Thirteenthly, with an undoubted and constant assent. For it is the property of
true faith to exclude doubtfulnes: whereupon i^ is also called a full
persuasion: for* it is the evidence of things not seen. Heb. 11. ^. (with
constant assent) is added, for that true faith does not now assent, and then
dissent; but at all times and constantly gives her assent, sometime indeed
more steadfastly; sometime more weakly; yet it believes constantly. F^r it
never reiectet^ the word of God as false.

Fourteenthly, And so we receive as by the Law. Here are expressed the
special effects of faith; and first such effects as it begets in v^ by the
view and assent to the Law of God; for these effects are 4. well known to all:
Whereof the first is the knowledge of sin; the next a sense of Gods anger
against sin, the third, despair of our own strength; from hence that we
perceive the Law to be spiritual, and to exact most perfect obedience, and our
selves to be carnal, and fold under sin; the fourth, is the desire of the
mediator. For it is our Schoolmaister, leading to Christ.

Fifteenthly, And by the Gospel. For these are principal effects of faith
which it produces in the Elect, even from hence, for that it looks (with a
single eye) into the Gospel of Christ. The first is the true knowledge of him
who is immediately published in the Gospel, that is, Jesus: that he is very
Christ, God and man, in respect of his person; the Redeemer in regard of his
office; alone, for that he only paid the price; together with the Father and
the holy Spirit (c^mmon* ^o both) our Savior. For although he alone paid the
price, and in that respect properly is the sole Mediator, yet he alone does
not save, that is justify, regenerate, bless, but jointly with the Father and
the Holy Spirit; perpetual, because he continues the work of our salvation
already begun.

So that Faith effects, that we do acknowledge by Christ, even the Father
to be our Father, and the Holy Spirit, as him by whom, dwelling within us, we
are regenerate and sanctified.

The second effect is; That by this faith we do not only acknowledge this our
only Savior to be our God, but withal so acknowledged we embrace him, even
with true love and reverence, even as our God, our Father, and Savior.
Herewith is joined our confidence, touching remission of sins, and hope of
plenarie atta^nement of life eternal, by the mercy and goodness of God, and for
the merits of Jesus Christ.

The third, is invocation; which arises out of knowledge, confidence, and hope.

The fourth; the study of observing the Law and will of God: this flows
immediately from the love, and our reverence toward God*

Sixteenthly: And that for his name sake. Here be three ends of ou^
obedience, and study of good works. The first, is Gods glory; the next, is
the testification of our fillall adoption and faith; the third, the salvation
of the Elect: but of them* who as yet are without, that they may come unto
Christ; and of them which are within, that they may be preserved in Christ.

This is a brief portraiture of faith. But yet, if need require, I will more
fully explain it, and confirm it by sin testimonies of scripture.

I do speak of this faith, when I do speak of faith, specially in this
question of the perseverance of the Saints in faith: from which I contend that
the Saints can never totally fall away: for that they do not utterly loose that
root, that is the virtue or force infused, which some call Habit; others the
seed, for the word of God which it retains; neither do they utterly shake
off all the fruits thereof, for that God does both the one and the other
perpetually preserve in them, for his promise sake, and the merit and
intercession of Christ. I do not follow the definition of some most learned
men, who do so define faith, as that they say it is a confidence in the mercy
of God promised for the son of Gods sake. For although I do^ not dislalow this
definition, yet is it not plenarie. And although this fiducie be inseparable
from true faith* yet fiducie to be one thing, and ^aith another, the Apostle
plainly teaches 3. ad Ephesians. saying; In whom (or by whom) Jesus Christ we
have boldness and entrance (adding withal) with confidence, by faith in him. The
Apostle calls fiducie (...), and faith (...) and makes that the effect of
this. Likewise the definition of faith Hebr. 11. does more largely extend it
self then the name of fiducie. And Bucer in lib^ d^ Reconcil. Eccles. in
articul. de Iustif does plentifully declare, that faith does differ from
fiducie, although both of them be inseparably ^o^o^ned together.

For this cause therefore I rather make choice to follow B^^^^r* by so defining
of faith, that I should call it an efficacy or virtue freely infused into the
hearts of the Elect etc then to call it a fiducie o^ confidence.

Of Grace.
GRACE, ^ol^arr^ as concerns (...) is present controversy* first is taken
for that aeternall favor of God, wherewith he did dignifie us from all
aeternitie before all other Nations; that verily he should Elect us in Christ,
unto life eternal, after calling in due time, justifying and glorifying us.
This Grace is called (by another name) that everlasting love wherewith God has
embraced us in his Son Christ. Of this Grace elsewhere most frequently, but
especial. 2. Tim. 1. He has called us with an holy calling, not according to
our works, but according to his purpose and grace, which is given us in
Christ, before all times, and n^w manifested by the appearing of our S^^i^r. He
says it was given us, yea before we were borne, but as then not manifested. Of
this grace I speak in the Question of perseverance, and contend, that all, to
whom before all times (as the Apostle speaks) this Grace was given, shall
never fall away; for that as that grace was given before they were borne;
neither the sins where in^^ God did foresee they should fall, could let him,
but he would bestow this grace upon them. Now therefore there is nothing now
that can effect, that they should fall away from this Grace. For it is nothing
else but the free love of God, eternal and unchangeable toward his Elect. And
this Grace is in God himself, and therefore is it immuble; in us is only the
knowledge, sense, and effects thereof: therefore (says the Apostle) which was
given to us. before all worlds, but now manifested by the coming of our
Savior.

Grace therefore is taken secondarily singular grace of God, neither an^ they
utterly deprived of this grace* for the Holy Spirit does preseru^ that in the
Elect, even until the last breath, as hereafter I will declare* Also Remission
of sins is a grace^ for it is freely given, and from this they never fall,
because the sinner once remitted shall never be again imputed unto them. For
his gifts and calling are without repentance* Romans 11. The fear of God also*
hope, and Love toward God, ar^ singular graces; neither do the Elect wholly
loose these graces; neither are they ever hayled to this pass that they
contemn God* as Epicures do, or that they utterly despair of God, o^ hate
him. Finally, all those effects which in no wise are seperable from faith, are
called Graces; and mine endeavor is, that they can never in the Elect be
utterly extinguished: for that if faith can never be totally extinct, neither
can such effects as are inseperably joined with faith be utterly wasted
Therefore I do understand, touching all these Graces, in this Question, That
the Saints cannot fully fall from Grace.

But yet there be other gifts of the Holy Spirit, and effects of that first
Grace, for that they are freely given, but yet so, as that they are in no wise
necessarily and always adharent with this virtue of faith: as a greator
purity of conscience and heart; as a^acri^^e of spirit, proceeding from a good
conscience; as great boldness in publishing and confessing Christ; as an
Heroical fortitude of mind in bea^ing every g^^euous Cross; as a vehement
and singular taste of the goodness and favor of God in us; as free and
cheerful invocation of God; and many other effects of faith, which are as
most splendent flames, shining out of a burning fire Certainly as the flames of
fire are extinguished either by withdrawing the ^ewell, or by infusion of
water, although the whole fire at once and together be not utterly extinct; and
as the beams of the Sun, by interposition of thick clouds, are expelled out
of of our Horison, although the whole light of the Sun be not utterly taken
away: so these effects of says, formerly mentioned, and of the holy Spirit (by
sin committed by consent) that they so can be removed out of the minds and
hearts of the Saints, yet (...) through the divine promise, the substance of
faith abiding, I never did, neither can it be denied: seeing both the examples
of the Saints in Scripture do praegnantly demonstr^^^ this, and every
sanctified man does experimentally find this in h^^selfe. David, although he
did not utterly loose his faith, neither all fear of God, neither all
confidence and hope in God, neither yet all love of God; for neither at any
time did he either wholly reject the word of God, or despair of Gods mercy,
or hated God; yet that he had lost many other things, both himself confesses
in the repetition of them, and prays for the restitution thereof. The purity
of conscience and heart, which before his sin he enjoyed, he confesses to
have lost, while he prays to be washed and cleansed from his iniquity.
Psalm. 51. Wash me from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. Again,
Purge me with Hysope, and I shall be pure, wash me and I shall be whiter then
snow. Again, Create in me, O God, a new heart; That joy of mind wherein
formerly he rejoiced in the Lord, and did often exhort others likewise to
rejoice, saying, Rejoice in the Lord, and be glad Oye righteous, he confesses
to be lost after his fall, whilst he requesteth restitution thereof
himself, saying; Fill me full of joy and gladness, and make my bones which
theu have smitten to reioyee. Again, Restore to me the joy of my salvation.
The sense whereby, through faith, he perceived God to be favorable to him,
and (as it were) with a cheerful countenance to smile upon him, that it was
extinct, and turned into trembling, wherewith he was throughout shaken, while
he saw God to be angry with him, and to frown ange^ly upon him, he confesses
saying; Turn thy (angry) face from my sins, and blot out all mine
iniquities. Likewise that free will of spirit, whereby before voluntarily and
with a willing heart he constantly followed the things that were right; after
(...) sin if it was not utterly extinct, yet notwithstanding to be
exceedingly decayed, insomuch that afterward he fainted in the things of God,
himself teaches when (...) says, Confirm me with thy principal and free
spirit.

Therefore of these and such like effects of grace, and faith which are even
not unworthily tea^^ed graces, for that they are freely given, and are effects
of Gods grace, I do not speak in this controversy of the perscuerance of the
Saints in faith, and in grace: for I am not ignorant that these fruits are
(...) lost; but my discourse is both of that first grace, and of the graces of
the second kind.

Of Saints.
NOW hear you what I will understand by the name of Saints. This name (Saint)
when it is attributed to Men, first it is generally taken for all them who have
consecrated themselves to the true God, and given their names to Christ, and
do profess him and his religion, whether it be before God truly and
sincerely, or if it be before men only. So the people of Israel, though they
were not all truly sanctified, yet are they called totally holy. So Paul
calls all Saints, who have given their name to Christ. Romans 1. So 1. Pet. 2.
All Christians to whom he writ, he calls an holy nation, royal Priesthood.
But specially (...) properly this name is taken for th^^ which are not only
called; but (...) in verity Saints in the sight of God* And they are thus
described in scr^^ture. Who being elected from all ^n^^nitie in Christ, and
after in time (...) called to Christ, according to purpose^^ and endued with
true faith in Christ and truly justified by Christ, (...) regenerate by the
holy Spirit, (...) and i^graffed into Christ, and so (...) graffed, that now
sin has no d^^^nion in them, but Christ; neither (...) they walk any more
after the flesh, (...) after the spirit, and they are so (...) by the spirit of
Christ, and prescrued, as they are both affected with a perpetual love of the
Law of God, and withal they continually bend their care for the keeping
thereof; and on the contrary, inflamed with a constant hatred of sin, they
likewise continually fight against sin: and they do so fight that although
at some time through the remiss^ne^ of the strength of the spirit, and
debilitie of faith, and by the excessive violence of the flesh and sin, in the
battle (as it were unhorsed) they be thrown upon the ground, and so suffer
and do many things they would not, and many things they would do they cannot
perform; yot forthwith being set on foot by the force of the spirit, they
redm^egra^e the combat again. By these marks plentifully in holy Scripture
are the true Saints pourtraited; specially in the Psalms, and Epistles of
Paul: Neither have the godly Fathers, and L^ther, and Buc^r, defined in any
o^^er sort who be Saints in verity for neither are the Reprobates at any time
truly Saints, seeing neither the sancti^ie of CHRIST is at all imparted or
imputed unto them, neither are they adorn^d at any time with true and
justifying faith, (...) at any time by the holy Spirit truly sanctified and
regenerate, neither at any time do they truly l^^^ the Law of God, or hate
sin, but are both servants to sin, and liu^ in sin, and dye in sin.

Finally, there be three sorts of m^^ in a Christian Commonweal, who as
Christians and disciples of Christ so also they are called Saints. The first
kind^s of them who indeed profess and confess Christ, and with (...) sometime
preach Christ, but in deed^ do always deny him, that is they do never
unitate him either inwardly in mind, or outwardly in manners* These never begin
truly to live according to Christ* neither truly before God, ^or fainedly
before me^ these therefore, although they (...) termed Saines, yet are they
(...) Saints indeed, neither before, God not the Church.

Another sort is of them, who (...) only confess and profess Chrish (...)
words, but also in deeds, and in (...) honest fashion of living, and that
before men and the whole (...) of Christ: Add withal, even for many years,
and sometime almost (...) their life long, they do so make (...) press
declaration, as that no body would otherwise ^ensure them, but that they were
to be recounted among the true Saints: yet in the mean time fraud lurketh in
their hearts, they never in the while love Christ from the heart, they are
never delighted in the law of God truly* or hate sin heartily. And therefore
before God, who knows the hearts of all men, and sounds what is in man,
they are never Saints in verity. Thereupon it falls out that they do not
persevere unto the end in their hypocritical sanctity. These men then begin to
lead a life according to Christ before men, but because* they never begin
truly* before God, therefore do they neither hold out unto the end before the
Church in ^^eur (...) all ^^ctity of life* Therefore although they may be called
Saints before the Church for ^ season, y^^ they ne^^^ truly sanc^^^ied before
God.

The third (...) of such who because they are elected to ^^ue holiness and
thereunto are effectually called, truly justified, and truly regene^^^^ and
sanctified, and reple^ished with true that is lively and perpetual (...) and
have the law of God written (...) their hearts, finally, are never des^^tute
totally of the holy Spirit, therefore after they are once truly e^dued with
true faith, and engra^^^^ into Christ, have beg^n to hate (...) truly, love
Gods Law, and labor from the heart for true and christi^^^ sanctity* in that
their study they d^ so continently proceed, as (...) though at some time they
(...) ^aint-hear^ed, yet do they never utterly give it oue^, but therein
pers^uere unto the end. For so does Christ define such a^ are truly Saint^,
^^der the name of his disciples, John ^, (...) are (...), if y^ (...) in my
(...) which words (...) considera^ely (...), T^. 7. (...) et (...) chap 19
(...) determines, those only to be (...) the disciples of Christ, the sons
of God, and Saints, who conti^^^^ to the end in the word and faith of Christ.
Lastly (says he C^l. 1336.) The Lord the Savior says, If y^e abide in my
word ye are verily my disciples. Was Judas to be numbered amongst the who did
not continue in his word? are they to be reckoned amongst them, of whom the
Gospel thus speaks? when the Lord had commanded his flesh to be eaten, and
his blood to be drunk the Evangelist says. These thing as sp^ke he in the
Si^agogus, teaching in Caper^^um: Many therefore of his Disciples hearing,
said, this is a hard saying who can hear it? Jesus therefore knowing within
himself that his disciples (...) at this, said unto them; does this offend
you? if therefore you shall see the son of man, ascending where he was befare?
it is the spirit that quickens, but the flesh profits nothing at all, the
words which I spoke unto you are spirit and life. But there ^e some of you
^e^re that do not believe. For Jesus knew from the be (...) who should
believe, and who should betray him: and he said, therefore I say unto you, None
can come to me, unless it be given him of (...) father. Upon this many of
his Disciples went away, and did not now (...) with him. Were not they even
called disciples? as the Gospel speaks; and yet were they not true disciples
for that they did not abide in his word, according to that his saying, If ye
abide in my word then are (...) verily my disciples, Because therefore they had
not perseverance, as they were not true disciples of Christ, so they were not
true sons of God, even when they seemed so to be, and were so called. We
therefore do call the elect both disciples of Christ and the sons of God,
because they are so to be called, whom being regenerate we do perceive to live
religiously: but then are they in verity as they are called, if they abide in
that for which they be ^^ called: but if they have not perseverance, that is,
if they do not persist in that wherein they Begun, they are not truly called,
for that they are not that which they are called. For with him they are not
that, so whom it is known what they will be, that is, of good, evil. For this
cause; the Apostle, when he had said, we know that to them that love God, all
things work for good, knowing that some do love God, and do persevere
therein to the end, he presently added, to them which are called according to
purpose: for such do continue in the love of God unto the end, and those who
for a season go astray, return again, that they may be brought unto the
end. These things S. Augustine.

Therefore under the name of Saints, whom I do understand according to the
description of the Scripture, and definition of Christ, thus you have, viz.
them, to whom because they are called of purpose, and beloved of God by an
everlasting love, and they like wise do never desist to love God, all even
their sins, by the grace of God, d^^ work together for their good, ^^
Augustine says de corrept. and gra^^^^ c. 9. as the Apostle says of them.
(...). 8. To them that love God, all things work for good, to them that are
called (Saints) of purpose.

Now although by those things which I have cleared, according to the Scripture,
both touching true faith, and grace, and them that are truly sanctified; and
have confirmed the same, both by the testimonies of Augustine and Bucer also;
you may out of your most prudent judgment easily conclude, this to be so
infallible, that the Elect truly sanctified do persevere in faith, and in
grace, and therefore in Christ; as that if they do not persevere, they may not
at any hand be accounted either truly Elected, or endued with true faith, or
ever to have been true Saints. Yet because this controversy of the
perseverance of Saints, contains, besides the ^^^st and principal, many
other heads, which to the perfect knowledge hereof are of like necessity to
be known, therefore I do ^ntreat my most clement Lords, that they would not
withal disdain to read with attention, and examine with diligence, those
things also which do hereafter ensue.

CHAP. II. What things are controuerted, and what are not in this Article of
Perseverance.
NOW such things are to be removed out of the way, as are not incident to this
present Question, touching the perseverance of the Saints; and that for two
reasons: one, for that my Lords may more clearly conceive the state of the
controversy and so better perceive even the arguments, whereby I do confirm
my determination, and more easily see whether they conclude (...) another is,
that when they shall see wherein the controversy between us stands, and
where not, they may withal understand what honesty and learning my
adversaries have, who obiecting against me such things, and impugning, and
condemning, as I either never avouched or called in 'question, they make
manifest that they either know nor what they say, or whereof they speak, or
that they are carried by a spirit that is good.

And first, verily here is no controversy of the faith of those hypocritical
Saints, who do so dissemble faith and piety, as with all they are in no case
ignorant of their own dissimulation; as was that Doctorall Hypocrite, who
pretended faith in Christ, and that he embraced his doctrine, and therefore
demanded of him as his Master, saying; What shall I do that I may inherit
eternal life? Luke 10. And of like quality were those, who being sent by the
Pharisees said unto Christ, Master, we know that thou are true, and to athest
the way of God truly, and carest for no man, neither respectest any man's
person. But one and other did so dissemble their faith in Christ, and
reverence, as that likewise they knew their own dissimulation thereof. So
there be many in the Christian state, who although with others they do profess
Christ, yet certainly do they know that they do not truly believe in
Christ; and all their profession of piety to be but mere simulation; which
thing even their own impious life, and firm resolution to continue in
wickedness, does confirm unto them. Of the faith of all these (or rather shadow
of faith) this present Question of perseverance of the Saints in faith, is in
no respect to be understood.

Neither yet is it to be understood of the temporary faith of that other sort
of hypocrites, that is, of th^^, who seem to themselves so ^^ believe from the
heart and truly in Christ, and by a certain (...) sanctity of life, do both
^^gui^^ themselves and others; (...) much ^^ at no hand they do acknowledge
their hypocritical faith, though God himself does well (...) that it is not
altogether in (...) and truth. For there be many, in whose hearts, fraud,
hypocrisy, i^pietie, does so lie hid, that even themselves cannot find it out
(...) knowledge it, but God only. I^^. 17. The heart of man is wicked and
^^searchable, and who shall know ^^ Of this kind were they of whom Ioh. 2.
Many, seeing the signs which he did, believed in him: but Jesus did not
commit himself unto them for that he knew them all, and had no need that any
should testify of man, for he knew what was in man: as though ^^e should have
said, They were ignorant of their incredulity, ^^rking in them, and of fraud
and hypocrisy lying secretly in their hearts, but yet Christ knew their
qualities, and whether they did truly believe or not, ^or he alone knew what
was in man. Such like are all they who are called of the Lord (...)
temporizers: for their faith is not sincere, therefore not true, though both to
themselves and others they appear to be endued with true and sincere faith.
But that their faith is not found, nor justifying, I will ratifye hereafter
both by the manifest testimonies of holy Scripture, and of Luther and Bucer.
Wherefore seeing neither their faith is true nor sincere, neither their sanctity
and piety; themselves cannot be true Saints, or truly religious. And our
Question is of the true faith of true Saints.

Neither yet is the controversy touching the true Saints as we sp^k^ of late,
whether the Elect even after they be justified and (...) and sanctified, and
endued with true faith and the holy Spirit, can s^^^^, and do often fall into
sin, For thi^ i^ without al question, for that no m^^ is ignorant what the
Apostle write^^ of himself and all the regenera^^* 1. Ioh* 1. If we shall say
that ^^ ^^^^ no sin, we deceive our selves and ^^^ truth is not ^^ us S.
Hier. 2. To* (...) beth this error to Iouin^^, and does refute him most
learnedly by many Texts of scripture, lib. 2. adu^rs^^ (...). But St.
Augustine* (...) 6. de haresib^^ ad Quod-vnit-(...) here is* 88. does attribute
this h^^^^ sie to Pelag^^^ the Monk. But yet Iren^us long before Augustire and
Hiero^^ does reckon this haer^s^^ amongst the errors of Valen^i^us (...) his
fellows lib. 1. For whereas of othermen, some they called (...) earthly, some
(...), natural, themselves they termed spiritual, upon whom ^o sin nor
impiety could befall

Neither in very deed is this (...) controversy, whether the Elect and Saints
do sin, only while they feel the flames of Concupiscence, which to be
incident to all the Saints while they remain in ^his mortal flesh, none does
doubt of; or whether even sometime they fall by some consent into diverse
sins, and those most grievous, being committed as well against the first as
second Table. For we all do know that David and Peter did commit most notorious
crimes, the one against the second, the other against the first table, and that
by consent and voluntarily, but yet, as hereafter I will declare, not by
plenary consent. This is the error of c^rtaine Anab^ptists and Libertines who
affirm, That although they do likewise feel the affections of the flesh, yet
they never so consent thereunto, as that they truly and properly do sin.

Neither also is this the controversy, whether the Saints sinning in this
manner, that is, with consent, do disple^se God, and provoke hi^ wrath against
them. For all godly men do grant, that God is offended with all men's sins as
well Godly as ungodly, and that God displeasure is provoked against (...)
sinners, whether godly or ungodly as well the Elect as Reprobate, (...) none is
ignorant what is pronounced from God by the Prophet, (...) of the sons of
God, Psalm. 88. (...) if my children for sake my l^^, I (...) zit their
iniquities with the r^d, Li^^wise those most grievous (...) wherewith we do
read, in (...) Scriptures that the Godly have (...) punished for their sins,
and we every day do see them punished, (...) make proof that God is offended
with all, and the sins of all, (...) the Scriptures speak, provoked to (...).

And from hence also it is m^^ifest, that it is without controuers^^^ whether
the Saints by those (...) in some sort are become the e^^mies of God, and
fallen from th^^ grace of God; that is, in that (...) as sons are said to be
(...) from the fa^^ur of their (...) children when they disple^se their (...)
and do now in cense them (...); are said after a manner to (...) of the (...)
of their (...) in this respect, that is ^^ say) That although they have (...)
cast of^ their fatherly affection (...) and their children* neither yet (...)
th^i^ r^solution of o^^^ining ^^d declaring them to be the heirs (...) their
good^* yet taking offense ^^ the sinne^ of their children, they (...) turn
their fathe^ly cockerings (in (...)) in^^ (...) severity, and (...) effect of
love into such (...) as (...) utterly ha^^^ull* for (...) bitterly ^^full* and
be ^old (...) with (...) them (...), and as (...) they do most (...) ^ear
(...) only excepted that they (...) life away. (...) were (...) in very deed
(...) and quite (...) their (...) of God (...) ^a^d to be made by their sins
(...) of God, and to be (...) from the grace of God* ^^^ (...) God, though ^^^
do neu^^ (...) his fatherlike ^ffection (...) them, o^ change his purpose of
(...) unto the^ by Christ (...) life, yet being displ^^s^d with (...) sinn^^
the effects of his lo^^ (...) change into the effects of a (...) hat^^d; hat^ed
I say (...) agai^^^ (...) children* b^t hi^ (...) both internally in (...)
(...) externally, of such is do (...) ^^wardly while he do^^ bring ^o (...)
that they feel a (...) them, God to be ^ngry (...) them, and themselves made
(...) of death* outwardly again* (...) he works so that they have ^^^^rience
of God^ (...) against (...) in the (...) of (...) pody and thinge^ (...)
T^^^^fore, hereof there i^ (...) for that both I ^y s^l^^ (...) both* know and
(...) ^ that (...) when his Saints do sin, (...) angry with their sins, and
does hate sin in them, and punish them most extremely, and yet not ^s enemy
to the Saints. For he always does correct them as a father, but as an enemy
of wickedness and vice even in his children; and therefore in a sort, as before
I have explaned it may be said that the children are fallen from their fathers
favor, although he yet neither cease to be a father unto them, neither do
they cease to be his children, and therefore never vtte^ly can it be truly
said that they are fallen from their fathers grace* which might very truly be
said* if either he should cease to be a father unto them, and ^ast off hi^
fatherly affection toward them, (...) alter his decree of making them* heirs
of life eternal; and that they should cease to be his children, and loose all
title to eternal life* which without blasphemy cannot be spoken.

Neither yet is the doubt whether the Saints, by those their sins, as much as
in them lies, ^^^ (...) the sentence of God touching everlasting death, and
whethe^ they (...) made guilty of death aeternall (...) there is none but
knows the s^^tence of the just Judge, Cursed ^^ ^uery one that does not
continue i^ (...) things that are written ^^ this (...) do them; therefore all
whosoeu^^ they be, who do violate the (...) of the Lord in their own (...)*
and as much as lies in them, (...) accursed and liable to death (...). But the
case is altered, wheth^^ these sins are imputed* by God unto the Saints unto
condemnd (...) on, Paul, Romans 8. does give his v^^dict in this manner; There is
^^ ^^^demnation to them which ^^^ is Christ Jesus, which w^lks not after the
(...) but aft^r the Spirit* for such ^^^ the Saints* whereof I speak in* this
Question.

Wherefore it also* is not in Question, whether* the Saints by these their
sins do so displease God their father, and so provoke his (...) ger against
them, and so incur the sentence of eternal death, as that they have need of
repentance, and a new act of faith, for their reconciliation to God, and for a
new pardon of sin to be obtained, and thereupon even a new remission to be
obtained of the punishment due to sin. For it is by all men yielded unto, who
are truly godly and truly learned, that the Saints have need of a new Act of
faith, and repentance, to attain new forgiveness of a new sin, according to
that saying* most vulgar in Scripture; Men are justified by faith, and sins
remitted: which speeches, when we make mention of men of years, are always
understood of actual faith, that is, of the Act of faith* whereby we do not
only in mind conceive, that by Christ our sins are remitted, but also we
apprehend and rereceiue in will, this forgiveness to be signified and offered in
the Gospel* For this is most infallible and most true, that God does never to
the Elect impute their sins to aeternall damnation, and that for^ three
causes: The first, is h^^ eternal and immutable love, wherewith from
aeternitie he has embraced his Elect in Christ, and does continen^ly
prosequte without intermissio^^ for there is not love when sinne^ are imputed
unto condemnation. The next, is the perpetual merit of Christ whereby all the
debts of the Elect are plenarily paid, and the handwriting of the debts
cancelled, insomuch that they cannot again by imputed unto condemnation to the
Elect. The third, is the perpetual ^^ si^nce of the Holy Spirit in the h^^ts
of the Elect, and conservation of ^^^ seed of faith, and regeneration. For
although that this be most certain, that God does never impute their sinne^ to
the Elect, both in regard of his everlasting love toward the^ and for the
perpetual merit of Christ imparted unto them, and for the continual
inhabitation of the Holy Spirit in their hearts; yet this withal is most true
and certain, That the Saints being fallen, though but by infirmity, into any
sin, the new remission of that new sin, without a new Act of faith, and
true repentance, that is, without a new knowledge and apprehension of faith,
cannot again understand and perceive that new sin to be remitted unto them*
the Father to be reconciled unto them, and the punishment due to sin to be
remitted. For this is an A^iome most infallible in Christian Religion. New sin
to stand in need of new remission, and new remission to be attained by new
faith, that is, a new Act of faith apprehending that remission.

Neither yet is the Question, whether the Saints by these their sins do
disturb, that is, as the Apostle speaks Ephesians. ^. do make sad, both the
Holy Spirit dwelling within them, as also their own Spirit, that is, the
inward man. For this is a thing confessed, and all the Saints do feel it when
they sin and after they sin, that their spirit, mind^^ and conscience is
troubled and wounded: for (as it were) a certain violence is offered to the
spirit and conscience when we sin by consent. From thence arises
perturb^tion of mind. Now because the Holy Spirit inhabiting in the hea^^^ of
the godly, and guiding and (...) porting the inward man, from (...) it comes
to pass, that our spirit being disturbed, that is, the (...) regenerate and
inward, the Holy Spirit inhabiting, is also by Paul said to be grieved, by a
form ^^ speech borrowed from men. For thi^ disturbance David likewise
complains Psalm. 29. Thou did (...) thy face from me O God* and I was
troubled: by which words he does manifest, as Augustine also observes, That
the Saints both do f^ll into sin, when God does but a little turn away his
face, and does leave them to their own will, and so they are troubled; as also
which God again turns his countenance and aspect upon them, then (...) they
again finally repurged and strengthened. So likewise it fell out i^ Peter.

And from hence likewise it is evident, that the Question is not, Whether the
Saints by those sinne^ do suffoc^^^ that ^rdencie of Spirit in them* and do
repress the good motions thereof, and (as it were) extinguish the good
motions, Actions, and flames thereof, and therefore do ^ue^ weaken faith it
self, and oppress prayer, fiducie, joy, and peace of conscience, and other
effects of Faith. For these effects of sin are those perturbations of mind,
whereof the Apostle speaks. Eph^s. 4. Make not sad the spirit; and of whom
David, Thou did turn thy face from me, and I was troubled. Of this weakening
and diminution, and extinguishing of faith, the spirit, and love* is that Apoc.
^. to be understood, I have a few things against thee, for that thou have left
thy first love: but not totally* for he had commended him (...) for his
constancy; saying, Th^^ (...) suffered for my name, and (...) n^^ (...):
presently he adds, but I (...) somewhat against thee, that then (...) left
thy first laue; he says not (...) lutely (love) but (first) that is, th^^
ardent (love) therefore it was ab^ted and languishing, and not utterly
extinguished.

Finally, the Question is not, whether also, so much as in them is, the Saints
do utterly extinguish all the fire of faith, love, and the Spirit* For this is
apparent, that the Saints, while they sin by any consent, d^e commit such
sins for which they do worthily deserve to be dispoil^^ utterly of al faith
and assistance of the spirit. Neither if faith and the spirit be preserved in
them, it is so preserved by their merits o^ strength* but they are continued
for the merit^ and intercession of Christ, and promise of Gods mercy, by the
operation of the Holy Spirit.

Neither did I ever either teach or think otherwise in your Schools touching
these things, as I have now formerly secluded from this Question, then is here
manifested by me; which my Praelections in writing do plainly testify.

Therefore let such consider with what conscience they did so, who now first,
viz. after eight years space wherein I have both taught and disputed in your
School, as though I had taught in many points even flat contrary ^o the
things before remembered, every where have falsely ^ccused, traduced, and
calumniated me being innocent, and now for many years a Professor of sound
and Orthodoxall doctrine; and that confidently, for that they saw me a
stranger, ignorant of the Germai^e tongue, destitute of the popular favor, and
let likewise, lest by any means, as I could, I should at leastw^se
maintain the truth and my reputation in the School: I say (such let them look
into their conscience) who being a Christian man, a professor of the
Scriptures, and a member of the Church of Christ, with grievous calumniations
above on^ year and an half, have traduced me with all men, and would not at
any time vouchsafe me conference: such as be elected, and either of ignorance
or infirmirie have sinned, I do pray for repentance for them to the Lord: the
rest, which are not the Lords ( for the Lord knows ^^^ be his) I do summon
before the Tribunal of the most High God* for God is a just Judge, and it
(...) fearful thing to fall into the ^an^^ of the living God.

CHAP. III. The first Question, touching a double Man in the Regenerate.
Whether every sanctified man, and regenerate, does consist of a double man,
that is, inward and outward?

NOW I come to the matter^ in controversy, which summarily are comprised in
five Questions: for my primarie Antagonist did collect this also out of my
Praelections, and condemn it, as may be seen in the Theses objected by him
against me* likewise in the end of his speech against the Epilogue of my former
Oration made in the Chapte^ ^^^se, he (...) these words: Nihilominus tamen
hanc qui facit Zanchius, etc. Notwithstanding I do asseuere as false and
monstrous that distinction which Zanchius makes in the fifth proposition,
touching that perseverance of the Saints; between the double Man of the
Regenerate; and that the Regenerate do sin only in the flesh, and not with
the whole will and the whole heart. These things he; Whereby every one
understands what he does condemn in my doctrine; Verily, That the Regenerate
consists of a double (...) that they in sinning do not sin, according to
the spirit, but according to the flesh, and therefore (...) with full and
plenarie consent of will.

Therefore touching that distinction, I do affirm it to be Apostelicall, and
most ancient in the Church, of God; and that by the judgment of all the
learned, and men of Go^^ insomuch that I cannot but wonder how it should come
to pass, there Doctor in Divinity should (...) this distinction monstrous.
Now what I meant by the name of inward and outward man, I explained in the
Schools an hundredth times, that is to say the inward Man to be the whole Man,
as he is borne of God and renewed by the Holy Spirit, and the same whole Man,
as it is borne of Adam, corrupt, and depraved, to be called the outward Man:
the one whereof the Scriptures do call the n^w; and the other, the old Man.
For so all men of learning do interpret, and (amongst others) Bucer* in Epist.
a^ Romans 7 and Ephesians. 3. although even this interpretation of the inward
out-outward Man, as though it were only mine, mine adversaries have impugned.
Put of this distinction there be many testimonies in the Apostle Romans 7* I
delight in the Law of GOD, according to the inward (...) for I see one Law of
my members rebelling against the (...) of my mind. Who in this place cannot
see in the Apostle, being Regenerate, ^ double man, inward; and outward? Romans
6. (...) old man ^^ also true (...). The old man (in the Apostles ^^^oning) in
the whole man (...) Adam concept both in soul and body. (...) off the old
(...) and put on the new. What is the (...) the same man totally, as he is
renewed and regenerate (...) Christ, Ephesians. 7. That his might (...) you
according to the (...) of (...), to be strengthened in (...) holy spirit ^^ the
inward (...) which place Bucer: (...) (says he) the inward (...) man
reformed, as by the (...) understands the (...) man; and (...), and (...)
ward is that which (...) calls ^ow, and the (...), which (...) are old. Thus
Bucer (...) putting off the old man, and p^^ting on the ^ow. (...)* The old man
of faith he (...) whole (...), as it is brought into the world, and (...) do
bring it with us from the womb of our Mother, without the holy Spirit, which
is called flesh, Col. 3. Thus Bucer. Therefore it is apparent, That this
distinction is not monstrous.

QVEST. II. The manner how the Saints do sin willingly.
COncerning the next point, they condemn this Proposition as false and
monstrous, That the Saints, or Regenerate, when they sin, and that willingly,
do sin not according to the inward man, that is, in that part wherein they
are ^egenerate, but only according to the outward (...), that is, in that part
wherein they are not regenerate, or ^^ sin not according to the spirit, but
according to the flesh* (...) will sin by the will of the (...) but by the
will of the (...) therefore to sin in will (...) not (...); and with consent,
but not (...); which others do hold, (...) much as not to sin with the (...)
mind: I say they do reject this P^^position, as false and horrible, as before
is said: and on the other side they contend, that the Saints, (...) they sin
with consent, as (...) and Peter sinned, that they (...) with the whole and
full will, and with all their heart. For so (...) of Peter, that he denied
(...) with the whole hear^, and with (...) whole heart abhorred Christ. (...)
therefore from hence they (...) That the Saints when they sin w^^lingly, that
they loose (...) and the Holy Spirit totally* But (...) the contrary part I
do conde^^^ this their resolution, both gene^^lly, in all men sanctified, and
specially in David and Peter, as re^^^nant to the holy Scriptures, and the
(...) and holy Fathers of the Church: but that former sentence I (...) approve
and embrace, and am ^^ereunto persuaded by many (...) both out of holy Writ,
and ^athers, and testimonies of learned (...), whereofsome I will have
subsequently set down.

If the Saints, when they sin with will, do sin with the total and full
will and with the whole heart, then they do not ^ate sin in any part or
detest and nill it; but this is most false, and dissonant to the holy writings;
Romans 7. The Apostle thus speaks of all the Saints and Regenerate, being in
his own person represented: The Law is spiritual, but I am carnal (scilic^t
according to the outward man) sold under sin; that is, under the tyranny of
original sin, as a bought servant under the tyranny of his Master; but such
servants do not love their tyrannical Masters, neither do they willing
service unto them, for they do always desire liberty. Therefore he
teaches* (...) Saints do always hate (...) when they (...) they (...) full
will from the heart. (...) he more fully explain* (...) adds; for what
(...) I allow not; that is, (...) commend it, nor in the will (...) outward man
do I (...) it, (...) of these he signifies by the (...) (...), as elsewhere
often (...); as Romans 9. ^e has (...) his people which ^e (...), (...) knew to
be his, and before (...) (...) So Mat. 11. I kn^w you not; (...) with in the
Apostle, Not that (...) I would, that I do, but that (...) that I do, that
is, that which I (...) in the will of the spirit, that (...) I do not. (...),
that (...) good, but that which I hate (...) spirit* that I do a^ (...) (...)
that which is evil. He (...) teaches that in the (...) they ^e regenerate,
there (...) an hatred of sin, although* (...) be carnal, they do always
(...) sin: which thing a little after (...) reports saying; The good that ^
^^^ld I do not, but the evil which I hate in the Spirit, that I do a^
car^all; and (by and by) for I am de^^ghted with the Law of God according to my
inward (...); for I s^^ o^^ Law in my members ^^^^lling to the Law of my mind,
and leading (...) to the Law of sin which is in my members. Lo here an
expli^a^ion and confirmation of that he spoke in the beginning, (...), when he
said, (...) ^arnall sold under sin. Therefore the Regenerate, in respect of
the inward man which hates sin, they do it not with all the heart, for that
in spirit they detest it* and are as unwilling servants unto it; hereupon they
both lamenting this misery and (...) as it were constrained, do (...) ou^
with the Apostle, O (...) that I am ^h^ shall deliver (...) from the ^^dy of
this ^^ath* and because they do (...) that they shall* certainly be (...) by
Christt* therefore* they support themselves with this hope, saying; The grace
of God, through (...) Christ our Lord. And that whi^^ (...) had taught in long
speech, ^^ ^^^cludeth after in the end of the (...), saying; Therefore I my
s^lf^ (...) my mind s^rue the law of God, (...) my flesh, the law of sin.
That the ^postle does here speak of the ^^generate; all learned men do (...)
knowledge.

And that he does not only (...) of the motions of conc^pisence, (...) likewise
of actual sins whi^^ (...) Saints sometime do commit* (...) the testimonies
of learned m^^* these words so often repeated (...) give notice; I do; I act;
I (...) serve. So also Buc^^ writes ^^^^ this place; to d^^, (says he) so^^
do take here for to l^st: but ^o (...) speaks not, he understands t^^ fact
it self which is effected by ^^^ violence of concupiscence, ^^^trary to that
which the mind^ ^^^gesteth, and the mind (...) to the Law approves. Therf^^^
if the Saints, even in sins actual, do work, as they be carnal, that
which they would not, but hate as they be regenerate and spiritual, it is
manifest that the Saints do never sin with the whole will and plenary
consent. Nay the Apostle proceeds even thus far in that place, as, because
the Saints do not sin with a full will, neither according to the inward man,
therefore he says, that when they commit sin, it is not the Saints them
selves who do or work evil, but sin it self, that is Original corruption
which is in their members. For thus he reasons; But if I do^ that which I
would not, it is now no^ I that ^^rke, that is, commit it, but sin that
dwells in me. Who may not here see, that the Apostle does fully and clearly
conclude, that the case is so far otherwise, that the Saints when they sin
actually, as they call it, ought to be deemed to sin with the whole and
ple^^^y will, and with all the heart, and as well according to the inward as
the outward m^^ (...) rather (after a sort) they (...) said, it is not they who
do (...) Sin dwelling within ther^ (...) the reason is, for that the (...)
does not cons^^t ^^ (...) and yet in the mean^ time th^^ (...) not excused from
sin, neither (...) their sinn^s extenuated. For (...) though not according to
the (...) pull part, that is the inward (...) they sin not, but only
according to the outward, and in mind (...) they serve the Law of God, but ^^
the flesh the Law of sin; yet ^^ very deed they are such as do (...) by
their own proper will.

If the Godly sin with (...) whole will, therefore whatsoe^^^ they will
according to the fl^^^ they effect it; but this contradic^^^^ the Apostle who
says, (...). 5. (...) ^^^sh ^^steth against the (...) spirit against the
fle^^: ^^ not (...) ^^^ ye^ would those ye^ do^ (...) spe^ch is to ^^e
vnderst^^d ^^ (...), for that (...) ^^ght against the spirit; that therefore
the Saints cannot always effect ^he things the^ do will according ^o the
spirit, and on the contrary, because the spirit does fight against the flesh,
therefore the Saints, what things they will according to the flesh, like-wise
they are not able to perform. Therefore as the Saints do not love God with
all their heart and all their mind, for that flesh is a ^^^ unto them: so they
love not sin, neither do sin, with the whole heart, for that the spirit
does hinder the doing thereof.

The Saints never sin of purposed malice, or (as others will) from the whole
heart, but always either of infirmity or ignorance. Now malice properly does
reside in the will and heart. Matthew. 15. Therefore the Saint^ do ^^rme with
plenary will, the whole heart, and full consent.

But that the Saints never of purposed malice do sin, but always either of
ignorance, or by infirmity, is cleared by these testimonies. Their Saints,
according to the (...) man, are delighted, in the la^^ (...) God, for that is
good Romans 7. And (...) they are delighted, in-so-much* (...) they who are not
delighted (...) are not Saints. Therefore with D^uid every holy man does truly
vouch* In the volume of this book ^^ written of m^^, that I should d^^ (...)
will, O GOD: I will (or I deligh^^* therein, for thy law is (written) wit^^^ my
heart. Psalm^. 89. For they h^^^ t^^ law of God written i^ their ^^^r^^ ^^ the
Holy Spirit. Ierem. 31. therefore do they m^ditate in the same (...). Psalm^.
1* And in their ^^^rt^^ there is no guil^. Psalm^. 32. for they are true
Isralites, in whom there is ^^ guile. Io^. 1. And they are ^ndu^d ^^^^ the
spirit of Christ, whereby ^^^y (...) ruled in the (...) ^^an, else they we^^
no* Saints. Romans. 8. And they l^^^ righteousness* and hate i^iquity. Psalm*
44. For they lo^^ the law of God* Psalm. 118. they like-wise lament with t^^
Apostle, that they are capti^^s* (...) so under sin. To. 7. How the^ can they
of destinate malice sin, and so with their whol^ hart^ Aug. To. 7. de ^orr. and
gratia, c. 9. by the example of David and Peter does teach, That all Saints,
when they sin* do sin being troubled, for that Christ does somewhat turn
away his face from them, according to that in the Psalm. 29. Thou turnedst thy
face from m^, and I ^as troubled. Now to sin being thus troubled, is not to
sin by endeavor, and of purposed malice, but rather, besides the purpose of
the mind.

Again, To. 7. qu^st. 25. in Number. he makes three sorts of sins; some of
ignorance; some of infirmity; and some of the contempt of Gods commandments,
or ^s the Scripturephras^* there is with the hand of pride. It is one thing
(says he) to contemn the commandments; another thing to esteem them as
precious; but yet either as ignorant, or surprised to do the contrary. But it
is granted, that the Saints do not sin of contempt either of God or his
commandments: the which thing ^lso (...) Mel^^cthon in* 10. Cor. 1. does
write* That they never grow into (...) picureall contempt; for they (...) law
and commandments of (...) Psal^^. 119. Now to sin of (...) tempt, and of
destinate mali^^* ^^ ^^^ one: wherefore the Saints do^ (...) sin of pr^tensed
malic^* W^^ then dare some divines write agai^^^ me. That they do sin with
(...) whole heart and plenary will?

G^^gorie. 1. To. 1. in Job* c. 34 (...) c* 11. does deliver the same (...) on,
of ignorance, of infirmity, b^ ^^deuour and of set purpose. And (...) says
that Paul did sin of ignorance, who says, But I therefore ^^tained mercy
because I did ^^ (...) Peter of infirmity, when he deni^^ Christ* and those
Jews purpos^^ and by endeavor, of whom the Lo^d speaks, if. I had not c^m^
(...) spok^n unto them, they had b^^ (...) again, they b^th saw m^, and (...)*
^^ and my father. Ioh. 15. Out of these examples he declares what it i^ to
sin of infirmity, and what of purpose, saying; for it is one thing not to do
good; another to hate the teacher of good things* ^s it is one thing to sin of
praecipitation; another to sin of deliberation. For oftentimes sin is
committed by p^^cipitation, which is yet condemned by counsel and deliberation:
for through infirmity often it chances, that we love God, and yet cannot
effect it; but to sin of purpose, is neither to do good, nor love it. But
the Saints do always effect that which is good, else no Saints* whereupon
Augustine also de corr^pt, and gratia, cap. 9. according to that of the
Apostle, To them that love God, all things do work together f^r good, to them
that of purpose are called Saints; says he; for these ( scilic^^ Saints who
are called of purpose) in this that they love God they con^^^ue out unto the
end. ^^ therefore, according to Saint Gr^gory to sin of purpose be neither to
do nor to love good; and, according to Augustine, the Saints do always love
good; for that in that which they love th^^ continue forth to the end: it i^ ^
good consequent, That the Sa^^^ do not sin of purpose, or det^^minate malice.

Luther likewise does deliver t^^ same thing, in every plac^, T^* 5* (...)
Comment mayor* in ep. ad Gal* 5. (...) these words; The work^s of t^^ (...) are
manifest. He says in (...) terms* That Da^id and Peter* (...) they committed
those (...) sins, did sin of infirmity and not of set malice. Here-vpon*
(...) (says he) speaking of the (...) says, the flesh in them does lust
(...) the spirit: therefore the desires and conflicts of the flesh will not be
^^sent, yet do they not therefore presently hurt such as feel them* But
hereof we must thus judge* it is o^^ thing to be solicited of the flesh* and
not willingly to endure the co^cupiscences thereof* but to walk in the spirit,
and to resist them* and^* and another thing to assent unto t^^ flesh, and i^
security to fulfill the works thereof, and persist in them; ^^d yet in the
mean space to dis^^^ble piety, and to brag of the spi^i^ etc. The former sort
he comfor^eth while he says, that they are ^ed by the spirit; and are under
the l^w: to the other sort he threateneth aeternall destruction. Nay sometime
it falls out* That the Saints do fall and fulfill the lusts of the flesh; as
David fell with a greiuous and terrible downfall: besides, he was the cause
of many men's murder, when his will was, that Vriah should perish in the
battle: and thereby also he gave occasion to the enemies of God, to boast
against the people of God, to adore their own Idols, and to blaspheme the God
of Israel. Peter like-wise did horribly fall, when he denied his Master. But
yet although those sins were h^inous, yet were they committed, not of the
contempt of God* or malice forethought, but of infirmity. Besides, being
admonished they do not persevere obstinate in their sins, but repented.
Therefore ^ (...) Doctor did no^ well, (...) in the Schools, that (...) Christ
with the whole (...) with his whole heart did (...) Christ. Luth^r he^^ (...)

Again, a little after th^^ (...) he faith whereforeth^ (...) sin, fall, and
even g^^ (...) but it is by ignorance* f^^ (...) they would not deny* C^^i^^
(...) loose* the Gospel. Th^se (...) Therefore neither did Peter* (...) deny
Christ* for he was (...) And if he would not willingly (...) him, therefore
did he no^ (...) with a full consent of will. (...) Buc^r every where does (...)
same doctrine; scilicet, that the (...) do never ^in with a full will or (...)
the heart, and of malice ^o^^ (...) but always of ignorance* (...) of
infirmity. Take th^se (...)

Upon Romans 7. he (...) d^eth this Question* (...) (...) at etc. How can this
he (...) That we will that which ^^ (...) and ye^ do it not; that we do ^^il
^^d ^^^ will ^^ not, ^^^ hate it* ^ay* ^^at we both do* and not do, that
which i^ ^uill? Now intending to determi^e thi^ Question* first he ^oth
inquire out* what manner man ^he Apostle speaks o^ in his own ^^ample and
summ^rily he conclu^eth* That the Apostle speaks of ^^ ^^n regenerate, who by
a true ^aith has already received the ^aw of God, and does love it* and
delight in it; but yet has no^ recei^ed such a plentiful portion of the
spirit of Christ* that he can (...) follow the same* as that he does not often
transgress against ^^* not only by concup^scence, which even faleth to men
most per^^^t, but likewise* by sliding into (...) and fi^thy offenses as be
fell ^^ D^^^^, and even to Peter before ^^ ^^^ (...) ^ more plentiful measure
of the Spirit at the feast of ^^^^coast* For there* he makes mention* of the
examples of these two men* In the next place he learcheth out* how it came to
(...) the same man being* (...) does both will and (...) (...) which he does*
The (...) That it so comes to (...) that in some man there is a (...) will;
one whereby he does (...) to the Law* another whereby (...) does that which he
(...) which follows the (...) the Law; another which is (...) knowledge
drawn from the (...) and which is of things (...) else that this so comes
to (...) for that in the regenerate* there (...) double man, inward and (...)
mind and flesh, whereof one (...) to the Law of God; the (...) to the Law of
sin* From (...) therefore it comes to pass (...) the Saints do both the
evil (...) would not and the good (...) they do not* wherefore, (...) not
with full consent, ^^^ with (...) whole will, not totally, that is (...) to the
double man.

Again in Romans 8. sect. 2. (...) (...) not li^^ after the l^sts of the flesh;
(...) teaches ou^ of the Apostle* That (...) cannot be* that they which are
^^uely Christ's and have the spirit of ^^rist, should li^e according to the
^^esh. And he f^ameth his Argu^ent in this form. Those whom the ^^irit of
Christ possesses, cannot (...) after the flesh. But they that are Christ's the
spirit of Christ poss^sseth; Therefore they that are C^rists cannot live after
the flesh, (...). Now to walk according to the flesh (...) vol^ntarily, and
with a willing and whole mind to follow the (...) of the flesh, and to obey the
l^sts thereof, with full will* Therefore the Saints do not sin with the whole
heart and ple^^ry c^^^ent of will.

Idem ^^ Mat 8* ^^^t* 2. page (...) says* Hearein the Saints in si^^i^g ^o
differ from the R^proba^e* for that they do hate that ^uill which they do, and
^resantly do dec^^ne from it* being indeed righly persuaded of God ^^d his
will: whereof it is that in mind they (...) his law, and do dete^t the ^^ill of
(...) flesh* but the wicked do love (...) evil they commit, and could (...)
perpe^ually to adh^^^ (...) but only that they f^are (...) either from God
(...)? And a (...) after he teaches, That the (...) of the ^^in^s do proceed
from (...) (...) of faith* saying, (...) ever the Elect do ^inne* it (...)
m^th. from hence, for that ^^ (...) they (...) d^fec^iue in that (...) swas^on*
Besides he faith (...) the Saints mind, wanting (...) ^^nneth into sin* the
(...) concupisc^^ce thereby turning (...) the edge thereof.

Id^^ in Mat. 12. sect. 4. page (...) has these words. Whosoever, (...) the
known truth, by (...) vol^^^^rily f^ll into (...), (...) willingly ^o sin* it
is necessary* (...) they did formerly condemn (...) truth; and that is to
(...) holy spirit. These thing^^ (...)

Whereupon it is man^fest, (...) the Saints Eleect do (...) sin against the
^oly Ghost, as (...) there teaches* therefore they never (...) mind to
impiety, after the known truth that i^* willing; scil^ce^, (...) full will
they do never sin, as (...) there does (...) what it is by relapse to fall
from the heart into impiety.

Id^^ ^ect. 4. page 308. The Elect (says he) do never (...) but of ignorance.
Again, thou s^^^^ at all times percei^e in the Elect a c^^tain^ feed of God,
and st^dy of the truth* eue^^ when they opp^g^e the truth, (...) do (...) l^^e
d^^agreeing with it. Again; ^^ many who live lewdly, being Elect, thou may
perceive a certain (...) love of right and ^^st And the^e things he writes
of the Elect, before they (...) tr^^h* or are justified how ^uch more a^e these
things and of the Elect, being now ins^^fied* wherefore of th^^ ^^e ^dd^th ^^g
309* After they have received the (...) ( ^scilicet the Elect) what they (...),
they sin therefore for that they are tur^ed out of the way by (...) lusts of
the flesh, so that they (...) not attend upon the known (...) but they never
so far d^^line, (...) they have and persecute ^^^ ^ (...) but forthwith
rather out of the la^ thereof they do begin to desie, a^^ detest, that wherein
they sinn^^*

Ide^ in Mat. 7* s^ct, 6. page (...)* Therefore a godly man thus (...) not
sin, for that he cannot be ^^uen over from the heart to (...) and sin, as
it is the manner (...) wicked; but with the Law of God in mind he shall be
still deligh^^^* for that the seed of God, of his word, and the Spirit of his
children abides with him, and for that h^^ is borne of God* yet withal* (...)
that he has no good in his (...) he does commit many things which he hate^h,
and are sinne^ (...) but because he ^^ not delighted therewith in the inward
(...) in his heart is addicted ^^ Christ* and before all things de^^^eth to b^
correspondent to the image of Christ, neither finally makes doubt, that all
things ^^^ remitted unto him for the merits of Christ, and that he shall (...)
to that lik^ne^* there shall also be no (...) unto him, although a sinner, for
that he abides in Christ* Romans 8* for God will not impute his sins unto him.
Wherefore, neither shall they be sins, as they are no debts* which the
Creditor has (...), (...) he (...)* b^ obliged, and has ye^ m^de no payment*
For which (...) he that is Christ^* as he (...)* that is, be wholly giue^^, and
studi^^ to sin, which only God imputes and accompteth for sin: so it is
necessaire, that he endeavor ^^e study of his will to his power, neither
account any thing ^^^^ p^^cious, then to compose himself ^^tally according to
his word* Ye^ i^ the mean while many things according to the flesh (...) upon
him* ^^ th^^ ^^ ^^^ (...) pray, forgive us ^^^ deb^^ (...) by the merit of
Christ, (...) does repose all his fiudci^, ^^ (...) be pa^doned, so they shall
(...) sins. Whosoever therefo^^ shall not do^ the will of the Fathe^^ (...)
is, shall not s^^die from his (...) performance thereof, (for other (...) to
do it is no^ inciden^^ (...) life) he neither has known (...) Father no^
Christ, he is not (...) God, and as yet* want^th the (...) ^^ Gods Children,
and so in that ^^spect shall be a^ hypocri^^ although he call to Christ, L^^d^
(...) that in his heart he does (...) knowledge the Lord, wherein (...) ^^n
call him* Lo^d, but (...) of a true faith* All these things (...)*

Idem. in Psalm. ^. v. 1. page ^. F^^t^^^ it is to be observed, that the Proph^t
says not, Blessed is (...) ^^ (...) been ^icked, ^ sins m^licious, (...) ^^^
b^ has ^^t had (...) with th^^ has not follow^d their (...), (...) their
f^^^s has (...) for (...) ^^^m that are blessed, and can live according to
Gods Law, the seed ^f God, and the good spirit does so ^^uaile, that they
cannot sin, that (...), b^come perverse and wicked with the whole heart*
Which thing ^^ express^ words Ioh. ^ap. ^. 3. does touch, for that they are
borne of God. But we daily sin al, as he con^^sseth c. 1. and not a few
likewise are overtaken with evil, do follow for ^ time the consultations of
the wicked, ^^ happened to David, Peter* and others; whereof the (...), to
satisfy his pleasure, did admit both adult^rie and (...)* the other, in des^^^
of his life, was so farr^ drawn^, that he denied his Saiuiour.

Here by the sentence of Buc^^, both David, and (...) are again^ placed in the
number of them, who^ although they sin, yet sin they not, or ^^^ (...) with
the who^^ heart.

P^^sently he (...) touching Mau^^^^ and the Thief, saying* Manasses King of
Judah may (...) have sitten in the seat of the (...) and wholly in malice to
have (...) with them, then whom (...) of the Kings did ever establish (...)
Idolatry against the Lord, or (...) more innocent blood of the P^^phets. With
him happily you (...) combine the Thief cruci^^^^ (...) the Lord Christ. Both
of them (...) were the sons of God* ^therwise neither could he pray (...)
God from his heart, and (...) pardon of his sins; neither (...) the other
have attained the ^^franchment of Paradise. For such (...) are not borne of
God, as they understand nothing of the things of God* (which Paul affirms of
them) ^^ther can they indeed hear: (which thing our Savior does testify
(...) 8.) so have they not any ability ^^ther to seek or pray for any (...)
matter. Therefore both of them (...) ordained to life, and chosen to ^^^uation,
before the creation of mankind; and therefore indeed neither of them was
wicked, ungodly, malicious, though they committed ^anythings wickedly, ungodly,
and (...), for that a full and (...) contempt of God, and the (...) and solid
study of naughtiness (...) never in them, although they had settled their seat
with perverse wicked men, that is, a resolute course (...) life they had
determined amongst them. H^^ ill^. But if the Elect yea even before they be
regenerate, do (...) in themselves a certain seed of God and of Piety* how
much more is it so to be sentenced touching the Elect now being regenerated? If
therefore such a seed of Piety be always r^^iant ^n them then do they never
pr^stitute th^^s^lues into any (...) the whole will, (...) do (...)

The Explanation of the (...), How it comes (...) pass, That the same (...)
man the evil that he will (...) not, that he does, (...) that respect also
does (...) it; and the good that (...) would he does not, (...) in that
respect he also (...) it.
IF any man does (...) understand, how it falls out that (...) same man (...)
things which are right, and yet does them not; and the evils which he would
not (but loatheth and detesteth) yet he does: let him read Bucer upon the
place of the Apostle Romans 7. where how that can be, he handles that question
most learnedly and deuou^ly* ^^d by the examples of David, when he committed
adultery; and of Peter, when he de^^ed Christ, he does manifest the matter
before our (...). The like ^ee does ^^br^ contro^^rs. Eccles. in (...) de
Iustif. page* 132*

The sum of Bucers answer to this Question i^ this* even as before we have
briefly related: This therefore comes to pass* for that in man there is a
double will* one* wherein he confe^^eth to the Law, that it is good; another,
which does that which he detesteth; one, which follows the knowledge of the
Law; another, which follows the knowledge drawn from our (...). While
therefore* we consider the Law of God with a true (...) it cannot but please
us. Wherefore, when this consideration prevails, or takes pla^^ i^ us, then
we necessarily do hate the evils which the Law forbids, and love the good
things which it commands* (...) when our good (...), (...) imbecilitie
deri^^d from (...), partly by violent and (...) lussts of the flesh is (...)
the consider^^^on ^^ that (...) which the L^w pr^poseth* and (...) ha^l^d to
those things, which (...) effectually suggesteth as (...) things, (which i^
without any (...) soon effected) then are (...) dr^wne away* from (...) the
L^w, and ^^ight will, into (...) appl^uding of (...) (...) and ^o (...) w^
(...) (...) that now we ad^udge* nothing^ (...) good* n^^ will eu^^ do, (...)
that which ^^^ (...) (...) flesh (...) T^us (...) (...) ^uil which we do^ (...)
wh^^* ^^e do^ i^* (...) (...) absol^^^ly we (...) for (...) not do^ it if in
a^^ ^^nd s^^ply (...) did, ^ill ^^* but for that we ^^^ (...) ^uow* det^st* and
nill the ^^ill (...) the b^fo^e that out min^^s ^^^^ (...) it were) b^witched
with ^h^ (...) desires and furies of the flesh: and how also when we do the
evil, if we were our own men, we would detest and reject it: which thing ^oth
clearly appear, for that so soon as the heat of the flesh abateth, which
does besot and surprise our minds, forthwith again we do detest and
disprove that evil which we do*

In the same manner, the good we would we do not; not that when we neglect
the good, we actually will it; but partly for that when we were not drawn
away by the violence of the flesh, as it were by strong ^^nd, into the liking
of the ^^sts thereof, the good which the Law proposed, we did both approve and
love; partly* for that at the instant, if we were freed from that fancy of
the flesh, which does infatuate us, that same good would we in act approve and
perform, and when we shall be delivered we will do it.

For that therefore there does remain (even when they do^ (...) sin) as I
may say, habitu^lly, (...) of sin, and a love of good* (...) though in act,
besotted with (...) flesh, they neglect the good and (...) evil; therefore the
Sa^nt^ are (...) to do evil that they would not (...) not to do the good
they (...) and therefore not to sin b^ (...) will or plenarie consent.

This is the sum of Bucers sentence, in that large and obscure (...)
concerning those (men) (...), who have a more (...) faith, and not so great ^
po^tion of the spirit of Christ; if now they (...) they sin, are not said to
sin (...) a full will, and total consent, (...) le^^e those Saints who are
(...) with a stronger faith, (...) have received a more plentiful measure of
the spirit: as when the (...) ^ame Peter, after he had received a most full
portion of the Holy (...) did sin, and (as it we^e) the second time deny
Christ, by dissembling ^^ Antioth the liberty of the Gospel.

Because ^his Quaestion does likewise pertain to the Philosophers, therefore
Aristotle also, as all things else, so also this question he discusseth
mostle^rnedly in his Ethics ad (...) lib. 7. by the example of a continent man
and incont^nent. The comparison also of a Merchant ^^ his ship is ^^ident, who
that he may be preserved in the tempest* does (...) his wares into the sea:
doubtless he does it in diverse respects, (...), ^h^t is, both vnvoluntarily,
and involuntarily, or with his will ^^ against his will* loose his traffic*
But in holy things I will produce an example from Holy writ, and will compare
spiritual things with spiritual, according to the Apostles precept.

The Mariners who c^rried the Prophet Io^a^ to Tharsus, through ^he horrible
tempest being all thereby in peril of their li^es, did throw Jonas the
Prophet into the se^ and that was th^^ both they and the sh^p might be
preserved, as the story of Ion^s reports. This they did both voluntarily and
involuntarily* voluntarily, for if simply they had been^ unwilling they had not
cast (...) into the sea, therefore were they willing to cast him in:
involuntarily, first for that before the tempest arose, they never had in
p^^pose, ^^ not in thought to destroy him, but rather as honest men they
intend^^ and determined to conu^igh hi^ safe and sound to Tharsus; then after
the tempest being risen, they we^^ not presently possessed with (...) thought
at all, either to cast do^^ him or any man else, or plunge the^ into the sea,
but rather so far as ^^ strength they could, they for a time by rowing
encountered the waves of the sea: and the burden of the ship they cast into the
sea to lighten the ship; likewise they called upon God finally also after Jonas
had said, T^^^ me and cast me into the sea* and ^^^ tempest will be a calm; for
I ^^^^ ^^^ for my sake this great st^r^^ i^ (...) upon you, and yet for all
this the ^^riners would not cast him into the sea: but still by sailing they
labored to bring the ship to shore, but at last being euercome by the greatness
of the tempest they would have him alone, rather the^ themselves and ship, to
be lost: also after they had thrown him into the sea, they did much condole
this fact, and fearing lest God should revenge it, they offered sacrifice:
lastly they cast not Jonas into the sea, as they were good men and faithful
mariners, but for in that respect they both loved Jonas his life, and detested
his ruin, but this fact they did as in self-loue of themselves, and of the
ship, more then of Jonas only; and unless that tempest had been more strong
and violent then they could have resisted, they would never have cast Jonas
into the sea. All these things considered, there is none who will not
acknowledge and say, That those mariners did not involuntarily cast Jonas into
the sea, and so the good they would, that is Jonas his safety, they did not,
and the evil they would not, that is, Jonas his perdition, they did. The like
is the case of the sons of God. The Saints in this world, and in this mortal
flesh, and most corrupt, are as Mariners in the sea; the temptations of the
world, the flesh, and the devil, are the tempests of the sea: Iona^ is as
Christ, with his word and law: to cast Jonas out of the ship into the sea is
(as it were) to cast off, by sin, Christ and his law from us* The Mariners
certainly did cast Jonas into the sea; so the Saints sin, not by casting the
law of God from them, that is by transgressing of it, but being willing. But as
they by many signs manifested, that they cast Jonas into the sea not
willingly, that is, not from their desire, and purposely; so do the Saints
declare, that they will not that sin which yet they commit: first, before the
tempest of temptations they had no mind to transgress Gods law, but rather
they hated sin, and loved the law of God; again, being assalted by
temptations, they do not forthwith yield the hand, they do (as it were) with
contrary oars, so much as strength will afford, resist and withstand; yea by
calling upon the name of the Lord; and so long they do resist, until being
(as it were) quashed in pieces, they do bow down under the temptation, which
if it were not such and so great, that they Saints were not often able to
resist they would never do that they would not, but would always do that they
would. Thirdly, after the sin committed, or after the violence of the sea,
that is of concupiscence, be abated, they do lament the fact, and mourn, and
pray forgiveness, and offer the sacrifice of repentance, that he may pardon
it: verily by all those things which befall to the Saints both before, in, and
after the temptation, and sin committed, it abundantly appears, how the
Saints in sinning both will and nill sin, and do the evil they would not,
and do not the good they would. And therefore it cannot be said of them; that
they do sin as the wicked do, with a fui will.

That which I have illustrated by the comparison of the Mariners, is declared
by the example of Peter and Judas. Before the sin it was not in Peter's heart
to deny Christ, but rather on the contrary he so loved Christ, and detested
both the offenses and enemies of Christ, as that indeed he was rather ready to
die, then to deny Christ; and therefore he said, though all shall deuie thee,
yet I will never deny thee. Such also is the purpose of the Godly before they
sin; scilicet, when as they are not their own men, and are not violently
carried with violent temptations, as it were, out of themselves, crossely into
absurdities. But the mind of Judas was not such as of Peter, but rather of a
long time with a quiet mind he had practiced officiously theft, by defrauding
Christ and his Apostles of their money, as Ioh. 12 does testify, that he was a
thief, and therefore of long, and with a settled mind he had deliberated with
himself, how he might with gain, and without tumult, betray Christ into his
enemies hands. Such like are the minds of the wicked: they always meditate
evil, according to the proverb, even in their cold blood.

But in the heat of temptation, Peter, though through the excessive force of
the fear of death, which he did perceive as imminent upon him, for the free
confession of Christ, is not recorded to have resisted or encountered with the
temptation, yet out of the quality of these three de nialls of his it may
easily be collected, That at the beginning he did somewhat in mind
with-stand; for that he did not directly in the entrance deny, but dissemble
by his cold answering (the Damsel, saying. And thou also wast with Jesus of
Galile^.) I know not what thou say. For after that the tempest increased,
the next turn he denied with an oath, directly renouncing Christ and saying,
I know not the man. But at the third turn, when the blast of temptation was
most vehement, he did not only dissemble, neither only deny with an oath, but
also even deuoting himself to execrations, he accursed, and (as Mark says*)
anathematized himself. But Judas from that time of his first temptation
touching the betraying of Christ, was always of the same mind: neither did
suddenly fall into temptation, as Peter, but with long deliberation he did
seek opportunities of betraying him into their hands. So* do all wicked men;
they do not fall into temptation upon the sudden, but they hunt and seek for
them. But the Godly are quite contrary.

And after the offense committed Peter presently was so penitent for his fact,
that he wept bitterly for his sin. So do also the Godly. But Judas although
he came to the Priests, and restoring the money, said; I have sinned in
betraying innocent blood; yet do we not read that he lamented, and truly
sorrowed for his offense committed. Wherefore in that he hanged himself, he
did not so from sorrow for sin, but for that he saw that his life should be
with perpetual infamy, for the betraying his master, specially for so small
a sum of money. So the wicked do sometime grieve, for their sin, but not
properly for the sin it self, but either for shame, or for punishment
temporal or eternal, whereinto they see they are fallen: wherefore the wicked
do not declare by such repentances that they hate the evil which they have
committed, but only the punishment whereunto they are liable: but contrariwise
the Saints* do indeed detest the sins committed, and hate them. Who in these
two Apostles, cannot see what difference there is between the sins of the
wicked and the godly; between the wills of one and other in their sins?

And that which I speak of all the Saints that it may be more clearly apparent
in the example of Peter, I will cite a place out of Bernard, ^l^b. de libero
arbitrio. Col. 1592 in which place with exceeding elegancie and piety he does
explain this selfsame Question which I do entreat of, concerning that will
where with the Saints do sin, by the very example of Peter produced. Sed
vid^aimus, etc. But let us see (says he) touching such who in word
compulsorily do deny the faith, through fear of pain and death, least happily
according to this assertion, either it fall out to be no fault that they do
deny in word only, or that the will could be coacted to offend; as that a man
should will that which it appears he nilled, and so free will should be
extinct: which because it was impossible (for that he could not will and nill
the same thing in one instant) the Question arises, How to them that in no
case will no evil, evil ought to be imputed? For this is not of like quality
with original sin, wherein not only he who consents not but also even he
that is ignorant is another way hanckled not being as yet renewed by baptisine.
For example: let Peter the Apostle come into the rank, for he seemed to deny
the truth against his will for either he must have dyed or denied: fearing to
dye he denied, he nilled to deny, but more to dye; therefore against his will,
but yet he denied to avoid death: but if with tongue and not with will, the man
was enforced to speak that he nilled, yet not to will otherwise then he
willed; the tongue was moved against the will, but was the will also altered?
for what willed he? verily to be (as he was) the disciple of Christ. What
spoke he? I know not the man. Why so? he was willing to escape death. But what
offense was that? we: do understand two wills in the Apostle; one, whereby
he would not dye, altogether vnculpable; another, even much commendable,
wherein he took delight that he was a Christian. Where^^ then shall he be
culpable? in this respect, for that he would rather lie, then die. This Will
utterly deserved reprehension, that he willed rather to save the life of the
body then of Sap. 1.
the soul. The mout^ verily that speaks ^ lie kills the S^^^e; therefore
he both sinned, and nor without consent of his own will, both weak and
woeful, and yet most free. But he sinned not in contempt or hatred of Christ,
but in too much love of himself: neither did that sudden fear enforce his
will into that perverse love of himself but convinced it to be so. Even then
(doubtless) he was such, but he knew it not, when he heard from him, ^^om
whom he could not conceal himself, Before the Cock crow twice thou Mat. 26.
shall deny me thrice. Therefore that debility of will was manifested (through
that peircing fear) not procreated; he made it known how much he loved
himself, and how much Christ; known (I say) not to Christ, but to Peter; for
Christ knew even before what was in man, Therefore in that respect he loved
Christ, his will did utterly endure violence, which cannot be denied, so that
he spoke against himself; but in that respect he loved himself, Doubtless
he consented voluntarily, so that he spoke for himself. If he had not loved
Christ, he would not have denied involuntarily; but if he had not loved
himself more, he would not at al have denied him: there fore it is to be
granted, That the man by compulsion though he did nor alter his own will, yet
did he conceal it; being, compelled (I say) not to revolt from the love of
God, but in some degree to yield co self-love: What then? perchance the former
assertion is totally dissolved, touching the liberty of the will: for that the
will is found obnoxious to compulsion? so it is clearly; but yet so, as if the
coaction is from another, not from it self: but if it self compelled and
compelling did enforce it self, it seems there to loose liberty, where it
found it* that is, it did suffer that force from it self, which it did
violently offer unto it self. Moreover, that which it suffered from it self,
was from the will; that which was from the will, was not of necessity, but
voluntary, and if voluntary, th^^ free. Finally whose own will did enforce to
deny, was enforced because he would; nay he was not enforced, but consenting,
and not to the power of another, but his own will; that i^, that will, whereby
he might by all means escape death: otherwise, how could the voice of a Damsel
have compelled a holy tongue to frame such heinous words, if the will, as Lady,
had not consented to the tongue. To conclude, when afterward he tempered
himself in his self-love, and (as duty was) began to love Christ with all
his heart, all his soul, all his strength; now the will could not at all be
drawn either by threats or punishments, to yield the tongue as weapons of
unrighteousness; but rather boldly applying himself to the truth, he said; It
is better too ^ey GOD, then men. Act. 5. Compulsion is of two sorts.
There is indeed a double compulsion, in that we are coacted to suffer, or do,
something against out will: whereof the Passive (for so it is rightly termed)
may sometime be without voluntary consent of the Patient; but nouer the
Active. Wherefore, the evil that is done against us, or of us, is not to be
imputed unto us if unwilling. But that which is done, and of our selu^s, is not
without some fault of the will. We are convinced to will, which would not come
to pass, if we were nilling. Therefore there is also an Active compulsion,
but without excuse, for that it is voluntary; A christian was enforced to deny
Christ, and yet lamenting, but not yet but as willing. These things Bern^rd.

These things I have more fully dilated by Explication, that my Lords may
better conceive, by what means it falls out, That the Saints are said both
to will and ^ill the sin they commit: and therefore it can by no means be
said, tha^ Peter and other godly men, when they offend, to have sinned, or to
sin by a total and plen^ri^ will for that otherwise there could ^^e no
difference put between the ^^i^ of the godly and ungodly t^^en from their
wills* and so as we^^ ^^ godly as ungodly should sin of p^^posed malice ^^ all
times. Therefore I do confess that the Saints, when they sin with consent,
that they offend indeed not of a will in suspense, but definite and certain,
for that absolutely their will is to sin: and if they willed not, they sinned
not. And in this behalf their sins are grievous, neither by me extenuated.
But my labor is this, that it cannot be said, That they sin with a full and
total will; for that in them there is a double man; and for other reasons, and
authorities by me alleged, both of Scriptures and Fathers.

QUEST. 3. Of the quality of the sins of the Saints.
OVT of the second Question arises the third, which is; Whether the Saints may
fall into sin (as Paul speaks) reigning, or the sin against the conscience,
as it is called? But that we may clearly understand what sin is meant in this
controversy, we must take notice, that there are three sorts of sins, as
the Apostle insinuates Romans 6. when he says, Therefore let not sin reign
in your mortal bodies, that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof.

The first, is the sin of Nature, the root and fountain of all other sins,
which is termed Original: and this is signified by an excellency of speech,
by the name of Sin.

The next, are the concupiscences of this sin, rising up even against our
wills* as lewd desires, and vicious affections to sin, which never cease in
this life to molest us. This kind is intimated by the name of Concupiscence.

The third, is in plain terms Actual sin, when indeed we obey that sin
of Nature in pursuing the lusts thereof; whether it be done by consent only,
or also by word or deed. This is signified by the word of Obeying,

The first is mere Original; the second partly original, partly actual; the
third totally actual. Of the first two there is no controversy, whether they
be in the Saints or no. The Question is only of the third. But for so much as
there be also many sorts of this, it likewise is to be distinguished, that
we may better perceive whereof this controversy is intended.

The third sin therefore, which is then done when we obey original sin in
yielding to the lusts thereof, is so voluntary, as that if it were not
voluntary it should not be sin, as Augustine in many places observes. For
no man could obey Original sin in perfecting the concupiscences thereof, but
that he is willing. Therefore it is always voluntary.

Moreover, men obey that natural and inhabiting sin, after a double, and that
also a differing, manner. Some are obedient, and (that) willing, yet not with a
full will, or plenarie consent, or with the whole heart, but as it were
captives to a Tyrant. And this befalls them; who either of ignorance or
infirmity do obey sin; Of ignorance, for that either simply they know not
that they do evil, and such in no case are said to sin against conscience,
or if they know ( in Thesi) in general, they do not consider ( in hypothesi)
in particular, or if they do consider, they do it very coldly: the violence of
concupiscence auerting their minds from Gods Law; And of infirmity, for that
by the violence and force of sin either presently smitten and quelled, they
voluntarily yield themselves; which after a short resistance to the contrary,
at last euicted they give place a time. Wherefore these first (sort) obey sin
willingly, but not with a full will and total consent; for they do not love
sin: these may be said to sin against their conscience, but not properly;
for they obey sin wittingly and willingly: but yet neither upon perfect
knowledge, nor intentive cogitation of that which they do, nor with full will,
and full consent, as a little before is declared. Others obey with the whole
will, full consent, and whole heart, and all their might: and these are such as
do offend of purposed malice, or with study, and from the heart. They
(properly) sin against the conscience: for they know that they do contrary
to the Law of God, and (that) with contempt: and they obey sin with such a
willing mind, as that they love it, and would, if they might with impunitie,
be perpetually serviceable thereunto. Therefore this is called even that
reigning sin: for that while we do love the concupiscences of the sin of
Nature, and do from the heart fulfill them, we do bring to pass effectiuely,
that it r^igneth in our hearts,

Therefore there be two sorts of Actual sins, drawn from the two different
manners of willing; one, which is so voluntary as that it is also partly
involuntarie, of which kind of Actions Aristotle treats in his Ethics,
which indeed is not committed with plenarie consent, as is expounded before.
This likewise I grant befalls the Saints: for thus sometime they sin, as
David and Peter; therefore of this (as is said before) there is no
controversy. Neither is it controuerted, Whether by this sin the Saints are
obliged with a new guilt, by the committing thereof, and so also have need of
new remission of this new sin? for none of us do deny it.

Another sort is so un vluntarie; as that in no respect it is involuntarie; for
which cause it is called the sin (properly) against the conscience, that is
to say plenarie, and utterly wasting the conscience; and therefore even
reigning. Therefore the difference between us is, concerning that other kind
of actual sin. For our Adversaries do vouch, That the Saints (as Peter) do
offend with the whole will, and with all their heart, and so (properly) against
the conscience. And for that such sin cannot in any wise consist with faith;
therefore hence they conclude, That the Saints may loose faith totally. But
contrariwise I do deny, that this kind of sin can befall the Elect, being
sanctified an regenerate: and so consequently I deny, That the Elect sanctified
can utterly fall from faith and wholly loose the Holy Spirit.

And why I should deny that this kind of sin can befall the Saints, I am
induced by these reasons and testimonies. For how can Sin reign, and by Sin
Satan, where Justice and Christ reigns? And how can Faith reign there, and
by Faith Christ, where Sin and Satan reigns? The Parable of Christ is
famous: When the strong man keeps his Tower, it cannot be invaded of the
enemy, unless he be stronger then the Owner of the Tower, and do expel
him from it. Now Christ is stronger then Satan; therefore Christ does often
banish Satan out of his Kingdom, and there does reign himself. And Satan,
though he do often besiege the Cities of Christ, (that is, the Elect) yet can
he not surprise them, and by e^ecting Christ the King there reign himself;
for he is not stronger then Christ. Therefore is it utterly impossible, That
Sin should (properly) reign, and get dominion in the Elect.

Sin in his dominion (or reigning Sin) is that, to whose concupiscences, ^
as to the Kings mandates, Men without any resistance, with heart and with full
and cheerful will, obey, and are always obsequious with readiness.
according to that of the Apostle Romans 6. Let not therefore Sin reign in your
mortal body, to obey the lusts thereof.

As touching the Saints, first, before Satan and Sin do make any assault
against them, in them there is no purpose to obey or serve Sin: for they hate
it with perpetual hatred. Again, in the assault and incursion of Sin,
striving to draw them to the obedience thereof, they, so far as strength will
work, do resist and encounter against it; though sometime they are wounded
and fall down buffeted: but this comes upon them against their wills.
Finally, after this, by imbecillitie sometimes being surprised, they do obey
sin a fresh, they do by the force of the Spirit thereunto fortified,
redintigrate the battle against Sin, as against a Capital and perpetual
enemy, and do continue this combat unto the end of their days. Gal. 5. How
therefore can it be said, that Sin reigns in the Saints, or that the Saints
do obey Sin, as their King, to fulfill the lusts thereof?

John in his Canonical Epistle sins wasting the conscience; sometimes,
sins unto death; sometimes reigning: and therefore that they are liars, who
boast themselves to be the sons of God, and to acknowledge God, when yet in
the mean while they sin in security, hate their brethren, and do not
endeavor to observe Gods Law: and therefore that they only are Saints, and
borne of God, who study to avoid sin, and keep the Law of God. cap. 2. He
that says that he knows God, and does not keep his commandments, is a
lier, and the truth^ is not in him. And Gods precepts a^^ specially observed,
when they are laid up firmly in the heart, and beloved. So says David; In the
volum^ Psalm. 41.
of thy book is it wrttten of me, that I should do thy will, O Lord: I am
c^^tent to do it, yea thy law is in the midst of my heart*scilicet. I have
it the^e written and engraven. If the Saints have the Law so fixed in their
hearts, how then therefore should sin reign in their hearts? cap. 3. Every one
wh^ abides in him sins not, and every one that sins haeth not seen him,
not known him: again, he that does sin is of the devil, because the devil
sins from the beginning. Hereof it is apparent, of what sort of sins the
Apostle speaks, when he says, He that does sin is not borne of God, but is
of the devil, that is, of such as are like to the sin of Satan the Father of
all the wicked. And of what quality is the sin of the devil? sin committed
of purposed malice: sin reigning, and perpetual. For the Devil sinned from
the beginning, that Aliud est proijcerese in lutum, vt sues; aliud, labi in
lutu^ vt solent munditiei studiosi. Zanchius.
is to say, from the beginning unto this present hour he does continually
sin, and adhaere unto sin. Wherefore it cannot be, that such as are truly
borne of God, should commit sins of such quality, that is deuilish, and
persist in them: therefore he adds, saying; All that are borne of God, sin
not, because the seed abides in him, neither can he sin, because he is borne
of God.

This also is the doctrine not only Luther and Bucer, but also of all
Protestants. For such things as were defended in the disputation at Ratisbone,
were defended in the name of all the Protestants. And there in many pages this
doctrine is pressed and defended, That such have not true faith as do commit
sins wasting the conscience: And contrariwise, they that are truly faithful
do nor entertain these sins, much less persist in them; for that the nature
of true faith cannot end^^e such sins. page. 241. Sin (say they) against
the conscience, or (as Augustine speaks) wasting the conscience true faith
cannot tolerate to be with it; neither does he ever continue in such a sin,
who lives by a true and justifying faith. But page 242. they do first
demonstrate, that the faith of them who do adh^ie to such sins against the
conscience, is no true faith, but a vain opinion.

Then of such as are endued with a true faith thus they say; yet touching
faith, whereby a just man lives, the case is otherwise: for they that have
that faith, are the sons of God, and them the Holy Spirit leads to holy and
rightful things, as that the things contrary wittingly and in understanding
they do not, much less persevere in them, although they do some-time, and
sin of the imbecility of the flesh, and not of faith; but not sins wasting
the conscience, or such as exclude presently from the Kingdom of God.

In this place they verify four things, of such as are true Saints, and the
true sons of God, of whom is this our Question.

One is, David and Peter who did sin of infirmity, as we have before proved
even by Luthers testimony, yet upon them never fall the ^eigning sins, which
properly are called, by the Protestants, sins against the conscience, and
wasting the conscience. And this doctrine they comfirme by the Scriptures, and
chiefly by this Syllogism taken from Saint John: He that truly believes,
that the Lord Jesus is the Christ, is borne of God. 1. Ioh. 5. But he that is
borne of God, sins not, neither can sin. 1. Ioh. 3. Therefore he that
truly beleiueth, he cannot sin, that is, the sin wasting the conscience,
much less porsist in it. These things are in that place word for word.

Neither did I ever teach otherwise. And indeed when I did interpret the
Epistle of Saint John, both in the Argument of the Epistles, and in explication
of the second Chapter, I confirmed at large the same doctrine. Let my
Praelections be read, specially upon these words of the second Chapter, He
that says he knows God, and keeps not his commandments, is a lier.
Wherefore, it appears what indignity to such men as profess Christ this
voice did bring, which my adversaries bruited abroad fasely against me,
persuading many, as also left in writing, scilicet, That I should teach, That
the Saints, although they do sin against conscience, and live wickedly, and
persevere in their sins, yet that they do not loose faith: whereas I did
always teach the contrary according to the Scriptures, That such as commit
such things, and persevere therein, not to be Saints, neither at any time to
have had a true faith, but to be the sons of the Devil. For these sins
cannot befall the Saints; who though sometime they do sin, and that with some
consent, yet not plenarie: yet notwithstanding never of set malice, nor of
contempt of Gods Law; and therefore do they not sin (properly) against the
Conscience, as is abundantly explained before.

QVEST. IIII. Whether the Saints do persevere in Sin?
FOR hence it easily appears, what I think, and what is to be holden
concerning the fourth Question which is controuerted between us, scilicet,
Whether any of the Saints, being justified and regenerate, do persevere in
their sins to the end, and perish in them? For a certain Divine does
affirm, and endeuoreth to defend this: And I deny, and do contend, That this
doctrine is repugnant to Holy Writ, and ouerturneth the whole course of the
Gospel. For how can this be a concordance, he that believes in me, has
everlasting life? how can it be everlasting, if he fall into aeternall
destruction? how likewise shall that chain of the Apostle continue inviolable.
Romans 8. Those whom he has Predes^inate he has called, (scilicet of purpose)
and whom he has called, them also he has justified, if that the justified can
outragiouslie continue in sin unto the last breath of their life; and run
headlong into aeternall destruction: Again, if sins reigning cannot befall
the Saints, as is before manifefested, how can they persevere therein?
Therefore the Protestants in their Disputation at Ratisbone, did more truly
put down in writing, as we have seen in the places before related, That the
Saints, and they who are endued with a true faith, and live thereby, although
they fall of frailetie, yet do they not commit sins wasting the conscience,
much less do they persevere therein. Better also writ Luther, in Gal. 5. fol.
422. If they do not repent, but going on in obstinacy do perfect the desires
of the flesh; it is an infallible sign, that fraud is in their heart, that is,
that they are not truly sanctified, but Hypocrites. Besides, he that obeys
the flesh, and goes on in security to perfect the lusts thereof, let him know
that he does not belong to Christ: and howsoever he adorn himself in the
highest degree with the name of a Christian* yet does he deceive himself. For
they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh, with the vices and lusts
thereof. Luther in these words teaches, That it is impossible, that such as
are truly Christ's, and Saints, should persevere in their sins, and proceed
in practicing the lusts thereof: for that i^ any be found that do continue,
they do give open testimony that they are Hypocrites, and in no case pertain
unto Christ.

QVEST. V. Whether the Saints do persist unto the end in faith once given?
THIS is the state of the Question; Whether the Elect, after they be once
endued with true faith, and truly justified, regenerate, and ingraffed into
Christ, can again utterly fall away from faith and from Christ? Neither did I
put in this Quaestion this Particle ( although the^ sin against conscience
and live wickedly) as I was untruly traduced:* for I was not ignorant, that
this Clause would make the Question (...), that is, not questionable; for that
it is impossible for one to be in Christ, and to live wickedly, that is, to
walk according to the flesh.

Therefore in the Schools I answered to the question to this effect, as may
be seen in my Praelections of Perseverance, That the Saints who by the bond
not only of aeternall Election, but also of the Spirit of Christ, and of true
faith* are coupled to Christ, and so have been once ingraffed into the body of
Christ; which is the Church of the Saints, will perpetually pers^uer^ in
Christ, and in faith, neither ^an they again utterly fall away from faith; and
that not from their own strength and merits, but partly for the promise of
God, partly for the prayer and intercession of Christ: the spirit of Christ
preserving faith in them.

All this doctrine they condemned and impugned, as new and H^reticall, but yet
mine accusers have not cassiered it. For although both my self in my
Praelections, and other my writings, I did so plentifully prove it, as also
other Universities and Churches, and other great men in Germany confirmed the
same; because notwithstanding ye my Lords did enioine me, that I should
exhibit unto you my Confession, and the same confirmed by some testimoni^s,
touching this point, therefore I will not hold it burdenous to establish the
same doctrine again, even by other testimonies both of Scriptures and Fathers,
both of our Doctors, as also of your own Confessions, so be it be not
grievous to you to read them with attention, and examine them with diligence.

Testimonies out of the Scriptures.
Esai. 59. I (says the Lord) will make this my Covenant with them: My spirit
that is upon thee, and my word which I have put in thy mouth, shall never depart
from thy mouth, nor from the mouth of thy seed, nor from the mouth of thy
seeds seed (says the Lord) from this time forth for evermore.

THIS is a promise, and Romans 11.
not a precept, as before is declared: And that in this Prophecy is promised
the gift of perseverance, elsewhere I have proved aboundant^y, Therefore to
avoid repetitions, I remit the Reader to those things which we have spoken for
the interpretation of this place cap. 4. of Perseverance.

A place not unlike to this we have Ier. 31 Behold the days shall come (says
the Lord) I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel and Judah, not
according to the cou^nant which I made wi^h their fathers, at what time I took
them by the hand and brought them out of the land of AEgipt* which my Covenant
they made frustate, and I declared my self to be their Lord, says the Lord*
And this is the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those
days says the Lord: I will plant my Law into the^r inward parts, and write it
upon their heart, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people: neither
shall any hereafter teach his neighb^ur, or a man his broth^r, saying: Know ye
the Lord; but all shall know me from the least to the greatest, says the Lord;
because I will be merciful ^o their sins, and remember their iniquities no
more. Out of this place likewise I did most manifestly confirm my sentence to
the Lords. But for that this prophecy also was fully by me explaned in the
former Book cap. 4. de perseuerantia Sancto^^^; therefore least I should
re-act a thing already acted, I send the reader thither: with this addition
only of things which were not there explaned.

Because he says not, I will make another Covenant, but absolutely, I will make
my Covenant, to wit, the same that your fathers frustrated: neither says he, I
will wr^te another Law, but simply, my Law, scili^^t the same which your fathers
transgressed: Therefore the old and new Testament, as concerning the substance,
the Prophet teaches to be one and the same.

Yet to be different one from the other touching the manner of dispensation of
the one and the other: partly for that he says, I will make my Covenant not
according to (or after) that Covenant, that is, after the same manner; 2.
partly, for that he says, I will write the Law in their hearts; as if he should
say, whereas before I had written it in Tables of stone.

this was made frustrate of the people, because they observed not the law: and
therefore they did not observe it, because they had it not written in their
hearts; therefore the new should be everlasting, for that the Law written in
their hearts should be loved of the new people and therefore kept; therefore
the study of observing the Law, to be perpetual in the regenerate, and so
faith in Christ to be perpetual which is the maine point of the Law.

For that he says I will write in their hearts, it is in sense as if he had
said, I will effect that my law shall be firmly sized in their hearts, they shall
take continual delight therein, and therein shall meditate day and night And so
every just and godly man does say with David, Thy law is in the midst of my
heart, that is fixed and imprinted, and thereupon I am affected with continual
study of the observation thereof. For that whch is written in the heart is
perpetual and can never be blotted out. So does the Apostle speak of the Law
of nature written in their hearts, saying; The Gentiles who are without the Law
(of Moses written in Tables) do show that they have the work of the Law
written in their hearts, their conscience testifying with them. By which phrase
of speech the apostle does signify, that the Law of nature which was written
in all men, even the Gentiles by God could never be utterly raced out of the
hearts and minds of men; yet after sin (came it) but that as yet continually
men do feel the accusation thereof in their conscience. Therefore this manner
of speech does signify; That things written by God in the heart are
perpetual and can never be blotted out. The same thing the same Apostle
purposed to signify 2. Cor. 3. when he terms them his, and the Epistle of
Christ, written by the spirit of God, in the fleshy Tables of the heart: They
were the Epistle of Christ, for that he by his spirit properly had engraven
that Law (whereof Jeremy speaks) in their hearts: They were likewise the
Epistle, of Paul, for that Christ did use Paul's labor, thereby to write the
Gospel in them. Therefore he calls them his Epistle written in the Tables of
the heart, that he might intimate thereby, that they were his glory (both)
living and perpetual.

Because out of this inscription of the Law in their hearts two things were
consequent; And I will be their God, and they shall be my people; another, And
they shall all know me. Therefore as that inscription of the Law is
perpetually permanent; so it likewise signifies, That God will perpetually be
our God, and we shall continually abide his people, and that we shall
perpetually acknowledge God: for he is acknowledged by faith retaining the word
of God. Therefore in whose hearts the Law of God is engraven, the Prophet did
signify, that they cannot fall from grace, and vtrerly make shipwreck of Faith.

Add withal, that with these things is conioined the perpetual forgiveness
of sins, whereby it comes to pass, that through daily offenses the
regenerate do not desist, both to know the Lord, and to be his people, and to
retain the Law firmly fixed in their hearts: for he presently adds as the
cause of the former things, saying; because I will be merciful to their
iniquities. Therefore by this Prophecy he does excellently confirm the
perseverance of the Saints.

Neither is here any matter of exception, That the Covenant is firm and
aeternall, on Gods behalf, for that there is no let in him why we do not
abide in the Covenant, or that the Law does not remain written in our hearts
for ever; but that the fault lies in us that it abides not firm, for that
the Law is not fixed permanently in us; for by the saine reason also the
Covenant contracted with the Israelites, on Gods part was everlasting, but by
the peoples default it was made frustrate. They (says he) did make it
frustrate. But if the same may be said of the second, what new thing then does
God promise by Jeremy? Therefore unless we will oppugn so clear a word of
God, it must be granted, That the Elect, with whom this new Covenant is made,
after that the Law of the Lord, and faith of the Gospel, be once by the Holy
Spirit written in their hearts, can never fall from this Covenant, neither the
Law and faith be utterly abolished out of their hearts. For the sins
wherinto they fall by infirmity, God (as he says here) does never impute unto
them.

Ier. 32. I will put my fear into their heart, that they shall not depart from
Augustine enforces this place often against ^he Pelagians. Hier. ib. Sic
liberum donat arbitrium, vt tame^ i^se Timor qui tribuitur, gratia perman^at
Lorgitoris. 2. These. 3. 3.
me. This testimony also in my former book I have fully explained cap. 4. de
Perseuerantia. The total sum is this; God does promise that he will bring to
pass, That his people ( s^ilice^ the Elect) shall not fall away from him* but
that they shall abide in his Covenant for ever. And will he effect this? He
says I will gi^e (or put) my fear in their heart, that is, I will bring to
pass, that my fear shall perpetually abide in their hearts* And by this
continual fear they shall be retained also perpetually, that they fall not
away.

Ioh. 3. Except a man be borne of water and the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God Now it cannot be but that the Elect must enter into
the Kingdom of heaven, and be saved; for they cannot perish. Ioh. 10. Romans 8.
Therefore the Elect of necessity, not without Regeneration, must depart hence
unto life everlasting. And Regeneration is once only wrought, and in
signification thereof the Baptism of water is also once dispensed. But if any
hold opinion, That Regeneration must again the second and third time be
repeated and infused, then necessarily Baptism it self must be repeated and
often received; specially, if in the speech of Ioh. 3. cap. we will understand
by the name of water Baptism by water. For in that place the spirit and water
are so conioined, as that the one is inseparable from the other. Therefore
Regeneration once effected by the holy Spirit, by the same is also conserved
unto the end. Your selves also Confess. Argent.
in your Confession, An. dom. 1539. do confirm this Argument For thus you put
down in the seventh Article. This Regeneration jointly with all the merits of
Christ, the holy Spirit inspireth in the hearts of the faithful; and does
confirm them therein unto the end.

Ioh. 4. Every one that drinks of this water shall thirst again; but he
that drinks of the water that I shall give unto him, shall not thirst for
ever; but the water that I shall give, shall be made in him a fountain of
water flowing upwards unto life everlasting. By the name of water to be
understood the Holy Spirit, all both old and new Interpreters do acknowledge;
according to the interpretation Ioh. 7* upon the voice of Christ, He that
believes in me, out of his belly shall flow rivers of water of life. This he^
sp^ke of the Spirit which they should receive that believed in him. Thus the
Apostle. Now to drink of this water, is by faith in Christ to be made
partakers of the Holy Spirit: but to become, or be made a fountain of living
water, to spring in any, is for the Holy Spirit, incessantly like a fountain
perpetually flowing, to be inhabitant to work in a man* And Christ verily
does promise this ever flowing fountain to such, as with a lively faith do
believe in him. Therefore whosoever do believe in Christ by a lively faith,
those also have attained this fountain of the Holy Spirit, perpetually
running, that is, the gift of Perseverance.

Bucer likewise does thus interpret this place page 644. It is certain (says
he) that this water is the holy Spirit: Therefore now if he that drinks of
this holy Spirit, can never thirst again, it is a clear case, that he to
whom once this Holy Spirit is granted, to whom once it is given to believe, can
never fall away from the grace of God. For as he can never thirst, who has a
fountain in his belly continually flowing, and thereof dri^^ing; so he cannot
but be replenished with whom is present the Holy Spirit of the Lord, and the
Spirit of his children. This is the fountain which does flow up unto life,
that is, which does afford life aeternall. It supplieth the knowledge of God,
and continual fruition, and for aeternitie of his goodness. From hence is
Paul's gloriation, That nothing, high or love, ^^^ separate us from the love of
GOD. Romans 8. These things Bucer.

So also Brentius did interpret this place, of the gift of Perscuerance. This
(says he) is the comparison of two waters, out of which Christ does
manifestly signify unto the women, That his promise is not of terrestrial,
but of celestial water which brings to man salvation, not transitory and
mutable, but spi^tuall and immortal. These things Brentius. Therefore whosoever
does once drink of this water celestial, has attained salvation, not mutable
but sempiternall.

If ye shall abide in my word, then shall ye be verily my disciples.
Therefore such as are true disciples of Christ, abide in the word of Christ,
that is, persevere in his faith and word. For as these two are liable to a
mutual conversion, such as do not abide in the word of Christ, are not true
disciples of Christ; and, such are not true disciples of Christ, as do not
abide in the word of Christ: so also these two are conuertible; they that abide
in the word of Christ, are true disciples of Christ; and they that are true
disciples of Christ, those abide, that is, perscuere in the word of Christ.

But Chr. as the son is ruler in the house, whose house we are, if we do
retain firm our fiducy, and that hope whereof we do glory, unto the end. Not
only the whole Church universally is called the house of Christ, but also
every faithful one. And Matthew, 12. Not only the whole Synagogue was meant
by the name of the house clean swept, into which did enter the seven Spirits
worse then the former; but also by that name was signified every hipocrite and
temporizer. Therefore of these words of the Apostle are collected these two
combining conuersions; the first: they that do retain firm faith and hope in
Christ unto the end, are the house of Christ, and they that are the house of
Christ, do retain firm faith and hope in Christ unto the end. The second:
they who do not retain firm faith and hope unto the end, are not the house
of Christ; and, they that are not the house of Christ, such do not retain
faith and hope unto the end. Now all the Elect and Saints, (of whom is the
Question) are the house of Christ, for I speak of them in whose hearts Christ
dwells by faith: therefore all the Elect now sanctified, in whom Christ truly
dwells, and therefore which are made the house of God, do retain faith and
hope unto the end. Wherefore, they cannot utterly fall from Christ and faith.

John. 10. The Lord says of his 5 John. 6. 17.
sheep, I do give unto them life eternal, neither shall they perish for
ever; neither shall any man take them out of my hand. These words are
declaratorie, first, that his will is, that the sheep given to him of his father
shall not be taken out of his hands; secondlle he declares that this his
will is accomplished: that both the father which gives, and he which
receives, are stronger then all creatures. Therefore it is a necessary
consequent, that after the Elect be once given into the hands of Christ by
faith, they cannot after be taken out of his hands; and (that) neither for
ever, nor for a time. For thereupon it would follow, that the Father and Christ
should be more infirm, and weak (at least) for a time, then he who should
violently take such sheep out of his hands for a time. But this is
blasphemy: for he says absolutely, Himself, and the Father which gave, is
mightier, to wit at all times, and always, then al creatures. Therefore in no
case can it be, that the Elect, after they be once given by faith into the
saving hand of Christ, should be taken out of his hand, or utterly fail from
him. So also has Bucer expounded this place; Again (says he) it is to be
observed, that it is of his only love that we are sheep and do follow
Christ; then, being such we can never fall away, for that the Father and Son
are one, and have the same hand, that is, power: out of which none can never
take away them, whom it has once apprehended for salvation: And they are
apprehended, to whomesoeuer it is given to hear and follow the voice of
Christ; for that none can do, but sheep. These things Bucer. Therefore as
well out of the words and argumentation of Christ, as of the interpretation of
Bucer, and also that particle ( Once) it appears, That the evasion is very
childish, whereby the adversaries strive to avoid all these places, by (
quamdiu) How long, and ( finaliter) finally. Besides these testimonies of the
Scriptures in the old and new Testaments, which ye have in my Lectures, these
also which I have now alleged, do to me appear by sufficient plainness to
confirm this doctrine of the Perseverance of Saints in the Faith. When you
desire, I will produce more.

Moreover, that you may understand, that I do not abuse Scriptures for
confirmation of this doctrine, I will now produce both testimonies of the
fathers of the ancient church, as alse of later divines; whereby the same
sentence shall be so confirmed, as that unless a man will purpose* lie shut his
eyes against the truth, he can make no further doubt.

Out of the Fathers.
But I will not relate all the Testimonies of Fathers; both for that a short
confession will not bear it, and for that ye have many in my Praelections of
Perseverance, and confirmations thereof amongst the Acts (there) yet some I
will briefly remember.

Augustine is totallie on my side. Out of his books many testimonies are in my
Lectures; I will report one. To. 7. de corept. and gratia. cap* 12. He
compares grace given to Adam in the Creation, with that which is now given to
the Saints Elected; and he shows ours to be greater then that; for that he
had grace whereby he had power to persevere if he would, but not that whereby
he was willing to persevere; but we by Christ have received grace whereby we
have will to persevere, and therefore whereby we do^ pe^seuere. Primo ita^
homini. etc. Therefore to the first man, who in that good whereby he was made
upright he received power not to dye, power not to forsake that good, was
given assistance of perseverance, not whereby he did persevere, but without
which through free will he had not ability of perseverance: but now to the
Saints predestinate for the Kingdom of God* by Gods grace, not only such
assistance of perseverance is granted, but such as that perseverance it self
is given unto them, not only that without this gift they cannot but persevere.
For he did not only say, Without me John 15.
ye^ can do nothing; but he said also, Not ye^ have chosen me, but I you, and
^et you that ye should go, and bring forth much fruit, and that your fruit
should remain. By which words he did manifest that he gave unto them not only
justice, but also perseverance therein. For Christ so ordaining them, that they
should go and bring forth fruit, and their fruit should remain, who dare say
Perchance it shall not remain? For the gifts and calling of God are without
repentance: but it is the calling of such as are called of purpose. Therefore
Christ making intercession for them least their faith should fail, doubtless
it shall nor fail to the end; and hereby it shal^perseuer unto the end,
neither shall the non ^anen^em.
end of this life find it to be deficie^t.

Ambrose^ Romans 8. Nam quos praesciuit. Those (says he) who seem to believe,
and do not persist in the faith begun, are deemed as elect of God; for that
whom God has chosen they do continue with him. And a little after, upon these
words, Quos ante praedestina^^t; says he, he speaks the same as before:
because whom God has foreknowne as sit for himself, those beleiuing persist,
for that it cannot be otherwise.

Trimasius, Episcopus Vticensis, who was famous the very same time in Africa
with Augustine: in 1. Cor. upon these words, That your faith be not in the
wisdom of men but in the power of God etc. says he* humane wisdom is
pleasant for a short time for that it is temporary as man himself is; but the
power divine is eternal as God himself is: Therefore that faith is permanent
and bestowed upon man by the power of God.

Pros^er, Episcopus Rhegi^ns. Augustines disciple, Of the life Contemplative,
lib. 3. cap. 13. Charity (says he) as me thinks, is a right will alienated
utterly from all: terrene and things present, conjoined and united inseperably
to God. These things he. He says that Charity is a right will, for that
Charity by the Holy Ghost shed abroad in our hearts makes a right will, and
conioyneth it inseperably to God. And the Fathers are wont to ascribe that to
Charity, which is proper to faith working by love Therefore Prosper does teach,
that faith which work eth by love* does conioyn the faithful to God
inseperably.

Gregor. 1. To 2 l^b. in Ez^ch. cap. 1* hom. 3. col. 87. upon these words They
returned not when they went etc. This (says he) is spoken of the reprobate,
for that they returned in heart into AEgipt: the truth speaks by it self No
man putting his hand to the plough and looking b^^^kward, is fit for the
Kingdom of God. Indeed, to put the hand to the plough is (as it were) by the
ploughshare of compunction, to open the soil of the heart, for to bring forth
fruit. But he looks back behind the plough, who after the beginning of a good
work does return to the evils which he had forsaken, Which for that in no wise
it befalls the Elect of God, it is therefore rightly said by the Prophet,
verse. 17. They returned not when they went.

Likewise Homil. 5. They returned not when they walked: because the Elect every
of them, do so go on to good things, as that they do not retire from
committing of evil things. for he that continues out to the end shall be
saved.

Again in the same homily expounding those words, This was a ruuning Vision
etc. he teach^h* That the holy Spirit, according to the virtue of says, hope,
and love does never depart from the hearts of the Elect, but according to
Prophecy and differences of tongues, and such like, sometime to depart,
sometime to return: After this concluding; says he, therefore in those
virtues without which we cannot come to life, the holy Spirit in the hearts of
his Elect is permanent; but in those by which the power of sanctity is
manifested, sometime it is mercifully present, sometime mercifully absent. Thus
Gregory. In which words we may not regard whether aptly he did interpret the
Prophet or otherwise, but only what his determination was touching the
perseverance of the Saints.

To. ^. Moralium. lib. 2. cap. 28 and 29. he proposes a Question touching the
holy Spirit; How in John 14. that can be a concordance ( The Spirit shall abide
with you and be in you) with that Job. 1. (Upon whom ye shall see the Spirit
descending, and abiding upon him; he it is which baptizeth with the holy Ghost)
If also it abide in the disciples? How can it be therefore a peculiar sign,
whereby Christ is acknowledged to be him, who baptizeth in the spirit? Answering
the Question, and reconciling these places he puts difference between those
gifts of the holy Spirit* without the which we cannot come to life eternal, and
those without which we may attain it. Afterward his co^clusio^ is in these
words therefore in those gifts without which we cannot come to life, whether in
Preachers or in all the Elect, the holy Spirit is always permanent: But in
such gifts whereby by manifestation thereof not our life is saved, but the
life of others sought for, in no wise it is always permanent in the Preachers,
for that always indeed it bears rule in their heart for to live well, and
yet does not always show forth by them powerful signs, but sometime he
withdraws himself from manifestation of signs, that with so much more
humility his virtues may be accounted, by how much being had they cannot be
holden: But the Mediator between God and Man, the Man Jesus Christ, has it in
all things, and always, and continually present; for that from him the same
Spirit is by substance produced. Therefore fitly, whereas it abides in the holy
Preachers, it is said singularly to remain in the Mediator for that in them it
abides by grace for some thing; but in him by substance it abides for all
things.

Bed^ Praesbyter has plainly taught the same things upon John's Gospel, 1.
chap. expounding that place, Upon whom ye shall see the Spirit etc. For he
moves the very same Question which also Gregory did before him, and does give
altogether the same solution; The Holy Spirit in the Elect partly to abide for
aeternitie, partly to depart for to return* to abide aeternally in respect of
such virtues without which we cannot be saved; to parted for a time in respect
of other gifts.

Bernard* de natura and dignitate amoris diuini ^. 5. v. 6. speaking of the
nature of true Charity, which is, that it never fails, he cites that of
the Apostle 1. Cor 13. Charity does never fall away* and he says, that
sometime indeed the effect of affection and of working does stagger and wander,
so long as with this life Charitic cannot see but in part, and by a glass, and
in a mystery; but yet the entire and solid affection is always permanent in
her force. Chap. 6. thus he writes.

Disposition is one thing; Affection Affectus and Affectio.
another. Disposition is that which possesses the mind with a certain
general power and virtue firm and stable, which it has obtained by grace:
Affections are they, which in variety the variable events of things and times
do produce. For the infirmity of the flesh through the corruption of the
first original does often offend, often fall, often does grievously hurt, and
receives hurt; the Mind in wardly lamenting, and rather suffering then doing
that which is done amiss outwardly; yet not loosing Charity, but out of
Charity mourning and crying to God: Owretched man that I am, who shall deliver
me from the body of this death? Whereupon the Apostle says, I serve (says he)
the Law of God in my mind, but my flesh the Law of Sin: and again, Not I
do work that, but Sin dwelling within me. Therefore whosoever he be (as
blessed John says) in this regard that he is borne of God, that is, according
to the state of the inward man, so far forth he does not sin, in that he
rather abhors Sin, which works outwardly the body of death, he rather
hates then approoueth it; the seed of the spiritual birth whereby he is born
of God, inwardly preserving him. Which although in the mean while, by the
incursion of Sin, he is sometime hurt and battered, yet he does not perish,
for that the root of Charity is deeply fastened, nay rather more plentifully
and effectually he does gather strength and revive into hope of good fruit.
For says Saint John, for all that is borne of God, sins not, because the
seed abides in him, neither can he sin who is borne of God. The force of
the words is to be noted; He says not that he does commit sin; for he
rather suffers then does sin, that is borne of God: and he cannot sin,
scilieet by perseuering in sin, whilst that he makes have to subdue the
flesh to the Law of God, whereinto in mind he obeys, which seemed to be
servant to the Law of Sin, whilst temptation and Sin invaded him. P^ter,
when he sinned, lost not D^fecit fide^ consessio in ore, sed non d^fecit fides
in cord. Zanch. (...)
Charity, sor that he rather sinned against Verity then Charity; when he
lied with his mouth, That he knew him not, whose he was totally in his heart:
insomuch as that the Verity of Love did incontinently wash away the denial of
falsehood, So also David, when he sinned, lost not Charity; but (in a sort)
Charity was benumbed in him by the violent blow of Temptation; neither was
Love at all abolished in him, but (as it were) in a slumber, which, presently
after it awaked at the voice of the Prophet reproving, incontinently brake
forth into that most fervent confession of Love, I have sinne^ against the
lord: whereupon he worthily heard, Thoushalt not die.

Out of Luther, and other Divines.
LVTHER in Postilis True faith perpetual, and immovable.
Mayor. in Euang. Natiuit. Do^ini. Describing in the shepherds themselves the
quality of both, to wit, of true and not true, of Divine (as he speaks) and
of humane faith* he teaches the nature of true faith to be constant,
perpetual, and immovable, but of Faith not true, that in fine it utterly
fails. These are his words.

And from hence take out the difference of faith, both divine and humane.
Humane faith does adhaere to the man's person, give credence, believe his word,
and honor him for the speakers sake. But Divine faith contrariwise does clean
fast to the Word, which is God himself; and does believe, put affiance, and
reverence it, not for the speakers sake, but does perceive the word so
certainly, that no man can remove him from it. Such were these Samaritans of
whom we read Ioh. 4. That at the first indeed they were by the voice of a
Damsel excited to hear Christ; but after the hearing of him, they said to the
woman, We do not now believe for thy word sake, but for that we have known
him to be that Savior of the World. On the contrary side, so many as gave
faith to Christ, moved with his person and miracles, all of them again fell
away when Christ was crucified. So always it has been, and so it must be at
this day, unless the Word of it self do clearly manifest it self to the
heart, and (as it were) captiuate the same, in such sort as that they perceive
the certainty thereof to be such, as by no means they can thence be drawn,
yea if the whole World, all the Angels, all the Powers of Hell do say to the
contrary; nay if God himself should say otherwise, as oftentimes he is wont
to tempt his Elect, as seeming to appear unto them as if he intended to utter
things contrary to his former promises. Which fell out with Abraham, when he
was commanded to offer his son Isaac: as also to Jacob in his conflict with
the Angel; and with David, when he was pursued by Absalom. Such faith does
persist immovable, both in life and in death; as well in Hell as Heaven;
neither can it by any thing be dejected, for that it is founded upon the sole
and bare word of God, without all respect of persons. With such Faith these
shepherds were replenished. These things Luther.

Let likewise his whole* Homily be read in 14. Ioh. being the Gospel for the
Feast of Pentecost, which is, of the Holy Ghost.

Also in festo Sanctae Catharina; expounding the Gospel of the ten Virgins,
who had taken their Lamps he says. The wise Virgins are true Christians,
endued with true faith; such have oil always in their lamps: But the unwise
to be hypocrites, who have a counterfeit faith, and have no oil in their
Lamps. Therefore of true believers he says; Furthermore, such as are rightly
seasoned with the doctrine of the Gospel, do lightly regard these storms and
tempests, but persist immovable, and perse^^^e unto the end; and therefore are
truly blessed, as says Christ, He hat continues to the end shall be saved.

Likewise in the same place; the other Virgins had not only their Lamps in
their hands, but had also with their Lamps oil in a readiness, that is, true
faith, which God has laid up in their hearts: they are furnished how to defend
themselves if any harm befall them. For they have the work of God for
afsistance, not any fained opinion, which cannot beat off the assaults of
death; such did continue in the hope of the divine promises. These things
Luth^r. Therefore the true believers continue in hope. Also in the other page:
Hence is it (says he) that our Lamps shall never be extinguished. Thus much
he. Therefore the Lamp of true faith is never put out in the Saints.

The same Luther To. 5. in 1. Pet. 1. upon these words; We are borne again
not of corruptible but incorruptible seed. The word is forthwith preached and
heard; but when it takes possession of the heart, it cannot after die or be
abolished. Neither will it indeed suffer thee to die, but will conserve thee as
long as thou do adhere unto it. For example: When I do he are that Jesus
Christ suffered death, and has done away my sins, and deserved heaven for
me, and withal has given me all that he has, now I do hear the Gospel;
when this is published in words, presently it passes away: but if it be
received in the heart, and thou do embrace him by faith, now can he not any
more fall away: this truth can no creature demolish; the depth of Hell cannot
at all exp^gne it.

An Argument out of Luther.
WHAT SO EVER things Christ entreated for his Elect, those also he obtained;
for Christ was heard with effect. Luther in Ioh. 17. upon these words, I pray
for them, I pray not for the world. I doubt not (says he) but this prayer was
heard. Now Christ in that prayer Ioh. 17. prayed the Father for all the Elect,
which should believe in him, That he would keep them in the faith, and not
permit them at all to fall away from the faith* This does Luther plainly
deliver upon these words, I pray for them, I pray not for the World. Says
he; So he prays for Christians, and for all that shall be converted, that
they abide firm touching true faith and profit therein, and proceed, neither
that they sall away from it. These things Luther.

Therefore has Christ obtained for all the Elect, that they shall persist in
the faith, and never shrink from it: Wherefore it cannot be, in regard of
this prayer of Christ, that the Elect, being endued with true faith, should
utterly slide away from faith.

He that doubts whether Luther was of this judgment which I defend, does
certainly declare, That either he has not been much conversant in his books,
or does not understand Luther.

The testimonies of Bucer so many and such ye have in my Lectures, as that of
his determination no doubt can be made. But beside them, I will also put down
these of new.

In Mat. 6. And lead us not into temptation, page 70. in the Entrance. Seeing
then none can take them out of the Lords hands, Ioh. 10. And he in no wise
casts off such as come unto him. Io^. 6. It is necessary, that such as are
Christ's once, shall never be alienated from him.

In Ioh. 4. Upon these words, If thou knew the gift of God. For (says he)
as the living and springing water out of the fountain does always flow to
quench the thirst of men; So the Holy Spirit giving testimony to our Spirit,
that we be the Sons of God, does for ever take away the thirst of the good,
in that it makes them finally blessed in fullness, and here does refresh them
continually with sure faith: This is that fountain never failing, for that it
never forsakes such as it once inspireth.

Romans 8. in the Quaestion of Praedestination. page 361. not much before the
conclusion of the Third Question, He concludes Predestination to be a Divine
designement of the Saints unto this, that they should be made partakers of
everlasting salvation by Christ the Lord. This verily is salvation (says he)
that being inspired with Gods Spirit, thou may most fully see and soundly
judge that which is truly good, and prose quute the same with a most eager and
constant study. Here of it is a good consequent, That therefore the Elect unto
life aeternall are also Elect to this, that they should prose quute that which
is good with a continual study, or with perseverance. And that which is by
God decreed, cannot be made frustrate: wherefore the Elect and Saints cannot
but persevere in faith.

Likewise in ep. ad. Ephesians s. c^p. 1. upon these words, He has chosen us that
we should be holy; Paul (says he) Romans. 8. does treat of Election, as is
meet; And when the Saints are compassed with most grievous afflictions, they
would often distrust amongst these evils whereunto they are thrown, of the
glory promised to the sons of God, if they did not rely upon this buckler.
For it will come to pass, that whatsoever their sufferings be, they shall be at
last glorified. Neither can they be dispelled by any thing out of their
inheritance which is in Christ Jesus: He is our everlasting Mediator, and we
for ever joined unto him: our union with Christ is inseparable, nether can it
be but for ever.

Also upon the same, 1. chap. in his short treatise of faith, page. 34. Faith,
although it be infirm, even in the Saints, and therefore also (more to be
lamented) they do commit the more sins, as every where both the old and new
Testament do testify, and examples too evident do declare, as in Peter,
David, and others; yet does it not suffer him, who is therewith endued,
utterly to lie under as surprised. He tries our faith, but yet for this
purpose, that we may understand how much imperfection is always intermixed in
us. Hence are are afflictions; and from thence these voices in the Psalm. O God
have thou forgotten me? have thou forsaken me? From hence it fell out that
Peter by the Damsel was assalted and afflicted with the batterings of
temptation, but yet he fell not for ever, for that God put under his hand. For
God does always sppport his Elect, that at last he shall swim out, and break
through, for the gifts and calling of God is without repentance. And what shall
we say to these things. If GOD be on our side, who shall be against us? which
words of Paul are not to be understood of some, but of al Gods elect. And God
does solace us against this debility of faith by the mighty power of Christ,
whereby he bears rule over all, and has dominion over death and sin. For
he verily died, but he rose again, death being subdued he ascended to the
Father, sits at his right hand, makes intercession for us; and let all the
Elect apply these things to themselves, and say, He arose for me. etc. And
seeing he is our head, he shall ^^relie quicken us, and confirm us; neither
can he derelinquish the duty of a true head. For we live for his sake, which
loved us; therefore we live not for our own love. Without doubt ours is
required, but it is imperfect, and cannot uphold the hope of life aeternall.
Therefore that our hope might be certain, the cause of our life is settled in
him, not in us. And therefore whatsoever excuse is alleged touching
uncertainty of faith, whatsoever commanded and delivered, is utterly impious
and blasphemous against the might, amplenesses, majesty, and love, and
dispensation of Christ, and does o^erturne all faith, and authority of the
word: which Paul presses, Romans 8. and every where else.

Likewise page 38. in the Treatise of the Church, quinto signo. Touching
Perseverance (says he) we have a place 1. Ioh. 2. If they had been of us,
they would surely have continued with us: And that, He that is borne of God,
sins not, is thus to be understood, He sins not wittingly and of
knowledge, He sins not impenitently; for that a certain efficacacie of the
Spirit of Christ does bear him up. For though many sins do yet beset the
godly, yet do they not persevere in them, or consent thereunto with a
suffocation of conscience, or of the Law of God. See Augustine Of Repentance,
against the Donatists. All these things Buc^r.

Here ye perceive (my Lords) First; that not unfitly I did entreat of the
perseverance of the Saints, when I did interpret that place of John, If they
had been of us, they would verily have continued with us. Again, neither did
I interpret amiss that place of John, He that is born of God sins not, in
my Treatise of Perfeuerance* when I gave this interpretation, That the Saints
born of God did not sin from the heart, or with their total and plenarie
will: and therefore not against their full conscience. Thirdly, ye see that to
be impious, which my Adversary did publish in the Schools, That such men are
Regenerate and sanctified, who may sin against conscience, and even persevere
in the same sins with madness.

Again page 39. Of them (says he) when it is said that they cannot sin, it
is only to be understood of Perseverance, and a study to sin. Thus Bucer.
Therefore the Saints do not sin, neither purposely, nor with perseverance.

And then presently: They sin (says he) but they do not lie in their
sins, neither does sin reign in them: but finally they are erected, and
hear, and follow their shephea^d.

Romans 8. Sect. 4. upon this, In that we pray, etc. page 343. The Saints indeed
do live and are led with the spirit of Christ, as Paul taught a little before;
but while our most gracious Father does humble us with adversity, and does
make us see our Nothingnes of our selves, There this spirit, whereby we cry
Abba Father, which does contestate the good will of God toward us, in all
things, and withal does make us even glory in our afflictions, as it were is
oppressed; the flesh which is weak to all honest things prevails, the
terror of Gods judgment does wholly possess us. From hence we feel nothing
but detestarion of Gods judgments, but a deploring of our own lot, and
accusation of God to burst forth, and to be tossed too and fro in our minds.
Hereupon are those most grievous complaints of Job, Jeremy, and the Psalmist.
God now is accused of excessive and unjust severity; we curse his holy and
just works; we do execrate our whole life, and such things as were
serviceable to produce or preserve life* So Job and Jeremy did curse the very
night and day wherein they were conceived and borne. But because, in that,
though most grievous praecipitation and intolerable exagitation of mind, the
Saints do still live in the Spirit of God; for the same does never forsake
them; therefore has it incessantly its operation in them, and always the
motion thereof. And that is nothing else but to cry Abba, father, that is to
pray for Gods help.

In his Book of the true reformation of Churches, fol. 135. out of those words
Ioh. 6. Whither shall we^ go, thou have the words of eternal life; he
infers saying: whereby he does clearly express, that such as do truly
believe, and by believing do soundly know, the Lord Jesus Christ to be the
Savior of me^, and to have the words of eternal life, cannot depart from him.
Whereupon the Lord so often here of uses repetition, That such have eternal
life who believe in him.

Again upon the three last verses of the 80. Psalm. This likewise redounded
out of the same spirit (says he) We will not decline from th^e. for that they
are sealed with such a spirit of the sons of God, insomuch as that they can
never fall away from it,

And whereas to all these and other most manifest places of Bucer in a manner
infinite touching perseverance, some do object three places, ex Refor.
Coloniensi, as though there were a repugnancie therein, they do nothing effect
thereby. For we have given demonstration in our answers to our accusers
arguments, That they are so far from being contradictory, as that they implie
mutual confirmation, First there it is taught that true faith cannot consist
with sin against the Conscience: and this we concluded out of Bucer, but we
added withal both according to the Scriptures and Bucers doctrine, That the
Saints do not sin against plenary conscience: nay therefore the Saints not
to commit these sins because they are endued with true faith which cannot
endure these sins to be with it; Agame, there it is laid down that many have
and do fall from grace and faith. The examples which are alleged are partly
of the reprobate partly of the Elect, as of David.

We likewise, according to Bucers doctrine, do teach thatt both the Elect and
Reprobate when they sin by consent, may be said to fall from grace and faith,
but not altogether after the same manner. For the Reprobate, for that they do
sin against conscience plenarily, they do utterly and fully fall from grace,
and do entirely loose that temporary faith totally which they had.

But the Elect, for that they do not sin with a full will, and full consent,
therefore neither fully nor utterly they fall away from grace, neither utterly
loose their faith, but partly; that is they are so said to fall from the grace
of their heavenly father, as sons from the grace of their parents, when as
they by their evil manners or offenses do provoke them to anger yet so, as that
they neither cease to be parents, nor they to be children. And so they are said
to loose faith, as fire is said to be extinguished, when either by wet fuel
cast upon it, it is suffocated, or for want of wood the heat is remitted; but
yet so, as the whole fire is not put out. Therefore by these places nothing is
concluded against such and such others produced by me for Perseverance.

O Ecolampadius in Ep. Ioh. trimam demegor. 8. upon these words, If they had
heene of us they would have continued with us: From hence (says he) some do
collect, That such as are once truly illuminated, cannot fall totally from
faith, and utterly sly out of the Church: for although Peter denied Christ,
yet went he not utterly away. We know that a revelation was made unto him of
the father, not from flesh and blood and that he sinned we are not ignorant,
neither yet did his faith utterly fail as neither of David the adulterer; from
whence by repentance both of them returned. But if some go out so as that they
do not return, we do at no hand believe that they were truly illuminated.
For such as reuert, have yet safe the seeds of faith, neither are they
altogether desperate, neither do any of such so go out as do the Antichrists,
who not being truly illnminated did go out, so that either they should oppugn
the known truth, or their brethren for the truths sake; for we do not read
that any such have returned: for they sinned with an unpardonable sin, that
is, against the Holy Ghost, which is neither remitted in this nor in the life
to come. Let every one consider what faith he has hitherto had, and pray God
continually to increase my faith, help mine unbelief; least either he be
drawn away with such a number of Antichrists, or be unprepared when the Lord
Jesus comes and calls. So be it, Amen.

This testimony of OEcolampadius can neither my adversary nor any other reject
as discordant with the Augustane confession, or coudemne it as haereticall
doctrine; but he must withal reject and condemn D. Hedion, as one who did
approve doctrine both haeretical and repugnant to the Augustane Confession, and
proposed it to be read and received of the people of a Argentme; for Strausburg.
he translated these Sermons of OEcolampadius, out of Latin into the Germane
Language, that they might be read even of the people.

Musculm in loc^s communibus, Of remission of sins, cap. 6. concludes That
forgiveness of sins, once obtained, cannot in the Elect be made frustrate;
and that for this reason, because they never so do sin that they fall away
from grace: says he, Every sin does not extinguish grace praecedent; but the
return to our old impretie, as to the vomit, does extinguish it. It is one
thing to defile the feet, after the Lauer; and another thing, to tumble again
with the whole body, like the filthy sow, in the filthy wallow. It is one
thing if the wife do often offend her husband; and another, if being
faithless she does violate by adulte^ie the conjugal faith and bond, and do
make her self deuoided of all matrimonial association. So it is one thing,
simply to sin, which is incident even to the sons of God; another thing,
utterly to fall awaic from the grace of God, to slide away to crucife Christ a
fresh, and to exexpose him unto reproach, which is the property of the
reprobate, not of the Elect. Of the latter kind of sinning the Epistle to the
Hebrews speaks, not of the former; thereupon cap. 10, he speaeketh
expreslie, By how greater punishment shall be vexed think yea, who trampeleth
under foot the Son of GOD, and does recompe the blood of the Testament as a
thing profane, by which he was sanetified, and does despite the spirit of
grace. He speaks of the same relapse whereof he treated cap. 6. Of the
former the Apostle, 1. Ioh. 2. speaks, If any man sin, we have an advocate
with the Father. These things Musculus.

Philip Melancthon, to omit other most evident places of this point, in other
Tomes, I will only recite such things as he writ in his last exposition upon
the first epistle to the Corinthians. cap. 10. upon these words. But God is
faithful, etc. he proposes this question in this form: But seeing so many
being overcome of Satan and their own frailty, do run headlong into their
own ruin; for example, the greatest part of the people in the wilderness;
and the Parable of the Sower. cap. 13. Matthew. does signify most men to fall
away from God: How can this agree with these words, seeing such a multitude is
not preserved? To this Question he returns answer in these words; I answer:
In the church there have always been two parts; one, having beginning of
fear and says, which though they be infirm, yet have they exercises of
repentance and invocation, and do retain the fear of God, and faith, Of this
part that is spoken, To him that has shall be given: also, Psalm. 144. The Lord
is nigh to all them that call upon him in verity: again, How much more will
your heavenly Father give his holy Spirit to them that ask him? again. Esai.
66. To whom shall I have respect, but to the contrite in spirit, and that
tremble at my word? the other part is secure without the exercises of
repentance rnd invocation, besotted with pleasures, or admiration and
confidence of their own wisdom and justice; as Saul, Achitophel, Absalom, and
infinite others. These are overcome of Satan, for that they want the fear of
GOD, they know not their own infirmity, they are without remorse, and do not
desire help from God.

Philip first propounds the Question of such as are so tempted in the Church,
that they fall into sin, as many did amongst the Corinthians: therefore here
is no mention but of them who do fall into sin.

Saul, Achitophel, Absolon, who he also says were overcome of the Devil.
Therefore it is apparent, that the Elect are not contained under this second
rank: therefore of necessity they are recompted under the first sort. For it
is without all doubt, that under the name of these two parts, he purposed to
understand the Elect and Reprobate: but in this his old age he willingly did
forbear from the names of the Elect and Reprobate.

To him that has shall be given. Who does not see here that D. Philip was of
this determination; the Elect, although by frailetie they sell into some
sins, yet always to retain faith and the fear of God: And why? for that as
he had taught before, the Elect, amongst which was David, are not tempted but
with temptation after the manner of men. Now humane temptation, for that it is
without contempt of the Word, does retain the Word, and therefore faith. For
humane temptation, as Philip defines it, is doubtfulnesse or error, or a fall,
arising of human infirmity, and not with such a confirmed outrage that the
mind is become Epicureall, or that there is an access of persequuting the
known Truth, or hatred of God, as was the fall of David, of whom he says
expressly thus; very lamentable was the fall of David, and Satan did not
lightly assalt him, yet could not he drive him to an Epicureal contempt of
God, or hatred, as he forced Saul. If he did not contemn or hate God, therefore
he did retain the fear of God, and love, and so faith in him. Seeing then
that all the Elect are assalted with this human temptation, it follows out
of the sentence of D. Philip* That all the Elect can never be drawn into
contempt or hatred of God, and therefore to retain the fear of God, and faith.

Brentius in Ioh. 17. homil. 34. We have declared (says he) what fruits they
do produce, who abide in CHRIST JESUS our true and only Savior. Now let us
explane what be the discommodities of such as do not abide in CHRIST, that he
who is not excited by profit to seek and retain Christ, may be provoked by
the damages and incommodites of the contemners, and forsakers of him, If any
(says he) does not abide in me, he is cast out as a branch, and withers, and
they gather it, and cast it into the fire and burn it. That these things may
truly be understood, it must be known who is he that does not remain in
Christ. And first, he abides not in Christ, who falls away to Judaism or
Tu^cisme. This is a gross kind of defection from Christ: which not only the
godly, but also even the wise of this world hold in detestation. Again, he
does not abide in Christ; who although he glory of Christ, and does seem to
acknowledge him, yet he puts confidence in the merits of his works; of
which sort are Popish shauelings, Monks, and Hypocrites in Christianisme. For
we are in Baptism espoused to Christ upon this condition That we should
acknowledge him the only and alone Savior, and purger of our sins. But if
any not content with this only and alone Redeemer, does think that even
himself by his own justice can expiate sins, and pacify God, he does
uiolate his faith given to Christ; and fall away from Christ. So Paul does
accuse the Galathians of defection from Christ. Whosoever of you (says he) are
instified by the Law, are fallen from grace. Lastly, he does not abide in
Christ, who while he does acknowledge the name of Christ, does lead a lewd
life, walks according to the flesh, and is a servant to sin. For it cannot
be, that Christ should abide in him who sins against his conscience, and
does give over himself as captive to the lusts of the flesh: for if Christ
abide not in him, how can he abide in Christ? John says, He that says I know
him, and does not keep his commandments is a lier, and the truth is not in
him: again, If any shall say, I love God, and hates his brother, he is a
lier: and Paul, If any do not provide for his, and chiefly his h^ushould, he
has denied the faith, and is worse then an infidel. It is therefore manifest,
that such as lead a godless life, though they brag of the name of Christ,
yet they do not abide in Christ. What then shall become of such as do not
continue in Christ? Verily the selfsame thing as is wont to befall the
branches not abiding in the Vine: for they being cut off from the Vine, are
cast out, and being withered they are gathered into bundels, and thrown into
the fire, to burn; neither are they fit for any other use but to feed the
fire. These things Brentius.

Here I do find three ranks of men; Apostats, Hypocrites, and licentious
livers, or notoriously wicked.

The fourth, which is of the Saints, that is of such as which neither in
perfidie do revolt from the faith of Christ to Iudaisme or Turcisme, neither
do repose their confidence, either to tall or in part, in their own merits,
but fully and entirely in sole Christ alone, neither yet either lead a wicked
life, or give over themselves captives to sin, but rather study for
sanctity of life, and resist sin: And although, while they walk aright,
they do slip and offend sometime, yet never do they either love sin, or
commit sin with a full consent of will, or persevere in sin. Therefore he
either holds opinion, that men truly holy, and truly believing in Christ do
always remain in Christ; and therefore never to fall utterly from faith and
from Christ; or if he think that even the very Saints can fall from Christ,
then did he not recompt all sorts of such men as do not abide in Christ: or
finally, if he will have even this same kind that is of the Saints, to be
comprised in any of the three former, he has done great injury to the
Saints, that he has not distinguished them, and severed them by some marks,
from those most vile sorts of men. But it is most probable, that such a man
would either make no difference be tweene the Saints and those three conditions
of men, Apostles, Hypocrites, and notoriously wicked; or in that his
distribution not to comprehend all the kinds of such, as do not continue in
Christ. Therefore it follows according to that partition of D. Brentius, that
this fourth rank of men, that is, of the Saints, seeing it differs from
these three in quality of faith and life, that they in like sort differ
herein, That whereas they do not abide in Christ; theso do never fall from
Christ.

The same Brentius in Ioh. 6. homil. 56. Upon these words, No man ^an come to
me except my Father draw him. Jesus Christ (faith he) is the book of the life
celestial, into which whosoever is enrolled by faith, there is no doubt but
that he is written in the very heart of God, and appertains to the
Congregation of the heavenly Citizens. But thou say, I do fear least either
my faith be not sincere, or that at last it willanguish: What? Do thou
think that God will either break a bruised Reed, or quench the smoking
Flax? The Mother does not reject her infant, either as yet tender in age, or
weak by sickness, but rather with so much a greater care does cherish it, by
how much more extreme the sickness has been. And should God the Father be
harder then a Mother in Mankind against him, though weak in faith, to whom
he has promised in his Son Christ all clemency? Thou know not the
tenor of that saying; whereunto it tends, Lord, I beleeus, help mine
unbelief. Therefore it is not to be feared lest God cast thee off for thy
feeble faith, but rather diligence to be given by the continual exercise of
the word, prayer, and obedience, that Faith by the efficacy of the Spirit
principally may more and more be augmented. But what is this that thou art
careful of thy perseverance, in faith? Do thou thy office in perseverance, the
rest God will care for. Do thou not know, that he is faithful, who will not
suffer us to be tempted above our strength? but will give an evasion together
with the temptation, that we may bear it? My sheep (says Christ) do^ hear my
voice, and I know them, and they follow me, and I give unto them ^ternall life;
they shall never perish, neither shall any man take them out of my hards. Thou
now verily art made a sheep of Christ, who know Christ by faith; why
therefore do thou fear least any should take thee out of the hand of Christ?
Thou can not doubt of the will of Christ, testified through out the Gospel.
But happily thou doubtest of his power: but he adds in the next words, The
Father which gave the^ me is greater then all; and no man can take them out of
my fathers hands. What think thou Christ's petition to be frustrate and
fruitless? I pray not only for them (says he) but for them also that shall
believe in me through their pre^ching, that they all may be one, as thou
father in me, and I in the^. But likewise Paul says: I am persuaded that
neither death nor life, neither Angels, nor Principali^ies, nor Powers, nor
things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other
creature, can separate us from the love of God, wherewith God embraces us in
Christ Jesus our Lord. Hear also that of the Prophet: The mountains shall be
shalen, and the hills tremble, but my mercy shall not depant from thee, and the
covenant of my peace shall not be moved, says thy merciful Lord. Wherefore,
it is to be compted infallibly certain, that God who has given to thee his
Son, and by whom thou have received faith, will also provide, that thou shall
also retain this his Son even in the midst of death, or (that I may speak
more rightly) thou rather be retained and conserved by him. These things
Brentius.

Who may not here perceive the scope of Brentiu^ to have been, That whosoever
does perceive himself to be endued with true faith in Christ, he should not
further make doubt of his eternal salvation* And that he may attain unto
this, he remoueth a double fear, which do weaken this certainty. The first
fear is, lest the Lord cast us off, for that our faith is faint and infirm.
This he takes away by the promise in Es^i, That the Lord will not quench
smoking Falxe. The other fear, lest our faith at last should fail, and that
we should not persevere in faith. This fear he expels by many arguments.
First, for that God is faithful, who will not suffer us to be tempted above
our strength. 1. Cor. 10. Secondly, that Christ will not permit any of his
sheep to be taken out of his hands, Ioh. 10. Thirdly, that the prayer of
Christ is effectual, wherein he makes request for all that shall believe in
him, and therefore even has obtained to them all, That as He and the Father
are always one; so they should abide one in Christ Jesus for ever. And this is
perseverance, Fourthly, he confirms us in this certainty of perseverance in
the faith; first, by the example of the Apostle, Romans 8. That nothing can
separate the Elect from Christ; again by the promise in Esai, cap. 54. That
Gods mercy shall never depart from the Elect. Finally, he concludes, That we
ought to be most certain of our perseverance, for that God the Father who gave
us his Son, and did effect, that we by faith should receive him, will even
altogether take care that we may perpetually retain him; or (rather) that we
may be retained of him, to wit, in faith and in himself, and be also
conserved. Wherefore, if no doubt is to be made of the believers and Saints,
according to the determination of D. Brentius, touching their perseverance in
Christ and in faith, and therefore of their eternal salvation, and (that) for
the promises of God which he related concerning this point, and for the prayer
of Christ, which he says was effectual; it is manifest, that such as are
truly Saints, and true believers, will persevere in faith and in Christ, and
therefore cannot utterly fall away from faith and from Christ, and (that) for
the promise of God and the prayer of Christ, as my Position voucheth.

There be (in a manner) infinite testimonies in the writings of this learned
man, for the perseverance of Saints, and certainty of salvation. I will only
add hereunto one more. Upon Job. 10. homil. 81. upon those words, No man shall
take them out of my hand; What (says he) should I speak of Death? Is this of
such power, that it can take from Christ his sheep? But as Death could not
detain Christ in his power; so neither can it withhold such as believe in
Christ. I will speak that which is more; No sin is so great, that it can
separate a sheep of Christ from his shepherd. For this Shepherd has
ransomed all sins: and the grace of God which Christ has purchased, is
greater then the sin which made alienation between God and man. For, where
sin (says St. Paul) did abound, there did grace more abound; that as sin
reigned in death, so also grace might re^gne by righteousness to life eternal
by Jesus Christ. What then? Shall we sin, because sin cannot take away
Christ from the sheep of Christ? surely nothing less to be done then to
sin. For such as are truly the sheep of Christ, they are so much more
watchful from committing sin, the more fully they acknowledge sin to be
done away by Christ; for they do rejoice by all manner of means to testify
their gratitude of mind to Christ-wards, and to conserve his loving kindness.
Therefore Gratitude is declared to Christ-wards by obedience of righteousness
toward Christ. These things Brentius.

I have named only the principal Doctors of Germany; for I suppose their
testimony to be more then sufficient to ratify my sentence, touching the
perseverance of the Saints in faith: but if ye require more testimonies, I
will produce them most willingly for I have many of them in a readiness.

Concerning foreign testimonies, I spare to speak at this present, for that
in a case so certain and perspicuous, I have no need of their suffrages with
us Germains. Lately also in that most famous University of Marpurge, besides
other positions, this also was discussed, defended, and confirmed, and (in
testimony of the approbation thereof) was with other things committed to the
Press and diuulged, which is set down Numb. 14. and is thus put down
verbatim, Into whom (scilicet Christ) if any be once truly ingraffed, he, for
that neither the spouse does cast him out, neither can any take him out of the
shepherds hand, of necessity he must be both certain of his salvation,
neither at any time can he utterly be plucked away either from this conjunction
with the Spouse, or can totally fall away from his Shepherd. Ioh. 6. and 10.

Now paetermitting the testimonies of many others I will only anexe touching
this matter, the judgment of D. Hesh^sius himself: and that I do for just
causes, whereof the least is not this, That ye may understand that I was most
wrongfully accused both by word and writing of my Colleagues, both with you and
all the Citizens, of a grievous offense committed against the Augustane
Confession; Because I taught, That the Elect being once endued with a true
faith in Christ, can never again utterly fall away from faith and from Christ.
Surely D. Heshusius* does not give place to D. M. in the defense of the
Augustane Confession. And whereas Heshusius has taught, written, and
published, the self same things of the pers^uerance of the Saints, which I
also taught in your School* it follows that either Heshusius himself also
did write against the Augustane, Confession, or that D. M. did not understand
it; and therefore in his ignorance did both condemn me unjustly, as also
disturb the whole city.

Heshusius his words; De s^ruo arbitrio, published An. 1562. are these*
Quartus gradus etc. The fourth degree of the operation of the Spirit, is the
perfection of salvation, or the gift of perseverance, whereby we persist
constantly in the faith, that certain salvation may be attained: for not all
who are illuminated by the word, and have tasted the first fruits of faith, do
retain this salvation given them, but many again do cast off faith, shake off
the holy Spirit, and fall from grace as Christ says, Their latter end is worse
then their beginning. Luo. 11. This is therefore a peculiar benefit of the holy
Spirit which be falls the Elect alone; That they are so established in faith,
as that they cannot fall away from it. And in this operation of the holy
Spirit, as there is no merit of ours; so is there no cooperation. For it does
depend on Gods sole mercy and unsearchable Election. For it is not of him that
wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy, And Phillip 2.
it is said, It is God that works in us both the will and the deed, that is
that we persist in faith,. And Philip. 1. I am content, that he who has begun
a good work in you, will finish it until the day of Jesus Christ. Ier. 32. I
will give my fear into their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. Which
testimonies do clearly euince that perseverance (of whom Christ speaks; he
that continues unto the end shall be saved) to be a mere and free gift of God,
and the work of the sole holy Spirit perfecting the same in the Elect. These
things He: then which nothing can be spoken more holy and apparent. Would to
God our did understand this doctrine.

Now hear your selves in your Confession An. Domini 1539. art. 7. This sole
and only Mediator has taken away our sins, reconciled us to his father,
has imparted to all them the holy Spirit and Regeneration, whom the Father
has given unto him, and such as hear his word. This Regeneration together
with all the merits of Christ, the holy Spirit inspireth into the hearts of the
faithful, and does conserve it unto the end. Let the word of conservation be
observed; if the holy Spirit in the Elect do conserve Regeneration unto the
end, and (that) for the merits of Christ, who has obtained both of them unto
us; And Regeneration cannot be preserved, unless faith also be withal
conserved: Therefore the Elect cannot, being now regenerate, and by faith, in
graffed into Christ, utterly fall away from faith and from Christ; and (that)
for the prayer and merits of Christ. Now the conclusion of that your confession
is thus put down word for word; Whatsoever is repugnant to that which is now
spoken, we acknowledge to be erroneous and false, and therefore worthily to
be renounced: But that doctrine diametrically is repugnant, Whereby it is
denied, That in the Elect (regenerate) regeneration once begun cannot by the
Holy Spirit be conserved unto the end; and therefore also that assertion, That
the Regenerate can loose, and that many of them indeed have lost and do loose
the Spirit of Regeneration. Therefore what to judge of this Position, and how to
determine, you understand.

Moreover of the says specially of David and Peter, which two principally and
by name were most cruelly buffeted by my friends, what I think that ye have
explained amongst my Acts, to wit, in the answers to all the Arguments of my
Adversaries, The sum is this: So far as can be gathered both out of the
sacred Scriptures, and Fathers, and the most worthy Doctors of our Age, Neither
of them, when they sinned, did totally loose faith, and utterly fall from the
grace of God; And the reason is: For neither, of them did sin of purposed
malice; God preserving both of them from the sin of that quality, and
continuing his fear and faith in both of them. Which from hence specially
appears: for that both of them did so repent, as that neither of them did
again return to the sins of the same kind. But besides the general
testimonies produced, and arguments, we might also allege some few else of
the constant faith of both of them, if formerly we had not produced more then
were necessary.

Of Peter there is a primary place, Luc, 22. I have prayed for thee Peter, that
thy faith fail not.

Tertul. de fuga. pa. 540 does otherwise teach of Peter's faith; That it was
battered by Satan, but yet protected by God at the intercession of his Son:

Aug. To. 7. de corrept. and gratia. c. 1^. de omni sideli qui super Petrum
ipsum aedisicatus est, intelligendam docet. Mota fuit sides Petri, sed non
amota. Robur sidei concussum, sed non excussum. To. 4. lib. 83. quoest. c. 8.
col. 1334. Cum rogaret ne deficeret sides eius, quid aliud (...) gauit, nisi vt
haberet just de liber fortis. in^ictis. per seuerantis volun^atem. Item. Quid
^irogauit nisipers^ueran vsque in finem. Chrisost. in Mat. 26. hom. 88.
nondefi^^re, id est, non cuanescere. Idem in Ezech. To. 2. hom. 15. col. 218.
Cum negauit Christum, suit scuherba, cuius viriditaserat in mente, quauit ipsa
herba valde flexibilis pede conculcare^ur ^imoris.
Augustine also other-wise. To. 7. de. cor^: and gratia. c. 6. Christ did pray
for Peter's preseuerance unto the end ca. 7. Peter's faith failed not, for that
Christ obtained to him a most strong and invincible will to persevere.
Chrysostom other-wise, who. To. 2. in Matthew. cap. 26. homil. 3. says:
Christ did pray for Peter, not that he should not deny him, but that by his
denial his faith should not vanish. Theophilact other-wise in Luke 22. who
says: That Peter was shaken for a time, yet he retained the seeds of faith:
And although by the blast of the Tempter the leaves were blown down, yet the
root lived. Gregory the first otherwise in Job. 34. where he says, That
Peter fell upon infirmity, therefore the strength of his faith was battered (as
one would say) but yet not demolished: and that God, whom he denied in voice,
he retained in heart.

Bernard otherwise, lib. de natura, and dignitate amoris diuini cap. 6. who
says; That Peter, when he sinned, did not yet loose charity, when he lied in
word that he was not he, whose he was totally in heart.

Lut. likewise, otherwise To 5. in cua. Ioh. cap. 17. And Bucer upon Ioh. cap.
6. sect. 5. in epist. ad. To. c. 7, where he teaches directly contrary both of
Peter and David, to that which my Aduerseries blunder out, as also (before
Bucer) Bernard had taught of them both. lib. de dig. amoris. cap. 6. The same
plamely Bucer delivers of them both, nay of all the Elect, regenerate by the
Spirit of God. Psalm. 1. and Psalm 51. Like-wise in libro do reconciliatione
Ecclesiarum. Art de Iustif. And (which is more) Philip. himself, in 1. Cor.
10. where he makes great difference between the sins of Saul and David, and
denies that Satan entered into the heart of David, as of Saul, or that the word
was taken out of his heart, as of Saul's: He says also, that Satan did
grievously assalt 'Dauid, but could never draw him to Epicureall contempt, or
hatred of God, as he brought Saul. How then are not some ashamed to aequalize
the sin of Peter to the sin of Judas; and David's sin to Saul's
wickedness? and to cry out clamorously, as well the one as the other to have
lost faith totally? Now also (most excellent Worthies) what my faith and
confession is touching the perseverance of the Saints in the faith, abundantly,
and (as I hope) apparently ye have mine explanation.

Blessed be God.
SVNRDY POSITIONS OVT OF THE PRAELECtions of ZANCHIVS, which were carped at by
his Adversaries; accordingly as he was en^^ined by his Reverend Masters to
exhibit a sum of them.
The whole Treatise of the Book of Life is distinguished into these Positions.
A BOOK is not ascribed to God, but only Metaphorically, and it is nothing
else but an eternal, certain, and firm Decree, and Praescience in God, for
all such things: which either he or we are intending to do.

2 Three Books by Metaphor are attributed to God: One is, wherein all men and
their names were written, yea even before they were borne. And this is nothing
else but the Praescience, whereby God from all aeternitie did foresee all men
whom he did purpose to create, their names and actions, whereof in Psalm. 139.
and appertains to Gods providence: so that it may be called the Book of Gods
providence. The next is that wherein are written all men which are born and
Aug. de ^iu. del. 20. c. 14
their actions, that every one according to their actions may likewise be
judged, whereof Apoc. 20. And this belongs to the general judgment of God:
so that it may rightly be termed the Book of the general judgment. And this
is nothing else, but the knowledge or remembrance which God has of all such
things as each one has, or does do; that according to the things he has
done every one may be judged. The third Book is that, wherein all that truly
belong to life eternal were written from all aeternitie, that is, were fore
known and praedestinate. And this is nothing else, but that aeternall and
certain Praescience of God, and Praedestination of al them, whom God has
decreed aeternally Aug. ib. c. 15. Non Deum isle liber coinmemora^sed
Praedestination^m significat.
by Christ to preserve to life everlasting whereupon as in the Scriptures it is
called the Book of Life; so also it may be termed the Book of Praedestination.

3 Although by the name of the Book of Life, the Holy Scripture and Law of God
be understood; us Eeeles. 24 for that it gives precepts appertaining to life:
sometime also that good and temporary opinion which the Church holds of
Hypocrites, while they abide in the faith of Christ, as though they likewise
did belong to life aeternall, is called usually the Book of Life: yet properly
the Book of Life is that certain and eternal Praedestination, wherein all,
who shall be saved Exodus 32. Dan. 12. Ezech 13. Luc. 10. Phil. 4. Apoc. 3. 11.
^0. 14. 21.
by Christ, are written, never again to be razed out. And of this Book
speaks Esaias, in this fourth Chapter.

4 Such as were once written in this Book of Life, they can never be blotted
out; Or such as are Praedestinate to life aeternall, can never from thence be
rejected into death aeternall.

5 Some (to wit Hypocrites) are Deleantur secundum spem eor^m; secundum autem
aquit at em tu^m quid dico? non scribantur. Aug. i^* ^n Psalm.
said to be razed out of the Book of Life, when their Hypocrisy being
discovered, they appear both to the Church, and to themselves, what manner men
they are, and that they are not truly prae-ordained to life everlasting.

Axioms which were propounded touching the Book of life, to be disputed upon
in the Schools.
THE Book of life that Divine purpo wherein all a^e written to aeternall life,
to be possessed for Christ's sake, whom from everlasting God has adopted to
himself for his sons.

2 Whosoever are written in this Book, are called effectually justified,
sanctified, and of necessity to be glorified.

3 Such as are once enrolled in this Book, can never be again blotted out.

4 Whosoever being called to the Gospel believes in Christ, ought to believe
that himself is written in the Book of Life, together with all other the
Saints from all aeternitie.

5 And therefore he ought, relying upon this confidence, in sanctity of this
present life, go out industruously to that glorious life to come, in a right
course by the way of good works.

6 For whosoever of us are recorded in the Book of life, we are no less
designed to follow sanctity and do good works, then to attain life it self.

The Treatise of Grace stands upon these branches.
THE five degrees of our salvation are gathered out of the words of the
Prophet Esai. 4. First, The grace of God eternal in Christ, whereby alone he
was moved to praedestinate and save us. Secondly, Praedestination it self, or
our conscription to life eternal. Thirdly, Our effectual Vocation to Christ
and Holiness. Fourthly, Justification or remission of sins, and our washing
from filthiness, after which follows sanctification, and reformation.
Fifthly, the continual guidance of God, after which follows everlasting
peace, life, glorification.

2 So it is called grace, for it is Aug. ^p. ad Sextum praesq^ter. and de
natura and gratia. c. 4.
freely given. And this Etymology does belong to Gods graces, That they are
freely given.

3 Grace is divided into Grace which is not only freely given, but also makes
acceptable to God; and into that Grace, which indeed is freely given, but does
not make acceptable to God: for which cause that is called of the Schoolmen,
Grace making grateful: but this; Grace freely given.

4 Grace making grateful, is properly the everlasting favor of God, and free
benevolence; wherewith he has loved us in Christ, and whereby he was only
moved to elect us unto aeternall life, redeem, call, justify, glorify.

5 This Grace making us acceptable, or the free love and favor of God to us
ward, is in God himself; in us only the knowledge and sense thereof.

6 There is indeed a double love of God; one general, whereby he loves all
his creatures, even the very wicked, to wit, in that he wills and does well
to all: of which Sapient. 11. Another special, wherewith he loves the Elect
only to aeternall salvation; of which Romans 9. Jacob I have loved; and every
where in scripture, Yet properly the Grace of God is taken for the free love of
God toward the Elect.

7 This Grace was given us before all aeternitie, by which he loved us from all
beginnings; but made manifest in time, partly, when he promised, but then
specially when he did actually exhibit Christ, 2. Tim. 2.

8 This Grace that makes us acceptable, is the fountain and cause of all
other graces, and benefits of God.

9 The Graces likewise of Faith, Regeneration, Hope, and Love, are re^^ed
Graces making acceptable; but improperly and secondarily; For they are effects
of that primarie and aeternall Grace.

10 But the Grace of prophesying, of speaking with tongues, and others, whereof
1. Cor. 12. are even the effects of that first and aeternall grace, and they
tend to the salvation of the Church in general, but not the salvation always
of them do they appertain, to whom they are given.

11 These Graces, for that they do not always make for the salvation of them
to whom they are given, therefore also are they given to many Reprobates.

12 And although they do not make for the salvation of the Reprobate to whom
they are given* yet for that they tend to effect the salvation of the Elect,
and restoration of the Saints, therefore are they taken to be effects of the
first grace* in this respect, that they do come from the aeternal and free
love of God (not indeed toward the Reprobate) but toward the Elect, for whose
salvation they are communicated.

13 Grace in the first and proper acception, that is, the aeternall and free
love and favor of God, is the beginning, consummation, and end of our
salvation, from whence have and do proceed our whole salvation, and whatsoever
make for our salvation.

14 That, from whence God (as I may say) was moved to elect and praedestinate
us unto life aeternall, was his Grace only, or his good will toward us, and
good pleasure and love. As for the last and principal end, it was his Glory,
to wit, That his Goodness, Mercy, and dustice might be manifested, and so
glorified. The Apostle does deliver both of them Ephe. 1. He has chosen us in
Christ, in himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, (this is the
first) to the praise of the glory of his grace. This is the second.)

15 Our salvation is totally of Grace. And because of grace, therefore it is
certain; and, because certain, therefore ought we, being freed from all
fear and doubtfulnes (or trembling) with a cheerful heart and joyful
conscience, continually give thanks to such an Heavenly Father in Christ,
believe in him, hope in him, call upon him, love him, conform our selves to
his will, study to accomplish his commandments, and to prepare our minds to
endure al torments for his Names sake; and to say with David, What shall I
render to the Lord for the b^nefits he ha^h done unto me? I will receive the cup
of salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord.

The Treatise of the Praedestination of the Saints, is severed into these
special heads.
THE love, whereby GOD loves all things, even the wicked, is different from
that whereby he has so loved some from all aeternitie, as that also he has
praedestinated them to life aeternall.

2 Of all men which ever were, are, or shall be, fallen into the pit of sin,
some God has taken up, some left therein, and therefore did decree to deliver
some, and other to relinquish there. And this is Election and Reprobation.

3 The Praescience of God is taken sometime for that knowledge, whereby God from
everlasting in general did know as well such things as some admitted that is
sin, as also what himself would do, whether in the Elect or in the
Reprobate, or in other creatures. Thus both in Fathers and Schoolmen: sometime
for that knowledge, whereby specially some, that is, the Elect, he did with
affection of love, foreknow as his, that loved them from aeternitie; as Romans 8.
(...). Romans 11. God has not rejected his people (quam (...). which he
foreknow; or it is taken for Praedestination it self.

4 Praedestination is a part of his Providence; and both (according to the
Schoolmen) is only of such things which God himself does and will do. But
Providence is extended to all things; and Praedestination restrained to
creatures endued with reason; although sometime (in the Fathers)
Praedestination is taken for Providence, and so it is extended abusiuely to al
things.

5 To Praedestinate (in the Latin tongue) is in the beginning to deliberate
beforehand, determine, resolve with thy self, to do a thing before thou
do it: again, to purpose before, and to appoint and direct beforehand, of
some thing to a certain end: Also amongst the Graecians, (...) signifies to
define before thou do any thing what thou will do, then, to determine every
thing before it be done to the certain end and use thereof. And Moses the
Hebrew, in the Holy Books, that which the Septuagint do translate (...), he
has ( Habhde^) which signifies to separate to a certain use one thing from
all other things. As when the Lord from the corrupt Mass of all other people
did select, separate and divide his own people Israel to the true worship and
true Religion.

6 This name of Praedestination may, if we respect the signification thereof
generally, be extended to all creatures, even unreasonable, nay also without
life. But in the Fathers it is only of Men and Angels, both of evil and good:
but in the Scriptures this name is only used touching the Elect; Therefore
they only are said properly to be praedestinate.

7 Therefore the definition of Praedestination is Triple; one most general,
comprising all creatures; another general, extending it self to all men; the
last special, pertaining only to the Elect.

8 The first Praedestination is that aeternall and immutable Decree of God,
whereby he has deputed and ordained every thing before it was created, to his
certain both use and end.

9 The next Praedestination is that aeternall and immutable decree of God,
whereby he has from all aeternitie determined with himself; first, both to
create all men, then to permit them to fall into sin, and run headlong into
death; then some of them to vouchsafe in Christ freely both of his grace and of
life aeternalll; but others not to dignifie with this grace, but with ^^ tanas
both to smite with blindness and to indurate, at also to destroy aeternally: and
(that) for this end, That both in theone sort his divine goodness and mercy,
and in the other his divine power and justice may be declared; and so God in
all may be glorified.

10 The third, that is the Praedestination of the Saints, is that aeternall and
immutable Decree of God, whereby, without any merits of men, he has with
himself determined some certain men being brought in due time into this
life, and sallen together with others by the work of the Devil into sin and
No free justification by Christ, unless we defend free praedestination in
Christ. Zanchius.
death, to ingraft into CHRIST, and by faith to justify, and being ingrafted
into Christ to regenerate, and to sanctify unto his hests, being sanctified
by a continual forgiveness of daily sins to attend upon, and by the
perpetual grace of the holy Spirit; finally, as the Sons of God, and
co-heires with Christ of the celestial Kingdom, to endue them with a blessed
and aeternall life; and all this, That in them the mercy and goodness of God
may perpetually be magnified, and God himself for ever glorified.

11 God knows nothing or wills now, which he has not also known from
aeternitie, and (likewise) willed. Therefore Praedestination is aeternall.

12 The aeternall and simple will of God is immutable. Hereupon that, Romans 11.
The gifts and calling of God is without Repentance. Therefore Praedestination
is unchangeable.

13 No man is the efficient cause of his own Praedestination; but Permittere
^ccata non ^st concede^^: sed non ^elle imp^^iri cum o^ (...) Zancl.
the sole, simple, and aeternall will of God.

14 Sin, in respect of God, does not fall out by change, but by the divine
counsel, because by the divine and (that) voluntary permission: neither yet
is Sin the effect of divine Praedestination, or of God; because the malice of
Sin, or of the sinner, is not of God. Therefore none can be said to have been
Praedestinate of God to Sin, as it is Sin.

15 Permission, and (that) voluntary, whereby God permits sin, is a work
of God, and therefore good; but sin permitted, as it is sin, is not a work
of God, but partly of Satan, partly of Man. Roge quis audial d^minum d^centem,
Non vos me elegistis, s^d ego vos: and audeat, dicere, credere bomines vt
^ligantur, cum potius eligantur us c^^dant. Aug de praed. Sanctorum. ^. 17.


16 All men are Praedestinate; some to life, some to death, aeternall.

17 Without Christ none can either be praedestinate to life aeternall, or
effectually called; or truly justified; or eternally glorified.

18 Whosoever are praedestinate to life everlasting as to the end, are also
Praedestinate to the due means by which it is received: Faith therefore, the
works of faith, and perseverance in faith; or the beginning, progress, and
consummation of Salvation, all are effects of Praedestination.

19 God, whereas he could, yet would he not, vouchsafe all men confusedly the
grace of Praedestination aeternall:

20 God does be-blind, harden, and destroy some; therefore them to make blind,
harden, destroy, he decreed eternally.

21 The final and principal end, both of the reprobation of some, and
election of other some, is Gods glory; which both in the reiection of the
wicked, and election of the godly, does shine plentifully.

22 To be created and suffered to fall into sin, and into death, are effects
of Praedestination, common to the Elect and Reprobate: but to be enriched with
grace, faith, works, perseverance of faith, and finally life eternal, are
effects proper to the Predestination of the Elect; but to be forsaken in their
sins perpetually, to be blinded, hardened and finally damned, are effects of
Reprobation, proper to the wicked.

23 This argumentation, a posteriori, that is (from the effect) God created
men, then did voluntarily permit them to fall into sin, and by sin to run
headlong into death; finally of them some he delivers, and saves from thence
by Christ mercifully; others in their sins he forsakes most justly,
blinds, damneth: but both he does to and for his glory. Therefore God from
aeternity has decreed to do all these things) is not a sophistication but a
demonstration. And this is the praedestination of the Godly and ungodly.

None is praedestinate to aeternal life conditionally, if he do believe, if he
observe the Law: but whosoever are praedestinate thereunto, are absolutely and
simply praedestinate, so that even they therefore, do believe and keep the
Law, because as to life, so also they are praedestinate to believe and observe
the Law.

25 The Elect only attain true and justifying faith: but the Reprobate,
although they seem to believe for a time, yet their faith is not true, but
temporary, and therefore hypocritical.

26 Whatsoever good the Saints haueor do, they therefore have and do it,
because for the enjoying and acting thereof they were from aeternity freely
praedestinate. Therefore the beginning of Salvation, that is, faith; and the
proceeding, that is, good works; and the end that is final perseverance, and
plenary possession of Life eternal, are free effects of divine
praedestination, or of God praedestinating. Wherefore neither Faith, nor good
works, can be the cause of predestination, seeing the Apostle says not, He
h^th' chosen us (because we would be holy) but that we should be holy; Neither
therefore did I obtain mercy (for that I would be faithful) but that I might
be fathfull.

27 It is no impiety to say; The Reprobate therefore not to believe, not to
repent, not to observe the Law, because they were praedestinate not to believe,
not to repent, not to keep the Law; seeing the Lord thus speaks, Therefore
ye do not believe because ye are not of my flock: Again, Therefore ye do not
hear because ye are not of God.

28 Nay it is not impiety to say, the Reprobate do therefore the works which
are evil, in the Reprobate, because they were praedestinate to do them; seeing
the holy Spirit does teach this in the Scriptures; Acts. 2. 4.

29 Neither Praedestination, nor God, can be said to be the cause of the sins
which wicked men do commit; or that God did praedestinate the wicked to sin;
both for that the warfare whereby wicked men do sin is not of God, but of
Satan; as also for that God has praedestinate none to sins, as they be
sins, but only as they be either actions in themselves, and therefore not
evil, or punishments of sin.

30 Rather therefore the wicked in doing these things do sin, to the doing
whereof they are praedestinate of God; because the works of God, otherwise in
themselves good, they do infect with the naughtiness of their fleshly mind.

31 Therefore the proper efficient cause of sin, is that homebred infidelity
and malice in men.

32 In every sin there be two things; The work which is done, or at
leastwise the action either internal or external; and the naughtiness of the
sinner, by which it is effected that the work or action is made sin. The
work of God (for he works all in all) but the evil in no wise. In that
therefore the wicked do that work they have it of God, and of Gods
praedestination; but in that by doing they sin, through their own
naughtines, neither is that of God, nor have they it of Gods praedestination,

33 The effects of the grace of God in the Elect: first Redemption from sin
and death by the blood of Christ: the second effectual calling by the holy
spirit to the participation of this Redemption. The third and therefore an
actual separation from the filthiness of other men of the world: The fourth a
real incision into Christ: and therefore the fifth justification by faith: the
sixth, Regeneration: the seventh true sanctification to do the acceptable will
of God: the eight Remission of daily sins: the ninth the presence Sophistae
dicunt, Deum non praedestinasse in prae^erito, sed semper in praes^n^i* Zanchius
of the holy Spirit: the tenth the gift of eternal life,

34 Although God praedestinating be not under time, yet men praedestinated are
under time. Wherefore seeing the holy Spirit perpetually in the Scriptures
says; that God has praedestinated us, and that before the world was made, and
not to praedestinate we do duly conclude, That Praedestination was determined
from all aeternity.

35 Praedestination is aeternal; wherefore we which were elected from aeternity,
have been dear and acceptable to God.

36 Praedestination is unchangeable; therefore the salvation of the Elect is
most certain, and they can never perish.

37 Some certain men are praedestinate to life, and not all; therefore is the
number of the Elect certain; which can neither be increased or diminished.

38. The praedestination of Saints is totally free: and the Saints are
praedestinate to life, to faith, to all the gifts of God, without any their
merits either past, or to come, and without any Ioh. 6. Que verbo p^rp^ndens
Aug. contra 2. ^p. Pelrg. lib. 1 c. 19. Christum dicere traxerit no
duxerit^cur? n^ vllam nostram praecedere crea ansus voluntatem aut meri^um Quis
enim ^rabi^ siv^. lebat? et ^amen nemo venit nist velit, trahitur mi^is modis
vt v^lit, ab illo qui nouit intus in hominum co^dibus operari, ^on vt homines
v^lentes credant sed v^ volent^s ex nolen^ibus siant Zanch ex Augustino.
good use of free will, finally, without any cause in them besides the will of
God.

39. Our salvation is more safe and certain in the hand of God then in our
hands.

40 Such as are praedestinate unto life aeternall, to them also are
praedestinate good works wherein they may walk; therefore none of the Elect
being of years from hence go to heaven without the study of good works.

41 Wherefore they do admit a fallacy of division, who thus reason: If I be
praedestinate to Salvation, I shall also be saved without good works.

42 But on the contrary, the Sons of God do thus conclude: I am praedestinate
to life aeternall, therefore I must walk in good works; for that to them who
are praedestinate to life, good works are praedestinate wherein they must
walk.

43 Whosoever does discern in himself the effects of Predestination, that is,
that he feels himself effectually called, justified endued with faith and
care of good works, he ought most certainly to persuade himself that he is
of the number of the Praedestinate,

44 For there be two ways, whereby the Elect are made certain that they are
predestinate to life eternal. The first is a priori, of from the cause: this
is the goodness grace, and love of God shed a ^ro^d in our hearts, or the
Spirit of God, which bears testimony to our spirits, That we are the sons
of GOD: of which way, Romans 8. The other is a posteriori, or from the effects of
Predestination and grace; which are vocation, justification, and study of good
works: of which way, 2* Pet. 1.

45 By this note are truly distinguished the Elect from the Reprobate; for
that the Elect being now regenerate, continually haters of sin, do walk in
the study of good works; and so walk, as though sometime in walking they do
fall into sin, yet are they cautelous before hand lest they should fall, and
afterward lest they persist in their fall, and so with whole heart and whole
will they never sin. But the Reprobate are so captives to Sin and Satan,
and to his concupiscences, (as to royal commandments) from the heart, and
always, and in every place to their power they are obsequious: as that,
allthough (for a fit) they appear to believe in Christ, to study for good
works, and so to be of the number of the Elect, they do never in sincerity
love the Law of GOD, they neuor truly do hate sin.

The Discourse touching the blinding of the Wicked, consists of these
Propositions.
THat God does indurate, Exodus* 4. v. 8. Job 12. ex. Esa. 6. To. 1. 9. 2. These.
1.
make blind, give over into a Reprobate sense, that they do such things as are
not convenient, the Holy Scriptures do apparently deliver.

2 But he does only harden the Reprobate, not the Elect.

3 And although he does at last forsake all the Reprobate, and deprive them of
his light, and so (after a sort) make blind, and indurate al, yet is God said
in the Holy writ to beblind and indurate with this kind of excaecation, (of
which Esai and Moses in Exodus, and the Apostle. Romans 1. 9.) not all, but only
some notorious wicked and obstinate ones.

4 The final cause why God does beblind such Reprobates as he does make blind,
is threefold. The first is, for that they for their praecedent wickedness (as
justice requires) should be punished with other sins. The next, that the Elect
by their example might learn to fear God, and not rebelliously to lift up the
heel against the Lord. The third, that the irefull displeasure, and power of
God against sin, might be manifested to the whole world, and so hisname
celebrated throughout the Earth.

5 But the cause, by which God is after a sort compelled and excited to strike
with blindensse the wicked, is double. One is the very impiety of the wicked,
and specially their p^euishnesse against the Lord: the other is the eternal
purpose and will of God.

6 In the Question How GOD Augus. Col. 1069. contra. Iulianu^. Quasi non simul
posu^rit haec duo Apostolus, et potentiam et patientiam. etc. Rom 9
does beblind and indurate: to say that God does it by sole permission, as
though God did nothing in them that are made blind, is Pelagianisime, and
confuted and condemned by Augustine.

7 Neither is it true to say, That God beblindeth by the sole subtraction of
his grace, or of his light.

8 Neither also does it suffice to say, That God makes blind by a certain
external action of his: but indirectly, to wit, by obiecting some things to
the eyes and ears of the Reprobate, by which, whereas they should be
illuminated and mollified, it comes to pass, by their own corruption, that
they are more blinded.

9 But besides those external actions, whereby he obiecteth offenses to the
wicked, he also working by an internal action, and that admirable, and most
just, in the hearts of the wicked, for the executing of his just judgment, GOD
does be blind and harden them.

10 Moreover GOD does that sometime indeed by himself, and Exo. 14. Deuteronomy. 28.
Ier. 13. 12. Aug. de gratia et libero arbi^rio. c^^ 20. et. 21. I Would. de
predestinatione sanctorum. lib. 1* c. 10.
immediately, but sometime mediatly, by the ministry of Satan the executioner
of the divine justice, by working in the hearts of the wicked, yet in no case
enforcing them.

11 Neither yet for that can God be called by any means the Author of evil,
because he is always just, and does nothing unjustly, neither infuse
injustice into any.

12 For although GOD on the one side do command the Reprobate, whom he will
make blind, that they be converted and repent, and on the other side he
blinds and indureth them, so that they do not that which he commands by
the outward word, that is, that they convert and repent, as appears in
Pharao: yet from hence it follows not that God does delude the Reprobate: for
he is always just, he does none evil, neither does he any absurd thing.

13 Man's wisdom, indeed infers this of the praemises; but it is not to be
heard in gods judgments, which are even deepnes it self. But we follow simply
the word of God.

14 Now the word of God plainly delivers; First, that God does Omnes quos
docet, sua misericordia docet, quos vero non docet, cos n^n docet secundum suum
iudiciu^, Aug. de prae. sanctorum.
command all men to repent and fly sin: this is Gods Law; therefore must man
settle thoroughly for the obedience thereof: the next that God does make some
blind, least they should be converted and healed: this is Gods judgment. And
the judgments of GOD are to be admired, not searched into, for that they are
inseparable, as says the Apostle and a great depth, as says the Prophet: The
third, that there is no iniquity with God, and that God Ille dicitur illudere,
qui aliquem inuita^, and postea siveniat repellit: Non sic facit D^us* Zanch.
does all things well and justly, and does no absurd thing: finally, that he is
perpetually like himself; Wherefore in verity neither does God delude any man,
neither do his judgments disagree with the Law.

15 Wherefore although GOD give some into a reprobate sense, to do those
things which are not comely, yet can he not, nor ought not to be termed the
Author of sin properly; because the cause of sin does reside perpetually in
men, to wit, the corruption of nature, or concupiscence of the flesh, which
John denies to be of God.

16 Blindness, obduration, Copelli non est ^ogi, sed induci, vt Christus, and
tradi, vt Apostolus l^qui^ur: and Augasus est verbo per Dei potentia pellendi,
cotra Iulianum Pelag. l. 5. c. 3. Et id^o in Oratione dominica dicimus, ne
inferas nos in ^^tationem; quod idem est quod imp^lli Zanch.
impulsion into evil desires, which in the Scriptures are attributed to God as
to the efficient cause, may be considered; First, in what respect they are
sins, next as they are punishments of sins past; Thirdly, as they are causes
of consequent sins. But to punish sin with sin is the work of a just
Judge, not of an Author of sin. Therefore God cannot, when he blinds and
hardens; either be accused of injustice, or be called the Author of sin.

17 God is always just; therefore he cannot be the Author of an unjust thing.
Now every punishment Non pecca^um Dei est, sed iudici^^. Gl^ssa ex A^gust i^
Ephesians. ^.
of sin whatsoever it be, is both just, and therefore of God: and some
sins are punishments also of sins. Therefore such as are punishments of
sins, are just, and God is the Author thereof.

18 Some medicines cannot so cure diseases, but withal in some sort they do
hurt the bodies of the sick, yet not therefore is the Physician at any hand
accused as Author of this hurt, of such as are wise, but rather contrariwise
commended as cause of the cure: And the reason is; for that he did praescribe
the remedy for this end, not to harm, but to heal. Therefore although
excaecation and induration cannot so be punishments of sins, but withal
they must be sins and causes of sins; yet cannot God therefore, who
beblindeth and hardens, be accused as the Author of sin, but commended
rather as a revenger of sins: for that in making blind the wicked properly,
he does not propose properly this end to himself, that they should commit
sin; but rather this end, that he might inflict punishment upon their
iniquities.

19 By the Law sin is augmented, Romans 7. And God gave this Law: yet cannot
God therefore in any sort be accounted the Author of the sin increased; for
that to that end he gave not his Law properly, That by it Sin might abound;
but rather on the contrary, That by it, it should not only be acknowledged
but also restrained. Therefore neither in that he beblindeth and hardens,
from whence are sins augmented in the wicked, is he, or can he be called
the Author of sins: because not properly that they may be increased, but
rather that sins may be punished, God does make blind and indurate.

20 Concupiscence is not only sin, but cause of sin: and this God left in
nature; and would have it traduced upon all men. Neither therefore is he
called the Author of sin: and that for this reason, for that he would have
it derived upon all posterity (not properly as it is sin, and cause of all
sins) but only as it is a punishment of the sin of Adam, in whom all have
sinned. Therefore neither in that he makes blind or hardens, can he, or
ought he to be called the Author of sin* for that he does not beblind or
indurate properly, that sin might be committed, but only that sin with
sins might be punished.

21 God does make blind and indurate, in that respect excaecation and
induration are the punishments of sin. For whatsoever God does, that also he
would from eternity and decreed to do and this is to praedestinate. It is
therefore no impiety to say, That God did praedestinate some from everlasting
to excaecation and obduration, not as they be sins, and causes of sins, but
as they be punishments of sin.

22 There is a double Evil, of fault, and of penalty; and there is an Evil
of fault, which is not of punishment, and there is another which is also of
punishment: and contrariwise there is an evil of punishment which is not of
sin, and another so of punishment, as it is also of sin.

23 To the Evil of sin, simply, as it is evil of fault, God has
praedestinate none; yet did he foresee it as future, and praeordaine it to his
glory: for there is nothing contingent in respect of God.

24 God has praedestinate some from aeternitie to the evil of punishment,
which in no wise is Evil of fault; or which is not sin, but only punishment
of sin, whether this be temporal punishment or eternal.

25 But some he predestined to such punishments of sins, which likewise
are both sins and causes of sin, but not as they are sins or causes of
sin, but only as they are punishments thereof.

26 A double end why GOD should beblind some, and praedestinate them to
excaecation; the first, and furthest. The first, (or nearest) is the perdition
of them who are made blind: the last, is the glory of God himself destroying
the wicked.

27 When God is said to make blind and indurate, we may not at all imagine,
that any is made of God of seeing blind, or of soft hard, (for none is made
evil, God being the Author) but these Phrases are thus to be understood, That
God of them whom he finds blind and hardened, whereas he illuminateth and
mollifieth some of them by his grace, some others through his just judgment
not only he forsakes in their darkness and hardness, but also does more beblind
and harden them, that he may punish sin, in such sort as before is spoken.

28 Now it is most just, that God, whom he finds blind and hardened by their
own default, that such he should more and more beblind and harden: therefore
can no man justly accuse God of injustice, that he beblindeth them.

A sum of the Treatise, concerning the Redemption of the Church by Christ,
and the certainty of our Praedestination and salvation, comprised in twenty
nine Positions.
TERRENE, (or earthly) Hierosoleme was a Type of the Church of Christ; and such
things as most ordinarily fell out therein, were figures of such things as were
to come to pass in the Church of Christ.

2 Therefore the deliverance of Hierosoleme, accomplished in the time of
Esaias, whereof Esai. 9. was a Type of the Deliverance of the whole Church to
be made by Christ.

3 As in that Terrene Jerusalem there were grievous darkness, that is,
calamities; so most grievous are the darknesses, that is, calamities, both
terrene and spiritual, into which partly the Church of God did fall presently
after the sin of Adam, partly wherewith it is daily pressed.

4 As that Jerusalem by the Angel of the Lord through the great power of God
found deliverance, insomuch as that the Prophet says truly, To the people
^alking in darkness has the light appeared: so the Church of God by Christ was
in part once delivered, in part daily more and more is freed from her
darkness: the divine light by degrees dispelling the darkness thereof, until
in the end (which shall be at the end of the World) she^ be delivered from
all adversities and enemies.

5 And although there were more Israelites which were besieged of the enemies
then Jews; yet not they but only these were delivered: so though there be
much more Reprobate then Elect; yet the Deliverance made by Christ did not
appertain to the Reprobate, but to the Elect; so that the Prophet truly
admiring spoke thus, Thou have multiplied the Nation, but have not increased
the joy.

6 For Christ, according to the purpose of his Father, for the Elect only,
that is, for those who according to the eternal Election should believe in
him, was borne, suffered, died, and rose again, and Mat* 1. Ioh. 17.
makes intercession at the right hand of his Father.

7 Moreover the Redemption of the Church by Christ, may be considered after
four sorts: First, in what respect she is totally redeemed before the Father,
in that Christ died for her; for then were all the Elect truly redeemed and
reconciled to God: Next, in as much as by faith she is made acquainted and
partaker of this Redemption: for when as the Elect do yield true faith to the
Gospel of reconciliation, they are said to be justified, and reconciled to
God, to wit, for that they do understand, receive and embrace the
reconciliation perfected by Christ: Thirdly, in as much as the Church daily by
the same Christ is delivered more and more from enemies continually besetting
them; for that, though she be daily oppugned, yet never for all that, through
Christ's defense, is she surprised: Lastly, in as much as all enemies being
utterly dispoiled, and even death it self (which the Apostle calls the last
enemy) so it shall be delivered from all evils, as that it shall never after
have any encounter with any kind of enemies.

8 Now the principal fruit which springs up in the hearts of the faithful
by the redemption apprehended, is true and solid, spiritual and aeternall
reioicing before God: of which the Prophet also speaks, They shall rejoice
before thee, as men in harvest.

9 For the matter of true joy is, when we perceive by faith, the yoke of Sin,
Death, the Law, Satan, the World, wherewith we were oppressed, to be broken
asunder by Christ.

10 For none either by their strength or their merit has delivered themselves
from the yoke of the servitude of Sin, Death, Satan, and the Law, but Christ
only has delivered us. Therefore our salvation entirely is to be ascribed
unto Christ alone.

11 But though it be Christ himself which has obtained victory to us
(without us) against all enemies; yet can we not be partakers of this
victory, but as the true Israelites in the voyage against the Madianites we
carry the light of faith in our hearts, and have the trumpet thereof, to wit,
Confession, in our mouth; as also it is written To. 10. With the heart we
believe, but with the mouth we confess to salvation.

12 Furthermore, the cause of man's whole Redemption is double: One, by which,
and for which; this is Christ the Mediator, and Christ's merits: The other
efficiens, primarie and principal; that is both the aeternall and constant
love of Vaticinia alia aperta, alia velaminibus tecta. zanch.
GOD toward his Church, to wit the Elect; as also the zeal of his glory and
honor. Of the first the Prophet speaks; To us a child is given, to us a
Son is borne to bear the rule. Of the second he speaks, The zeal of the
Lord of Hosts shall do this.

13 Christ does bear upon his shoulders the whole principality, and burden
thereof, as the Prophet teaches, saying: Whose government is upon his
sholders. Now the Kingdom of Christ is the Church of the Saints: therefore all
we faithful ones are carried upon his shoulders. And whom Christ has once
taken up to be borne upon his shoulders, them he never deiecteth down from
off his shoulders; according also unto that John cap. 17. I have kept those
whom thou have given me. Therefore our salvation is secure in Christ.

14 The burdens of the principality or Kingdom of Christ, are our sins, but
the government with all his burdens is upon his shoulders, Therefore Christ
does bear the sins of all the Elect, according to Esaias 13.
that also of the Prophet, God has put upon him the iniquities of us all.

15 If the government be upon his shoulders, Christ therefore himself Esaias 9.
does perpetually protect and govern his Church.

16 If the Church be the Kingdom of Christ, therefore the Church in respect of
her Prince is a Monarchy and has Christ only their Monarch, And he is an
immortal prince, and does continually govern his Monarchy. Therefore the
Church is never, nor can be without an Head.

17 Jerusalem, that is the Church, is not only delivered by Christ, but also
for Christ: and that into two sorts, first because for the merits of Christ it
is redeemed and delivered then for Christ as the final cause; because
therefore the Church is delivered, that is, the Kingdom of Christ is freed
from the hands of the enemies, and daily more and more enlarged, that he alone
at last himself together with the Father; may enjoy it in Heaven; according to
that also of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. Then shall he give up the Kingdom of God
again to his father; as we also on the other side shall enjoy God, and our
Prince Christ.

18 The fountain and original of; our salvation, is the eternal and constant
Love of God to-vs-ward; aeternall, for that he has loved us to life aeternall,
not in time; but from aeternity before we were borne; constant, for that whom
once he has embraced with that his eternal love, he holds on to love for
ever. And so Gods love is not only everlasting but perpetual.

19 This love of God is the fountain of our salvation: because from thence it
comes to pass, that he has praedestinate us to life aeternall in Christ;
that he sent his son into the world; that he has called us effectually by
the preaching of the Gospel; that he forgiueth our daily sins; that finally
he will bestow upon us fully life aeternall.

20 The love of God to-vs-ward is called by the Prophet, Zeal; for that it is
as the love of the husband toward his wife, that is, most fervent, and
therefore intermixed with carefulnes and dolor: with carefulnes least any
adversity should happen to the thing beloved: and dolor if it happen.

21 Zeal also wherewith God also is zealous; that is, fervently loves his
own glory, is the cause efficient of our salvation. For he could not endure,
that over and besides the Reprobate, the Elect likewise should be held
perpetually as Captives in the hands of Satan, for that this did cross Gods
glory. Therefore the zeal of the Lord, to wit, whereby he has and does love
both us and his own glory so ardently, has effected this, that is, was the
cause of our salvation by Christ, both obtained and preserved.

22 Salvation and life aeternall can fall to none, but to such as are elect to
salvation and life aeternall. Mat. 10. 25. Romans 8. Therefore none can be
ascertained of his salvation, unless he be made certain of his aeternall and
immutable election to life aeternall.

23 Every one is bounden certainly to believe, that he was elected unto
salvation and life eternal in Christ by God, before the world was made, which
is at large demonstrated in cap 7. of this Treatise.

24 Now that every one may persuade himself hereof, there be certain rules
delivered; partly a priori (as they term it) or from the causes; partly a
posteriori deduced, or from the effects: And this is also handled in the 7.
cap. of his Tractate.

25 Christ according to the purpose, both of his fathers and his own will,
neither prayed nor suffered but for the Elect only: which is proved fully by
many places of Scripture.

26 None can be endued with true faith in Christ, unless he be elect in
Christ to aeternall salvation, as is by many places of Scripture confirmed cap.
7. Whosoever therefore does feel himself enritched with true faith in Christ,
let him conclude that he is in Christ ordained to life eternal.

27 Whosoever is endued with a true and lively faith, may perceive and does
perceive that he truly believes in Christ, therefore a believer may be made
certain of his Election to life aeternall.

28 The doctrine of Praedestination: As to the Elect nothing is more
sovereign, so to the Reprobate by their own default nothing is more
pernicious. For although they take offense at it, yet for the others sake it is
to be preached.

29 Out of the rich treasures of Christ* so much each one has and possesses;
how much he receives and draws out by faith. Whosoever therefore can truly
believe that he has been elected in Christ from aeternity, unto life
everlasting, he is elected.

The Sum of the fourth Chapter of the Tractate touching Christ our Advocate
contained in four propositions.
CHrist is the Advocate of the Elect only, and (that) of all which Io 17. To.
8. 1. Io. 2. Ang Tract. 41. in Ioh.
have been from the beginning of the world, and shall be to the end.

2 Christ also is the propitiation only for the sins of the Elect of Eusebius.
Hist. Ecelts* l. 4. c. 15.
the whole world; therefore is he their advocate only. So the Church of Smyrna
to all the parishes of Paul says, Christ did suffer for the salvation of all
the World which are to be saved: but the Elect only are saved. So Ambros^. To.
2. de fide ad Gratianum. lib. 4. c. 1. If thou do not believe, he descended
not for thee, he suffered not for thee. Therefore he suffered only for the
believers.

3 The (world) is sometime taken for the whole World, and all men, as well
Elect as Reprobate; sometime Genesis 18. and 22. Gal. 3. Psa. 44. Ioh. 12. To. 5.
2. Cor. 5. Col. 1. Hab^t erge populus Dei plenitu^inem suum. Am^r. ibid.
for the more principal part, to wit the Elect; some-time for the worse part
of the World, that is, the Reprobate. The Author also of the Book de vocatione
Gentium. lib. 1. c. 3. does declare by examples of many Scriptures oftentimes
for a part of the Earth the whole Earth, for a part of the World the whole
World, for a part of men all men to be nominated; and this as well touching
the wicked as the godly. Therefore when he says, that Christ is the
propitiation for the sins of the whole World, we are not enforced by the name
of (the whole World) to understand universally all men.

4 There is a difference between the work of our redemption, and the force (or
fruit) of our redemption: for the first is once done; the other is eternal,
extending it self as well to them which were from the beginning of the World,
even before the work of our redemption was accomplished, as to them who after
the work of our redemption effected shall be to the end of World. (...) is
properly the effecacy of redemption and propitiation; nothing therefore does
let, but that Christ has been and is perpetually the Atonement for the
sins even of them which were elected, even from the beginning of the world.

The Summary of the Questions, whether Remission of sins, once obtained, can
again be made frustrate; comprised in fourteen Conclusions.
THE whole course of the Gospel is contrived in this sum, that it might
persuade us which believe in Christ, that our salvation is firm and constant,
(that is in Christ*) If therefore any shall say, that Remision Ioh. ^. and 5.
M^. 7. and 16 To. 11.
of sins, once obtained, by consequent falls can be made frustrate in the
Saints, he does ouerturne the whole scope the Gospel. nunquam, in nemine ^b
nullum ^ecca^um fit irrita remissio Zanch.
Read Esai 38. 44. Mich. 7.

2 Only by an absolute relapse from piety to impiety, the remission of
sins past once obtained can be done away; but this relapse the true Saints
and Elect are not incident unto. Therefore in them forgiveness of sins cannot
be frustrate.

3 In the Reprobate true Remission of sin ^neuer took place; therefore it
can never in them be frustrate. Wherefore in none.

4 For the blood of Christ, by Pro omnibus sufficienter, pro electis
t^^tumefficaciter Z^nch. ex Scolasticis. Pro ^mnibus illis electis ex
Augustino. John 17 1. Ioh. 2. To. 8. Aliqua luce mentes illuminat, nunquam
iamen paenetrat illorum corda Zanch. John 1.
which alone remission is ate^i^ued, is not according to the purpose of GOD and
indeed shed out for the Reprobate unbelievers, but only for other many, that
is, the Elect, and that for all those many.

5 Neither did Christ pray upon earth, nor now mediate in Heaven, for the
Reprobate; but only for the Elect believers, and in time to come to believe in
him. But remission of sins is obtained by the intercession of Christ.

6 Likewise, none but the Elect are truly endued with the Spirit of a
Regeneration, who are truly Christ's. Romans 8. But without the spirit of
Regeneration forgiveness of sins is not gotten.

7 So also true and justifying faith Tit. 1. To. 10 2. These. 3. Act. 13.
is only proper to the Elect. How then can the Reprobate attain remission of
sins?

8 To the wicked Reprobates To. 5.
there is no peace, as says the Prophet; but of remission of sins does follow
true peace.

9 From remission of sins does always follow Title to aeternal life; and
after Title, the possession it self: but the Reprobate never have any Title
unto life aeternall, and much less to the possession thereof.

10 To attain remission of sins, and to be justified, are all one, R^. 4. Now
none are justified who are R^. 8.
not praedestinate, and elect to justification and life aeternall: and
whosoever are justified, shall be glorified, Romans 8. Therefore the Reprobate
shall never obtain truly remission of sins: therefore it can never be
frustrate in them, in whom it is not at all.

11 By that speech of the Apostle Gustaueru^t non comederunt. Zanch gustant sed
^ox exp^unt. Ide^* Diserimen inter do^^ Spiritus sa^cti simpliciter, et done
Spirit ^s sancti regenerantis. Zanchius
to the Hebrews cap. 6. it is impossible that they who are once illuminated,
and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and have been made partakers of the Holy
Spirit, and have tasted notwithstanding of the good Word of God, and of the
powers of the world to come, and are fallen away to be again renewed to
repentance* it cannot be concluded, that the Reprobate are endued with the
true spirit of regeneration, with a true and justifying faith, and therefore
with true remission of sins: yet that many of them are affected with a,
temporary faith, and some tastes of the Holy Spirit, this and other places do
plainly teach.

12 The place 2. Pet. ^. touching Hypocrites, ( for he that has not these
t^ungs is blind, which sees nothing afar off, forgetting that he was purged
from his old sins) is to be understood according to the custom of the Holy
Scripture; which does call Saints, according to the judgment of Charity,
just, and purged from their Sins, although they are not al so before God; so
many as are baptized into Christ, and have given their names to Christ, and
confess him: for all such are sacramentally cleansed.

13 That of Ezechiel, cap. 18. (If Conditionalis propositio nihil ponit in
forma. Zanoh. Psalm. 1. 112.
the just, do auert from his justice) is not to be understood of him who is
truly just, but of him who only seems to men to be just. For neither can
he who is truly righteous, finally fall from justice to iniquity and die
therein; of which final and perfect auersion the Prophet speaks. Now
Hypocrites being just only before men, do never obtain true remission of
nnes before God; therefore it cannot be proved by this sentence, that it is
frustrate..

14 That Mat. 18. So your heavenly Father shall do to you, unless you forgive
every one to his brother from the heart their offenses, does not conclude, That
sins once truly released can again be called into judgment, but this
only, That such men are deceived, who think their debts to be remitted from
God unto them, when as they do not forgive trespasses to their brethren.

FINIS.

