SELECTED SENTENCES OVT OF SACRED ANTIQVITIE, CONDVCING TO the establishment of
Faith and good Manners. Gathered by W. WIN.

LONDON. Printed by E. A. for Nathaniell Butter. 1624.

TO The Right Honorable, Sir HENRY HOWARD Knight of the Hon: Order of the Bath,
Lord Matrauers, Son and Heir apparent of the most Hon: the Earl of
Arundell, Lord High Marshall of England.
Right Hon:
YOUR Thricenoble Brother and my most honored Lord and Patron, being now a
Celestial Courtier, and crowned with immortal Glory among the Princes in
Paradise, has left your Lordship behind him, not only to enjoy his Honorable
titles and fortunes here upon earth, but withal, to tread the paths of his
exemplar Virtue and Nobleness, where through you may finally arrive to the
height of his felicity in Heaven. My true devotion being tied to the
perpetual memory of his Honorable name, and therein also to your Lordship as
the succeeding heir to all his most worthy attributes and rights, does justly
exact from me some tribute, or token of my bounden Duty; which I thus humbly
present under these few memorials gathered out of Sacred Antiquity; not
presuming thereby, to add any thing by way of supply to those perfections you
have already attained, but rather very humbly craving your favorable
Countenance and Honorable protection of them, to the benefit of some others
meanlier instructed, who thereupon, may peradventure be the easilier induced
to peruse them: For if your Lordship deigne to patronize them, who will
altogether despise them? Such therefore as they are, I dedicate and consecrate,
together with my self, to be for ever:

Humbly at your Lordships service and commandment: William Win.

To all my beneuolent Friends and favorable Readers.
GReat Works of Pen, proceed from much reading and like experience: yet the
greatest are easily brought to pithie abridgement, containing the sinews and
marrow of that big Body, and by compendious regularity, are fitter for
memory, easier for price, and more portable for use: This brief Collection,
aims at no outward practice, not coming from inward virtue to enable
religious Constancy of mind, that in conversation of life, it may bring forth
fruits of Piety and Civility: There is no Sentence without weight; Exercise
of one will draw on an easy habit to the rest: which as I wish to all, so I
commend to all; desiring that the endeavor may pass with good Construction,
and the use to both issues of inward Devotion and outward Practice.

W. W.

SELECTED SENTENCES OVT of Sacred Antiquity, conducing to the establishment of
Faith and good Manners.
A love principium.
GOD is all in all to you: If you hunger, he is Bread; if you thirst, he is
Drink; if you sit in darkness, he is Light; if you be naked, he is a
garment of Immortality. August.

2.
God is the true and chiefest life; in whom, from whom, and by whom, all
things created are blessed and made good. Ibid.

3.
It is God from whom to be auerted is to fall; to whom to be converted is to
arise; in whom to abide, is to stand fast; from whom to depart, is to dye; to
whom to return, is to revive; It is God whom no man leeseth, but he that is
deceived; no man seeks but he that is taught; no man finds but he that is
clean. August.

4.
There is no refuge from God displeased, but to God pleased. Ibid.

5.
God is never wanting; yet far from his Enemies thoughts: neither when he is
far off is he wanting: for where he is not by Grace, he is there by
Justice; God is every where present and can hardly be found; we pursue him
standing, but are unable to apprehend him. Greg.

6.
As there is no Time, wherein we enjoy not the benefits of Gods mercy and
goodness, so should there be no moment without remembrance of his presence:
for all Time wherein God is not remembered, we must reckon as utterly lost.
August.

7.
God is all an eye, for he sees all: he is all a hand, for he works all:
he is all a foot, for he is every where.

8.
Whatsoever is besides GOD, is neither sweet nor sauory: whatsoever my Lord God
will give me, let him take it all again from me, and give me himself. Aug.

9.
Far be it from thee (O LORD) that in thy Tabernacle the Rich should be
preferred before the Poor, or the Noble before the Ignoble; seeing thou made
chorse of the worlds weaklings, to confound the strong and potent.

10.
Affection makes us do many things with respect to bodily neerenesse: But to
offend the Creator of body and soul without respect, we stick not.

11.
I had rather be blamed of any, then praised of a Flatterer; for a lover of
Truth is never afraid of a fault-finder; but a Flatterer, both erres himself,
and confirms others in their errors. Aug.

12.
Nothing so easily Corrupts the mind, as Flattery; yea, more hurt does the
tongue of a Flatterer, then the sword of a Persecutor. Hier.

13.
Ambition is a foolish Disease, a secret Poison, a lurking Plague, a worker of
Deceit; the mother of Hypocrisy, the begetter of Envy, the spring of Vice, the
moath of Holiness, the blinder of Hearts; breeding diseases of remedies, and
turning medicines into malladies. Ibid.

14.
The Ambition of power, deprived an Angel of his Felicity; the appetite of
knowledge robbed Man of his Immortality. Ibid.

15.
Eus was not beguiled with the Apple, nor did she forget the Commandment, but
the Ambition of promised Honor beguiled her. Ibid.

16.
Ambition is the Ape of Charity; Charity suffers for Eternal things,
Ambition for Earthly; Charity is benign to the poor, Ambition to the rich;
Charity sustaines all for verity, Ambition for vanity; both of them believe
all, but after a far different manner. Pet. Raven.

17.
That is ever lost with much Lament, which is possessed with much Love.

18.
There be two Loves which build up two Cities: the love of God builds up
Jerusalem, the love of the world, Babylon; Let every one ask but of himself,
what he loves, and he shall soon find of which City he is. August.

19.
The labors of Lovers are never painful, but pleasant; as those of Huntsmen,
Faulconers, Fishers; for in that we love, either we labor not at all, or we
love our Labor. Ibid.

20.
They are happy that have all they would have, and wish for no more then what
they should have.

21.
Peace is not sought that War may come thereof, but war is made that peace
may ensue: Be you therefore peaceable in War, that you may the better reduce
those to Peace, against whom you have gotten victory.

22.
If the cause of Combat be good, the end can never be ill. Bern.

23.
To be a Soldier is no fault, but to be a Soldier for booties sake, is a
sin. Aug.

24.
No less do they sin who blaspheme CHRIST reigning in Heaven, then did
they, who Crucified him walking upon Earth.

25.
The root of all good is Charity, the root of all evil Cupiditie, these two
can never be together; for unless the one be rooted out, the other will never
be planted.

26.
He verily is a Christian, that works Mercy to all; that is moved with no
Injury; that feels the grief of others as his own; to whose Table the Poor
is no stranger; who is reckoned inglorious before men, that he may be glorious
before GOD and his Angels; who despises Transitory things to enjoy Eternal;
who suffers not the poor to be oppressed if he can help; and to conclude,
who weeps with them that weep: which was well observed by St. Paul, Quis
(says he) infirmatur, and ego non infirmor? Who is infirm or grieved, and I
not so too?

27.
In vain takes he upon him the name of a Christian, that does not imitate the
life of Christ: for (alas) what is it for you to be called that you are not,
or to usurp another name?

28.
A Christian is he that thinks himself a Stranger in his own house; our
Country being above, our home at Heaven.

29.
Will you walk? Christ says I am the way; will you not be deceived? I am the
Truth; will you not dye? I am the life. Aug.

30.
As the many branches of a Tree do grow from the root only, so many virtues
spring from Charity alone: nor has the branch of a good work any life, or
greenness, if it abide not in the root of Charity. Greg.

31.
Say not that you carry chaste minds, when you have wanton eyes; for a wanton
eye is the messenger of a wanton heart. Hierom.

32.
Among all Christian conflicts those of Chastity are the sharpest; for there
is continual battery, and rare victory; Beauty and Chastity seldom lodge
together. Ibid.

33.
Confession is the health of Souls, the destroyer of Vices, the scourge of
Devils; briefly, it stops the mouth of Hell, and opens the gates of Paradise.

34.
A clear Conscience is that which can neither be justly accused with what is
past, nor unjustly delighted with what is present. Aug.

35
Gold is Caesar's Coin, Man is GODS: Caesar is seen in his Gold, GOD in Man.
Therefore offer your wealth to Caesar, but reserve your Conscience for GOD.
Chrysostom.

36.
You should rather think of what you want, then of that you have; what you
have beware you leese not, and that you want pray God for: Consider in what you
are lesser, not in how much you are greater; for if you compute only wherein
you are, or have been excellent, that may engender vanity and pride in you,
which is to be feared; but if you reckon wherein you are or have been less,
or defective, this will breed humility and tears in you which are to be
wished: And doubtless if you strive to be humble, you shall walk more
safely, you shall not run headlong, your foot shall not slip.

37.
God is above you, the Beasts are under you: acknowledge him that is above you,
that they may acknowledge you, which are under you: Therefore when Daniel
acknowledged God above himself, the Lions acknowledged him above them.

38.
O Man! if thou did consider what comes from thee by thy mouth, by thine
ears, by thy nostrils, by thy pores, and other euacuations of thy body; Thou
would confess never to have seen a more vile and loathsome dunghill, then
thy self. Aug.

39.
To give a simple man Counsel is Charity; to a Wise man Presumption: but to
give it in case of peruersitie, or necessity is Wisdom. Greg.

40.
Among the Sages, one was wont to say, that a good Custom is never diswonted
without shame, and that good Communication runs into affectuall habit:
according to that; who fore-goeth Virtue being young, shall not know how to
forbear Vice being old. Basil.

41.
Let not your heart vary from your face or Countenance: carry not a face upward
and a heart downward. The heart is little, and desires much; it is scarce
enough to give a Kite his breakfast, and yet the whole world is not able to
satisfy it. Bern.

42.
Open Sin before all, requires open Punishment for example of all. Aug.

43.
Impunitie is the offspring of negligence, the mother of Insolence, the root
of unshamefastness, the Nurse of Sin.

44.
Covetousness is the root of all mischief; it commits Sacrilege and Theft;
it rauins and deuoures; it makes war and murder; it buys and fels by
Symonie; it asks and receives wrongfully; it negotiates and floords up
unjustly; it is at hand with all fraud and deceit; it dissolues pacts and
violates oaths; it corrupts Witness and peruerts Justice.

45.
Three things are most affected; Wealth, Pleasure, and Honor; of Wealth comes
wickedness, of Pleasure turpitude, of Honor vanity; for wealth breeds
Cupiditie and Avarice; Pleasure breeds Lust and Gluttony, Honor fostereth
Pride and Ostentation. Innoc.

46.
The Thief confessed Christ, Peter denied him; in Peter the Just are taught
not to presume, in the Thief: a Sinner converted not to despair. Therefore
let the Just be off aid of falling through Pride, and the Sinner of despairing
through malice.

47.
Let no man distrust, nor any sinner despair of Gods mercy: for God knows how
to change his Judgment, if you know how to change your life. Aug.

48.
Desperation holts the gates of the Eternal City, Hope vnbolts them; but
Faith sets them wide open. Chrysostom.

49.
Not only they are guilty that utter falsehood, but such also as easily
hearken thereunto. Ibid.

50.
The heart lifted up to God corrupts not; if your Corn were laid in
vnder-romes, to save it from moulding, you would remove it higher: you raise
your grain to higher losts, so lift up your hearts to Heaven. But now should
this be done say you; what strong Cords, what Ladders, what Engines will be
required to this? Isay, the first step is your affection, the lest of your
labor is your will: by Love you ascend, by neglect you descend, and when you
love God, you are in Heaven upon Earth.

51.
The Devil is every where ready to hurt every one, but that his power is
restrained by a greater power; for if he could but what he would, there should
not a Just soul be left to breath. Aug.

52.
The Devils office is to suggest; ours not to consent: as often as we resist
evil; so often we over come it; we glad and glorify the Angels; we honor
God, who visites us that we may fight, helps us that we may conquer, and
aids us that we may not shrink. Bern.

53.
O wretch that I am how much am I bound to love my God, who Created me when I
was not, and redeemed me being lost; for I was not, and he made me of nothing;
yet he made me not a stone, not a tree, not a mere Animal, but a Man: he
gave me to live, to feed, to understand; he delivered me from bondage,
redeemed me from servitude, and called me by his Name, that I might remember
him for ever.

54.
CHRIST anointed me with the Oil of gladness, wherewith himself was
anointed; that of the anointed I might be anointed, and of Christ be
called a Christian. August.

55.
To learn that which is fit, no time is to late; and though it become fear
Age rather to teach, then to learn, yet it is better to Learn then to
beelgnorant. August.

56.
I wish, and think nothing more fit for me, then to learn to the last hour
of my old age: for no Age was ever long enough to learn. Greg.

57.
By all means avoid chiding or contention in words; for with your equal it
is dangerous, with your better it is madness; and with your inferior
especially with a Fool, it is base: and to fall out with him that is Drunk,
is to fall out with him that is absent.

58.
Virtue indiscreetly possessed, is often lost; discreetly forborne, it is better
retained. Greg.

59.
Whatsoever you do well with discretion, is Virtue; whatsoever without
discretion, is Vice; for indiscreet virtue, is of no better account then Vice.
Ibid.

60.
If worldly wealth be wanting, yet seek it not by any ill means in the
world; but if you live in abundance here, then lay up by good works for your
self elsewhere, in Heaven.

61.
A manly Christian mind, should nener show higher for Wealth, nor lower for
Want.

62.
Gold is live matter; of vnquietest danger to them that have it, a bad Lord,
and a false Servant.

63.
The rich man begging in Hell was not heard, because he heard not the poor
man begging on Earth.

64.
Earthly riches compared to Heavenly gifts, are rather trouble some then
comfortable: Temporal life in respect of Eternal, sin rather Death then Life.

65.
When Dives was a dying, he had taken all his wealth with him, had he but
given to him that asked when he was living; for all earthly things which may
be lost by keeping, are preserved by giving. Greg.

66.
Gold and Silver, in respect of the soul, are things indifferent, neither
good nor bad: yet the use of them may be good; the abuse is naught, the Care
worse, the unlawful gain of them worst of all.

67.
If Art and use be separated, Use is better without Art, then Art without use;
for Art in unprofitable without use, and Use unadvised without Art. Greg.

68.
If Doctors Preach the Faith, and deal themselves Unfaithfully; they give
peace to others, but none to themselves; they praise the truth and practice
falsehood; Let us receive their Doctrine, not their ill manners: The Bees gather
not upon Weeds, but upon sweet Flowers; so let us gather the flowers of their
Doctrine, and leave the weeds of their Conversation.

69.
Drankennesse is the mother of all mischief, the matter of offense, the root
of vice; it is the Heads perturbation, the Senses subversion, the Tongues
tempost, the Bodies storm, shipwreck of Chastity, and loss of Time; it is a
voluntary madness, a disgraceful diseafe, a filthy fashion, a shameless
life, the infamy of Honor and Honesty, the Souls corruption.

70.
Drunkenness is a flattering Devil, a sweet Poison; a pleasing Sin; he
that has it has not himself: he that is Drunk, is not only a sinner, but
all sin himself.

71.
A Drunkard whilst he soakes in Wine; the Wine soakes him: he is of God
abhorred, of Angels despised, of Wertue forsaken, of Men derided, of Devils
confounded, and scorned of all.

72.
A Drunkard destroys Nature, leeseth Grace, escapes Glory, and incurreth
eternal Darnnation. August.

73.
Noah in one hours Drunkenness, discovered his secret parts, which he had
covered six hundred years together. Hierom.

74.
The Church has this property; to flourish when it is persecuted, to grow
being oppressed, to profit being despised; being beaten it overcomes, being
blamed it understands; and stands fast when it seems to fall. Hillar.

75.
If you can give, give; if you cannot, yet make your self affable and willing;
for God Crowns inward willingness; where he finds not out ward ableness:
Let no man answer I have not for you; Charity comes not always out of a
bag. Aug.

76.
If you would be a good Merchant and an excellent Vsuter indeed, give what you
cannot keep, that you may receive what you can be leese; give a little to hand
much, part with something to gain an hundred fold, give a Temporal
commoditise to receive an Eternal patrimony. August.

77.
Who lays up his treasure in Earth, has nothing to look for in Heaven.

78.
The hand of the Poor is the treasury of CHRIST; what the Poor receives,
CHRIST accepts. Therefore give your Land to the Poor, that you may get a
Kingdom to your self; give a Crumme to have a Crown; I say give that you may
recoine, for whatsoever you give to the poor, you shall be sune to have
again, and that which you will not give, another shall beceine. Pet. Rouen.

79.
It is great impiety to deshone the goods of the Poor upon the Rich, and to
curry favor with the mighty at the poores cost; It is to drayne water from
the dry ground, and to bestow it where is no need. Isid.

80.
I ask you if you believe? and you answer Creed, I do believe: do as you
say, and it is belief.

81.
Labor not to understand, that you may believe; but believe, that you may
understand; for understanding is the fruit and reward of Faith.

82.
Lay arguments aside where Faith is required: Logic is now at rest, and
silent, in the Schools, where Fishermen are believed, not Logicians. Ambrose.

83.
Great is that Glory which increases by no praise, and diminishes by no
dispraise. Cass.

84.
The vain glory of this world is sweet and deceiptfull; a fruitless pain, a
perpecuall fear, a perilous Throne; it begins with improuidence, and ends with
impenitence.

85.
The glory is not so great of sitting high, as the grief is extreme in
falling low; nor so much the triumph which attends upon Victory, as the shame
and reproach that follows Destruction.

86.
If you love Wealth, lay it up where it cannot perish; if Honor, esteem it
where none are unworthily honored; if health, speak to enjoy it, where
nothing is feared; if Life, then love it where it cannot end with Death.

87.
If GOD have given you Grace because he would give it freely; then Love you
God freely, not for reward, but for himself.

88.
Why Gods grace is bestowed upon one and not upon another, the Cause may be
unknown, but it cannot be unjust. Aug.

89.
All that is done is lost, if Humility bed wanting. Greg.

90.
Humility is a Virtue, by which in knowing, we learn age esteem our selves.
Bern.

91.
Fasting is known to be the Tower of God, the Castle of Christ, the wall of
the Holy Ghost, the shield of Faith, the triumph of Sanctity.

92.
Of that manner of Fasting God well allows, by which you take out of your
own mouth, to put into another; or by which you afflict your own Carcass,
to relieve your poor Neighbors.

93.
Though Fasting expel the sickness of Vice and Sin, cuts off Passions, and
drives away the causes of offense; yet without the ointment of pity, without
the stream of (...) and the cost of Alms, it brings no perfect health to the
Soul: Fasting cures the wounds of the soul, but without mercy, it leaves the
scarres behind. Pet. Rouan.

94.
The blessed shall first be called to their prepared Kingdom, before the
accursed be cast into their burning Lake, that their sorrows may be the
sharper by seeing what they have lost, and the lust have more joy by
considering what they have escaped. Bern.

95.
It is laudable to be patient in our own wrongs, but to dissemble the
injuries of God is impious. Chrysostom.

96.
Envy is the Daughter of Pride, and that mother Pride is never barren, but ever
bearing: strangle that mother, and there will be no more such Daughter. August.

97.
Not to be sorry after you have finned, makes God more angry and displeased,
then the sin you committed.

98.
The ignorance of Judges for the most part, is the misery of Innocents.

99.
I say unto you Swear not at all; least Swearing breed a facility of
swearing; facility Custom, and custom lead you to Perjury. August.

100.
As that Tree has no fruit which first had no blossom; so that Age has no
honor, whose Youth had no Discipline. Cyprian.

101.
It is no true bounty that proceeds more from vain Glory, then from the
occasion of mercy; for your work takes it name from your affection. Ambrose.

102.
Very many have I seen fall into sin by speaking, but seldom any by
silence; and doubtless, it is harder to learn how to be silent, then how to
speak. Ambrose.

103.
O Infernal wantonness of the Flesh, whose matter is Gluttony, whose flame is
Pride, whose sparkles are lewd Speeches, whose smoke is Infamy, whose end is
Hell fire. Hier.

104.
O extreme filthiness of lust; which not only effeminateth the mind, but
enfeebleth the body: not only spotteth the soul but polluteth the person: All
other sin which a man commits, is besides his body but the Fornicator
sins against his own body. Heat and wantonness march before it:
uncleanness and pollution accompany it; Sorrow and repentance do always
follow it. Hier.

105.
It is great virtue not to hurt, him that hurts you; it is no less fortitude
when you are hurt to forgive; but to spare him whom you may hurt, is great
glory, Ibid.

106.
To search the reason of Gods secret council, is no other thing then proudly
to vaunt against his Council. Greg.

107.
I remember not to have read of any that dyed an ill death, who had freely used
the works of mercy in his life; such a one surely has many intercessors, and
impossible it is, that the prayers of many should not be heard. Hier.

108.
Good men are called away betimes, that they may no longer be vexed of the
wicked; and wicked persons are cut off, that they may persecute the just no
further.

109.
In such estate as every man's last hour leaves him, in the like will the
worlds last day find him; for as he dies in the one, so shall he be judged
in the other.

110.
He cannot Dye ill, that has Lived well; and hardly can he dye well, that
has lived ill. August.

111.
A Sinner should be astonished with this note; that when he dies, he may
forget himself, who whilst he lived forgot God. Caesarius.

112.
To maintain a poor wife is very hard, to endure a rich one is a torment:
what booteth a diligent watch? seeing a dishonest woman will not be kept in,
an honest should not: Necessity is but a false keeper of Chastity, and she
only is truly to be reputed chaste, that might have sinned and would not.
Hier.

113.
If it be a sin to put away a Wife, and a torment to keep her, then of
necessity we shall incur danger of Adulteries by the one, and suffer
continual brawles by the other. Chrysostom.

114.
The Fetters of this world are truly rough and troublesome, the Pleasures
false, the Sorrows certain, the Joys inconstant, the Labors hard, the Rest
doubtful, the Wealth accompanied with Care, and the hopes of Earthly
happiness vain. August.

115.
The World proclaims, I will fail you: The Flesh cries out, I will infest
you: The Devil roares, I will betray you: But CHRIST says, I will refresh
you. Bern.

116.
Who would not be ashamed to say, What will you give me that I may do you
Justice? Is it not as much as to say, what will you give me to deny my self,
to forget my place, and to sell God Almighty? Chrysostom.

117.
A Christians chiefest liberty to Godward, is to be no servant to sin; his
chiefest Nobleness, to excel in Virtues. Hierom.

118.
Prayer is talking to GOD: when you read, God speaks to you; and when you
pray, you speak to God; Therefore pray with attention; for the prayer which
man intends not, God hears not.

119.
God is neither forced nor moved by a crying voice, but pleased and appeased
by an upright Conscience; for he is a hearer not of the voice, but of the
heart.

120.
Many there are whom God hears not to their intentions, that he may hear
them to their saluations. Chrysostom.

121.
Whether it be Man or Woman, that uses wanton attire to provoke and tempt
others, though no hurt should come thereof, yet he, or she shall abide the
eternal Judgment, because they proffered Poison, if any would have drunk of
it.

122.
The only perfection of any, is the knowledge of their own imperfection. Hier.

123.
Seeing that Sin must not escape unpunished, punish you it, least it punish
you: ever let your sin find you a Judge over it, not a Patron for it.

124.
Vain is that Repentance which is spotted with ensuing sin; Laments avail
nothing where sin is doubled: It is to no purpose to ask forgiveness, and
fall into the same sin afresh.

125.
The practice of right Conversation, is not to presume to Command, before we
have learned to obey; nor to impose that upon our Inferiors, which we yield
not to our Superiors.

126.
So far should a Prelates behavior transcend the Peoples, as a Shepherd
transcends his Flock.

127.
If he shall be cast into the Fire, that gives not of his own, what may we
think will become of him that robbes another? If he burn with the Devil,
that clothed not the naked, where shall he burn that strippeth the Poor?

128.
What you have found, and not restored, you have carried away by force; for
what you could do, you did; and you did no more, because you could not; he
also that denies to another his own, as much as in him lies, robbes him.

129.
Sin is not remitted, unless debt be restored, if it may be. August.

130.
We that live upon the oblations of the Faithful, which they offered for
their sins, doubtless if we eat and be silent, we feed upon their sin.

131.
Consider (O Brethren) how damnable a thing it is, to receive wage for no
work? what a crime to take the price of sin, and to Preach nothing against
sin. Greg.

132.
Whatsoever ye retain of the Altars, besides simple Food and Clothing; it is
rapine, it is Sacrilege. Bern.

133.
Who affirms to have knowledge being ignorant, is rash; who denies that
knowledge he has, is unthankful.

134.
An Old man's discourse should not only be weighty and grave, but withal
short or not very long. Aug.

135.
An Old man hears the messengers of Death, and will not believe them; the
messengers are three; Casualtie, Sickness, and old Age it self: Casualtie
propounds things uncertain; Sickness things sorrowful; old Age things
certain: Casualtie shows death lurking; Sickness death appearing; old Age
death present: From uncertainty of Death proceeds fear; from pain of
Sickness, grief; and from the certainty of old Age, should come not
obstinacy and stiffenesse, but Mortification and Humility. Hug.

136.
The patience to say nothing, the opportunity of speaking, and the contempt of
worldly wealth, are the chief foundations of Virtue.

137.
As it becomes not a Bishop to sell that hand he lays upon others, so the
ordained Minister, must neither set his Tongue nor his Pen to sale.

138.
When a Bishop purchases undue Order with money, whereby his inward man is
cast off; his Body receives honor, and his Soul loses honesty. Ambrose.

139.
Every one is so much the more unwise inwardly, as he strives to be thought
wise outwardly. Greg.

140.
If a Rich man proud, be scarce tolerable, who will suffer an insolent
Beggar? Aug.

141.
Pride precipitateth from the highest Heaven, to the deepest pit of Hell:
Humility exalts from below to above: an Angel fell from Heaven into Hell;
Man from Earth ascends to Heaven. Bern.

142.
The vicious for the most part, love such as are like themselves; only one
proud body, can never endure another. Inno.

143.
Present fear, begets eternal security; now fear God above all things,
that you need not be afraid of Man.

144.
Let Man understand, that GOD is a Physician, and tribulation a Medicine to
Salvation, not a preparatiue to Damnation.

145.
In the Furnace, Straw burns, Gold purifieth; the one consumes to ashes,
the other is purged of dross and corruption: the Furnace is the World; the
Gold is the lust; the Fire is Tribulation; the cunning workman is GOD: What the
workman wills I do; where and when he appoints I suffer: he that appoints
me to endure, knows when I shall be pure: though the straw burn and set
me on fire, yet when it is turned to ashes, I shall be clean without spot or
stain.

146.
Our LORD says Forgive, and you shall be forgiven: say not with your tongue
you forgive, and differ with your heart; for God knows what you say and think
together; Man hears what you say, but GOD sees what you think: It is much
better to forgive heartily and say nothing, then to carry a fair golden mouth,
and a false froward heart. Aug.

147.
So merciful is our Lord JESUS, that he would have pardoned Judas, if he had
but craved pardon and hoped for CHRIST'S mercy. Ambr.

148.
O Man! thou can not be without sin; and if always thou will be forgiven
all, then forgive always; how much thou will be forgiven, so much forgive;
how often thou will be forgiven, so often forgive: yea, and because thou
would be forgiven all, forgive all: I say O man conceive, that in forgiving
others, thou forgiuest thy self. Chrysostom.

149.
Truth is both sweet and bitter; sweet when it spares, bitter when it cures.
Aug.

150.
What booteth a clean Body with a corrupt Mind? an humble Wife is better then
a proud Virgin.

151.
What is the Minds virginity? entire Faith, strong Hope, and perfect
Charity. Aug.

152.
Virginity surpasses the condition of humane nature, by which men are made
like unto Angels: yet greater is the victory of Virgins then of Angels; for
Angels live without Flesh, but Virgins triumph in Flesh.

153.
Virginity is the Sister of Angels, the Conquest of Lusts, the Queen of
Virtues, the Treasure of Goodness. Cyprian.

154.
Virtue, the more it contemns, the more it is esteemed. It is great Virtue to
strive with Prosperity, and great Prosperity not to be overcome by it.

155.
The mind can never enjoy the kingdom of Virtue, unless it first shake off
the yoke of Vice. Aug.

156.
There is no such persuasion, to Virtue, as often to remember the ugliness of
Sin. Chrysostom.

157.
There is nothing well-done, unwillingly, though the thing done be never so
good.

158.
If you steal not because you are afraid to be seen, yet inwardly in your
heart you have stolen, and are to be held guilty thereof, though you take
nothing away. Bern.

159.
When you will you cannot, because when you might you would not; so as through
an ill will past, you have lost a good being present. Aug.

160.
With GOD (who knows all things before they be done) a resolved will to do
well, or ill, is reckoned for the deed done. Aug.

161.
His brain is taken away whom GOD intends to punish, least he should by
providence auert the intended plague.

162.
He that makes an indiscreet Vow is foolish, and he that keeps it is impious.
Hier.

163.
Always break unlawful Promises, and change ungodly Vows.

164.
What good you have vowed freely, that you are bound to perform justly. Bern.

165.
A greedy Covetous man who deuoureth all like Hell, would have none left alive
but himself, that he might possess all. Aug.

166.
When God rewards Merits, he crowns nothing but his own Gifts: in the
merit you do nothing; in the work, you work alone; your Crown is of God,
your work of your self, yet not without Gods assistance. Aug.

167.
Many good things does God in Man, which man does not; for Man does nothing
which God does not, that Man may do it. Ibid.

168.
All our merits are in such manner the gifts of God, that Man is for the same
more indebted to God, then God to Man. Bern.

169.
Merit and Grace are at this odds; that Grace will never enter, where Merit
takes the vpperhand. Bern.

170.
I know well, that by no virtue, no merit, he shall ever be saved, who by the
Passion of CHRIST is never moved. Aug.

184.
Whenever Ideuoutly remember and meditate the Passion of CHRIST, I shall be
safe. Ibid.

172.
Not any one upon earth is so rich, as he desires nothing but God: and he is
the Almesman of CHRIST, that is out of love with the world. Aug.

173.
Among thirty thousand men, scarce one of those shall repent truly, who drive
of Repentance to the last cast.

174.
He is far enough from Faith, that deferreth his repentance till his Death.
Greg.

175.
Repentance should not be late, not compelled, not fained, not desperate.

176.
In a sound man Penance is sound, in a sick man it is sick, and in a dead man
it is dead.

177.
Reckon from Adam to the last Just man, and you shall find none to be saved,
but by very hard and rough ways.

178.
Always in your heart eschew ill Company, and when you cannot avoid them,
converse very warily amongst them.

179.
The virtue of the Sacraments, is not abated by the viciousness of the Priest.

180.
I had rather undergo the torments of Caiphas, Herod, and Pilate, then of a
Priest that celebrates unworthily. Aug.

181.
He that tells a Lie, and he that concealeth Truth, are both culpable, and
guilty before God, the one for desiring to do hurt, and the other for not
doing good. Hier.

182.
If scandal arise from truth, it is rather to be permitted, the truth
pretermitted. Greg.

183.
If I do good with a good intention, though evil come thereof, yet it shall
not be imputed to me for sin. Ambr.

184.
Certainly he cannot be good, that would not be better: For where he
begins not to be made better, there he leaves off being good.

185.
No man is more incurable, then he that thinks himself sound when he is
truly sick, August.

186.
To stand and not to fall into sin, is Angelical; to fall and rise again,
is Humane; but to fall and arise, is Diabolical.

187.
The Devil hurts by persuasion, not by compulsion. Hug.

188.
The Devil never tempts or assaults those, that are in his quiet possession.

189.
That sin which is not consented to, is no sin, but in atter of exercise to
virtue. Greg.

190.
The worlds Mirth is unpunished Wantomesse. Aug.

191.
He that takes unjustly, seldom restores justly. Isid.

192.
He that is proud of his own virtue, kills himself; not with a Sword, but
with a Salve.

193.
Who often with their goodwill fall into offense, must sometimes against their
will abide the smart of punishment. Greg.

194.
God never forsakes man, before man forsakes God. Hier.

195.
It is monstrous to behold, an eminent state with a base mind; a high seat
with a mean life; a nimble tongue with an idle hand; many words with no
deeds; grave looks with light actions; great authority with little
constancy. Bern.

196.
Be always doing of some good work, that the Devil may never find you at
leisure for him. Hier.

197.
God deferres the giving of that we ask, that we may ask more often, and
more fervently.

198.
He that made you without you, will never save you, or justify you without
you. Aug.

199.
Do not that evil your self, which you would not have another to do. Greg.

200.
As Justice without Mercy, is not Justice but Cruelty, so favor without
Justice, is not favor but folly.

201.
Correction without instruction, is Tirannie.

202.
The last things evermore to be remembered are Death, Judgment, Hell, Glory;
what is more horrible then Death? what more terrible then Judgment? what more
intolerable then Hell? and what more joyful then Glory. Bernardus.

Deo Gratias.

Short Prayers or Meditations upon the last things, viz. Death, Judgment,
Hell, Glory.
Upon DEATH.
OEternall GOD in whose hands the souls of the Iustare, and under whose
protection the torment of Death does not touch them; take from my foul the
disordinate love of all visible things, that in departing from them, it may
have no feeling of torment. O my Soul, if thou desire that the bitterness
of Death should not touch thee, love not those things that Death can take from
thee; for if thou possess them not with love, thou shall leave them in Death
and Dolor.

Upon IVDGEMENT.
O How afflicted shall my poor Soul find it felfe, with so straight and
rigorous an examination? O how astonished shall it be with the evidence of so
certain and clear proof? O Eternal GOD, enter not into Judgment with thy
Servant; for none that live, shall be justified in thy presence. Fear O my
Soul, although thou find no great sins in thy self; for he that is to
examine and Judge thee, is GOD, that sees more then thou, and can find them.
Examine thy self with the greatest rigor thou can, and judge severely thy
self for the sins thou shall find; for if thou judge thy self with
Dolor, thou shall no more be judged to Damnation.

Upon HELL.
O Good JESUS, aid me to bewail bitterly my sins, that I may not go to
that tenebrous Land covered with the shadow of Death, the Land of those that
are in Despair, O touch me with thy mercy, that being freed from the fears
of Hell, I may ever enjoy thee world without end.

Upon GLORY.
O Infinite GOD, center of my Soul, convert me to thee, that on thy eternal
Sabbath, I may partake of thy Glory; for thou made me for thee, and my heart
is unquiet till it come near thee. O Eternal Father, seeing thou Createdst
me, that I might Love thee as a Son; give me Grace for thine own sake, that
I may love thee as a Father. O only begotten Son of the Father, and Redeemer
of the world, seeing thou Createdst me and Redeemedst me, that I might obey
and imitate thee, aid me that I may always obey thee and imitate thee in all
things. O most Holy Ghost, seeing that of thy goodness thou did Create me
to be Sanctified, grant that it may be for thine own Glory, world without
end.

Amen.

FINIS.

