ENGLANDS BANE: OR, THE DESCRIPTION of Drunkenness. COMPOSED AND WRITTEN by
THOMAS YOUNG, sometimes Student of STAPLE-INNE.

Prestat non nasei, quam male viuere.

ECCLES: 8.11. Because sentence against an evil work is not executed
speedily, therefore the heart of the children of men is fully set in them to
do evil.

LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM JONES, and are to be sold by THOMAS BAYLEE, at the
corner shop in the middle row in Holborne, near adjoining unto Staple Inn.
1617.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL VERY WORTHY indicious and understanding Gentleman
Sr. FRANCIS DOWSE Knight, T. Y. wishes increase of health and perpetual
happiness.
RIght Worshipful, calling to mind my own follies (ever from mine Infancy,
prone to have conjunction with intemperancie the chief fountain of all men's
perturbations, and also remembering your good counsel ever given unto me, that
I should loath excess, and love temperance (which I now find of it self to
be the treasure of virtue,) compelling men to follow Reason, bringing peace to
the mind, and mollifying the affections with concord and agreement, receiving
I say from you, not only good advice (being as great a benefit as one friend
can do to another) but also good example which is the readyest pathway to
guide men to felicity, and for fear I should be culpable according to the
proverb; Thanks waxes old as soon as gifts are had in possession I thought
good although I cannot requite, yet to make known to your Worship, that I do
not forget (for omnium ingratissimus est, Ingratus qui beneficium accepisse
negat, quod accepit: Ingratus qui ^d dissimulat, vursum Ingratus qui non
reddit: et omnium Ingratissimus qui oblitus est.
qui oblitus est: neither this: nor other your manifold great and continual
kindness bestowed upon me: And that you may see how good a scholar I have
proved in the art of sobriety by your discipline consiliatorie and
exemplarie. I am imboldened to crave your patronage to this pamphlet which will
at large set down all the subtle sleights, tempting baits, and crafty
allurements, which Satan uses for the overthrow of mankind, by this vice of
drunkenness, (which indeed is the Metropolitan city of all the province of
vices) which Reason made me entitle my Book, Englands Bane: because no Nation
is more polluted with this capitol sin, then ours. And I protest it is not
ambition that made me crave the patronage to this Treatise: (considering my
small deseruings) but chiefly presuming upon the affiance of your good nature
and kind constructions of my weak endeauours, and something the rather,
because I know your liberal qualities inclinable to the Rule of my intentions:
which is not to bar Society, but to condemn Ebrietie; Eccles. 31.23. Pro.
22.9.
For Solomon says, He that is liberal shall be blessed, and honored of his
neighbors: And of this virtue, I know both your self and all your Worshipful
Family: fully endued; for often have I heard you say, that of the Wine and
Beer you regarded not the expense: but you blamed such as would abuse these
creatures to overthrow their own sense, and such voluptuous livers are them I
chiefly aim at, that cannot take moderation to be their guide: Omne nocet
nimium, mediocriter omne gerendum, I know you love to Read: because you know
to censure? Let me therefore entreat your Worship to read this, and to give
it favorable protection to the world: although the lines be rude, the matters
good, and it is no shame to gather a Primrose growing among Briers, had it
better you should enjoy it, such as it is if you entertain I shall rest.

Your Worships in all faithful observance, THO: YOUNG.

TO THE READER.
YOUNG I am I confess who take upon me to correct an enormitie crept into my
country, too much frequented by young and old of all conditions. Yet (gentle
Reader) let me persuade thee to peruse the same, with an indifferent eye: not
contemning any part thereof, because it is compiled by the Young. And although
thou may perhaps justly say, that I have been equal with thee in this
aspersion, yet let me entreat again that thou will no less equal me in my
contrition) then resolve fully to concur with me in my conversion. Our Nation
has had for many years since this imputation, that we should apelike imitate
Foreign countries in their vices, wherein I will not particularize for
avoiding of offense, and the rather because it is to all judicial men too
perspicuous, I could rather wish that leaving their examples in the worst, we
did frame our selves to imitate, to compare, nay to excel them in their
virtues and heroical atchieuements, which may very easily be performed by us
in that God of his especial goodness to our Nation, has endued us with
singularity of apprehension, dexterity of invention, and means for
discipline, exceeding all the bordering countries of the world. There is an use
and an abuse of the best creatures, and we can not deny, as well by the
assertion of God himself, who in the creation saw all that he had made to be
good, but that they were all made for the comfort for the service and for the
use of man. If we then neglecting the use, do fall into the abuse of those
good creatures, and make them evil and hurtful to us: that follows that we
contradict God in his purpose: we alter the nature and quality of the
creature, we derogate from our selves, that precedence and superiority, which
God has given to man over those creatures: how do we abase our selves from
that sovereignty which God has given us: who said (let man rule and have
power over all creatures on the earth, when we suffer a poor inanimate
creature, so to conquer and overcome us, that we lie grouelling on the earth
speechless: nay sometimes lifelesse (over come by the strength of a Grape a
weak and feeble substance) we all desire (as good reason we have) to extenuate
the power and kingdom of Satan: but I dare boldly affirm, he gains more
souls by this deadly sin of Drunkenness, then by all the sins of the
world: and has drowned and swallowed up more in this gulf, then were drowned
in the general deluge of Noah's flood. Lend me only thy good will, for my
desire of thy safety, which thou may have or not have at thine Election. But
better it were to forbear to read this same, unless thou practice the same
in thy life and conversation: Which thing grant both thy self and me, hoping
thou will pray for me, as I have done for thee, leaving thy will to Gods
directions.

ENGLANDS BANE.
IF according to the saying of Saint Paul, Romans 6.23.
that he which commits but one sin is to be rewarded with damnation, and
according to the saying of Saint John, 1 Ioh. 3.8.
he which sins is of the Devil, What shall we think of those desperate
persons? Nay rather monsters of men, which through the loathsome vice of
Drunkenness commit all manner of sin: For Plato says, Drunkenness is a
monster with many heads: As first, filthy talk: Secondly, Fornication;
Thirdly, Wrath; Fourthly, Murder; Fifthly Swearing; Sixthly, Cursing. If these
be the chief heads that proceed from the polluted body of this ugly Monster,
Filthy talk, the first bead of Drunkenness.
let us try them by the touchstone of the holy Scripture, and see how they are
allowed of thereby. And first concerning filthy talk, is is said to the
Counthians, that filthy speakers and raylers shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God: and the fourth to the Ephesians Saint Paul forbids us to have any corrupt
communication to proceed forth of our mouths, Ephesians. 4.29.30.
but that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace to
the hearers. And also we must put away all bitterness and evil speaking: And
further the fifth to the Ephesians, S. Paul wishes that no filthiness nor
foolish talking, Ephesians. 5.4.
no not so much as jesting should either be used, or named among Christians.
But from the mouths of Drunkards what idle talk, filthy speech, blasphemous
oaths, and profane words are used, no Christian ears can with patience
endure, but with grief of mind, vexation of spirit, yea with both horror and
terror to the soul of man. The greatest curse that ever fell on mankind
since the flood came by Drunkenness, as appears in Genesis by Noah (the
godliest man then living) avoiding all other sins, Gen 9.25
yet was unawares taken with this vice of Ebrietie, and cursed his own son
with the bitter and perpetual curse of servitude, Saying, Cursed be Canaan, a
servant of servants shall he be to all his brethren. Which thing of servitude
was never either heard or spoken off, although the world had then been the
space of 1656. years: to the which curse, God saying Amen, added also nakedness
to the posterity of Cham, as appears this day by the Virginians, and Indians
being by the best Authors of Antiquity noted to come from that Cham, Nakedness
and servitude are hereditary curse to all drunkardes and their posterity.
and surely by the slavery and beggerie that happens generally to all that
uses this vice I can think no other of it, but that it is a curse hereditarie
to all Drunkards themselves, or at least to their posterity.

Now concerning the Description of the second head of this Monster
Drunkenness, Fornication second head.
which is Fornieation; The Apostle in the sixth chapter to the Corinthians
says, Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Adulterers, nor Wantons, nor
Buggerers, 1 Cor. 6.9.15 18.19.20.
shall inherit the Kingdom of heaven: And in the 15. verse he says, Know ye
not that your bodies are the members of Christ, shall I then take the members
of Christ, and make them the members of an Harlot: Fly fornication, every
sin that a man does is without the body, but he that commits Fornication,
sins against his own body. Know ye not that the body is the Temple of the
holy Ghost which is in you, whom ye have of God? And ye are not your own: for
ye are bought for a price: therefore glorify God in your body, and in your
spirit, for they are Gods. Which being thus, what glory can that party show
unto God in his spirit that has neither use of body nor sense: for as Socrates
says, Reason departs, when drink possesses the brain. Thrice worthy is
this saying of the Philosopher, and fit to be noted with golden letters: Cum
tibi sieve Deus, sieve matter rerum omnium Natura dederit animum quo nihil est
prestantius sic teipsum (O homo) ab abiicies at que prosternes vt nihil inter
te and quadrupedem aliquem potes interesse? Wheu as God has given thee a
living soul which excels all things (O man) will thou so much abase and
disgrace thy self, that thou will make no difference betwixt thy self and a
bruit beast, for Drunkenness does not only disgrace, but even slays the
soul of man: according to Zeno his saying, It is not Death that destroys the
soul, but a bad life. But to return to the vice of Fornication, S. Paul to
the Thessalonians says, 1 These. 4.3.
For this is the will led a man he should be slain for it, and further to set
out the greatness of this sin, and fearing they might be tempted through
briberie to spare the murderer, he says, moreover ye shall take no
recompense for the life of the murderer, Number. 25.16.19.20.31.32
which is worthy to die, but he shall be put to death: The land where the
murder is done is so much pollnted, that there is no way to cleanse it, but by
the blood of him that shed it. And surely it is seldom or never known that a
Murderer went in peace to his grave, as may appear by Abimelech, who after
he had killed his seventy brethren, although God suffered him for a time to
live and to rule all Israel, yet at length he died miserably, and was slain
by the hands of a woman. Zimri murdered Elah, but afterward by Gods just
judgment was forced to burn himself. 1 Kin. 19 and 18
But this unnatural sin, this monstrous deed, this abhorred fact of Murder
is by no accident or occasion so often committed as through Drunkenness, not
only by Drunkards upon others, but also many times through Gods heavy wrath
upon Drunkards themselves, as by too many examples I am able to make proof as
well of the one as of the other.

And first to begin with that high and mighty Monarch of the world Alexander
the Great, Murders in Drunkenes.
who in the beginning of his Reign was so temperate that he refused the Cooks
and Pasterers of the Queen of Caria: saying, he had better then they were
(viz.) for his dinner early rising, and for his supper a moderate dinner,
notwithstanding through the vicious manners, and lewd customs of the Persians,
he was so much given at last unto the excess of drinking, that he propounded
six hundred crowns for a reward to him that drunk most, called a cup of
silver, being of a great bigness after his own name: which cup when he
offered unto Calisthenes one of his favorites, he refused, saying, that he
which drank with Alexander had need of Asculapius, at which words the King
feeling himself touched, and being in his drink was so incensed against him,
that he caused him immediately to be put in a cage with dogs (where he
poisoned himself) afterward being persuaded by a common Strumpet named Thais,
he burnt Percipolis the chief City in Persia, and which was worst in his
intemperancie killed his dear friend Clytus: for which bloody deed after he
came to himself, he wept and fasted three days, and would had he been
permitted have slain himself. In this deed of Alexander., Seneca. Epist. 59
the saying of Seneca is verified. Ebrietas vnius horae hilaram Insaniam longi
temporis tedio pensat. Drunkenness requires one hours merry madness, with a
long tedious time of sorrow and repentance. The son of Cyril being drunk,
wickedly slew that holy man his father, and mother also great with child: he
hurt his two sisters, and defloured one of them, which fearful example is
sufficient to make the hair of our head stand upright, as often as any
occasion is offered unto us; whereby we might fall into any inconvenience
through the allurement of drinking. But I may leave off Foreign examples, and
recite too many of like nature in our own Nation, William Purcas in Essex,
Anno 1615. in his Drunkenness being rebuked by his mother for his vice most
cruelly and unnaturally killed her. Anderson in his drunkenness killed a boy
and was hanged for the same in May 1616. But as I have recited these few, so
could I make mention of multitudes and examples of the same nature. For I fully
persuade my self, that there is not a city nor market town in England, but
it would appear (if the records of assizes were searched) that there has not
been some one or more slain in it through Drunkenness, which is according to
the old saying, Plus crapula quam gladio, more men have died thorugh
intemperancie then with the sword, for such is the nature of excessive drinking
that it intoxicateth and boyleth the brains, benummeth the senses, infeebleth
the joints and synewes, and brings a man into a lethergie, Drunkards
murdered. King. 16, 9.
the whole body into Dropsies, Gowtes, Palsies, Opoplexes and such like. But
now to return and speak of them that have been slain in their drink. Elah
King of Israel being drunk in Tirzah was murdered by Zimri his servant. Amon
one of David's ungracious sons was slain by his Brother Absolons
commandment, 2 Samuel 13.18, 29.
when he was full of Wine. Fliolmus King of the Goths was so addicted to
drinking, that he would sit a great part of the night quaffing and carowsing
with his servants, and as on a time he sat after his accustomed and beastly
manner carowsing with them: his servants being as drunk as their Master; threw
their master King in sport into a great vessel full of drink that was set in
the midst of the Hall, where he most ridiculously and miserably ended his
days.

Augustine Lachimer reports that in Germany in the year 1549. there were
three companions in such a iollity, after they had taken in their cups
according to their brutish manner of that country, that with a cole they
painted the Devil in the wall, and drank freely unto him, and talked to him
as though he had been personally present, the next morning they were found all
strangled and dead, as the fly plays so long with the Candle, until at
length she burns her self: so these men delighted in sin, and dallied with
the Devil so long until they brought themselves to utter ruin and
destruction. Which horrible and fearful example, is sufficient to strike
terror and amazement to the greatest carowsers of our age, to fear least Gods
heavy wrath should be incensed against them, and so deliver them over to
Satan, and suffer them to die in their drunkenness, and as the tree falls
so he lies. Luke 21.34.35.36.
But I will conclude with our Saviors words, the 21. of S. Luke, Cauete autem
vobis, Take heed to your selves lest at any time your hearts be oppressed
with surfeiting and Drunkenness, lest the last day come on you unawares.

Now to proceed to the fifth Head which is swearing forbidden by Gods
commandment both in Exodus and Deuteronomie, Swearing. Exodus: 20.1. Deuteronomy. 5.
Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain. Which is so frequently
used among Drunkards that scarce six words are used amongst them without an
oath, and that upon most vain and idle occasions, (viz.) that you have not
pledged me, or your cup was not full, or you left a snuff in the bottom, and
upon such like swaggering occasions, the Name of God is taken in vain, and
with such horrible, detestable, and blaspheamous oaths (as me thinks) I am
afraid to mention, being by all the parts of Christ, as by his Life, Death,
Passion, Flesh, Heart, Wounds, Blood, Bones, Arms, Sides, Guts, Nails, Foot:
as if they went to crucify Christ a new: who while he was upon the earth,
forbid it utterly in these words: I say unto you, Mat. 4.34.35.36, 37.
swear not at all, neither by heaven for it is the Throne of God, nor yet by
the earth, for it is his so testcole: nor yet by Jerusalem, for it is the City
of the great King: Ne there shall thou swear by the head, because thou can
not make one hair white or black. But your communication shall be yea, Leuit.
19.
Nay nay? In Leuitious it is said, Ye shall not swear by my name falsely,
neither shall thou defile the name of thy God, I am the Lord. I fear me we
shall have just cause to complain with Jeremy, Ier. 23.10.
that because of oaths the land mourns, In Zechariah we may find that
swearers are noted in a book and that every one that swears, Zach: 5.3.4.
shall be cut off as well on this side, as on that side, (viz:) wheresoever he
be in the world, and that the curse of God will enter into the house of him
that falsely swears, and it shall remain in the midst of his house, and
shall consum it both with the timber and the stones thereof. The wise King
perceiving the great danger that comes by swearing, Ecclesiast. 23.9.11.
warns us not to accustom our selves to swearing, for in it are many falls,
neither take up for a custom the meaning of the Holy One, for thou shall not
be unpunished for such things: for as a servant which is oftpunisht, cannot be
without some scarre, so he that swears and names God continually shall not
be faultlesse, man that uses much swearing, shall be filled with wickedness,
and the plague shall never go from his house, when he shall offend his faults
shall be upon him, and if he acknowledge not his sin, he makes a double
offense and if he swear in vain, he shall not be innocent, but his house shall
be full of plagues. Iam: 5, 12
Saint James wishes us before all things, to avoid swearing, either by heaven
or by the earth, or by any other oath: Let all swearers take heed, although
God suffers them for a time, lest they be suddenly stricken with death as many
have been, and then vengeance waiting at the door, at the hour of death, and
when their bodies shall be without life, their souls shall be everlastingly
without God. How did God punish the oath broken by the Gibeonites, 2 Samuel: 21,
1.9
not only with famine three years together, but with the death of Saul's seven
sons, who were hanged up openly in the mountains. See what the Lord says in
Ezekiel, of Zedechiah that he shall not prosper for breaking his oath: As I
live, Ezech. 17: 15.16.19.
I will surely bring mine oath that he has despised, and my covenant that he
has broken upon his own head: 2 King: 25.2.
and so it came to pass Nabuchadnezar by an army overcame him, slew his
sons before his face, put out both his eyes, and carried him to Babel. But in
these later times, and in this our land I may show very many examples, as of
Earl Godwin, who wishing at the Kings table that the bread he eat might
choke him, if he were guilty of Alphreds death, whom he had before slain: was
presently choked and fell down dead. Fox: acts and monu.
We may read in the Acts and Monuments of one John Peter, a horrible swearer,
with whom it was usual to say, if it be not true, I pray God I may rot ere I
dye. To which God said, A men, and so he rotted away indeed, and died
miserably. Lastly, witness the example of a Seruingman in Lincolne-shire, who
for every trifle had an use to swear no less oath then (Gods precious blood)
he would not be warned by his friends to leave it, at last he was visited with
grievous sickness, in the time whereof he could not be persuaded to repent of
it, but hearing the Bell to Toll, in the very anguish of death, he started up
in his bed, and swore by his former oath that Bell tolled for him. Whereupon
immediately the blood abundantly from all the joints of his body as it were in
streams did issue out most fearfully, from mouth, nose, wrists, knees, heels
and toes, with all other joints not one left free, and so dyed. These and such
like examples, and fearful warnings from heaven, are sufficient to terrify
the hearts of all Drunkards whose tongues being set on fire of hell, Iam. ^.6,
7.8, 9.
speak nothing without an oath, and Drunkards usually fall into the sins of
the tongue, against which S. James speaks so bitterly, Psalm. 141.3.
and David says, Set a watch, O Lord before my mouth, and keep the door of
my lips: With whose saying in the 50. Psalm, I will conclude and wish all
Drunkards and Swearers to ponder his words: Psalm. 50.21.
Consider of these things ye that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and
there be none to deliver you.

But to speak of the sixth and last Head, Sixthly Cursing.
which is Cursing: David noting the vileness of this sin: Reputeth those
persons that use this vice to think there is no God to yield them vengeance
for their wickedness, notes them in the 14. Psalm, which begins, Psalm. 14.6.
The fool has said in his heart there is no God: and so going forward to the
6. verse, says, Their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness: And in the
hundredth and ninth Psalm, he shows that God will never bless them that
curse. Psalm. 109.17.18.
But that he shall be cursed of all people: As he loved Cursing so shall it
come unto him, and as it loved not Blessing, so shall it be far from him: as
he clothed himself with cursing like a raiment, so shall it come into his
bones: Let it be unto him as a garment to cover him, and for a girdle wherewith
he shall be always girded. David did rightly term Cursing the girdle of the
Drunkard. For he is compassed about both at home and abroad with cursings. At
home he is cursed of his Wife, for wasting of her portion, and bringing her in
contempt, penury and misery: Of his Family, because he defraudeth their
bellies, through his wasting and superflous excess abroad: The good Wise is
forced to pinch her household at home: Yea, of his own children (if not in his
life time by his daughters,) for that they are not through his vnthristinesse
and base manner of living, preferred in marriage. Yet by his sons after his
death, for spending their patrimony (by succession due to them:) and not
giving them education: How many men have I heard say, I am bound to curse the
time, that ever my Father was a company keeper, which had he not been I might
have proved a Scholar, or I should have had such lands or such livings, which
my father spent in his solly: Yea the very nourishers of his vices themselves,
when his money is spent do curse him, the Host and Hostess curse him, because
he troubles their house (being pierce penilesse) and not give place to other
guests: that are full fraught: The Tapsters curse him, because he calls for
Beer, and runs in score: the Chamberlaines they curse him, for tumbling the
beds, polluting the room, and he curses them as fast, for deceiving him of
his money, are not Drunkards accordding to David's saying, girded about with
curses: Which girdle the Devil claspeth about him so fast, it is to be feared
without repentance and the great mercy of God, it will never be unloosed until
he has him in hell, where with the damned souls he will be forced to cry:

O dolor, o Rabies, o stridor dentium and Ingence,
Luctus and Inferni meluendus carceris horror.
With grief, with rage, with gnashing teeth, and howling great,
In this infernal lake and horride place my soul is fret.
Saint Paul the third to the Colosians bids us to put away all malicious cursed
speaking forth of our mouths, Col. 3.8.
and to the Romans he says, Bless but curse not. And surely the Devil and
destruction waits at the door, when we fall into this humor of cursing,
Mark. 14.17.
as appears by Peter, before he denied his Master, Our blessed Savior.
First he began to curse, and then he swore, saying, I know not this man of
whom ye speak. Goliath before he was killed of David, 1 Samuel 17.43.
fell a cursing, and so died in this wickedness. David held this fault so great
in Shemi, for cursing him that even upon his deathbed: he took order with
Solomon his son to put Shemei to death for the same. 2 Samuel 16.5.13 Shemei
cursing. 1 King. 2.8.9.46. His death.
Behold with thee is Shemei which cursed me with a horrible curse, therefore
thou shall cause his hoare head to go down to the grave in blood.

If the heads that spring from this polluted Monster, are so detestable
dangerous, and damnable: (as by the fore-recited places of Scripture is
declared:) it is requifite (that the noisome and infectious poison to mankind)
which does proceed from the nature and condition of this Monster should
plainly be made manifest, and described to the world: Drunkenes defined.
And therefore to define it, Drunkenness is a vice which stirs up lust,
grief, anger, and madness, extinguisheth the memory, opinion and
understanding, makes a man the picture of a beast, and twice a child, because
he can neither stand nor speak. Saint Augustine says, Ad sacram Ebrietas est
flagitiorum omnium matter culparumque materia, etc. Drunkenness is the mother
of outrages, the matter of faults, the root of crimes, the fountain of vice,
the intoxicate or of the head, the quelling of the senses, the tempest of the
tongue, the storm of the body, the shipwreck of chastity, loss of time,
voluntary madness, an ignominious languor, the filthiness of manners, the
disgrace of life, the corruption of the soul: Were there no more to be spoken
against Drunkenness then the words of this Holy Father (if they were duly
considered) my thinks it should be enough to deter any Christian man from
that vice. Cyrus being but a child and a Heathen, when he was asked by his
Grandfather Astyages, why he drank no Wine at a great Feast, answered, he
took it to be poison, because said he those at the last Feast that drank it
were deprived of their understanding and senses: The Lacedaemonians would often
show their children such as were drunk, to the end they should learn to hate
that vice. These being but children and Heathens by seeing ill examples loathed
the vice, and grew the better. We being men and Christians on the contrary,
by seeing ill examples love the vice, and grow the worse. For before we were
acquainted with the lingering wars of the Low Countries, Drunkenness was held in
the highest degree of hatred that might be amongst us: For if by chance any one
had been overtaken with his cups, and gone reeling in the streets, or lain
sleeping under a Table, we would have spit at him as a Toade, and called him
drunken Swine, and warnd all our friends out of his company: but now it is
grown for a custom and the fashion of our age, even in Cities, Towns,
Villages, I even amongst the very Woods and Forests (as shall be spoken of
hereafter) nay it is mounted so high, that men must in a manner blush and be
ashamed as much to speak of sobriety, or to be temperate, (in a thousand
companies.) As in that happy time of our ancients, they were ashamed of
Ebrietie in others, or to be drunk themselves. Why? He is reputed a Pesant, a
slave and a Bore, that will not take his liquor profoundly: He is a man of no
fashion that cannot drink super naculum, Carouse the Hunters Hoope, quaffe
Vpsey-freese cross, Bowse in Permoysaunt, in Pimlico, in Crambo, with
Healthes, Gloves, Numpes, Frolicks and a thousand such dominering inuentitions,
as by the Bell, by the Cards, by the Dye, A lottery upon the card newly
invented for drinking.
by the Dozen, by the Yard, and so by measure we drink out of measure. Thus
we spend so great a time in carowsing, as though we did not drink to live,
but lived to drink: and for the further maintenance and upholding of this most
execrable vice, there are in London drinking schools: so that drunkenness is
professed with us as a liberal Art and Science: all Christians have just
cause to complain, and to cry out that we have received by the Low Countries
the most irreparable damadge that ever fell on the Kingdom of England.

Drunkards now a days make meetings and matches of drinking, Isa. 56.18.
and encourage one an other thereunto, according to the saying of Esaias: Come I
will bring Wine, and we will fill our selves with strong drink, and to morrow
shall be as this day, and much more abundant. But you that rejoice thus in
your wickedness and in your abominable Drunkenness hear and tremble at the
reward provided for you, and mentioned by S. John, Reu. 23.8.25.27.
Your part is in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone which is the
second death. The gates of heaven shall he shut against you. For there shall no
unclean thing, nor none that works abomination. Saint Paul to the
Corinthians says, that Drunkards shall never inherit the Kingdom of Heaven.
And likewise to the Galathians, he says, that Drunkards, shall not inherit
the Kingdom of God. 1 Cor. 6.10. Gal. 5.21.
These sayings of the Apostles and Evangelists are enough to strike terror to
the souls of any Christian man, and so far to bar them from Drunkenness,
that rather then they would be in danger to fall into it, they would drink
water as Daniel and his fellows did, Dan. 12.
when they refused the Wine of the Kings Table. But your common Drunkards are
no Christians: For a true Christian is the child of light, and walks in the
light, 1 These. 5.6.7.8
and is sober, but the Drunkard is the child of darkness, and the works which
he does are the works of darkness: And Saint Peter says, It is sufficient
for us that we have spent the time past of our life after the lust of the
Gentiles, 2 Pet. 4.3.
walking in Wantonness, Lusts, Fit. 2.12.
Drunkenness, Gluttony, Drinkings, etc. Saint Paul to Titus says, that the
grace of God that brings salvation to all men, has appeared, and teaches us
that we should deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and that we should live
soberly, and righteously, and godly in this World. Tit. 3.8.
And in the third Chapter, It is a true saying, that they which believe in God
must be careful to show forth good works. Which makes plain that Drunkards
are no Christians, and therefore not of God, for the Drunkard makes his belly
his God, Phil. 3.19.
because he more diligently serves it, more better loves it, and more carefully
pleases it, then God himself: And to speak truly of him, A Drunkard sit for
nothing.
a Drunkard is unprofitable for any honest service, and can make neither good
Magistrate, nor good Subject: seeing he can not rule others, that cannot rule
himself. Therefore rightly said Saint Augustine; Ehriosus cum obseruet
obsorbetur a vino, abominatur a Deo despicitur ab Angellis, decidetur ab
hominibus destituetur a virtutibus confunditur a Daemonib conculcatur ab
hominibus. When the Drunkard deuoureth Wine, he is devoured of Wine, he is
abominable to God, despised of the Angels, scorned of men, abandoned of virtue,
confounded by the Devils, and trampled under men's feet. If the inconvenience
that follows drunkenness be so great; let us search out the benefits and
pleasures that comes thereby: The pleasures that proceed of drink.
and see whether they will counteruaile the precedent mischiefs. And first I
will begin with the words of him that showed the great force of drink to
Darius, 1 Esdras. 3.20.
It turns every thought into joy and gladness, so that one remembers no
manner of sorrow nor debt. This is a most special matter, that many men do
pretend to be the cause of their drinking, because they would comfort
themselves in their sorrows, either for that they are in debt, or their wives,
parents, or friends cross them. I must confess drink makes a man merry for
the time, and quite forget his debt. For being drunk he thinks himself as
rich as Croesus, and as good as Alexander. But this joy is deceivable, false
and fleeting; it is like a dream, ashadow, for let him drink what he can, if it
were a Hogs head, it pays not of his debt a halfe-penny, and when he comes to
himself he finds his body is sick, his time is lost, his money spent, his
credits cracked, he has abused his God, wronged his wife, grieved his friends,
and shamed himself: here is an inch of pleasure bought with an ell of pain,
in like manner if thy parents or friends cross thee, and thou range from house
to house, from Ale to Beer, from Beer to Wine, and so fill thy skin and head
with liquor, to expel thy grief, it will be no otherwise with the, then it
was with King Saul, who while David played with his Harp was never vexed with
the wickea spirit, 1 Samuel 16.23. and. 18; Chap. 10.
but when he ceased his play, the Devil tormented him afresh. So while the
sense is lost and memory decayed, thy discontents are clean forgot, but when
thy drink has played his part and force thereof is quite expelled: thy souls
ensnared, thy minds perplexed, thy griefs and discontents (as bad) or worse
then ere they were. I may fitly compare these ranging drunkards to Virgils
Heart: Quam procul incautam nemora inter cressia fixit
Pastor agens telis,
-- Illa fuga Siluas saltusque peragrat dicteos
-- haeret lateri lethalis arundo.
Who ranging through the chase, some hunter shooting far by chance,
All unawares has smit, and in her side has left his lance,
She fast to wilderness and woods does draw and there complains,
But underneath her ribs the deadly dart remains.


Wherefore he does most unwisely that has any cause of grief or discontent,
and thinks to put it away by drinking, or going to their merry companies, or
that good fellow: for let him fly whether he will, he carries his discontent
in his heart; Take Saint Paul's advice, the second to the Corinthians, endure it
with patience, For our light affliction which is but for a moment, ^ Cor. 1.34,
4.17.
causes unto us a far more excellent and an eternal weight of glory.

If thou art troubled with a scoulding wife, whose tongue I must needs say
stingeth like a scorpion (and he that can abide a cursed wife needs not to
fear what company he lives in) the bitter tempest of whose tongue I must
confess as forcibly drives a man out of his doors into evil company, as a
violent storm does birds forth of the field into bushes: enter into the
Etemologie of her name, she is called: in Latin Mulier quasi mugire vix: In
English a woman, quasi woe unto man, She is as Solomon says, Eccl. 9.9,
The portion of thy sorrow which God has allotted thee thy tormentor upon
earth to bring thy soul to heaven. For which malady: this is the best
medicine: The remedy for a scolde.
Vsibus edocto si quicquam credis amico.

Either to stop thine ears and not here her: or else to be silent, laugh at
her, and not regard her: and not to seek revenge like the base son of a
noble man in Rome: who being taken in a robbery, and brought before a Judge to
be arraigned, he asked him whose son he was: he answered he would not
tell him, but said he was the son of him that if he were hanged would surely
be revenged for his death, and so was contented to be hanged, that he might
afterward be revenged of the Judge; and no otherwise does he that leaves his
home, runs besseling to an Alehouse, Mad men that go to be drunk for
woemens words.
damnes his soul, hurts his body, spends his time, wastes his goods, grieves
his friends, beggars himself, undoes his children, and all to be revenged of
a woman: (for her tongue in which there is no government) wherefore that is to
be borne with patience, which cannot be redressed with carfulness. Others
protest the delight they take in this vice is not for the drink, but by reason
of the company. To which I answer, Company the great cause of drunkenness.
that is a bad fellowship which brings us into a league with vice, and makes us
to set virtue at utter defiance, that is a wicked knot of friendship, which
ties us to our damnation, and mad dotage, that rather then we will part with
wicked companions, we will in foolish kindness, accompany them into hell. If
thereforee our companions delight in sin, let not us delight in them, but
fly their society, Exodus 23.2.
as being the Devils advocates to solicit us into wickedness, and let us take
heed whilst we labor to maintain friendship with men, we do not proclaim
omnitie against God. It is said in Exodus, Ephesians. 57.11.
Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil. And Paul to the Ephesians bids
us to have no fellowship nor company with th^se instruments of Satan, but
rather reprove them. 2 Cor. 5.11.
And to the Corinthians: Company not with a Drunkard, not so much as to eat
with him, much less to drink. Solomon says, Be not of the number of them
which are bibbers of Wine, for the drinker and the feaster shall be come poor,
Pro. 23.
etc. The Poet rightly said:

Commencia turpia sanctos. Corrumpunt mores, multi hoc periere veneno labimur
in vitium and facile ad peiora mou^mur:

Evil company does corrupt good manners, and many have perished by this
mischief, we quickly slide into vice, and are easily persuaded to become
worse and worse.

The greatest benefit thou shall receive by these swaggering and deboyst
companions, A drunkard either cannot or will not do any man good.
is fair words, but faint deeds, for the most part what they promise when they
are drunk, they forget when they are sober: or else in their vainglorious
humor, they promise higher matters then their low estate (consumed with
prodigality) can perform, for

Prodigalitas est vas magnum sine fundo ingens arca,
Sine sera omnia profundit, reponit nihil.
Prodigality is a huge vessel without a bottom, a great chest without a
lock, it draws forth all things, it lays up nothing. Your pot friendship, is
no friendship: For as long as thou have good clothes on thy back, and money in
thy purse, thou shall have friends plenty, and good fellows flock about thee:
to give thee drink, when thou have too much before, and truly I think
hereupon comes the name of goodfellow, quasi goad fellow, because he forces
and goads his fellows forward to be drunk with his perswasiue terms, as I
drank to you, I pray pledge me, you dishonor me, you disgrace me, and with
such like words, does urge his consorts forward to be drunk, as oxen being
pricked with goads, are compeld and forced to draw the Waine. But to return to
their friendship, if thou art in want and misery, these companions will not
know thee, and if by chance thou come in house where as they are, to shun thy
company they strait call, Chamberlain gives a private room? And he that
before would spend a crown upon thee to make thee drunk, will not now in thy
penury lend thee six pence to make thee eat, although for lack of food thou
staruest in the street. But I will council you with Nash. All you that will
not have your brains twice sodden, The fruits of drunkenesse.
your flesh rotten with the Dropsy, that love not to go in greasy dublets,
stockings out at heels, and wear Alehouse daggers at your backs, leave this
company keeping this slabbering bravery, that will make you have stinking
breathes, and your faces blowed like bladders, decked with pimples, your bodies
smell like Brewers aprons. It will bring you in your old age to be companions
with none but Porters, Oastlers, and Carmen, to talk out of a Cage railing as
Drunkards are wont, a hundred boys wondering about them: It is a most
bewitching sin, and being once entered into, hard to forgo. Saint Austen
compares it to the pit of hell, into which when one is once falling there is no
redemption. Therefore you that are free from it rejoice and desire God so to
keep you: and you that are entering into it forgo it in time, as S. James
says, Iam. 4.7.8.
Resist the Devil and he will fly from you, draw near to God, and he will
draw near to you. Take heed lest you take a habit in it, and so it grow to a
custom, and then like the grand Drunkards of this age (of whom I know too
many) you account it no sin: For, consuetudo peccandi tollit sensum peccati,
the custom of sinning takes away the feeling of sin. But with these
Drunkards I have not to do, for no admonishment, but banishment will make them
leave it: For I fear the Lord has done by them, as by Jeremiah, Iere. 51.39.
he threatens the Babylonians, he has given them over to a perpetual
drunkenness.

Others excuse themselves, and think they are free from this vice, because
(through the strength of their brains and bodies) they can carry more then
others: and boast although they drank as much as any in the company, and that
their consorts were drunk. Yet they were fresh enough: it is a small conquest
they have got, when in excessive drinking they have overcome all their
companions: seeing in conquering they are overcome, and are shamefully foiled
and overthrown by Satan, their chief enemy, whilst they triumph in a
drunken victory over their friends: these men for want of virtue in them brag
of their vice: but Habakuk says, Haba. 2.15.16.
woe unto him that gives his neighbor drink, thou ioynest thine heat, and
make him drunken that thou may see his priuities: Isa 28.3.
The Lords right hand shall be turned unto thee, and shameful spuing shall be
for thy glory. And Isaiah says, Prouer. 11.
The crown and the pride of the Drunkard shall be trodden under feet. And in
the fifth chapter he pronounces a woe unto them which rise up early to follow
Drunkenness, and to them that continue until night, etc. The Philosopher says:
Nulla capitalior pestis hominibus a natura data est quam Ebrietas, nam, ex hac
font prodit quicquid est in hominum vite scelerum and calamitatum.

Nature never sent amongst men a more deadlier plague then Drunkenness, for it
is the wellspring from whence flows all manner of mischief, and calamity
that happens to men. Wine has as much force as fire, for as soon as it has
overtaken any it dispatcheth him: For it discloseth the secrets of the soul,
and troubles the whole mind. A drunken governor and ruler of any thing
whatsoever, brings all to ruin and overthrow, whether it be a Ship, or a
Wagon, or Army, or any other thing committed to his charge: The consideration
whereof made the Philosopher say, when the Wine is in a man, he is as a
running Coach without a Coachman. Therefore they that delight (not only to
see) but also to force their neighbors to sin in this vice by urging them to
drink more then they would only to pledge them, do no otherwise then if they
made it their glory and pastime, to see God dishonored, his name blaspheamed,
his creatures abused, and their friends and companions damned. To rejoice to
see a man drunk, is no otherwise then to be glad to see a the ungodly and
sinner appear. These men are imitators of Tiberius and Vitellius, most beastly
and luxurious, Emperors of Rome: who were drunk and rioted all night, and
sleep and rested all day. The first, for his beastly conditions of Tiberius,
was called biberius, Suetonius.
of Claudius ca^dius, of Nero, Mero: in his drunkenness be caused Rome to be
fired, yet before he died (as a just plague unto him) he was forced to drink
puddle water. and commended the same for an admirable drink: ^a^llius. Reguat
but eight-monthes.
and for fear of the Citizens punishment, was forced to stab himself: the
other was drawn through the streets with a halter about his neck, and
shamefully put to death: a right reward and good example for drunken
Magistrates, and governors. But I could wish that ryotous persons, would note
and take example by the government of Antonius Pius, T. Anto. P. was the 16.
Emper. of Rome 23. years.
in whose time (when he perceived) the people of Rome given to drink without
measure, he made a law that none should sell Wine, but the Apothecaries in
their shops, and only for the sick and diseased. Or behold the government of
Alexander Seuerus, Alex. 26. Empe. Romans 13. years
who quite purged Rome from all the filthy vices, and foul enormities, bred in
the time of his predecessor, Helyogabalus, and reduced it to the ancient and
civil government, that Cicero writes of in his Book of laws, wherein he
affirms, that no Roman durst go in the streets. If that he bare not a show
in his hand, whereon he did live. In consideration thereof, the Consul did
be^re a Battle Axe before him, the Praetors a Hat in the manner of a Coyfe: the
Tribunes a Mace: the Cutlers a Sword, the Tailors a pair of Sheares: the
Smithes a Hammer: the Orators a Book; not permitting that those that were
Masters of Sciences, should be scholars of vices: (in such sort that Marcus
Aurelius in making mention of the ancient diligence of the Romans, writes that
they did also employ with such a zeal their labors and trauely, that in Rome
could not be found an idle person, to carry a letter two or three days
journey. But if this law of the Romans were in force with us, how many
thousands (if they made show of the trade and art they professed) would be
forced to go up and down with quart pots in their hands: our Nation is so
polluted with this vice of Drunkenness, that the great drinkings of foreign
Countries compared to ours, are but sippings. We have them that drink more in
a year, Maximillion the Emp. is said to devour forry pound of flesh, and drink
a hogshead of wine in one day.
then Maximillion the Emperor: And others that drink more at a draught, then
any Hackney horse. The history that Paulus Diacrus reports (of the drinking
of four Lumbards, although a thing to all the hearers in former ages reputed
monstrous, yet compared to the drinkings of our times, it is scarce
marvelous:) He says, there were four old men that made a banquet, in the
which they drank the years of one another, after the manner as follows:
They ordained to drink two to two, and counted their age of years that each
of them had, and he that drank to his companion should drink so many times,
as he had lived years: and the youngest of these four was eight and fifty
years old: the second threescore and three: the third fourscore and seven:
the fourth fourscore and twelve: so that he that drank least drank eight and
fifty tasters of Wine: Although these drinkings were strange, monstrous and
unnatural, and the draughts many in number, yet they were not great in
quantity: nor like the draught that one of Sleuent^n made, A town within two
miles of Abington in Barkhamstead.
who is yet living, he drank a peck at a draught: one also a Dier of
Barkhamsteed in Hartfordshire did the like. I have seen a company amongst the
very Woods and Forests, drinking for a muggle, in such excessive manner, that
in my opinion it far excelled the drinking of the Lumbards. For six have
determined to try their strengths who could drink most glasses for the
muggle. The first drinks a glass of a pint, the second two, the next three,
and so every one multiplyeth till the last takes six. Then the first
begins again and takes seven, and in this manner they drink thrice a
piece round, every man taking a glass more then his fellow, so that he that
drank least: which was, the first drank one and twenty pints, and the sixth
man thirty six: which although the number of draughts were less then the
Lumbards, yet the quantity of drink was far more. But if they hap to go a
fourth about (as these Forresters are like enough to be soon ready embarked
in this bold adventure for hell) Then they far exceed the drinkings of the
Lumbards, in quantity and quality, and for the same worthy to be canonized,
fit Saints for the Devil. And to speak a truth concerning the manner of living
of these Forresters (as well the inhabitants of the new Forest, as the Forest
of Windsor) there is no place in England given to more frequent Ebrious
meetings, and continual drinkings, then they are: And although one may travel
a whole day abroad in these solitary places, and not find a man to guide him
in his way. Yet if one return to their scattering Villages, and loan houses,
you shall scarce go a furlong, but he shall find great plenty of tempters,
and store of directers, to bring a man out of his wit: For there is not a
Hamlet amongst them, but is furnished with three or four Alehouses at the
least: Nay scarce a lone Cottage, but is a typling house, and these continually
haunted with true Ale-Knights, that cry out, they had rather drink forth their
eyes, then the worms should eat them out, according to the Poet: Valebetis
inquit ocelli
Namque satis vidi non satis vsque bibi:


M. Camden in his Britania recites, that it is written in the Black book of
The Exchequer, that a Forest is a safe harbor and abiding place of Dear or
Beasts, not of any sort whatsoever: but of wild and such as delight in Woods,
(and hereupon a Forest has the name (as one would say Feresta, that is a
Station of wild Beasts: and likewise I think the inhabitants of these places,
learn their savage manners, and brutish behavior, because they converse
chiefly with Beasts: For they have no Magistrates, nor they will hire no
Ministers, for they go ten times to an Alehouse, before they go once to a
Church: Well they may be likened to Dionysius the younger, who was sometimes
more then nine days drunk together, but in the end he lost his estate, and it
is to be feared (unless they repent and amend, their hap will be as hard for
heaven, as his was on earth: And then too late they may remember these old
verses:

Damna fleo Rerum, sed plus fleo Damna dierum,
Quisquis potest rebus succurere nemo diebus,
For loss of wealth partly I grieve,
But for loss of time I grieve much more,
For many may my wants relieve,
But time being lost none can restore.
I remember Montague in his Essays makes it a question disputable, whether the
estate of him that is going to the Gallows to be hanged, or he that is a
common Drunkard is more miserable, yielding his censure: that he which is
going to dye on the Gallows, of the two is the happier (by so much as he that
is entering into a surfeit, is in worse estate then he that has taken Physic,
a purgation for the same,

Miserius nihil est misero, se non miserante. There is nothing more wretched,
then in a wretched man that Reakes not his own misery: and such is the state
of the Drunkard, that he both perceiues this vice, and disalloweth it in
others, but neither sees nor hates it in himself, like she in Ovid:

Video meliora proboque deteriora sequor: Ovid Metam.

I see the good, and give allowance to it,
The evil is my choice, I love and do it.
For a Drunkard although he cannot speak a plain word, will never yield
himself to be drunk, and after their rule a man is not accounted drunk,
altheugh he cannot speak, go, nor stand, nor is able to craule forth of the
high way, so as he can hold up his finger, if he see a Cart coming upon him.
After this Rule it is a thing questionable whether of their consorts, named
John Lawrence being at Windsor, and drunk so hard, that having a Cart and
three Horses, he was not able to stand to drive them out of town, but some of
his company helped him up into the Cart, thinking the horse would bring him
home. (But so it chanced he fell a sleep in the Cart) and the Horse going in
the midst of the Forest, and there stayed feeding, came a good fellow by,
and stole away two of the Horse: The Filhorse making after his fellows, drew
the man in the Cart so far that it was out of his knowledge where he was: and
either by the braying of the horse, or some Iut of the Cart, he by chance
awaked before he was come to himself: (which being) and he seeing but one
Horse in the Cart, cried out, Lord, where am I? Or who am I? If I am John
Lawrence, then have I lost a Cart and three Horses: But if I am not John
Lawrence, then have I found a Cart and one Horse. Nor by their rule a Merchant
of Bristow (which shall be namelesse) coming to a house of a Gentleman's of
good hospitality, within two miles of Hungerford, and two of his friends with
him, where they all drank most free of this Gentleman's Beer, because they
found him liberal of his love, in so much as when they came in the midst of
a great water leading into Hungerford town, this Merchants eyes dazeled: and
he asked his friends why they did not alight up that great Hill: they answered
it was water, but that could not persuade him, but in the midst of the water
he alighted, swearing he would not ride up so great a Hill, and so waded
through the rest of the water, being half a furlong of length, and of a great
depth, yet by their rule he was not drunk. Nor he that cralled under all the
signs from Holborne Bridge to Saint Giles, because in a Moone-shine night his
eyes being glazed (with the mist of Mallego Sack) and seeing the shadow of
the Signs upon the ground. swore they were arrant knaves for setting the
Signs so low, that a man could not go upright under them. But letting
carowsers alone with their own definition, because a Drunkard cannot be
expressed without some division we will (before we enter thereunto set down
a learned man's description, who says, A Drunkard is the annoyance of modesty,
The di^cription of a drunkard.
the trouble of civility, the spoil of wealth, the destruction of Reason, he
is one ly the Brewars agent, the Alehouse benefactor, the Beggars companion,
the Constables trouble, he is his wives woe, his Childrens sorrow, his
Neighbors scoff, his own shame, in some: he is a tub of swill, a spirit of
sleep, The nine sorts of drunkards.
a picture of a Beast, a Monster of a man. Drunkards nine sorts. The first is
Lion drunk, which breaks glass windows, calls his Hostess Whore, strikes,
fights or quarrels, with either Brother, gives away his Horse, his Sword, the
clothes off his back. The fourth is Sow drunk, Aebritas prodit quodamat cer
sieve quod odir.
that he deceiues any man that shall deal with him: of this nature are many
of the Dutchmen, that when they drink most, they bargain best. Drunkards
that will not openly be seen in such actions, but as the reremowse or Bat,
delights in secret places and flies by night: so they will drink privately,
and chiefly in the night: of this sort may be some of your damask coated
Citizen, that sit in their shops both forenoone and afternoon, and look more
sowerly on their poor neighbors, then if they had drunk a quart of Vinegar
at a draught, yet at night sneake out of their doors and slip into a Tavern,
where either alone, or with some other that battles their money together, they
so plye themselves with penny pots, (which like small shot) go of pouring into
their fat paunches, that at length they have not an eye to see with all, nor a
good leg to stand on, and on this sort are many hypocritical professors
which abuse sacred Religion, carrying in the day times Bibles under their
arms, but in the night they slip into Alehouse or Tauernes.

And therefore to draw toward a conclusion, I account that party to be within
the predicament of Drunkenness, that in any sort through drinking does at all
enter into any of these precedent passions, beyond his natural inclination:
and for the more surer remedy of this dangerous and detestable sin, the best
course is to avoid that which was the first, and is the chiefest occasion
thereof: (viz.) pledging and drinking one to another: which thing first arose
in this Kingdom, upon a good reason, because men were so brutish, that at
Feasts and meetings when one was drinking his enemy would take an occasion to
stab him. Whereupon general meetings were avoided: unless they had in their
company some sure Friend to be his pledge while he was drinking, that none
should hurt him: Which thing (God be thanked) needs not to be feared by us,
in regard we have the laws of God to guide the virtuous, and the laws of the
Land to rule the wicked, and this thing of urging one another was most
carefully prevented by Ashueroshe at his great Feast made to an hundred and
seven Hest. 1.8.
and twenty Provinces: wishing that none should force other, but that they
should drink in order: May not we that are Christians be ashamed to think
that Heathens should have more care to prevent this great and capital sin,
then our selves, considering there is no sin so unnatural to our bodies, so
pestiferous to our souls, more wasting to our estates: Wherefore (gentle
Reader) God grant thee grace to avoid it, by my slender instruction: and me
power to give example by my life and and conversation, and then have thou
sufficient recompense for thy reading, and my self full satisfaction for my
writing.

FINIS.
Errata.
IN the Epistle Dedicat. read for crave the patronage, your patronage, Ibid.
for the Wine and Beer, your Wine and Beer: Ibid. for it better, had it been
better, for enjoy it, have enjoyed it. In the Epist. to the Reader, for which
thing grant, God grant. page B. 2. l. 22. for the body, read, your body: Ibid.
for potes, putes: ib: for parat parant, lb. for foemina vina, r. foemina vina
virum, ib. for cassum, castum for Sodama, Sodoma B. 3. l. 32. for now aims,
presently aims, C. 1. l. 20. for requires, requiteth, ib. l. 4. and examples
of examples, ibid. l. 17. Opoplexes, Apoplexes. 26. l. for Master King, the
King c. 4, l. 9. for it loved he, loved, ib l. 17. for meluendus, metuendus. D.
lin. 28. ad sacram, r. Ebrietas etc. for slabbering, slauering, E. 4 l. 3. for
Steuenton Stenenton.


