H. ZANCHIVS HIS CONFESSION OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION.

Which now at length being 70. years of age, he causea to be published in
the name of himself and his family.

Englished in sense agreeable, and in words as answerable to his own latin
copy, as in so grave a man's work is requisite: for the profit of all the
vnlearneder sort, of English christians, that desire to know his judgment in
matters of faith.

ROMANS 10. With the heart man believes unto righteousness: but with the mouth
man confesses to salvation.

Let all things be subject to the judgment of the true Catholic church.

PRINTED BY JOHN LEGATE, printer to the University of Cambridge. 1599.

TO ULYSSES MARTINENGVS EARL OF BARCHEN HIEROME ZANCHY WISHES grace and peace.
WHat, of what sort, and how great the confusion and trouble is in this age of
ours, [noble Earle] throughout all christendom, as well about all other matters
almost; as more especially about matters ecclesiastical concerning religion,
there is no man, that does not see: no good man, that does not grieve at: and
no godly man, that with great admiration of Gods judgments, does not
exceedingly bewail.

Very great surely is the light of the truth in this our age, which through
Gods singular gift, has bin found out in the holy scriptures, by some
faithful servants of Christ, and spreading abroad far and wide has shined
forth unto us, as the sun in the firmament: but I pray what and how many
mistes of errors, how diverse and black clouds of heresies, have bin stirred up
and raked out of the depth of hell, by no small number of verletts and
ministers of the devil, to cast a darkness over this heavenly light?

I speak not now of tyrants: which ever have, and yet do imploye and bend
all their swords, all their power, and the very force and might of their
authority to this: that these candelsticks (of brittle earth I confess)
wherein any of this light remains and shines being bruised and broken by
their iron-blowes; the whole light of the divine wisdom (if god so pleased)
might be utterly put out and extinguished: and in place thereof, that infernal
darkness fetched again from hell, might succeed and bear the whole sway.

For this very cause, what in these our wretched times has bin done: what and
what manner of slaughters of an infinite number of men, in many places
committed, and in many other places attempted more then once: we have yet in
fresh memory. And what, and by whom, the devil lately assaied in those
valleies of yours. though by Gods mighty hand defending you, the slaughter
succeeded not to the wish of those ungodly wretches: your self know better,
then we do. And now also what that euer-busie Satan, is for the same intent
continually attempting: what devises he purposes: what trecheries he studies:
what weapons he prepares: what wars he brocheth against godly princes and
magistrates, who desire to have this heavenly light to shine in their
dominions, and labor to spread the same far and wide into the whole world,
the Lord himself knows, who dwells in the heavens, who also is wo^t to
scatter the wicked counsels of the ungodly and to disperse them as vain
smoakes, through his incredible love and mercy toward us, when it is most
expedient for his church, and when tyrants do look for nothing less, then a
disapointement of their intents, which they so long and watchfully provided for.

For witnesses take the Pharaohs: Senacheribs: Amans: Antiochies: Iulians: and
other such like enemies to the church. For still the promise abides, The gates
of hell shall not prevail against it. But to let pass tyrants, and to return
to the body of our christian commonwealth so miserably torn in pecces: who is
there, I pray you, except he be clean void of alpietie, that beholding such
and so great a rent of this body into diverse shiuers, namely of all those
which profess and call upon Christ as true God and true man, and the only
redeemer of the world diverse of the^ defending diverse errors most obstinatly:
some, many and those most gross: others, few and those not so weighty: and
upon these occasions pursuing and hating on another with more then serpentine
hatred: and plaging and tormenting on another with more then butcherly
cruelty: what man is he, I say, who beholding these things, hearing the^, and
waighing them in his mind, is not moved with great grief, sigheth not,
lamenteth nor, pours not forth tears? The church of Rome once in times of
old, was for the great glory of her piety, her heavenly doctrine, her divine
service, christian discipline, and constancy in the faith against all
heretics, most famous: and as the sun in the firmament shines far brighter
then all stars, so she shined far above all churches on earth, by example
of her exceeding christian piety: that well and fittly she deserved to be
generally called the mother of all churches. But into what and into how great
darkness and blindness did she after sink, by Gods just judgment, being as
it were cast out of heaven, and in the same still lies buried and drowned? he
that in such great light of the gospel sees not this, is blinder then a
moule. Neither is it any new thing: seeing the same happened first to the church
of the Israelites: afterward to the churches in the East, and to them in Greece.

Now to speak of those churches, which in such things as the Romish church
has made an apostasy or backsliding from the Apostles, have been forced
through her willfulnes and tirannie, at length to forsake her: what horrible
heresies in some of them, have bin fetched out of hell by the ministers of
Satan? Anabaptisme, Libertinisme, Arianisme, Samosatenisme, Martionisme,
Eutychianisme, Nestorianisme, and what not? yea even Atheism [I grieve to
speak it] spreads it self abundantly. The trusty ministers of Christ have
withstood all these, and in many places have beaten down their devilish
doctrines, and have preserved their churches, reformed by the sincere doctrine
of the gospel, free from these pestilent mischiefs, and by Gods benefit, do
still preserve them: so that we have no friendshipp nor dealing with such
manner offects: and yet notwithstanding this cockle cannot be clean weeded
out in all places. Many plagues do still grow and increase every where: and
many wicked spirits do still come into the world. What then should a
christian man, who loves the glory of God, and the salvation of his own soul
and his neighbors, and desires to have a good name in the church [for it is a
matter of no small moment, to be taken and accounted in the catholic church,
for a true member of Christ:] what I say, should a christian man do, in such a
confusion of things, such a dissagreement in opinions, such a multitude of
heresies, such variety in religions? I will, if I can, by a similitude declare
my opinion, agreeable to the scriptures.

If a huge and a most mighty army of enemies should overcome any country,
killing and spoiling wheresoever they came, so as they could not quickly or
easily be driven out again: what should the inahbitants of that country do, to
provide for the safety of themselves and their children?

First they must fly into the strong defensed cities: and tarry there, until
by gods help the country might be delivered out of their enemies hands. Next
least being besieged they should perish by famine, or be constrained to yield
themselves to the enemy: they must look for as plentiful provision of
vittailes as may be. And because unless the Lord do keep the city, the
watchma^ watches but in vain: therefore all the people must with earnest
prayers call upon god daily, to be with them keep, and defend the^. Hereunto
it is ne^d^ul, that al within the city do observe constantly a brotherly
faith, love, peace and concord among themselves: since every kingdom divided in
it self (as the Lord used to say) cannot stand: and even the heathen do
witness, that by concord small matters grovve to increase: by discordgreat
things fall to decay. Neither is the health of body to be neglected, wherein the
citizens must be kept sound and strong as much as may be, for the profit and
defense of the commonwealth. For the sick and deseased, especially at such a
time, ca^ profit the common state very little, nay they are a great burden and
combrance to it: so far ar they from being able to fight against the enemy.
Therefore it is very needful that every one look to his health: then, there is
need of a careful and diligent watch, least the foes by any sudden assault, or
by some deceit or vndermininges should pearce into the city, and set upon us
unawares and unprovided: hereupo^ are night watches provided. But how can there
be any watching without sobriety? For by surfeting and dronkenesse heavy sleep
is provoked: so that there can no watch be kept. Therefore least being over
drowned in wine and sleep, we should be catched by our enemies, we had need
of sobriety: and what is more needful, then always to have weapons in our
hands, whereby we our selves may both be kept and defended from the blows of
our enemies: and may also be able to repel and put back the enemy? therefore
over and besides our strong walls and well defensed ra^piers: the cittize^s
themselves must also be ready in their armor. But nothing can happen more
pestilent and pernicious to the commonwealth: the^ if within their city,
especially in time of war, they have favorers of the enemy, who may indeed
give them a wipe privily, howsoever they may pretend friendship with the
citizens, and profess in words that they consent unto them in all matters; such
are perfidious and traitorous fellows. Therefore there must great care be
taken, that diligent inquiry be made, who be in the city: what they do:
what life they lead: and whereon they live: and if there be any found to go
out of course from the common profession, life, and manners of the city: they
may be known, examined, corrected, punished, or driven out of the city. But
as there is nothing that can either set a deeper mark of infamy upon the
citizens, or make the^ deserve to be more severely punished, then if being
entised by large promises or bribes of the enemies, they betraye their country:
or being terrified by their threatenings, they slipp from their ruler, and
shamefully yield themselves: so contrariwise, there is nothing more honorable,
more profitable, or worthy of greater praise and reward, then if keeping sound
thy faith to thy prince and country, with the public profession of the faith
thereof, thou constantly stand to it even unto death, and fightest it out to
the last man. Therefore there is need of constancy in thy faith given to thy
prince and country, and a public profession of that faith even unto the death.

By these defensed cities, I mean, those churches, which were once builded
upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, and afterward were
repaired again out of the gospel and truly reformed: and so do hold the same
foundatio^s of the Apostles doctrine firm and fast with the holy scriptures,
understanding and expou^ding the same, according to the sound interpretations
of the ancient fathers. These foundations the church was wont to comprehe^d in
that short form of doctrine, which they call the catechism: wherein is
contained the Apostles creed, the Lords prayer, and the ten commandments. The
creed briefly shows, both what we must believe, and in whom we must place
the whole hope of our salvation. The Lords prayer manifestly directs us, both
who is to be prayed unto, and what is to be prayed for, as also for what
causes God is only to be called upon, and that we ask all that we ask, of
him only: namely because his only is the kingdom, the power, and the glory:
by which addition our assured hope is kindled unto prayer. The decalogue or ten
commandments, very briefly and plainly prescribes, how we must behave our
selves to godward, with what ^^^uice we must worship him: in what sort also we
must live with our neighbors: and how we must die unto our selves, that is, to
our concupiscence, in withdrawing from it evermore, all such things as it
coueteth, against the law of god. Unto these three, and those chief parts of
the catechism is joined a fourth part: the doctrine of the sacraments, which
by a Synecaoche, is wholly comprehended in the great creed (as they call it)
under the name of baptism. All these things summarily gathered out of the
holy scriptures, and reduced into a brief compe^diary, we doubt not with the
whole ancient church to call the fou^dations of al christian religion. And
because heretics, when they durst not simply deny these foundations, were
ever wont to wrest and yet do wrest and wring the same for the most part, by
false interpretations, to their own heresies: therefore that the true churches
may be discerned from the conuenticles of heretics: we must understand and
expound those principles and chief points of doctrine in no other sense, then
as the ancient church, agreeably to the scriptures, by common consent,
specially in the best approved counsels, expounded them.

For what (to say something for example fake) can be more firm, certain, and
manifestly spoken, for the article in the creed, of the person of Christ: then
those things which we^e determined out of the scriptures in the counsel at
Nice, at Ephesus. Constant. Chalced. add also the 5. and 6. by the godly
fathers against Arrius, Samosatenus, Apollinaris, Nestorius, Eutiches, the
Monothelites? whosoever therefore, teaches concerning Christ's person against
the determinations of those counsels: certainly they do not rightly hold
this principal foundation of christian religion.

Further concerning the grace and benefit of Christ: (the beginning whereof is
his eternal love toward us, and his free election of us to the participation
of redemption and euerlastin life: but the proceeding of it is the free
dispensation of the same redemption once performed upon the cross, the
effectual vocation, justification, sanctification, and the gift of constancy
in the faith: the end is, our glorious resurrection and even eternal life:) I
say for this other principal foundation of christian religion, what ca^ be said
more plainly, and more largely, the^ that which has bin in the counsels of
Africa, determined out of the scriptures, by Meliuitanus, Arausicanus, and
others against the Pelagians: and which were written by Augustine [to say
nothing of others] in many books, against the same Pelagians.

Concerning the holy Catholic Church, what is there needful to be known,
which has not been most plentifully and plainly set down by Augustine
as well in other places, as especially in his books against the Donatists, even
out of he foundations of the holy scriptures? But it is a matter of great
moment, to know what and where the true church of Christ is: being out of the
church there is no salvation: and therefore it is an article of faith not of
the least account.

About the points of the sacraments also, if a man will content himself with
the simple truth: what is more evident then the doctrine which the ancient
fathers, Iustine, Ireneus, Tertullian, Cyprian, and chiefly Augustine have
delivered out of the scriptures and left unto us in their writings? One says:
Like as Jesus Christ being by the word of God, made flesh, had flesh and blood:
so also we have learned that the food hallowed by him, by the word of prayer
and thanks giving, is the flesh and blood of the same incarnate Jesus Christ:
(even according to those words of Christ, This is my body:) But Christ, that
is, the word was made flesh without any changing of it self into flesh,
but only by a hypostaticall or personal union: therefore neither is the bread
made the body of Christ, by any transubstantiation of it self into the body,
but only by an union, and that not a physical or bodily, or hypostaticall,
but only a sacrame^tall union: Also he says, by that food, namely of the
blessed bread, our blood and our body is nourished, by a certain changing (of
it self namely into Christ:) therefore that change which is made in the
supper, is not, of the bread into Christ's body: nor of Christ into us, but of
us into Christ, by reason of our ingrafting: as also we read in Augustine,
that Christ should say, speaking of the receiving of the Eucharist, I shall not
be changed into thee, but thou shall be changed into me. The same man says:
unto this (the food of the Eucharist) none is to be admitted, but they that
believe that our doctrine is true, being washed with the water of regeneration
unto remission of their sins, and so living, as Christ has taught them.
Therefore no infidells and heretics: nor they which have not received the
baptism of Christ: not they which live in such apparent sin and wickedness,
that they give no notice to the church of their amendment: are to be admitted
to the supper.

Another of them says, the eucharist consists of two matters: an earthly
and an heavenly. The bread, though it be sanctified, yet he calls it an
earthly matter: why so? because it comes from the earth, it existeth on earth,
and is eaten with an earthly mouth: the body of Christ he calls a heavenly
matter, not because the substance of it is out of heaven, but partly because it
is taken into unity of the person of the word, and partly because it is in
heaven endued with heavenly qualities. For although in the hypostasie, which is
the very word, it be every where: yet in the own proper essence, it is only
in heaven, and not on earth. Whereupon it also follows, that it is not eaten,
either by earthly men, or by the teeth of an earthly body: but only of those
men, who being borne from above, do carry the image of heavenly men and eat
it in a heavenly manner, namely in soul and spirit. And yet notwithstanding
the very bodies also of the faithful, while they eat only an earthly matter,
they also participate of a heavenly matter, to their glorious resurrection,
and are nourished by it: as the same author in that place very learnedly
expounds.

I think that by this which I have spoken out of the creed concerning four
principal parts of christian doctrine, your Hon. can well gather, [such is
your piety, learning and wisdom) what is to be concluded concerning the whole
body. The sum is this: that those be the true churches of Christ, and
therefore called of us the truly defensed cities of Christ's kingdom, which
professing generally the sacred scriptures, and specially the catechism in all
places received: do so reverence the ancient church and ancient fathers,
having therefore friendshipp and communion with them being now in heaven; that
neither in their opinions, nor yet in their expositions of the holy scriptures,
they will easily decline from them: but only then, whenas they be forced to
dissent, both by manifest words of the holy scriptures, and also by
testimonies, and consequences beyond all doubt necessary, drawn from the
principles of faith. This surely was counted for a notorious fault in
Nestorius, and it is written to be the cause of his vile heresy: that
contemning the fathers, and trusting upon his own wit, he expounded the holy
scriptures after his own brain. What speak I of Nestorius? yea that the same
contempt of the fathers, and some confidence of their own wits, and their
own learning, did cause diverse more besides, otherways very notable men, to
fall into sundry heresies: I could easily show out of the Ecclesiastical
histories and counsels, if the brevity of an epistle would suffer me. For
whence I pray was it, that after that most holy council at Nice, so many
heretics forth with arose: of whom some oppugned the true and everlasting
deity of Christ: others his true and perfect humanity: others the true uniting
of both the natures in one and the same person: others the true distinction of
their natures and their proprieties? hence surely, that conte^ning the
determinations of the fathers in the Nicene council, and their expositions
upon the holy scriptures: and trusting confidently to their own wits, and
puffed up with humane knowledge and eloquence, they dared every one to expound,
yea indeed, to deprave and wrest the holy scriptures, and foundations of the
faith, according to their own fancies. Hereunto pertains that which Vigilius
left written in his first book of the causes of heresies against Eutyches: but
they blow forth [saieth he] these smoakes of vain accusations chiefly:
because they are even sick of the infirmity of ignorance or disease of
contention: and whilst they are gogged on with a fond conceit of mind, they
despise the rules of faith delivered of old by the fathers, only for this
cause, to bring in their own conceited opinions of innouations into the
church. Thus says Vigilius. This that I say, is confirmed by the dispositions,
imitations, and words of the sound fathers on the other side, who expounding
the scriptures and the foundations of christian faith according to the
determinations of the fathers of elder times, have ever no less prosperously
then faithfully defended the truth of christian religion, and preserved the
same soundly confirmed in the church. To which purpose tend the words which
they use in their own determinations: We therefore every where following the
determinations of the old fathers, and their rule: do also determine the same,
etc. Nothing then is more safe, then that every man keep himself within these
churches, as in cities well fensed: wherein the holy scriptures are expounded,
according to the analogy or rules of faith, and according to the received
expositions of the ancient fathers: and consequently, which hold the same
faith, that the Apostles did, and all the ancient church.

I have spoken of the first duty of a christian man, which desires to keep
himself and his family safe from his enemies, unto everlasting life: namely,
that he must retire himself into the defensed cities of Christ's kingdom, and
there constantly abide: until that at the last all enemies, being put to
flight, by the glorious coming of our king, we may be safe and free in all
places.

But without provision of vitalls, who can long maintain his life: our victual
or sustena^ce, is the daily hearing, reading and meditation of Gods word, and
the receiving of the holy supper at appointed times: For by both these we are
nourished, streng thened and we live: and that through Christ our life, whom
they offer and give unto us. He which eats this bread (taken either by the
word, or by the sacraments) shall never die. In the Acts: Christ's disciples
continued in the Apostles doctrine, and in breaking of bread, that is, in their
common loue-feastes, in which the Lords supper used to be celebrated. And such
heavenly victuals are seeldome wanting in well defensed cities: yet except
thou eatest and drinkest, and by that means preseruest thy life, what good
will it do thee to be in a defensed city? Thou must therefore frequent
sermons: and receive the sacraments, and imploye thy self in reading the holy
scriptures.

3 It is very needful also, that continual prayers, both public and private
be made unto God, wherein we must ask those things, which the Lord Jesus has
commanded to be asked of his father, namely al things, which pertain as well to
his glory, as to our own and our neighbors salvation: and that he would
defend us from all kinds of enemies, and keep us safe in the truth. In the day
of tribulation shall thou call upon me, says the Lord. And is not then
chiefly the day of affliction, when heresies do ouerspread and tyrants
persecute the truth? Then therefore chiefly is God to be called upon, and that
by faith. And therefore the Apostle Paul says, Pray ye without ceasing: and
Christ Jesus, ye must pray alvvaies, and not be vvearie. And he that thus
prays, and prays by faith, how should he not obtain? wherefore God adds
by his Prophet, And I will he are thee. Ask and ye shall receive, said also
the Lord Jesus Christ: seek and ye shall find: knock and it shall be
opened unto you.

4 But how can it be, that men should there live happily, and the city be
preserved: where the citizens among themselves keep no friendship? therefore
brotherly love, peace and concord must be kept: then which, nothing is
sweeter, nothing more pleasing to God, and nothing can be more profitable for
preservation of the church: as contrariewise there is no thing, by which,
churches and all societies are sooner brought to ruin: then envy, then
hatred, then grudgings, then enmities, then dissentions, then domestical
fallinges out: Doubtless there is no faith, where charity has not place: since
true faith as the Apostle witnesses, works by charity. And brotherly love
has ever bin a mark of true christians: Christ himself saying: By this shall
men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one with another. This do
the Acts of the Apostles teach us, where Luke says of the faithful: they had
one mind and one heart, namely in the Lord. And Tertullian reports in
Apolog. cap. 39. that the Romans were wont to say of the christians: mark
how they love one another. For by this brotherly love, as by the true badge of
christian religion, they would have christians discerned from them that were no
christians.

5 Further more how necessary the care of health is to all the citizens living
in such a city, to defend them and theirs, and so the whole city against the
enemies: was said a little before. By this spiritual health, I mean a good
conscience: which as it springs from faith, so also it preserves faith, that
it cannot quite decay: eue^ as the life of the body brings forth health: and
health preserves the body in life. Every one therefore must be careful, that
he keep a good conscience. But by what means is it kept? 1. after a due
sorrow, by a sure trust, of the free forgiveness of our sins which we have
committed, through Christ: Next, by a true amendment of life: that is, an
earnest study of avoiding sins afterward, and keeping the commandments of
god lastly by a firm purpose, if by infirmity we do fall, to rise again, and
to fly unto Christ for pardon. By this means shall we always hold fast a
good conscience. He that in this sort constantly looks unto his health: let
him assuredly know, that the Lord will never suffer him, that he shall die at
all: that is, that he shall ever err and go astray unto his last end, in
that doctrine which is necessary to his salvation. For the Apostle says to
Timothy: keep faith and a good conscience, which while some have cast aside,
they have made shipwreck concerning faith, that is, the doctrine of faith. They
therefore which keep fast a good conscience, shall never make a deadly
shipwreck of the doctrine necessary to salvation: Seeing God by his grace,
indueth them, as with the treasure of a good conscience, so also with a
perseverance in the faith and with a heavenly gift of doctrine. The safest
thing therefore, both at all times, and especially in this diversity of
religions, is, by continuing in the churches, where the pure word of God is
preached, and the assured foundations of the faith according to the expositions
of the fathers, are retained, to imploye our selves in hearing the word of God,
and receiving the sacraments: to call upon God: to have friendship with our
brethren, and to keep a good conscience to our selves.

6 But unto all these things, how necessary watchfulness is, who, unless he
be utterly unskillful in all things, knows not? where there is nothing at all
to be feared, as in heaven: there is also no need of watchfulness: but they
may and they ought to live in great security. But where there want no thieves,
robbers, intrappers, flatterers, couseners, traitors, enemies, and where all
things are full of trecheries, there, how pernicious and dangerous, security
and retchlesnesse is, who is he, that knows not? Therefore Christ Jesus
foreseeing the evils which were at hand, said to the Apostles, vvatch ye and
pray, least ye enter into temptation. And Peter, Be sober and vvatch: because
your aduer sarie the devil goes about, seeking whom he may devour. But
what manner of watchfulnes is this, which the holy ghost requires? what it is
to watch in all living creatures, every man does know. Therefore a man, in
that he is endued with a mind, is said then to watch: when putting from him
all retchlesnesse or carelessness of mind, and with open eyes, he looks
attentively, on the things set before him: and wisely discerns what be good,
and what be evil, what be profitable, and what be hurtful: that so his will,
may reject that which is to be rejected, and choose that which is to be
chosen: may eschew and drive away that which is to be eschewed, and allow and
seek after that which is to be allowed. Wherefore shaking of the drowsinesse
of all carnal security, we must watch: and we must warily take heed to our
selves, and beware of the subtelties of the devil, the inticements of the
world and the flesh, and of doctrines and sophismes of heretics. Take heed
unto your selves of false prophets, says our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
which come unto you in sheep clothing, but inwardly are ravening wolves.

7 Now how can any man watch, that is laden with surfeiting and dronkennes?
therefore sobriety is very needful. Whereupon the Apostle Peter first said,
Be ye sober, and after adds, and vvatch: and Paul: let us be sober and
vvatch. Sobriety is clean opposite to drunkenness: and sobrietas sobriety
is said as it were sine ebrietate without drunkenness. By which word, is
signified by a Synecdoche the very surfett or sickishnes of the stomach. For
sobriety is the moderate use, not only of drink, but also of meat: that we
should be contented with such and so much, as suffices for sustaining of
nature, and preserving of health. Wherefore the Lord Jesus, exhorting them unto
sobriety, dehorted them as well from surfeting as from dronkenes, saying,
Ouercharge not your hearts with surfeiting and dronkenes: evidently showing in
one word, how pernicious and noisome a thing dronkennes is. For by it men's
hearts are so ouerloaden, and pressed down toward the ground: that they can
never be lifted up, to call upon God sincerely, to an earnest contemplation
of heavenly matters, to an attentive reading, hearing, and true knowledge of
the holy scriptures, lastly, to a profitable consideration of the mysteries of
God, such as is the Lords supper: and they which are given over to this vice of
dro^kennes, are most unapt for all exercises of piety. And how many are there,
which even for their bellies lake, do fall from the truth? So far from them
is it, either that they can or will watch against the enemies thereof, or take
heed to themselves because of false prophets: that thus at length they must
needs miserably perish. But far larger and wider does this christian
sobriety extend it self, of which the Apostle speaks: Let us, says he, be
sober and watch: that is, in the moderate use, not only of meats and drinks,
but also of all other things in this world. For God would not have us to be, as
it were by sweet wines, dronken with the too much love of riches, pleasures,
honors, friends, children, wives, nay not of our own lives: but they which
have wives, to be, as not having wives: they which weep, as not weeping: and
they which rejoice, as though they rejoiced not: and they which buy, as though
they possessed not: and they which use this world, as though they used it not,
etc. Now, how needful this sobriety is, to the keeping first of faith and
true religion: is seen by those, which for too much love of this world and the
things thereof, are wont to fall from the truth: and others, which never think
upon amendment of life: and others, in some part, to whom God gives some
consideration: as Demas, of of whom the Apostle says, Demas forsook me,
loving this present world. And the Lord Jesus when he had said, Take heed,
least your hearts be over laden with surfeting and aronkennes: he added, of
this other part of dronkennes: saying: And the cares of this life: and so that
last day come upon you. For whence are these cares, but of too much love of
this life? but then there is a third kind of drunkenness, which is more
pestilent then both the other, by how much more subtle it is, and pertains
more to the mind then to the flesh: namely, a drunkenness of carnal
wisdom, vain eloquence, and worldly philosophy. For who so be addicted to
these, as to sweet and counterfeit wines, and therewith be delighted, and
trust upon them: they then loathing the simplicity of christian doctrine,
will very soon and easily make shipwreck of their faith: Of which thing the
Apostle Saint Paul says: Bevvare least there be any man that spoil you,
through philosophy and vain deceit. For while we go about to measure with
our carnal speculations, and rules of humane learning, the mysteries of God,
which the holy ghost has delivered unto us in a simple and plain style and
method: being over weighed with the divine glory, which we are not able to
bear, we fall headlong into the deep pit of diverse heresies: as it happened
to Arrius, Marcion and almost all the heretics: seeing the wisdom of the
flesh, is enmity against God: and the fleshly man does not perceive, nor can
perceive the things that are of God: for they are foolishness unto him. By
this, which (so much as the shortness of an epistle may suffer) I have spoken
of the three sorts of drunkenness: how necessary the contrary sobriety is,
to resist the enemies, and to keep safe the treasure of divine wisdom: as
you, (my noble Earl,) do very well known, so I think there is none, but he
may, if he will, understand. What if I adjoined likewise, that blind and too
exceeding love of our teachers and masters? wherewith we^ are for the most
part so dronken: that whatsoever is said and written by them, the same without
all judgment and proof we embrace and hold with tooth and nail, even as the
oracles of the holy ghost: contrary to the Apostles precept: Try all things,
hold that which is good. Let us therefore be sober, and watch.

8 Our weapons or armor moreover, are not carnal, but spiritual, as the
Apostle teaches, and are of two sorts: some to defend our selves: and some
used for offense of the enemies. Of the first sort, are, the helmett,
breast plate, girdle, and shield: of the other sort, the sword, and darts.

First therefore the head of the inward man, must be armed with the helmet of
salvation: that is, with the assured hope of salvation, which as it is already
begun in us, through Christ by his only grace, so it shall be made perfect
through him, by the same grace. For unless he have this assured hope, who can
be able to stand in the battle, and to continue the same? The breast, where
the vital parts lie, must be armed round about with the breast plate of
righteousness I say, of righteousness of faith especially and of a good
conscience. For who is able to stand to coape with so many and so great enemies
in the battle: unless he be persuaded that God stands his helper and
favorer by him: and does from his heart hate iniquity, against which; and
loves righteousness, for which the battle is begun?

We must have our loins girt about with the girdle of truth: and our feet
shodd with the knowledge of the gospel of peace: that is, it behooves us to
be so armed on all parts, with the knowledge, love, and might of the truth:
that we must be ever ready and prepared, to fight for the gospel: holding in
our left hand the shield of faith, wherewith we may receive and quench all the
fiery darts of the adversary: but in our right hand, the sword of the word of
God, wherewith the enemy may be driven back and wounded. We shall indeed use
the shield of faith, if against all the sophismes and subtelties of heretics,
we hold fast those principles of faith, whereof we spoke, howsoever we be to
seek in refelling their fine and subtle quirks, and then have we use of the
sword of the word, if we convince the enemies by apparent testimonies of
scriptures, and reasons drawn by necessary consequence from them? to which
purpose it preuailes not a little, if we cast at the enemies, sharp pointed
darts, and stinging arrows out of the quiuers of the auncientest fathers: as
also we see those laeter fathers themselves have done, bringing forth the
testimonies and arguments of their predecessors, against heretics. We must
therefore take unto us this whole complete armor of god, with earnest prayer
unto him: that in these troublesome and evil days, we may be able to
withstand so many, diverse, and mighty enemies, and in the end we may triumph
over them.

9 To the preservation of the city and safety of each citizen, how
needful it is, that, the city being clean void of all the enemies
favorers, hirelings, close workers, and traitors, may live the more safely and
quietly: who, that has any sight at all in things past and present, can be
ignorant? Therefore the church governors, and magistrates must take great care:
that according to the Apostles discipline, it may heedfully be looked unto, what
doctrine each one professes, and what life he leads: and they which being
taught and admonished will not amend: to let them be made known to the whole
congregation openly, and separated from the holy assemblies, and from the
conversation with the other faithful: least by their contagion others should
also be infected: or least (as the Apostle says) a little leven mar the
whole lump. But to every of the faithful, let such obstinate men, be as
Ethnicks and Publicanes: and let this saying of John be kept, if any man come
unto you, bringing not this doctrine, namely, which the Apostles have delivered
concerning the son of God, and concerning the foundations of christian
religion: him receive not into house, nether bid him, god speed. This
discipline is perpetual in the church: of which Tertullian in apolog. the 39
chapter speaks. The magistrate further, is to punish by Gods commandment,
according to the quality of their faults or blasphemies.

10 That which in the end we said concerning the last duty of each
citizen: the same is also in this business which we have in hand, very
easy to be known; I would it were as easy to be performed. Our faith
therefore which we give and promise in Baptism must constantly be kept unto
our prince Christ Jesus, to our last end; yea if need be, even to the spilling
of our blood and our lives. And therefore that doctrine, which by the writings
of the Prophets and Apostles, by the manifest principles of faith, and also by
common consent of the whole ancient church, we know assuredly to be the
doctrine of Jesus Christ: the same we must hold and keep with a most constant
faith, against all new opinions: neither must we only keep them in our
minds, but also freely confess the same with our mouths, and openly profess
that we will never be willing to decline from the same: and so we must
profess it, that unless we do it, we can hope for no salvation. For with
the heart, it is believed unto righteousness: but with the mouth confession
is made unto salvation. With God indeed, who sees the hearts of men, only
faith shall be sufficient: but with men, and for men's sake, the free
confession and profession thereof is also necessary. He which is ashamed of
me before men: I will also be ashamed of him before my father: said the Lord
Jesus Christ. For we while we are in this world, must set forward the glory of
God, the name of Christ, and salvation of our neighbor: and it is meet that we
should make known to the whole church, what manner of religion we follow, and
with what faith we are by Gods grace endued: that it may be evidently known
who be the members thereof. Whereupon the same Lord, stirring us up to this
confession, added: He which confesses me before men, him will I also confess
before my father. And therefore we must neither be allured by commodities to
betray Christ, neither must we be skared, by threatenings and punishments, from
free confessing of him: but rather fixing our eyes upon the same Lord, the
captain and perfecter of our faith, who with a willing gladness suffered the
torment on the cross, not caring for the reproach, and sits at the right
hand of the throne of God, we must constantly run out our purposed race. For
he which endures unto the end shall be saved.

By these ten points (noble Earl) I hope I have declared the right means,
by which, in this so great diversity of opinions, about the way of salvation:
in so great invasion and mighty power of evil spirits: and in so cruel
tyranny of the devil, every one may provide for the safety of him and his.

I have now almost 34. years by Gods good gift, done my endeavor, that I
might my self follow the same course: and besides the holy scriptures, which
do teach apparently, that it is according to Gods will, I have learned by
experience of many years, that it is a heavenly and excellent way. For upon
the very same occasion, leaving the Babylonicall captivity, I gatt me into the
free churches of Christ's kingdom, as into defensed cities: First to the
churches in Rhetia, where I lived eight months and more: afterward unto Geneua
where likewise I abode nine months: From thence I came to Strausburgh, where
then flourished the French church: and there I lived and taught 11. years: but
not without some conflict, after the death of that ornament of the whole common
wealth and parent of the school James Sturmius, and the loss of the grave
elders. After this, being called to Cleue, I was pastor in that church about
four years: with what fruit, though not without my cross, your Hon. does
very well know, who (such was your singular piety) were ever my hearer, and no
small helper both with your labor and authority, in setting forward the
kingdom of Christ. Afterward in the reign of that great and incomparable
prince Frederike the 3. I professed ten years in the university at
Heidelberg: and at length I came to Neustade, the famous and most valiant
prince John Cassimiers town, where in the school newly erected I have taught
seven years and more: And where, as yet being a withered old man, but yet by
Gods good favor in good health, I live by my princes liberality: And as by
little and little I die unto the world in body, so I do my best eudeauour
that I may also more and more die unto it in mind: I wish it indeed. For the
world passes away, and the lusts thereof: And the little worm in Jonas, in
a little hours space, so gnawed the root of the gourde, under the shadow
whereof he lay secure: that it being withered away, the good prophet had not
wherewith to shade himself from the exceeding heat of the sun. This very
means. I wish that mine own children may also follow.

Which is also a principal cause, why I was willing now to publish this sum
of all the christian doctrine, not only in the name of my self, but also of my
whole family, which indeed I writ long since for another use and purpose: but
now brought forth into light, because that my children, besides the doctrine of
Christ Jesus which they daily hear delivered in our congregatio^s: may have
also mine own form of the same christian faith, left unto them by me, which
they may follow. For although touching the substance of christian doctrine, I
teach nothing in this my confession, different from that which is preached in
our churches: yet, for that I am not ignorant, how much the authority and
example of parents prevails with children: therefore I deemed that I should
do a thing, not a little beneficial unto them, if I should leave behind me
in Christ's church some picture or image of my self; I mean, not of my
countenance, but of my faith: which they might often look upon, and by which
they might be more and more encouraged to the study of the holy scriptures, to
proceed in the knowledge of the truth, and finally, to the constancy and
perseverance in true piety. Neither was it unknown unto me, that hereunto
belonged that which the Apostle writ to Timothy: If there be any man that
provides not for his own, and namely them of his household, he denies the
faith, and is worse then an infidel.

To this I join also another cause, which pertains properly to my self and
mine own estate. That which hitherto I have in heart believed, and with my
mouth confessed, yea and many years, publicly taught in the church, both by
word, and by books published: my desire was to comprehend the same wholly in
one just volume: that all posterity might know what my faith has been: and
that all the faithful, both now living, and to come, and so all the true
catholic church, may evidently understand, that I never consented to such
heresies as do now spread all about, or ever heretofore did spread: specially,
seeing that if I have been deceived in any one thing, I submit me to right
judgment therein, and I wish that my escape may be examined and reformed by
the touchstone of the holy scriptures, and by the analogy of faith.

Now to dedicate this my book unto your Hon. I was induced by many and those
very honest causes; which I trust shall not be disallowed, either of you, or
any other good man.

It was meet that a book, not ill, containing good doctrine, should have a good
patron: who both for his piety would, and for his learning could, defend the
same: and that constantly: whereunto, how much the nobility of blood, and
generosity of mind, if they be joined with true piety, can help, we have
learned by long expetience. For it is proper unto a noble man, to be constant
in a matter commendable, and worthy of honor: and not to suffer himself to be
carried away from any honest purpose, either by weal or woe. Sincerity and
constancy are such virtues, as cannot fall into rusticall and scruile minds.
Add hereunto, that I judged it a thing honest and necessary, that there should
some monument be extant to all men in all ages, of my duetiful obserua^ce to
you, and of our christian friendship. For the friendship which proceeds of
virtue, and is therefore sincere and sound, is a thing both with God and men
most worthy of all praise: such as was between David and Jonathan: Peter and
John, Paul and Barnabas. For as all have not faith, as the Apostle said, so al
have not true friendship: and as faith, so also love is from God, says John:
and springs from true piety and virtue. Ours, doubtless, was not settled,
through flesh and blood: but through Christ, piety, religion, and love of the
same religion: whereunto afterward, was added a likeness of our minds,
studies, and manners, and a most sweet conuersing together for many years,
whereby the same was confirmed: and so confirmed that it could not by any,
though very great distance of place, no not in many years, be diminished or
weakened. What? that it has not only continued hitherto firm and constant:
but also has ever, and still does seem more and more daily to increase: the
holy ghost more and more kindling this brotherly love in our hearts? I surely
for my part do well feel, how great a desire is in me, both to see you, and to
speak with you, yea and to embrace you in the Lord: as also I well understand,
both by your letters unto me, and by your kind dealings in my behalf, what
great care you have of me. So true friendship, which is wrought by the spirit
of God, is ever wont, continually to be preserved and increased.

And surely such good things as proceed from God, and may also be for the
profit of others: those we ought to show forth and celebrate by all means
that we can, for his glory, and the edification of our brethren. Therefore as
it was Gods will, that the particular leagues of friendship, of some of the
Saints should be commended in the scriptures: so this of ours, ought not to be
buried in perpetual silence.

Hereunto also, besides that with your singular benevolence and favor, you
have respected, not only my self (as is said) but also my dear kinse-men,
and all that honest and christian family of the Limacii: such also, have been
your good benefits and offices toward me: that unless I would be utterly
unthankful: I must needs mind, if not a full recompense, yet at least an
honest declaration of a grateful heart: especially seeing true friendship
cannot consist among the unthankful. Now, what was I able to perform, either
better acceptable to you, or more beseeming your piety, virtue, and nobility,
the^ that I should dedicate unto your name, this little book, wherein, in as
much brevity and perspicuitie as I could, I have comprehended a sum of our
whole christian doctrine? For what kind of man each one is, and what manner of
study, knowledge, and religion each one professes, such kind of works are
used, and indeed ought to be dedicated and commended to him. So Luke did write
the Acts to his [both in deed and in name] Theophylus: So Caelius Lactantius,
his christian institutions, to the most christian emperor Constantine: So
Ambrose his godly books of faith, and of the holy spirit, to that religious
emperor Gratian. So lastly, (to stay no longer in a matter evident) all wise
men, have chosen such patrons for their books, as were the books: that the
title of the books might be answerable to their profession, to whom they were
dedicated. Wherefore since I could in no sort better recompense your deserts
toward me, then by dedication of this book: I desire and beseech you, to
receive with your courteous acceptance, this [howe small a present soeuer]
perpetual testimony of my love toward you: and that your self would still
continue in that kindness which you show to me. And for my children, T.
Cornelius: Ludowike: Hierome: Robert: Lael: Constantia: Anna: Lydia:
Violanthes, with their most loving mother, and my dear wife, in the Lord, R.
Liuia, I most heartily desire, they may especially after my death, be commended
to your good favor.

Thus for mine own part, [my noble Lord] I pray that your years may be as
many as mine are: whereby you may still be a benefactor both to yours and my
friends, as also to our churches, as hitherto you have been: but so I wish
that you may reach to my years and beyond, without those discommodities which
are wont to accompany crooked old age: and in respect whereof, he that said, it
is a good thing to be old added thereunto, but not to be twice old for old
age comes not alone. For even to live being old is wont to be a heavy burden
to old men: so that they must rather meditate on death and on the grave, then
on life, whereof the very name in greek does put us in mind. For the word
signifying an old man in that tongue imports as much, as one that looks on
the ground.

But seeing both to live, of it self is the great blessing of God, and may be
to the profit of others: and also those very discommodities of life, which
follow old age, are profitable to the spirit in godly men: for these causes,
to pray for the long life of some godly man, is no evil prayer, but very good:
although old age can not want some inconveniences. The God almighty therefore
vouchsafe to preserve your Hon. in sound health, and a good and long life for
the profit of many, to his good pleasure. Health and wisdom are two good
blessings in man's life.

At Ne^stade Call. April. 1585.
CHAP. I. Of the holy scriptures, the foundation of all christian religion.
I. Concerning god, and matters pertaining to Religion: how we must simply
believe in God alone.
TOuching God, and such divine matters as pertain to the kingdom of Christ,
Ambr. epist. 31.
and our salvation, we hold that we can be instructed better or more
certainly of none other then of God himself: who can neither deceive nor be
deceived. No man has seen God at any time. Ioh. 1.18.
The son which is in the bosom of his father, he has showed him unto us.

II. God himself speaks in the vvrightings of the Prophets and Apostles.
But we know that God, (though he has not meanly or obscurely manifested the
knowledge of himself and his everlasting power and deity, to all men in the
world, by such works as are done by him, so that as many as have not glorified
him as god, are made inexcusable) yet in a more peculiar forte, he has
revealed himself and his will to his Church very plainly and perspicuously
namely by Prophets and Apostles, inspired by his grace, and by their writings:
and therefore these writings of the Prophets and Apostles to be the very true
word of God.

III. The Prophets and Apostles wrightings to be only Canonical.
Now we doubt not but these writings of the Prophets and Apostles are those,
which the Church of god has been accustomed to call by the name of Canonical
books, because knowing these books assuredly to be (...) inspired from above,
2. Tim. 3.16.
she always acknowledged them only for the Canon or rule of all christian
piety, by which every controversy in religion, ought to be avoided: and
calling likewise the other books (though they be contained in the volume of the
holy Bible,) by the name of Apocryphi, because she could not be assured they
came so from the holy Ghost as those of the former kind.

IIII. Which be Canonical books and which Apocryphi.
We therefore, Con. Laod. Can. 59.
with the whole Church both before, and since the coming of Christ, without al
doubt do acknowledge and embrace these books of the old Testament for the
very certain word of God.

Five books of Moses: Of Iehousuah one: Of Judges one: Of Ruth one: Of Samuel
two: Of the Kings two: Paralip. two: Of Esdras the two former: Of Hester nine
chapters: And three first verses of the tenth chapters Job: The Psalms: The
Proverbs: Ecclesiastes: Canticum canticorum: Esaie: Jeremy with the
Lamentations: Ezechiell: Daniell the twelve former chapters, excepting the song
of the three children: The twelve small Prophets.
These other we receive for not Canonical.
Judith: Tobias: Of Esdras the third and fourth: Daniell chap. 13. and 14: The
song of the three children, which is annexed to the third chapter: Wisdom of
Solomon: Wisdom of Jesus the son of Zirach, in latin called Ecclesiasticus:
Baruch: Epistle of Jeremy: Of Hester, the rest from the third verse of the
tenth chapter: Of the Macchabees both the books: These of the old Testament.
Of the new Testament we except none: for although there be some books of them,
whereof some have doubted, yet afterward they were acknowledged, yea even for
apostolical no less then the other, to which judgment we also do subscribe.

Of the former kind,
The gospells after Matthew: Mark: Luke: John: Acts of the Apostles: Epistles
of Paul: The first of Peter: The first of John:
Of the latter sort,
The epistle to the Hebrews: The epistle of James: The last of Peter: The 2.
and 3. of John: The epistle of Jude: The Revelation.
For although they which were never doubted of may seem to beat a greater
authority then the rest which have bin doubted of, yet we as well to the one
sort as the other do give undoubted credit, as to the assured word of god:
and to the Apocryphi contained in the volume of the Bible, do we yield the
chief place next unto the Canonical books.

V. The rules of faith can be proved only by the canonical books.
And therefore we use only the canonical books for proof of the rules of
faith, Hieron. in praef. in lib. Sal. Cypr. in sym. p. 377. Con. Laod. cap. 59.
and with the fathers we teach that they are to be used: but we think the
rest to be of great force to confirm the same rules, being before
sufficiently proved.

VI. The canonical scriptures take not their authority from the Church.
Wherefore this we hold without all controversy, and we think it is to be
holden: that although the Church being taught of the first fathers, namely
Prophets and Apostles, who received their doctrine immediately from god, and
committed the same to writing, and being also instructed by the holy ghost,
has delivered to the posterity by a continueing and perpetual tradition,
which are canonical, and which are not canonical books, yea and has given
and shall always give testimony unto them, of the holy and heavenly truth:
yet that these writings have not received their authority from the same
Church, but of god only, their only proper author: and therefore that of
themselves because they are the word of God, they have power over all men, and
are worthy to be simply believed and obeyed of all.

VII. Yet that the Churches authority does much avail, to make men believe
the holy Scriptures.
Although we deny not by the way, but that the authority of the church has
an especial force to move men to the hearing and reading of the holy
Scriptures, as the word of god: according to that of Augustine I had not
believed the gospel (for so he meant) unless the authority of the church had
moved me. Tom. 6. cont. Epi. Fund. ca. 5.
Yet the same Augustine notwithstanding in all places pronounces, that his
belief came not from the church, but from the bolie spirit, whose gift faith
is.

VIII. That the church has nopovver over the holy scriptures.
But to dispute whether the authority of the church be greater then that of
the holy scriptures, yea and much more to set down the affirmative part, as
though the church over and above the gift of knowing the spirits, and of
discerning canonical scriptures from others, and of testifying of them and of
interpreting of them, should have also authority either of adding too or
diminishing any thing from them, and of dispensing with the^: we judge it more
then sacrilege. Deuteronomy. 4.2. and 5.31. and 12.32. Apoc. 22.18. and 19.
For God commands, that no man shall add, or diminish, nor any one shall
decline to the right hand or to the left, but all together shall simply obey
him speaking unto them in the holy scriptures, in all manner of things.

IX. The holy scriptures are so perfect, that nothing may be added to or taken
from them.
For the scriptures are so holy and meerlie perfect, plentifully containing
whatsoever is necessary to salvation, that nothing can be added unto them:
and written with such perfection and wisdom, that nothing may be taken from
them.

X. And therefore men ought to rest upon them.
Wherefore we, even as all godly men ought to do, do rest our selves upon
the doctrine of those holy writings: holding that same spoken by the Apostle,
2. Tim. 3.16.
all Scripture inspired from above, is profitable to doctrine etc.

XI. Nothing must be established concerning religion without the word af god,
but all things to be reformed by it.
We hold therefore, Did. 9.
that nothing must be determined concerning religion in the church of god,
which has not apparent testimony in the canonical books, or may out of them
be convinced by manifest and necessary consequence. And if at any time there
has crept into the church any thing either concerning doctrine or the service
of god, which is not agreeable to the holy scriptures: the same ought by some
lawful means either quite to be taken away, or else to be reformed by the rule
of gods word: and that all controversies in religion ought lawfully to be
judged and decided out of the same holy scriptures.

XII. Traditions truly apostolical and catholic are to be retained in the
church.
And the traditions in mean while which it is manifestly known have come
from the Apostles, Aug. tom. 7. con. Donat. lib. 4. ca. 24. and tom. 2. 2d Ian.
ep. 118. D. 11. c. 8.
to have been ever observed in all churches, as that of hallowing the Lords
day in place of the Sabbath, and such like: and allthough there be no express
commandment in the scriptures for the observing of them, yet we judge that
they are to be retained in the church.

XIII. The scripture is very perspicuous in such things as be necessary to
salvation: and therefore ought to be read of all.
Yea we think and know the whole doctrine of salvation not only plentifully
but plainly and perspicuouslie to be delivered in the holy scriptures: and
since God never spoke unto his people but in their natural language, which might
be understood of all, that it is a great injustice and tirannie to forbidd the
reading of them to any men, and consequently the turning of them into the
proper tongue of any nation, which the Lord has willed and commanded should
be read of all men for their own saluations sake, yea and should be
continually borne about in their hands day and night.

XIIII. The faithful interpretations by learned godly men are not to be
contemned.
Although the holy scriptures, in those matters which are necessary to
salvation, be plain and easy: yet we dissolve not the interpretations and
expositions of skillful and learned godly men, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.
as well aimcient as later, namely such as are grounded upon the same
scriptures, and so far forth as scriptures are expounded by scriptures, and
that in correspondence to the chief principles of faith: the sum whereof is
contained both in the Apostles Creed, and also in the Creedes of the true,
general, and of the ancient holy counsels gathered together against those
which were notorious heretics.

XV. The only word of god to be the pillar of faith and foundation of religion.
For our faith nether ca^ nor ought to grounded upon any other thing, Romans
10.17.
then the word of god delivered in the holy scriptures: that faith may be
allwaies of hearing, and hearing by the word of god: whereunto whatsoever in
any men's works is repugnant, we reject it: whatsoever is agreeable, we embrace
it: but that which stands in a newtralitie, as it shall be expedient or not
expedient to the church, we allow or disallow it, and so we teach that it is to
be allowed or disallowed.

CHAP. II. Of God, and of the divine persons and properties.
I. That there is one only god, distinct in three persons.
AS we are taught therefore by the holy scriptures, Deu. 4.6.
which are his own word, we believe that there is only one god, that is, one
simple, indivisible, eternal, living and most perfect essence in three
existences, or (as the church uses to speak) persons, Mat. 28.19. 1. Ioh. 5.7.
namely subsisting of the eternal Father, the eternal Son, and the
eternal holy spirit, truly distinct among themselves, yet without all
division: being both beginning and cause of all things.

II. That so euerieperson by it self is true god that yet there be not three
gods.
For so we do believe and have learned out of the holy scriptures, that the
father by himself is true and perfect god, the Son by himself is god, and
the holy spirit by himself is god: and yet that they are not many but one
only god Almighty: Romans 11.30.
of whom all things, by whom all things, and for whom all things are.

III. One person to be distinct from another in personal proprieties: but in
essential they differ from every creature.
And because the holy scriptures do so speak of god, that they attribute
unto him many proprieties, both essential, and personal, and they teach that
in the essential he differs from all things created, but in the personal,
one person to be distinguished from another; we therefore do so believe, that
as to begett the Son is such a propriety of the Father, as can agree neither
with the Son nor the holy spirit: and again to be begotten, can agree to
none but the Son, and so of the rest: so likewise to be most pure, eternal,
immeasurable, present every where, simply knowing all things, simply
almighty, simply good and such like, are in such sort the very proprieties
of god, that they can by no means be communicated to any creature, so as it
should be good (for example sake) in that immeasurable goodness, or
omnipotent in the same omnipotency, that god is.

IIII. The essential proprieties in god, do not in very deed differ from
the essence.
For we acknowledge that in god for his singleness, the essential proprieties
do not in deed differ from the essence, and therefore they without this cannot
be communicated to any creature: and therefore no creature can be or can be
said to be (for example sake) omnipotent simply, just, wise, or such like.
Even as our Lord Jesus speaking of one propriety, Matt. 19.17
teaches of them all, saying, none is good (simply) but god.

V. That nothing is or can be made simply such as god is: unless the same
might simply be god.
Wherefore they which will affirm that any created substance ever could or
can be made partaker of those divine proprieties, whereby it should be such as
god is, as simply omnipotent, and such like: they must needs then confess
that the same is, or that it can be (...) of the same substance with god, for
as much as neither the son himself is simply omnipotent, but, as he is (...)
consubstantiall with the father: nor yet the holy spirit.

VI. A confirmation of the former opinion.
Whereupon we also understand, how it is that since the son is no less
omnipotent the^ the father, and so likewise the holy ghost, yet we do not
say that they are three almighties, Atha. creed
but we confess with Athanasius, and the whole church, that they are one
only almighty: because indeed of them all there is but one and the self same
substance. Therefore seeing no creature has one and the self same essence
with God, but a far other and diverse: and if the same by communication of
the divine omnipotency could also be made omnipotent, then it must follow that
there might be more almighties then one: which we believe can not without
blasphemy be affirmed.

VII. Errors.
Wherefore we condemn and detest all heresies, which have risen against this
first article of our faith, or have sprung from hell, and bin condemned by the
holy fathers in their lawful counsels: as those of Cerin thus, Ebion,
Valentinus, Marcion, Manichaeus, Arius, Eunomius, Sabellius, Praxea, Fotinus,
and such like, as Seruetus, and Tritheitae, also the blasphemies of Jews and
Turks: and lastly all heresies which have bin invented by the devil, either
against the unity of the divine essence or against the true Trinity of
persons: Yea and those therefore which deny either the Son to be true and
everlasting god, or the holy ghost to be so: or which do confound these
persons, and say they be one and the self same existence, which for diverse
respects is called by diverse names of Father, Son, and holy Ghost. We also
condemn all those errors which do separate the essential proprieties of god
from the divine essence: which it seems unto us that these men very
unadvisedly do, which teach that those essential proprieties in very deed
may be communicated or rather at already communicated to creatures without
communication of the essence.

CHAP. III. Of the foreknowledge and praedestination of god.
I. God did foreknovv and foresee all things from the beginning.
WE believe that God before he made the world, even then from before all
things, by his immeasurable wisdom, foreknew all things, yea and what good he
meant himself to do, and what ill he meant to suffer to be done: so far forth
as nothing was ever hidden or could be hidden from him, but all things, as well
what has bin done, is done, or shallbe done, as what ca^ be done, though it
never be done, Heb. 4.13. Act. 15.18
we doubt not but has and does lie open and manifest all ways in his sight.

II. God has determined all things in his eternal counsel and has before
hand ordained them to the best ends.
And we believe that God has not only foreseen all things and that they are
present in his sight, Act. 4.28.
but also in that his most wise and eternal counsel he has certainly
established whatsoever did or does appertain to the creation and government
of the world, or to the selecting of his church from the unclean filth of
other people, or to our redemption and eternal salvation: and that he ordained
through his infinite goodness, that those evils which in his wisdom he
would suffer to be done, should be to good ends: so that not one hair can
fall from our head, Mat. 10.29.30.
without the will of the Father, or without cause.

III. All men to be praedestinate, some to life and some to death.
Wherefore we also doubt not, that God when he created all men (to speak
nothing of Angels) in Adam righteous, he foresawe that in him all should
sin, and elected some in Christ; Ephesians. 1.4.5.
that they should be holie^ and undefiled in his sight in charity, and
therefore predestined them of his mere grace, and according to the purpose
of his will, Romans 9.22.
to eternal life: other some he would not vouchsafe that grace and therefore
prepared them as vessels of wrath for destruction, because of his
iustiudgement: that in the one sort his infinite mercy, in the other his
justice, might be known to the whole world, to his great glory.

IIII. The election of the Saints by free gift.
For as the calling unto Christ, and justification in Christ is wholly of free
gift, Ephesians. 2.9. Tit. 3.5.
and not of our own works: so likewise we understand, that the whole
praedestination of Saints is freely given, Ephesians. 1.4. Romans 9.11. 1. Cor. 1.31.
because it is wrought in Christ, and for Christ is put in execution: that no
man might glory in himself, but he which glories, should glory in the Lord.

V. We are pradestinate not only to the end, but also to the means.
Whereupon we also believe, since God has chosen us in Christ, that we might
be faithful, and holy, and unblameable in his sight, that we are
praedestinated, not only to the end, that is, to eternal life and glory:
but also to the means by which we attain unto the end; and chiefly unto
faith, whereby we are ingrafted into Christ, and to regeneration and true
repentance, 2. Cor. 5.17. Gal. 6.15. Mat. 5.16.
whereby being made new creatures in Christ, we might live holilie to his glory
and edification of our neighbor.

VI. They be not elect, neither can they be saved which are never grafted
into Christ by his spirit, and true faith.
They therefore are shamefully deceived, and to their own destruction, which
persuade themselves they are elect, Tit. 1.16. Ephesians. 2.10.
and therefore shallbe saved, although they be not grafted into Christ by
faith, nor repent them of their sins, nor regard the will of God, or to do
any good works. For they separate, that which god will have joined together.

VII. Every one ought steadfastly to believe he is ^lect in Christ: yet we may
be more assured by the feeling of our faith in Christ.
Hence it is manifest, although no man in general, ought to exempt himself
out of the number of the elect, since the Scripture does not so, but rather
steadfastly to trust, that when he is called to Christ, he is called according
to the eternal decree and election of God: 2. Cor. 13.5.
yet if any man will be more assured of his certain election, he must run to
his faith, and the witness of his conscience, whether he perceive that he truly
believes in Christ, and whether he carry a sincere love toward god and his
neighbor. Yea if he find himself herein not altogether soundly and
thoroughly settled, yet let him not desparre, but desire of god that he will
help his unbelief: hoping that he may in time be better assured. Mat. 9.24.


VIII. The causes, why the doctrine of predestination is delivered in the
Scriptures.
For neither is the doctrine of the eternal free, and unchangeable
predestination delivered in the holy scriptures, that we should neglect
Christ, or despair of salvation, or with security let loose the raines to our
concupiscence, or grow insolent: but contrariewise for these especial causes.
Act. 4.12. 2. Tim. 2.19
First that we may know that without Christ none can be saved: since the
foundation of our whole salvation, was fastened and laid in him before the
world was made. Then, that in time of our temptations, we, which believe in
Christ, should strengthen our selves by the certainetie of our salvation, Romans
8.
and so neither despair nor distrust: knowing the same to be certain and sure
in the eternal decree of god. Thirdly that thereby we might be stirred up to
the study of faith in Christ, of holiness, and of good works: Ephesians. 1.4. and
2.10.
since we are chosen, that we should be faithful, and holy, and blameless in
his sight, and walk in good works. Lastly, that we grow not proud, if we
trust in Christ, and live godly: in Christ, and that he which glories may
glory in the Lord: 1. Cor. 1.13.
since god through his grace did from the beginning decree in Christ, that we
should be such.

CHAP. IV. Of the omnipotency and will of God.
I. So is god omnipotent that he is able to do more then he will do.
WE believe, that God is so omnipotent, that he not only has done and does
whatsoever he would and will: but also he is able to will and to do infinite
works, which he will not; following also herein the doctrine of John, who said,
Mat. 3.9.
God is able of these stones to raise up children, vnro Abraham, which yet he
would not do: and also the opinion of the Apostle, who writ, To. 9.15.18.
that God will have mercy on whom he will, (whenas he could have mercy on
all) and he will harden (not all, Turt. con. Prax.
as he could, but) those whom he will: so that it is very impious, to
conclude any thing to have been done, to be done, or shall be done, of the
only omnipotency of God, wherein his will is not also revealed.

II. It infringeth not the omnipotency of god that certain things can not be
done by him.
Where the Apostle writes, that god can not deny himself: we hold that
there is no injury done against the omnipotency of God, if a man say there
are many things which cannot be done by god: namely such things as are
repugnant to the nature of god, and do implie a contradiction.

III. A confirmation of the former assertion.
For he being the chiefest good, he can neither be made evil, nor can do ill;
and being truth it felfe, he cannot lie; being justice it self he cannot do
unjustly; being life it self, how should he die? Finally being only one
god, and that uncreated and eternal, subsisting only in three persons: we
believe and confess, that he can not so take any creature to himself, to
make the same (...) consubstantiall to himself, and wholly such as he himself
is, or constitute a fourth person: and we are persuaded that nothing is drawn
or taken away from the omnipotency of god by this confession: yea surely
whatsoever is already done it cannot be that the same should not have bin
done: so that it is certain, that what so implies a contradiction, the same
cannot be done by God, who is the especial truth it self. For by this
reason, even the omnipotency of God, whereby they were done should be
apparentlie denied.

IV. The will of god to be searched for only in the holy scriptures.
Furthermore since the counsels of god are infinite and secret, which he
reuealeth not to the Angels themselves: we hold, Mar. 13.32
that when there is any question concerning the will of God, the same is not
to be sought for in any other place, then in the holy scriptures; whereas
whatsoever things were necessary to our salvation, Ioh. 15.15. and 17.29.
god has plentifully and perspicuouslie laid open unto us, and whatsoever he
would have us to do, he has of his singular goodness revealed unto us by his
spirit.

CHAP. V. Of the creation of the world, of Angels, and of man's first estate.
I. All things were made by god, Genesis 1. and 2.
and that exceeding good.
WE believe, that God the Father, Col. 1.16.
by the Son, together with the holy ghost, in the space of six days
created of nothing all things visible and invisible, which the holy spirit in
the holy scriptures comprehends under the name of heaven and earth; and the
same all exceeding good: Pro. 16.4. Heb. 1.10. Luc. 1.35.
and appointed the same, for man's use, and for his own glory: so that we
acknowledge as well the Son, and holy ghost, for creator of the world, as the
Father, since they are all one and the self same god.

II. That heaven is distinguished from earth, and the Saints heaven does
differ from the other heavens.
Neither do we mingle heaven with earth, or confound the heavens among
themselves, 2. Cor. 12.2. Mat. 6.10.
but with the holy scriptures we distinguish them: even as we see the
elements, and all the kinds of living creatures, and of other things, to be
distinguished. And therefore we confess this heaven likewise, wherein the
souls of the blessed do live with Christ, and where all the bodies of the
faithful shall be, and which Christ calls his fathers house and paradise,
and the Apostle calls a cuie having a foundation, the maker and builder
whereof is god: Ioh. 14.2. Luc. 23.43. Heb. 11.16.
to differ from the other heavens, but much more, from earth and the deepes.
Whereunto also Paul alludeth, 2. Cor. 12.2.
where he says, he was taken up into the third heaven: namely above the
heaven which we see, and above all the visible and moveable spheres.

III. The Angels were all created good, though some of them continued not in
the truth.
We believe also, that all the Angels were created good and righteous,
spiritual and immortal substances, indewed with an intelligence and free
will: although all of them did not abide in that goodness and righteousness, and
(as the Lord Jesus speaks) in the truth: but we are taught by the
Scriptures, that many of them, of their own will, even from the beginning
sinned, being made enemies to god and all goodness, yea and of mankind
especially of the church of god; liers, and speaking lies of their own,
menkillers, devils, and evil spirits, and for this cause, were thrust down
from heaven into hell, and delivered to the chains of darkness, and reserved
to condemnation.

IV. Causes, why many of those celestial spirits were suffered to sin,
and to become evil.
And that this also was not suffered of the divine wisdom without cause, we
learn by the Scriptures. For besides, that he meant in this to set forth his
judgments, and his wrath against sin in all kinds of creatures: he decreed
also to use their labor, to tempt and exercise us in faith, in spiritual
fight, in patience, and so to help forward our salvation: Ephesians. 6.12.
and lastly, he would have them the executors and ministers of his judgments
against men's offenses: that, 1. Reg. 22.21
they which will not embrace the love of truth, whereby they might be saved, 2.
These. 2.12
might follow the doctrines of devils, and might believe in their lies and so
perish.

V. The good Angels were saved by the favor of God, that they might be Gods
ministers and ours.
Again we believe, that innumerable many of those celestial spirits were
saved by the favor of god for Christ, that they should not sin with the
rest, Dan. 7.10.
but should abide in the truth and in obedience: and that these are made the
messengers and ministers of god, which do their service for help of the
elect, Heb. 1.7. Ps. 103.20.
and do defend them against the devil, and set forward the kingdom of
Christ: who do so love us, and awaite upon us, that they greatly rejoice at our
welldoing: yet will they not be worshipped of us, Luc. 15.7. Apo. 22.9. Mat.
22.30.
but do instruct us, that god alone is to be worshipped, and call themselves
our fellow-seruants: with whom also we shall live an eternal and blessed
life in heaven.

VI. Man was created after the image of god. Genesis 1. and 2.

We believe, that after all other things were created, man also at the last
was created to the image and likeness of God, his body being fashioned of
earth, and his soul, being a spiritual and immortal substance, made of
nothing, and inspired into that body: and that shortly after woman was given
him, made (concerning the bodily parts) of his bones, and formed to the same
image of God.

VII. That image of god, in what things it especially consists.
But we believe that this image of god, especially consisted herein: both in
that as god is the absolute Lord over all things, Genesis 1.28. Ps. 8.7.8.9.
so unto man were all things subject, the fowls of the air, the fishes of
the sea, and beasts of the earth: so as he should be king of the whole world:
and most especially, that as god is most holy, and most just, Ephesians. 4.24.
so man also was created righteousse, in justice and true holiness, as the
Apostle interpreterh.

VIII. Adam was meerelie free before his fall.
Hereuppon we believe, that man in that first estate, was not only indewed
with such a liberty, that he could not will any thing without consent of his
will: Eccl. 7.30. Sirac. 15.18
(which liberty ever was and is remaining in man) but also was furnished with
such strength, that he might, if he would, not have sinned, and not have
died, but have continued in righteousness, and eschewed death: so that
deservedly it is to be imputed to himself and no other, that he lost both.

IX. Errors.
We condemn therefore, the Valentinians, Marcionits, Maniches, and whosoever
either taught or left any thing in writing against this article of faith:
faininge either that all things were made of some other god, then the father
of Christ, or that good things were made of one God which was good, and evil
things, of another which was evil: since none can be god, but he which is
chiefly good, and only maker of al things. We condemn likewise, all those
which either teach that the soul of man is of the substance of God: or which
deny the immortality and perpetual action of the same: or which referr the
image of God in man, only to his power and rule over creatures; or lastly
which do deny that man was created meerelie free.

CHAP. VI. Of providence and government of the world.
I. The world and all that is, Genesis 2.2.
and is done therein, is governed by gods providence.
WE believe, that God, having created all things, did so rest from all the
works, which he had finished: that he nevertheless ceased not or left of to
care for, Wis. 14.3. Matt. 10.29.30.
to rule, and govern the world and whatsoever is therein, as well small
things as great, and especially mankind, yea and every particular man: so
that nothing can be done or may happen in the world, which is not governed by
the divine providence.

II. The Church of God to be governed by a peculiar care.
But although al and every thing be subject to the divine providence: yet we
believe, that the Church of god is governed by an especial care and means,
and all the elect people, Romans 8.13. Phil. 2.13. 2. Cor. 6.16.
yea and all the wills and actions of the elect: since he calls peculiarly,
justifies and sanctifies, but not all: since he works in them, to will
and perform: Act. 4.16.
and says that he dwells in them, and not in all: since lastly he leads
them unto eternal life, but suffers others, in his just judgments to walk
in their own paths, and fall into eternal destruction: 1. Pet. 5.7.
so that worthily we be commanded, peculiarly to cast all our care upon
god, because he (peculiarly) cares for us.

III. That god ordinarily governs the world by second causes.
This also we learn by the holy scriptures, though God performs many
purposes of his divine providence, by himself, without any external helper,
yea and sometimes quite against ordinary means: yet he executes many more
things ordinarilye, by second causes, Hos. 2.21.22.
as well in the government of the whole world, as of the church: since he
himself says, he will hear the heavens, the heavens will hear the earth,
the earth will hear the corn, the corn will hear Israel.

IV. The means unto the end, are not to be contemned; since god orders as
well the one as the other by his providence.
Whereupon we also know, that although we are assured, that god has a care
over us, yet the means which he has ordained for the salvation both of our
souls and bodies, are not to be contemned, nor god to be tempted: but herein
we must follow the Apostle, who although he were assured of the safety of
all them which were in the shipp, yet as the mariners went about to escape
away, he said to the soldiors and to the captain, unless these abide in the
ship, you cannot be saved. For God who sets an end unto each thing, he
also has ordained both the beginning and means, by which that end is
attained unto.

V. All things come to pass in respect of god necessarily, in respect of us
many things happen casuallie.
But since god by his providence does preserve second causes, which he uses in
governing the world, every one in her proper nature, yea and is the moouer of
them: and of them, some are ordained of their own nature to certain and sure
effects, and other some are indefinite: We know and confess, that although
in respect of God, Mat. 10.29.30. Ex. 21.13.
without whose foreknowledge and will nothing can happen in the world, all
things are done necessarily: yet in respect of us, and of the second causes,
many things happen and come to pass chau^ceablie. For what can be more
chaunceable and casual, to a carpenter and trauailer, then if the axe fall out
of his hand and kill the other? yet the Lord says that it is he which killed
the trauailer. And our Lord Jesus died willingly, yet he said, Christ must
suffer. Luc. 24.46.
Herod and Pilate of their free will condemned Jesus: yet the Apostles say,
Act. 4.28.
they did nothing but what the hand and counsel of God had decreed to be done.

VI. That god is not the author of sins which are committed in the world.
And hereupon we also know and confess, Act. 17.28.
that although many offenses are committed in the world by men, god in the
mean time guiding all things: 1. Ioh. 2.16.
yet the same cannot be imputed to god, nor to his providence: for he indeed
moves all things, and ministers strength by his providence unto every one
to work, but yet he instilleth not that corruption to any, whereby they work
amiss. As therefore the earth yielding her sap as well to il trees as to
good, yet is not to be blamed, because an ill tree makes ill fruit: so much
less may god rightly be said to be either the cause or the author of our
sins, although by the hand of his providence, he bears, vpholdeth, orders
and guides even the wicked. Jn him (says the Apostle) we live, we are
moved, Heb. 1.3. Act. 17.28
and have our being: namely we are moved of him, such as we are; except he
by his grace do make us otherwise.

VII. The secret counsels of God, in governing the world, are to be
reverenced, not inquired after.
Mean while the secret and vvonderfull counsels of god, whereby we see
innumerable things to be done, and whereof we cannot give or know any reason;
the same we behold and adore with that reverence which we ought, contenting our
selves with this assured knowledge, Mat. 10.29.30 Romans 9.14
namely that nothing comes to pass in the world without the will of God: and
that will of god to be so just, that it is the most certain rule of all
justice: and therefore that which the Apostle says must ever be holden, Romans
11.33
O the deepenes of the riches, both of the wisdom, and knowledge of god, how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his vvayes past finding out: Romans 9.14
Romans 11.36
Also that, Is there any iniquity with God? And yet, Of him, and through
him, and for him are all things. To him be glory for over. Amen.

VIII. Errors.
We condemn therefore all scorners, and all those philosophers, which either
do wholly take away the providence of god out of the world, or deny that
human matters and small things are regarded of god: Those likewise, which
abusing the providence of God, do contemn the means ordained of God, for the
salvation of us, both soul and body: as also those which would have all
things to come to pass so merely necessarily, that they take away all
casualtie, and deprive men of all liberty: lastly those which will have God
so to work all things in all men, that they also do blasphemouslie prove
him to be (...) a iointe-worker, and an author of sin.

CHAP. VII. Of man's fall, and of original sin and the fruits thereof.
I. Adam sinned of his own accord by disobedience.
WE believe, Genesis 1. and 2 Eccl. 7.30 Sirac. 15.18
that the first man when he was created after the image of God, just and
righteous, and meerlie free, so as he might, if he would, not have sinned, nor
have died any kind of death: The devil then alluring him, and god not letting
him, but leaving him in the hands of his own counsels, he transgressed by
disobedience, Romans 5.19 Libera voluntate.
of his own accord, and of his mere free choice so that he nether can nor
ought to ascribe the blame of his transgression, to his own nature given to
him of god, nor to god himself, nor to any other thing created, but to his own
self alone, because it was his own will.

II. What, and what manner of sin Adams was.
For we know that Adams sin was a voluntary transgression of gods
commandment that he should not eat of the forbidden fruit (as Moses
describes it) and so (as the Apostle speaks) it was a disobedience: Genesis
2.17 and 3.6. Romans 5.19.
which was showed not so much in the outvvard deed, as in the purposed consent
of his mind, vvherin he would not be obedient unto god.

III. What, and how manifold a death followed Adams sin.
So we confess, that man being then destitute of the favor of god, by his
own fault did loose that life wherein he lived holily unto God, his mind
being darkened, his will depraved, and all integrity of nature utterly lost,
Ioh. 8.34 Ephesians. 2.1. Romans 5.12
name lie in those things which pertain to god, and to a life acceptable to
God: and so was made the servant of sin, the slave of satan, and quite dead
unto god: Moreover he incurred both the death of the body, which is now come
unto all men, with all the calamities of the body; and also the eternal (that
is, the most miserable, grievous, and most unhappy life of the whole man,
more intolerable without comparison then any death) with the devil in
everlasting torments whence he could not be delivered but by Christ. 1. Cor.
15.22


IIII. That in Adam all men sinned.
But for as much as al mankind which was by natural generation to issue from
Adam, was then in his loins, whereby the commandment with the curse annexed,
pertained not only to the person of Adam, but to all mankind likewise: The,
Romans 5.19
efore with the Apostle do we believe and confess, that in Adam sinning, all
men sinned: so that, that disobedience was not only proper to Adam himself,
but also made common to all mankind, since his guiltines enwrapped all men, who
were then and are yet daily carnally to be begotten of his seed. Even as the
Apostle to the Romans plainly teaches, yea and most strongly proves by an
Antithesis or contraposition of the disobedience of Adam, and the obedience of
Christ. For if the obedience of Christ be no less ours by imputation, then his
own by his proper action; because we are regenerate of his incorruptible
seed, and of his spirit; it follows, that the disobedience likewise of Adam
must be imputed unto us, and we touched with his guiltines, because we are
borne of the seed of his flesh, being father of al men.

V. The corruption of man's whole nature followed upon Adams disobedience, in
all men.
But like as the corruption of our whole nature, Romans 7.7 Aug. tom. 7 con.
Iul. Pela. li. 5. c. 3
immediately by gods just judgment, took hold on the person of Adam for that
actual disobedience, called of the Apostle, Concupiscence, which is both a
punishment of the former sin, a sin, and a cause of other sins; even so
being taught by the holy scriptures, we believe, and with the whole church
confess, that all men, which by natural propagation are conceived of his
seed, ar borne infected with the contagion, of his corrupt nature. For all men
sinned in Adam, and by the guiltiness of his disobedience we are all kept
bound.

VI. What we properly call original sin.
Wherefore we do so say, that this haereditarie fault and contagion of nature
is sin in all men, and so we use to call it original sin: that we do not
separate it from the guiltines and imputation of the first disobedience. Even
as likewise on the other side, we doubt not but the righteousness of christians,
does consist, not so much in the regeneration of nature, which is made by the
spirit of Christ, and which is usually called by the name of inhere^t
righteousness; as in the imputation of the perfect obedience, and righteousness
of Christ, whose members we are.

VII. That, contagion of nature, is very sin.
And although that contagion, was, inflicted not only upon Adam alone, but
also on his whole posterity, for a punishment of that first transgression of
Gods commandment: yet we hold this as certainly, out of the holy
scriptures, as whatsoever is most certain, Romans 7.7
that the same is not only the punishment of sin, and the cause of all other
follovving sins, but also a very sin it self, even so great as were
sufficient to condemn us.

VIII. That, concupiscence of it own proper nature is a sin in the very
regenerate.
Yea so far do we learn, that concupiscence of it own nature is a sin,
fighting against the law of God, and making all men subject to condemnation,
unless they be delivered by Christ: yea that in the regenerate themselves,
though the guiltines being taken away by faith in Christ, it be not imputed
unto them any more, yet we doubt not, 1. Ioh. 3.4 Romans 7.7
but it is a sin, yea and that worthy of eternal death: since it is (...), a
transgression of the law, and is by gods law condemned as the Apostle
teaches.

IX. From concupiscence ingrafted in us, the rivers of sin do continually
flow.
Futrhermore we believe that this our natural deformity, is such a fountain
of al sin, and that ever so abounding, that from it do continually spring,
most corrupt waters of eeuill affections, of ungodly thoughts and wicked
desires: which unless they be by the spirit of Christ restrained, they break
out at length into manifest sins and offenses, some worse the^ others; so
that, there is not any man so holy, which bears not about him this puddle of
vices, yea and feels not the filthy vapors breathing from it, and is not
often sprinkled and bespotted with that noisome contagion. Every man is
tempted of his own concupiscence (says James) when he is drawn away by
his own concupiscence, Iam. 1.14.15
and is entised, then when lust has conceived it brings forth sin, and
sin when it is finished, brings forth death.

X. That God is not the author of sin.
Now, all these things being thus, we are confirmed in that belief, wherein
we hold that god is not the author of sin: since he neither created Adam
evil, or prone unto evil, but just and righteous: neither did he entice or
move him to il, but he of his own accord and by his free will sinned: 1. Io.
2.16.
neither yet, was this natural perverseness from god, but of it self, it
followed that disobedience of Adam, being deprived of his righteousness, god
most justly so permitting, and punishing man's tra^sgression by that worthy
punishment.

XI. Errors.
We condemn therefore with Ireneus, and the whole church, all those which make
god the author of sin: likewise all Pelagians, as well new, as old, which
deny that all men sinned in Adam, and are holden in the guilte of the first
offense: or do labor to prove that this ingrafted concupiscence is only a
disease, and a punishment of sin, but not indeed a sin it self: or at
least in the regenerate will not have it to be worthy the name of a sin.
We condemn also those, which have taught that original sin is a substance:
because this opinion, either makes god the author of sin, or else denies that
god is the maker of every substance, and confirms the doctrine of the
Manichs, concerning the two beginninges, the chiefest good, and the chiefest
ill, of which all things should have their original, namely good things of the
good, and ill things of the ill. Moreover we condemn the Stoics, and such
like, which teach that all sins are equal, and that one offense is more
grievous then another: lastly those, which will affirm, that there may some
man be found in the world, which is quite void of all sin.

CHAP. VIII. Of man's free will after his fall. Liberum arbitrium.

I. What we understand by the name of free will.
Since all men after Adams fall and by his fall are conceived in sin, Ephesians. 2.3
Gal. 6.5. and 8.21.
and are borne the children of wrath, and proone not unto goodness, but
exceedingly unto wickedness: this is our belief and confession concerning the
freewill of a man not regenerate. By the name of freewill, we do so mean the
free choice of a man, that we do not yet separate from it, the faculty of the
understanding whereby we judge and determine upon things, as what is good and
what is ill, or what is to be chosen and what to be refused.

II. That the question is two fold, one concerning the nature, the other
concerning the power of freewill.
But we distinguish the question concerning the nature of the whole freewill,
from the question concerning the nature of man's choice. Nature we call, that
natural and essential propriety, given of god, unto the will or choice:
whereby, whatsoever it wills, whether good, or ill, the same it wills
freely, with mere accord and consent, ever void of all manner of constraint.
But by the name of power we understand an abillitie or force given unto us,
whereby we can both discern in the mind, what is good, and what is ill: and
also in the will, to make choice of the one, and refuse the other.

III. That freewill is always free from constraint.
Even as therefore the substance of freewill was not lost by sin: (for the
understanding and the will, and the whole substance of the mind remained) so
believe we, that the nature thereof was not lost, but whatsoever it wills
yet, as well ill, as good, that it wills the same freely, and without all
constraint: as Augustine truly said, free will is always free (namely from
constraint) but is not always good.

IV. Three kinds of things and actions, wherein the power of man's free will
is occupied.
But of the power to choose the good or refuse the ill, thus we think. We
distinguish good and ill into three kinds, that is, in such things as pertain
to the animal life, and in such things as pertain to humane life, and in such
as pertain to the divine, that is, a christian life. Of the first kind, are
such things as are in a manner common unto us with beasts, and do belong
unto the vegetable and sensitive faculties. In the second kind are reckened,
such things as are proper unto man, and pertain to a human mind, as are
all the arts, as well mechanical as liberal, the moral and politic virtues,
lastly, all sciences, and al philosophy. And the third kind contains,
only those good things, and good actions, which are ordained only to the
kingdom of god, and a christian life: as are the true knowledge of god, faith,
and the effects thereof, regeneration, obedience, charity, and other of the
same sort.

V. The power in a man not regenerate is very weak, in those things which
pertain to human life.
To speak nothing therefore, of man's power after his fall, in knowing, in
desiring, yea (and if occasion be offered,) in choosing and following those
things, which pertain to the sustaining of this animal life, and the happy
leading thereof, and to eschew the contraries, because they belong not to
religion and to manners (in which point notwithstanding, daily experience
teaches us how great an infirmity both of judgment and appetite has taken
hold on man) we believe, that although by the mercy of God, there is some
light remaining in men's minds, partly for the judging of what is right and
wrong, good and evil in human affairs, and partly for the attaining to the
knowledge of diverse things, of arts and instructions, and sundry virtues:
yet that small light, what so it is, is left so little in man's mind, and his
will so depraved, that unless the mind be helped by light from heaven, and
his will inclined by special grace, to choose that which is good, and refuse
the ill: men can neither learn the arts truly and profit by any
instructions, nor attain unto any virtues; although there may be in the
unregenerate never so many: even as Augustine not without cause did write,
that all the learning, or virtues, Tom. 7. con Iul. Pel. lib. 4. cap. 3
or rather the images of virtues, which were in the Romans, and other heathen
people, were the singular gifts of god.

VI. A confirmation of the former opinion.
For neither were, nor are, all the infidells endued equally with the same
virtues and knowledge: so that thereby it manifestly appears, that these were
not the gifts of nature, but gifts of god added to nature.

VII. In those things which pertain to god and to true piety, a man not
regenerate, can do nothing.
But in things pertaining to God, godliness, religion, and christian life, we
believe, that the mind of a man not regenerate is so darkened, and his heart so
unsound, and all the powers in him so extinguished: that he can neither know
god, and the things belonging to god, nor love him, and desire any thing
acceptable unto him, much less be obedient to his will, as he ought: 1. Cor.
2.14
since the Apostle says: The natural man perceives not the things, that are
of god, neither can he know them: how should he therefore will, Ioh. 15.5
and perform? and Christ says, without me ye can do nothing.

VIII. A confirmation of the former opinion.
For as a man being dead unto nature and to men, can do none of those things
which belong to nature and to man: so neither can he which is dead unto god in
sin, truly know or do those things which belong unto god or true
godliness, but shall altogether consume and putrify in sin, unless he be
delivered out of the same with grace by Christ, and be called to life again.
For all me^ without Christ and not regenerate by Christ's spirit are quite dead,
so as they are said to be truly revived, raised up, and borne again, which
are delivered from sin by faith in Christ, and do serve him.

IX. Errors.
We therefore condemn all Pelagians, which teach the contrary, and do
exroll the power of freewill against the grace of Christ: so do we detest and
accurse the Manichs and others, which make man to be but as a block, which has
no judgment nor any free liberty of will, no not in civil causes.

CHAP. IX. Of the promises of redemption and salvation by Christ.
I. That Christ, the man from heaven, was promised by grace to save us.
WHen therefore the first earthly man, by his own fault had fallen into so
miserable an estate, through disobedience, and together with him, all his
posterity, which had sinned in him, and were in deed to be conceived in
sin, and to be borne the children of wrath: we believe that god of his mere
grace and favor, promised unto Adam and Eve, and in them to all mankind, an
other man from heaven, Genesis 3.15 1. Cor. 15.47.48 Mat. 1.20 Luc. 1.34 Ebr. 4.15
Ios. 7.14
that should be the true substance of very woman, but conceived without the
seed of man, and so should be born of a virgin without sin: in whom, as in
another head of mankind, consisting of a divine and human nature, being the
true image of the father, and full of the holy spirit, that should be
supplied, which in Adam the first head, by his own fault, was decayed: that
is, that he the second man, in the name of all us, which were to be ingrafted
into him by his spirit, Romans 6.5 and 11.17.
and by a spiritual regeneration should become flesh of his flesh, and bone of
his bone, Io. 5.6 Ephesians. 5.29 Phil. 2.8 Romans 5.19 Ephesians. 2.13.14
should most perfectly be obedient unto god: and by his obedience and death
should take away sin, should appease the wrath of god, should redeem us,
justify us, sanctify us, and govern us by his spirit, should indue us with
true liberty, and with power to do god, and lastly should save us and glorify
us to eternal life.

II. The promise of redemption by Christ was very necessary.
For Adam, not as a private person, but as the parent and original of all
mankind, as he was endued with a righteousness, which he should have
dispersed into all his posterity, as hereditarie, for which cause it is used
also to be called original righteousness: so by his disobedience, in stead of
righteousness, he brought upon all men great iniquity, and a spring of all
sin, and in stead of eternal life eternal death. Therefore there was need
of an other head, from whom, through his obedience, that true and heavenly
righteousness, holiness, and life might be derived into all the members.
This same is Christ.

III. To what end that promise was made presently after the transgression.
And we believe, that this promise was made immediately after the
transgression, eue^ from the beginning of the world, and afterward often times
mentioned to the holy fathers, declared, yea and confirmed and sealed by
diverse and sundry means, signs, and sacraments: that not only we which
were to be borne after the coming of the Messiah, but also all other, which
from the first creation should believe in this promise, and in true faith
should embrace the Savior which was to come, might by that faith be made
partakers of the following redemption, might be justified and saved.

IV. As many as believed in Christ that was to come, from the first
beginning, were saved.
We believe therefore that as many since the making of the world, as believed
in Christ promised, and to come, they were ingrafted unto him by this faith:
made partakers of his following obedience, of his passion, death, and
redemption: that they did eat his body that was to come and to be betrayed,
and drank his blood that was to be shedd: and finally that they were all
christians, and endued with the spirit of Christ, and saved unto eternal
life, as well as we.

V. Errors.
Therefore we condemn and abhor all those, which say that none were saved
that were before the coming of Christ: and that those fathers received no
promises concerning eternal salvation, but only concerning things temporal.

CHAP. X. Of the law.
I. The law of Moses came between the promise of redemption by Christ, and the
accomplishment thereof, and to what end.
But between the promise of redemption by Christ; made first unto Adam, and
after more manifestly declared, as well to others, as most especially to
Abraham, sealed with the sacrament of circumcision, and confirmed as it were by
the death of Isaac his first begotten, offered for a sacrifice, and established
by an everlasting covenant: and between the accomplishment of the fame
promise, the law was given which Moses delivered: the people which came of
Abraham's seed being gathered together and wonderfully increased, (of whom
also Christ should be borne) and being also delivered out of the bondage of
Egypt by a wonderful means, that God might have a church known and visible,
and separate from other nations, and gathered together in one certain place:
in which church, that promise concerning Christ made unto the fathers might be
kept safe, and an acceptable service of God maintained, even unto the coming
of the true promised redeemer: The law, I say delivered by Moses from God unto
his church, came between, containing three kinds of commandments: Moral, by
which the life and piety of every one should be directed: Ceremonial, with
the form whereof the church should be governed in her outward service and
religion: and judicial, pertaining to the government of the whole common
wealth in matters politic and oeconomicall: that by these means the people of
God, of whom Christ was to come, might both be restrained from the profane
manners and idolatries of wicked nations, and might be kept within their duty
and obedience to Gods will, and finally might be vpholden in the faith and
hope of the promise to be performed concerning the true redemption by Christ:
and so might be prepared more and more for the receiving of Christ: and so in
that people God might be glorified.

II. Whatsoever was necessary to be done, for salvation, is contained in the
law of God.
To let pass then the two latter parts of the law, which do not appertain
to us, and to speak only of the former: we believe, that in that law, as it
is declared in the books of Moses, the Prophets and Apostles, 2. Tim. 3.16
al things which are necessary to salvation are so perfectly set down, and
Gods will, Deuteronomy. 2.4. and 5.22. and 12.32
which he will have us to do in his word, so revealed, as nothing can be added
or taken from it.

III. The law of the Decaloge or ten commandments, is a declaration of the law
of nature, and a picture of the image of God.
We also believe that this law, is a declaration of the law of nature, which
was written in the hearts of the first men perfectly, of others imperfectly,
and but in part: and therefore by this law is condemned, whatsoever is not
agreeable to that image of God, whereunto man was created; and is commanded,
whatsoever is agreeable to the same. For God would show by that law, what man
was in his first estate, and what he was made in the second estate, and what
manner one he ought to be: and further what he should afterward be in the
third estate in part, and what perfectly in the fourth, by Christ: so that
the law is nothing else, but a true and lively picture of the image of God,
to which man was created: whereby we are instructed, what we were,
what we are, what we ought to be, and in deed what we shall be, if
we trust in Christ.

IV. The sum of the law to be restrained to the love of God and our
neighbor.
Now we believe and confess, that Christ did teach, Mat. 22.37
that the sum or substance of the whole law is contained in these two
precepts: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, withal thy
mind, withal thy soul, and vvithall thy strength: and thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self: the first of these is the sum of the first table, the
other, the sum of the second table.

V. If God alone be to be loved with the whole heart, he alone is to be
worshipped.
And if the sum of the first table, which contains the whole worship due
unto God, do consist in the perfect love of God alone: from hence, besides
other express commandments of God, declaring this commandment, we gather and
we believe that God alone is to be adored, inuocated and served with a
religious worshipp, and that we must swear only by his name, because these
be all contained within that commandment of loving God with all our heart:
to let pass, that the image of God, whereof this law is a type, did teach
Adam the same thing.

VI. That our very concupiscence and corruption of nature is a sin.
But if by Gods law be condemned, whatsoever offense is repugnant to that first
image of God, that is, to justice, holiness, and righteousness, wherein man was
created: we hold that in man not only his actions committed with consent of
his will against the law of god, but even the motions also of lust, yea the
concupiscence it self, and the whole corruption of his nature, is sin, Romans
7, 7
and by the law of God condemned: because it is repugnant to that vprightnes
and justice wherein man was creted, and wherein he ought, and might have kept
himself, if he would.

VII. Although the law cannot be observed: yet it was not given in vain nor
unprofitably.
And although the law of God be so perfect, Romans 7.101 and 8.3
that it never could or can be observed of any man, either all, or always, or
in such measure as it ought: yet we believe that it was not given in vain, nor
unprofitably, since God does not any thing in vain, but all things with his
exceeding high wisdom, to his own glory, and to our profit and salvation.

VIII. A threefold profit by the law of God.
First by the perfect declaration of the will of God by this law, men might and
may better understand, what was pleasing unto god: what was good, and what ill,
what was to be done, and what to be avoided: then by the only relics of the
law of nature remaining in man's mind: and therefore all cloak of ignorance
being clean taken away, the Jews were made more inexcusable then other
nations, if they kept not the law: which thing falls out greatly to the glory
of God: since men do thereby understand, that his judgments toward us are very
just. Furthermore, by the curses which are added against the transgressors, and
the blessings for the obseruers, men were restrained by fear of those as it
were with a bridle, from committing sin, and by hope of these as it were with
a spur, were stirred up to keep the law, if not wholly and perfectly, yet in
part, and for the external obseruances: and so might be the better held
within their duties: which how profitable it is not only to a whole common
wealth, but to every particular man, so bearing himself, none can be
ignorant. Last of all, by that, that men saw by daily experience, how they
continually sinned against this so perfect a law; and perceived, that they were
not able to observe it, as it ought to be, and so that they were daily more
and more in danger of Gods wrath, and guilty of eternal death: It came to
pass that distrusting themselves, and their own strength, they grew to have a
greater and earnester desire of the promised Savior and redeemer. And therefore
how much the more they knew their sins by the law, and their weakness, and
more sensibly felt the wrath of God, so much the more greedily did they
hunger and thirst after righteousness, and were disposed and prepared to take
hold on Christ by faith: so that very true were both those sayings of the
Apostle: by the law is the knowledge of sin, Romans 2.20 Gal. 3.24
and the law was a schoolemaister unto Christ.

IX. The law has still the same use, yea even in men regenerate.
And we believe, that these uses of the law are perpetual, as long as we
remain in this world: not only in men not regenerate, as it said, but also in
the very regenerate. For since our minds are still blinded with much
darkness, and our memory so slipperie, that we can neither perfectly
understand the things that are of god, nor keep in mind that which we have
understood: we have evermore need of this glass of the divine law, wherein
we may daily behold, and still more certainly understand, what god will
have us to do. Moreover, since our heart is not yet perfectly cleansed from all
corruption, that it can be fully settled upon doing the will of God, but that
the flesh still wrastleth against the spirit, Gal. 5.17
therefore the law is most necessary, which may terrify us with the
threatninges, and hold us in from offending: and with the promises may stir
us forward to obedience and to the working of righteousness. Lastly since
there is none so holy which sins not many ways, 1. Ioh. 1.8
and which has not sin dwelling in him, whereby we be made weak unto
goodness, and prone to ill: Therefore the law is proffitable unto us, by
which our sins and infirmities being made known to us, we may daily more
and more acknowledge how impossible it is that we by our own works, should at
any time be justified or saved: and therefore should be filled with the
greater desire, hunger, and thirst of the righteousness of Christ, and embrace
him by faith: And thus the law, when it can never justify us, yet it may
always draw us nearer unto Christ who justifies, more and more to be
justified.

X. The moral law, touching the substance, was not to be disanulled by
Christ.
For we know and believe that the law, touching the substance, and those
wholesome uses, of which we speak, was not to be abolished by Christ, and so
not abolished at all: but only touching the curse and condemnation: because
there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1
which walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. But yet the law was
proffitable even in the condemnation, and always is, to them which are not yet
in Christ: in as much as it drives them to Christ, that they may avoid
condemnation.

XI. Errors.
Therefore we condemn those which reject the law out of the church, as
unprofitable, and not pertaining to christians; and again, those which teach
that a man may either wholly, or in part, be justified by the law: fith it
was rather given, Io. 1.29
to shutt up all men under sin, and to lead them to Christ, who alone takes
away the sins of the world. And this is briefly our confession of the law,
delivered from god by Moses, and declared by the Prophets, which prepares,
disposes, and brings men unto Christ: Romans 10.4
and therefore Christ is end thereof as the Apostle writes.

CHAP. XI. Of Christ the redeemer.
I. A sum of the faith of the person and office of Christ the redeemer.
WHen therefore the fulness of time was come, Gal. 4.4
wherein the promise of redemption, made unto the first man, was to be
accomplished by the second: God the everlasting father, sent his only begotten
son, and eternal, and therefore true God, of the same nature with the
father; made of a woman, alone, and without the seed of a man, and therefore
true man; but without sin, and so true Christ: made subject to the law,
and therefore circumcised; that he in most perfect obedience might fulfill that
law in the name of us all, made obedient to his father even unto death, namely
for us (for he being without sin, deserved not to die) that he might redeem
those which were under the law, and all the elect, even by his obedience, by
his death and bloodshedding, that is, by a sacrifice of exceeding virtue (for
it was the blood of God) and a most effectual -- ransom: -- that he might I
say redeem us from sin, to the old image of god to perfect righteousness:
yea from death, to eternal life: and from the kingdom of Satan, to the
kingdom of God: and that we might receive adoption of children, and so in the
end be taken into full and perfect possession of the heavenly inheritance,
as sons and lavvfull heirs: And lastly that he might gather together all
things in heaven and in earth under one head, and join them to himself, Ephesians.
1.10
for the glory of God the father.

II. Christ the redeemer is true God and true man.
We believe therefore Jesus Christ to be the only begotten son of God, Ioh.
1.14 Mich. 5.2 Phil. 2.6 1. Ioh. 5.20 Mat. 1.1
and so the son in nature consubstantial and coeternall to the father, and
lastly true God almighty: also true man, of the true seed of Abraham and
David, conceived without the help of a man, Heb. 4.15 Mat. 26.35
but only by virtue of the holy ghost, in the womb of the virgin, and
without sin, and borne of her, endued with a true soul and a human
mind, and made like unto us in all things, sin only excepted: so that he
is true God of the substance of the father, Ath. in sym.
begotten before all worlds, and true man of the substance of his mother,
borne in the world.

III. Only the Son to be both God and man, and only Christ.
But so we believe that the son of God is both true God and true man, and
therefore the true Christ, and him alone we confess to be such: since we
read that neither the father, neither the holy Chost but only the word it
self was made flesh: Ioh. 1.14
and the Apostle says that the son only was made of a woman and that he
only suffered: Gal. 4.4
although to the creation of the nature which the son took upon him, not
only the Son, but the Father also and the holy ghost were all concurrent.

IV. That the son was made man, without any change of himself, but only
assuming to himself human nature.
And we believe that the son of God was made man, without making any
confusion of the divine and human natures, without his conversion into
flesh, or any change in the flesh, only by assuming of the human nature,
into the unity of that person: and as Athanasius speaks, In sym.
not by conversion of the godhead into flesh, but by taking of the manhood into
God: so that, that which he was, he did by no means leese or let go, but
that which he was not, he took upon him as the Apostle says, Ieb. 2.16.
the son took on him, the seed of Abraham: and as he teaches, that, as the
son taking upon him, was not changed into the thing taken, (for God cannot
be changed at all) but remained the same that he was, truly distinct from
the thing assumed and taken: So that seed taken on him was not turned into
the thing that took it, but was united with the divine nature, into the unity
only of the same person; according to that saying, The word was made flesh.
The flesh therefore remained flesh, and was not changed into the word.

V. Nether one nature took on it another nature, nor one person another
person, but the person of the son of God took on him man's nature.
Whence also we understand that neither the divine nature, common to the three
persons, nay indeed one and the self same nature of them all, did take on it,
human nature; nor one person took on it another person, but only another
nature. For neither did the son of God take on him any son of Abraham, but
the seed of Abraham: that is, human nature spreading from Abraham, and
therefore we acknowledge not two persons in Christ, but only the same alone,
by which all things were made, and which was so perfect, before it took on it
the seed of Abraham, that by the same taking, it is not made any other, or
any perfecter person, or yet indeed any whitt imperfect.

VI. The human nature was not taken, to make a new person in Christ, or to
make perfect the former: but only to be coupled and united to his eternal
and most perfect person.
For albeeit we acknowledge two natures in Christ, the divine and human: yet
we do not admit, that the human was therefore assumed, that either a new
person, compounded of that and this, as of the parts, should be made in Christ:
or that the former and the eternal person should be made the perfecter, by
the coupling of a new nature: but only that man's nature being taken into
unity of that most perfect and everlasting person, the son of God, remaining
the same that he was, might be made that he was not; and might have what to
offer unto his father for us. And therefore we do not simply allow it, if one
say, so the person of Christ is compounded of the divine and human nature,
as the person of a man consists of a soul and a body. But we allow the
usual phrase in the church, that Christ clothed himself or was clothed with
our flesh. Whereupon Augustine says, Christ came down from heaven, as a naked
man comes down a hill, but he went up again, clothed with our flesh, as with
a garment. For this manner of speech, although it do not perfectly declare
the personal union, Hypostatica.
yet it shows a manifest difference beetweene the person of the son of god
taking, and our nature taken. For this same cause we embrace those kinds of
speeches of the Fathers, as man's nature was borne of the son of god: to
subsist in the person of the son of God: and such like, separating the person
of the son of god taking, from the nature taken: and teaching that the person
of the son of God by the coming of man's nature, was made neither other, nor
more perfect.

VII. A confirmation of the former opinion with an exposition of the place of
Athanasius.
Surely we confess with Athanasius, that as the reasonable soul and flesh is
one man; so God and man is one Christ: that is, Christ is only one person,
although there be in him two natures: yet not that the person of Christ (if we
will speak properly) is constituted or made of both these natures, as of the
parts; as to the perfect co^stitution of man, no less the body, as an
essential part, then the soul must join together: seeing the person of Christ
was already, 1. Cor. 10.9 1. Pet. 3.19
and that whole and most perfect, before it was showed in the flesh: but the
person of man (as of Adam,) was none at all, until the foul was coupled with
the body: and since that nether the soul does assume unto it self a body, or
the body a soul, as the son of God assumed unto himself the seed of
Abraham, into unity of the same person: And further since the body and the
soul are two existences, as it is manifest in the creation of Adam, but man's
nature did never subsist by it self, but only in the person of the son of
God: so that very unjustly do some abuse this godly saying of the holy
man, for proof of their own dreams: For he which did show himself (and he
is the person of the Son of god) must needs differ from the flesh, wherein he
did show himself: and that not only before, but also after his
resurrection, and sitting at the right hand of his father: which (as says
Augustine) added a glory to the flesh, but took not away the nature.

VIII. How Christ is one only person, and that eternal and unchangeable but
there are in the same two natures: and how it is said to consist of them.
We therefore acknowledge and confess against Nestorius, that in Christ is
only one person, and that eternal, most simple and most perfect, and the
same shall remain for ever: namely the person of the everlasting son of
God. Further, that unto this eternal person, there came in time, not another
person, but another nature, namely man's nature: and the same not as a part of
that person, of whom it was taken, but a thing far different from it, and
yet taken unto it, into unity of the same. And therefore we thirdly confess,
that in one and the self same person of Christ, there is now two natures, the
divine and the human, in which we doubt not that the same does subsist, does
live and does work: for which cause also we fear not to speak thus, Christ
consists now of his divine nature, and his human being taken into the
unity of person: and that he is after a sort compounded of them both.

IX. How the two natures are united into one person without alteracion or
confusion, the properties and actions of either of them remaining whole and
distinct.
But we believe and confess that these two natures, are truly and
inseparably joined and united into one person of Christ: that yet we doubt
not, but each of them remains whole, and perfect, and the one truly distinct
from the other, yea and that they do hold the essential properties and
operations of each of them distinct: without all manner of confusion: so that
as the divine nature holding the properties, remains uncreated, infinite,
immeasurable, simply omnipotent and simply wise: even so the human nature
holding hirs remains created, comprehensible, and determined with certain
limitts: And as the divine nature has will and power, whereby Christ wills
and works, as god, such things as are of God: so has the human nature will
and power, whereby Christ as man, wills and works those things which are
of man: so far forth as Christ in that he is God, he wills not nor works
by human will or power: so neither as he is man, wills he or works he by
divine will or power: as it has bin learnedly determined by the fathers both
against Eutyches, and against Macarius. We therefore did always like well of
that saying of Leo the first, Epi. 10. c. 4
writing unto Flauianus about the same thing, where he says. He which is true
God, the same is also true man, and in this unity there is no untruth,
whereas there meet together the baseness of manhood, and the excellency of
the godhead. For as God is not changed by the partaking, so man (that is man's
nature in Christ) is not consumed by the dignity, for each form works with
communion of the other, their own property: namely the word works that
which is proper to the word, and the flesh performs that which is proper to
the flesh. Thus far Leo that learned man: which he afterward fetteth out by
examples, whereby it is plainly showed, that, as the natures are truly
united in Christ, yet remain distinct, and not confounded: so also were and
are the actions: for things which were proper to the word, the flesh did not
perform, but the word and that which was proper to the flesh the word
performed not, but the flesh. To raise again Lazarus from death, was proper to
the word: but to cry Lazarus, come forth, was proper to the flesh: yet both
those actions were united to the raising up of Lazarus, because they were both
one and in one Christ, and tend both to one purpose: and yet they were
distinct. Likewise to forgive sins was a proper actio^ to the divine nature,
but to say, thy sins be forgiven thee, was proper to the human nature. To
restore his sight, that was born blind was an action of his divine nature: but
to put clay upon his eyes, and to say, go and wash: was of the human
nature. Therefore this personal union, as it did not confound the natures, so
neither did it the actions, but kept them distinct: neither yet did it confound
the properties of the natures. For there be in one and the same person of
Christ these three things, Natures, the proprieties and faculties of the
natures, and the actions of them: and these proprieties of natures in Christ
are after the very same manner that the natures, and actions are. Therefore as
it is clear, that one nature passes not into another, nor one action is
confounded with another: so is it apparent that their proprieties are after the
same sort.

X. That it cannot be proved by the union of the natures, that there is a
true and a real changing of the divine proprieties, into the humane nature of
Christ.
For we allow that axiom or principle of the Fathers, against the Eutychians,
and Monothelities: namely that, they which have the same essential
proprieties, have also the same natures and essences: and they whose natural
proprieties are confounded, they have also their natures confounded. Which
being of it self true in all things, then is it especially true in God: in
whom the essential proprieties are indeed nothing else, but the essence it
self: that it must in very deed needs follow, if those essential proprieties
can truly and properly be communicated to any created substance, so that it
may be made such, as God is, as (for example) simply omnipotent; then the
divine essence it self ca^ also be communicated unto it: so that it might be
made equal to God in substance, and therefore consubstantiall with God, if it
might be made equal unto him, in power, or any other propriety. So herein is
admitted a double, and that a grecuous offense: One is, that when we
communicate truly and properly, to a creature those things which belong to
God, we make the creature equal to god. Neither can this exception serve to
shift it, that God has them of himself, but the human nature in Christ
takes them of the Godhead. For even the Son, is not of himself, nor has he
his divine essence of himself, but of the Father: yet is he notwithstanding
equal to the father and has the same nature with the Father. Another offense
is, that while we attribute divine and so infinite proprieties to the human
nature, as infinite power: we deprive the same of the own and proper
quality: not otherwise then the glory of the resurrection shall deprive our
bodies of the baseness of corruption, when it shall be truly communicated
unto them: and not otherwise then the clear light of the Sun, if it be let
into the air, which was lightened only with the light of a candell, it
extinguisheth that light. For if the infinite power works and does all
things: the finite shall be idle, and therefore none at all. But since this
heresy, even in our time, is largely and plainly refelled by many learned men:
we which do here exhibit this brief and simple confession of our faith to
the church of God, and to all posterity, will add no more to that which has
bin said.

XI. How great the force of this personal union is.
Mean while, we believe and confess the force of this union of the natures
in the person of Christ to be so great: that first, whatsoever Christ is or
does, according to the divine nature, that same, whole Christ, the Son of
man, may be said to be, or to do: and again, whatsoever Christ does or
suffers according to his humain nature, that same, whole Christ the son of
God, God himself, is said in the holy Scriptures, to be, to do, and to
suffer. As that: God (that is Christ, man and God) redeemed the church with
his blood: Act. 20.28
whenas the force of the redemption pertained to the god head, the shedding of
his blood only to the manhood. Yet both these actions are joined in one, and
each of them may be spoken alike of whole Christ: although they were and are
distinct, because the natures, although distinct yet are coupled together in
Christ's one person. Yea Christ the mediator, according to his humanity never
did or does any thing, wherein his divinity did not or does not work together:
and he never performed any thing according to his divinity, whereunto his
humanity was not assisting or consenting: that the Fathers very fitly called
all the works of Christ the Mediator (...), that is performed both by God and
man. Secondly as the force of the union is so great between the Father and
the Son, that he does nothing, nor communicates any good thing to the
world, but by the Son: even so the force of the personal union of the two
natures is so great, that no grace, no salvation, no life can come to us from
the deity, but by the humanity, apprehended of us by faith: so that he must
needs be coupled to the flesh of Christ, that will be partaker of eternal
life: whereunto that saying of Christ tends, Ioh. 6.53
unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, ye shall have no life in you.
Lastly it causes, that we cannot adore the deity in Christ, but we must
also therewith adore the human nature, and that the divine and human nature
must both be reverenced with one reverence only, according to that same: And
when he brings in his first begotten son into the vvoolde, Heb. 1.6
he says, and let all the Angels of God worship him: Him says he, that is,
whole Christ, God and man together: when as notwithstanding the human nature
of it self, and considered alone in it self nether can nor ought to be
worshipped: (for God alone is to be worshipped) but the union, (not
whatsoever) but this personal union of the divine nature with the human,
causes it. Therefore albeit that God dwell in the Saints: yet they are not to
be worshipped, nor prayed unto, as is Christ the man. Wherefore we confess
this union whereof we speak, to be of great force: yet we say that it is an
union which excludes al confusion and transfusion. For if the union between
the father, the son, and the holy ghost in one essence, (then which union
there can be none greater thought or imagined) do not take away the
distinction of the persons: then nether this union of the natures, and so of
the proprieties and actions in one person, can take away the distinction of
the same, and bring in confusion.

XII. Christ, in that he is man, is endued with a very great yet a determinate
power: and other gifts.
Finally we beleeue^, that Christ, like as in that he is God, he is simply
omnipotent, simply wise, and so it may be said of all his other attributes: so
in that he is man, he is endued of the father with a power and knowledge very
far yea almost infinitely exceeding the power and knowledge of all things
created either in heaven or earth: and yet a determinate or finite power: and
so it may be said of all his other gifts and virtues, love, prudence,
fortitude, justice, grace, truth and the rest, of which Esaias says, Esaias.
ii. 2 Ioh. 1.14 Luke 2.52
and the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him etc, And John, He was full of
grace, and truth. Also Luke, he grew in wisdom and favor with God and man.
For which cause also, he is said, Ioh. 3.34 Col. 2.3
in that he is man, to be exalted above all principalities and powers: also
that the spirit is given unto him above measure: also that in him lie hidden
the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Whereby it comes to pass, that he, in
that he is man, is ignorant of nothing, he is able to do all those things
which pertain to his office: yea and such things as cannot be performed of
any created substance, but only of God himself, may be done by him, by the
power of his deity, yet his human will always working therewithal evermore
by consent and as it were by desire: so that in all the actions of Christ, as
he is God, pertaining to our salvation, always his soul in some sort joins
it self thereunto by love, by desire, and will: as also in all things which he
did as man, the deity was always concurrent, yea even in his death and
passion: not that the deity suffered, but that it willed both the passion and
death of Christ, and added to his passion and death an infinite power, even to
cleanse us of our sins. To conclude, concerning the two natures in Christ,
and the union and proprieties of them, we believe whatsoever has bin
determined in the Nycene, Constantinopolitane, Ephesian, and Calcedonian
counscels, against Arrius, Apollinaris, Nestorius, and Eutyches: and in the
sixth Synod against the Monothelites.

XIII. Two kinds of actions in Christ: and all those things which we read
that he did and suffered, were done indeed according to the truth of the
matter, and not after a vain show or illusion.
Now from the person of Christ, and his natures, and the union of the natures,
to pass over peculiarly to his actions and his office: First we believe, that
as there are two true natures in Christ, whereof each has had and has her
true and essential proprieties, coupled together, even as the natures are also
united, but not confounded together: so there are two kinds of actions, which
our Lord Jesus Christ is said partly to have performed, and partly will yet
perform for our salvation: some whereof proceed from his deity, and some from
his humanity: and the same partly have bin, and partly are so joined
together, and yet distinct that each of their forms (as Leo speaks) always
works with communion of the other, The word, performing those things which
are of the word, and the flesh, those things which pertain to the flesh.
Moreover, as those things which Christ did and does by virtue of his divine
nature, were true and not fained deeds, (for he truly reconciled us to his
father, he truly forgiueth sins, and truly sanctifies, and regenerateth.)
So whatsoever we read that he did or suffered for us according to his humanity,
we believe that he did and suffered all those things truly and indeed, and
not only in a vain show and (as some speak) an appearance only.

XIIII. A declaration of the former opinion.
We believe therefore, that Christ, as he was truly conceived of the seed
of David, and truly borne true man, and did truly eat, drink, and perform
other human deeds: so also that he truly kept the law for us, 1. Pet. 4.1
Luc. 24.36
that he truly suffered in the flesh, and died, and rose again from the dead
in the same flesh, and ascended with his visible, palpable and humain body,
circumscribed with true and certain dimensions, into the true and created
heaven placed above all these visible heavens: Act. 3.21
and there of his free will works and abides: til such time as he return
again in the same visible body truly from heaven, to judge the quick and the
dead: and that he truly desires our salvation in heaven, and has a care over
us: and his spiritual and lively motion and feeling works in us, Ephesians. 1.22.
and 4.16
as his members: and lastly that he governs the whole church.

XV. The fruits of the obedience, passion, death and resurrection of Christ.
And we believe that Christ by his perfect obedience, deserved eternal life,
not only for himself but also for us: by his passion and death he satisfied
for our sins in his flesh: he redeemed us out of the hands of Satan, the
tirannie of death, and the bondage of sin: he reconciled us to God in
himself, and made us his beloved, that in him we might be deemed righteous
with the father: and by his resurrection and ascension into heaven he obtained
also for us both the resurrections, Apo. 20.5
(as John speaks) the first and the latter: and that in our name he took
unto himself possession of the heavenly in heritance: Ephesians. 1.20
and sits at the right hand of God, that is, has taken to himself power
over all things in heaven and in earth: So that, in as much as he is our
Mediator and is man, he has obtained of his father the second place: is
appointed head of the church, as well which is in heaven, as which is on earth:
that from him, and even from his flesh, is conuaied by his holy spirit,
whatsoever pertains to the quickening and to the spiritual life of us, to all
those, which as members are fastened unto him their head. And therefore we
acknowledge, believe and confess, that in Christ alone is placed our whole
salvation, redemption, justice, favor of God and eternal life: 1. Cor. 1.30.
according to that saying, Who of God is made unto us wisdom and
righteousness, and sanctification and redemption: Also, be is our peace: Also,
Ephesians. 2.14 Ier. 23.6 Ephesians. 1.7 Col. 1.19 1. Ioh. 5.11
Jehovah our righteousness, In him we have redemption by his blood,
forgiveness of sins: Also, it pleased the Father that in him all fullness
should dwell: Also, life is in his Son. And therefore we know that the
promise concerning redemption, which was made unto the first man, did receive
accomplishment in this other man Jesus Christ: so that whosoever will be made
partaker of it, he must needs be joined to his head Christ and be made a member
of him. For we have redemption and salvation not only by him, as a Mediator,
but also in him, as our head. This is our faith concerning Christ the redeemer,
his person, natures, and office, and the salvation of mankind fulfilled and
laid up in him.

XVI. Errors.
Therefore we condemn all as well the ancient as later heriticks, which ever
taught or teach the contrary: Arrius, Photinus, and namely Seruetus, and all
other ungodly men of that crewe, which deny the true deity of Christ: the
Cerdonians, the Marcionits, the Valentinians, the Maniches, the Priscillianits,
the Apollinarists, and the rest which do oppugn the true humanity of Christ:
some denying, that Christ came in the flesh, and that he had true flesh: and
do contend that he brought a fantastical body from heaven, or that he was
conceived of the elements, and not of the seed of Abraham, and that he was
not borne of a woman: others granting him indeed a true human flesh, but
yet depriving him of a reasonable soul, and substituting his deity in place
of his soul: Also the Neitorians, which denied the true union of the human
nature with the person of the Son, and did set down two persons in Christ,
and two Sons, the Son of God, and the Son of man. We likewise condemn
the Eutychians, which on the contrary side, as Christ is but one only person,
so they leave him but one nature only, namely the divine: teaching that the
human nature which he assumed, either is wholly turned into the divine: or else
so mingled and confounded with the divine, that they make no difference at al
in him, between the proprieties and actions of his divine and human natures.
We condemn also those which have proceeded from the former, as Macarius with
his followers, which make but one only will in Christ, namely the divine,
and therefore admit no proper action at al of the humane will in Christ. We
condemn likewise the Cerdonians also in this point, that they said, Christ
did not truly suffer, nor was truly dead, but that he fained a suffering, or
(as some heritiks say) he suffered and died putatiuelie: and therefore with
these we also co^de^ne, all which taught or teach the like things: as namely,
that Christ rose not again truly in the same flesh, wherein he died, but in
another of a diverse nature: or else, that if he rose in the same, yet that he
did not truly ascend into heaven, and carry the same into heaven, and
change the place of it. We also also with Hierome, Cyrill and other of the
fathers condemn the Originists, and their like who taught that Christ rose
again with a body like unto a spirit, most subtle, and in it own nature
invisible, and not subject to the senses: all those likewise as Jews and
Turks, which deny that the world is redeemed by the benefit of Christ's
death: Also all those lastly, which go about to prove our salvation to be
grounded upon any other thing, either in part, or altogether, then only in
Christ: and blasphemouslie do avouch that sins may be expiate or remitted
by any other sacrifices, then that one sacrifice of Christ only. For we
acknowledge one only redeemer Jesus Christ, without whom, as there is no
true God, so no true salvation: and one only sacrifice, the oblation or
offering whereof being once made, not only all the sins of the elect were
once washed away in the person of Christ, but also being yet continually
washed away even unto the end of the world are remitted to them that believe.

CHAP. XII. Of the true dispensation of the Redemption, the salvation, and life
which is laid up in Christ alone: and therefore of the necessary uniting, and
participation with Christ.
I. Salvation and eternal lise is laid in Christ, that from him it may be
communicated to be.
WE believe, that even as the sin of Adam, and death which followed the same,
remained not in Adam alone: but from him, as from the head of all mankind, it
did and does flow into all men, which by a common generation have bin and are
borne of him: so likewise that the righteousness of Christ, and the eternal
life due unto him, is not holden in Christ alone, but is derived into all
those, who by the regeneration of the holy spirit are made one with him, and
as true members are joined unto him as head of the whole church: and that to
this end and purpose Christ came in the flesh, and that all our salvation and
life consists in him, as in our head: that it may indeed be bestowed and
communicated upon all the elect of God which are united unto him.

II. The grace of redemption, and salvation is offered unto all men: but indeed
is not communicated, but to the elect, who are made one with Christ.
For we believe, Mar. 16.15 and 16
that although the grace of redemption, salvation and eternal life which God
bestows, be earnestly propounded and offered unto all men by the preaching of
the gospel (for, that very many are not made partakers of the same, it is
through their own fault:) yet is it not indeed communicated, but unto those,
who (being from the beginning chosen and predestinate unto it in Christ, as in
the head of all the elect, that they should be his members and so made
partakers of salvation) were afterward in their time called by the gospel,
endued with faith and so grafted into Christ and made one with him.

III. To the true participation of eternal life, how necessary this true
union or communion is with Christ.
For even as the branch can draw no lively sapp from the vine, Ioh.
15.1.2.3.4.5.6.7
nor the bough from the tree, nor the members any motion, sense, or life from
the head, unless, they be joined to the vine and tree, and these to the head:
even so cannot men receive any salvation or life from Christ, (in whom only
it consists) unless they be grafted into him, and coupled in a true and
real union, and being coupled do abide in him.

IV. That we cannot be united unto Christ, unless he first unite himself to
us.
Since therefore the whole participation of true righteousness, salvation, and
life, hangs and depends upon this most necessary communion with Christ,
and unto the same is referred, both the preaching of the gospel, and
administration of both the Sacraments, yea and the whole Ecclesiastical
ministry: Therefore what our faith concerning the same is, we purpose to
declare and witness to the whole church, as briefly and plainly as may be, in
certain assertio^s or positions, which after follow. Of the community with
Christ. 1. Ioh. 4.10
And first we believe that, as we therefore love Christ, as John says, because
he first loved us. and we come unto him by our spirit, because he came first
unto us, by his: and therefore we embrace him by faith, because he first, by
virtue of his spirit embracing us, stirs us up to faith: so we also can by
no means cleave and be united unto him, unless he first do join and unite
himself unto us. For the one is the cause of the other the first of the
latter. Wherefore we must pray unto him, Ioh. 14.23
that he will come unto us, and make his abode with us.

V. How many fold is the union of Christ with us, and of us with Christ, and
how they are ordered in themselves.
We acknowledge furthermore this conjunction of Christ with us, and likewise of
us with Christ to be threefold: one, which was once made in our nature:
another, which is daily made in the persons of the elect, which yet go
astraie from the Lord: and the last, which shall be likewise with the Lord in
our persons when they shall be present with him: namely when God shall be all
in us all. And the first is referred to the second, and the second to the third
eue^ as nature is ordained to grace, and grace to glory. For the first is also
made by assuming of our nature into the unity of the person (...) Of the word.
The second is made by assuming of our persons into grace, and into one
mystical body with him, and as Peter speaks, into participation of his
divine nature. The third shall likewise be made by assuming of us all into
everlasting glory with Christ. Neither do we doubt, but Christ purposed to
foreshew unto us the second by the first, and the third by the second: that by
that which was already made, we might be confirmed in the hope of that which
was to be made.

VI. As the first union was made that satisfaction might be made for our
sins: so the second is made, that we might be partakers of that
satisfaction.
We believe therefore (that letting pass those things which pertain not to
this matter in hand, we may come nearer) that the Son of God, by the
everlasting will of the Father, and therefore of himself also and of the holy
ghost, like as he took upon himself into unity of his person, our flesh, that
is, man's nature, conceived by virtue of the holy ghost in the womb of the
virgin, that he might in himself purge us of our sins, and in that flesh he
most perfectly fulfilled the law of God for us, being made obedient unto his
Father even unto death, and at the length the same flesh being offered up in
sacrifice for our sins, he obtained in himself eternal salvation for us: so
also, that he might make us partakers of this salvation, by sacrifice of his
flesh assumed for us, he was willing and accustomed to take unto him and to
knitt and join all his elect unto him, in another kind of union: namely in
such a coupling, as in it we may be united with him, though not into one
person, yet into one mystical body, whereof he is the head, and every one of
us members, and may be made partakers of his divine nature.

VII. As the first is made by virtue of the holy ghost, so is the second.
As we certainly know that as the Son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, in
the first union coupled unto himself our flesh and blood, by virtue of his
spirit: (for he was conceived man of the holy ghost, and therefore without
sin: for which cause also he is called, the man from heaven:) so also in the
second union he does communicate his flesh and his blood and his whole self
unto us, and in the same communion does knitt, join and incorporate us into
him, by the power of the same his spirit: that always the bond, where with
Christ is coupled with us, and we with Christ, might be the same spirit of
Christ: which, as it did bring to pass in the womb of the virgin, that the
son of god should be made flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bones: so also
by working in our hearts, and incorporating us into Christ it bringes to pass,
that we likewise, by participation of the body and blood of Christ, should be
bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh: especially seeing he stirs up
that faith in us, whereby we acknowledge and embrace him for true God and man,
and therefore a perfect Savior.

VIII. The union of us with Christ, is spiritual, yet so as it is true and
real.
So we believe, that this other union also, is almost no less (then the
former) so spiritual (if we may so speak) that yet it is true and real:
Because that by the spirit of Christ, we, allthough remaining on the earth,
yet are truly and reallie coupled with the body, blood, and soul of Christ,
reigning in heaven: so as this mystical body, consisting of Christ as the
head and of the faithful members, sometime is simply named Christ. So great
is the conjunction of Christ with the faithful, and of them with Christ: that
surely it may seem not to be said amiss, that as the first union was made of
two natures in one person: so this is made of many persons, as it were into one
nature: 2. Pet. 1.4 Ephesians. 5.30
according to those sayings, That ye should be made partakers of the divine
nature: And: We are members of his body, of his bones, and of his flesh.

IX. A confirmation of the former opinion, how straight this union is.
For like as the soul in a man, because it is one and the same, and no less
whole in the head, and in each member, then it is in all the body together, it
causes, that all the members do unite and join themselves into one body,
under one head: even so, by virtue of Christ's spirit, because it is one and the
same in Christ and in every of the faithful, it causes, that all of us knitte
spiritually together both in souls and bodies into one, we are all one and the
self same body with Christ our head: a body (I say) mystical and spiritual,
because it is joined and compact, by a secret band of the same spirit.

X. This union, because it is made by virtue of the holy spirit, cannot be
hindered by any distance of place.
Whereupon it follows that this true and real union (though spiritual) of
our bodies and souls, with the body and soul of christ, can be let by no
distance of place, though never so great: because that spirit is so mighty in
operation, as it reaches from earth to heaven, and beyond, and joins in one
no less strictly, the members of christ being on earth, with their head in
heaven sitting at the right hand of the Father, then the soul of a man joins
together the hands and legs and other members into one body with the head:
yea though that man were so great, that his head did reach unto the ninth
sphere, and his feet stand fast in the center of the earth. So great is the
virtue of the soul: the^ how great is that of the holy spirit, the true and
almighty God.

XI. The spirit, by whom this union is made, is given of Christ, to the
preaching of the gospel and administration of the Sacraments.
Furthermore we believe, that his spirit, whereby christ both coupleth
himself unto us, and us unto him, and joins his flesh with ours, and ours
with his: is communicated of the same christ, unto us, by his mere grace, when
and where and how he please, yet ordinarily at the preaching of the gospel and
administration of the Sacraments. Of which thing was a visible testimony,
which we read, how that they in the primitive church, which embraced the
gospel by faith, and were baptized in the name of christ or upon whomsoever
the hands were laid, besides the invisible grace received also diverse sensible
gifts of the spirit.

XII. This union, is the especial end of the gospel, and Sacraments.
Whereupon we do easily gather, which is the principal end, both of preaching
the gospel, and administering the Sacraments: namelye this communion with
christ the Son of God incarnate, who suffered and died for us, but now
reigns in heaven, and imparteth salvation and life to his chosen: which
communion was begone here, but was to be perfected in heaven: so that we, by
this true and real copulatio^ of our selves with his flesh and blood, and his
whole person, may also be made partakers of eternal salvation, which was
purchased by him, and still remains and abides in him.

XIII. That this union is not imaginary, nor made by participation of gifts
only, but by communication of substance.
But we call this present incorporation of us with christ, true, and real, and
substantial: that we may meet with that error, wherein some think that we
forge a certain imaginary and a false union: or that we mean no other true
union, but that which is made by participation of spiritual gifts, and grace
of christ, without communication of the substance of his flesh and blood.

XIIII. This union is made by no other means, but by the holy spirit, and by
faith.
But again, lest some might hereby falsely gather, that we conceive of such
an union, which is made with the flesh of christ being really here upon
earth, by some physical or natural touching, either gross or subtle, as al
sensible things are coupled with the senses, some in grosser; and some in a
subtiller manner: or which is made with the same flesh remaining in heaven, by
certain intelligible forms in the mind (as the philosophers speak) as all
things which are understood are united with the understanding faculty, which
apprehends the same by certain forms or images: Therefore we al adioyne the
means whereby this union and incorporation is made namely by the spirit of
christ, communicated unto us, really abiding in us, coupling us unto christ,
and working in us, that by a lively faith we may embrace christ.

XV. A confirmation of both these propositions, namelye, that this union is
essential, but is made only by the spirit, and our faith.
For both these things, namely that this copulation is essential, and made by
the only spirit of God, and by our faith, the holy scriptures, do plentifully
and plainly declare. Ephesians. 2.14.15 16
The Apostle writing unto the church at Ephesus, because all enmity being
taken away by christ, and the particion wall broken down, The jews and
Gentilles, two sorts of people much different, were reconciled to God and
between themselves, and were altogether ingrafted and renewed in christ by the
same holy spirit: therefore he doubted not to say, They were both built,
(not into one people, as it seemed he should have said) but, the better to
express how straight this union is, into one new man, in Christ. Wherefore
since all of us do live with one and the self same spirit, renewed as it were
in one and the same mind, and are joined together unto one and the self same
head christ: Ephesians. 4.1^
we are fittlie all of us together called one new man. And in the same epistle
describing this near and essential incorporation, he compares christ to the
head, and all us to the members, coupled and knit with the head by sinnues,
joints, and ligamentes: which take their life and motion from the head. And
nothing is more often used in the holy Scriptures then this similitude, that
hereby we might more easily and clearly understand, what, and how great, this
conjunction of all us is with christ, through his spirit, which dwells in all
people that are regenerate. For this cause the same Apostle, Ephesians. 2.21.22 23
compares Christ to the foundation, and all the faithful to stones (but yet
living stones, even as the foundation, that they may receive increase from him)
built upon the foundation: Mat. 16.18
In whom all the building coupled together, grows unto an holy temple in
the Lord, by the holy spirit: which thing also christ did, before the
Apostle, more then once, making himself the foundation, and the church the
building, surely grounded upon that foundation, and fastened by an inseparable
knot. Ioh. 15.1
To the same purpose, christ calls himself a vine, and us the branches,
which drawing life and sapp from the vine, do live, and bring forth good
fruits. The same is also showed by the similitude of the tree and the olive,
Romans 11.17
whereinto the faithful, as branches cut from the wild olive, are ingrafted,
that they may bring forth good olives: and are ingrafted by the holy spirit,
and by faith. Phil. 2.1 Ephesians. 3.17 Ephesians. 5.32
Whereupon, to the Philippians, it is called the communion of the spirit: And
Christ is said to dvvell in our hearts by faith. Nor is it obscure, that the
Apostle calls this incorporation of the church with christ, and of christ
with the church, and all the faithful, a marriage, after the custom of the
Prophets: whereby two shall be made one flesh. And two, said God, shall be one
flesh: And the Apostle, This (says he) is a great mystery: but J speak
concerning Christ and concerning the church. But that same is still very plain
and ready; which John writes of this union, and of the spirit by which the
same is made and known: 1. Ioh. 4.13
By this (says he) we know that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he
has given us of his spirit. Therefore he dwells in us, and we in him, by
the same holy spirit, which is both in him and in us. To this also beelongeth
that same, He which has not the spirit of Christ, the same is not his. But
the Apostle knows that all are christ's, which are true and lively members of
christ.

XVI. It is concluded, that this conjunction is essential, and made by the
only spirit of Christ and our faith.
Being persuaded therefore by these and other the like testimonies of holy
scriptures, we doubt not, but christ and his Apostles meant to signify unto us,
that the communion, which all we the faithful, as well small as great have with
christ, and with his flesh and blood, is true and real: and yet is made by no
other means, then by virtue and knitting of the holy spirit. And therefore
though it be secret, full of mysteries and spiritual, because it is made by the
spirit and by faith: Yet we ought not to doubt, but that through the same
spirit, it is as true and essential, as is that same between the husband and
the wife being joined into one flesh: between the foundation, and the stones
thereon builded: between the tree and the boughs: between the vine and the
branches: lastly between the members and the head, coupled together with
ligaments and sinues, living and working with the same soul: that no
conjunction with christ himself, can be made greater then this, while we live
in this mortal flesh.

XVII. A confirmation of this opinion by another similitude, and by very
philosophy.
Surely if there were in all men but one and the self same soul, it must
follow, that innumerable many persons, were only one man: Even as, of one and
the same essence being in the three divine persons, the holy writers do
conclude, that therefore there is one only God. Yea and the same would appear
much more plainly to be true, if those many men had but one only head, to
which they should be joined, and of which they should have their motion. What
marvel then, that the holy ghost be one and the same in all the godly,
which being also in Christ, does so really couple us with him, that we are one
body with him and amongst our selves: yea al of us one new man in the same head
Christ? for in those two respects, namely one, of the spirit, by whom; the
other of the head, Ephesians. 2.14
to whom we are joined, Paul said all the faithful were one nevve man.

XVIII. By the union with Christ, the participation of the benefits of his
death and resurrection is conveyed unto us.
Now of this communion with christ, there follows and depends the
participation of his benefits, and of salvation gotten, and remaining for us
in his flesh and blood: For as the branches can draw no nourishment from the
vine, nor the members from the head, nor the lively stones from the foundation,
unless they be really joined with their foundation, with their head, with the
tree, with the vine, and abide in them: so neither can we from Christ our head,
our foundation, our tree, our vine, unless we be truly grafted into him by
the holy ghost, and do abide in him, being made flesh of his flesh, and bone
of his bone. Wherefore they do us very great injury that say we therefore
deny the true participation of his flesh and blood, and that we affirm a
participation only of his gifts and benefits, because we will not admit, which
we cannot admit, that the true body of Christ does pass reallie through our
mouth into our bodies. As though it were not a true and an essential
communion, which is made by the holy ghost and by faith: since nothing can knitt
more strictly, diverse substances and natures into one, then the holy ghost:
As we see in the incarnation of the son of God: and in the creation of man
being compounded of the soul and the body. Surely if that communion, which
is made by the only spirit and by faith, with the flesh and blood of Christ,
were not able to save, unless he should also pass through the mouth into our
bodies: Christ had provided but slenderly for his church. Therefore in
receiving of the gospel, and in the profession of Baptism, he would have the
same communion to be made: 1. Ioh. 1.3 1. Co. 12.13
as John witnesses of the first, and the Apostle Paul of the second. This
therefore is our confession of the true communion with Christ in general, and
therefore of the dispensation of salvation and life which is in Christ.

XIX. Errors.
Wherefore we disallow their error, which teach that remission of sins, and
salvation is communicated to men, Opus operatum.
by the work wrought, as they call it, without faith, and without the true
uniting with Christ. Yea and we condemn their blasphemy, who labor to prove,
it may be done by works not commanded of god, but devised by men, and full of
superstition and idolatry: and theirs also, which setting naught by the
ministry of the word, do teach that salvation is communicated as well
without, as with the hearing of the word and receiving of the Sacraments: and
much more those, which affirm that al infants in their mothers wo^bes, as well
of faithful parents as of infidells, are made partakers of the benefit of
Christ.

CHAP. XIII. Of the gospel, and of the abrogation of the law by the gospel.
Seeing, first the gospel, and then the Sacraments, Baptism, and the Lords
Supper, are the outward instruments, whereby our redeemer the Lord Jesus
Christ, uses to offer and bestow the grace of redemption, and remission of
sins, upon the world, and to communicate himself unto us his elect, and to
incorporate us likewise into himself, and so to make us indeed partakers of
that salvation and life, which we have in him; Therefore we have purposed,
briefly and plainly to declare unto Gods church, what our faith is concerning
the same.

I. The gospel what it is.
Concerning the gospel therefore, according to the signification received and
used in the church, we believe, that it is nothing else, but the heavenly
doctrine concerning Christ, preached by Christ himself, and the Apostles and
contained in the books of the new Testament, bringing the best and most
gladsome tidings to the world: namely, that mankind is redeemed by the death
of Jesus Christ the only begotten son of God: so that there is prepared for all men, Mat. 3.2
if they repent, and believe in Jesus Christ, a free remission of al their
sins salvation, and eternal life. Wherefore it is fitly called of the
Apostle, Ephesians. 1.13.
The Gospel of our salvation.

II. The gospel was promised by the Prophets, but published by the Apostles.
For albeit, that this mystery, even from the first beginning of the world,
was revealed unto the fathers, and that the Prophets spoke of the same: yet
that which they preached, was rather Euangelical promises, and those reserved
among the Jews, then the gospel it self, which was to be published to all
nations: since they foretold of a thing which was to come, but did not declare
the thing present, or that was past: Romans 1.2 1. Pet. 1.10
as the Apostle teaches to the Romans, and Peter in his first epistle.

III. As Well the fathers were saved by faith which they had, in the promises
concerning Christ the redeemer, as we which believe in the gospel.
Mean while we doubt not but as well the fathers, Romans 4.3
who believed in those Evangelical promises, of Christ which was to come, and
should bruise the serpents head, were saved, Heb. 1.10
as we also by our faith in the gospel, telling us that Christ is come, and
that he has redeemed the world, are saved: as the Apostle, both in other
places and in the epistle to the Romans does largely teach us, concerning
Abraham: and to the Hebrews, concerning all the other so that it is a foul
blasphemy, to say, that only earthly matters were promised to the fathers, and
that they received only such, and not heaue^lie, as remission of sins and
eternal life. For look what the gospel is unto us, properly received: the
same were the Evangelical promises to them: Romans 1.16
namely the power of God to salvation unto every believer.

IV. The doctrine of the gospel, touching the substance, is most ancient, and
eternal.
Whereby we know, that the doctrine of the gospel, touching the substance
thereof, is not new, but most ancient, and preached unto the Fathers, even
from the worlds creation: so as John not unfitly called the gospel, Apo. 14.6
an everlasting gospel.

V. The parts of the gospel, how many, and what.
Furthermore, there are three especial points in the gospel, which we are
called upon to perform: Repentance toward God, Faith in our Lord Jesus
Christ, Act. 20.21 Mar. 1.4 Mat. 28.10
and a care to observe whatsoever Jesus Christ has willed and commanded.

VI. A declaration of the former opinion.
The Gospel therefore, which sets out unto us Christ with the whole favor
and mercy of God, with the purging and forgiveness of sins, and with the whole
salvation and eternal life, laid up in him, requires only these three
things. First that being touched with an earnest grief of our whole life ledd
amiss, we might desire from our heart to have our minds, and so all our
affections changed and renewed into the obedience of the divine will: and that
we might earnestly pray and do our best endeavor, that it might be so:
Secondly that, embracing Christ by a true faith, withal his treasures, we
might believe firmly, and without any wavering, that all our sins are for
ever pardoned, of the favor and mercy of god through Christ alone, and we
received into grace, made the children of God, and heirs of everlasting life:
Lastly, that being thus persuaded of the free and eternal salvation through
Jesus Christ, we should thence foreward labor by all means, to observe
whatsoever Christ has commanded, to the glory of God, and profit of our
neighbor: so, as faith do evermore accompany us to the end, whereby we
believe, that howsoever in this new obedience, we err or do offend, yet for
Christ's sake it shall not be imputed to us: but contrariewise, by the perfect
obedience, justice, and holiness of christ imputed unto us, our imperfect
obedience shall be perfected, and shall be taken and reputed for most perfect in
the sight of God. And to three things are all the precepts of christ
referred, namely, that renouncing all ungodliness and worldly desires, we
should live in this world, (in respect of our selves) soberlie, (in respect of
our neighbor) justly, (in respect of God) godly: Tit. 2.12.
looking for that blessed hope, and the coming of the glory of the great God.
This we believe to be the sum of those things which christ requires of us
in the doctrine of the gospel: and therefore that they be true gospellers,
and christians indeed, that bend their whole study and care hereunto.

VII. Jn what things especially the Gospel differs from the Law.
And now of that which is already said, it appears, that we do not
confound the Law with the Gospel. For albeit we confess that God is author
as well of the Law as of the gospel, and that of it self, it is as well holy,
just, Exo. 20
and good, as the gospel: Romans 7.12
yet we hold that there is no small difference betwixt them both: not only
because the Law was delivered to the Israelites alone, and the gospel
pertains to al people and nations: and also, not only because that was for a
time, and to continue but till christ, and the gospel is everlasting: and also
not only because, that was delivered by Moses, and declared by the Prophets,
and the gospel was brought by christ, and published to the whole world by the
Apostles: But indeed and most especially for these causes: First, because the
matter of the law, is only commandementes with irreuocable curses thereunto
joined, if they be broken never so little: It has also promises, not only of
earthly but also of heavenly blessings: but al of them with the condition of
perfect obedience, and none merely free. But the gospel is properly a happy
message, setting before us gratis christ the redeemer, forgiving sins and
saving us: yea and requiring nothing at our hands for the obtaining of life
everlasting, but a true faith in christ, which faith cannot be without true
repentance, nor without a care to do the will of God, that is, to live so
berly, justly, and godly, as is above declared. Moreover because the law did
not perform, that which it required; nether had it power whereby to save, and
therefore was insufficient, and a killing letter, the minister of wrath and
death, more provoking then taking away sin: But the Gospel, what it requires,
the same it performs, and therefore, whatsoever it offers, the same also it
truly imparteth unto us: For as much as the holy ghost is by it powerful in
the elect, at the preaching of the Gospel: stirring up in them that true
faith, whereby they apprehend christ offered, and with him eternal life: For
faith is by hearing of the Gospel: Romans 10.17
but obedience is not by hearing of the Law: because the holy spirit gives
no man strength to the hearing of the Law, by which he might observe the
same, as he stirs up faith in the elect, to the hearing of the gospel. For
which cause, as the Law is called a killing letter, so is the Gospel called a
quickening spirit: and therefore is a true and forcible instrument to
salvation, unto every believer. Whereon also follows the third difference:
namely, that the Law was not written in their hearts, but remained written
only in tables, and therefore did not change men: But the Gospel is written
by the holy ghost in the hearts of the elect, and therefore it changes and
renueth them, 2. Cor. 3.18
because it is the instrument of the holy ghost, to sanctify and to save us.

VIII. The Law of Moses is partly taken away, and partly not taken away by the
Gospel.
Of this which we have said, it also plainly appears, what our faith is of
the abrogation of the law by the gospel. First we believe, that in the
gospel (so far forth as it declares all things, which in the old Testament
did figuratively foreshew of Christ, to be fullfilled in this Jesus, as is
said before in the 11. chapter) we are taught, that the law of Moses
concerning ceremonies, sacrifices, and all Moses outward worship are simply
abrogated: according to that saying of the Apostle, Heb. 9.10 Ioh. 1.17
that all these things were enjoined until the time of reformation: and that,
The Law was given by Moses but the truth came by Jesus Christ. Moreover so
far forth as the gospel is the instrument of the holy spirit, whereby we are
ingrafted and united to Christ, and made partakers of redemption and salvation
(as is said before in the 12. chapter.) So far also we confess that the moral
law, touching the curse against the transgressors, is abrogated by the gospel
of Christ: according to that of the Apostle: Romans 8.1
There is no comdemnation to them that are in Jesus Christ: where of this is a
token, that they walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. But now so
far forth as the doctrine of the Gospel requires our repentance, and the
holiness of life, and that we live soberly, righteously, and godly: therein it
takes not away the law concerning ma^ners: for it is wholly consonant and
agreeable with the doctrine of the gospel of eschewing vices and following
virtue. Lastly, in as much as Christ in his gospel did not take away the
politic laws of the nations, which were not contrary to the law of nature:
Therefore we think it lawful and free for any governors to bring among
their subjects such politic laws as were delivered to the people of Israel,
and by the same, (then which none are more just) to rule and govern the
people. Therefore they do exceeding great injury to the Gospel of Christ,
that say it troubles or overthrows commonwealths. This is our faith
concerning the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

IX. Errors.
We condemn therefore the Antinomi, and whosoever disallow the moral law, and
cast the same out of their churches as contrary to the gospel, or nothing
appertaining to christians, and do reprove those magistrates which labor to
bring in Moses political precepts among their people.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the sacraments of the new Testament.
BEcause God to make perfect that communion with Christ, wherein consists the
whole participation of salvation, would not only use the word of the gospel
by it self alone, but also other external signs applied and joined to the
word, of which two consists a Sacrament: Therefore after our confession of
the gospel, we have also adjoined our confession of the Sacraments, and the
same brief and plain, and agreeable to the holy Scriptures and chiefest
articles of our christian faith.

I. What we mean by the name of a Sacrament.
We know that a Sacrament is properly a holy covenant or oath and promise, on
both sides, that is, made between God and his people, not simply, but
established and confirmed by sacred rites and ceremonies: as it manifestly
appears in the Sacrament of circumcision between God and Abraham: and
between Christ and us in Baptism, which succeeded the circumcision. Therefore
Sacrament is often taken of the Fathers for that whole action, either of
Baptism, or of the Lords Supper: wherein there goes before, a promise on both
sides, holily confirmed with external rites and seals or signs, and even with
the blood of Christ. But afterward by a Synecdoche, they understood by the
name of Sacrament, only the rites, and signs added to the word. And this last
signification has been much used in the church. We therefore call a
Sacrament, according to the signification received in the church, not the word
alone, nor the element alone, but the element, water, or bread and wine, joined
with the word of the gospel according to Christ's institution: according to
that same of Augustine. To the element comes the word, and then it is a
Sacrament.

II. Sacraments, of what things they be Sacraments.
But because every Sacrament is a Sacrament of some thing, this thing we say
is that which is me^t in the word of the gospel, namely, the grace of God in
Christ, or rather Christ himself with grace and salvation placed in him. For
him does the gospel wholly propound or set out unto us: and unto his communion,
as the word, so the Sacraments also were instituted, and do draw our minds by
their signification: and therefore that which is outwardly given, we call it a
sign of him, which is to be received in wardly: and that which is done
without, we call his seal, which the holy ghost works inwardly in our hearts.

III. Of what parts a Sacrament consists.
Hereby also we know, of what parts properly consists a Sacrament, namely of
the word and outward sign, but so as they be referred to the thing signified
and represented by them, and whereof they are a Sacrament. For that whereof any
thing is a Sacrament, can not be the Sacrament it self, nor part of the
Sacrament: since every Sacrament is a Sacrament, of some other thing then it
self. Mean while we do not simply separate the thing it self from the
Sacrament, neither do we deny but among the fathers, and most of the godly
and learned writers, under the name of Sacrament, is comprehended that it
self, whereof any thing is a Sacrament: as by the name of Baptism not only is
understood the outward washing with water, and the word, but also is contained,
the very inward cleansing of the conscience from sin and regeneration.
Therefore we embrace that saying of Ireneus, of the Lords supper, that it
consists of an earthly matter, and a heavenly: Neither do we our selves use
to forbear such kind of speeches when we talk of the sacraments: but yet in
this sense, not that it is properly a part of the sacrament, since it is rather
that, to the participation whereof the sacraments do bring us: but that the
sacrament has a mistical relation unto it: and by the band or knott of this
relation, the earthly matter is coupled with the heavenly. And thus do we
reconcile many sayings of the learned writers and of the Fathers, which seem
to have some diverse and contrary meanings, when indeed their opinions are one
and the same every where: most of them calling sacraments simply by the names
of signs, figures, tokens, tipes, antytipes, forms, seals, sealinges,
ceremonies, visible words, and such like names: others, saying it consists
of an earthly matter and a heavenly: which how it is to be understood, we
declared even now: but all often calling the sacraments, by the names of those
things, whereof they be sacraments, after the use of the holy Scriptures: when
as notwithstanding all men have meant and professed in the name of sacraments,
these three things, the word, the signs added to the word, and the things
where of they are signs.

IV. Causes, why the Lord would have the external signs added to the word of
the gospel, and why they are called visible words.
We believe also and freely confess, that these visible signs, by Gods
institution, were added and ought to be added to the word, for a more full and
firm confirmation of the word, in our minds: since it is even unto such an
end, that every where among all nations they use to put their seals to
writings and to testaments. Which is also the cause why Augustine calls the
outward signs and the things object to our senses, visible words: because
indeed they were instituted to this end, and added to the word, that they
might do that which the word does: that is, that the same which the word
signifies to our ears, the signs may represent to our eyes and other senses:
and so might confirm the word and promises of God: and as by the word faith is
stirred up in our minds, so also by the outward signs, as it were sealed with
seals it might be more thoroughly confirmed and increased: and lastly, that, as
the word, so also the holy signs be instruments of the holy ghost, by which
we are brought unto that communion with Christ, and do conioyne therein. And
we have no doubt, but all this was instituted of God for our infirmity and
ignorance, and for the weakness of our faith: that the same might be helped not
only by the word, but also by the vi^ible signs; by which faith properly we
take hold on Jesus Christ, and grow together in him.

V. Where the words of the institution are not rehearsed, there is no
sacrament: and therefore without use they be nothing, but as they are in their
own nature.
But as we believe, that the signs are added to the word, not for
superstition, but for greater confirmation of our faith, so also that the word
in administration of the sacraments is necessary, not to charm us, but to
stir up faith in us: so that where the words of the insutution are not so
rehearsed, that they may be heard, and understood, whereby faith may be stirred
up: there we deny it to be a ttue sacrament: and therefore we affirm, that
the signs without the lawful use, be not Sacraments, but only the same
things which they are of their own nature, and nothing else. For the signs
are translated, only by the word, from their common use to the holy use: that
which many call to be consecrated and hallowed: and thereby is made a
sacrament, even as Augustine said, The word comes to the element, and the
sacrament is made, it comes indeed, that it may be understood and believed.

VI. That Sacraments be not simple marks, or bare signs.
Therefore we believe, that these sacramental signs be not simple marks which
only do sever us from other people, that are not of the true church; or mere
tokens unto us of our christian society; or whereby we should profess our
faith openly, and give thanks to god for our redemption: but that they are the
instruments by which (while the actions and benefits of Christ are represented
unto us) they are called to our remembrance, his promises are sealed, and our
faith stirred up, the holy ghost also does ingraft us to Christ, and does keep
us being ingrafted, and makes us daily to grow up more and more into one with
him: and that being endued with a greater faith toward God, and earnester
love toward our neighbor, and a mortification of our selves, we might lead a
life even like (so far as might be) to the life of Christ, in spiritual joy
and gladness: till the time when we shall live with him in heaven most holily
and blessedlie for ever.

VII. The sacraments of the new conenant, of what sort.
We also confess with Augustine, De doct. chr lib. 3. cap. 9
that the sacraments delivered by Christ, are in number few easy to be done.
and most worthy to be understood. Few in number, because they are only two,
Baptism, and the Lords Supper: easy to be done, for there is nothing either
in Baptism or the Lords supper, which may not easily be performed and
received, nothing troublesome, nothing unpleasant, or strange unto a man.
Lastly most worthy to be understood, because, although the things which are
seen, are of no value, yet those things which are signified, which are set
down to be thought on, considered and understood in the mind, are most
reverend, heavenly, divine, and pertaining to eternal salvation.

VIII. To the worthy receiving of the sacraments, there is need of
understanding and faith.
And thereby also we know, that the sacraments to the worthy receiving of
them, do require an action and attention of the mind and a faith in us:
whereby we understand what is signified and offered to us by them, and
apprehend it with a mind settled in faith: even as Christ teaches, Luc. 22.19
1. Cor. 11.24
where he says of his supper: do this in remembrance of me, And the Apostles
waighing and considering these words of Christ does largely expound them. To
which purpose is also that, Lift up your hearts. For there be set before us
matters most reverend, heavenly, and divine, to be understood in the mind, and
received by faith.

IX. That the matter of the Sacrament is seriously offered to all men, though
all do not truly receive the same, but only the chosen faithful.
And although all men come not to the receiving of the sacraments, with faith,
and true understanding; yet as the signs are given to all that profess
Christ, so also we believe, that the things signified by the sacraments, are
seriously offered unto all by Christ: and therefore that nothing is diminished
of the substance or soundnes of the sacrament, by the unbelief of them that
receive the signs only: for it depends wholly upon the institution of Christ,
and the truth of his words.

X. While the sacraments are ministered, the spirit of Christ is powerful in
the faithful: and therefore they not only receive the signs, but also
participate in the things signified.
But albeit the spirit of Christ be not powerful in all men, on whom the
Sacraments are bestowed, (as it is neither, to all unto whom the word is
preached, and that by their own fault, because they have not understanding and
faith:) yet we believe that in the faithful elect of God he is powerful: in
as much as they being endued with faith by the hearing of the word, and
confirmed more and more in the same by the receiving of the sacraments, are
brought by the same spirit into the communion of Christ, and made to join and
grow together with him therein: and therefore we confess, that these men in
Baptism are truly washed and purged from sin by virtue of Christ's blood,
and in the Lords supper they eat of Christ's true flesh and drink of his true
blood.

XI. That Christ is both author, and true disposer of the sacraments.
And we acknowledge, as one author so one true disposer of the sacraments,
even our Lord Jesus Christ: which gives the outward signs by men his
ministers, but he himself properly and truly imparteth unto them, the matter
of the sacraments effectually by himself, or by his holy spirit: like as John
the Baptist said, J baptize with water, but Christ will baptize with the
spirit. And therefore as it is lawful for no man to institute new sacraments:
so also can no man boast that he truly and properly cleanses consciences of
sin, or that he feeds men with the true body and blood of Christ: but
only (as they say) ministerially, or, as a minister.

XII. The sacraments are not polluted to the faithful by the vices of the
ministers.
Now if Christ alone, be not only the true author of sacraments, but the
disposer also: we easily gather, that the sacraments are not polluted to others
that be faithful by the vices of the ministers, whose labor he uses: Tit.
1.15
but that notwithstanding they may receive them worthily, and be made partakers
of the thing signified and offered by the sacraments. For to the clean all
things are clean: Ephesians. 3.17
and Christ with all his riches, dwells in the hearts of the faithful.

XIII. That grace is not tied to the Sacraments.
By these foundations are we confirmed, in the opinion received among all
godly men, that the grace of God is not tied to the sacraments, so that who so
receives them, must needs receive also grace, that is, the thing signified and
offered by the sacraments, although he want faith: as though a man could obtain
the matter of the sacrament by the work wrought (as they call it.) Mar. 16.16
Act. 8.13
For Christ said not simply whosoever shall be baptized, he shall be saved, but
he first adds, whosoever believes. And Simon Magus he received the
sacrament of Baptism, but he obtained not the matter of Baptism, when as yet
(as Peter witnesses) he was wrapped in the most bitter gaul of sin and in
the bond of iniquity, and devilish malice: and therefore he had no part in the
kingdom of Christ. Many also (as says Augustine) do eat the bread of the
Lord, but not the bread the Lord. For as they that hear the gospel are not all
made partakers of the forgiveness of sin declared therein, unless they repent
them of their former ill-life; and do believe in Christ: so neither do they
obtain those things, which are represented and offered by the sacraments,
because they receive the same sacraments, unless they have also true
repentance and faith.

XIV. By the unworthiness of the receivers, the virtue of the Sacraments is
not taken away, nor weakened.
Neither yet do we thereby weaken or take away the virtue of the sacraments,
and the force and power given unto them of God, which we acknowledge to depend,
not upon the unworthiness of the ministers, or receivers but on the faith and
virtue of Christ the institutor of the sacraments. For even as the gospel does
keep unto it self always, both the signification, though it be not
understood of all, and the power of giving all things which it offreth, though
all be not made partakers thereof: even so the sacraments, those visible
words do the like: namely, that as the gospel of it self, is the power of
God to salvation, but indeed to none but the believers: So also the sacraments
are always the working instruments of the holy ghost to salvation, howsoever
none receive this powerful working, but the true believers. For which cause,
the Apostles feared not to call them all which were baptized, 1. Cor. 6.11
holy, renewed, righteousse, although they knew, that among them were many
hypocrites. For by such speeches they declared the great power given by God unto
the sacraments, and what we should believe they would work, unless perhaps our
hypocrisy did hinder them. In which sense if a man say, that who so do eat
the bread of the Lord, they also are made partakers of the Lords body, that is,
it cannot stand with the virtue of the sacrament, and with the virtue of the
author and distributor thereof, but who so be partakers of the sacrament, must
needs also be partakers of the thing signified and offered by it: such a manner
of speech we cannot disallow: so that such expositions might be added, by which
the people might be instructed, and those false opinions, conceived before of
the work wrought might be drawn out of their minds.

XV. Betvveene the signs and the matters is a sacramental union, and what it
is.
And although we say, that the matter of the sacraments is not tied to the
sacraments, or included in them, namely either physically or locally, or
corporally, or also by any knott or band, as though God had simply promised
the very matters themselves to every one that should receive the sacraments,
howsoever they lacked faith: so that he were bound to communicate them unto
unrepentant and unbelievers: yet we take not away all conjunction and
copulation of the thing signified, with the signs. For we acknowledge and
confess a sacramental, that is, such an union, as is agreeable to a
sacrament, with the things of the Sacrament. And this sacramental union
consists in a certain mistical and holy relation: namely in as much as the
signs do signify the things, and offer them to be received: and the things
are signified by the signs, and are given to be received: no otherwise the^
the union is, between the word signifying and exhibiting, and between the
things by the word signified and exhibited. But the conjunction, as well that of
the sacraments, as this of the word with the things themselves, hangs or
depends upon the will and counsel of God the institutor: who when he
instituted the preaching of the gospel, and administration of the sacraments,
did institute them to this end and purpose (as is declared;) both that we,
hearing the word, and seeing and receiving the signs, should by and by lift
up the eyes of our mind to the things signified by them: and being offered
unto us, should receive them with the hands of faith: and might indeed be
united unto Christ, whom they preach unto us, and show as it were with the
finger, by their signification. Therefore as the coniunctio^ of us with Christ,
is al full of mystery, as the Apostle teaches in the 5. to the Ephe. So also
we think this union both of the word, and sacraments, with the things whereof
they be signs and sacraments, to be mystical and spiritual.

XVI. A definition of the sacraments.
We judge therefore sacraments (in few words to comprehend many things) to
be external signs and such as are object to our senses: joined to the word
of the gospel, according to Christ's institution, for our ignorance and
infirmity, and the more earnestly to stir up and confirm our faith: by
which all men are seriously called to the true and real communion with Christ,
and so with his flesh and blood, and consequently to the parking of all the
good things which are in Christ, and which are signified and offered by the word
and by the signs: and as for the elect and faithful they are indeed drawn by
the holy spirit inwardly working in their minds, that they being incorporated
to Christ may accomplish and make up the body of the whole church,
preordained of the Father, to his own praise and glory, and their eternal
blessedness.

XVII. The sacraments of the old Testament, what in general they had in them,
common with ours.
Touching the sacraments of the old Testament, there is no cause we should
speak much seeing they are quite abrogated: only this, that the Fathers had the
same God, the same promises, the same mediator, the same spirit of
regeneration, the same faith and hope: and the same sacraments in respect of
the substance, which is Christ: howsoever in ceremonies they were diverse from
ours: especially since theirs were delivered to them for the same end and
purpose, for which ours were delivered to us: namely, that they might be
confirmed in the faith of Christ, and be joined in communion with him.
Whereunto belong those sayings. The lamb slain from the beginning of the
world: Apoc. 13.8 1. Cor. 10.4 Heb. 13.8
Also, All did drink of the same rock, and the rock was Christ: And, Christ
yesterday, to day, and for ever.

XVIII. There be only two sacraments of Christ's church.
And we acknowledge two sacraments, which are properly to be called by that
name and which have ever bin common to the universal church of Christ: Baptism
and the Lords supper: of which the one properly belongs to the beginning of
the communion with Jesus Christ, the other, to the increase: whereupon also the
one is called the water of regeneration, the other, the holy banquett and
supper.

XIX. Errors.
Wherefore we cannot allow of those, who will have sacraments to be there,
where no word is heard, but only the element seen: nor those which distinguish
not the matter of the sacrament from the sacrament, but will have it come into
the mouth, as well as the sacramental sign: whenas the matter of the
sacrament, is that, which the sign, that is object to our senses, makes to
come into our thought, not to fall into our hands or mouth: neither those
likewise, which do consider nothing in the sacraments, but what they see with
their eyes: or which will have them only tokens or badges, by which we are
discerned from other people, or bare signs, and not the instruments of the
holy ghost, by which he works mightily in us, and confirms us in the
communion of Christ. And we condemn them which institute new sacraments, other
then them, which Christ instituted: and those, which tie the grace of God, and
the things signified by the sacraments, to the sacraments: so that every one
which receives the sign, should be said ever to receive truly the thing it
self.

CHAP. XV. Of Baptism.
BEsides that, which we have spoken of the sacraments in general, we also
especially believe and confess of Baptism, thus.

I. Baptism what it is, and what are the effects of it.
Baptism, M^t. 28.1^.
first is a sacrament of the new covenant: wherewith all men which either
having professed true repentance of their finnes, do also profess faith in
Jesus Christ, and so in God the father, Cor. 7.14
the son, and the holy ghost, or at least, are believed to appertain unto
the covenant, Act. 19.5. 1. Cor. 6.19
through the faith of their parents: but especially they, which truly do
belong unto the covenant, as being now incorporated into Christ are sealed by
him; that they should be no longer their own men, but his, by whom they are
called into the society of the covenant, and consequently into one body with
him and all the Saints, and into participation of all spiritual and heavenly
good things: Ephesians. 1.12 Ephesians. 5.26 Apoc. 5 Tit. 3.5 Romans 6.4 Mar. 1.4
and are cleansed by this Baptism, as the water of regeneration, from al their
sins, by virtue of Christ's blood: and buried into the death with Christ: that
as he rose from death by the favor of the Father, so we should walk in
newness of life: whereupon it has bin usually called the sacrament of
repentance for the remission of sins, the sacrament of faith, the seal of
the covenant, the water of regeneration, the washing away of sins, the
sacrament of new life.

II. The virtue of Baptism takes place only in the elect, and they only are
baptized with water, and with the holy ghost.
But though all these things are said of baptism, and are truly attributed
unto it, as to the holy ghostes instrument to work these things, and that
therefore all which are baptized, are truly said to be made and to be such
sacramentally: yet we believe, that it is not indeed and really performed, but
only in the elect, which are endued with Christ's spirit: since they only do
believe rightly, and do truly belong unto Christ, and to his mystical body:
And therefore, that all are baptized indeed with water, but the elect only
with the spirit: and all do receive the sign, but not all are made partakers
of the thing signified and offered by baptism, but only the elect.

III. Of what parts the whole sacrament of Baptism consists.
And we believe, that unto the making of the whole sacrament of Baptism, those
two things are sufficient which Christ instituted, namely, the simple element
of water, wherewith the parties are washed, either by dipping in, or by
sprinkling upon: and that form of words, wherewith Christ taught them to
baptize, that is, In the name of the father, the son, and the holy ghost:
nether did the Apostles as we are persuaded, use any form of words, or added
any thing else unto the water.

IV. The young infants of the faithful, are to be baptized.
We believe with the whole ancient church, that unto the sacrament of Baptism,
are to be admitted not only they that are of discretion, which having
professed repentance of their sins, do also profess faith in Christ: but
also the young children of such, since they are to be accounted to belong to the
covenant, 1. Cor. 7.14
(as the Apostle says,) The children of the faithful are holy: especially
seeing God has no where altered that commandment which he gave to Abraham, for
the marking of all, with the figne of the covenant, even the children of the
faithful: Mat. 19.14
nay he said, Suffer little children to come unto me; for of such is the
kingdom of heaven.

V. How far forth Baptism is necessary in the Church, and how needful to
every one to salvation.
We believe that Baptism is altogether necessary in the church, as a
sacrament instituted of Christ: and which the church cannot be without, so that
where it is not used, if it may be used, there we acknowledge no church. And
we think it so necessary unto every one to salvation: that, yet
notwithstanding if one dye not washed with the water, for defect or want of a
minister, and not upon contempt; we believe, he is not therefore condemned, or
wrapped in eternal destruction. For the children of the faithful are
therefore saved, because they are holy and under the covenant of God: and men
grown are saved, because they believe in Christ with a true faith, which
indeed can suffer no contempt of the commandments of Christ.

VI. Baptism once rightly received, ought not to be taken again.
Furthermore we believe, that as circumcision was done only once in the flesh:
so the Baptism of water, which succeeded circumcision, Col. 2.
being once rightly and lawfully received, ought not again to be repeated.
We say that it is rightly and lawfully administered when first the doctrine of
the gospel, concerning the true God, Christ and his office, goes before
according to Christ's institution: and then the parties are baptized with water,
and that of a lawful minister, in the name of the father, the son, and the
holy ghost. Romans 6.4
For Christ also once died, and was buried; and we are baptized into his
death, and are buried with him by Baptism: Act. 19.5.
neither do we read that the Apostles ever did rebaptize any: except those
which Paul did baptize, who had not bin rightly baptized.

VII. The virtue of Baptism is perpetual.
Now although we come but once to the sacrament of baptism: yet we hold,
that the matter of this sacrament and the virtue thereof is perpetual: which
virtue is nothing else but the very planting into Christ, and so the
participation of his benefits, the washing away of sins, and regeneration,
which daily more and more is made perfect by the holy ghost. For the Apostle
says, Ephesians. 5.26.27
that he cleanses the church by washing of water through the word, that he
might make it unto himself a glorious church, without spott or wrinkle. 1.
Ioh. 1.7
And his blood cle^seth daily from all sin. And therefore we think and
believe that the faithful being content with once receiving of the sacrament,
ought daily to be occupied in remembrance of it, and to weigh in their minds,
to what end they were baptized, or what they have obtained of God by baptism,
and what also they promised to God therein: whereby they may the more be
confirmed in faith, and grow up into the communion with Christ, and be made
more careful of performing their duties. For baptism is not bestowed on us,
for remission of original sin only, or our sins past: but of all the
offenses of our whole life: eue^ as the pulling out of the waters is a sign of
a new life, not for one day, but for all our time: as the Apostle says, Romans
6.4
We are buried with him (ever) into his death by baptism: that as Christ rose
from death by the glory of his father, so we should (always) walk in newness
of life. We were once washed with outward water: but the blood of Christ is a
continual stream, washing and cleansing us daily from our sins.

VIII. By whom baptism ought to be administered.
We believe also, that holy baptism is to be administered by those: by whom
also the gospel is preached: For to whom Christ said, Go into the whole
world, and preach the gospel, to them he also said, Baptizing them, in the
name of the father, and the son, and the holy ghost: teaching them to
observe, whatsoever is commanded you.

IX. Errors.
Therefore we condemn all, as well ancient as late herisies, which have at
any time been scattered against the sound doctrine of baptism: Seleucus and
Hermias, who baptized with fire: The Cerdonians and Marcionites, who used
another form of words, then that which was prescribed by Christ, and baptized
in the name of another God, then of the father, son and holy ghost: those
also which baptized in the name of John, or any other man: the Cataphriges, who
baptized dead me^: with all Donatists and Anabaptists, who rebaptize them which
come unto them: and which deny that infants ought to be baptized: and those
also that deny baptism to be true, unless there be added, exorcismes,
spittle, salt, and other ceremonies devised by men.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Lords supper.
BY that which we have said, of the communion with Christ, and of the word of
the gospel, of the sacraments in general, and of Baptism: may easily be
gathered what our faith is, concerning the Lords Supper.

I. The sacrament of the supper, is an instrument of the holy ghost, to help
forvvard the communion with Christ, and with the church.
We believe that the sacrament of the supper, is not only a testimony of our
communion with Christ, and with his flesh and blood and with the whole church:
but also an instrument of the holy ghost to confirm and help foreward the
same: the Apostle saying, the bread which we break, 1. Cor. 10.16
is it not the communion of the Lords body? the breaking and the taking of the
blessed bread, he calls the communion of the Lords body: because they which
eat with an actual faith in the Lord, do join in communion with the Lord,
and with his flesh and blood: as also they that embrace the word of the
Apostles in faith, do receive a communion with the Apostles, and that communion
is with the father, and with his son Jesus Christ.

II. A confirmation of the former opinion.
For as baptism, is an instrument to begin this communion, because by it, we
are borne again in Christ: so is the supperinstituted, to make perfect the
same: because in it we are fedd or nourished with the flesh and blood of
Christ, that we may grow up in him: as the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 12.13
we are all baptized into one body, and we all drink, of one drink into one
spirit.

III. The increase of our communion with Christ, is the principal end of the
Lords supper.
There are also other ends of the institution of the Lords supper: namely,
that being admonished both by the words and signs, which represent unto us
Christ's death, and his blood shedd for us, we should reverently esteem of the
benefit of our redemption: as the Apostle says, As often as ye shall eat of
this bread, 1. Cor. 11.20.
ye show the Lords death. And therefore the end is, that we may be confirmed
in the faith concerning remission of sins, we may be nourished into hope of a
blessed resurrection, we may give thanks to him for so great a benefit: we
may be stirred up to repentance, and lastly, we may openly before the whole
congregation renew our covenant begun with God. But since all these things
tend to this, that we may more and more be united to Christ, and be made one
with him, and he more feelinglie live in us, and we in him, being now made
flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone: therefore we doubt not but the supper
is principally instituted, for the increase of this uniting and communion with
Christ, wherein our salvation is made perfect and accomplished. Whereunto it
also tends that bread and wine are the nourishments of the body: so as we
may hold it for most certain, the flesh and blood of Christ is the same in
nourishing of our souls, and preserving the^ in life, that the bread and wine
is to our bodies.

IV. The bread, why it is called the body of Christ.
Whereupon we may also understand, why Christ called this bread, his own body:
namely, not for that it is either properly his very true body, or that there
is any such body contained within it, or also that it is only a bare sign of
his body, broken and dead for us: but that it is a sacrament, (for sacraments
says Augustine take unto them the names of the things, whereof they be
sacraments) and therefore an instrument also of the holy ghost, to communicate
unto us the true body of Christ, and to confirm us in his communion. Like as
for the same cause the Apostle also called baptism, not the sign of
regeneration, Ephesians. 5.26
but the washing water it self of regeneration: namely because that by this
washing of water through the word, as by a fit instrument, Christ by the
working power of his spirit does inwardly wash and cleanse us, and begett us
a new.

V. The true and substantial body of Christ is spoken of the bread, but
improperly, and figuratively.
Wherefore we doubt not, but in the words of the supper, the true and natural
body of Christ is spoken of the bread: especially since it is added for
expositions sake, which is given for you. So that it is most truly said that
the bread is Christ's body, even that true body which was given for us: but
yet this is improperly and figuratively: since in very deed, the bread was not
given for us, but the very body of Christ, whereof the bread is a sacrament.

VI. The body of Christ is not in the bread, reallie, and properly.
Hereby we are also confirmed in this opinion: that as the bread is not
properly the very body of Christ, but a sacrament thereof: so also Christ is
not in the bread, reallie and properly. For in sacraments, the things whereof
they be sacraments, are not really included, although they borrowe their names
of the things, as in baptism the matter is apparent and out of all question:
in which no man says that the blood of Christ, by which we are washed from
sin, or the very regeneration it self is included, as also in the word of
the gospel, the things are not therein really included which by it be
declared. Now sacraments be visible words. And Christ said not, my body is in
this, that is, in the bread: but in a far other manner of speech, as, This,
that is, this bread is my body. Now if any will say, that this is all one in
sense: it will follow, if the body of Christ be really in the bread, then the
bread is really, properly, and substantially the body of Christ. And if this
be impious to be spoken, neither do we think that the other can godlily be
affirmed. Yet we deny not, but it is in it sacramentally, in that sense, that
we say remission of sins, and salvation and life is in the word of the
gospel, which it declares and offers. But since the common sort have used
to draw such manner of speeches to superstition, we judge that those speeches
are altogether to be foreborne and avoided, and the simple plain phrases of
the scriptures to be used.

VII. In the supper are given, not only the signs, but also the things
signified by them.
Now this is settled in us, without all controversy: that although the body
and blood of the Lord, are not, that is, do not existe in their own substance
and in very deed and properly, in the bread and wine, but are in heaven: yet
notwithstanding with the very distribution or giving of the bread and wine,
there is truly offered unto all men the true flesh of Christ to be eaten, and
his blood to be drunk: not simply, but in as much, as his flesh was betrayed
unto death for us, and his blood shedd for the remission of our sins. For the
words are manifest which Christ speaks, in John, of the eating his flesh,
Ioh. 6.53.
and drinking his blood, if any man will have life in him: and that which the
Apostle says eue^ iumping with the words of Christ, He which eats the bread
and drinks the Lords cupp unworthily, he is made guilty of the (true) body
and blood of the Lord. Neither doubt we, but Christ, as he plainly commanded
the bread to be eaten: so also by adding immediately This is my body, he
closely commanded tha to be eaten, as well as the bread, but yet each of them
in a diverse manneri

VIII. None but the faithful do truly eat Christ's true flesh.
But albeit the flesh of Christ be offered unto all, in the supper to be eaten:
yet we believe that it is truly eaten of the faithful only; both because they
alone have communion with Christ, and with his flesh and blood, and others have
not; neither by receiving the bread are made partakers of him; and also because
they alone have the spirit of Christ, by virtue of whom only, the flesh of
Christ is truly communicated, yea and also because they alone do bring true
faith, without which, the same cannot be truly received and eaten. For Christ
gives not his true body to be truly and indeed eaten, but only to them,
which do as well believe that the same was betrayed for them unto death, and his
blood shedd for remission of their sins, as those words to be true, This is
my body.

IX. That hypocrites eat Christ's body sacramentallie.
By the way we deny not, but hypocrites also lacking the true and justifying
faith, in receiving and eating the bread, as a sacrament of the Lords body:
may be said to eat the very true body of Christ also, namely sacramentally,
not truly and indeed: Even as the Apostle says all the Corinthians, 1. Cor.
6.11
which were baptized with water, were sanctified and justified, namely
sacramentally, as is above said: though not all of them were truly made such.

X. There be three kinds of men that eat, and therefore diverse sorts of
eating.
Thence also we learn, that there are three kinds of men which may be called
into question, whether they eat the flesh of Christ, or eat it not. The
first, is of such as receive the bread, as common meat, and not as a
sacrament: They eat not the true body of Christ in any respect, and are the
true Capernaites, and their eating is mere carnal. And others of the
contrary side, receive not the bread (yet not upon contempt) but only believe
in the gospel: and their eating is mere spiritual. Lastly there are others,
who not contenting themselves only with faith in the gospel, do also receive
the bread: not simply, as the first sort, as bare bread: but as a sacrament
of the Lords body. Whereupon it comes to pass that they are said, to take
and eat sacramentally. But since this may be done as well of the the godly and
faithful, as also of ungodly hypocrites, (yet in a diverse manner; of the one
sort by faith, of the other without true faith:) therefore we also say that the
ungodly hypocrites do eat it only sacramentally, but the faithful, do eat it
both sacrame^tally and truly and spiritually, and therefore to salvation.

XI. The true body of Christ is eaten only by faith.
Seeing then, we say that the true body of Christ is reccaued only of the
faithful, both sacramentally, and also truly: we mean that it is eaten, not
with the mouth of the body, but the mouth of the mind and with a heart endued
with faith: and that by means of the holy ghost, which works in us, and
applies whole Christ unto us. For it is the meat of the mind (says Cyprian)
not of the belly. And, Ser. de caen. 1. Cor. 12.13
The flesh profits nothing (as Christ says, and Augustine expounds) but it
is the spirit which quickneth. And the Apostle teaches, Ioh. 6.63
By one spirit we are all baptized into one body, and have bin all made to
drink into one spirit. And if that all true coniu^ction with Christ be
through the holy ghost, though he with his body do remain in heaven, and we
upon the earth: it follows, that this eating must be after the same sort.
For what else is it to eat, then to receive and unite unto thee meat for the
nourishment of that part, to which it is ordained, after a due sort? But the
flesh of Christ (as has been said) is food of the mind, not of the belly.
Neither undoubtedly, is the flesh of Christ otherwise eaten, then in respect
that it was killed for us, and made bloodlesse, as the words do sound, and the
breaking of the bread does represent; and that truly also, even as the
passover, and all the sacrifices were eaten. But now his body lives, and can
not be without blood: as at the first supper it was neither without blood, nor
dead. And therefore we cannot without sacrilege affirm, that it passes
properly and that by the mouth into our bodies. And to what end also, as the
sacrament of bread is given without wine, and the wine without bread: so in the
supper, the body is given without blood, and the blood severally without the
body: but that we might know, that these his own substances, as they are
properly in heaven, do not pass through our mouths, but are received only
by a faithful remembrance, effectually stirred up by the holy ghost? For this
did the Lord himself require, saying, do this in remembrance of me: and in
saying, This is my body which is given for you. For in speaking thus, he
required in them faith, whereby they might believe this. and believing might
eat: that is, might apply it unto themselves for the food and life of their
souls. Wherefore we hold assuredly, that they eat the flesh of Christ
truly, and not by an imagination: who, believing that it was given unto death,
for the cleansing of their sins, do with a faithful mind embrace the same
for such a sacrifice, and apply it unto themselves. And they which thus eat
the body of Christ as dead, we doubt not, but they are more and more joined
to the now living and quickening body of him, according to his own promise:
Ioh. 6.56
who first said, He which eats my flesh, and afterward added, abides in me,
and I in him.

XII. The opinion of the corporal eating, to be rejected, as vain and
unprofitable.
Moreover since this manner of eating the flesh of Christ, namely, by faith, is
both sure, and profitable to salvation: And the other, namely of eating it with
the bodily mouth, cannot be proved out of the holy scripturs: and admit that
somewhat might probably be alleged for it, yet it is not necessary, nor ca^
any thing at all profit the soul, but brings with it into the church many
mischiefs, monstrous herisies, idolatries, stirs, schisms, dissolution of
congregations: yea, makes christian religion to be a scorn and derision to
infidells: we therefore believe, that piety wills al of us, contenting our
selves with that kind of eating, which in the supper is made by faith and by
the spirit, we should not regard the other kind, but bidding it farewell, we
should reverently embrace brotherly charity, and peace, to which end also the
supper was instituted. Nether indeed ca^ the use of those kind of speeches be
suffered in any other sense: then in this, as we use to say, that what we
understand by hearing the words with our ears, the same we learn by our
ears. But to bring in phrases not used in the scriptures, especially such as
be not only unprofitable, but also pernicious and hurtful, we think it
altogether unlawful.

XIII. That there is a true presence of Christ in the supper: but it is
spiritual.
Now by this which we have said, both of the true union, and the true eating:
it may easily be seen, what we ought to believe of the true presence. We
hold therefore, that if we be truly and indeed united with Christ, and so with
his flesh and blood: and, if we truly eat his flesh and drink his blood:
then the same Christ not only in his deity but also in his flesh and blood is
present unto them that are united unto him, and do ear his flesh and drink
his blood. For what can be more present to thee, then that which thou eatest
and drinkest? and to which, thou in thine own substance art coupled, and from
which, as from thy head, life and motion is imparted to thee as into a member?

XIV. Such as the union and eating is, such is the presence, namely spiritual.
But as both the union, and the eating are made by the spirit and by faith: so
also we believe, and have been taught, that the presence is no other then
spiritual, and is in men that are endued with the spirit of god, and with
faith: and therefore that this kind of presence cannot be let by any
distance of place, though never so great.

XV. A thing is present, or absent, so far forth as the same is perceived or
not perceived.
For neither the neerenesse nor the farnesse of the places, makes a thing to
be present or absent, but the participation or not participation of the same
thing. The sun, though it be very far distant from us, yet it is said to
be present; and it is truly said to be in our eyes, when as we are made
partakers of it: Again it is absent, when as either ouershadowed with clouds,
Aug. ad vol. Epi. 3. Col. 10.
or gone into the other hemispheare we cannot see it: To a man stark blind,
the light thereof is never present, though it shine even into his eyes: as
likewise excellent music to one that is deaf: or the sweetenes of an
oration, to an unlearned man. God is also said to be far from the ungodly,
because he is not perceived of them by faith: whenas notwithstanding in his
own essence, he is not far from any of us. For in him we live and are
moved, and have our being. Therefore so far forth as a thing is perceived or
not perceived of us, either by the natural part or by the senses, or by the
mind, or any other way: so far also is it said to be present or absent.

XVI. What kinds of presence we deny, and what kinds we grant.
Wherefore albeit we disallow, that the substance of the bread being changed,
or wasted into nothing, there should succeed in place thereof, the true flesh
of Christ, and that so to be present unto us, that under the accidents of
bread should lie hidden the true substance of Christ's body; and albeit we also
deny the flesh of Christ to be really and in it own substance, present in the
bread, which bread has no other union with his flesh but the sacramental
union, which is made by a mystical relation; and albeit, we also gainsaye,
that he is present to the wicked, which have not that spiritual communion with
him, nor can be said truly to eat his flesh; And albeit we do not grant
such a presence of Christ's body, namely that he is now present with the
faithful upon earth in the time of the supper, visibly to be seen of them, as
he was in the first supper present at the table, visibly to be seen of his
Apostles (for this does plainly disagree not only from the nature of the body
of Christ, but also from the scripture it self) but do grant that he is
present with them only in an unvisible manner, and such a manner as is not to
be perceived by our senses; Lastly albeit we detest that presence, wherein
some do feign the flesh of Christ really and in it own substance to be every
where: yet we believe and acknowledge such a presence, as is no less
essential, for the things which are truly present unto us (seeing we are
indeed made partakers of them) then spiritual for the manner, wherein they are
made present, and are truly communicated unto us. Yea we also do little
doubt, but the flesh of Christ is present in the bread, and his blood in the
wine: but after no other sort, then as we use to say, that what so is declared
and offered in the word of the gospel, the same is present and is contained in
the word: since even the sacraments are visible words, and every thing that is
signified, is (in some sort) in the sign thereof, and is given with it.

XVII. The presence of Christ's body in the supper, depends not upon
vbiquitie, but upon Christ's words.
Whereupon it is evident that the presence of Christ's body in the supper
depends, not upon vbiquity (or being in all places at once) as some have
dreamed, but upon the very words of Christ, working in us, to whom he is
made present by the holy ghost. For if the Apostles had eaten the bread,
received at the hand of Christ, and had not heard, and by faith understood
those his words, (This is my body:) doubtless they had then nether received
nor eaten any other thing, then bread. So that to the confirming of their real
presence in the bread that monstrous opinion, and odious to God and his whole
church, concerning vbiquity, can nothing help them: drawn indeed out of their
scholasticall distinctions, but yet clean against the judgment of the
schoolmen themselves. And this is our faith and confession, of the true
communion, of the true eating, and of the true presence of Christ's body.

XVIII. What rites are to be used in the celebration of the Lords supper.
Concerning rites and ceremonies in the celebration of the Lords supper we say
only this, that those are principally to be allowed of, which come nearest to
the Apostolical simplicity.

CHAP. XVII. Of faith, hope, and charity.
I. To the communion with Christ, and therefore, to the participation of
salvation, faith is most necessary.
TO the ingrafting into Christ, and the helping forward this communion, the
holy ghost uses the outward instruments, of the gospel, and the sacraments:
But unless the same spirit do also stir up in us, faith, by which we may
embrace Christ with all his benefits offered unto us: we hold, that those
instruments can profitt us nothing to salvation: And therefore we doubt not
but to the union with Christ and participation of all his benefits, faith is
most necessary.

II. What we mean by the name of faith.
Now by the name of faith we understand, not a certain human opinion, or
persuasion, concerning God, and Christ: but a gift of divine wisdom and
prudence, stirred up by the holy ghost in our hearts, by hearing the word of
God: whereby we with a sincere, firm and constant mind do assent to the
whole word of God revealed in the scriptures for the authority of God speaking
therein, but especially to the gospel, which brings the gladd tidinges of
redemption purchased by Christ; and do truly understand in it God himself,
his will, Christ our mediator, and all his benefits: yea we certainly know
them, lovingly embrace them, and call upon God with an assured trust in his
mercy and in his unspeakable love toward us: and we are encouraged to love
him again, and also provoked to the performance of a faithful obedience to
him, and to glorify him in good works, and duties of charity toward our
neighbor, even to the end of our lives.

III. A confirmation of the former opinion.
For neither is true faith a property of man's wit, but a gift of God: Phil.
1.29 Tit. 1.1 Act. 13.45 Heb. 11.
neither is it given to all, but to the elect: neither is it an uncertain and
wavering opinion, of things promised, but a substance and settled assurance of
things promised, and an assured taking hold on things which are not seen. Romans
10.17.
Neither does it grow from the hearing of human reasons, but is conceived by
hearing the word of God, and is grounded upon the authority of God himself
only, speaking and promising: Neither is it an hypocritical and dissembled, 1.
Tim. 1.5 Mat. 13.21.
but a sincere assent thereunto. Neither is it a temporal persuasion, but a
constant and perpetual: though many times we weaken the same by our sins.
Ephesians. 1.8
Neither is it a blind or fond matter, but an exceeding great wisdom,
whereby we know God and Christ and heavenly things: and a christian
prudence, which causes us not to abuse that knowledge of God, but to apply it
to the true use: Gal. 5.6 Ia. 21.20
Neither (lastly) is it a dead thing, but lively and working through charity.

IV. Faith has her increases.
And albeit the faith of the elect does never utterly decay, but always
lives; yet we know that it is not always so perfect and complet, but it has
daily need of increase: for which both the Apostles prayed, Luc. 17.5 Ephesians.
1.17.18
and we confess that we ought always to pray unto god.

V. The confession of the truth cannot be separated from the true faith.
We also believe that true faith can never (when need is) want the true
confession of the truth: Romans 10.10.
as says the Apostle, With the heart man believes unto righteousness, and
with the mouth man confesses to salvation: And therefore we condemn the
Libertines, and others of their crew, that think it is in their own choice to
dissemble the truth in all places, and among all people, and to apply
themselves unto any religion.

VI. Hope springs of faith.
We also believe that hope springs of faith, and that faith is the
foundation of hope, as the Apostle says, Faith is the ground of things which
are hoped for. Heb. 11.1.
For therefore do we hope for the good things to come, and assuredly look for
them through patience: because we believe in Gods promises.

VII. What hope is.
Now hope is a gift of god, whereby we do as certainly look for, as we
assuredly believe through patience, in the mercy of God and for the merit of
Christ alone, Romans 8.24
those promised good things, which are not yet either had, or seen.

VIII. The assurance of hope, whence it is.
For Christian men's hope as it does not spring of any human promises: so
neither is it cherished by human merits nor relieth thereupon, but being
manifoldly confirmed and sealed in our hearts by the sole truth of Gods
promises; being also declared to all the faithful by the mighty and
all-working power of the same God alone which promised, but especially being
showed openly in Christ at such time as he raised him from the dead, and made
him sit at his right hand in the heavenly places: Ephesians. 1.20
and lastly being fixed and vpheld by the only obedience and merits of Christ
in whom we believe, and in whom we hope: it does assuredly and steadfastly
look for the accomplishment of our salvation, even the resurrection from
death, the coming of the glory of the great God, and of our Savior Jesus
Christ, and the full possession of the heavenly inheritance.

IX. Charity also does spring of faith.
We believe also, that of true faith springs true charity, by which it
works, and by which it shows how forcible it is: as the Apostle says, Gal.
5.6 1. Ioh. 4.3
that the faith avails much in Christ which works by love: and John
affirms, that he which loves not, Ia. 2.15.16
has not known God. Therefore we acknowledge not them for brethren, which
boast of faith: when they have not charity.

X. Charity is the gift of God.
And we believe that the same charity is the singular gift of God: 1. Ioh.
4.18
whereby we are affectioned toward God the father, and Christ our redeemer, to
love them again and to glorify them, with all our hearts: and inclined and
made prove to good will and loving kindness, as well toward al men, yea even our
enemies, as especially toward the saints and faithful. Therefore we disallow
them, which say, that man can of his own natural power love god above all
things. For love comes of God, 1. Ioh. 4.7
says John.

XI. Testimonies of true charity.
Neither do we think that to be true and christian charity, which comes
not to that nature, which the Apostle describes in the first to the
Corinthians chap. thirteen: ver. 4.5.6.7.
namely that it suffers long: is bountiful: enuieth not: does not boast it
self: is not puffed up: does no uncomely thing: seeks not her own things:
is not provoked to anger: thinks not evil: rejoices not in iniquity: but
rejoices in the truth: suffers all things: and the rest which follow.

XII. By charity, the communion with Christ and the church is nourished.
We believe that by true charity the communion with Christ, and with the
church is exceedingly cherished, increased, and preserved: in as much as love
does unite between themselves the persons loving and beloved: as John says,
He which abides in love, abides in God, and God in him.

CHAP. XVIII. Of repentance.
ALthough that all these things, Faith, Hope, and Charity; Repentance,
Justification, the study of good works and of a godly life, cannot indeed be
separated from one another: yet in as much as one of them depends on another,
they are therefore to be distinguished, and each of them severally to be
considered of, and to be seen, what they be, and what they work. And
therefore we think good briefly to declare what we think of them every
one, and first of repentance the continual and inseparable companion of faith.
For albeit it be daily made more perfect after justification: yet because no
man is justified without repentance, and the beginning thereof goes before
justification: therefore we have purposed in this first place, to declare what
our belief is concerning the same.

I. To Justification, and therefore to the communion with Christ, Repentance is
necessary.
We believe that to the true participation of Christ's righteousness, and so
to the communion with Christ, repentance is very needful: whereby being
turned from sin and from the world, by changing our minds and wills, we
are turned to God, and are joined unto him, and so obtain forgiveness of our
sins in him and by him, and be clothed with his righteousness and
holiness. For the first thing, that John Baptist, yea that Christ himself
preached, Mar. 14.15.
was repentance for the remission of sins. And, except (says Christ) ye
repent, Luc. 13.3.5
ye shall all likewise perish.

II. What we mean by the name of repentance.
By the name of repentance we understand two things especially; first, an
earnest grief, and a true sorrow for our sins committed against God: and
that not so much for the fear of punishment due to sin, as for that we have
offended God himself, our chiefest good, yea our maker and loving father: and
then, an unfeigned changing of our minds, hearts, wills and intents, and so of
our whole life. For this part, which Christ calls properly repentance, and
the Prophets, a turning to God, 2. Cor. 7.10.
and the circumcision of the heart, the Apostle teaches to come of the former,
joining both parts together, where he says, Godly sorrow causes repentance
unto salvation.

III. Repentance is the gift of God.
We believe, that repentance is the gift of God, coming from his mere grace:
and not due to any of our deserts or endeauours, as the Apostle says, 2. Tim
2.25.
If god at any time will give them repentance that they may acknowledge the
truth, and may come to amendment out of that snare of the devil: Ier. 31.18
and the Prophet says, Turn me O Lord, and I shall be turned.

IV. To stir up repentance in us, God uses ordinarily the word of the law
and the gospel: and therefore the hearing of both is most necessary in the
church.
God accustometh, for the stirring up of repentance in us, to use ordinarily
as well the declaration of his law, which discovers our sins, and lays
open gods wrath: as also the preaching of the gospel: which shows remission
of sins, and favor of god in Christ: eue^ as it manifestly appears to
every godly man, which reads the holy scriptures. And therefore we judge
the declaration and hearing of them both to be very needful in the church.

V. A sum of the doctrine of repentance, every where and always necessary
to all of years of discretion.
The sum of our faith concerning repentance necessary every where and at al
times, to all that be of years of discretion, is this; that, repentance is a
changing of the mind and heart, stirred up in us through the holy ghost, by
the word both of the law and the gospel: wherein we grieve from our heart:
we detest: we lament: we loath and bewail: and confess before God, all our
sins, and even the corruption of our nature, as things utterly repugnant (as
the law teaches) to the will of god, and to the cleansing whereof, the death of
Gods own son (as the gospel preaches) was needful: and do humbly pray
and entreat for pardon and forgiveness of the same: and do earnestly resolve
upon amendment of our life, and on a continual study and care of innocence
and christian virtues, and exercise our selves in the same diligently all the
days of our life: to the glory of God, and edification of the church.

VI. That the vulgar or usual parts of poenitencie, as contrition, confession
of sins and satisfaction, are not simply condemned.
Concerning the parts of repentance, besides those, which are already
declared, we have not much to speak: being taught by the holy scriptures,
that the same does wholly and chiefly consist in an earnest mortification of the
old man, and a quickening of the new: whereof, the former takes the force
from the death of Christ; the latter, from his resurrection the holy ghost
imparting them both unto us. Meanewhile we do not simply disallow that same
distinction, received and long held in the schools, of the parts of
repentance, into contrition, confession of sins and satisfaction: namely if
it be examined to the rule of the holy scriptures, and do not vary from the
use and custom of the ancient church. For there want no testimonies in the
scriptures, of contrition, and likewise of confession of sins, both before
God, and before our brother whom we offend, and also before the whole
congregation, when it is expedient. As also, if any man ouerloaded with the
burden of his sins, and troubled with grievous temptations do privately
require counsel, or instruction, or comfort, either of a minister of the
church, or of any other brother who has knowledge in the law of God, we
disallow it not. Moreover, those Ecclesiastical satisfactions, whereof we
read in Tertullian, Cyprian and others, which consist only herein, that an
assured testimony of true repentance may be showed to the whole congregation,
which they call to do penance, we cannot condemn it. But we condemn, the
superstitions thereunto added, the torments of consciences and ungodly
opinions, wherein appears to be taken no benefit of the death and
satisfaction of Jesus Christ, the one and only washer away of sins, and
perfect and full redeemer from all fault and punishment.

CHAP. XIX. Of justification.
I. They which have true repentance, have also a lively faith, are ingrafted in
Christ, and justified in him.
THe man that is contrite in heart, Esaias. 66.2
and loatheth his sin from his heart, and repe^teth him of his whole misledd
life, Psalm. 32.6 Mat. 5.6
sighing unto God for remission of his sins, and hungring and thirsting for
the true righteousness of Christ, we do believe, that as he was by the
holy spirit endued with this repentance toward God: so also that he is by
the same spirit endued with a lively faith in Christ, and even from the
beginning was preordained to be joined unto Christ, as a member to the head:
and therefore in him to obtain remission of his sins, and to be endued with
his perfect righteousness, and so to be reputed truly righteous for Christ,
into whom he is ingrafted, and to be absolved from all guilt: as the Apostle
says, Romans 8.1 1. Cor. 1.30.
There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ: and, Christ is made our
righteousness.

II. He which through Christ, into whom he is ingrafted, is counted just: the
same is also endued with inhaerent justice.
We believe also, that, he which through Christ, into whom he is ingrafted by
the holy ghost, is accounted just, and is truly just, having obtained
forgiveness of his sins in Christ, and imputation of his justice: the same man
forthwith is possessed of the gift of inhaerent justice, so that he is not
only perfectly and fully just in Christ his head, but has also in himself
true justice, whereby he is indeed made conformable unto Christ: although,
while we remain in this flesh we can never have the same so perfected, but
that it is by our own fault, spotted and defiled with many corruptions of our
sins. Of which justice John says, 1 Ioh. 3.7.
He which does righteousness or justice: that is, just works, he is
righteousse or just. For the Apostle does always join both these
righteousnesses, as well to the Romans, as in other his epistles, and teaches
they be both bestowed on the faithful through Christ: Phil. 1.11.
as he well proves to the Philippians: And we affirm, that the later
justice, the fruits whereof are made manifest to men, is so sure a testimony
of the former, that where the last is absent, Iac. 2.21. etc
there we hold (withal the Apostles) that there is no place for the first. So
far be we from letting loose the raines to ungodly people, by the doctrine
of justification by faith only apprehending the remission of sins and
imputation of the justice of our Lord Jesus Christ.

III. Because this inhaerent righteousness is always by our own fault most
imperfect: therefore we are just before God, only by the righteousness of
Christ.
Mean while we confess, that this inhaere^t righteousness is through our
own fault so imperfect in us, that we are made just before God, and can be
accounted for just only by that righteousness of Christ, whereby our sins
are not imputed, not only in the beginning of our conversion, when of wicked
we are made godly, but ever after even to the end of our lives: as David
says, Psalm. 32.1 Romans 4.7 Psalm. 143.2
and the Apostle alleges, Blessed are they whose wickedness is forgiven:
and again, In thy sight shall no man living be justified. Therefore we
conclude, that our true justification does consist in the only remission of
sins, and imputation of Christ's own righteousness.

IV. By faith it is known, whether a man be justified in Christ: and therefore
it is said that such a one is justified by faith.
But because justification is not without the knowledge and feeling, and
consequently the assent of him (we speak of such as are of years of
discretion) who is justified: and that feeling, is the feeling of faith:
therefore we say that a man is then justified by faith, when he which is
ingrafted into Christ, perceiving and feeling the same, is persuaded, that his
sins are so forgiven him, by the only mercy of God, and for the only
obedience, satisfaction, and sacrifice of Christ, to whom he is joined: that
he is freed and delivered from all fault and punishment due unto his sins:
yea and is persuaded that the perfect righteousness of Christ is so imputed unto
him, that he knows eternal life to be even due unto him for the same in like
sort as it is due to Christ: and consequently finds the same to be due of
free grace and favor, and not for his own works.

V. A confirmation of the former opinion, and what it is for a man to be
sanctified.
First, Romans 4.8. and 5.19
to justify, in the scriptures, as well in the old Testament, as the new, and
especially with the Apostle, when he handles the same matter, does signify to
forgive sins, and so to absolve and acquit from all blame and punishment,
and also to receive into favor, and to pronounce a man just, and to account
him for just: not such a one as is simply vnrighteousse, but such a one as by
the obtaining forgiveness of his sins is no longer vnrighteousse. Moreover
although God do always in Christ acknowledge for his, and has freely made
acceptable to himself in his well beloved, all those whom from the beginning
he has chosen in Christ, as members in their head, to be his children: yet
because we are not yet really in Christ, until we are ingrafted and
incorporated into him by the holy ghost, (which indeed we that are of years of
discretion are not, till we be endued with faith, so that we acknowledge Christ
to be our righteousness, and embrace him for such) therefore the scriptures do
teach that we are then justified, and that by faith in Christ, without our own
works, when we believe all this with true faith, that is, when we are
persuaded that our sins shall no more be imputed unto us, as being once
washed away in Christ, but shall be pardoned by the favor of God, and for
Christ's sake alone: Ia. 2.21.
and on the other side that Christ's righteousness shall be imputed to us as our
own, and that we being clothed there with, shall be, and shall be counted just
in the sight of God. An assured and manifest testimony whereof, is, as we
said before, that same begone and inhaerent righteousness in us: which
consists in the detesting of sin, and the love of righteousness, and the
study of good works.

VI. A confirmation, what it is to be justified by faith.
Wherefore when we say a man is justified by faith or through faith: we do
not mean, that the virtue of faith is that very thing, whereby as by the
form (as they speak) and by true justice, he is justified: or that, for which
we deserve forgiveness of our sins and justification: or that, which, as the
head of al other virtues, and the cause or fountain of all good works, does
draw with it all other virtues, charity, cleanesse of heart, in ward justice,
and good works whereby we are justified: But because it is as the light,
whereby looking into the glass of the gospel, we behold in what state we are
in Christ, by the free bounty and will of God, and through the merits of the
same Christ: and also because it is as the hand whereby we grasp and take hold
upon that favor of God, and benefit of Christ showed unto us in the gospel,
and performed in the person of Christ: or, to say more briefly as the matter
is: we are said to be justified by faith, that is, by remission of sins and
by the imputation of Christ's righteousness, apprehended by faith: so that
faith is taken for the thing that is believed, or apprehended by faith. As we
read of Abraham, Gen 15.6
He believed God, and it was imputed unto him for righteousness: namely, that
which he believed of the seed promised unto him, that is, Christ. For he is
the righteousness of all the chosen which believe, and of the children of the
promise, as the scripture calls them.

VII. Men are justified by faith alone,
Here by it is easily understood, what is me^t in that we have evermore
confessed and do yet constantly confess with the holy scripturs and with the
godly fathers, that we are justified by faith alone. For since to be justified
by faith in the sight of God, is nothing else, but to be accounted just by the
remission of sin and justice of Christ apprehended by faith: and that this is
only the true righteousness: whe^as, whatsoever inherent righteousness there
is in us, and whatsoever good work we do, is such as cannot stand in the
sight of God: according to that saying, Psalm. 142.2
Enter not into judgment with thy servant O Lord, Psalm. 130.3
for no flesh is righteous in thy sight: and that also, if thou markest what is
done amiss O Lord, Lord who can abide it? it most plainly appears, that
our belief concerning justification by faith alone is most certain and most
true.

VIII. Not only in the beginning of our conversion, but even in the whole
course of our life, to our death we are justified only by faith.
And hereby also is it, that we cannot but believe and constantly affirm,
that not only in the beginning, when of ungodly men we be made righteousse,
but also all the whole course of our life even unto the end, we are justified
only by faith in Christ; so that our righteousness is always from faith to
faith. For there is no man which does not daily sin: so that we have need
continually to say, Mat. 6.12 Psalm. 32.6 1. Cor. 1.30 1. Ioh. 2.2
Forgive us our sins: and, To thee says David shall every one that is
godly make his prayers, for forgiveness of his sins: And Christ not once but
evermore is our righteousness, sanctification, redemption, and the
propitiation for our sins.

IX. Justification by faith alone is no imaginary or fained matter.
Now least any man might think, that we forge a certain imaginary
righteousness, which has no foundation, nor force in us: we will again
repeat, that which we have before made profession of: First, that this faith,
where by we say that we are justified, is a faith that is lively, and works
through love: then, that God does not so justify us by the forgiving of our
sins, and imputing Christ's righteousness unto us, but that he also makes us
partakers of his divine nature, but that he regenerateth, refineth, sanctifies
us, gives inherent righteousness to us, and makes us conformable to the image
of his son: and this begun righteousness in us, is a manifest testimony of
that other true and perfect righteousness which we have in Christ alone: and
we confess that both of these are joined together by the band of the same
holy spirit, Romans 5.15.
(as the Apostle says) not only the grace of God, but also, the gift by
grace, which is by one man Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many. For even as
not only the disobedience of Adam was imputed unto us, but also the corruption
of his nature flowed into us: so also not only the obedience and righteousness
of Christ is imputed to us, which are ingrafted into him, but also his holy
nature is truly communicated unto us, 2. Cor. 5.17 Ephesians. 2.10 Tit. 2.14.
that we may be made new creatures, righteousse and holy even in our selves,
followers of good works.

X. Inherent righteousness is increased by good works.
But like as we say that the former justice is neither due to our good works,
nor begone, nor increased by them: so the latter, although it be not due, nor
begunn by our good works that went before (for they are all sin, since good
works go not before him that is to be justified, but follow him that is
justified) yet we confess, that by these following good works and exercises
of godliness it is much preserved, set forward and increased: 2. Tim. 1.6.
as the Apostle teaches; the gifts of God bestowed on us, are stirred up
nourished and maintained with such manner of exercises, like unto a fire: and
of this increase of righteousness John says, He that is righteousse, let him
be righteousse still: Apo. 22.11.
And therefore, when we speak only of this inherent righteousness, we deny
not, but that a man is justified by good works, and not of faith only, that
is, he is made more and more just.

XI. A man is justified by that justice which consists in the forgiveness
of sins, and imputation of Christ's justice, and not properly of his own
works: but by them he is declared to be justified and to be just.
But if we be asked of the former kind of justifying, we answer that a man
is never justified by his works, but always properly by faith alone: but yet
that it is declared by his works whether he be just or no, as well in the one
kind as the other: since none is justified by the former justice, but he is
also endued with the latter, and both of them are declared by good works: in
which sense we doubt not but James spoke.

XII. Errors.
We condemn all Pelagians, which thought that infants were conceived without
sin: and therefore needed not the forgiveness of sins and benefit of Christ
for their salvation: and those also, which teach that although they must needs
have forgiveness of sins, yet that the same may be obtained without faith
in Christ: And those too, which think, that although we need to have faith
in Christ, yet that the same is not sufficient, but that we need also our own
works, as merits necessary for the obtaining forgiveness of sin: but
especially those that teach the same to be done by ungodly worship and fond
superstitions. Neither do we allow of those, which have taught that we are
justified by no other justice then that inward and inherent justice: Nor
those, which thought that the remission of sins can stand without the
internal renewing and justice. We also condemn them, which suppose they may
be justified and saved by the historical faith concerning Christ, which James
calls a dead faith, that is, none at all. Yea and there opinion is disallowed
of us, which teach that a man is justified, not by remission of sins and
imputation of Christ's justice, but even by the very essential righteousness
(as they call it) of Christ really communicated to us.

CHAP. XX. Of the regenerate man's freechoise, and power to do good.
I. They that are justified in Christ, are also regenerate in him and receive
power to do good.
WE believe that they which are ingrafted into Christ, like as they are
justified in him, so they be regenerated in him, and made new creatures, by
participatio^ of his divine nature: and consequently are made free, and do
take force from Christ himself, as members from the head, and as branches
from the vine, to eschew evil, and to follow that which is good. As Christ
says, if the son of man shall make ye free Ioh. 8.36.
ye shall be free indeed. But then be we made free, when we are joined unto
Christ, and regenerate by his spirit: as the Apostle also says, where the
spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.

II. Christ lives and works in men regenerate.
For with the Apostle we confess that Christ lives in us, Gal. 2.20 Phil
2.13. Romans 8.26
that are regenerate by his spirit, and lives not idelie, but works, both
that we may will, and that we may perform; for the great love that he
bears unto us, and by his spirit does help our infirmities.

III. A regenerate man, in matters pertaining to the sensible and human life,
does bear himself better then one not regenerate, and therefore is more free.
So a regenerate man, besides that he always keeps his will free from all
constraint, (as also the unregenerate does:) he does likewise bear himself
better and more warelie then the unregenerate, even in such actions as pertain
to the sensitive and human life, wherein the unregenerate may be
circumspect: since in those actions also a regenerate man is wrought by the holy
spirit, who lighteneth his mind, governs his will and his thoughts, and
draws his actions out of a good fountain, that is, out of a good heart, and
directs them to their principal end, that is, to the glory of God.
Whereunto the Apostle also exhorts us, 1. Cor. 10.31
saying, Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all things to
the glory of God. And therefore he is even in this kind of actions more free
then the man unregenerate: namely, in that he is not violently drawn by his
own lusts to the doing thereof, as the other unregenerate is: but being
wrought by the holy ghost, thinks, wills, and attempteth all things more
warily, wisely, and religiously: evermore heedfully respecting this, that he
do all things to the glory of God, his own salvation, and some profit of his
neighbor. Romans 147.8.
For he always observes that rule of the Apostle, None of us lives to
himself, nether does any die to himself, for whether we live, we live unto
the Lord, or whether we dye, we dye unto the Lord: whether we live therefore
or dye, we are the Lords. And therefore he commends all his actions to the
divine providence: and says with James, or at least thinks, if the Lord
will, I will do this or that, or I will go to this place or that.

IV. Likewise in getting the moral virtues, a regenerate man is freer, and of
more force then the unregenerate.
And albeit we confess, that a man unregenerate, helped by the special aid
of God, ca^ be possessed with the moral virtues: yet we hold, that this
special aid of God is much more forcible in the regenerate: and that through
the presence of the holy ghost, Tert. in the Apol. c. 4.5. Aug. cont. Iul.
Pel. lib. 4 c. 3. and De Ciu. De. lib. 19 c. 25. Orig. con. cells.
by whom they are lightened, governed, and driven forward: as it was well
proved of the ancient fathers, against the vain boast of the ge^tilles, that
those virtues which they call moral, were far other manner of gifts in the
christians, then they were, or could be in the infidells: since in them they
were only the images or shadows of virtues, but in true christians they were
the very virtues indeed.

V. Unto such things as are of God, and pertain to his kingdom, only the
regenerate man is by the holy ghost enlightened, inclined and wrought, to the
understanding, choosing, and performing them.
But we believe that in the true understanding, choosing, and performing those
things which pertain to the kingdom of God, only the regenerate, are so
guided by the holy ghost: that they alone, truly understand, will, and do
the same: since the Apostle says, The natural man perceives not the things
of the spirit of God, 1. Cor. 2.19
neither can he perceive them, but of the regenerate he adds, The spiritual
man discerns all things, Phil. 2.13.
and in another place, God works in us, both to will and to perform.

VI. A regenerate man is not only wrought, but also works by the holy
spirit.
Being so taught by these words of the Apostle, and other testimonies of the
holy scriptures, we confess that regenerate men are so wrought by the holy
ghost, that they themselves do likewise work: and God so works in them to
will and to perform, that they are the same, which do will and do perform.
For, they are not blocks, nor beasts, but men endued with reason, whereby they
understand, and with a will, whereby they desire, and whereby they command over
the other powers of the soul and body, that such things as are good should be
put in execution

VII. The power of free choice in the regenerate is yet weak: so that we
have still need of the help of God, neither can we do all that we would.
But, because our regeneration is as it were only begone, and not as yet
perfect, so that whereas we were before wholly flesh, now we consist partly of
the spirit, and partly of the flesh, Gal. 5.17.
which do continually fight the one against the other, that what good things we
would, them we cannot perform, but in our spirit we serve the law of God,
Romans 7.25.
but in our flesh the law of sin: Therefore we believe, that which we also
know by experience, in the regenerate, that much bondage still remains, much
darkness in the soul, and perverseness in the heart, and weakness in all
the faculties of mind and body: that we have still need of new help from
God, and new grace, whereby both our minds may be more and more enlightened,
and our wills made better and better, and our strength to do good more
increased and perfected. And therefore while we remain in this flesh, our
free choice is never truly and merely free: that is, never able enough of it
self, to avoid ill and do good: especially since the event of all things is
not in our power, but in the hand of God: and that it must needs be, that all
those things come to pass, Act. 4.28.
not which we think, but whatsoever his hand and purpose has decreed shall be
done.

VIII. That God so governs the minds and wills of the godly, that in the
very conflict of temptations and of the flesh, he suffers them not altogether
to fall from him.
Mean while we hold this, that they which be already ingrafted into Christ,
their minds and wills being now endued with the holy ghost, are so governed
and vpheld by God for Christ's sake: Ier. 32.40. Luc. 22.32 Romans 8.35
that although they may be weakened many ways and by many temptations, yet
they are never suffered wholly and altogether to be beaten down and so to
perish.

IX. Errors.
We condemn them, which either denying or extenuating this new birth, will
have a man regenerate, to be as unable to do good, and as much the servant of
sin, as he was before he was borne again: against so many and so manifest
testimonies of holy scripture, concerning the deliverance of the regenerate
from the bondage of sin, and their choice to do good: (to say nothing of
that bigh injury which is done to the holy ghost, which dwells and works
in us.) Again we disallow those likewise, which will have a regenerate man,
to be so delivered out of the bondage of sin, that he can by no means sin
any more: which all the whole scripture in general, and our daily experience
gain-saieth. For although we be not suffered to sin unto death, yet it is
very apparent that we commit many sins, in their own nature worthy of
death. Therefore on the other side we also disallow their opinion, which do so
extenuate or make small the force of the spirit in the regenerate, and so
enlarge and set out thereliques and remainder of the flesh: that they say the
working of the spirit is often times quite extinguished by the forces of the
old man: and teach that the same regenerate man may utterly fall out of the
favor of God, and so eternally perish: which God gaine-saith by the Prophet, I
will give my fear into their hearts, Ier. 32.40 2. Tim. 2.19 Phil. 1.6
that they shall not slip from me. And the Apostle affirms, that the
foundation stands sure etc. And, He which began this good work in you,
shall perfect it unto the end.

CHAP. XXI. Of good works.
I. They which are ingrafted into Christ, have both whereby they themselves do
live, and bring forth the works of their life for others: and this is the
principal end of their ingrafting.
AS the branch does not only draw sap and nourishment from the vine, whereby
it lives it self, but also takes from it, whereby to bring forth fruit unto
us: so also we believe, that the faithful have not only life from Christ, in
whom they are planted, whereby they live themselves, but all force and power
whereby they show forth fruits of good works, to the glory of God and
edification of the church: Ioh. 15.5. etc
as Christ says, I am the vine, and you the branches: he that abides in me
and he in whom I abide, he shall bring forth much fruit. Whereunto this also
pertains, we are his workmanship, Ephesians. 2.10
created in Christ Jesus unto good works which God has ordained, that we
should walk in them.

II. What we mean by the name of good works.
But by the name of good works, 2. Pet. 1.5.
we understand all those actions, which are done by men regenerate, after the
rule of Gods will revealed in his word, and by a lively faithin Christ, 1. Tim.
1.5
and a pure heart through the holy ghost: For, Romans 14.23
as every thing which is not of faith is sin: so all things which are of
faith, and so out of a pure heart, and good conscience must needs be good
works: wherefore we do not think, that those deeds can be numbered among good
works, and acceptable to God, Col. 2.18.23
which are done of the ungodly without faith, and without the word of God,
Mat. 15.8.9.
and not through the guiding of the holy spirit: howsoever they may carry a
show of great piety and service of God.

III. Good works are done of us by power of the holy ghost.
For as the branch of the vine, or the wild olive boughs being grafted into a
good olive tree, bring forth fruits not of themselus, but by the virtue of the
vine and the tree where into they are ingrafted: so we also do not good
works of our selves, but by virtue of Christ's spirit, to whom we are
incorporated, and from whom we draw that life, whereby we live: Christ
himself working in us by his spirit, both that we may will that which is
good, Phil. 2.13 Ioh. 15.5.
and perform the same. For without me (said he) ye can do nothing.

IV. Good works are not the cause, but the effect of our uniting to Christ, and
of our justification and life.
Likewise as these branches and boughs, do not therefore bring forth good
fruits, that they might by them be planted in the vine or the olive tree, or
that they might live therein, but therefore they bring fruit, because they
are already planted and do live: and so their good fruits are not the causes
of their planting and life, but the effects and manifest testimonies thereof:
after the very same manner we believe that it is between us and Christ: as
also Augustiue fully teaches, who also says, that good works do not go
before him that is to be justified, but follow him that is justified. And
therefore we constantly confess, that a man (speaking properly, and of the
justification of his life) is not justified by works, but by them declared to
be just.

V. Although we be not justified by our works: yet others are oftimes edified
thereby and saved.
Now this also we add, that as of the fruits of trees, though the trees
themselves live not by the same, yet others, namely earthly creatures and men,
are fed and their life maintained by the same: so although we by our own
good works be not justified, yet others thereby are not a little edified, Mar.
5.16.
and stirred up both to glorify God, and also by our example to seek after
the true righteousness and life in Christ, and are so saved: Romans 11.13
The Apostle also saying, that he magnified his office among the gentilles
(namely by his diligence, and holiness of life) that he might provoke them of
his flesh to follow him, and might save some of them. 1. Cor. 7.16.
And in another place. Sometime by the believing wife (living godly and holily,
and doing her duty) the unbelieving husband is saved. And to Timothy, 1.
Tim. 4.16
if he look to himself, that is, do the duty of a bishop, he shall save
himself and others.

VI. Though we deny a man to be justified by works, yet we do not therefore
condemn works.
Wherefore though we deny, that good works are to be done to this end,
that by them we might be justified: because that this overthrows the free
justice of god, and whole benefit of Christ: yet we do not therefore
disallowe the care of a holy life, and good works: nay, we commend them, and
urge me^ thereunto as much as we can possibly.

VII. There be many and those most weighty causes why men must labor to do
good works.
For there be many and very weighty causes declared in the holy scriptures, why
we must diligently labor to do good works, although we be not justified by
the same: whereof some are referred immediately to the glory of God: some to the
salvation of our neighbor, and profit of the church: and some also pertain
to our own thankfulness toward God, yea and to our own salvation. God
commands this thing and to his commandment we must simply obey. Mat. 5.16
By these works God is glorified and the glory of God must be set forward.
Tit. 2.12
God did therefore elect, create, redeem, and plant us in Christ, that we
should live soberly, justly, and godly in this world: and God is not to be
defrauded of his purpose. Act. 10.35 Col. 1.10
They please God: for he hates iniquity, and loves righteousness: and we
must do those things which please god, though thereby there should arise no
profit either to our neighbor or to our selves. But both to our neighbor and
to the church especially comes great profit by our good works, not only in
regard of the body, and external commodities, but also of eternal salvation:
whilst by our example (to let pass other things) the elect are provoked to
the like godliness. 2. Cor. 1.4
Heb. 10.24 2. Pet. 1.10
And to us they are profitable, first, because that by good works, as by the
effects of our election and vocation, we make them both, that is, both our
election and calling, assured, both to our selves and others. Secondly because
faith not only manifests and utters it self by the fruits thereof, 2.
Tim. 1.6
but is also by them exercised, kindled, strengthened, and increased: eue^ as
al moral virtues do get increase and stre^ghtning by the exercising of them:
Thirdly, because, Ephesians. 4.30
as by our sins we grieve the holy spirit dwelling in us: so by good works
we make glad, and fill our hearts and consciences with spiritual joy: and
contrariewise we resist the temptations of the devil: Fourthly because, Deuteronomy.
28
as in avoiding sins, there be also many punishments avoided: so by doing
good works, Ephesians. 2.10
we obtain many blessings of God, as well in this life, as especially in the
other: Lastly, because they are the way: by which God ordinarily leads his
elect unto eternal life: and unless the branch bring forth fruit it shall
be cut of, and cast into the fire. Ioh. 15.6


VIII. There is promised and given a revvard to our good works, yet of free
grace, and for Christ.
Whereby we understand, that although by our works, we cannot (to speak
properly) deserve for our selves the possession of the heavenly inheritance
(for eternal life is the gift of God:) yet we may obtain the same, Luc.
17.10 Romans 6.25 Ier. 31.34 Mar. 5.7
as it were a reward, but yet of the free mercy of god, and for the merits of
Christ.

IX. Errors.
We condemn therefore those: which teach, that for the worthiness of their
works, there is due unto them either remission of sins, or ternall life, or
any other good gift. For though we should perfectly fulfill the commandments
of God, yet we should be but unprofitable servants. Luc. 17.10
But no man yea after his ingrafting into Christ, keeps the commandments of
God, as they should be kept. Meanewhile we disprove not the Fathers, in that
they used the word merit: namely so farreforth as thereby they meant nothing
else, then a good work, done by faith, unto which of favor, and for the only
merits of Christ was given a reward. Again we cannot allow of those which
do so discourse of good works, as if they were things indifferent: and
therefore hold that the same are not only needelesse, Heb. 11.6 Iud. 2 20
but also do nothing avail to salvation. For how should any man be saved
without faith? and how can he have a living faith without a care to do good
works? and who can also hold faith, unless he also keep a good conscience?
and how can he keep a good conscience, unless he also keep a care to avoid
sin, and to do good works, and to frame his whole life to the will of God?
but we simply condemn all Libertines, who make it all one to keep or not to
keep gods commandments, to do well or to do ill. We condemn also those,
which teach that our good works do profit the very souls of the dead, which
lie in a certain burning flame, which they call purgatory: 2. Cor. 3.10
since the scripture says, every one shall be judged according to his own
works, which he did in his own body: Apoc. 14.13
and, not the works of other men, but their own works, do follow them which
are dead.

CHAP. XXII. Of invocation and an oath.
BEcause among the other good works commanded by God prayer is not the least,
so that, very often in the scriptures it is taken for the whole service of god;
whereunto is joined also an oath, as being a part of Gods service: therefore we
have thought fit, briefly to declare our faith, concerning these two things:
and the rather since among the professors of Christ there is some controversy,
about both these points.

I. Only God, and so Jesus Christ, to be prayed unto.
We believe that (speaking of prayer, which pertains unto religion) the true
God, (that is, the Father, Son, and holy ghost) and so Jesus Christ our
advocate, is to be prayed unto, and none other. Psa. 50.16
For of calling upon God alone, there be express commandments: since he
alone is to be served and worshipped. And of Christ being our mediator and
advocate we lack not testimonies and examples in the Acts of the Apostles, in
their Epistles, Deu. 10.12 Mat. 4.10 Col. 2.18
and in the revelation. And as it is expressly forbidden us, to serve or
worshipp any mere creature, whatsoever it be, either in heaven or earth: so
also we are forbidden to pray unto them. And if whatsoever is not of faith is
sin: Ioh. 1.6
much more then is that which is admitted against the clear word of God: since
the very heathen themselves, thought none was to be called upon, except he
were thought a God: And how shall they pray unto him (says the Apostle) in
whom they have not believed? But that God alone and Jesus Christ are to be
believed in, the whole scripture, and the whole catholic church, even in the
creed which is daily rehearsed, do manifestly teach.

II. A christian man may swear, lawfully.
We also believe, that a christian man may swear, Ier. 4.2
lawfully, namely in truth (as the Prophet teaches) in judgment, in
righteousness, so that his oath be neither false, nor rash, nor unjust.
Neither is it condemned, that one should take the name of the Lord: but if he
take it in vain, and for an untruth. And among all nations, since the
beginning of the world, an oath has been used: when it makes for the glory
of God, and profit of our neighbor. Yea it has been confirmed by the
examples of god himself, of Christ, and of the Apostles, being a part of Gods
worship: to speak nothing of the perpetual consent of the whole church.
Wherefore the doctrine of Christ in Matthew, Mat. 5.35 Ia. 5.12
or of James in his Epistle, cannot be repugnant unto this. For they spoke
against the abusing of oaths: and meant to declare a true understanding of the
commandment concerning an oathi

III. We must not swear, but by God.
We believe, when an oath is to be taken, that we ought to call upon or take
to witness of our conscience no other, besides God: and therefore may not
swear, but by him. For God alone is the searcher of our hearts, and he alone
must have his honor and worshipp, that he may be the witness and revenger
against our souls, if we perform not that, which by our oath we promise.

IV. Oaths which are just, and lawfully taken must be kept.
Hereuppon we confess, that for the honor of God, whose name in our oaths, is
as it were laid to pleadge, all oaths, lawfully taken ought to be observed:
as also the law commands: neither is the name of God to be taken in vain,
or in an untruth.

V. Oaths upon ungodly and unjust matters, such as be against the law of God
ought not to be made: or being made ought not to be kept.
Again since we ought to promise nothing that is unjust or ungodly, namely,
contrary to the law of God: much less do we judge it lawful to be confirmed,
by oath, or by taking the name of God: yet if it be taken, we affirm that such
an oath, unlawful in it self, ought not to be kept: because in performing
such an oath the sin is doubled: Mat. 14.7
as we read of Herod in the Evangelists.

VI. Oaths which cannot be kept without breach of Gods law, ought not to be
kept: though some such oaths are in themselus not unjust.
This also we add, that all such oaths, as cannot be kept without breach of
gods commandment, C. 22. q. 4
though they are in themselves not unjust, yet are not to be kept. And
therefore (for example sake) they which by oath promise perpetual single life,
which afterward they cannot keep without manifest breach of Gods law: we
judge that such ought by no means to keep their oath.

VII. Errors.
We disallowe therefore those which pray unto idols, dead men, things
without life, or do worship them. We disallow also the Anabaptists, which
simply condemn all oaths, and affirm that no manner of oath is lawful for
a christian man: as also those, which call to witness to their souls, others
besides God: lastly those, which hold that their oaths, which in themselves are
ungodly, and cannot without great offense be performed, yet that they are to
be fully kept and observed.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Christ's church in general.
Since it appears, that the church of Christ, which is his body, does
consist of those which are coupled unto him by the bond of the holy ghost as
members to their head: and it is manifest that the gospel and sacraments, with
which as with instruments, men are knitt unto Christ, are not administered but
in the church: and that all which are endued with a true faith in Christ, with
hope, love, repentance, and care to do good works, do pertain unto the
church: Therefore we think it a thing worth the labor, to declare what our
faith is concerning the church: the rather because about this article chiefly
there are so great controversies. And first of all of Christ's church in
general: so with the whole church it self do we make confession of our
faith, and purpose afterward to speak severally of the militant church, and
the things thereunto pertaining.

I. The article of faith concerning the church, out of the Apostles creed,
We believe the holy catholic Church, the communion of Saints.

II. What we mean by the name of the church and the description thereof.
By the name of Christ's church, we understand a certain number and company well
known to God both of Angels and men: not only chosen and predestined, to
have a perpetual communion with Christ, and among themselves, and to serve the
true God, according to his will and commandment, and to love among themselves
mutually with a perpetual and sincere love: but also of those which in their
time shall be effectually and by the holy spirit called out of the number of
others, and joined to their head Christ, and so truly made Saints. Which
number was begone, from the first creation, and gathered and continued in a
perpetual line, and band of the holy ghost, and to be continued to the end of
the world, yea to all eternity: and partly already triumphing in heaven with
Christ: and partly yet on earth, warring with many enemies for Christ:
preaching and hearing the word of the gospel; ministering and receiving the
sacraments: and taking care that the commandments of Christ's may be kept,
as well publicly as privately.

III. The church is a company consisting of many.
For the Scriptures teach us, that the church is a company consisting of
many, as a body compact of many members: calling the same the body of Christ
distinguished into many members: and also, a flock of sheep, Ephesians. 1.23 Ioh.
10.3 Heb. 11.10
and the kingdom of God, and acitie consisting of many citizens, and such
other like names.

IV. The church consists only of the elect, already incorporate into Christ.
Now that these many, of whom the church consists, are none but elect,
already ingrafted into Christ, and endued with Christ's holiness: the same
scriptures do plentifully teach, both in other places, and chiefly to the
Ephesians: where the Apostle, speaking of the church and the members thereof,
says, Ephesians. 1
We are all chosen in Christ and have redemption in him: and are sealed with
the holy spirit of promise: That Christ is given to be the head of the
church: and the church is his body. It is therefore such a body, whereof all
the members, are joined by the same spirit, both to the head Christ, and among
themselves: and are quickened or have life from the head, and are endued with
his holiness: so that this whole body is truly holy, and called the holy
church.

V. The holy Angels are not excluded from the body of the church.
Neither from this body of Christ, which is the holy church, do we exclude
the Angels: both because the Apostle speaking plainly of the church,
comprehends the Angels therein: and also because they with us are likewise
gathered into our body, Heb. 12.22 Ephesians. 1.10 Col. 2.10 Apo. 229
under one and the same head Christ, and Christ is expressly called of the
Apostle the head of the Angels: yea and also because they call themselves our
fellow servants: and have the saine father with us, and serve the same God,
and we all of us shall be for ever together in the same city the heavenly
Jerusalem: lastly, they are also Saints; and the church is the communion of
all Saints.

VI. The reprobate hypocrites, though they are in the church, yet they are not
of the church.
So we rightly believe and confess, that the reprobate hypocrites, though
they dwell in the church, and live among the Saints: yet they are not of the
church, nor members of the church, when they are not truly joined to the head
Christ, nor endued with his spirit, and consequently not truly Saints. As the
Apostle John says, 1. Ioh. 2.19
of certain hypocrites, they are gone out from us (as filth from the body)
but they were not of us. For if they had been of us, they had continued with
us. They therefore are not of the church, which at last do fall from Christ,
and keep not that perpetual communion with Christ and with all his Saints:
howsoever great and rare men they seem in the church for a time, yea and hold
the government over the christian common wealth, and rule over the whole
church. For they are members of Satan not of Christ: whosoever have the
spirit not of Christ, but of Antichrist.

VII. That there ever was and is one only church of Christ.
And we confess, that there ever was and is one only church of Christ: Ephesians.
4.4.5.6
because there ever was and is one only body, to which Christ was given of
the father to be the head: one only spirit, by which all the members are
knitt unto the body: only one God, to the serving of whom and glorifying for
ever, we are all chosen and called: one only faith of all the faithful
believers: one salvation: and lastly one heavenly inheritance of all. To which
purpose, also Christ ever called the church one, and one flock: wherefore we
make that church which has been since the first creation, and before the
coming of Christ, no other, but the same, that it is now: and shall be to the
end of the world: but we call it one of all times, of all places, and all
persons joined with Christ, and consequently one communion of all the Saints:
from which, they that make an utter seuering and departure, we are persuaded by
the holy scriptures that they belong not to this body.

VIII. Of the christian church there is one only head Jesus Christ.
Hereuppon we are strengthened in this belief, that since there is one only
church of Christ, which is his body: there ever was and is yet therefore one
only head of it: by this name head we mean him, which was given of God, even
from the worlds beginning to that end, that he might be made of the same
nature with it: that he might redeem it: that he might join it to himself:
that he might quicken it: that he might deck it with the glory of his wisdom:
that he might kindle it with the fire of heavenly love: that he might
effectually move it to all good affections and good works: that he might
evermore govern it and keep it. For that this is the proper duty of the
head toward the whole body: besides daily experience in nature, we learn
also out of the holy scripturs. But who could perform, has, and will perform
this to the church? we acknowledge none other, besides Christ Jesus: mean while
not denying, but there may be one head of all hypocrites which are in the
church, and so of the hypocritical church: since the Prophets foretold it
should be so and the Apostles confirmed the same. Ephesians. 1.22. and 4.15 and 5.23
Col. 1.18
But that there is one only head, Jesus Christ, of the holy church: we
believe and confess with the holy Apostles.

IX. This church is truly holy.
Whereupon it follows, this church therefore to be truly holy: because it
has a head that is most holy, and makes it holy: because no sins are
imputed unto it: because from him it draws the spirit of sanctification: and
because whatsoever holiness is in the head, that is wholly imputed to every
member.

X. It is also truly catholic.
We also confess it to be truly catholic, that is, universal: because the
head thereof is also catholic and everlasting: at all times, even from the
foundation of the world to the end thereof joining unto himself members out
of all places, from all kinds of men, and all nations, and governing and
preserving them to himself for eternal blessedness.

XI. This one church, is partly in heaven triumphant, and partly on earth
militant.
But we acknowledge, that this church, though it is, and ever was one: yet it
is so distinct, that one part is triumphant in heaven with Christ, already
raised from death, and sitting at the right hand of the father: another part on
earth, fighting still with flesh and blood with the world and the devil.
Whereupon arises that usual distinction among all the godly writers of the
church, of the triumphant and militant church.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the militant church.
ALbeit by this which we have confessed of the church in general, every one
may easily perceive, what we believe particularly of the militant church: yet
that our faith may more clearly and plainly be known, we have purposed to
declare our opinion of this church severally, partly referring that which was
spoken of the whole, in a brief rehearsal, to this, and partly adjoining the
properties of this peouliarly.

I. A description of the militant church.
We therefore believe, Ephesians. 1.4
that the militant church is the company of men, chosen in Christ before the
worlds creation: Mar. 28.19 Mar. 16.15 Romans 10.14 Ephesians. 1.22 Mat. 18.20
which being called by the preaching of the gospel, and by the holy ghost, in
their time, from the world to Christ, and from the kingdom of the devil to
the kingdom of God, and gathered together into one body, under one head
Christ, and so made truly just and holy wheresoever they be, Ioh. 10, 27 and
13.4
and whether few or many: do profess from their heart and soul the same
faith in god, and in Christ, the same hope of the heavenly inheritance for the
only meritts of Christ, the obedience of the same commandments of Christ,
and so the same brotherly love among themselves, and charity to wards all men:
do preach and hear the word of the gospel: Romans 7
do administer and receive the sacraments according to Christ's institution:
and have a great care, to live soberly, rightly and godly in this world:
meanewhile while they remain in this flesh ever warrfairing for Christ, and
fighting against sin that dwells in the flesh, Ephesians. 6.12
and against the world, either alluring them to sin or persecuting the^ for
Christ, or lastly against the devil: Mat. 13
and by patience looking for the coming of Christ, and eternal felicity:
Among whom also many reprobates, and naughty hypocrites do live, 1. Ioh. 2.19
and profess the same Christ: But as they themselves are nothing less then of
the church, so their wickedness cannot take away the church, nor extinguish the
name of the church. Neither do we doubt, Mat. 13
but under the name of the church, the hypocrites also, which are in it, are
contained: since the Lord himself says, it is like unto a flower wherein
there is corn and chafe: to a field, wherein is wheat, and tares: to a nett,
Mat. 25.1
wherein are good fishes and badd, to the company of ten virgins, wherein
some were wise, and some foolish: Mat. 16.18
but yet that these are not of the church: the same Lord taught us, when he
said, he would build such a church, against which the gates of hell should
never prevail: 1. Ioh. 2.19
and John confirmed it in his epistle, when he said, they went out from us,
but they were not of us. This we believe to be a true description of the
militant church: for it has manifest testimonies from the holy scriptures.

II. Differences between the triumphant and militant church.
So, although the triumphant and militant be one and the same church: yet what
great difference there is in each part we may easily understand. For besides,
that the militant consists only of men, when as the other, has also the
blessed Angels joined and present: we have also here need of preaching the
word, of administration of the Sacraments, of discipline of manners, which
things are not required in heaven. Likewise, from that are all the wicked and
hypocrites excluded: in this, there are ever ill mingled with good. And there,
those heavenly brethren having as it were received a token of free-dome do
triumph and rejoice over those vanquished enemies, being in Gods presence, and
see him face to face; but we must still fight with flesh and blood, with the
world, with sin, and Satan, the prince of this world: and we see through a
glass in a dark speech, as strangers to the Lord. Lastly, that is evermore
one and the same, that it can neither be divided into parts, nor be in
hazard of any chaunges, which cannot certainly be spoken of the militant
church.

III. So is the militant church one and the same, and that catholic: that yet
it fares not ever after one sort, and it may be parted into diverse particular
churches.
We acknowledge therefore, that albeit this militant is and has always bin
one, and that a catholic church, since it has ever since the worlds beginning
and in all places, had one and the same head, Christ, who coupleth to himself
into one body, all the elect, out of all people: yet the same has not, nor
does ever fare or show it self after the same sort: and is distinguished into
many particular churches, as into diverse and sundry members, according to
the variety of times, places, and people. For it was after another manner in
the terrestrial paradise before sin: and another after sin; before the
floude, and among the Patriarchs: otherwise under the law, and otherwise
under grace: and otherwise in Christ's time among the Jews only, and otherwise
after Christ's glorification, gathered as well of Jews as Gentiles by the
Apostles, and that not in one place, but in diverse, neither of one people, but
of diverse and many: neither observing always and every where the same
ceremonies: in which respects we use to say, that there was one before, and
another after Christ: and that was the church of the old Testament; this, of
the new: and as we read, they were wont to call them the old people, and the
new: likewise one church was at Rome, another at Corinthus, another at Ephesus,
and so of the rest.

IV. Of many particular churches, consists one catholic church.
Again albeit for these many and diverse respects already declared, there ever
have been and are many and diverse, and particular churches: yet we
acknowledge that in substance there has ever consisted one and the same church
of them all: Ephesians. 2.15.18
and the same, Catholic, Apostolic, and holy. One, because it ever was and
is gathered into one body, Ephesians. 4.5
under one head, by one and the same spirit, and there is one faith of all
men, and one confession of faith. Catholic, because it stretches to all
times and places, and consists of all kinds of persons and people. Ephesians. 2.20
Apostolic, because it is built upon the foundation, which the Apostles have
laid, Jesus Christ: and is grounded upon the Apostles doctrine, which has
been the same with the teaching of the Prophets, ever since the worlds
beginning. Lastly holy, not, because it has no sin, but because being
grafted into Christ, and endued with a continual repentance and faith, no
sins are imputed unto it, but has obtained forgiveness of them all: because
also, it is made partaker of the spirit of Christ which sanctifies and
regenerateth it: lastly because the righteousness and holiness of Christ is
imputed to it: for which cause, it is also said to be without wrinkle: Ephesians.
5.27
namely, in Christ the head and spouse thereof.

V. Particular churches how they may be known, whether they be true churches,
or not.
And hereby we believe, every particular church may be discerned, whether it
be a true church gathered in the Lord: even by those things whereupon the Lord
has willed them to be built: Mat. 28.19 20
namely upon the preaching of the gospel, the administration of the Sacraments
instituted of Christ, and the keeping of his commandments. Therefore those
churches we acknowledge for the true churches of Christ, in which, first the
pure doctrine of the gospel is preached, heard, and allowed of: and that so
allowed of, that there is no place nor hearing for the contrary. Ioh. 10.4.5
For these both are properties of the flock or sheep of Christ, namely to
hear the voice of their shepherd, and to reject the strangers voice: in
those also where the Sacraments instituted of Christ (as much as in them lies)
are lawfully, 1. Cor. 11.20
that is according to Christ's own institution administered and received: and so
where other Sacraments devised by men are not allowed of: in those lastly,
where the discipline of Christ takes place: that is, where a care is taken
through love, that both privately, and publickely, Mat. 18.19 Tit. 1.8
by admonitions, corrections, and when need requires by excommunications, the
commandments of Christ may be observed: and so that men may live soberly,
justly, and godly, to the glory of God, and edification of their neighbors.
For wheresoever ungodliness, and all looseness of life is in public
practice, and open offenses are not reproved, according to the discipline of
Christ: there, we believe, that it is possble that many good and godly men
may be: but we believe this is not a godly and christian congregation: the
Lord himself saying: Ioh. 13.35
in this men shall know, that ye are my disciples, if ye love one another:
but what love can there be, where no care is taken, that according to Christ's
doctrine, brethren which offend, may be corrected, may repent, may be gained
unto the Lord, and saved?

VI. By what manner of succession of Bishops it may be showed, that some
church is Apostolical.
So we acknowledge, that from a perpetual succession of bishops in some
church, I say not any manner of succession, but such a one, as has had joined
also unto it, a continuance of the Apostles doctrine: it may rightly be
showed, that that church is Apostolical: such a one as was once the church of
Rome, and the succession of the bishops thereof, even to the time of Ireneus,
Tertullian, Cyprian, and some other. So that they were wont not without reason,
to appeal unto it, and cite before it, and such other of the fathers, the
heritickes of their times. But indeed as we do acknowledge and confess with
Tertullian and other of the fathers that those churches are to be acknowledged
to be truly Apostolical, in which the Apostles doctrine, with the discipline
of Christ and lawful administration of the Sacraments, is kept pure, though
the same have not been planted by the Apostles, nor have had a perpetual
succession of bishops, even from the Apostles time: So again, the churches
which were planted and watered by the Apostles, although they can show a
succession of Bishops continual and without interruption, yet if with the
succession of bishops they can not also show a continuance of the doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles: we will grant, that they have bin christian and
Apostolical churches: but now we cannot acknowledge them for such. For as the
hood (as the Proverb says) makes not the monk, but his godly and holy life:
so neither do bishops, but the doctrine of Christ and christian religion, make
the church of Christ.

VII. Not by any manner of consent, but by consent in Christ's doctrine, some
churches may be showed to be true and christian churches.
For thus we know, that it can never be proved, that wheresoever there is a
full agreement among themselves, there are the true churches of God: since both
in the Jewish sinagogues, and in the turkish congregations and long since in
the conuenticles of the Arrians and Donatists, there has ever been an
especial agreement: but we hold it may be proved only by that consent,
which is in the pure doctrine of Christ, and in true piety. For where the
Apostle says, 1. Cor. 1.10.
I beseech you brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all
speak one thing, and that there be no dissentions among ye: but be ye knitt
together in one mind and in one judgment: he means, in that Lord Jesus
Christ, by whose name he entreated them.

VIII. The churches be not taken away by every dissension that arises in them.
But by the way, we are not so unjust to deny those to be christian churches
wherein there is not always a full consent and agreement of all things. For as
every agreement does not make a church: so every dissension does not dissolve
the same: so long as the foundation, which is Christ, true God and true man,
the true and perfect Savior, be kept sound and firm, and so long as there is
a full agreement in the sum of the Apostles doctrine, which is delivered in
their creed.

IX. A confirmation of the former opinion.
For as the reprobate hypocrites, by their being in the churches, do not
hinder, but that they still remain true churches: so neither the dissentions,
which are raised in the churches by the ungodly, or which through frailty or
ignorance do spring among the Saints themselves, can extinguish the same:
which very thing the Apostle teaches, whenas speaking of the ministers of the
true churches, he says, that upon the same foundation some do build gold,
silver, and precious stones: other wood, stubble and hay: and to the
Philippians having declared the sum of christian doctrine, and exhorted all
men, that who so had profited therein, should persist in it: afterward he
adds, and if any be otherwise minded, God shall reveal the same unto them,
if we abide in the same whereunto we are come. For else, if we should deny,
there, to be any true church where contentions about religion are stirred up:
then was there no church at Corinth in Paul's time: where there were not only
divisions very rife, one saying, I am of Paul, another of Cephas, another of
Apollo: but also maruailous controversies rose concerning religion: Nor yet in
Gallatia because immediately after those churches were passing well planted by
Paul, there sprang up in them seducers, and heresies: lastly, neither yet
could there be said to be any churches in the East, or in the West: because
they were never void of contentions, not only between the catholics and the
heretics, such as arose from the catholics, but also even among the godly
fathers themselves: as the histories do plentifully make mention: in so much
that for these dissentions and sects, the christians were wo^t to be skoffed
at in the theaters and stages among the infidells: as also at this day we are
all derided for the same cause, among the Turks and Jews. But as in the
primitive church, by those contentions of the christians it was no consequence,
that therefore they were not the people of God: so, neither at this time by
ours can any man prove it justly against us: but that indeed the contrary
may rather be concluded, because it is the property of good wheat, that is, of
the gospel, whereby Gods people are gathered into his church, that where it is
sown, there straight ways in the same field, does the enemy Satan sow
cockle upon it. And surely never in any place or sooner were heard the Simons,
Menanders, Ebions, Cerinthians, Valentinians, and such plagues: the^ in the
church, and after the preaching of the gospel. Neither could the church of
this present world be truly called the militant church, unless it had both at
home and abroad with whom it should continually fight.

X. The peace of the churches are not to be troubled nor schisms to be made,
for every difference that arises in doctrine, or ceremonies.
And therefore we cannot allow it, that any should make a separation from his
church, and trouble the peace of the church, and violate brotherly love: much
less that one church should condemn another, for every difference in
doctrine, or in ceremonies, where the fou^datio^ is still held: so that, good
reason was it that Victor the bishop of Rome intending once to excommunicate
the churches of Asia, because they diffred from him in certain rites, was
reprehended of Ireneus the bishop of Lions. Neither is it the Apostles meaning,
that for the stubble and hay, built upon the foundation, there should be
division made in the church, or the church condemned: Cant. 1.5 and 2.10 Ephesians.
5.27
since the church does not straight cease to be a church, and as yet is holy,
and the bewtifull bride of Christ, though it be darkened, and has yet some
wrinkles and scarres. In a word, though the errors and defectes of it are never
to be dissembled: yet in what congregations soever, the foundation, and the
sum of the Apostles doctrine is kept and preserved, and no manifest
idolatries allowed of, we judge that we ought to embrace peace and communion
with them as true churches of Christ: So great is the account of the union of
churches.

XI. The unity of the catholic church is to be labored for.
Since therefore the whole church, being one and catholic, consists of
many, and particular churches, as of the parts, and is yet militant on the
earth: we are not ignorant nor do we doubt, but if an agreement in the Lord,
ought to be observed with every particular one, much more ought we to labor
for the unity of the whole catholic church.

XII. What we mean by the name of unity of the catholic church.
By the name of unity of the catholic church we mean a conjunction of all
elect and regenerate people, whersoeuer they be on earth, made with their head
Christ into one body by the holy ghost: which in the creed we call the
communion of Saints. For the Apostle also describing this unity, teaches,
that the church is a body, Ephesians. 1.22 1. Cor. 12.12 Col. 1.18 Ephesians. 4.12 Ephesians.
2.15 Romans 8.11 Tom. 7. de vni. Eccl. c. 2
consisting of many members, whose head is Christ, repairing, quickening,
working and preserving all that believe in him, by his spirit into one new
man. The unity therefore of the body and all the members, with the head, and
among themselves, is the unity of the church: as also Augustine determined
against the Donatists.

XIII. The unity of the church wholy stands in the same faith in Christ,
and love to our brethren.
But because to the preserving and nourishing of this unity, God uses as well
our faith in Christ, stirred up by the word of the gospel, and by the
Sacraments in our hearts: as also our charity and the duties thereof toward
our neighbor: nay, because the testimonies of the true communion of Saints,
and conjunction with Christ are manifest and apparent: therefore in sum we
confess, that this unity of the catholic church consists, in the unity
of faith, and band of brotherly love: that is, that we should all of us in
true faith embrace the same doctrine, which the Prophets and Apostles left us
in writing, and publicly profess the very same: retain the same Sacraments
sincere and only, which Christ himself instituted: not neglect the discipline
appointed and commanded by Christ, wherein brotherly love is exercised, and
the salvation of our brother that falls, sought for: and lastly that we
should love one another mutually, and practice the duties of charity.

XIV. A confirmation of the former opinion.
For look by what things, diverse people are gathered into one body: by the
same do we believe that being united they are preserved, and knitt faster and
faster together. Since therefore the church is not gathered nor preserved
properly, by ceremonies, but by the holy ghost, but by the word, by faith, by
love and by keeping Gods commandments: we doubt not but by the same things
is the unity thereof kept and cherished: since the Apostle also to the
Ephesians handling the unity of the church, teaches them, Ephesians. 4.2 etc.
that it consists upon those very things, never making mention of any
ceremony.

XV. That an unity in the same ceremonies, though it be not always and every
where expedient, yet where it is settled ought not to be troubled.
By the way we deny not, but an unity also in these very ceremonies and
rites of each church, so far forth as in conscience may be, ought to be kept
and observed. For there are two kinds of things, wherein the unity of the
church may stand: such as are delivered in the word of God: and such as are not
expressed in the word: as are many external rites, and ecclesiastical
ceremonies. In the first we believe an unity to be every where and always
most necessary: in the other, though it be not of it self necessary, yet it
may be profitable for the diversity of places, and in a diverse respect of
times, to have diverse rites: yet where any certain thing concerning these
matters, is appointed and received, for the edification of the church, there
we judge that all ought to keep an unity also in such manner of rites, and
not to trouble the Ecclesiastical orders: according to the Apostles rule. All
things ought to be done by order and comely in the church and to edification:
1. Cor. 14.40
about which matters we also wonderfully well allow and embrace the two
epistles of Augustine written to Ianuarius. Ep. 118 and 119


XVI. A conclusion of the unity of the church.
Since therefore the ecclesiastical unity is two fold, one essential, and
therefore of it self, every where, and always neeessarie, and consequently
proper to the catholic church: the other accidental, and alterable by reason
of places and times, and therefore proper to peculiar churches: we believe,
that it is lawful for no man to make separation from the former, at any time,
or for any occasion: whieh were nothing else but to fall from Christ and from
God, and to renounce the holy spirit, and disioyne himself from the whole
body of Christ; which is a very damnable apostasy: but to forsake the latter
for to return to the former, and to preserve the same, we are persuaded it is
not only lawful, but very necessary unto all men: and that much more, if
also those rites and ceremonies, wherein the unity was, be polluted with
diverse superstitions: yea and especially, if also the Sacraments, instituted of
Christ, be corrupted, and wholly disordered, so that a good conscience can not
be partaker of them: but what if the heavenly truth also be banished from
them, and in the place thereof preached and defended the doctrines of devils?
what also if thou can not there be suffered to be silent, but shall be
constrained, either to deny Gods truth, and to subscribe to devilish
untruths, or else to spill thy life and blood?

XVII. He which is departed from the church of Rome, has not thereby broken
the unity of the Church, nor is severed from the body of Christ.
In as much therefore as we are accused of apostasy or a backsliding from the
catholic and apostolic church of Christ, and are said to have broken the
unity thereof, because we would no longer communicate with the congregations
of the Romish church in ungodly superstitions, and idolatrous services: but
choose rather to follow the ancient doctrine, service and discipline, renewed
through gods benefit by the true servants of Christ: we protest before God
and his angels, and the whole church even to the worlds end, that they do an
exceeding injury, not only to us, but also to the holy ghost, and to all the
ancient church: Since in this matter we have done no otherwise nor do, then
we are commanded to do by the holy ghost, taught by the fathers, yea and
counseled by the Papists themselves.

XVIII. A confirmation of the former opinion.
For the Lord has especially forbidden, 1. Cor. 5.11 2. Cor. 6.14 Tit. 3.10
Romans 16.17 Ca. 24 q. 1 c. 24 and 26 and q. 3. c. 9
that we should have any fellowship, with idolaters, and obstinate apostataes
and heritickes, in their idolatries and heresies. Nor otherwise do the fathers
teach (as they are alleged for witnesses even in the canons) then, that not
only if there be a man, but also, if there be a church, which renounceth the
faith, C. 24. q. 1. c. 29.
and holds not the foundation of the Apostles preaching, and in which Christ
doctrine abides not: it is to be forsaken. Neither for any other cause was the
old church of Rome so celebrated of the fathers, that which then flourished,
and was holy, and called the mother of the churches: but because it constantly
retained the doctrine received of the Apostles, all the rest for the most part
slipping away. But now what the doctrine of it is, and what service, and how
far it is fallen from the ancient doctrine in many things, it is too too
well known. We therefore moreover protest, that we have made no other
separation from the church of Rome that now is, but as we are constrained by
the word of God, and as we must needs obey God, so commanding us: and
therefore least we should still abide in an apostasy from the apostolic and
catholic church, we have judged it our parts and duties to return at
length to the same again, and to depart from the idolatries of this filthy
polluted Romish company.

XIX. We are not simply departed from the church of Rome, but (...), in some
respect.
For we have not simply and in all things forsaken the ehurch of Rome: but
only in those things, wherein it has fallen from the apostolic church, and
even from it self, and from the old and sound church: nether are we gone with
any other meaning, but that if it would return amended and reformed to the
ancient state, we would also return unto it, and have communion with it, and
in their own congregations. Which that it may one day come to pass, we
beseech the Lord Jesus with our whole heart. For what were more to be wished of
every good man: the^ that where we were by our baptism borne a new, there we
might live even to our lives end? so it were in the Lord.

I Hier. Zanchius with my whole family, pronounce this to be witnessed to the
whole church, even to the worlds end.

XX. The whole catholic church is not suffered to err, but every particular
church may.
We believe and acknowledge, that this catholic church, as we have before
described it, is so governed by the holy ghost: that he never suffers the
same wholly, and all of it, to err: because it ever preserves in some godly
men the light of the truth, and retains the same pure and sound by their
ministry to the end of the world, and delivers it to posterity. To which
purpose, we doubt not but that tends which Paul said, 1. Tim. 3.15
The church is the pillar and ground of truth, because without the church is
no truth: but in the church it is always reserved: since there is ever more
some congregation, great or small, wherein the word of truth does sound. But
of every particular church, wherein there be ever good and badd mingled
together, we know the reason is far otherwise. For first, in these
congregations, either the pure word of God is preached: or else with it,
untruths are also taught. For where no ministry of the word is, there we
acknowledge to be no church. If therefore together with the truth, there may
also false assertions be taught: how can that congregation be said, that it
cannot err, when it does manifestly err? And if the pure word of God be only
taught, then the reprobate hypocrites, which believe it not, do always err,
when they reject the light of the truth, and walk in darkness: and of them
is almost in every place the greatest number. As for the godly, Mat. 24.24
though they are never suffered so to err, that they continue in their error
and perish: Christ himself saying, Gal. 2.11 etc. 1. Cor. 1.11 etc. Gal. 1.6
etc.
The elect can not be seduced, no not by the miracles, and wonders of
Antichrist, namely, not to the end, and to their destruction: yet that they may
err, as well every one severally, as many gathered together, and that not
only in manners, but also in the doctrine of faith, we are manifestly taught
by the histories both sacred and ecclesiastical, and by that which has
happened to godly and holy bishops, and their churches, in the East and in
the West.

XXI. A confirmation of the former opinion.
Peter doubtless did err at Antioch, and many in the church of Corinth, and
more in that of Galatia, being seduced by the false Apostles did most grossly
err: though they were soon after called back again by the Apostle from their
errors. David also taught that the very sheep of Christ may err, Psalm.
119.176
when he said, I have gone astray like a sheep that is lost: and why were the
ministry of the word in the church, needful for all the godly, if they could
not err? Since therefore every godly man in each particular church, and the
same a true and pure church have often and do often err: and that hypocrites
are never endued with true faith, whereby they are rightly minded: how can it
be said of any particular church, that it can not err? that then can much
less be affirmed of those churches, from whence the truth is banished, and
wherein lies do prevail, and iniquity it self, and palpable darkness. They
surely which are such, cannot be the true church of Christ: 1. Tim 3.15.
if the church be the pillar and ground of truth. Therefore we conclude that
every particular flock, and each several sheep thereof, can so far forth
not err, as it hears only the voice of the shepherd Christ, being guided
by the holy ghost: but as often as it hears not his voice, but harkeneth to
strangers voices, it ca^ straight ways do no other the^ err. But in a word,
seeing God in the scattering and dissoluing of all churches, does yet reserve
some unto himself whom he holds in the truth, and by whose ministry he
will spread the same still to the end of the world: therefore we confess,
that the whole catholic church altogether, is never suffered to err.

XXII. Without the catholic church is no salvation.
Here hence we consequently learn, and believe, that this catholic church
only is so holy, and has salvation so annexed to it: that out of it there is
no holiness, no salvation: since that in it only the truth so shines, (without
which salvation can come to none,) that without it there can be no truth: and
lastly, since none but the body of Christ can be saved. Ioh. 3.13.
For no man ascends into heaven, but he which came down from heaven, the
son of man, which is in heaven: that is, the whole son of man, withal his
whole body, which is the church: that not unfitly Peter compared the church to
Noah's arc, in which alone, mankind was preserved, 2. Pet. 2.5
and out of which whosoever were found, perished in the waters of the floode.
Genesis 7.23
Now that which we confess of the whole church as a thing most assured, the
same of every particular one, we cannot grant: namely, to say, that in this
church alone, or that, in the Romish, or that at Constantinople, the rrueth and
salvation is obtained: so that without it should be no salvation: and
consequently to depart from it, were nothing else then to forsake the truth,
our salvation, and Christ. For some church may be brought to that pass: that
unless thou departest from the fellowship thereof, thou can have no part nor
fellowshipp with the catholic church, and her head.

XXIII. The catholic church is not tied to certain persons or places.
Moreover we confess this catholic church because it is catholic, therefore
to be tied to no certain places, persons, or people: so, that who so would be
of the church, he should needs get him to Rome, or to Wittemberge, or he must
depend upon the authority of their churches, by shops or ministers: Seeing
Christ is in all places, and every where may the word be heard, the seal of
Baptism received, the commandments of Christ kept, and a communion with the
Saints had. And wheresoever these things have place, there is the church: that
not without good cause, were the Donatists condemned, who shutt up the church,
in Africa only, and not in all Africa neither, but in certain parcells of it,
where they themselves dwelt, and taught that it was only there: Nor less
worthily are they to be condemned which account the churches of no foreign
countries for true churches, but only such as consist of men of their own
nation.

XXIV. The catholic church is partly visible, and partly invisible.
To conclude, we believe this church, to be partly indeed visible, and partly
invisible, but these in diverse respects. Visible, in that it consists of
men, visibly ha^dling and hearing the word of God, ministering and receiving the
sacraments, praying not only privately but also publicly to God, exercising
the works of love toward their neighbors, and glorifying God by their whole
life: which things can not indeed be performed; but they must sensibly be
perceived. And if it should be merely invisible: how could it be discerned
from the Synagogues of the wicked? Again, we call it also invisible: first,
because it has in it many hypocrites mingled, which perform all these outward
things, as the elect do: and who are the elect, (for of them only consists
the church) surely it cannot be known of us, but only of God, according to
that, The Lord (alone) knows who are his. 2. Tim. 2.19 To. 2.28.29
Whereunto also tends that of the Apostle, He is not a Jewe which is one
outward, but one within. Moreover, because the church, in regard of the outward
appearance, being evermore pressed with manifold calamities in the world: the
number of the professors of Christ's faith is sometimes so diminished, and all
christian congregations thrust up into such narrow straightes, that it may
seem even to be none at al remaining: namely when there is no longer any
public assembly, wherein Gods name is called upon: as the histories both
sacred and ecclesiastical do most clearly and plentifully teach to have often
happened: whenas notwithstanding it is very certain that God always reserueth
some church unto himself upon the earth: Mat. 16.18 and 28.20
the Lord himself saying: And the gates of hell shall not prevail against it:
and, behold J am with you even to the end of the world: and the same do we
also with the whole church confess in the creed, saying, I believe the holy
catholic church, namely to have ever bin from the beginning, to be now, and
shall be unto the end of the world. even upon the earth. For properly we
believe always, those things which we do not always see. Heb. 11.1
This is our confession, concerning the militant church: what it is: how it
differs from the triumphant: how diverse often times in it self: how of many
particulars it is made one catholic church: by what marks the true may be
discerned from the false: what manner of succession of bishops, and what manner
of consent may prove a true church: how not for every difference in the very
doctrine, the unity of the church is to be broken: what is meant by the name of
ecclesiastical unity: and in what things it consists: of what estimation it
ought to be: in what respect also it may err, and in what, it cannot err:
and how without the church there is no salvation: and lastly how it is
visible, and how invisible. It remains that we speak of the government
thereof.

CHAP. XXV. Of the government of the militant church, and of the
ecclesiastical ministry.
I. The church is governed of Christ.
WE believe, Col. 1.17
that as all things were made, have their being, and are ruled by Christ: so
he also governs the church, which is his kingdom and his body, by a more
peculiar means then all other things, as being author, king, Ephesians. 1.23 Luc.
11.33 Heb. 3.6.
and head of the same: as the Angel says of Christ, and he shall reign in
the house of Jacob for ever: and the Apostle, that he is as the son over his
own house, and this house we are: that is, the church: and in another place,
that he is the head of the church, Ephesians. 5.23
and the same is the Savior of his body.

II. Christ orders his church partly by himself, and partly by assistance of
fellow laborers.
But the government, wherewith Christ guides his church, we know to be two
fold: one, wherein he of himself, and by his holy spirit, without any help or
service of man, Phil. 2.13 Ephesians. 1.23
reigns inwardly in the hearts of believers, and works in them to will and
to perform, and is even all in all: and moves unto that which is good,
defending us from evil against Satan, the world, and all our enemies: The
other, wherein he so guides the church, as he also vouchsafes to use the
help and ministry of others, as well Angels, as men especially, to the
preservation of the church; As of Angels the Apostle speaks, Heb. 1.14
They are ministering spirits, sent forth to minister, for their sakes which
shall be heirs of salvation: 1. Cor. 3.5.9
and of men, he says, We are Gods ministers, by whom ye have believed. For
like as in a man the head of it self, by virtue of the mind, which lives and
works chiefly therein, does so rule the whole body, that it also uses the
help of every member to the profit of the whole body: so Christ, the head
of the church, does in like sort bear himself in the government thereof, not
for his own cause, or that he needs our ministry, but does it for our
necessity, yea for our manifest commodity and honor.

III. A difference between the ministry of Angels, and of men.
By the way we acknowledge a difference between the ministry of Angels and
of men: since the Angels are not sent either to teach in the church, or to
administer Sacraments, but to perform other duties, and those for the most
part invisible: neither come they ordinarily always, and to all, but at such
time, and to such persons as God sends them: but the ministry of men is
apparent and perpetual, and pertains to every one.

IV. It was most advisedly done, that Angels should not teach in the church,
but men.
And we know it was most wisely and advisedly done of God, that Christ should
teach in his church, not by Angels, but by men: both, because we can not more
willingly suffer our selves to be informed familiarly of our equalles, then to
be taught of spirits of a far diffring nature, with an unacquainted majesty:
and also, because we might more easily be deceived of Satan, falsely faining
himself to be sent of God, and transforming himself to an Angel of light.
And those surely in our judgment are two not the least causes, why the son
of God, when he was to fulfill the office of a teacher in the church, would be
made a man, and our brother, and familier, and like unto us in all things
sin only excepted: whereto that same tends: Heb. 4.15 Heb. 2.12 Heb. 1.1
I will declare thy name to my brethren, in the midst of the congregation will
I praise thee: and that same, In these last days he has spoken unto us by his
son, namely, being now made man, and living familiarlie in the church.

V. There be two kinds of men especially, whose ministry Christ uses to the
government and preservation of the church.
And although there be not one member in this whole great body of the church,
but Christ uses the same to some profit of the other members, 1. Cor. 12.7
and so of the whole body, as Paul teaches: yet we acknowledge two
principal kinds of men, whose help and service he is wont to use for the
government and preservation of the church: namely, first, teachers, and others
to administer the word, sacraments, and other ecclesiastical duties: then,
godly princes and magistrates, whose ministeries or offices we confound not, but
acknowledge them to be distinct and very diverse: among which differences this
also is not the least, that the ministry of teachers is always very
necessary to the church, but of politic magistrates not so: since the former
the church cannot be without, but the other, it often has wanted and may want
them.

VI. About what matters especially the ecclesiastical ministry is employed.
But as the sum of christian piety, consists in three things: in faith in
Christ: in continual repentance, that is, in the mortification of our flesh,
and of our sins, and quickening of the spirit: and lastly, in charity
toward our neighbor: so also we acknowledge three principal parts of the
ecclesiastical ministry. First to teach, and to preach the word of the
gospel, and also to administer the sacraments, and offer up the public
sacrifice of praise to God, through Jesus Christ: Secondly to (...) declared by
the Apostles: and lastly, to do all such things, which though they be not
expressed in the scriptures, yet do belong to order and to decency, and do
make for edification and not for destruction, according to the general rule
given by the Apostle, 1. Cor. 14.40
that all things ought to be done in the church in order, decently, and to
edification. Neither think we that any authority is given unto ministers
beyond the bounds of the word of God, or to any other end, then for
edification: and therefore we deny that one Bishop or all Bishops together,
have authority to appoint any thing against the scriptures: to add or detract
any thing, or change any thing in them: to dispense with the commandments of
God: to make new articles of faith: to institute new sacraments: to bring new
rites into the church: to prescribe any laws, which may bind consciences, or
may be thought equal to gods law: to forbid any things, which God has
granted, and left free: or lastly, to command any thing, without the word of
God, as necessary to salvation: since not the whole church can have or truly be
said to have this authority.

XXI. The Bishops which are also princes, their political authority is not
denied.
By the way we disallow not, but that bishops, which are also princes, besides
their ecclesiastical authority, they have also their political rites and
secular powers, even as other princes have: the law of commanding in secular
causes, the law of the sword: some of them the law of choosing and confirming
kings and emperors: and of directing and ordering other political matters:
and to constrain people that are their subjects, to do them obedience: and
therefore we confess, that their political commandments, which may be kept
without breach of Gods law, are to be obeyed by their subjects, not only for
fear, but also for conscience sake. Romans 13.5. For we know that all power is
of God: Romans 13.1.2
and whosoever resists the power, resists the ordinance of God: and that
kings are to be honored, 1. Pet. 2.17
and that we ought to be subject to our princes and rulers, in all fear not
only to the good and curteousse, but also to the froward and unjust.

XXII. Marriage ought to be free as well to ministers of the church as others.
Of marriage.

And we believe, that this is very necessary and behouefull to honesty, to
the salvation of ministers, and to the honor of the ministry it self, and
consequently to the true government of the church: that it should be permitted
as freely unto them, as it is to al Lay men (as they call them) to marry: since
Christ forbad it to no kind of men, nay, speaking of single life he said, that
not al me^ do receive this, (namely to lead a single life): meaning that, which
the Apostle in round words expounded: 1. Cor. 7.9 Heb. 13.4
namely, he which cannot contain, he must marry a wife. For marriage is
honorable among all men and the bed undefiled, as with the Apostle we
confess.

XXIII. It is good and commendable, if any being endued with the gift of
continency, abstain from marriage.
Mean while we deny not, but they which are endued of God with the gift of a
pure single life: they may more fittly attend upon divine causes, and more
easily serve the church, then they which are married: by reason of many
grievous cares and troubles which marriage brings with it, and whereby often
times, even against our wills we are drawn away from following the divine
causes, to deal in domestical and troublesome businesses of this life: as the
Apostle also says, the unmarried cares for the things of the Lord, 1. Cor.
7.32
how he may please the Lord: but he that is married cares for the things of
the world, how he may please his wife. And therefore as these men have their
just commendation, which do therefore take a wife, that they may live with a
clean and pure conscience to God; So also do we think them worthy to be
commended, who therefore choose to themselves a chaste single life, that they
may the better employ their labor on the church: and in the same do live so
long as they can.

XXIV. Marriages are to be contracted in the Lord, and are reverently to be
esteemed.
And we know and confess, 1. Cor. 7.39
that all marriages ought to be contracted in the Lord, by the law of nature,
and the law of God, yea and by honest customs of all places, and are
reverently to be esteemed: Mat. 19.9
and that no man may put away his lawful wife, unless it be for fornication:
but if any unbelieving woman, through hate of religion, will not remain with a
believing husband, he ought not by force to keep her: for one that is faithful
is not in subjection in such things: 1. Cor. 7.15
but God has called them in peace.

XXV. Both he which has put away an adulteress, and he which is forsaken of
an unbeliever: may no less contract new marriage, then he whose wife is
dead.
We also believe that as well he, which has lawfully put away an adulteress,
or is forsaken of an bnbeleeuer, may marie again, as he whose former wife is
dead. For that saying of the Apostle is ever most true and profitable to all
unmarried persons and widows: It is good for them, if they remain even as I:
but if they can not contain let them marie: 1. Cor. 7.8
for it is better to marie, then to burn.

XXVI. That some should be appointed in the church, which should judge of
matrimonial controversies.
But we allow not, that any of these things be done in the church, without
the lawful knowledge, judgment and sentence, of the church, and some
christian magistrate, if there be one: and therefore that some godly,
skillfull and wise men ought to be appointed in the church, which may discern
and judge of matrimonial causes and these matters: that nothing be done rashly
or unadvisedly, least every one should think lawful, whatsoever he listed:
but all things should be done lawfully, to edification, and without injury to
any: 1. Cor. 14.26 Romans 2.24
and least the name of God should through us be evil spoken of among the
infidells.

XXVII. They which are rulers in the church, ought to take care, that the
children of the faithful, may be christianly instructed: and that they may be
taught in learning, and honest arts.
With these is joined the care of children: we therefore believe it is very
necessary to the continual preservation of the church, not only that each
several man have a care to instruct his children in true godliness, in
christian duties, in learning and honest arts: but also, that the whole
church have a special regard thereunto, that they may be made fit and
profitable both for the church and common wealth: whereto belong both public
grammar schools, exercises of honest arts, and ecclesiastical catechizings.

XXVIII. Ministers with their families ought to be maintained, Of stipends and
church godds.
with honest and liberal stipends.
We also believe that the church cannot well be governed, unless such
necessary maintenance be bestowed on the ministers, as whereby they and their
family may live in an honest estate: For no man, except he have whereupon to
live; Mat. 10.10
can do his duty: and Christ says, the workman is worthy of his wages:
and the Apostle writes largely thereof in more the^ one place: 1. Cor. 9.7 etc.
showing by many reasons, that ministers which serve the churches ought to
receive of the same church what so is needful for them: 1. Tim. 5.17 etc
and that they have good right to demand the same: so far from offense is
it, that they should take it, as some would cavil: yet notwithstanding
covetousness, as well in all other as chiefly in ministers we do with the
Apostle utterly condemn: 1. Tim. 3.3.8
as also we allow not prodigality: and we teach that both these faults are
to be shunned and avoided.

XXIX. The church goods should not be wasted, but be bestowed on the
maintenance of ministers, and other godly uses.
And whereas many goods have in times past, and yet in some places are given
to churches, by the liberality of princes and other godly persons: we judge
that if any church have such goods, great care is to be had, that the same be
not wasted, nor converted into profane uses, and much less into sacriligious
uses, nor fained to be so converted: but to be only bestowed upon that
purpose whereto they were given, even to a godly intent. And we well allow of
that ancient partition of church goods, where one part went to the bishops,
that is, to the teachers, Deu^ (...)
and ministers of the word, and their families; another, to the clerks, that
is, to students and such as were ordained to the ministry of the church: and
to them that attended on the church: the third part, to poor people and
trauelers: a fourth part to repairing of churches and schools, to which part
also, belong not only the houses of ministers, teachers, students, libraries
and books, all kinds of instruments and things necessary for churches and
schools: but also spittles and hospitals, and other such like places, where
such live, as are peculiarly to be relieved and cared for of the church.

XXX. What manner of temples or churches christians ought to have; what
language to use therein: of churches and ceremonies.
what habitt and apparel: what holy days to be kept: to whom they must
pray: and lastly that the ceremonies which were not prescribed by Christ and
the Apostles ought to be free.
And since it is none of the least causes, why faithful people, so far forth
as may be, are wont and ought to dwell together in the same cities, towns and
villages, that they might not only privately among themselves, daily nourish a
common faith by godly conferences, and practice mutual charity by christian
duties, but also that they might meet together in certain places, and at
certain known times, publicly to praise, and pray unto God, to hear his
word, to receive the sacraments, to perform public works of charity
toward the poor: which things indeed cannot be done without language,
without rites and ceremonies: therefore concerning the^ also, what our opinion
is, we will briesty declare. Seeing it is beyond all controversy, that all
things in the church ought to be done to edification, and all show of
superstition ought to be avoided, we judge, that true piety, and the churches
edification requires, Temples or churches.
first, concerning places, that, if they may use the old and profaned
temples, the same must be clean purged of all idols, and all relics and
monuments of idolatry and superstition. 1 Cor. 6.16
For what agreement has the temple of God with idols? Language.
Moreover no language is to be used, but that which is known to the whole
congregation. For what edification can come to the church by an unknown
language? 1 Cor. 14 28
the Apostle surely commands the^ to keep silence in the church which speak
languages, if there be no interpreter. Thirdly all pride and vanity of
garments are to be shunned, and all those ornaments, Garments
which do rather beseem the profane theaters of the Gentiles, then the
sacred temples of christians: and which rather tend to delight the flesh, the^
to edify the spirit: but all things must be done in the churches with most
high reverence and modesty, as in the very sight of God and his Angels. And
albeit concerning the fashion of garments, which ministers ought publikly to
wear, either in their ministry, or out of it, we do not think it a matter
to be so stood upon, that for it, the peace of the church ought to be
troubled: yet where they come nearest to the simplicity of the Apostles, there
we judge the church rather to be approved. Holie-daies
Fourthly, that upon every Lords day the congregation should come together,
and make an holy assembly: since we see, that ever since the Apostles time
that day has been religiously consecrated and dedicated to that holy
business. Next unto the Lords day we can not but allow of the hallowing of
those days likewise, wherein we keep the memory, and the ancient church did
celebrate, the nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ, of his circumcision, his
passion, his resurrection, his ascension into heaven, his sending down the
holy ghost upon the Apostles. Upon other days, even as each church shall
think to be convenient: so also let them call an holy assembly, to the word,
to the sacraments, to prayers, or collects. Col. 2.16
But evermore let all superstitious observation of days be far from them.
Prayers.
Fiftlie, that prayers may be made to God only, and to Jesus Christ, without
invocation of Angels or any Saints that are dead: even as the Prophets and
Apostles did, and the whole ancient church, as it is manifest to be seen in
the old collectes, Heb. 13.56
(to say nothing of Gods own commandment) who will have this sacrifice of
praise and of the mouth to be offered up to him only. Ceremonies.
Sixthly, concerning rites and ceremonies to be kept in the church, the same
piety and edification of the church does require, that they should not so
bitterly and sharply be controuerted, as though the contention were upon life
and death: but should be left to every congregation in free choice, as we
read in Socrates and other ecclesiastical writers, it was in the old church:
concerning which matters in general we allow and embrace both the epistles of
Augustine to lanuarius. Tom. 2. ep. 118 and 119
For these tend to the churches edificatio^.

XXXI. Public fastes ought sometime to be commanded and the same are most
profitable and commendable: Of fastes.
yet no man must be constrained to them.
It appertains also to a profitable government of the church: that as private
fastes are in men's free choice, so also to the public fastes al men are to be
counseled, but no man to be constrained. The commodity of fastes cannot
sufficiently be commended: yea it often happens that they are very needful,
so that godly magistrates, and ministers of the church are compelled to
command public fastes unto the whole church; for the appeasing of some
grievous wrath of God: as it was wont to be done in the old testament, and in
the primitive church: not that by them we ca^ deserve remission of sins, and
mitigation of gods anger: but that by taming of the flesh, the spirit may be
stirred up more fervently to call upon God, and to appease him by faithful
invocation. By the way it pertains to the churches edification, that no man's
conscience be compelled and bound unto such fastes: since they ought to
proceed from a free, willing, and truly humbled spirit: as also the Apostle
writes of alms to be bestowed on the poor, that they ought to be done, not
with heaviness or upon constraint, but as every man can find in his heart.

XXXII. At no time, Choice of meats.
not in the times of public fastes the faithful ought to be forbidden any
kind of meats.
Hereof it also follows, that at no time, either of fastes or not fasts, any
kind of meats is to be forbidden to any: since none of these things ca^ defile
a man, Mat. 15.11 Tit. 1.15. 1. Tim. 4.1.3
but to the eleane al things are clean. And the Apostle calls their
doctrine, who command abstinence from meats, for religions sake, the doctrine
of devils: that doctrine therefore how can it tend to the churches edification?

XXXIII. Sick people must be visited, Of sickmen and burial.
comforted, and strengthened in faith: and they that are dying must be
acompanied with prayer, and commended to Christ: and the bodies of the dead
reverently buried.
Neither ought the church to take less care of the sick, the^ of the whole,
nor of the dead, then of the living: seeing all are members of Christ and their
bodies temples of the holy ghost. We therefore acknowledge that it belongs to
the true government of the church, that some godly and wife men be appointed:
which may visit the sick persons, comfort them out of the word of God, and
confirm them in faith: and if it happen that those sick persons be called of
God forth of this world, to encourage and animate the^ to their departure: as
knowing, that the souls of the faithful, so soon as they go forth of their
bodies: do presently pass into heaven to Christ: conuaied thither by Christ's
spirit, and accompanied with his Angels: and that they are blessed which dye
in the Lord; Let them also pray with them, and acco^panie those, who are
departing this life with their prayers, even unto the last gasp, and so
commend them to Christ. And we doubt not but their bodies are with reverence to
be brought unto the graves: as our churches both in words and in their deeds
do teach: openly witnessing, that they were temples of the holy ghost: now
indeed destroyed, but shall again in their time be restored, and raised
again to life, and that eternal. Mean while the graves and churchyardes (or
burial places) must be kept decently and religiously, as it is with us: and
the children, parents, kinsemen, and alliance of the dead, are to be comforted:
and all those offices of humanity which can be performed, we endeavor to
perform unto them, and teach that they are to be performed. And if so be,
any psalm concerning the resurrection of the dead, be any where song in
carrying of the course, or any sermon made unto the people, after the dead body
is laid in the earth, wherein also some honest mention may be made of others
that are dead who religiously died in the Lord: this we do not disallow: so
long as it is not done for the salvation of the dead, but for the comfort and
profit of the living, and edification of the whole church. We believe also
the souls of the faithful, loosed from their bodies, do presently pass into
heaven to Christ: and therefore have no need of our prayers: yet the
edification of the church is to be promoted and set forward upon any occasion
whatsoever.

34 The church cannot rightly be governed without lawful, free, and christian
meetings and Synodes of ministers. Of Sinodes

This also we are assuredly persuaded, as we learn both by the holy
scriptures, and by continual experience: that the church can not rightly be
governed, unless at known times there be meetings of ministers as well
private, in each several church; which were wont to be called consistories or
consultations; Synedria.
as also public and common in each province and kingdom, which for this cause
were used to be called prouincial Synodes: yea and also so much as may be
common to al people in christendom which were called general counsels:
wherein it may be determined upon all matters pertaining to the health,
preservation, and edification of the church: every ones free opinion may be
heard: and each thing concluded by common consent, and out of other the most
approved counsels: as we read the Apostles, and all the ancient churches did.

35 A confirmation of the former opinion, wherein of ecclesiastical discipline,
Of discipline.

For the church is governed by discipline, and without discipline it cannot be
ruled aright. Discipline is a means and institution, wherein we as scholars
of Christ do learn in his school, how to live unto God, and to do all things
according to the doctrine of the gospel, as well publicly as privately, to the
edification of the church, and to our own salvation. It contains therefore
the whole course of piety, the beginning, proceeding, and end.

36 Discipline two fold.
Further, discipline in the church is two fold, one common to all christian
people, which of many is called vulgar discipline: the other, proper unto
ministers, and to men appointed for church-offices, which therefore is used to
be called clergy discipline.

37 The parts of vulgar or common discipline.
That common and popular discipline consists chiefly in these matters: first,
for the beginning, when any is received into the church, he must learn to know
God, and Christ, and to call upon him, and to understand what is his will. This
is done by catechizing, wherein every one is taught the sum of christian
religion: and being taught, he must profess his faith before the whole
congregation, and promise obedience unto Christ and to his church according to
the doctrine of the gospel. Then, Romans 10.10 Mat. 28.20.
because not to go forward in the way of god is to go backward: therefore they
which are godly, that they may truly proceed, and go on in godliness, must
often frequent the holy assemblies at appointed times and places, and give
themselves to hear the word of God, and make prayers with others, and practice
charitable deeds toward the poor bestowing their gifts and oblations
liberally. But seeing even in our proceeding we do all fall, some more
grievously and with greater offense to the church, some less greeuouslie,
therefore the third part consists in the censure of our lives and actions:
namely that every one be subject to the censure, Mat. 18.15 1. Tim. 5.20
all the time of his life, and yield unto brotherly correction. And if any have
fallen into a grievous fault, known unto the congregation, and being
reprehended, has not truly repented, for which cause he may deserve to be
driven forth of the church for a time, and to be bound, until he make amends,
and till he make public signification to the church of his true repentance:
let such a brother be excluded out of the church, and be bound: but when he
has repented, let him be loosed, received into favor, and admitted into his
former communion. This is the first discipline, the end whereof is, that
every one should live unto God, and at last also dye in the Lord Jesus.

38 The parts of the clergy discipline.
By the way, albeit all kinds of men, as well ministers, as lay men (as they
call them) be subject to this christian discipline: yet among the fathers came
in a certain peculiar discipline of the clergy: whose part it was to be
rulers over others, not only in word, but also in example of life and
diligent performance of their duties. Of this these were the principal parts.
The first, that they should abstain from many things, which otherwise in some
sort might be suffered in laymen: such as are many delights of the flesh,
glorious pompes, sumptuous feasts, costly furnitures, profane attendants, and
such like matters. The second, that they should cast aside al businesses of
this life, which might hinder from doing their duty, which consists chiefly
in lawful administration of the holy things, in preaching the word, and
exercising the discipline of ma^ners: such businesses are warre-fare,
merchandise, law causes, looking to vittlers and tippling houses, and such base
affairs. The third, that they should promise a peculiar obedience to their
own bishop and metropolitan of their bishop in honest matters. The fourth,
that they should more diligently then the laymen apply the reading and study
of the holy scriptures, and those arts and tongues, whereby the scriptures
may the better be understood, and likewise their prayers and holy
contemplations. The fifth, that they should also apply themselves with a more
diligent care, not one ly to the proper duty commanded unto every one, but
also to all those things which may seem to appertain to edification of the
whole church.

39 Upon the necessity of the discipline is concluded the necessity of
Synodes.
These are the parts of the discipline, without which we see not how any
congregation can be rightly ordered or preserved. And how should this
discipline have any place there, where the ministers do never meet together to
know what is amiss in the church, or what is wanting, to make a censure on
men's deeds, to judge upon doctrines if any new be spread, to consult upon all
things which pertain to the profit of the church? we judge therefore that
meetings of ministers and ecclesiastical Synodes are very necessary to a true
and wholesome administration and conservation of churches. Seeing neither any
civil state, common wealth, nor kingdom can stand without their senates,
counsels, parlaments as they call them, and meetings. Therefore we would
wonderfully well like, that the ancient custom of the churches might be
restored, that which was allowed, by a new decree of the emperor Justinian,
namely that in every province, at the least twice in the year Sinods might be
celebrated: and that sometime also a general council might be called, of the
most learned, discreetest and wisest ministers of al provinces, and
ambassadors of princes, which profess the gospel: which if ever it might be,
in this our woeful and miserable time, wherein so many and such horrible
heresies, are every where recalled out of hell, it would as we think do much
good. And we pray unto God the father with our whole heart, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, that he will stir up the godly and valiant Constantines,
Vale^tinians, Theodosiies, who by their authority may call a council, in
which, themselves being present and moderating the Synod, it might be
deliberated friendly and brotherly out of the holy scriptures, of godly
agreement, peace and salvation of all churches, to the glory of God, and of
the name of Christ and salnation of all the elect.

40 Errors.
We therefore disallow all such things, as are repugnant to this foresaid
doctrine confirmed by the scriptures: and chiefly these special points. 1
That the church consists of men only, and the Angels not to pertain unto
the same. 2 That the true church, which is the body of Christ, consists not
only of the elect, but also of reprobate hypocrites, and that they are true
members of the church. 3 That the church does so consist of the elect and of
true Saints: that in it should be contained no hypocrites, and that in the
scriptures they should never be comprehended under the churches name. 4 That
the church which was before Christ's coming was not a true church, but only a
tipe or figure of it, which was to be gathered by Christ and the Apostles. 5
That the church has two heads, one, invisible and remaining in heaven, namely
Christ: and another visible, ruling upon earth; the bishop of Rome: with whom
whosoever does not agree in all matters pertaining to religion, and obeys
not him in all things, he can not belong to the church nor be saved. 6 To
affirm upon any particular church, that it can not err. 7 So to bind the
church to certain places and persons, as to say there only with the^ is the
church. 8 Not to acknowledge those for Christ's churches, which, although they
hold the grounds of faith: yet in ceremonies, or in some part of doctrine do
not altogether iumpe with us. 9 To make a separation from the churches, upon
any error, or for the ill life of some men. 10 To stand in contention, that
where true doctrine, true service, and right administration of sacraments is
banished, yet that therefore there remains the true and Apostolical church,
because there may be showed a continued succession of bishops even from the
Apostles time: and contrariewise, that those are not true churches, which
although they keep fast the true doctrine right sacraments, and pure discipline,
yet can not show a continuance and succession of bishops, never broken. 11
That the authority of any bishop, in that he is a bishop, is extended beyond
those matters, whereunto he is called of Christ. 12 That the church has
authority to alter any thing in the scriptures, or to dispense with the
commandments of God, or to make new commandments that may bind
consciences. 13 That it should not be lawful for ministers to marry wives,
or at least, to marry the second time. 14 That ministers may not lawfully
receive stipends. 15 That it is lawful in churches to use an unknown
language, though there be no interpretation. 16 That it is also lawful to
invoke, besides God, and lesus Christ, the holy men that are dead, and to
direct prayers and sacrifices of thanksgiving unto the^. 17 That christians may
not in the fasting time of lent, and other certain days, eat any kinds of
meat. 18 That the church should do well, in praying for dead men's souls, that
they might be delivered out of the fire of purgatory.

CHAP. XXVI. Of a magistrate.
Seeing we have now spoken, of the first kind of men whose labor God uses
in the governance of the church, namely ecclesiastical ministers, and their
duties, and other matters belonging unto them: it remains, that we also
briefly declare what our faith is, concerning the other kind, that is, the
civil magistrate. For the Lord does also use his ministry, especially if he
be a christian, to the defense and preservation of the church.

I. Every magistrate, whether godly, or ungodly, is of God, and therefore no
magistrate simply to be resisted.
We believe therefore, that every magistrate, as well impious as godly, Romans
13.1 1. Pet. 2.13 Romans 13 7
is from the Lord God, and is the minister of God, for revenge of evil doers,
and for the praise of well doers: and therefore that he is to be feared, and to
be honored, and his commandments, which may be done with a good conscience,
and without breach of Gods law, Romans 13.5
to be observed: and that not only for fear: but also for conscience sake:
namely because the Lord so commands. Therefore in respect that he is gods
minister, Romans 13.2
he is not to be resisted; for who so resists it, resists Gods ordinance,
and God himself.

II. A magistrate that commands any thing against God, must not be obeyed.
But yet if a magistrate command us any thing against the will of him who
sent, and whose minister he professes himself to be: we doubt not, with the
Apostles, to deny obedience unto him, Act. 5.29
and to say, we ought to obey God more then man: whenas indeed, such a
magistrate is not in that behalf the minister of God. Wherefore if we must be
subject and obey the magistrate, for conscience sake and not for fear only:
Romans 13.5
then we conclude, that where we cannot for conscience obey him, neither ought
we there for fear to obey him. In other matters, Romans 13.2
whosoever resists the power, we know, that he resists God, and shall receive
to himself damnation.

III. We must pray for all magistrates, that, what there duties are, they may
indeed perform: and what the duty of every magistrate is.
But seeing the duty of every free magistrate is to have a dilligent care, both
in making laws, in giving judgment, and also in punishing offenses, that
their subjects may live virtuously, and after Gods laws, the sum whereof,
is that we should live in this world, Tit. 2.12
soberly (therefore chastely and honestly) and rightly, (therefore peaceably with
our neighbors) and godlilie (toward God,) and that no princes can perform
this of themselves, unless God indue them with a knowledge of their duty,
and stir them up both to will and to perform: therefore that which we do
according to the Apostles precept, Phil. 2.13 1. Tim. 2.2
the same we teach others that they should also do: namely, that they must
pray for all magistrates, of what sort soever: that they may both be willing
and able to perform that which is their duty: and so may bring to pass,
that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all honesty and godliness:
that is, that we may live all friendly and in peace on with another: that a
public honesty may be observed, and true piety and religion preserved and
increased.

IV. It belongs principally to a christian prince, to take upon him the care
of christian religion.
And if he be a christian and godly magistrate we believe that it chiefly
belonges unto him, that besides the regard of the public and politic good and
profit, of the public and politic peace and honesty, he should also take
the peculiar care of christian religion: since the Lord has made him the keeper
of both the tables, Ios. 1.8 Deu. 13.2 etc.
and commands him, that as a prince he always keep the law of God in his
hands: that he may punish as well idolaters and blasphemors, false Prophets and
seducers, as murderers and adulterers: and the same is abundantly confirmed
by examples of godly kings in Israel, and christian princes, Constantine,
Valentinian, Theodosius, Justinian and others: who, not only as private men,
but also as kings served the Lord, according to his commandment: even as
concerning their duty and office, To^. 2. ep. 50.
Saint Augustine most learnedly noted out of the second Psalm, and declared it
to Boniface.

V. The office of a godly prince concerning religion is two fold, and wherein
it chiefly consists.
Now since the duty of a godly prince, that is, a magistrate which has a free
power over any people, and authority within his jurisdiction to institute and
reform religion, is twofold, which he owes to Christ and to the church, in
the cause of religion, one, about such things as belong unto religion: the
other respects men which are in his jurisdiction and subject unto him: for
the first, our belief is, that he should diligently take heed, that by the
pure word of God rightly understood, and expounded by the very word it self,
and according to the principles of faith (that which they call the analogy or
rule of faith:) religion may be instituted in his dominion or kingdom, or
where it is instituted, may be kept found and pure: or where it is corrupted,
may be restored and reformed: to the glory of God, and salvation of his
subjects. For this we read has been commanded of God, and of Moses, and
ever observed of all godly princes.

VI. A declaration of the former opinion by the parts.
We believe therefore, the duty of a godly magistrate is, first to know out
of Gods word generally, and according to the sum of the points of faith,
which is the true and christian religion, and which is the apostolical
doctrine, whereunto the church is to be reformed: that he may do or dare to do
nothing only by the judgment of others, but also upon his own sure
knowledge. Then, this being thus known, to have a care that ministers which
are meet men for the office, not by his own choice, but according to the rule
of Gods word, may be chosen, called, and ordained. Thirdly, to bring to pass,
that by them, both the doctrine of salvation delivered in the holy scriptures,
may be set forth, expounded and often beat upon and also the sacraments
according to Christ's institution administered: yea and the discipline ordained
of Christ, exercised. Fourthly, to have a regard to this, that schools may be
erected, wherein as well good arts and tongues may be diligently taught, as
also the holy scriptures faithfully expounded, and the studious may learn the
sum of christian wisdom. Fifthly, whereby ministers and teachers may be held
in their duty, and so true religion by them preserved in the church, to do
their best, that private co^sultations, yea and also provincial Synodes as is
said before, may at least twice in the year be called Sixthly, to carry a
special care to the goods of the church, that they may be bestowed on the
right, that is on the true godly uses: and that all necessary things be
supplied to the church, and to the ministers thereof.

VII. A godly prince ought not to deal with all men of a diverse religion,
after one manner.
But seeing (to say something briefly of the other duty of a prince
concerning religion) there be diverse kinds of men, which a prince may have
under his government, namely either mere infidells: or such as indeed
profess Christ, but yet are also open idolaters, or in many things apostataes
from the apostolical church, or in some article of the faith manifest
heritikes, or else err upon simplicity: or such as are rightly persuaded in
all matters: we do certainly hold, that a prince ought not to use one kind of
measure toward all these sorts: for some of them are to be loved, cherished,
and honored: some to be winked at: some not to be suffered: other some to be
quite cut off: and none must be permitted to blaspheme Christ, or to worshipp
idols, or retain ungodly ceremonies.

VIII. All men must be subject to the higher powers: and all the higher powers
must be subject to Christ himself and to his word.
Lastly we believe, that every soul, that is, Romans 13.1
every man, none except, and therefore also every inferior power, must be
subject to the higher and greater power: yea and that superior power also, no
less then the inferior, and all other men must be subject to Christ the king
of kings, and Lord of all Lords. Apo 17.14 1. Tim. 6.15.
For it is Gods will that they should al kiss the Son: and bow their necks
under the yoke of his discipline. And therefore we believe that it belongs
to the true government and edification of the church; that princes should
chiefly subject themselves to be taught, admonished, and reformed by the word
of God: whereby others, by their example, may do so also the more cheerfully:
and that if they refuse to do it, the princes or rulers, may more freely
punish them for it, and compel them to their duties.

IX. Errors.
We therefore condemn all contemners of magistrates, rebels, seditious
persons, enemies of their common wealth, and whosoever do either openly refuse
to perform their duties which they owe to their rulers, or do craftily shift
the same. We condemn by name the error of the Anabaptists, saying it is not
lawful for a christian man to bear office, much less to use his authority
over his subjects in the course of religion: affirming, that it is free for
all men to follow what religion he will, and none ought to be compelled to
faith: We disallow them also, which give authority in religion unto
magistrates, only (as they say) for names sake: denying that they have
authority to call Synodes, to consult about religion, to reform churches,
and, to determine out of the scriptures, such things as pertain to the
peoples salvation: and will have them to be nothing else, but the executors of
those things which the bishop appoint. As also neither do we allow those
magistrates, who without a sufficient knowledge in the causes, do alter religion
upon their own pleasures; do condemn men never heard, and spoil, and
confiscate their goods: set down rules of religion, not out of the scriptures,
but rather against the word of God: and bear themselves, not as servants of
God, in the church of God, but as Lords over the churches: nor will bow their
neck under the yoke of the son of God. For whom, that they may have a
greater knowledge of God, and better minds, we pray and beseech God the
Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

CHAP. XXVII. Of perpetual remisson of sins in the church of Christ.
I. There is a perpetual dispensation of remission of sins in the church:
and thereunto, is the perpetual ministry of the word ordained.
WE have before confessed, that so soon as any one is ingrafted into Christ by
his holy spirit, he presently obtains forgiveness of all his sins
committed, and draws a new life from his head Christ, and so is made a
lively member of the church. But, because the most holy ones that are in this
militant church do daily sin, eue^ to the last end of their lives, so that
they have still need of new forgiveness of their sins, and also of new
repentance, and new faith to apprehend forgiveness of sins in Christ: and
that faith and repentance, is stirred up by the ministry of the word and
sacraments: therefore we believe that remission of sins is dispensed and
bestowed perpetually in the church, by the ministry of the word and
sacraments, and that the ecclesiastical ministry which is perpetual in the
church, is ordained thereunto.

II. What we mean by the name of remission of sins.
And since there be three things in sin, the action it self; the wickedness
of the action and therefore the sinners fault remaining in him; and lastly the
desert of due punishment cleaving unto the fault; then we understand that our
sins are forgiven us, when not only the fault and wickedness of the action
is not imputed unto us, but also when as the desert or guiltiness is taken
away, and the due punishment pardoned. For then are our sins properly
forgiven us: and we, when we desire in prayer that our sins may be forgiven
us, we desire not only to be absolved from the fault, and that the iniquity
may not be imputed unto us, but also that the punishment and condemnation due
unto us for the iniquity may be forgiven, and we delivered from our debts and
guiltiness: seeing that neither we can say that we forgive our brethren their
debts, unless we set them free from the debt it self and from all
satisfaction: and seeing it is certain that we are not commanded to ask any
thing, but that which he will give us: and that Christ has cancelled the hand
writing of all our debts, having himself made a perfect and full payment and
satisfaction.

III. The afflictions, which the children of God endure after their sins are
pardoned, are not punishments and satisfactions for sins past, but fatherly
chastisement for those to come.
But whereas God, after the forgiveness of sins, is wont to afflict and
scourge his children with many torments: we believe that God does it not, for
that, they should by that means either wholly or in part satisfy his justice
for their sins: seeing that one full satisfaction of Christ for us, is enough
and more then enough: but, that by them, as by fatherly corrections, we may
afterward be more wary, and take heed what belongs to the mortifying of
sin that dwells in us: and that we should no more so easily slipp into
sin: whereupon we with Augustine do call them and teach that they are to be
called, T. 7. de pec. mer. and Re^. lib. 2. c. 33 and 34.
not the punishments of sin, but the trials of faith, and exercises of the
Saints.

IV. Sins are properly remitted of God alone freely, and for Christ's sake our
mediator.
We believe also, Ies. 43.25
that our sins are properly forgiven us, of God only by mere favor, and
for Christ our mediator: since also it is he alone, against whom we properly
commit sin both mediatly and immediately, when as we break his law: Luc.
23.34
and it is always in the power only of the creditour, to gratify his
debtors, and to forgive their debts. Whereupon Christ also, as man, prayed his
father for them which crucified him, that he would pardon them, Luc. 5.21. etc
and forgive them their offenses: and when the Jews said, who can forgive
sins but only God? he partly by holding his peace, and partly by showing a
miracle confirmed it.

Wherefore in that, that Christ of his own authority forgave sins, we with
the fathers, do believe it may well be concluded, he is true God: since the
same cannot be done by any mere creature, but only ministerially, or as
being a minister (as they speak) and in the name and authority of God. Mat.
18.18 Ioh. 20.23
Which we know was equally given, not to one alone, but to all the Apostles,
and so to all lawful ministers of the gospel.

V. Christ, God and man, indeed forgiueth sins, but in a diverse manner: as
he is God, and as he is man.
Whereon it also follows, that Christ god and man, (which we also confess)
together with the father and the holy ghost, forgiueth sins: but he does it
in one sort, as he is God, and in another, as he is man. For as he is god, he
does effect the same properly and of his authority: but as he is man, he does
it, and did it in the flesh, as being a fello-worker with the deity: in his
human will consenting to the divine, and pronouncing the words thy sins
are forgiven thee: as also Leo the first, Epist. 10. c. 4
so expounds it to Flauianus, saying, each form (namely of God and man)
works with communion of the other, that which is proper to it self: as, the
word working that which is proper to the word, and the flesh performing that
which belongs to the flesh. To forgive sins was the proper action of the
divine nature: and to say, thy sins are forgiven thee, of the human. Thus
far he.

VI. Jn Christ alone is offered the forgiveness of sins, and of the elect
alone, endued with faith, it is received.
But like as in Christ alone, our mediator and redeemer, as the head of the
whole church, we have redemption, by his blood and remission of sins; so as
without Christ there is none: so also we believe that only the elect, endued
with true repentance and true faith, and ingrafted into Christ by the holy
spirit as members to their head, are made partakers thereof: and therefore
although forgiveness of sins be declared unto all manner of men by the
gospel, yet to the reprobate, as unrepentant and unbelieving they are not
forgiven: but by their own fault and blame, their sins do still remain.

VII. All sins at once are forgiven to the faithful elect.
We also believe, that as Christ by his one oblation satisfied not for some,
but for all our sins: so also is offered unto us, that are truly penitent, of
Christ and in Christ by the gospel, the forgiveness not only of some of our
sins, but also of them altogether: and the same communicated to us by the
holy ghost: and received by faith: Mat. 18.23 etc.
seeing God declared by a parable: that he forgiueth all our debt, not part of
it.

VIII. Forgiveness of sins is bestowed in the church only, received by
faith only, and that only in this life.
Lastly, to make an end, we believe, that as in Christ alone, is found
remission of sins, so the same also is disposed and bestowed in the church
only: and as it was purchased for us by the merits and blood of him alone, so
also it is received by true faith in Christ only, without our own meritts: and
as in this life only the gospel is preached, and by it, forgiveness of
sins declared to the repentant and believers; so also we can only in this
life be made partakers thereof: seeing after this life there is no place left
for faith and repentance: and therefore that the church, by her ministry, can
do nothing for the obtaining of forgiveness for men after they be departed
this life: Cyp. ad Demetr.
as Cyprian also says. When a man is once gone hence, there is no place for
repentance, no effect of satisfaction. Here life is either lost or gotten: here
he must provide for salvation by serving of God, and by the effect of faith.

IX. A confirmation of the former doctrine, by the order of the creed.
According to these three points we interpret this article of forgiveness of
sins in the creed: as first, that after the article of the church and
communion of Saints, is placed this article, to teach us, that, without the
church, remission of sins is not bestowed, nor has any place. Again, that
the same is placed after the confession of our faith in God the father, the
son, and the holy ghost, and of our faith, wherein we believe the church to
be holy, and to consist of the society and communion of Saints: to witness
unto us, that not for our own merits, but by our faith in the father son
and holy ghost, and because we are in the church, and have communion with all
the Saints, therefore we daily obtain forgiveness of our sins. And finally by
this placing of the articles of faith, we may well believe and confess that
after forgiveness of sins obtained in this milita^t church: there is no more
to be looked for of the dead, but the resurrection of the flesh, and life
everlasting.

X. Errors.
Thus we condemn, the error, wherein some do teach, that after the fault
forgiven, there remains a debt to be paid for the punishment: and this
punishment, being eternal death, by penitencie is changed into temporal
pains: which we must abide either in this life or after death in purgatory,
unless we be delivered thence by masses, indulgences and other helps.
Secondly we condemn their blasphemy, which seek for forgiveness of sins,
any where then in Christ, and do so teach. Likewise them which would prove,
that the same may be applied to themselves and received, by any other means,
then by true faith, and by the holy spirit. We condemn also their
sacrilegious doctrine, which teach, that God does forgive always to the
faithful, all their sins: but ever retains some of them which are to be
satisfied for, by fasting, alms deeds, prayers, and other works of our own,
or else by the oblations of other men, and sacrifices of priests.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the state of souls after death and of the resurrection of the
dead.
I. Men's souls do neither dye with their bodies, nor sleep after they are
loosed from the body, nor lie still out of heaven or hell, nor be tormented in
purgatory.
WE believe, that our souls do neither dye with our bodies: nor being loosed
from our bodies do sleep: or not sleeping, do lie still in some close place,
both out of heaven and hell: nor yet are tormented in purgatory: but that out
of the body also men's souls do live, understand, and desire: and that the
souls of the godly do reign with Christ in heaven, and of the ungodly, are
tormented in hell with the devils: the Lord himself saying of them, when the
godly and merciful men do decay, that is, depart out of this life, they, that
is, their souls, Luc. 16.9
shallbe received into everlasting habitations: Luc. 23.43 Luc. 16.23 Act. 1.25
and teaching in another place, that they are with him in paradise: but of the
other, by showing an example of the rich glutton, that they go down into hell,
that is, into the place appointed for everlasting fire, (as we also read of
Judas) there to be tormented.

II. That the places be diverse, where the souls of the faithful, and the
unfaithful do live, after the deaths of their bodies.
Now, seeing the condition and state of the souls of faithful and unfaithful
men is so diverse: we also believe that the places into which they pass are
diverse: that is to say, everlasting tabernacles, ^. Pet. 2.4
or heaven and paradise ordained for the godly; and hell and the deepes
prepared for the wicked: since to one of these places the scripturs attribute an
immeasurable light, and to the other exceeding darkness, which Christ called
utter darkness: and since the Lord says, Mat. 8.12 Ioh. 17.24
that he desires, that where he himself is, there should also be they,
which believe in him: plainly meaning, that in the same place, where he is in
body and soul, the faithful are and shall be also: first indeed in their
souls, afterward at their time they shall be with their bodies. but the
unfaithful with neither souls nor bodies. So we judge it great impiety to
say, that heaven is every where: since it is to the ungodly no where, but to
the godly it is only assigned in the holy scriptures, as their proper, and
everlasting seat. And it must needs be granted, both that bodies are
circumscribed with their certain distances of place, yea even after the
resurrection: and also that souls are contained at least, (as they speak)
definitely.

III. There shall be an and of this world, and all things shall be changed, though
the very time be unknown.
And although it be unknown unto us, Mat. 24.26 Act. 1.7 Ies. 24.23 and 65.17
and 66.22 Psalm. 102.27 Dan. 12.2 Mal. 4.1 2. Pet. 3.13 Apoc. 21.1 Jude. 14.15
Mat. 24 Luc. 25.1 etc.
when the end of this world shall be, and that it may not be known: yet we
believe, that doubtless it shall be: and that then shall be changed not only
the earth, but also the heavens: and that there shall be a new heaven and a new
earth: and that all the dead yea the wicked, shall rise again, Christ calling
them to the general judgment, by the voice and trumpe of an Archangell: to
the assurance of which things it appertains, that the Lord, when he foretold
of the desolation of Jerusalem, did forthwith apply his speech to these
matters: namely that we seeing what happened to Jerusalem, might by those
things, believe also that the same should certainly come to pass, which he
then also spoke concerning the end of the world.

IV. At length shall all dead men, have life again, and shall rise out of
their graves.
We believe therefore that as by Adam all dye, so bv Christ all shall be
revived, 1. Cor. 15.22
yea even the wicked also in their bodies: when as every ones soul shall take
the body again: though we confess that some shall rise to eternal
blessedness and some to everlasting damnation: as Christ says, and they shall
come forth, Ioh. 5.29
that have done good, to the resurrection of life: they that have done evil,
to the resurrection of comdemnation: whereby is confirmed the order also of the
resurrection, which the Apostle sets down, saying, first they shall rise
that are Christ's, then the rest.

V. There shall not be new bodies created for our souls, but the very same,
which died shall rise again.
But we believe, that there shall not a new body be framed for each foul,
but that the very same bodies, touching the substance, of every one, which
died, shall rise again, though diversely altered in some qualities: even as the
Apostle reaches, of the same bodies of the godly, 1. Cor. 15.36 and 42 etc.
by a similitude of the same seed, that it is sown one manner of body, it
rises another: they are sown corruptible bodies, they rise incorruptible: and
so forth: and Job, witnessing of his hope, (says) I know that my redeemer
lives, Job. 19.25
and, at the last day I shall rise out of the earth: J shall see God my savior
in my flesh, whom I my self shall see and none other, and mine eyes shall be
hold him. For with our corporal eyes shall we see Christ returning in the
clouds in his body: and also reigning in heaven.

VI. By the example of our bodies after the resurrection, it is showed that
Christ's body is not every where. Phil. 3.21

But since the Apostle says, that Christ shall transform our vile bodies,
that they may be made like unto his glorious body: we believe that if
Christ's body, by that glory which it received, by rising again, received
also the power to be every where in the proper substance, so also our bodies
for the same glory shall also be every where: which, since it shall not be:
therefore we believe that neither the body of Christ is now every where in it
own substance how full of glory and majesty soever, being it self finite or
determinate, Ioh. 17.24
and the glory thereof also finite: especially, since he said, that where he
himself is, there he will have us to be also: and we shall not be every where
in our bodies.

VII. Errors.
We condemn those impious dotages, both of the philosophers, which taught that
men's souls were mortal; and of those heritickes, which thought that the
souls of all men once separated from the bodies were in some close places,
where they slept, that is, were deprived of all sense and operation of the
mind: or else waked, but yet rested, till they resumed again new bodies, and
the^ were admitted into heaven, or else thrust into hell: as also those, which
dreamed that the souls of many godly men, were cleansed by a certain fire in
purgatory, from the relics of their sins, and their suffered temporal
punishments. We disallow also those, which do not distinguish between heaven
where we read that the godly are, from hell and the deepes, where we read that
the wicked shall be: but that make a difference between them both, only in
this, that some are made blessed, some accursed, though they shall be all in one
place together. Neither can we allow of those, which say, that if not the
certain day and hour, yet the certain time, month or year, may be known
and set down, when the Lord will come, and end this world: notwithstanding
that Christ said, it is not for you to know the times. Yea and we accuse
those skorners; of whom Peter spoke, which think that the world shall ever
remain thus: Act. 17 2. Pet. 3.3 etc.
denying that there is any life to come and laughing at it. We also condemn
those which deny the resurrection of the dead; as also those which dream,
that they shall not have the same, but other new bodies. Also we condemn those
that taught, that our bodies after the resurrection shall be so spiritual: that
they shall be like to a spirit, or as the air, and not be seen nor felt, as
some have also feigned the body of Christ was after his resurrection: and since
have also forged, and impudently lied, that his body was, as it were changed
into his divine nature, so that it could no longer be called a creature.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the glorious coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, to judge the
quick and the dead.
I. Aresurrection of the dead, and changing of them that are alive, at the
coming of the Lord Jesus out of heaven, being made: Christ shall straight
exhibit himself to be seen of them all in the clouds: and all the
faithful shall meet him in the air.
WE believe, that the dead rising again by the ministry of the Angels, at
the coming of the Lord Jesus: they which shall then be remaining alive, they
shall not indeed dye, but they shall in a moment be changed, into the same
state with the dead that are risen: and then Christ, being come down from
heaven even in the clouds, there shall judge all men, and from thence give
sentence on them, shall show himself apparently to all: and that all the godly
being taken up from the earth, even into the clouds shall go to meet him, 1 Thessalonians. 5.1. etc. Mat. 24.3 and 25.31
attended on by the Angels, and appearing in his great majesty and glory: as
also he himself, and his Apostles have taught and left in writing.

II. Christ shall visibly return from one place to another, and that with a
body visible, local, and determinate.
We therefore believe, Christ shall so return visiblie, as he before in the
Apostles sight ascended into heaven: and shall come even out of that heaven,
where he now is: and therefore from that which is far distant from the earth,
and from the clouds, unto which he shall descend: and we believe he shall so
descend with his natural body, that it must needs be granted that the same
is local and finite, and consequently, not existing every where: seeing also
the holy ghost describes such a descending unto simple people, which he
shows, cannot be made without change of places.

III. The faithless reprobates, shall not come up to Christ sitting in the
clouds: but remaining on the earth shall hear the sentence of the judge.
But seeing the Scriptures do pronounce, only of the godly, that they shall be
caught up into the clouds, and shall meet Christ in the air: we believe,
that the ungodly shall not come up unto Christ, but remaining under his feet
upon the earth, shall hear that sentence of the judge, go ye cursed into
everlasting fire, when all the Saints, which shall be aloft with Christ, shall
approve the same sentence of the judge: according as the Apostle thinks, 1.
Cor. 6.2.3
The Saints shall judge the world, yea and the Angels.

IV. For what causes that general judgment was appointed.
And we believe, that for two causes principally, this judgment was
appointed, wherein Christ shall sit as judge in the sight of all men: the first
is, that such things as are now hidden unto men, as well innocence, faith, and
the good consciences of the godly, as the hypocrisy, and vile deeds of the
wicked, may be openly known to all the world: and thereby be manifestly seen
how just the judgments of God were ever from the first to the last. Whereupon
also the Apostle called that day the day of declaration. The other cause, Romans
2.5
is that the reward which was promised as well to the good for their good
works, as to the bad for their evil deeds should be fully paid and
restored: as the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 5.10
we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every man may
receive the things which are done in his body according to that he has done,
whether it be good or evil: whereupon also the same Apostle calls it the day
of the just judgment. Romans 2.5


V. Aeternall life, which shall be given to the elect, is called, and is, a
reward: yet due unto us only upon favor, and not but for Christ's sake.
For albeit it be a mere gift of God, which the elect shall receive, and
purchased by the meritts of Christ alone, yet we doubt not; but it is named,
and that it is truly a reward: since the Lord Jesus vouchsafed to call it so,
namely a free reward: seeing also that the good works themselves of the godly,
and all the causes wherefrom the same do proceed, are free gifts of God: free
election: free redemption: free calling, faith, justification, regeneration,
forgruenesse of sins; and lastly a free pardon of all wants and imperfections
wherewith our good works are infected, and a free imputation of Christ's perfect
obedience, wherewith our imperfect obedience is clothed, and made acceptable to
god and consequently to speak properly, is a reward, not due unto us for our
own works considered in themselves, but for the meri^ts of Christ imputed to
us.

VI. After the judgment given, the godly shall be presently with Christ in
heaven, but the ungodly, in hell, with the devil and his Angels.
Further more we believe, that presently after the same judgment, the godly
shall follow Christ into heaven, but the wicked shall be thrust down with the
devils into hell: Christ saying to the first, come ye blessed of my father,
but to the other, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire.

VII. That day shall be to the godly most joyful, and is therefore to be wished
for: to the wicked most heavy, and is therefore, eue^ in the only hearing
intolerable.
So do we believe that this last day shall be unto them which are grafted into
Christ, most happy and joyful, and therefore loved and wished of them: 2.
Tim. 4.8
and ought to be loved and wished for of us: and to the wicked, the most
accursed and woeful day that ever was: and therefore no marvel though they
hate that day, and cannot abide the mention of it.

VIII. Errors.
We condemn, whosoever shall deny that Christ shall truly and in very deed
descend in his human body from heaven into the clouds, and then return
with his chosen into heaven again, and would prove, that it shall all be
without any change of places, only by appearance (as they call it) and a
certain likeness: to the which the Angels do affirm the contrary unto the
Apostles, Act. 1.11
as ye have seen him ascend into heaven, so shall he come again. We
disallowe also, those which teach, that the works of piety considered in
themselves are the true cause for which eternal life is given, and are the
true meritts thereof: against which the Apostle also, says, Romans 6.23
The gift of God is eternal life. Neither do we approve the opinion of the
Chiliasts concerning the thousand years: wherein Christ with his elect should
remain here in the earth, after the latter judgment: and that they should
here live in the delights, yet honest delights of the flesh, and should
procreate children, but Saints: and so at last be translated up into heaven.
And we condemn, and detest their error, which stand in contention, that the
fire whereinto the wicked shall be thrown, shall at the length be quenched: so
that all, even the devils themselves shall live blessedlie in the kingdom of
God: flatt against the plain words of Christ, go ye into everlasting fire.
Mat. 25.4


CHAP. XXX. Of eternal life.
I. Eternal life shall be given to all; which by their good works have
witnessed, that they were truly grafted into Christ, and have believed in
Christ.
WE believe that eternal life, that is, full and perfect possession of
eternal life, shall be given in that last day, unto all who by the apparent
works of true faith and godliness shall be declared before al Angels and men,
manifestly showed, and by sentence of the judge Christ pronounced, to have
been truly joined to him, by the holy spirit, and so to have believed in god
the father, in his son Jesus Christ, and in the holy ghost, and to have bin
lively members of the holy church, and to have had communion withal the
Saints, and obtained forgiveness of their sins: which the Lord also
teaches, saying, He will say to them, which shall be on his right hand, come ye
blessed of my father, possess the kingdom prepared for you before the
foundation of the world: for I was hungry, and ye gave me to eat etc.

II. A confirmation of the former opinion, and that eternal life is not given
for our own works, but for Christ in whom we are freely chosen, blessed, and
made the children of god.
For by these words the Lord seems to have declared unto us, that our good
works are testimonies of our election, blessing, and adoption in Christ, and
so of our lawful inheritance: and that the cause, whereby we shall obtain
eternal life and possession of the heavenly kingdom, is, partly because that
ere the beginning of the world, that is, ere we had done any good thing, that
kingdom was freely prepared for us in Christ: partly because we were blessed
of the father, namely, Ephesians. 1.3
with all spiritual blessing in Christ, and therefore called by grace,
justified, forgiven our offenses, and sanctified: lastly, because we were in
the same Christ adopted the sons of God, and ^^nued or borne again by his
spirit, and therefore made coheirs with him of the kingdom: which he plainly
meant by the word (...), that is, by the right of inheritance, possess as
sons. Whereas, the Lord therefore shall reckon up the works of piety, he
shall do it (we doubt not) to this purpose, that by them it may appear to the
whole world, that we were the truly blessed, chosen, just children of God, to
whom the inheritance was due: Romans 8.17
the Apostle saying, If sons, then heirs also: but that we are the sons
of God, is declared by our regeneration: and regeneration, by the effects of
regeneration, which are called works of faith and piety.

III. As the godly shall have eternal life: so the pains and fire of the
wicked shall be eternal.
And as we believe, that the children of God shall obtain eternal life: so
also we confess, that the hypocrites and all the wicked shall be cast into
the fire that never shall be quenched and there be tormented for ever: Christ
saying plainly, Go ye into everlasting fire. Mat. 25.42


IV. How happy that eternal life shall be, it can neither be said, nor thought.
But what, and what manner of life it is, and how great felicity, which is
meant by the name of the heavenly kingdom, we do with the Apostle freely
confess, 1. Cor. 2.9
that neither ear has heard, nor has it come into man's heart to conceive:
for it is a matter, greater and more excellent, then can be comprehended in
man's understanding: and of such passing happiness, that nothing ca^ be wished
more happy. We therefore simply believe, that we which are christ's, which are
guided by his spirit, which depend on his word, which lastly do place but
whole hope of salvation in him: shall all be most blessed: Mat. 13.43
shall all shine as the sun in the fight of god: we shall all see God, even
as he is: 1. Cor. 13.12
we shall all live a heavenly and divine life with Christ, and his Angels:
and be delivered from all sin, from all mystery, from all ill: without any
longer grief, without fear, without lack or desire of any thing: 1. Cor.
15.28 Apo. 22.3.4
because God shall be all in all: and we shall behold his face. And in that
city shall be no more night, neither shall there need any candell or
sunne-light, because the Lord shall give us light: and we shall reign for
ever and ever with Christ Jesus our head, spouse, Savior and our Lord: to
whom be praise, honor, and glory, world without end. Amen.

Observations of the same Zanchius upon his own confession.
NOT few, nor small were the the occasions, whereby I was induced, rather to
adioyne these mine obsernations, to my confession it self, then to alter any
thing therein contained. Many there be, to whom it is not unknown; upon what
occasion, at what time, at whose commandment, in whose names, and for what
purposes, I even against my will and constrained thereunto, wrote this sum of
christian doctrine. For although there is no man but sees, that this
confession, as was never looked for, is published in their name for whose sakes
it was written: yet how this came to pass, and for what causes it was done,
all men do not know: many wondering at the deed, yet ignorant of the true
causes. Hereuppon how diverse suspicions many men might gather, how diverse
judgments might be given, of me, and of the confession it self, I say not of
private men, but even of the whole congregations, yea how diverse and sinister
speeches might be thrown out among the vulgar sort, who is it that perceives
not? I was therefore enforced (before I dye) to stop such sinister and false
suspicions, judgments and speeches concerning my doctrine. That I thought
could be done by no better means: then to publish a part by it self, both
the confession, even as I write it: and a part likewise my observations upon
the same, wherein what so is dark, is expounded, and what so is doubtful is
confirmed: and so to leave the judgment of the whole matter together, to all
the true catholic church. I thought moreover, it would be no little help, to
take away al suspicions of men, if there be any conceived: if such judgments
as learned men have given of my confessions, I make known to all the godly
readers, out of their own letters: especially since by them it may well appear
unto every man, what were the causes, why the confession came not forth in the
same manner, as was appointed.

One great learned man write unto me concerning that matter, in these words.

Whereas you write unto me concerning your confession: it has been read over
both by me, by N. and others, with great pleasure: which is written very
learnedly, and with an exquisite method: and if you take out that same, which
you have added in the end concerning Archbishops and the hierarchy, it
pleases me passing well. But whenas together with the brethren N.N. which are
with us we conferred, about the way and means of an agreement among the
churches of our confession, to be begone: they all with one consent thought
only this, to be the safest and speediest way, that the confessions of faith
received and set forth by every of the churches in each province, should be
composed and framed into one harmony: that they might be alike (touching the
substance of faith) all of them: and each church embrace the^ as their own.
This their advise, since they commended to us by many reasons: we have written
unto you theruppon, and to the reverend brethren N. N. and other co^gregations
round about us: who have al of them liked very well thereof.

Thus far out of the letters of that learned man: almost to the same purpose
could we bring many things besides, out of letters written from other about the
same matter: but (for that it greatly needs not) we will for brevity sake
omit the same. Therefore to our matter.

An observation upon the whole confession.
When we use the word of condemning: we mean nothing else: the^, that the
heresies which have bin condemned by the catholic church, the same also we
condemn: and which it allowed not, the same also we allow not: and this we
desire to leave witnessed to all posterity.

Upon the first chapter aphorism. 4.
Whereas we have given the first place, next after the canonical books, to the
Apocryphi in the volume of the Bible: we did it, induced by the authority of
the greek and latin churches, who did always give that honor unto them, that
they should be joined with the canonical books. See the places in Hierome,
Cyprian, and the council of Laodicea, cyted in the confession the first
chapter and fifth aphorism. Moreover, we spoke of books, not of any manner of
writings. For otherwise we prefer the general creeds, before the Apocryphi.

Upon the second chapter. Of God. The first aphorism.
Though the property of existences be, to exist in the essence: yet speaking
of God, we would rather use another manner of speech, and that more usual, for
certain causes; as namely to teach, against the reproaches and skoffes of the
Arrians of our time, that the divine essence is not found, but only in the
persons: and therefore that we do not make an essence aparte by it self
subsisting from the persons: wherein yet three persons should subsist, as
though the catholic church should forge four existences in God.

The third aphorism.
Of this real communication of the essential proprieties of God, we have also
written a several treatise, in the book, which shall be entitled, Of the
incarnation of the son of God, upon the words to Phil. 2. Who when he was in
the form of God etc. Unto which, we refer the reader, who so he be that
desires a further explanation of this doctrine. Surely the Lord Jesus, when he
said, No man knows the son, but the father, and no man knovveth the father
but the son, and he to whom the son will reveal him: he plainly excepted
his created mind from that essential knowledge, wherewith the father knows,
that is, (as the schoolmen speak,) comprehends the son, and the son the
father: teaching that what knowledge soever creatures have in themselves
concerning God, the same is some way revealed unto them: and therefore such
knowledge is not the essential and infinite knowledge, which is in God: but a
created, and a finite or determinate knowledge.

Upon the 5. chapter of the worlds creation etc. The 2. aphorism.
That the heaven of the blessed, wherein the Lord Jesus is now in his body,
does differ from the earth, and from the other heavens, and is above all those
visible heavens: besides that which has bin already said, these few proofs do
also confirm: Ephesians. 4. Christ is said to have ascended above all heavens: in
another place, he is read to have ascended into heaven, and to be in heaven,
and to sit at the right hand of the father. Therefore this heaven is above
the other heavens, and differs from them. So in the third to the Colloss. the
Apostle distinguishes the place where Christ is at the right hand of the
father, from the earth: and calls it upward, saying, Seek ye the things
above, set your affections on things above, where Christ is: and in the 4. of
the first to the These. he says the Lord shall descend from heaven, namely
into these lower parts: and all the godly shall be caught up into the air to
meet Christ in the clouds. That heaven therefore is aloft, not on the earth,
not in the air: much less in every place. For he shall come down in the
visible shape of his body, from the high heaven, into these parts, to judge the
quick and the dead. Of this heaven we have spoken particularly, in our books
Do operibus dei, of the works which he created in the six days. We
therefore disallow of that doctrine which is contrary: which distinguishes
not the heaven from the earth, nor this heaven, from other heavens, but would
prove it to be every where.

Upon the 7. chapter. The 11. aphorism.
Among other things which Iulianus the Pelagian objected to Augustine,
proouing and defending original sin, these were some: that either he made
God an author of sin, or the devil a creator of man: and that because, the
Pelagians thought that Aughstine made original sin, the very substance of
man. Al which objections, he confuted in his 7. Tome, against Pelag. the 5.
book and first chapter in these words. Neither do we ascribe injustice to God,
but rather equity, in that, even infants are punished, not unjustly with such
and so many evils, as we see: neither do we attribute the making of man, but
the corrupting and depra^ing of man's original to the devil: neither do we
grant a substance in the sin, but an act^ of it in the first man: and a
contagion thereof in all his posterity: neither do we grant unto infants, a
conscience without knowledge, in whom is neither conscience nor knowledge:
but he knew what he did, in whom all have sinned, and from whom all have
drawn^ corruption etc.

Upon the 9. chapter. The 5. aphorism.
How they can wind themselves out of this error, which deny that the fathers
did eat the true flesh of Christ, we see not: as though, because he was not as
yet indeed existing in nature, therefore he was not existing in the assured
promise of Christ and consequently could no^ be apprehended and eaten by faith.
For this proposition is general, and to all men, and at all times belongs.
Unless ye eat the flesh of the son of man, ye have no life in you. For
life is not imparted, but only to those, which by faith, as members to the
head, are joined to the flesh of Christ, and by the flesh to the spirit, or
(...) To the word, which is life.

Upon the 10. chapter. The 3. aphorism.
For God would show etc. That which I said of the first, second, third and
fourth estate: had bin more clear, if I had told, what man was, before he
sinned: what after he had sinned: what under grace: and what he shall be in his
glory.

Upon the 11. chapter of Christ the redeemer. aphorism 6.
That the person of Christ, speaking properly, is compounded of the divine
nature, which is immeasurable, and most pure; and of the human, which in
respect of the divine, is less then a prick to an infinite mass, as of two
parts truly and properly so called: we together with the schoolmen do
justly deny. Tho. 3. p. q. 2. ar. 4
For what proportion can there be between that which is finite and the
infinite, between the creature and creator. But by the way confessing with the
ancient fathers, that it may be called (...) compounded, in that sense, as
the scripture says the word was made flesh: and that, he which was in the
shape of God, was now made in the likeness of man. And this is nothing else,
but that this eternal Hypostasis, does now subsist in two natures: so as
Christ is no less true man, then true God. Hereunto tends it, which before
we said, of the similitude of the soul and body (for of these two, as true and
essential parts, consists the person of man) how the same does not agree
fitly every way: and yet we allow of the same similitude, in that sense which
Athanasius and other fathers used it, to show the true and substantial union
of the two diverse natures: although it do not fully agree in all things to
this great mystery, as Justinius, in his exposition of faith and other fahters
have freely confessed. The similitude of the garment is much used of the
ancient fathers: especially of Athanasius and it is agreeable to the
scriptures. For the flesh of Christ, wherewith his deity was covered, the
Apostle calls a veil, Heb. 10. ve. 20. And most excellently, by this
similitude of the garment that opinion of the real imparting and communication
of the divine proprieties, with the human nature is quite overthrown: which
some do much labor to prove by the similitudes, of a fire-hoatiron, and of a
body with life in it: which they can never do.

The seventh aphorism.
We have said that the body and the soul are two existenees: which is
manifestly proved in Adam whose body did first subsist by it self: then the
soul being also a substance subsisting by it self, was joined unto it. The
same is also proved, by the separation of the soul from the body: whereof
each does remain subsisting by it self. But seeing they are the essential
parts of a man: each of them indeed severally are existences, but yet
imperfect: and being joined, they make a perfect existence, that is, the person
of man. But thus stands not the case in Christ, touching the divine and
human natures: for his human nature never subsisted by it self any ways,
before he took it on him, nor subsisteth yet after the taking, but only in the
word: which word was ever by it self a most perfect existence.

The 10. aphorism.
The similitude of the sun, does not altogether so fittly agree as that
similitude of the glory, which our bodies shall receive, because that glory
shall clean take away all the shame and reproach of our flesh, but the sun,
does only dim the light of a candle, and not clean put it out: yet
notwithstanding this similitude of the sun does plainly show what we mean:
namely that by the real communication of the sun with the air, the light of
the candell is made altogether unprofitable, and so as it were put out, and to
be no light at all: yet that the essential proprieties of the flesh, are never
quite taken away, or so weakened, by the personal union, that they serve to no
use, it is manifest. And yet this indeed could by no means be avoided, if the
human nature should really participate with the divine omnipotency; so that
it could do whatsoever God could do. For the word, the son of God never
took unto him, held or holds any thing in vain. Therefore by this
similitude of the sun is strongly confirmed, that which is proved by the
similitude of the glory which shall take away all ignominy from our bodies.

The 11. aphorism. That same whole Christ etc.
Here in the first part to the name of Christ, is added the son of man: in
the other part, the son of God, God: that we might show, how that divine
attributes are spoken of Christ the man: and human, of Christ God: seeing the
very person of Christ is meant in either part. For the same Christ, one and the
same person, is whole God, and whole man, though not wholly (as Damascene
speaks) for in two distinct natures he subsisteth one and the very same. This
does Damascene thus declare lib. 3. cap. 7. The whole Christ is perfect God;
but the whole subsistence of Christ, is not only God; for it is not only God
but also man. And the whole Christ is perfect man, but the whole subsistence
of Christ is not only man; for it is not only man but also God. For the whole
subsistence does represent the nature; but whole Christ, the person.

But whereas we spoke of his actions, done by him either according to his
humane nature, or according to his divine, that yet one and the same and whole
Christ performs the same: it depends upon this that the actions were (as
the schools say) of supposite natures. But the diversity of the actions
proceeds from the diuersnesse of the natures or forms by which they were
done. Since therefore there is in Christ two natures, and but one person,
thereon it comes, that there is but only one worker, namely whole Christ, two
natures that can work; and two kind of actions. Now these actions are called
the actions of God and man, not so much for that they proceed from one agent
which is, (...), God and man: as that not only the deity, but also the
humanity meet together for this work of our salvation: each joining his
actions, with the others actions. And this is the first and principal force of
this hypostaticall, or personal union: namely that by it, the two natures, and
their properties and actions, are so united in one and the same person: that
he, who, by the form of God, wherein he has from the beginning subsisted, is
God, and by the form of a servant, wherein he now subsisteth, is man: and the
same being whole God, is whole man, and being whole man, is whole God: and
consequently is wholly omnipotent, and every where present, and whole
inomnipotent, and existing in a certain place: and the same whole died, and
whole by dying destroyed death. And thus it finally follows, that to the
obtaining, communicating, and applying of our salvation, not only his divine
nature works, but also the human works with it.

The second force follows of the first: namely that the human nature was
made the deities instrument united personally thereunto: and therefore a most
forcible and effectual instrument, to bestow all benefits upon us.

The third, that by this union, this mass or lump of human nature, is lift
up to such dignity, that we neither can nor ought to be^d our actions of
adoration, faith, prayer, and love, to the only deity of Christ: as is
declared in the confession. For we are commanded to worship the son himself,
that is, the person. Heb. 1. and to believe in him.

The fourth force is, that because this human nature is personally united to
the divine: therefore the gifts of God, conferred upon the same are without
measure, as is declared in the aphorism following.

The 12. aphorism.
Although when I wrote this confession I thought to my self, that I had
handled al things which belong unto this article, of the person of Christ: yet
I thought for the better explaining thereof to join this also which follows,
to that which I said before.

1 There is and ever was one only person of Christ. For there is but one only
begotten son of God and one and the same Christ.

2 This person, being from all eternity, by the natural begetting of the
father, is proper unto the word: but in time was made common to the human
nature taken to it, by virtue of the personal union.

For in the word, the essence which it has common yea the very same with the
father and the holy ghost, is to be distinguished from the proper manner of
subsisting, whereby it comes to pass, that it is a certain Hypostasis or
person, distinct from the father and the holy ghost: and therefore is and is
called the Hypostasis or person proper to the son or to the word.

But this eternal Hypostasis, proper by nature unto the word, is by this union
made common, as we said with the divine nature and the human taken unto it:
namely that the word does no less subsist really in this human form the^
it does in that divine form: and in that respect is no less true and perfect
man, then true and perfect god: yet the natures, properties and actions
remaining safe and distinct.

3 Therefore into the unity of that immeasurable, most pure, and most perfect
person, was taken, the human nature, that is, that lump consisting of the
reasonable soul and flesh of man, finite, compounded, and needing many things.

But how? not so as that (for example) it contained that infinite person within
the bounds or limitts of it own finite or determinate substance: or that it
spredd it self, as it were stretched out, into the largeness of it. And that
which we say of this property, the same is to be thought and believed of all
the rest: because they all remain unchangeable and unmixed. How then was the
human nature taken? surely, it was so taken into unity of the same person:
that yet it is not made the very person: but rather existeth in the person, is
borne and sustained of the person, and ever depends wholly upon the same.

For this vnio^ of the natures according to the Hypostasis, or uniting of the
Hypostasis is made without alteration, confusion or division.

4 Whereby it also follows, that the nature taken, (to speak properly) is
not a part of this person, as is aforesaid.

For like as of the union of the two natures, there is not framed a third
nature, so, neither by taking the human nature into unity of the divine
person, is there framed, as it were a new person, which should be the proper
person of Christ, and should differ from the person of the word, which is the
word it self. For it is altogether the very same, nor does it differ from it
self, except herein, that the same which subsisted only in the form of God,
and was only God: now subsisteth also in the form of a servant, and is also
man: and before, was as a king naked, but is now clothed with our flesh, as
with a purple garment: so that for this cause, the fathers not amiss, called
the same (in some sort) a compounded person. But mark also this difference,
besides the rest, that the garment pertains not to the essence of a king: but
the human nature in Christ, is in such sort, that without it, cannot be
defined what Christ is.

5 Which is the cause, why the human nature thus taken, is to be reputed and
acknowledged as it were a part of the person of Christ: namely because it is so
taken into unity of his person: that as the word with this human flesh, is
said to be, and is man: so also this flesh in the word, and with the word God,
is said to be, and is God: as Athanasius, Gregory, Nazianzene, Damascene, and
other fathers have proved out of the scriptures: for that flesh, is God, not by
nature, but by Hypostasie; in which sense, the same flesh, is omnipotent, and
present in all places, whereupon it comes also, that what honor belongs to
the word, of it self: the same is also to be given to the flesh in the word
and for the word: because of them both there is but one and the same Hypostasie.

6 Add this moreover, for better explications sake, that the word, although
wheresoever it be, (and it is in all places) there also the same is not only
god, but also man, and that because, it has in all places, the human nature
united thereunto by Hypostasie: yet, where soever it is it self, it does not
make it self an Hypostasis or personal, to the human nature, but only there,
where the same nature existeth: namely so, as that nature is sustained, borne,
and wrought or moved by it.

For how should the same be said to be sustained, where it does not exist? the
feet are sustained by the soul, not wheresoever the the soul is, be it in
the head: but only where they themselves are existing. When the flesh was in
the virgins womb: the word being then personally united unto it, did not the^
sustain the same, out of the womb of Marie: but only it was Hypostasis unto
it in the womb, which sustained the same there, and not in any other place:
which is also to be said of all the time of Christ's life, when he lived in
diverse places. Likewise after his death it was Hypostasis unto his body, when
it was dead and buried, and sustained the same in it self: but where? surely,
not in heaven where the body was not: but only in the grave: even as also it
was Hypostasis to his soul separated from his body, not in the grave, but out
of the grave, and sustained the same in it self. And now it sustaineth both
the soul and body together, in heaven, not in earth: much less every where.

7 Neither does it follow upon this doctrine, that the personal union is
dissolved, neither does it come to pass that the whole person is not
Hypostasis to the flesh, but only in part. The reason is because this person
of the word, as it is infinite, so also is it most simple and pure, and
therefore both is wholly Hypostasis to the flesh, wheresoever the flesh
existeth: and is also wholly Hypostasis in other places, where the flesh
existeth not, being it self existing in the form of god. Indeed the soul (as
is aforesaid) is wholly Hypostasis to the head, giving life to it and
sustaining it: but where? not in every part of the body, but only in that,
where the head it self is: and out of the head is also wholly hypostasis to
the feet, sustaining them too: not where the head is, but where the feet
themselves are. Is then the union which the soul has with the head dissolved,
because, out of the head it is wholly also in the feet?

8 Finally, that all things which have bin spoken of this personal union, may
more plainly be declared. I add these also.

The soul is Hypostasis to the eyes: to what eyes? such as they are: namely
instruments used for sight, not for hearing: on the other side to the ears,
for hearing, not for seeing. So the word was Hypostasis to the human nature,
not to destroy death, which was a property of the word: but to suffer death,
which was a property of the flesh.

Lastly, it is Hypostasis to the flesh, not to this end, that the flesh should
be it and such like, which, and of which sort the word is: but it should be
it, and such like, which, and of which sort it is it self, either by nature,
or by grace reallie put into it, which they call infused or habitual grace. For
the grace of this union is this, that it is taken into this unity of person.

This same doctrine of ours is confirmed by those things which are delivered
both by the scriptures, and the fathers concerning the office of the mediator,
that is, concerning the end of his incarnation.

Many ends of this incarnation are noted of the fathers in the scriptures, and
particularly of Anselme, in his book entitled Cur Deus homo, why God is man:
but the principal and immediate end was, not simply that the word God
might save us (for he could have performed it by his omnipotency, and by his
only commandment without taking flesh:) but that he might by such means
save us from death, namely, by death of his own person: and by his own
resurrection, might raise us to life: according to that of the Apostle, to the
Hebr. 2. ver. 14. That by death he might destroy him who etc. And in the 2.
to Tim. 1.10. Who has abolished death and has brought life etc. To which the
old church consented, saying, who by dying destroyed death, and by rising
again repaired life. Leo the first declared this end, saying, The son of God
took our flesh: that by one nature he might dye, by the other he might not
dye. Therefore he took upon him flesh to this principal end: that for the
performing of our salvation, he might do such things by that flesh, which of
himself being in the form of God, he could not perform: as, to suffer, and
to dye. For to kill death, simply, he could by himself have done it: but to
kill it by death he could not in himself do it, without taking mortal flesh
into unity of his person. Wherefore, the word did not take flesh, that by
the flesh it might do such actions, as were the proper actions of it self:
but that it might work our salvation by such means, namely by the own proper
actions joined with the actions of our flesh.

Upon the 12. chapter. The 8 aphorism.
Concerning this true and essential union of us, and of our own flesh, with
the flesh of Christ, there is a notable place in Cyrill, upon John. lib. 10.
cap. 13. Col. 500.

We deny not, but we are spiritually joined to Christ, by true faith, and
sincere love: but, that we have no manner of conjunction with him according to
the flesh, that we flatly deny: and affirm it to be clean against the
scriptures. For who ever doubted, but Christ is so the vine, and we the
branches, that from him we draw life unto our selves? Hear what Paul says.
We are all one body with Christ: for though we are many, yet in him we are
one: for we all are partakers of one bread. Does he perchance think, that
the virtue of the mystical benediction is unknown unto us? Which being in us,
does it not also make Christ to dwell in us corporally, by communication of
the flesh of Christ? For why are the members of the faithful the members of
Christ? know ye not, says he, that your members are the members of Christ?
shall I then take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an
harlott? God forbidd. Our Savior also said. He which eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood, abides in me, and I in him: whereby we may consider, that
Christ is in us, not only by dwelling in us, which is perceived by love: but
also by a natural participation. For even as, if one take wax melted by the
fire, and mingle it with other wax likewise melted, so as of them both he
make but one thing: so by this communication of the body and blood of Christ,
he is in us, and we in him. For otherwise this corruptible nature of the body
could never be brought to incorruption and to life, unless the body of
natural life were joined unto it. Beleeuest thou not me telling thee this?
Believe (I pray thee) Christ himself: Verily verily (says he) I say unto you:
unless ye shall eat the flesh of the son of man and drink his blood, ye
shall have no life in you. He which eats my flesh, and drinks my blood:
has eternal life, and I will raise him at the last day. Thou hear him
plainly crying out, that we shall have no life, unless we drink his blood
and eat his flesh. In you (says he) your selves, that is, in your body. By
life, may well be understood the flesh of life: for that, does raise us up at
the last day. And so need I not think it an vncurrant speech to say, the flesh
of life being made flesh of the only begotten son, is brought to the virtue
of life: and therefore cannot be overcome of death. And therefore being made
in us, putts death from us: For gods only begotten son, is never absent from
it, whereupon because he is one with his flesh, I (says he) will raise him
up. Why then should it be denied that we are called branches, according to the
flesh? May it not fittly be said that the vine is his humanity, and we the
branches, for the identitie or likeness of our nature? For the vine and the
branches are of the same nature. So both spiritually and corporally are we
the branches, and Christ the vine. Thus far Cyrill.

In this whole text, Cyrills purpose was to show: that Christ, not only
according to his deity, as his adversaries the Nestorians did think, but also
according to the flesh, was the vine, from which life flowed into us as
branches: and consequently that we, as branches were joined not only to his
deity, but also to his humanity, and so to his flesh: and do draw life and
all our spiritual nourishment, not only from his deity but also from his
flesh. And the reason is brought from the Hypostaticall union, which makes the
word, and his flesh taken into unity thereof to be but one person, one and
the same Christ, one and the same vine. Therefore that we cannot be joined to
the deity of Christ, but also we must be united to his flesh, nor can we draw
life from that, but we must also draw it from this.

To declare plainly this near and real copulation of our flesh with the flesh
of Christ: he brings a similitude of wax: not that it every way agrees in
all things, as is manifest, but because it fittly shows our communion with
Christ to be real and substantial. And this he meant when concluding he said,
not only spiritually, but also corporally, (that is, not only in respect of
the spirit, but also in respect of the body:) both Christ is the vine, and we
his branches. This therefore he spoke not of the manner of our coupling to
Christ, whether it be spiritual or corporal: but of the things which are
coupled, namely, that not only our souls and our spirits, are most nearly
joined, with the soul and spirit of Christ, but also our flesh with his flesh.
This is to be gathered out of the adversaries proposition, against which he
argues: which is that we are not joined with Christ in flesh. Coll. 500. B.

These aduerbs therefore spiritually and corporally in Cyrill, do not signify
the means by which we are united to Christ the vine: but the things which are
united, as is already said and declared. But the means also Cyrill grau^teth
to be spiritual, that is by our faith, and by the spirit of Christ: for in
every place he teaches, and specially upon the sixth of John, that we eat
the flesh of Christ by faith. And by this eating he proves our incorporation.

Upon the 13. chapter. The 7. aphorism.
If any shall make exceptions concerning the law, thus: were not the elect in
the old Testament endued with grace to keep the law: as we in the new, are
endued with grace to believe the gospel? I answer. They were: but not to the
hearing of the law: as we are with faith to the hearing of the gospel: but
because they first believed in the evangelical promises concerning Christ: and
for that cause received the gift (and yet but imperfectly and in part only) to
keep the law: not because they heard the law: but because they believed in
Christ to come: that always the obedience of the law might follow of the
faith in Christ, even as an effect follows the cause.

Upon the 24. chapter. Aphor. 1.
When we said that the signification of a Sacrament, is so received, that not
the word alone, nor the element alone, but the element together with the word
is called a sacrament: we meant nothing else, but that as the word alone without
the element or sign cannot be said to be a Sacrament: so neither ca^ the
sign without the word. For a Sacrament (as the church has used to define it)
is a visible sign of an invisible grace (add) by the word, that is, by Christ's
institution, consecrated to that purpose: that is: altered from the common use
to that matter.

So Augustine Tom. 5. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 10. ca. 5. The visible sacrifice, is,
a sacrament, or a holy sign of the invisible sacrifice. And in D. de cons.
did. 2. ca. sacrif. A sacrament (says he) is a visible form of an invisible
grace.

And the same Augustine Tom. 9. in Ioh. tract. 80. says concerning the word of
the gospel: the word comes to the element, and so is made the sacrament,
even that visible word as it were. A sacrament therefore according to the
received signification in the church, we do and ever did acknowledge to be a
visible sign: And whereof? of an invisible grace. But from whence has it the
virtue, to be sign of such a thing? from the word of Christ the institutor:
For take away the word and it shall be no Sacrament: Pull away the word (says
Augustine) and what is the water, but water? This is the meaning of our words:
not that the word is the sacrament, or, to speak properly, any part of the
Sacrament, in as much as a Sacrament is defined to be a visible sign of an
invisible grace: but because without the word, a visible element, cannot be a
Sacrament of an invisible thing: but therefore it is the visible sign of an
invisible thing, because by the word of the Lord it is instituted thereunto.

Irenaeus also, making no mention of the word, (because that is always
supposed) has left in writing: that the Eucharist, that is, the Sacrament of
the Eucharist, consists of two matters: an earthly, (that is, the sign) and
a heavenly (that is, the thing signified) neither yet the thing signified, is
the sign or the Sacrament: but because the sign cannot be without the thing
signified: (for else, whereof should it be a sign?) therefore he said that
the Sacrament of the Eucharist consisted, both of an earthly matter, (that is,
the sign:) and a heavenly matter, (that is, the thing signified.) This
belongs to the confirmation, of that which we said concerning the word and
the element.

Upon the 25. chapter. Of baptism. The third aphorism.
Of the water it appears in the Acts: where it is manifestly showed that
never any thing was mixed with the water by the Apostles. Other form of
baptizing, besides that which we have in the 28. of Matthew, Christ did not
institute: and that the Apostle did simply follow Christ, is beyond al
controversy. Where as therefore we read in the Acts, that the Apostles
baptized some in the name and into the name of Christ: that does nothing
pertain to the christian form of baptism. John indeed baptized into the name
of Christ, as it appears, in which name notwithstanding, as Ambrose
expounds it, the trinity was closely signified, as the person anointed,
that is, of the son, in that he had taken the nature: the person anointing,
that is, the father: and the anointing, that is, the person of the holy
ghost. But Christ himself expressly set down the proper form of baptism,
saying, in the name of the father, of the son, and of the holy ghost.
Wherefore, it is manifest that the phrase of speech, to be baptized into the
name of Christ, does nothing belong to the form of christian Baptism.

Which is also hereby confirmed: that we never read that the Apostles
baptized any, saying, that they baptized them into the name of Christ: but we
read only that many were baptized in the name and into the name of Christ.
Then what me^t the holy ghost by that form or manner of speech? he meant, in
my judgment, summarily to show thus much: First, in that, they which
professed faith in Christ were commanded to be baptized, that it should be
done by the name, authority, and commandment of Jesus Christ: yea, that they
should be baptized in this form, In the name of the father, the son, and of
the holy ghost, even by commandment of Christ. Therefore they were baptized
in the name of Christ, that is, according to the commandment and form
prescribed by Christ.

Secondly, they which were so baptized: as they were now incorporated into
Christ by faith, in Gods sight, and admitted into the fellowship of the new
covenant: so are they, by this sign of the new covenant, consecrated unto
Christ, in the sight of the congregation, and sealed, for to hold fast, the
faith in him, and to perform obedience to his commandments; and to be
ingrafted into the body of his church: and received into the communion of
Saints, and to a perpetual amendment of life, and to a continuance of faith
in Jesus Christ to their lives end. For the whole church, and every of the
faithful are baptized into the death of Christ, and buried with him: whereof
the sign, is the very dipping into the water: that thereby we may learn, that
throughout our whole life, we must die unto sin, and live unto
righteousness, which is to be truly baptized into the name of Christ, who
died and was buried for us.

The fourth aphorism.
The substance also of the law, yea the canonical law, is perpetual, and for
ever to be holden. For Christ came not to destroy the law, or the Prophets,
touching the substance of doctrine. And it belongs to the substance of the
law of circumcision, that they which are the covenant, should be sealed unto
god with the sign of the covenant. But now the sign of the covenant is
baptism, which succeeded circumcision. Coll. 2.

Add the place of Peter out of the Acts. 2. ver. 38. Repent ye, and be baptized
every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for remission of sins, and ye
shall receive the gift of the holte ghost. For the promise is made unto you,
and to your children, and to all that are a far of, even as many as the Lord
our God shall call. To whomsoever therefore, the promise of salvation by Christ
belongs; to them also belongs baptism. But Peter teaches that the promise
belongs to the young children of the faithful, therefore young children are to
be baptized.

Aphorism 6.
Whereas we said that Paul baptized again those, of whom it is spoken in
the 19. of the acts, as being not rightly baptized: we said it without
prejudice to any learned interpretor: for we condemn none. Only we desire the
reader, to conster favorably of that word rebaptize. For we meant not, that
they which were rightly baptized, were afterward baptized again: but they
which were not baptized with true baptism, where the true doctrine of God the
father, the son, and the holy ghost went before it: they, after Paul had
taught them the true and sound doctrine of Christ: then they took true
baptism: and after baptism, by the laying on of hands, received the holy
ghost, and the gifts thereof: and this, to speak properly, was indeed not to
be rebaptized, but to be truly baptized.

Now why I thought so, and do yet think: I was induced by the authority both
of the fathers, and especially Ambrose, and Hierome so expounding that place:
and also by a reason drawn from the text it self.

Touching the authority: first, never any of the fathers did teach that these
words, (and when they heard it they were baptized) were the words of Paul,
spoken of them, which heard John Baptist: but expounded them as the words of
Luke, spoken of them which heard Paul. So Chrysostom Tom. 3. in act. hom. 40.
So Occum in act. ca. 19. So Augustine Tom. 7. cont. Petil. ca. 7. So Gregory
Tom. 1. in euang. hom. 20. So Bid in act. ca. 19. So all the rest.

Moreover most of them do in plain terms write that these twelve disciples
were baptized by Paul, or at least by Paul's commandment, as having not bin
rightly baptized before, because they heard not the doctrine of the holy
ghost, nor were baptized into his name. Ambrosius Tom. 2. de spi. san. ad Theo.
imp. ca. 3.

Lastly they themselves also, which said, we have not so much as heard,
whether there be an holy ghost, were afterward baptized in the name of the
Lord Jesus Christ. And this abounded unto grace, because they then by Paul's
preaching knew the holy ghost, neither must it be thought a contrariety,
because although afterward no mention is made of the holy ghost: yet it is
believed, and that which is omitted in words is expressed in faith. For when
it is said, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, by the unity of the name is
fullfilled the whole mystery: neither is the holy ghost separated from the
baptism of Christ because John baptized to repentance, Christ in the holy
ghost. Thus far Ambrose.

Hierome, Tom. 6. in Joel. ca. 2. pa. 66. Therefore (says he) the saving
health of God, cannot be seen, except the holy ghost be powered down: and
who so says that he believes in Christ, and believes not in the holy ghost:
he has not the eyes of perfect faith. Whereon, also in the Acts of the
Apostles: they which were baptized by John's baptism into him that was to come,
that is, in the name of the Lord Jesus: because when Paul asked them, they
answered, we know not whether there be an holy ghost: they were baptized
again: yea they received true baptism, because without the holy ghost, and
the mystery of the trinity, whatsoever is received in the name of the one or
the other person, is imperfect, etc. Augustine cont. Petil. cap. 7. coll. 498.
says. Paul baptized those twelve, either because they had not received John's
baptism, but lied: or else, if they had received it, yet they had not received
Christ's baptism. For he thought with Cyprian, and Tertullian, and other
fathers that John's baptism and Christ's did differ: of which matter more
hereafter. Of our own writers also, that learned man Wolff. Musculus, about
the place of the Act. 19. thinks as Ambrose does, in his common place, the
place of baptism, whose words, because he ha^dleth that place very largely, we
will not repeat, and before Musculus, Bucer both on the third of Matthew. and on
the fourth of the epist. to the Ephesians. upon Math. he has these words. To those
Ephesians, which had been baptized with John's baptism, not knowing what it
was, because as then they knew not the holy gnost: wherewith Paul had
preached that Christ should baptize them; we read that he said Act. 19. John
baptized indeed with the baptism of repentance, saying unto the people, that
they should believe in him, which should come after him, that is, in Christ
Jesus. Now what do we else, or ought we to do in baptizing? For ours is also
the baptism of repentance: so long as those whom we baptize, we also bury
into the death of Christ, that is, we ascribe them into that number, which
throughout all there life, must die unto sin, and live unto righteousness:
and yet shall not receive that neither, but by the gift of Christ. Therefore of
such as be of years of discretion, whom we baptize, we require their faith in
Christ: and the infants we commit unto the church to be brought up to the same
faith. Therefore Paul would never have rebaptized those Ephesia^s, if they had
been baptized with John's baptism, that is, with that baptism, wherewith he
used to baptize, into repentance and the faith of Christ: but seeing they were
(as Luke reports) only baptized into John's baptism, which notwithstanding
they knew not what it was, and were altogether ignorant of the baptism of
Christ, that is, of the spirit, he baptized them: showing unto the^, what John's
baptism was: and how he baptized into Christ not into his own sprinkling or
dipping of the water, as though that could be any profit unto them. He
therefore baptized them with this baptism of John, that is, as John used to
do, into the name of the Lord Jesus: and by and by after laying on his hands,
he baptized the^ with the baptism also of Christ, that is, with the spirit.
For immediately the holy ghost came on them, as it is there read. This there.

And upon the epistle to the Ephesians. chap. 4. the same Bucer writes thus.
Hereby it is also manifest, that the twelve men at Ephesus, which knew not
whether there were an holy ghost or no whom Paul baptized, were not baptized
with the baptism of John, that is, with that which he administered: but, as
they witnessed themselves, they were baptized into John's baptism. For John
preached unto all whom he baptized, that Christ should baptize them with the
holy ghost: and exhorted them, that they would believe in him, and that of him
they might receive the holy ghost. And therefore these Ephesia^s could not have
been ignorant of the holy ghost, if they had bin washed with that baptism,
which might truly be called John's: which also the Apostles words to those men
does sufficiently declare: John verily baptized with the baptism of
repentance, saying unto the people, that they should believe in him, which
should come after him, that is, in Christ. For by these words he would teach
us, that they never received John's baptism, who as yet knew not John's
preaching of Christ, and the promise. Thus far Bucer.

Seeing then the fathers expound this place in Act. 19. as we have now
declared: who I pray am I, that I should dare, or that I ought to gainsay, so
many and so learned men, in such an exposition of this scripture, which neither
does any whitt wrest the text, nor contrarieth any other scriptures, nor is
against the analogy of faith, nor brings with it any absurdities?

For if any man shall object out of the text, that same truly and but: it
proves nothing against the fathers exposition: seeing it is no unusual thing
with the Apostle, where he says first truly, not always to join the
aduersatiue particle but: Romans 3. ver. 2. Coll. 2. ver. 23. and in other
places. And unto this truly, another but, which Luke for brevity sake left
out, might be understood very fittly, as hereafter we will show: so that it
is no necessity, with this truly to join that but, which follows in the 5.
verse: in which verse the fathers, will have, not Paul's speech, but Lukes to
be continued. Therefore the fathers exposition is not repugnant to the text:
nor yet with any other scripture. For if any man say, Paul writes to the
Corinthians, that he is gladd he baptized none, but the house of Stephana: it
may be answered, it is true, namely at Corinth: but these twelve were baptized
at Ephesus: and besides, he speaks of such as were baptized with his own
hand: but these twelve, he might baptize by some other: to dispute no longer
about the circumstance of the time. And it is most certain, it is not
repugnant to the analogy of faith, nor brings with it any absurdities:
because the fathers do not speak of a baptism rightly administered, as though
Paul had repeated that again. This exposition therefore of the fathers in my
judgment, cannot easily be refelled. And this therefore is the chiefest cause
why I have ever thus thought, and yet think of this action of Paul: although
indeed I cannot consent unto them all, in the cause, why Paul baptized them:
but only to Ambrose and Hierome.

That John's Baptism, and Christ's Baptism did differ, the fathers teach, both
by this, that John said, how he baptized (only) with water: but Christ
should baptize with the holy ghost, and with fire: and also by this, that the
baptism of John is called, the baptism of repentance: but Christ's baptism
is said to be given for the remission of sins. And because that he prepared
the way to this: and (as Tertull. speaks) that baptism of repentance, was
as it were a sueing for the remission of sins and sanctification in Christ,
which was to follow after. Read Tertul. of bap. page 707.

So Cyprian also in his sermon of the baptism of Christ, and of the
manifestation of the Trinity, page 430. So August. To. 7. against. Petil. cap.
7. But all of us do not know, what the fathers me^t, by this difference of
the baptism. For they meant not, that the one diffred from the other in the
matter, or in the sign, or in the doctrine, and form of baptisine: but only
in efficacy: that namely, although remission of sins was given to them,
which were washed with John's baptism: yet the same was not of John's baptism,
that is, of water, but by the baptism of Christ, which is the baptism of the
spirit: whereunto that belongs: I baptize with water, but he with the holy
ghost. And with this baptism of the spirit were they only baptized, which
believed in Christ, whom John said was then come, though all knew him not.
Therefore John in his baptism did inculcate and often repeat this faith, as
Paul witnesses in that place of the 19 of the Acts. They therefore are
deceived, who for this diversity, did think the baptism of water was to be
repeated.

August. against. Petil. (as we touched a little before) shows how some held
opinion, that the 12 did lie unto the Apostle, when being asked unto what they
were baptized, they answered, unto John's baptism. So by this, that first those
Ephesians said unto him, that they had not yet heard, whether there were, that
is, whether that holy ghost did exist or not, namely, the giver of those
gifts, whereof the speech was: the Apostle might be said to convince the^ of a
lie, by this argument. Whosoever have bin baptized, they have professed faith
in Christ, as the son of God, and consequently in the father, and in the
spirit of them both. For John did require this faith: and according to the
same he baptized men: and in baptizing he always urged that Jesus Christ was
he which should baptize in the spirit. But you, by your own confession, do not
know this spirit etc. and so believe not rightly in Jesus Christ. Therefore
etc.

But surely, to say that these twelve did lie unto the church and to the
Apostle: it seems to me, to be to hard and vile a thing in me^ which professed
Christ. And for this cause we did ever better allow of the opinion of Ambrose
and Hierome: that the 12 did say truly, when they said, they were baptized
unto John's baptism: but yet not by John himself, but by some one of John's
disciples, who expounded not unto the^ the true doctrine concerning God: and
therefore baptized them not rightly. But all the fathers do hold beyond all
controversy, that they which are not rightly baptized into Jesus Christ, as
the natural Son of God, and mediator, and so also into his father, and the
spirit of them both: the same must be rightly baptized. And therefore those
twelve were not, as being not baptized, rebaptized: but, as being not rightly
baptized, Paul did baptize them with true baptism, first teaching them the
true doctrine of the trinity, which also John had preached unto them.

And thus much of the authority of the fathers: from whom, either in their
assertions, or in their expositions of Scriptures, especially where they all,
for the most part do agree, I dare not decline for my conscience sake, unless
I be constrained by most apparent reasons. Thus I freely confess to the whole
church of Christ.

The reason also, (besides the authority of the fathers) brought as we saw
before, even by the fathers, out of the very text, confirms me in the same
opinion. This reason is partly gathered out of those words, which these
Ephesians, being asked by Paul, whether they had received the holy ghost,
that is, the gifts of the holy ghost, answered, saying: that they had not so
much as heard, whether there be, that is, whether that holy ghost be
existent: whom Paul would have to be the author of those gifts: so far
from the^ it was, that they should have received him and his gifts: and partly
it is gathered out of the words, which Paul used concerning the doctrine and
baptism of John, saying, John verily baptized with the baptism of repentance,
saying unto the people, that they should believe in him, which should come
after him, that is, in Christ Jesus: as if he had said, you have not rightly
believed in Christ, such as he is, the son of God, God: seeing ye know not
his spirit. The conclusion followed: that therefore they, although they were
baptized, by I know not whom, into John's baptism, yet were not rightly
baptized: seeing they were not instructed in the doctrine of the person of
Christ, in whom they ought to believe, namely, that he was not only man and
the Messiah, but also the son of God, God: from whom also and from the
father proceeds the holy ghost, and consequently not in the doctrine of god
the father, the son, and the holy ghost, in the name of all which, baptism
is to be given. And therefore that they ought to learn the true doctrine
concerning the father, son, and holy ghost, and resting therein, to receive
lawful baptism: that afterward by laying on of hands, they might receive
the gifts of this holy spirit: which Luke teaches to be afterward done,
saying, but when they heard it, (namely, those twelve Ephesians:) what when
they heard? even, when they perceived Paul's doctrine, concerning true faith in
Christ the son of God, and so in his father, and the holy ghost: which faith
John had also preached, and wherein they resting were baptized etc. This is the
interpretation of the fathers: namely, that those twelve were not rightly
instructed in the doctrine of god the father, the son and holy ghost, and so
neither rightly baptized: and it may be confirmed, both by the kindred and
cuntrie of those twelve: and also by the cause, for which Paul, letting alone
all the rest, peculiarly asked them, whether they have received the holy ghost,
since they believed.

By kind they were Jews, as appears by John's baptism, unto which they
said they were baptized: and they were baptized by a Jew. But the Jews for
the most part, never rightly held the doctrine of the three persons subsisting
in one essence. And therefore these 12 Jews also, though they granted Jesus,
to be the true Messiah: yet they seemed to acknowledge but only two persons:
the person of God the father, and the person of the Messiah, even (as the most
thought) a bare man, but yet such a one, as in whom God the father dwelt: but
that they were altogether ignorant that the holy ghost was an existing thing,
and the giver of those graces, they are convinced by their own words.

But surely there was some cause, why Paul coming into Ephesus, where were
many of Christ's disciples, asked this question of the 12 Jews only. Surely
it is to be thought, by their answer, that the Apostle, either by their own
talk, or by telling of some other of the brethren, perceived that these twelve
did not think aright concerning the holy ghost.

Finally this was the Apostles argument, whereby he would prove by their own
answer, that they were not baptized with the true baptism of John.

Whosoever has bin baptized with the true baptism of John: he has also heard
his doctrine, concerning god the father, the son, and the holy ghost: and
has professed the same, and consequently has known also the holy ghost. This
proposition is not expressed: but the proof of it, the Apostle brings in the
4. verse, saying, John baptized etc. that is, John preached not only
repentance, but also faith in Christ: namely, that he is not only man the
Messiah, but also the son of God, God: from whom, as also from the father,
proceeds the holy ghost, and that he shall baptize in the holy ghost: and
therefore all which desire to be saved, must also believe in him, as the true
Savior.

But you have not heard this doctrine, nor professed it, and therefore have not
truly believed in Christ, such as he is. For ye your selves say, ye have not
so much as heard whether there be an holy ghost, (namely, when ye were
baptized). Therefore etc. So consequently it remains, that professing this
doctrine and faith, ye now receive lawful baptism: and afterward by the
laying on of hands those gifts of the holy ghost. This is the declaration of
the argument according to the exposition of the fathers: but Luke, as the
Prophets and Eua^gelists use to do, comprehended the whole sum in few words.

And I pray, what absurdity can follow hereo^? or what injury is done to
the Apostles narration? is the heresy of the Donatiftes and Anabaptists
maintained? nothing less. For they rebaptize such as are rightly baptized:
the Apostle baptizeth them, which had not been rightly baptized: as having not
heard nor professed the true doctrine concerning God, he took care they should
be rightly baptized. And such when they come into the catholic church, (we
speak of them that be of years of discretion) all the fathers teach, they
must be baptized with true baptism, instructing them first in the doctrine
concerning God, and Christ their Savior:

Touching the text it self: it is no whitt wrested. That their answer. (But
we have not so much as heard whether there be an holy ghost) ca^ not be
understood of the gifts of the holy ghost, it appears by Paul's demand
following, being asked with an admiration: Unto what were ye then baptized?
For no man is baptized unto the gifts of the holy ghost: but unto the holy
ghost it self, as also unto the father, and the son. And the Apostles held
it for certain, beyond all doubt, that whosoever were baptized either of John,
and his true disciples, or of Christ's disciples: they were surely baptized,
with instruction of the true doctrine of the holy ghost also, according to
Christ's institution. Hereupon was that admiration: Unto what were ye then
baptized? They answered him, unto John's baptism: For Paul thought this could
not stand together that they should be baptized with John's lawful baptism,
and yet should not know nay not so much as hear, whether there were, and
whether there did exist an holy ghost: whom John both knew and preached unto
all that came to his baptism: neither did he preach Christ without this holy
ghost. For he said that he baptized in water, but Christ Jesus should baptize
in the holy ghost.

Hereupon was it, that meaning to convince them, that they were not baptized of
John, nor of his true disciples, he added, saying: John indeed etc. This truly
or verily is an aduersatiue particle: whereby he would show, how it could not
agree with the lawful baptism of John, that they said, they had not so much
as heard (namely when they were baptized) whether there be an holy ghost or
no: Since John baptized none, without mentioning the same. And to this truly
here expressed, does a but closely understood make answer: so that the
argument is such, as before we set down. John indeed baptized etc: as though
he had said: John preached both repentance, and faith in Jesus Christ, such as
he is, namely the son of god, from whom as also from the father proceeds
the holy ghost, and who baptizeth in the holy ghost, and into the confession
of this doctrine, he baptizeth men. The minor was to be added, which Luke
expressed not, because it is contained in the twelues own confession, but we
have not so much as heard etc. what is plainer then this text?

That therefore which follows in the fifth verse, But when they heard it etc,
is Lukes own words, showing truly and briefly, what followed upon Paul's
argumentation: But when they heard etc, (namely these 12) when they heard,
what? what it is truly to believe in Christ, and that he baptized men,
according to the confession of this doctrine concerning Christ, and his father,
and the holy ghost: and that Christ alone, as the only Savior, baptized men
into the holy ghost: when they heard (I say) these things, not only with the
ears of their bodies, but also of their minds: and so believed and confessed
the same: They were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus; that is, into
Jesus, as he is called and described in the Scriptures, not only man, but
also the son of God, God: from whom, as also from the father proceeds the
holy ghost: and therefore, as a true and only Savior baptizeth us with his
holy spirit.

Add this also, that by the new interpretation, there is admitted in a little
narration, no small Battologie or superfluity of words. For when Paul said,
John verily baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying unto the people
that they should believe in him, which should come after him, that is, in
Christ Jesus: to what end should the Apostles have added this concerning the^,
whom John baptized, but when they heard, namely that company or those men,
were baptized. For who could not understand, by the words going before, if
John baptized: they therefore, which had heard and professed his doctrine
concerning repentance, and faith in Christ, were by John baptized.

To conclude, if I should allow that interpretation, I see not, what Paul
could else prove by this whole narration, but that those Ephesians had been
rightly baptized: and therefore that nothing else remained, but that by laying
on of hands, they might receive the holy ghost. But this conclusion, I do not
think to agree with that which goes before it, but to be needelesse.

I have to my power, declared the exposition of the fathers, upon this place,
and that modestly, and without prejudice to any: to no other end, but that I
may by such reasons as I am able declare unto the brethren, which perhaps have
took offense at that particle in my confession, That Paul did baptize those
twelve again, which had not bin rightly baptized: that I did not put those
words rashly in my confession. By the way as I said, we condemn no other men's
interpretation.

And this also I freely profess, that my conscience is such, that I cannot be
easily drawn to dissent from the ancient fathers, either in their assertions,
or in their interpretations of scriptures. Unless I be co^uinced and enforced
by manifest testimonies of holy scriptures, by necessary consequences and
plain demonstrations. For so does my conscience rest, and in this settled stay
of mind I desire to die.

And therefore I humbly desire of all the brethren, that if in this behalf, my
opinion, be not altogether as theirs is: they will by no means take offense:
especially, seeing that in all the principal points of Christian faith: we
have a sound agreement.

Upon the 16. chapter. The 9. aphorism.
The place of the 1. to the Corinth. 6. being diligently marked (as also we
noted before in the 15. chap. and 14. Apho.) may well decide the controversy
about the wicked men's Eating, that is, the Hypocrites; and of the sacramental
eating.

We say, that hypocrites do not eat the true body of Christ, since they are
void of faith (namely they ear it not truly and indeed, since it is not
indeed eaten, but only by true faith, which they want) but only
sacramentally, that is, they eat indeed the sacrament, and the sign it
felfe: The Adversaries say also, that hypocrites do eat the true body of
Christ, only sacramentally: but by this word they mean, that they receive not
only the sacrament, that is, the sign, but all the thing it self: though not
unto salvation. If they mean this in the same sense, that the Apostle does,
when he said, The Corinthians were all sanctified, justified etc. namely that
by receiving baptism the sacrament of true Regeneration, and sanctification,
they were reckoned to have received the thing also: since the very sacrament
hindered not, but they might also be pertakers of the true sanctification,
although all of them did not indeed obtain the same, by reason of their
hypocritical faith; the^ doubtless I see not, but such a manner of speaking
may be well allowed: so it be declared as it ought, after the Apostles meaning.
This I only allege, that the brethren may bethink them of some good means
of agreement, that so great an offense and scandale may be rooted out of the
Church. We must all stand before Christ's Tribunal seat.

Upon the 16. chap. Apho. 10.
Here should a subdistinction have been added of the godly: because some do
come worthily, some unworthily: yea one and the same godly man eats sometime
worthily sometime not worthily enough, as in the 1. to the Corinth. 11. it
appears. And the ungodly also which receive only the element, and not the
thing of the sacrament, are not all of one sort. For among them are also
contained the Hypocrites, of whom we spoke eve^ now. We thought good
therefore, here to join a more plain and clear distinction.

There be two kinds of men, which, like as they come to the hearing of the
word, so may they come to receive the supper of the Lord: the ungodly, and the
godly. Again, of the ungodly, some are wholly and simply wic^ed: as Atheists,
Godless men, also Jews and Turks, and all such as know nothing, and believe
nothing of all those things, which they hear by the preaching of the gospel,
or see to be done by the administration of the Sacraments: nay they rather
laugh at and contemn all such matters. These if they come to the Lords table:
they neither eat nor drink any thing else, but bread and wine, and that
also, not as they are sacraments, (for they know not of what things they are
sacraments) but only as they are of their own nature, namely, bread and
wine. For even so also at the preaching of the gospel, they receive nothing
but bare words and the sound of the words. Another sort are indeed and before
God wicked, though they are not so in respect, I mean, in profession, or in
sight of men: such as are the hypocrites in the church: who are not endued with
the true and lively faith, which is proper to the elect: but have only a
temporal and an hypocritical belief. These, coming to the supper, do
indeed eat and drink no more then the former: that is, bread and wine. The
reason is, because they have no true faith, by which alone, Christ's body is
truly eaten. For all this the difference between these and the other is not
little.

1 For the former, seeing they believe none of all the things which they hear
concerning Christ's body in the supper: nor perceive any thing with their
minds: as little do they eat the true body of Christ: but only with the
mouth of the body they eat bread, as common bread. But the other, seeing that
by their only historical, hypocritical and temporal belief, they
understand in their mind, and in some sort, do believe the things which are
spoken and done: therefore by the same belief and mind, they may be said in
some sort to receive, and in some sort to taste, the body of Christ offered in
the word and sacraments: although they do not in very deed eat it, seeing
they do not swallow nor retain the same (for this properly is to eat) in the
stomach of their soul for nourishment of their spirit: but rather do spue or
vomitt out the same, being tasted, and after a sort received down. For so
also we read in the 6 to the Heb. of those temporary professors: that they
tasted the heavenly gift and good word of God: as if he had said, they tasted
indeed, and that also by the gift of the holy ghost, but being tasted, they
cast it up again. And in the parable of the seed: the temporary ones were
said to receive the seed of the word: but that they kept it not, and therefore
brought forth no fruit by it. These things cannot be said of the first sort of
these wicked ones, which are most true of the second sort, namely, these
temporary hypocrites. Let this then be the first difference: hereuppon
follows another difference between the eating of those and these.

2 They, seeing the bread which they take into their mouths, they nether
acknowledge nor believe it to be a Sacrament of Christ's body: therefore they
take it and eat it, not as a Sacrament, but as common bread: and therefore can
they not be said to eat the body of Christ sacramentallie. But these take the
bread, not as common bread, but as a Sacrament of Christ's body: and for that
cause, are said to eat Christ's body, though not in very deed, seeing they
lack the mouth and teeth of true faith, yet to eat it sacramentallie: by an
argument drawn, as they call it, a coniugatis: they eat the Sacrament, as the
Sacrament of Christ's body: therefore they eat Christ's body sacramentally: and
so far forth as it is a Sacrament, because they eat not Christ's body in
very deed, but only the Sacrament thereof.

Hereupon follows that exposition, whereof we spoke before, that it is not
ungodly to say simply and absolutely, that the hypocrites do eat not only
the Sacrament, but also the thing of the Sacrament, that is, not only bread,
but also the very body of Christ. But in what sense? namely, in that,
wherein the Apostle said, all they of Corinth in their first state were
unclean, ungodly, etc: afterward he said, they were not only vvashed (which
some might have interpreted only of the water of baptism) but also
sanctified. and justified: when notwithstanding they were not all made truly
such: but as yet there lacked not some hypocrites among them.

So all they which professing faith in Christ do come to his supper, and eat
the Sacrament of the Lotds body, are said also to eat the Lords true body,
by reason of the sacramental union, which causes, that he which receives the
sign, is by the church judged to have received also the thing signified.
because there is no fault either in the institutor, of the Sacrament, or in the
Sacrament it self, but that he which has received and eaten the one, might
have also received and eaten the other: since Christ by the minister does
truly offer them both: and the soundnes and truth of the Sacrament,
depends not upon our faith, but upon Christ's institution, So that if we
receive not the whole Sacrament, but only the sign without the thing
signified the fault is in our own selves, who receive one part with the mouth
of our body, and cast away the other part by our infidelity (for an
hypocritical faith is infidelity:) separating those things which God would
have to be joined. By these things it appears, what difference is in the
eating of those that are simply wicked, and the hypocrites: although neither
sort can be said truly to eat Christ's true body. For such only do truly
eat Christ, who are also truly ingrafted into Christ, by a true and lively
faith: with which alone, the elect are endued. They which are dead corporally,
can no longer eat corporal meat: how then should they which are dead
spirituallie, be fedd with spiritual food? And only the faithful, do
therefore live, because by a lively faith, they are joined unto Christ, which
is our life, as members to their head: as branches to the vine, as the boughs
to their tree. And if, as Cyprian says, it be meat of the mind, not of the
belly: surely it is eaten with the teeth not of the body, but of a faithful
mind: which only the godly can do.

If likewise the body of Christ be (as Ireneus speaks) a heavenly matter:
^owe can it be eaten of them, which have nothing in them that is heauely, but
are altogether earthly me^: and endued with no faith, whereby they may ascend
up into heaven, and eat the heavenly food? therefore only the godly can do
this.

But the faithful also are not affected all alike, or after one sort: seeing
very often they eat worthelie, but sometime it chau^ceth, that they eat
unworthily: and therefore are sundry ways chastened by God for it.

They are said to eat worthelie, who before they eat of the Lords bread, do
examine themselves, whether they be in faith: and if they be, then they
diligently way and consider the signification and greatness of this mystery:
moreover they try their consciences, whether they be touched with a true
repentance: and by earnest and hearty prayers do stir themselves up to both.

And they eat unworthily, who although they be planted in Christ, by faith
and the spirit of regeneration: yet their faith being in some sort choked
with the cares of this world, and other affections of the flesh: do nor
sufficiently prove themselves: do not dilige^tlie examine, nor stir up
themselves, to an earnest consideration of so great a mystery: nor weigh with
an attentive mind, what is given in that holy table; what the Lord requires
of them; for whom, and for what purpose the Supper was instituted by the Lord:
Lastly, they do eat unworthily, who as the Apostle speaks) discorne not
the Lords body: and so come not to that table, with a due reverence, and fear
of the Lord: discerning in their mind and by faith, the things signified,
from the signs, and the signs from other common meats and drinks, in such
sufficient manner as they ought: whereby they do not as well open the mouth of
the inward man, to eat the spiritual food; as they do the mouth of the
outward man, to eat the food, which (of it own nature) is corporal. By
reason of this duty so neglected, namely, that they do not sufficiently
prove themselves, nor discern or judge of the Lords body, and consequently
do eat unworthily the Lords bread, christians and faithful men other whiles
are wo^t to be visited with diverse chastiseme^ts of God, yet such as are for
their salvation, least they should be condemned in this world. And of them does
the Apostle properly speak, in the 1. Cor. 11. and not of such as be simply
wicked and more hypocrites, when he says, these do eat judgment unto
themselves, etc. This is thus proved.

1 Because he says not, that they which thus eat unworthily, do eat unto
themselves (...), which signifies eternal destruction, but (...) judgment:
which words, what difference there is betwixt them, is manifest in the same
text, where the Apostle in the 32 veise faieth (...), We are judged or
corrected of the Lord, (...), least we should be condemned with the world.

2 When he declares the punishment, which they shall have which eat
unworthily, he rehearses none but teporall chastiseme^ts, making no mention of
eternal destruction: For this cause, (says he) many are vveake, and sick
etc.

3 Add this, that he says, if we will judge our selves, (that is, try our
selves, and acknowledging our sins, chastife our selves by repentance and by
true faith, and amendment of life, separate, our selves from the world, we
should not be judged: namely of the Lord, who does therefore chasten and
mortify us, because we do not mortify our affections, nor repent us of our
sins.

4 And what means this, that in most plain words, he calls this
judgment, by which we are therefore judged, because we eat unworthily the
Lords bread, a chastning, very prositable for us. For thus he says. But when
we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, because we should not be condemned
with the world.

3 And surely he places himself and all the other true believers, in the
number of those, which being judged, are chastised of the Lord for their
salvation. For he makes two sorts of men: the wicked, which are understood in
the name of the world: and teaches that upon them awayeth eternal
destruction: and then the godly, who by reason of their many falls and
vnworthinesses, are also chastened by many punishments, least they should also
be condemned together with the wicked: and them he sets down under (...)
judgment, that they may avoid (...), eternal destruction. This place
therefore is to be understood properly of the faithful, but such as are
imperfect, and therefore do greeuouslie sin, because they come unworthily
to the Lords table.

Whereas some do expound the same also of the wicked, and do take (...)
judgment, for (...) condemnation, this is rather to be understood, that it is
by a certain consequence, with an argument drawn, from the less to the
greater, then by force of the text: Thus, if the godly which sometime eat
unworthily, do eat unto themselves (...) condemnation: then what (...)
condemation, shall abide the wicked?

(...) therefore, if it be spoken of the godly, is taken for chastisement: if
of the wicked, it signifies eternal destruction.

Upon the 17. chapter. Aphorism 1.
Here we spoke of such as be of years of discretion: concerning the young
infants of the faithful, the reason is otherwise: as in another place we
declared. For the holy ghost does ingraft them into Christ, as true members
to their head, from whom they draw their life: yea and we also believe that
they are endued with the spirit of faith: although through the weakness of
nature in them, they cannot use the same: even as they cannot use the virtue of
their understanding; whenas notwithstanding, they are not without a mind or
the faculties thereof.

The 2. Aphorism.
In the description of faith, I willingly used those two words of wisdom and
prudence: following the most learned divine M. B. upon the Epistle to the
Ephesians: because in the former, I comprehend the knowledge of christian
religion, of God, of Christ etc. in the latter the practice thereof, into which
two, the whole gospel is dissinguished, which christian religion imbraceth,
and upon which only it is grounded.

Whereunto belongs also, that others do teach, how faith is an assured
knowledge concerning God, and Christ, conceived by the word of God etc. And the
whole christian doctrine consists partly in knowledge, and partly in practice.

And there be two kinds of the actions of faith: one in the understanding,
another in the will. The understanding being endued with the light of faith
does perceive, assent unto, and believe things set down in the word: The
will being filled with the power of faith does love, desire and embrace the
same things, as good: And further, such things as pertain to outward works,
those it commands to be performed faithfully and prudently by the other
faculties of the mind and instruments of the body.

Upon the 19. chap. Of justification. Aphorism 6.
Whereas I so expounded that place concerning the faith of Abraham out of the
15 of Genesis, and the 4. to the Romans as I said, that that same thing was
imputed unto him for righteousness, which he believed concerning Christ the
promised seed: I did it rather respecting the matter it self, then the bare
word of faith. For I was not ignorant, that both Moses and Paul spoke of the
faith of Abraham, that this (faith) was imputed to him for righteousness: seeing
the Apostle manifestly gathering a general doctrine from the example of
Abraham, adioyneth these words: But to him that works not, but believes in
him that instifieth the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness: that
is, he is therefore accounted just with God: because he believes in him which
justifies the ungodly: by which place it most plainly appears, that from
the true justification of us, are excluded our own works, and that it is
wholly ascribed, to only faith, as well touching the end, as touching the
beginning.

But when the question is asked, what cause there is, why justification should
be attributed to faith, and not to the works thereof: it is wo^t to be
answered, and that both well and truly, because faith and not the works
thereof, does apprehend remission of sins, and Christ our righteousness. For
by it we are not justified in respect that it is a work, but in respect that
Christ is apprehended by it: by the righteousness of whom alone, being imputed
unto us, we are properly reputed just before God: and this is that which some
say, how faith justifies not in respect of it self, but in respect of the
object, which it takes hold on. Thus is it manifest, that it is true which I
said, how that was properly imputed unto Abraham for righteousness, for that
he believed God concerning Christ, namely that in him all nations should be
blessed: and therefore Abraham himself also.

Likewise in the last aphorism.
Neither deo we allow of those which set our justification in the only
remission of sins: denying the imputation of the justice and obedience of
Christ: which we think to be repugnant to the Scriptures.

Esaias 7. Achild is given unto us, etc, Whatsoever therefore he did, or has, it
is wholly ours.

Romans 5. As by one man's disobedience, many were made sinners, so by the
obedience of one, many shall be made righteous. The disobedience of Adam, was
the breaking of Gods commandment, therefore the obedience of Christ
consists not only in his death, but also in his whole former keeping of the
law. Likewise, the disobedience of Adam was wholly imputed to us: why not then
also Christ's whole obedience? Also we are two manner of ways made sinners by
Adams disobedience: namely by imputation of his transgression, and by the
real deriuation of sin, that is, of concupiscence into us. Why then should
we not think the same of Christ? The virtue of his obedience to the
commandments of God the father, is truly communicated unto us: so that we
also begine to obey Gods law. What lets then, why we may not say, that his
whole obedience is imputed unto us? 1. Cor. 1. He is made unto us of God
wisdom and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption. Phil. 2. He
became obedient unto death: for which humbling of himself, and obedience even
unto death, God has highly exalted him, and in him us, etc. He has deserved,
by his obedience, eternal glory, for himself and us: as all the schoolmen
and fathers do teach. Therefore his obedience also to the law, is imputed unto
us for righteousness.

Gal. 4. He was made subject to the law, that he might redeem those which
were under the law. Therefore he kept the law for us, and for our salvation.
The testimonies of the fathers, and also of the learned men of this age, for
brevity sake we ouerpasse. To conclude: we believe concerning Christ, that as
for us men, and for our salvation, he came down from heaven, and was
incarnate: so also for the same cause, he kept the law, and did all the other
things.

Upon the 25. chapter. Aphor. 10. and 11.12.
When I write this confession of says, I write every thing upon a good
conscience: and as I believed, so I spoke freely: as the holy scriptures do
teach that we ought to do. My faith is grounded simply, and principally, on
the word of God: and next, somewhat upon the common consent of the whole
ancient catholic church if it do not gainsaye the holy Scriptures. For I
believe, that the things which were decreed and received of the fathers, by
common consent of them all gathered together in the name of the Lord, without
any contradiction of holy Scriptures: that they also (though they be not of
equal authority with the Scriptures) come from the holy ghost. Hereupon it
is, that the things which are of this sort, I neither will nor dare
disprooue, with a good conscience. And what is more certain, out of the
histories, the counsels, and writings of all the fathers: then that those
orders of ministers of which we spoke, were ordained and received in the
church, by common consent of all the whole christian common wealth? And who om
I, that I should disprooue that which the whole church has approved? Neither
have all the learned men of this age, dared to disprooue the same: as knowing,
both that the church might lawfully do so, and that all those things were
ordained and done upon a godly purpose, and to excellent good ends, for
edification of Gods children.

For confirmation sake hereof: I have thought good here to insert, that which
Martin Bucer of godly memory, a man both for life and learning most famous,
has left written concerning those matters upon the Epistle to the Ephesians.

The ministry of the word, being performed by reading and rehearsing the
divine Scriptures, by interpretation and exposition of the same, and with
exhortations taken there out, and also by rehearsal and catechism, which is
done by mutual questions and aunswers of the young beginner and the catechizer:
and also by holy conferences, and deciding of the hard questions about
religion: according to this manifold dispensation of wholesome doctrine, there
are also many duties in this function. For whatsoever belongs to the
perfectest manner of teaching, is with an especial care to be used in the
ministry of the doctrine of salvation: because indeed it ought to be
delivered as a knowledge both of all other most divine, and of all, most
difficult: namely, that he which is man, should live according to God. Now
they which do teach diligently the arts, as they are contained in certain
known books: as, if they mean to teach mathematical principles out of
Euclide: first of all they will read and rehearse the same book: by and by,
they will expound the several words, such as every one knows not, as every
art has it own proper words and names. Then if there be any collection or
argume^tation dark or intricate, they explain the same by Analysis or
resolution, and set it forth by examples: and by general precepts they teach
particular things, and declare how largely the same are meant and taken. And
this is properly to teach. Now though this be in faithful and sound
delivery of instruction, yet a true and faithful teacher, not contenting
himself thus, does also rehearse and often takes account of that which he
teaches: and is still at hand among his scholars, that of such things as they
doubt, they may ever require and ask the plainer exposition of himself.
Moreover the things which he has taught them, he also propounds to be
decided and handled in public disputations, that no whit of doubt may remain.
To these things also, he adioyneth oftentimes exhortations, to encourage them
forward in the same instruction: and exhortations from such matters as may
hinder the same, and also general admonitions, reprehensions, and childings.
Lastly, such a master marketh diligently, what profit every one of his
scholars takes: and if he find any one to loyter in his learning, he both
privately corrects him, and admonishes him of his duty: if he perceive any
to go through his learning lustilie, him he encourages, commends, and
whetteth on to follow the study of it more and more. From the seven duties of
teaching were brought into the church 7. orders of ministers.
All these seven points of teaching, did our Lord Christ also observe. In the
Synagoge at Nazareth he read the 61. chapter of Esaias and expounded it, Luc. 4.
He expounded the commandments of God upon the mount, Math. 5. And he taught
in all places: and exhorted: he reprehended, out of the word of God. And he
made answer to all that asked him, as well good as badd: and also asked them, as
Matt. 22. He also catechized his disciples: and he himself was present at a
catechizing, Luc. 2.

Since then the ministry of teaching does require such manifold labor: there
have bin also many sorts or orders of ministers appointed to this ministry.
And first of all readers, whose office was in some pulpit or high place, to
rehearse the divine scriptures. Now this rehearsal of the scriptures was
instituted to this end, that the language and manner of phrase, in the
scripture, and the scripture it self also might so be made better known and
more familiar to the people. For within one year they read over all the bible
to the people: where as they which shall expound the scriptures, are not able
to perform more the^ some one part, and that not greatnether, in one years
space. And mean while by the only reading of the holy Bible to the people,
the knowledge of all the principles of our salvation, was wo^derfullie
confirmed: for the same are still again and again repeated in each of the
holy books, and are declared by other and other words, so that the people
might often, by the following readings, learn that which by the former they
could not so well conceive: And by this very means the peoples judgment was
strengthened, as well in religion, as also in the expositions of scriptures, and
in all doctrine, which was brought unto them either by the lawful curats and
teachers of the church, or by others. For this cause this office of only
reading the Scriptures to the people, was greatly esteemed in the ancient
churches: neither were any chosen for this ministry, unless they were
commended for singular piety. Which we may know as well by other monuments of
the ancient fathers, as especially by two epistles of Saint Cyprian, as the
five Epist. of Aurelius the reader ordained, and the 5 and 3. Epist. book 2.
of Saturus, and in the 4. book of Celerinus, Celestinus. To these readers were
afterward also added queristers or singing men, which ordered and directed
the singing of the psalms and hymns. For the reading of the holy Scriptures,
it is, by Gods grace, very well appointed in the churches of England: if so
be that there were meet men ordained, which might add a gravity and a
religion worthy the divine ministry in the holy readings. Let them therefore
diligently weigh and consider whose mouth they make themselves, which read the
holy books unto the people in their sacred assemblies: even the mouth of the
Lord Almighty: as also of what force, and of what dignity the words at which
are read, which be the words and precepts of eternal life: Lastly, unto what
manner of men: and for what purpose the readers of the divine Scriptures ought
to serve. For they serve to administer the word even to the children of God;
for whose salvation the first begotten son of God powered out his precious
blood: and to whom, by them, the same salvation is more and more declared and
made perfect. All which things, whosoever weighs with himself in true faith,
what gravity, decency, religiousnes, can be used in any action, which such a
reader may ouerslipp? And this they, whosoever be appointed for that office,
ought evermore to have in the sight of their mind: that the things which are
read, must effectually serve for the edificatio^ of faith in the hearers: which
is then done, when the same things are well understood and received as the very
words of god. To both which is requisite, a pronunciation, very plain,
discreet, grave, and religious. Hereby it is known, that they are not Christ's
ministers, who do so read the holy Scriptures, as if only this were to be
required, that as little tarrying as may be, might be made in rehearsing the
same.

Now another duty is, the interpretation of the doctrine which is to be
disposed, namly, a more plain declaration of the words, and sentences. This
office was performed by bishops and Elders: and sometime by them of the order
of Deacons and subdeacons: sometime also they employed unto this function some
of the laity, whom they found by the holy ghost to be made fit for the
profitable executing of the same. So Origin also a lay man, was called unto
this office in the church at Csarea in Palestine, by Alexander bishop of
Jerusalem, and by Theoctist bishop of the same church at Caesarea. So Euelpis
was called by Neonus bishop of Larandi: and Paulinus, by Celsus bishop of
Iconium, and Theodorus of Atticus, bishop of Sinadi. This we read in Eusebius
his sixth book of his ecclesiastical story chap. 20: and out of the epistle
of those two bishops, Alexander of Jerusalem, and Theoctist of Caesarea in
Palestine, unto Demetrius bishop of Alexandria, who had reprehended the deed of
these two bishops concerning Origin, as a thing never heard of, that a lay man
where bishops were present, should speak to the people in the congregation.
But this the same bishops manifestly affirmed, was not true but that godly
bishopps had ever used, to exhort such as they knew meet men among the laity,
to profit the people by interpreting the Scriptures and by teaching, to
execute this duty, even when themselves were present. And therefore this
second and third part of the holy m^nisterie, name lie interpretation and
teaching; the Bishops and Elders did administer by themselves: yet if they
knew or found any among the inferior orders, and of the lay sort also, that
were fit for that duty, they joined them as fellow-workers with themselves.
In the same manner also the Bishopps and Elders did execute the fourth part of
the delivery of the doctrine, which is, out of the scriptures expounded to
make exhortations to the duties of piety, and dehortations from sin, and
from al things which might never so little hinder and stopp the course of a
godly and holy life: to reprehend them which sinned, and to comfort the
penitent: this function was chiefly performed by the bishops and elders,
because irrequireth an especial authority, 1. Tim. 5. The fifth part,
Catechizings they committed to Elders, or Deacons, or sometimes to ministers of
inferior orders, even as every one, was thought most fit for that kind of
teaching. So Origin was also a Catechist at Alexandria, as we may read in the
sixth book of Eusebius his story of the church chapter thirteen and twenty.
The sixth part also, the holy disputations, they appointed to those that
seemed meetest: albeit for the most part the bishops themselves ordered the
same. The seventh part, private conference, and admonition, the bishops also
themselves had a special care to look unto: and also evermore exhorted the
elders, and the grauer sort of the inferior orders to do the same 1 Thessalonians. 5.
Therefore this ministry must be executed, by readers, in rehearsing the holy
Scriptures: and by bishops in expounding and teaching, exhorting, disputing,
and private conferring: as also in reading and catechizing, if there be not
particular readers and catechists. But the catechizings they committed to
certain elders and deacons, or some specially chosen for that purpose, out of
the inferior orders: like as they did also imploye in these duties of
interpreting, teaching, and disputing, whomsoever they found meet for the
same, in any order of the ministry, and also in the laity as we said. And
this was diligently marked and considered in them all: that the holy ghost
did so impart these gifts of teaching among men, that to one he gives a
gift and a singular faculty to interpret the holy Scriptures, and explane
the same, to whom notwithstanding he gives not the gift so readily and
profitablie to teach and confirm the principles and grounds of our opinions
out of the holy scriptures, or to defend the same by disputation. To another
also he gives a peculiar and notable skill to make exhortations out of the
holy Scripture, or admonitions, or reprehensions: also to cathezice: and to
instruct privately: to whom notwithstanding, are not given the other parts
of teaching. This variety and diversity of the gifts of the holy ghost we
have daily experience of in those, which teach publikelie the people of Jesus
Christ, which are the true churches of Christ, and do suffer themselves to be
wholly governed by the holy ghost: Such do religiously observe what
spiritual gifts are given to each one in the church: and do imploye every
one in his own function according to the same gifts so much as in them lies.
Wherefore to all the points of teaching, they appoint several ministers, if
among their own they find such as be singularly quallified and furnished by
the Lord to every several part of teaching. But because it is requisite for
the salvation of Gods people, that not any church should omittanie of these
seven parts of teaching, which I have reckened: Every one of the ministers,
and laye-men also in what place soever of the church he be placed, ought so
far forth as he is able, to perform all these parts of teaching: both
reading, interpreting, teaching, exhorting, catechizing, disputing, and,
private confening. For each one must take unto himself in administering these
duties, so much of each one of them, as he finds himself furnished and made
fit for by the holy ghost. Let us weigh and consider, the example of a
household well sorted and ordered, in which the master or husband executes
some duties, the houswife or matron, other duties: the sons other, and the
daughters other: the menseruants other, and the maideseruants other: Here while
they be all at home and in health, every one fulfilleth his own duty: but
if any of the family be from home or be sick, yet (if the necessity of
that service so urges) they must all needs supply that want, so that
oftentimes the men must discharge women's duties, and women men's, the masters
their servants, and servants their masters.

Also concerning clergy discipline.
The third part of clergy discipline is a peculiar subjection, wherein clerks
and ministers of inferior degrees do subject themselves to them which are in
the superior orders and ministry. This part of discipline the Lord taught us,
also by his own example: who ordained his disciples to be teachers of gods
chose^ through out the whole world, giving them a certain government or
domestical discipline, peculiar for this office: whom the Apostles imitating,
had also every one his disciples, whom he instructed to the right performance
of that holy ministry.

For every difficult and hard course of life, requires also a peculiar and
perpetual teaching, instruction, and watchfulness over it: as we see in the
studies of philosophy, and in military discipline. Which Lycurgus considering,
so instituted (as Xenophon reports) the common wealth of the Lacaedemonians:
that there should not be one sort or order in the common wealth, but should
have a government in it. Also Plato in his laws and common wealth requires
that among citizens there should be nothing without guard. Hereuppon our Lord
also, desirous that all that be his, should so be settled and agree together,
as the members in a body are settled and knitt one to another: does make every
one of his to be in subjection unto others by whom they may be maintained,
moved and governed, as by members having a more large and ample power and
efficacy then others have. The same is commanded by the holy ghost, Be subject
one to another in the fear of God, Ephesians. 5.

The holy fathers therefore in times past thus considering these matters, so
appointed this order in the clergy, that all the rest of the clerks should be
maintained and guided of the presbiterie or Elders with singular care and
diligence. And that among the Elders, the bishop, as a consul among the
Senators of a commonwealth, should bear the chiefest care and gouerna^ce both
of the whole church, and also peculiarly of the whole order of the clergy.
And in all the greatest and most populous congregatio^s they ordained bishops,
and to each of the^ they committed the next co^gregations, which were in little
towns and villages, and decreed that the elders and curats of those
co^gregations whom they called Chorepiscopi: cuntrie or pettie-bishops, should
every one harken and obey the bishop and presbitery next unto the^. These those
superior bishops did call together, and all their whole clergy, and did
instruct them in knowledge, and the diligent execution of their office. But
whereas it was the Lords will, that his people should mutuallie love among them
selves, and should mutually care one for another, even as far and wide as
might be possible (for all christians are one body:) the holy fathers
ordained that the bishops of each province (for then all the roman
jurisdictions were distributed into provinces) should meet together with their
presbiteries, so often as the necessity of the churches required: but always
twice in the year, and there they should enquire concerning Christ's doctrine
and discipline, how the same was administered, and how it prospered in the
churches: that where they found any default, they might correct it: that which
they knew to be well, they might confirm and set forward. And that these
Synods might also be ordered aright and orderly, they would have the
Metropolitaine, the bishops of every mother city, to be the chief directors,
to call them together and to guide the^: For in each province, the head city,
wherein was the ma^sion or seat of the chief governor, was called Metropolis,
or the mother city. And therefore they enjoined unto these Metro. politaine
bishops a certain care and charge over all the churches throughout their
province: that if they should understand of any thing taught or done amiss
either of the ministers of the churches or of the common sort, that they should
give warning thereof in time: and if by their admonitions they could not amend
the same, the^ for the correction thereof they should call a Synod of bishops:
for it was not granted unto the^, that they should execute any judgment upon
their own authority, over churches which had bishops of their own: for the
power of judgment over both clergy and laity, was only in the hands of the
bishop and elder of the same place. And the bishops themselves were judged by
the Synods. Therefore when there were any bishops to be ordained for churches,
it was decreed, that they should assemble at the same church, withal (if it
might without hurt of the churches) if not with some, at the least two or
three of the bishops of their own province, which (if he were not already
elected) should guide and govern in the election of the bishop, and the
election being done should examine it, and inquire of the man elected most
severely, and make due proof of his whole life, and of his skill and abllitie
to perform the office and duty of a bishopp. And then at last should inuest
him in his bishops function. All which things were instituted and served to
this end, that there might be as much know ledge and mutual care between
churches and the ministers thereof, as could be possible: both for the
remoouing and expelling of all scandalls of doctrine and life, and also to the
earnestes and more effectual maintaining, provoking and increasing of the
edification of faith, and a life worthy of Christ our Lord. In so much as if
any one did loyter or neglect their own duty, the other bishops might be
ready to help, yea even so far forth as to the suspending of the obstinate,
and utter casting them out of their bishops function. We should consider what
Saint Cyprian writes to Stephan the roman bishop, concerning Martian bishop
of Arelatensis: who fell into the sect of Nouatian, book 2. Epist. 13, and
which he writ in his 3. epistle and first book, Of a certain flock
distributed unto every one of the shepherds, and which he spoke in the
council of Carthage, as he writ to Quirinus.

Now further when the world began to be full of churches, and that the
Metropolitanes had also need of their peculiar care: (for not all, there
beginning now to grow very many, had other skill enough or watchfulnes enough
for their place: for ever and in all orders of me^ there be few that do
excel) the care of some provinces was committed to certain bishops of the
chief churches, as to the bishop of Rome, of Constantinople, of Antioch and
Alexandria, and afterward of Caesarea, and Cappadocia, and certain others, as
by reason of the great increase of churches of the faithful, necessity did
require. But notwithstanding, these primate bishops, (whom afterward they
called Patriarchs) had no authority over the other bishops or churches, more
then (as I said before) the Metropolitaines had over the bishops and churches
of their provinces. Every one did owe a special care and diligence to that
portion of the churches that belonged to him: it was his duty also to
admonish the bishops in time if any had offended, or neglected his duty: and
if admonition prevailed not, then to add the authority of a counsel. Among
these the first place was given to him of Rome: both for the reverence of S.
Peter, and also for the majesty of the city. Which reason the fathers
afterward following, gave the second place to him of Constantinople, as being a
second Rome, and the bishop of the imperial sea: whereas Antioch before, had
obtained the second place among these patriarchs.

But as the nature of man depraved by ambition, did ever labor more, that his
rule might stretch far, then to govern well: these patriarchs, by occasion
of this general care of the churches committed unto them, drew unto
themselves, first the ordaining of their neighbor bishops: and by that
ordaining, they crept by little and little and at last confirmed a jurisdiction
over such bishopps, and their churches: which mischief when it grew to be
very great, there began a grievous contention, for a universal rule over
all churches: which the first that labored to get unto himself, was one John
bishop of Constantinople, under the emperor Mauricius: concerning which
co^tentio^ there are extant many epistles, among the epistles of S. Greg. book
5.6.7.10.

At length under Phocas, he of Rome obtained this title of universal bishop,
which the bishops of that sea began more and more by degrees to abuse: even
until by occasion, first by division of the Empire under Charles the great,
afterward by dissentions of princes and nations, whereby they tore and rent
the power of the emperors of the West, and other kings: they exalted
themselves into that antichristian power which now they bragg of: having
oppressed the powers, first of bishops, and then of all kings and emperors.
Thus therefore has Satan overthrown the wholesome obedience and government of
the clergy orders: For the roman Antichrist got to himself an immediate
rule over all both clergy and laity: and has dissolved and broken the care
and charge of bishops, such as were good bishops, over those that were
committed to their trust. But seeing it must needs be, that all orders of clerks
must have their governors and overseers, therefore the power of bishops must be
restored, as also of Archdeacons, and al others, by what name soever they be
called, to whom any portion of governing and keeping the clergy, is
committed: and also a watchfullnes and inquiry that there be none in this
order unguarded or unlooked unto. Thus far Bucer, not only rehearsing, but
also commending the custom of the ancient church, ordaining diverse orders of
ecclesiastical functions, whereof we before spoke.

I should also have had consideration of those churches, which albeit they
embrace the gospel of Christ Jesus: yet they still retain their bissiops and
Archbishops both in deed and name.

What? that in the churches even of the protestants, neither bishops indeed nor
archbishops are wanting: whom, having turned the names out of good greek,
into badd latin, they call Superintendents, and general Superintendents? yea
there also, where neither those old names in good greek, nor these new in ill
latin, are used at all: yet there are wont to be some superior persons, in
whose hands is almost the whole authority. The controversy then has been
about the names: but seeing we agree about the thing, why should we contend
about the names? By the way, as I did not disallow the Fathers, in that matter,
whereupon the question is: so can I not but love the zeal of our men, which
do therefore hate those names, because they are afraid, least with the names,
the old ambition and tirannie should be brought in again, to the destruction
of the church.

Aphorism 12.
For neither did Christ ordain any such head: neither would the fathers admit
thereof, because it was not expedient for the church: but contented themselves
with the four Patriarchs of Rome, Constantinople, Antioch, and Alexandria,
all which, were of an equal authority and power: and every of them contained
within his own bounds: as also it was decreed in the counsel at Nice, and
confirmed in others: and that not without many and very weighty causes:
whereof, in my judgment, this was not one of the least, least there should be
a door set open to tirannie in the church: but rather if that any one durst
attempt any thing, against the sound doctrine of Christ, and against the
liberty of the church: then the other archbishops with their bishops, of no
less authority, might oppose themselves against him, and suppress his
insolency and cut of his tyranny. The church in respect of Christ is a
kingdom: in respect of men, which are in it, and either rule or be ruled, it is
an Aristocracie.

Aphorism 21.
These be two questions far different: whether bishops may also be princes,
and princes bishopps, keeping also their principalities in their hands: and,
whether they which are both bishops and princes, besides their ecclesiastical
authority, may also have civil power over those that are their subjects, and
so, whether their subjects must obey them as princes, or not. In my Aphorism,
I spoke not one word, of the former question, for it was not needful, but only
of the latter. Now who sees not, how I showed by apparent demonstrations, that
princes must be wholly obeyed, howsoever, rightfullie or wrongfullie, they be
made princes? For why should not they that are subjects both to the princes and
Archbishops of Colone, Mentz, and Treuers, in matters that are not repugnant to
christian piety, be obedient unto them? Surely it were mere sedition in them
not to obey them. And if to these: why should not they also, which are within
the jurisdiction of the bishop of Rome, in the same matters and for the same
cause obey him? For there is one and the same reason of them all.

Of the former question (as I say) I spoke not at all: neither purposed I now
in this brief confession to discourse thereof: knowing, that all are not
herein of one opinion: and much may be said to and fro both ways: that place
in the 20 of Mat. (Ye know that the Lords of the Gentiles have dominion over
them, and they that are great, exercise authority over them. But it shall not
be so among you:) some expound it one way, of the Apostles only, and
ministers of the word: others another way, of all Christ's disciples and all
christians.

An appendix to the eleventh chap. Of Christ the redeemer or of the person of
Christ.
THey which write that the essential proprieties of the divine nature, are
reallie communicated to the human nature, not that they be in the same,
either essentiallie and formally, or subiectiuelie and habitually, but only by
the reason, and respect of the personal or Hypostaticall union (for so they
speak, darkly indeed and ambiguouslie, when both they might and ought to
speak plainer:) if they mean this in no other sense, then as Vigilius writ
and thought: namely, that the proprieties of the natures, are made proper to
Christ himself, but are common to the natures betwixt themselves, not in
themselves, but in Christ, that is, in his person: I will not surely, gainesay
them, neither do I think that any good or learned man will gainesay them. For
Vigilius according to the catholic churches doctrine, speaking out of the
council at Calcedon, said and declared, that the proprieties of the human
nature were made common to the divine, in the very same sense, that the divine
are also said to be communicated to the human. But now these proprieties of
the humanity, as to suffer, or to die, are so communicated to the deity, that
for all that, yet the very deity is not made in very deed, passible, or
mortal: the cause whereof, Vigilius sets down to be this: namely, because
to die and to suffer, are not made common to the deity but only in the
person: so that they can not truly be said, but of the human nature by it
self, and of the person, in respect of the human nature.

Wherefore we must even so think and say altogether of the communication of
the divine proprieties. Vigilius own words be these book 5. chap. 2.

And now since out intention is chiefly bent against those which following the
error of one nature, do with a wilful obstinacy resist the decree of the
Calcedon council. I think it not amiss, for the remoouing of their vain
contradictions, and beating to pieces their glassie opinions with the mallett
of truth, to rehearse some few things, concerning the human nature of the
son of God, which they every way deny to be in him: and to show what want
of christianity is in them, and how far of they be from the hope of
everlasting life. It is a rule of the catholic faith, to confess, one and the
same Lord Jesus Christ, as true God, so also true man: one of them both, and
not two into one: the same without all time borne of the father, the same in
time borne of the virgin: so that each of these births do so hold on Christ,
that he suffered not any loss in either: retaining in himself that was proper
to him both ways, that is, that the nature of the word should not be changed
in the flesh, and the nature of the flesh was not swallowed up in the word.
Hereuppon the same Lord Jesus Christ, is true God, and the same, true man,
existing unspeakably of two natures, united together in one person in the
virgins womb: which natures, seeing that in this wonderful covnion they are
not abolished in him: to show a plain extance and appearance of the propriety
of them both in himself being one, he did and spoke things, belonging to
both: not dividing the words, nor parting the aspects, nor seperating his
deeds: but he himself being one, speaking and doing in himself and by both,
that which was agreeable, and was proper to both natures. And to make it more
plain which we have said, let us use an example as thus, I my self am he,
which with my bodily eyes do behold a white color or a black: and again I
am he, which by sight of my mind do judge of the evil of iniquity, and the
good of righteousness: yet notwithstanding I am not now diverse persons,
because I do both these in a diverse respect. For I do not see the difference
of colors, with the same eyes, with which I see the diversity of speeches:
and yet I am the very same, which do this both the ways: both are in me not
to see righteousness but only with the eyes of my mind, and it is in me not
to see colors, but only with the eyes of my flesh: and it is in me not to
hear words with my eyes, and in me not to see light with my ears: in me not
to judge of tastes with my nose, and in me not to perceive smelling at my
mouth. And whereas it is wholly mine own propriety in my self, to see, to
hear, to smell, to taste: and yet it is one thing in me whereby I see, another
whereby I hear, another whereby I taste or smell: and all this being in me
wholly, and yet in a certain private respect divided and diverse: I my self
notwithstanding cannot be divided or separated: So therefore Christ himself
also, being one and the same, created, and not created; having beginning, and
being without beginning: growing in age and understanding, and receiving no
increase of age and understanding: suffering death, and not yielding to the
laws of death: receiving honor for his desert, yet having need of no ma^s
honor: and al these things being diverse in him, yet are merely proper unto
himself: And therefore he divides not in himself, the words, affects, and
deeds, agreeable both ways in himself: because both are properly his own:
yet having one propriety by the nature of the word, which remaining God, he
lost not: and another by the nature of the flesh, which, being made man, he
received. We will yet speak more, to confirm more plainly this one nature:
for their sakes which through their vnsaide skilfullnesse, not understanding
the propriety and communion of the natures, how it is said to be in Christ,
do abuse and utterly refuse the same words.

It is diverse and another thing, not to have beginning, and to subsist by a
beginning: to die, and not to be able to suffer: yet, as they are both proper
unto Christ, so are they both common, not unto him, but in him. For if we say,
common unto him: we must needs be urged and driven, to give and show some
other, with whom the same should be common unto him: which necessity of
instance, cannot but incline to the impious opinion of Nestorius. We therefore
better and more catholically: say, it is common in him and not to him: and so
we say better, it is proper to him, and not in him. Therefore it is proper to
him to dye, by the nature of his flesh, which is mortal: and it is proper to
him, not to dye, by the nature of the word, which cannot dye. Likewise by that
unspeakable mystery of the union of both the natures, the mortallitie of the
flesh was common in him, to the nature of the word, which could not dye: and
the immortality of the word was common in him, to the nature of the flesh,
which yielded to death. Therefore as it is proper unto him in respect of both
natures, to dye and not to dye: so it is common in him, in both natures, to do
that which is their propriety: and as I may (for example sake) say, it is
proper to me, to carry the mark of the blackness of a stroakein my body, by
the nature of my flesh: so it is proper to me to carry the stripe of a word,
that is, of some hard speech, in my mind, by the nature of my soul: and it is
also proper to me, not to carry the same stripe of words in my body by the
nature of my flesh. And since both these are proper to me: and both of them
different from my body and from my soul: because neither my body
understands any hard or any pleasing speeches, neither can my soul be made
black by the stroke of a whipp: yet both these are common in my self, both
to my soul and to my body: because, neither my soul placed out of my body,
does feel that, which is proper to it to feel: nor my body without the
company of my soul, can carry the marks of the blows. That therefore, which
is proper unto me in either of them and yer different from neither of them;
that is common in my whole self to either of them, which is proper to either
of them.

And yet I am the very same in them both, being both of them common in me: and
I am the very same in either of them, being both proper to me. This says
Vigilius.

What can more fittly be said for the deciding of this present controversy, of
the real communication of the proprieties? For this whole treatise of Vigilius
is resolved into these special propositions, pertaining to our cause. For
setting first down a rule of the catholic faith, which in the text is marked
with the letter A: then from the same he draws certain positions, by which
he manifestly confuteth the heresy of Eutyches. The sum of that rule of
faith, is this: that one and the same Christ, is God and man: and both natures
are kept whole in him. Out of this rule Vigilius gathered these positions.

1 The Lord Jesus Christ, is the same true God: and the same true man. The
reason: for he existeth of two natures, (the divine and the human)
vnspeakablie joined and united together in one person, and that in the virgins
womb. This is against Nestorius; against Eutyches, is added another position.

2 These natures in that wonderful covnion, are not abolished in Christ. The
confirmation follows by the life of Christ: because the Lord Jesus both by
his sayings and deeds did show that the proprieties of both the natures,
remained safe and whole in him: therefore he adds.

3 To she we an extancie (that is, an existence) of the proprieties of them
both in himself being one: namely: that the proprieties of both the natures
did exist distinct in him: he spoke and did things of both natures himself
being one. This is also against Eutyches.

But how? namely so, that he showed, how these sayings and deeds, were not the
actions of two persons, but of one. Therefore against Nestorius he also adds:
Not in making a diversity in words, or showing sundry aspects, or seperating
the deeds: but he himself being one, speaking and doing in himself and by
both (that is by both natures) that which was agreeable and was proper to
both the natures.

By these words we may perceive these two things as clear as the noone day:
one that there were not in Christ, two which did work and will, and
understand, but only one: namely the very word incarnate, which is called
Christ: therefore he says in himself being one etc. Also, he himself being
one speaking and doing in himself: this is the first, and that against
Nestorius.

The other is. That yet there were and are in Christ working, two beginnings of
actions, distinct in themselves: by which those actions (as the schoolmen
say) were formallie performed by the agent: namely the faculties or powers of
the two natures: and this is against Eutyches.

And therefore he joins: by both (that is, by both natures) speaking and
doing, that which is proper, to both natures.

Now who sees not, that the the things which Christ did according to one
nature: the same he did not according to the other? For he did by both, such
things as were proper to each: he did not therefore according to his
humanity, such things as belonged to his deity: nor contrary wise.

Moreover to confirm and set forth the same he brings in an example of one
and the same man, who according to the diverse faculties of the soul, does
work diverse actions, and brings forth deeds agreeable to each faculty.

The example appears of it self, there: And to make it more plain, etc.

But we must warily mark his particles, not only the affirmatiues, but also
the negatiues. For he denies that a man sees those things with the eyes of his
flesh, which he sees with the eyes of his mind: and contrariwise. Therefore
he also denies that Christ does those things according to his flesh: which he
works according to his deity. This he plainly declares, whenas applying
the example, besides other things he says of Christ, But having one
property by the nature of the word, which remaining God, he lost not: and
another by the nature of the flesh, which being made man, he received, etc.

It is also to be marked, that Vigilius, as well denies that Christ does by
the flesh, that is, according to the flesh, those things, which are proper to
the deity: as he denies that he suffered and did those things according to
his deity, which were proper to the flesh.

Vigilius also adioyneth a special declaration of the propriety and communion
of the natures, and the same very perspicuous and certain: where he says,
We vill yet speak more to confirm this nature for their sakes, etc. The sum
is this:

4 The proprieties of both the natures are proper to the very person of
Christ: but are common to the natures betwixt themselves, not in the very
natures but in the person. The declaration is this.

For to die (which is the propriety of the flesh) is proper to Christ. For in
that he is said to have died: it is properly spoken, in respect of the
human nature which is in him. Also, not to die is proper to him in respect of
his divine nature, which cannot die.

Likewise to die, is common to the word or deity of Christ: not in the
divine nature it self, which cannot be partaker of death: but this was common
to him with his flesh in the person, because the person which carried the flesh
could dye in the flesh, and Jesus Christ did dye. The same is to be thought and
said of the other part: as Vigilius also declares: adding the example of
himself, that is, of a man: where he says, And for example sake, to say, etc.
In this example there is nothing but that which is plain.

But the conclusion is diligently to be marked, where he says: That therefore
which is proper to me in either of them, and yet different from either of them:
the same is common in me to either of them, which is proper to either of them.
And yet I am the very same one in them both, being both of them common in me:
and I am the very same in either of them, being both proper to me.

Nothing can be said more clear for the declaration of the question concerning
the real communication of the proprieties. For first he teaches, that the
proprieties of the one nature are so proper unto it self, that they are quite
different from the other nature, and so different, that in their proper essence
they can by no means be made common: that is, they ca^ not be so really
communicated, that the same should be made that very same, or the like unto
the other nature: as, for example, that the humanity should be made the
deity, or be made omnipotent, or, on the contrary, that the deity could be
made the humanity, or be made partaker of passion or suffering.

2 He delivers in plain terms, that the proprieties of each nature, are
proper unto Christ: because indeed, it is proper unto him in himself (for
example) in one nature to suffer, and in his other not to be able to suffer:
so as this he has common with no other thing, either in heaven, or on earth,
or in himself. For there is nothing besides himself, that is both God and
man: and neither of the natures in him, has also the proprieties of the other
nature besides their own, in their proper essence. Therefore it belongs only
to Christ God and man, to have in himself really, and therefore proper to
himself, the essential proprieties of each nature, both divine and human.

Wherefore hereby is it manifest also, which before was said of the
communication. For if this be proper to the person of Christ, that these
contraries, namely, to suffer, and not to be able to suffer, may truly and
indeed be said of him, and yet not simply, but in respect of some other
thing, that is in respect of his other nature: Then can it not agree to any of
both his natures severally, that the same nature should truly and really be
said, to be able to suffer and not to suffer, in it own proper essence.

3 The proprieties of the natures which he said were proper to Christ: these
he taught to be made common in themselves, not indeed in the very natures
themselves, but in his person. For example: To susser which is proper to the
human nature simply and by it self in it own essence, but proper to the
person in respect of some other thing that is, only in respect of the flesh: I
say this essential propriety of the flesh, by reason of the union, which the
flesh has with the deity it self in the same person, is made also common to
the very divine nature it self with the human: how common? namely that to
susser is truly attributed also to the divine nature.

But how can that be, since passion cannot fall into it? It is therefore common
to it to suffer, not in the own essence (for that nether could nor can suffer)
but in Christ, that is, in the person of Christ, which consists of the two
natures: and therefore, which only according to the flesh suffered: so that in
the proper essence of the deity thereis no passion, but it is only in the
common person by reason of the flesh: and consequently God is also said to have
suffered, when notwithstanding the deity suffered nothing, but only the person
of god and man, that is he which is God and man, suffered according to the
flesh. I will rehearse this again. The proprieties (for example) of the
human nature, as to suffer, and to die, they are therefore said to be common
to the deity, because the deity also has them. For if in no sort it had
the^: the same could be said no ways to be made common to it with the flesh.

Now then, they are truly said to be common to the deity with the humanity,
not simply, but in Christ: because it has them not in it self, that is, in
the own essence, as the flesh has: but only in the person of Christ, which
is one and the same person of both the natures, seeing it subsisteth in both of
them.

The soul also has the proprieties of the body, common unto it self, not in
it own essence, as the body: but in the person of man, who as he consists
of them both, as being his essential parts, so also he has in himself
really the proprieties of them both: so as he may truly be said to be visible,
and invisible: mortal and immortal.

This which is said of the proprieties of the human nature, common with the
divine, not in the proper essence of it, but in the common person of both the
natures; that the same also is to be thought and said of the divine
proprieties with the human, we are taught by Vigilius bishop and martyr.

These things being in very deed thus, it hereupon is to be gathered, what
manner of speeches may be thought agreeable to these matters. If a propriety of
the flesh, as to suffer, be in some sort common to the deity, the^ it may in
some sort be said of the deity. If it be not in such wise common to the same,
as to have it in it self, as in it own essence, nor as an essential part of
it self, nor as an accident in the subject: then the deity cannot be said,
in it own essence, to be subject to passion.

But if it be common unto it only in person: then to suffer cannot be said of
the deity in the abstract, but only in the Concrete: this is, by such a
word, wherein the deity may be so signified, as the person may be
signified with it: such as be the Concrete names as God.

For by this name, so far forth as therein is signified, the person of
Christ, which is also God, and not bare man, it is truly and really said that
God did suffer, and died: yet not fimplie, and according to his deity also,
but only according to the flesh: whose property it is to suffer and to dye.
Wherefore as this is most true, God suffered: so this is most false, the deity
suffered: or that Christ also according to his divine nature suffered. This is
the doctrine of Vigilius, and the whole church.

But seeing, that which Vigilius has delivered, of the proprieties and
communion of the natures, is indifferently said of all the proprieties and
their communion in Christ: so that by this hypostaticall or personal union,
the divine proprieties are said to be made common to the humanity in the same
sense, that the human are to the divinity: namely not in the essences of the
natures themselves, but only in Christ and in the person of Christ: it
follows, like as the proposition is impious, the deny, by reason of the union
with the flesh in the person of the sonce of god, is made partaker of passion
in it own essence: so also this is blasphemous: the human nature, by reason
of the union with the divine, receives of it, that it is omnipotent really, in
it own essence, etc.

Now if we add that, which the same Vigilius left in writing out of the common
consent of the whole church book 4. chap. 4. this doctrine, which we showed
eue^ now out of him, will more plainly appear. For disputing against the
Monophysites (defenders of one nature) he plainly proves, by the diverse
proprieties, which were seen in one and the same Christ, and which the holy
Scriptures do speak of, that the word and the flesh cannot be in him all one
nature: he brings a reason, because one nature cannot receive in it self any
thing that is contrary and diverse: besides other things he also writes thus:
Moreover if there be but one nature of the word and of the flesh, how can it be
but that the word being in all places, the flesh must be found in all places
too? For doubtless when it was on earth, then was it not in heaven, and now
being in heaven, it is not likewise on earth: yea it is so far from being on
earth, as that according to it, we look for Christ to come down from heaven,
whom according to the word we believe to be with us on earth. Therefore
according to your opinions: either the word with his flesh is contained within
one place: or the flesh with the word is in all places: whereas one nature
cannot receive in it self any contrary or diverse things. But it is very
contrary and far different, to be circumscribed or contained in one place,
and, to be every where: and seeing the word is every where, and the flesh is
not every where: it appears that one and the same Christ is of both natures:
and that he is every where, according to the nature of his divinity, and is
contained in a place, according to the nature of his humanity: that he has
been created, and has no beginning: that he has died, and has not bin able
to dye: the one he has by the nature of the word, whereby he is God: the other
by the nature of the flesh, whereby the same God is man. Wherefore, this one
the son of God, and the same made the son of man, has a beginning, by the
nature of his flesh, and has no beginning by the nature of his divinity: he
was created, by the nature of his flesh, and was not created, by the nature of
his divinity: he is circumscribed, by the nature of his flesh, and is not
contained within place, by the nature of his divinity: he is less also then
the angels, by the nature of his flesh, and is equal to the father, according
to the nature of his divinity: he died, by nature of his flesh, and died not,
by nature of his divinity. This is the catholic faith and confession, which
the Apostles delivered, the Martyrs confirmed, and the faithful do yet
assuredly hold. Thus says Vigilius.

By this the very same is undoubtedly proved, which was also by the other
before, namely, not only that the word and flesh, cannot possibly be both of
one nature, as the Monophysites affirmed: but also that the proprieties of the
one nature, cannot really be communicated to the other: so as indeed, it should
have the same in it self, and that the one nature should be made the very
like, that the other is: as thus, that the flesh, by reason of the union with
the word, should also with the same word, be made present in all places, in it
own esseuce. For from this proposition, which is held for granted, of all
sound believers, namely, The flesh through the union with the word, has not
gotten this propriety of the word, that it self, should with the word be
present in all places, in it own substance: from this proposition (I say) he
concludes, therefore neither is it made of the same nature with the word. This
certainly is the argument of Vigilius, yea of the whole catholic church. What
remains? only this, that if it may be said to be present in all places: it
can be said to be so, by no other means, then by the Hypostasie of it, which
is the very word.

For in Christ's human nature, there be only two things: the proper essence of
his nature, with his proprieties and gifts created: and the common Hypostasis
with the divine, which is the word it self. His proper essence is finite or
determinate, and so is only within one place: The Hypostasis is infinite,
immeasurable, and most simple or unmixed. And therefore in this only, and not
in the proper essence, the flesh of Christ can be, and in very deed is,
present in all places.

That which has bin said of this propriety: the same is also to be thought of
all the rest, as well those of the word, as of the flesh. For also in the
argument before going, against the Monophysites, book 4. chap. 4. he concludes
the same, from certain proprieties of the word, as is, to be uncreated,
invisible, vntouchable: and said, that it is impossible, the flesh should
partake in those qualities. Hereuppon he concluded, therefore, the flesh cannot
be of one nature with the word: since it can by no means be made, invisible,
uncreated, vntouchable: understand this in it own essence: whereas
notwithstanding in the Hypostasis of it, which is common to it with the word,
it is in very deed, as in all places present, so also, uncreated, invisible,
vntouchable, and what not? seeing in the same Hypostasis it is also god. These
things are all most assured and plain, and do depend upon that infallible
rule, which he delivered in the fifth book and second chapter: namely, We say
better and more catholically: it is common in him, and not unto him: And we say
better, it is proper to him, and not in him.

I beseech all christians, by our Lord Jesus, that setting aside all the vain
dreams of private men: and rejecting all the affections, hatreds, enmities of
their flesh: and embracing, the assured and wholesome doctrine of the ancient
church, and christian love: we may all join together into one holy league of
friendship: even as we have all one God, one mediator, one baptism, one hope
of our vocation: to the glory of Gods name, the building up of the church, and
the salvation of our souls. For sooner then we suppose; shall we be summoned
before Christ's tribunal seat, that every one may give account for that,
which he has done in the body, and in this life: seeing that after this life,
there is no hope of pardon, no place for amendment.

CERTAIN POSITIONS OF THE same Zanchius.
Of some principal articles of our christian faith, against diverse heresies at
sundry times disputed on, partly at Heidelberg, partly at Newstade.
FOr what purpose I published this confession with my observations upon it: for
the very same cause, at this time have I gathered together these positions
concerning sundry matters in question, which were handled partly under
Frederick the third of godly memory at Heidelburge, partly under my favorable
Lord John Cassimier, erector of this school, here at Newstade, against diverse
heresies: and being all brought together, I thought good to have them printed
with my confession: thereby, that al posterity might evidently see, that I
never consented to any of these heresies, which in these days of ours have
been fetched again from the depth of hell: and this, to Gods glory, the
edification of the church, and the salvation of many, through our Lord Jesus
Christ. Amen.

Of one true god, eternal father, son, and holy ghost.
year. 1572.
1
THere is one only Jehovah, creator of heaven and earth, and God of Israel.

2
And this God, though he be one only Jehovah, yet is he not one, but mere
Elohim: the number and names of whom, the son of God manifested in the
flesh, has clearlie and appara^tly revealed unto us, without all doubt: namely
the eternal father, the eternal son, and the eternal holy ghost.

3
Further these three Elohim are true existences, and those undivided, living,
understanding, willing: and therefore (as the church has ever used to speak)
true persons.

4
And the father, son, and holy ghost, are so distinct among themselves, as
the one is not the other.

5
Yet every one of them is the true Jehovah.

6
Yet are there not therefore manis Iehouahs, but only one Jehovah.

Of the nature, singularity, and immeasurablenes of one true God.
year. 1573.
1
BY the name of the nature of God is usually signified, not only his essence
simply considered in it self, but also all his proprieties, or attributes, by
which he is declared to us and for our sakes, of what sort he is.

2
And therefore God is rightly said, of his own nature to be gentle, wise,
good, and such like.

3
But albeit he uses to apply many qualities like to this his own nature,
unto men, by which we are made just, good, wise; yet his own nature he does
communicate to no created thing, which he cannot indeed communicate, unless
their could more Gods be made.

4
God also besides his other proprieties, is simply simple, or unmixed; that he
can no ways be said to be compounded of many things: no not of his being and
essence.

5
For although he attribute unto himself, many things in the Scriptures, as
it were many qualities, as to be good, just, mighty etc: yet no quality does
in very deed fall into god: but of what sort soever he is, the same he is in
his own simple essence: but by these diverse names the infinite perfection of
his most simple essence is signified unto us.

6
But God not only admits no composttion in himself, but also falls not
into concretion or substance of any created thing, as that he should be either
the form or matter thereof.

7
God is furthermore truly immeasurable and in finite, and therefore present
every where: and that not in his power and virtue only, but in his whole
essence: filling heaven and earth and all the world.

8
But although he be in every place present: yet he is more said to be in
heaven, then in earth: and more in his children, then in wicked men; and more
in one godly man then in another: but this not in respect of his essence, but
by the power of his working and of his grace.

9
Wherefore when we read in the Scriptures, how God does either depart from
us, or return to us: we must believe he does not so by changing of place: but
by the effects of his presence, both internal and external; either showing
them or withdrawing them.

10
Yet he is in the human nature of Christ, in a far other manner, then in
us: namely, not only in a more effectual operation, but also in dwelling in
him corporally, and as a part of a thing compounded; so as he is true God, but
we cannot be so.

11
But further it is so Gods property to be immeasurable and infinite, and
consequently also every where present: as that it can belong to no thing
created, no not to the human nature of Christ.

12
For like as it cannot be that any creature can be made God in essence, so
neither can it be, that that which is not God, should in it own essence exist
every where, since it can neither be infinite nor immeasurable.

13
Wherefore, like as, by this, that Christ is showed to be every wherein his own
essence, he is proved to be true God: So if any would prove the body of
Jesus Christ to exist every where in it own essence, they must either deny
that Christ's deity is proved by that argument, or else they must needs frame a
new god and that a corporal one.

14
Christ's body indeed is present, not only in it own virtue, but also in
substance, to the minds of all godly men, receiving the same by true faith,
and so by Christ's spirit growing more and more into one with the same Christ,
no less, nay more then the sun is to the eyes of al them which see: but yet
Christ's body can as well exist in many places at once (much less every where,)
in that manner of existing, where in it is in heaven: as the body of the sun
can exist in all the pattes of heaven and earth in the very same sort, that it
is in his own sphere.

15
Yet hereupon follows it not (as some do impudently cavil) that the eternal
and true deity of Christ is denied: but contrariewise it is rather proved,
since the word of the deity is defended to be of that sort; as it can be
imparted to no created thing, so as the same should be God in essence, or
equal to God in any divine propriety.

16
For God could not be the word: if of what sort he is, of the same sort any
creature might be made, no though it be a spiritual creature, much less a
human body.

17
On the other side rather, they that will have his divine and essential
proprieties, so powered into the humanity of Christ, that it is as well
almighty and every where, as is his deity, they do not only open a wide gate
to the Arrians, but even take away the true deity of Jesus Christ.

18
For he is not indeed true God, whose essence and nature can be so really
powered into any thing created, as that the same may be made altogether such,
as the same God is: really and by it self, infinitely mighty, infinitely wise,
extending it self (as I may say) endlesly, and by that means actuallie
existing every where in it own essence.

19
For the essential proprieties of God are in very deed nothing else, but his
very essence: seeing otherwise it could not be most simple.

20
To say then that Christ's humanity is as well made almighty, and every where
present, as is his deity: is as if thou should say, that it is made such in
it own essence and nature, and therefore is true God.

21
Now such a deity is no true deity: and therefore the word (which is
horrible blasphemy) shall not be true God.

22
Add, that it is not only most absurdly, but also most impiouslie said, that
the proprieties of the divine nature are powered into the human.

23
For neither did we ever read, that the word or any propriety thereof was
powered into Abraham's seed: as contrary wise we read that Abraham's seed was
taken by the son of God: neither could the proprieties of the word be powered
into the human nature, without pouring of the nature it self and the divine
essence: seeing they are in very deed nothing else, but the divine essence.

24
But the divine nature cannot be transfused into the human, but that the
union of the natures must cease, and so a mixture and confusion must be made:
and they which are so mixed, do cease to be that which they were.

25
Now therefore we say, that deity, to which any created thing can be made
equal, is not a true deity.

26
For it would needs be, that either the thing to be made equal, must be made
infinite: which is altogether impossible: or else the same deity to which it is
to be made equal, must be finite, seeing nothing that is finite can be made
equal, but only to a thing finite. But a deity finite is no true deity.

Of the eternal omnipotency of one true God.
year. 1575.
1
WHen in the Scriptures god is called mighty, we must not conceive in our
minds, that there is a passive might in God: whereby he may suffer any thing,
or leave to be that which he is: or become that which he is not by any change
of himself: but we must with a firm faith believe, (as it is indeed) that
he has only an active power, whereby he always works and can work.

2
For god is an essence most simple, most perfect, truly eternal, void of all
passion, and unchangeable, and most powerful: and of whom and by whom all
things are made.

3
Yet we must not imagine any such active power in God, which is a diverse thing
from his essence.

4
For God in his own most simple essence is such, whatsoever he be: just, good,
or almighty.

5
And although there be indeed but one only power in God: yet for the diverse
respects wherein he is considered, it may be said (not impiouslie) to be
manifold.

6
For it is one respect when it is considered, as God workethal ways in
himself in understanding, willing, loving: and another respect, when we
behold it as God has wrought outwardly or without himselfen in creating the
world: and as he evermore works in governing the same: and as he could work
innumerable things, if he would.

7
Therefore as the actions of god are not vnfittly distinguished into abiding
actions, and passing: so the power of God may not unjustly be called twofold,
one, wherein he ever from all eternity did work and does work in himself:
the other, wherein he did not only make, rules, and works all things in
time without himself: but also can bring to pass infinite things, which he
never will do.

8
Whereupon it is also that the same is usually divided into actual power,
which works whatsoever he will: and into absolute power, whereby he can also
do infinite things which he will not: because otherwise he could not be said to
be simply omnipotent.

9
For as we hold not with them, which think God is therefore called omnipotent:
because simply whatsoever can be said or thought, whether it be good or ill,
or if the same implie a contradiction, he can do the same: so neither do we
subscribe to their opinion, which hold that God is called and is omnipotent for
no other cause, but for that he can do whatsoever he will: that his power should
so stretch no farther then his will: but we believe he is therefore almighty: in
that besides he can do whatsoever he will, he can also both will, and bring to
pass, innumerable things which he will never will, nor bring to pass.

10
For when the Scripture says, that God did whatsoever he would: it plainly
teaches, that he could have done much more if he would. And he which says
he will have mercy on whom he will, and he will harden whom he will, he
shows manifestly, that he could as well have mercy on all, or harden all, as
he can harden some, and have mercy on some: and therefore that he can have
mercy on more then he will have merdie on: and so that: there are more things
which he can do, then he will do.

11
For that which he can do, be can by his nature do: and therefore can not but
be able to do it: unless he could also so do, as that he should not be God.
But whatsoever without himself he wills, he freely wills it: and therefore
could also not will it, so as it is manifest, that God can do more, then he
will: seeing he can will that he will not.

12
Now we say God can do all those things: which are not repugnant either with
his personal proprieties, or with his essence and nature: or which implie not
a contradiction: or lastly, which are not of the defect or want of power, if
they be admitted.

13
Thus although the father, cannot be the son, nor the son the father:
neither also the father ca^ beget of himself another son, or the son any
other of himself: yet therefore does nether the Son nor the Father cease to
be omnipotent.

14
For these are personal proprieties, that the father should begett and not be
begotten, but the son be begotten, not begett: neither does the essence of
God bear it, that there should be more fathers, or more sons.

15
Neither is any thing taken away from the power of god, in that, he cannot
bring to pass, but that he must be good, just, wise* seeing he ca^ not be God,
unless he be such, as the scripturs describe him.

16
So we take no power from God, nor weake^ it at all, if we say God cannot
sin, he cannot suffer, he cannot bring to pass, either not to be that which
he is: or that those things which are done, should not have bin done: because
these things are partly of the defect of power, and partly they implie a
contradiction: And therefore are directly repugnant to the truth of God: and
simply impossible.

17
And so is it the property of God, to be omnipotent, as that it can belong to
no created thing.

18
For seeing omnipotency is nothing else but the very immeasurable, infinite
essence, and able to be communicated to no creature: that it should agree to
that thing to be omnipote^t, unto which it does not agree to be God in it own
essence.

19
Neither can a thing finite be capable of a thing infinite, seeing every thing
is received according to the measure (as they say) of the receives.

20
Also it is no less contrary to the nature of God, that there should be more
almighties: then that there should be more gods. Whereupon christian religion
will not allow: that the three persons in God should be said to be three
almighties.

21
Wherefore although the man Christ Jesus is truly omnipotent, because he is
not man only, but also God: yet his humanity cannot be, or be said to be
properly omnipote^t, without impiety.

22
For the human nature of Christ, though it be united to the divine nature
into one person of the word: and yet as it is not therefore made God: so
neither is it made properly omnipote^t: but held still the own weakness,
whereby it was able to suffer for us and to die.

23
For neither could it have suffered, if as God, so also it had been made
omnipotent: seeing, to be able to suffer is impotencie: and therefore God could
not suffer, because he is omnipotent.

24
And if the human nature of Christ was made omnipotent, through the
hypostaticall union in Christ: why do the Scriptures attribute it not to his
humanity, but to his deity, that his body saw no corruption: or that this
soul being restored to him, he rose from the dead?

25
Furthermore as a human body, through the union with the mind, neither is
made an incorporeall substance endued with will and understanding: neither
receives from it either immortality or the virtue of understanding or
willing: so neither the human nature, through the union with the divine
nature of the word, is made an essence subsisting by it self, most simple and
most perfect: or has received from it, to be properly omnipotent.

26
Noreouer the argument, whereby the fathers proved against the Arrians, Christ
to be true God by the omnipotency attributed in the holy Scriptures to the
son, is quite overthrown, if we grant that the omnipotency, may be
communicated to any created thing.

27
Lastly concerning religion, we must not speak but agreeable to the
Scriptures, and to the analogy of faith. But the holy Scriptures do declare
none but only God to be omnipotent, neither did the church ever profess any
otherwise in her creeds.

28
Whereas Christ said after his resurrection, alpower is given unto me:
Authority is one thing, and power another: neither said he, it is given to my
humanity, but to me: neither was this spoken in respect of his nature, but of
his office of a mediator. And that office was and is of his whole person,
according to both natures.

29
Therefore as we believe by the holy ghost, God alone to be truly and
properly omnipotent, so also with the whole church do we confeffe and preach.

30
But we doubt not that the human nature of Christ is endued, both with that
power (though finite) which farrexceedeth the power of all created things as well
in heaven as earth: and therefore wherein it may well and properly be called
the mightiest of all creatures: and also forth hypostatical union with the
truly omnipoten: word: although properly in it self it be not such: yet we
grant it may in some sort be said to be omnipotent: namely, in as much as it
is so united to the word, that both those things, which are proper to the
word may also be said of it yet in the concrete: and the word did use and
might use his soul and his body as proper instruments, (yet the proprieties
and actions of each of them remaining distinct) to perform many of the works
of his omnipotency.

Of gods providence.
year. 1576.
1
WE believe and teach out of Gods word, that the providence which the grecians
call Romans 13.14
(...) and also Luc. 22 Act. 4.28
(...) is in God: by which providence al things are Ps. 139.4
foreknowne, Ps. 119.91.
preordained, and Don. 4.3.
governed.

2
This providence of God is that Job. 9, 4 12, 13 Ier. 51.15
most wise, Deuteronomy. 32, Psalm. 145, 1^ Sap. 12, 15
most just, and unchangeable counsel, Dan. 4.32
wherein he Pro. 8, 22 Ephesians. 1, 9
decreed in himself from all beginnings, of all things as well in heaven as
earth, both that they should be These. 2, 39
made, and that they should be made in such order and fashion as they are made:
and to the Rs. 1.19, 92
pattern whereof he also Lev. 26, 4 Psalm. 104.4 Hos. 2, 21 Ephesians. 4, 11
orders and governs continually all things Genesis 1
in time, Deuteronomy. 8, 3 Psalm. 72, 18 Ier. 32, 20. 1. Reg. 17, 4
sometime by certain and ordinary means, Psalm. 115, 3 Romans 9.10
sometime without them, but evermore Psalm. 138, 8 Dan. 4, 32 Ioh. 5.17
mightily: and that both for the Genesis 50, 20 Romans 8, 28 Cor. 3, 21
Psalm. 19.1, 1. Chron. 29, 11, 12 Romans 9, 17.
salvation of his chosen, and especially for the advancement of his own
glory.

3
For besides that it is manifest, that God is Ier. 32, 17 Luc. 1, 37
omnipotent, wise, and exceeding 1. Cro. 16, 34 Mat. 19.17
good: whereby it cannot be that he should suffer this huge large world Genesis
1.1 Heb. 11, 3
created by himself, and wherein Christ's Ioh. 16.33
church remains, to roll after the rash hazard of fortune and chance: Psalm.
33 and 147 Job. 5. ibi. 9 ibi. 37.38. c. Sap 14, 3 Col. 1, 16 Heb. 3 Ios. 42.5
Also the holy Scriptures themselves in apparent words do teach, that this
world is governed by Gods providence.

4
Neither do we make only a Neh. 9, 35. Act. 17, 28 Heb. 1.
general providence in God, whereby he rules the whole frame of the world: but
also we acknowledge and hold that peculiar providence, wherein he works and
guides Job. 37, and ^8
every thing severally, and especially ^sa. 104, and ^47
men, and of men, chiefly ^at. 6, 26 and ^, 29
his elect, withal their actions.

5
For we know that nothing is done or moved in the world, without the will of
the ^^h. 4, 6, 7 Psalm. 8, 5 ^^r. 10, 23 Ies. 43, 1 Psalm. 139 Psalm. 91 Zach. 2,
8 Mat. 6, 10
father: so that nothing can be more absurd, then to say, there may something
be done in the world: which God had not before ordained, and and which he
governs not with his own hand.

6
Neither yet do we thereby simply deny, but that many things fall out Mat.
10, 29 Luc. 12, 6
casually and by chance: Pro. 16, 4 Dan. 4, 32 a Exo. 21.13 Pro. 16, 33
seeing this being rightly understood does not impugn the eternal and
infallible providence of God.

7
For God by his unchangeable providence decreed, not only that such things
should be done, as are done: but he also ordained from the beginning that all
things should come to pass in that very manner as they do come to pass.

8
But in that we say nothing is done in the world without the will of the
father: we do not thereby enwrapp God himself the most wise and just
director of all actions, into sin, or make him author of sin.

9
For sin is ^^h. 3.4
a transgression of the law and a declining from the straight line of the
divine law. But God can neither Nu. 23.19 Tit. 1.2 Heb. 6.18 1. Ioh. 1, 5
decline from the straightness of his will, neither Ia. 1, 13 Ose. 13.9
does he instill into others the fault of declining, Psalm. 5, 6
nay God is a hater and a Deu. 32, 41 Ios. 59, 17 Nah. 1, 2
most just revenger of sin.

10
Wherefore seeing it belongs to the providence of God, that sins should be
punished of God the just judge: by the doctrine of providence it is rather
proved, that God is to be feared, and sins to be avoided, then that thereby
any blame can be transferred upon God, or our wickednesses excused.

11
But whereas besides this which we now spoke of, there be many other
profitable uses of this doctrine of Gods providence: yet these two are
principally to be noted: namely, that this doctrine is a means that the
godly, in all their afflictions do fly unto God, 2. Cro. 14 11.20.6.12 Psalm.
46.1 Mat. 10.28 and 27, 23, 35. 1. Pet. 5, 6, 7. Iam. 4.11
who governs all things, and do rest themselves in his bosom: and they
refer all glory to him alone in prosperity: and are evermore humbled under
his mighty hand, by which he works all things.

Of eternal election and predestination, and of redemption made by Christ. Out
of the first chapter of Paul to the Ephesians.
year. 1579.
1
NO blessing since the worlds creation has befallen or can befall us, ver. 3.
and 4
to which we were not elected and predestined before the foundation of the
world: neither is the same bestowed on us by any other, nor by any means else,
then by whom, and after what sort God in his everlasting decree had
appointed: as the Apostle says, We are blessed in Christ Jesus with all
spiritual blessing, even as he has chosen us from the foundation of the
world.

2
As in Jesus Christ alone we obtain all spiritual blessing: so also in him
alone we were chosen and predestined, to obtain it; since the Apostle
teaches both, namely, that we are blessed in Christ's, and were all chosen in
him. ver. 3. and 4


3
Whosoever we be that have been elected: ver. 4
we were elected not only to the end, that is, eternal life, but also to the
means ordained for the end. For S. Paul says, God has chosen us, that
we should be holy and unblameable.

4
In that God has chosen us, ver. 3, 4, 5
he it did of his love toward us, and according to the good pleasure of his
will, and therefore our whole election is of free gift.

5
The end of our free election is twofold, ver. 5. and 6
our salvation, and the glory of God: Of the first the Apostle Saint Paul
says, We are predestined into the adoption of the sons of God, and
therefore to a heavenly inheritance: of the other, that it was done for the
praise of the glory of his grace.

6
The salvation therefore of the elect in Jesus Christ is certain and
necessary: the foundation whereof is the ternall, free, and vnchaungable
purpose of the will of God.

7
Who so have been chosen from the beginning in Christ unto life everlasting,
and to the means thereunto: all they and only they in the time appointed of
the father, ver: 7
which is called the fullness of time were in very deed, through Christ and
in Christ redeemed from their sins, and so from the evil which follows
sins: the Apostle saying, in Jesus Christ we have redemption, even
remission of sins.

8
Neither were we redeemed, Tit. 3. v. 5 ver. 7.
according to the merits and works of righteousness, which we have done, but
according to the mercies of God and according to the riches of his grace, by
the blood of Christ Jesus: both which are manifestly confirmed by the Apostle.

9
And albeit the eternal father redeemed and saved us by his son, by whom he
also created us: yet the ^onne is he, which by an especial respect, the church
of God uses to call, the redeemer of mankind and our Savior.

10
For the Son alone, Lev. 25. ver. 48.49
was and is God and man: and he alone had the right of propriety, as they call
it, or of kindred to redeem us: and he alone shedd his blood, whereby as by a
ransom we were redeemed. Lastly he it is alone in whose person our redemption
is made perfect and accomplished.

11
By the name of this ransom, which we are said to have in Christ, ^. Cor. 1.
v. 30
we mean that full and accomplished redemption: in as much as it contains
not only remission of sins in this life, but also in the life to come after
this, a perfect deliverance from all ill, and from the bondage of all
corruption: so that there is no ransom, which we have not in Christ our most
perfect redeemer, who as he is made unto us by God our wisdom, righteousness,
and sanctification, so also our redemption.

Of the resurrection of Christ Jesus from the dead, his ascension into heaven,
and sitting at Gods right hand, out of the first of Paul to the Ephesians.
year. 1581.
1
GOd did effectually show the greatness of his power in Christ, Ephesians. 1.^^
by raising him from the dead: therefore only God, by his infinite power, is
the efficient cause of the resurrection of Christ, and all the dead.

2
Yea but Christ also by his power raised him self from death; as he said,
destroy this temple, Ioh. 2.19
and in three days I will build it up: but he spoke of the temple of his
body: and that, Ioh. 10.17
I lay down my life that I may take it again. Christ therefore is no less
God, then the father, neither is he God of lesser might.

3
But one and the same cannot be, truly the raiser and the raised from the
dead, unless he consist of diverse natures, of the divine, according to which
he does raise, and the humane, according to which, he is raised. Therefore the
same Christ, as he is true God coessentiall with the father, so he is true
man, coessentiall with his mother and his brethren.

4
Neither can any be truly said to be raised and to rise from the dead,
unless the same be truly said to be dead and to have died. But death
consists in a true separation of the soul from the body, whereby the body
which dies may presently be rightly called a dead carcass. Christ then if he
truly rose from the dead, it can by no means be denied, but that he also
truly died, his soul being truly separated from his body.

5
If then (since he truly died) neither his soul for that time of his death was
in his body, neither (since he was truly buried) his body while it honge
upon the cross, was in the grave, or while it lay in the grave, hong upon
the cross; neither since God truly raised him from the dead) either his soul
recalled his body, or his body recalled himself from death to life: therefore
the humane nature in Christ was neither omnipotent, nor every where present in
it own substance.

6
For as this consequence is not good, Christ Jesus himself was dead and
buried, and rose again from the dead; therefore he was dead and buried and
rose again according to both his natures: So neither is this, behold I am
with you even to the end of the world; therefore not only in his deity,
but also in the substance of his humanity, he is really present with us on
the earth.

7
But as this consequence is good, Christ being God, suffered: therefore he
suffered not according to his deity, but according to his humanity: so is
this other, Christ Jesus being man is every where and simply omnipotent,
therefore he is every where and omnipotent, not according to his humanity, but
according to his deity: seeing the divine nature is no less united to the
humane, then the humane is to the divine, in the same person of Christ Jesus.

8
If God himself, and so the divine nature in Christ raised his body from the
dead, not by the same body, but by it self: namely by the divine nature, then
it is false, that the divine nature in Christ did all things and does not
only in and with, but also by the humane nature.

9
For the soul of Christ Jesus does not work all things by the body, as
neither do our minds understand or will things by the bodies: and that for
this cause, that as the philosophers also taught, our mind depends not on
the body. Much less then does the deity of Christ work all things by the
flesh which it took.

10
For does the deity understand by the humane understanding, or does it will
by the humane will? or does it keep or sustaien the humane nature in the
person of the word, by the very same humane nature? or does it bear all
things by the humane flesh or rather by the word of it own virtue? Lastly,
if the form of God do nothing but by the form of a servant, how can that
saying of Leo be true: each fo rme does the property of it self with
communion of the other?

11
Like as therefore the form of God is one, and the form of a servant another:
so the actions and proprieties of the one and of the other be diverse: though
many times both the one and the other have one and the same work and
operacion.

12
Wherefore this is no consequence: to whomsoever Christ comes with the
father, according to the form of God: to him he also comes, and abides in
him in his own substance according to the form of a servant: much less that
he is so every where.

13
Further, like as no other, but the very same Christ, rose from the dead: so
he rose in no other but in the very same body, in which he suffered, died, and
was buried.

14
For he could not be truly said to be raised and to rise from the dead: except
that which truly died the very same quickened again should rise again.

15
Now the body wherein Christ suffered, died and was buried: was a true humane
body, visible, palpable, circumscribed. Therefore Christ after his
resurrection had and retained no body but that which was circumscribed in a
certain place, and wheresoever it was and is, might and may be seen and
handled.

16
Add also, that the Apostle carefully discoursing of the qualities, with which
our bodies being raised up to eternal life shall be endued, he says not, that
they shall not be subject either to the eye, or to the touch, or not be
circumscribed in a definite place, but he rehearses only incorruption,
glory, and power, as is the agilitie thereof, and that they shall rise
spiritual, not that the corporal substance shall be changed into an
incorporeall, but that they shall be (as the greeks call it) immortal, and
shall be full of the holy spirit dwelling and working in them. The Apostle
therefore taught that these are qualities never to be separated from the
bodies, namely that they shall be circumscribed, visible, palpable. Wherefore
neither did Christ's body after his resurrection put of these qualities.

17
Neither is that exception any thing, that Christ after he was risen came in to
his disciples the doors being shut. For it was not therefore either made
vnvisible or uncircumcised or vnpalpable: seeing Christ being come in and
seen of his disciples, presently said, Feel or handle and see, Luc. 24.
for a spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me have. And therefore (as the
Fathers teach) there was no change made of Christ's body, no more then there
was, when he, or Peter, walked upon the waters; but by the omnipotency of his
diety having power over all things, the doors gave place to the true and firm
body of the son of God.

18
Wherefore not without cause did the Fathers condemn not only Marcion, the
Maniches and others, which taught that Christ took not a true and firm humane
body, but a fantastical one, and did all things according to imagination and
fantasy: but also the Originists, John of Jerusalem, and Euticius of
Constantinople, Hier. tom. 12. ad Pa^mach. Greg. in Job. lib. 24 c. 29.
Bishops, and others, which said that Christ's body after his resurrection was
made so spiritual, that it was more thin then air, and therefore invisible
and vnpalpable.

19
Seeing then that in the supper no other body of Christ is given us to be
eaten, but that which was broken for us, that is, truly suffered and died? it
follows that Christ's (...) body which we eat in the Supper, is truly
circumscribed, visible, and palpable; and consequently seeing nothing is seen,
touched, or perceived in the Supper, besides bread: the same body cannot in it
own substance really be contained under the forms of bread and wine, or lie
hidden in the very bread and wine.

20
Now we acknowledge the resurrection of Christ is both the cause and an
example of our as well spiritual as corporal resurrection. The cause of the
spiritual, because the Apostle says to the Romans 4. he rose again for our
justification; and an example, because he says, Romans 6.
we are bur^ed together with him by baptism, into his death, that as Christ
was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father: so we also should vwalke
in newenesse of life.

21
But that he is the cause of our corporal resurrection, we doubt not, 1. Cor.
5.
for that the Apostle says, If Christ be risen again, we shall also rise
again; and for that he also says, Christ is the first fruits of them that
rise: and an example, for that the same Apostle also writes, he shall change
our vile bodies, Phil 3.21.
that they shall be like his glorious body.

22
Whereupon It also follows, either Christ's body not to be invisible,
vnpalpable, uncircumcised, and so not spiritual bodies, but incorporall
spirits.

23
For where Christ says, Feel and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones,
as ye see me have: he did not only conclude that himself was no spirit,
but he especially taught this, that there is no flesh nor bones but may be
seen and felt.

24
The Scripture teaches, and the church confesses, that our Lord Jesus Christ
being raised from the dead, did show unto his disciples, for forty days
space, by many arguments, that he was truly risen, and then even in the
beholding of the Apostles, that he was lifted up from the earth and ascended
into heaven. Therefore like as no other Christ rose again then he which died:
so no other ascended into heaven, nor in no other body, then he, and in which,
that truly rose again from the dead, the son of God, truly humane,
visible, palpable, and circumscribed.

25
Wherefore as the conversation of the same Lord Jesus Christ, wherein he
conuersed among his Apostles after his refurrection, for forty days space,
was not fantastical, but real and true: so also his ascension was not only
visible, but also truly (as the fathers say) local: when the Apostles saw
him ascend from the earth up into heruen.

26
But such an ascension and moving, cannot agree to his divine nature: therefore
he ascended according to his humane nature.

27
Yet by the way we deny not this, but that Christ as God, like as he is said
to have descended from heaven in respect that he abased himself, taking upon
him the vile form of a servant, and suffered in it: so also it may rightly be
said, that he is exalted and ascended up into heaven: namely in respect that in
the very same form of a servant, when it was glorified, even the form of God
was after a sort glorified by his ascension and after it: that is was made
glorious in the wholle world.

28
But it is apparent, that as this consequence is not good, Christ himself
being God and man ascended into heaven, in a local and visible moving.
Therefore he in the same sort ascended according to his dietie: so neither is
this good, Christ God and man is with us to the end of the world truly, and
in his own essence, therefore he is present on earth as well in the substance
of his body and soul, as in the essence of his dietie.

29
If also the Apostles saw with their eyes Christan his own body, by change
of place ascending from earth into heaven: then the heaven into which he did
ascend, cannot be an vbiquitary heaven, but it must needs be far distant
from the earth.

30
Moreover nature and all right requires that for every thing some certain place
must be assigned: as we see god has done in all the things which he created.
Seeing then no created thing can be found more excellent, then Christ's body,
both for the union with the word, and for the wonderful gifts created in the
same, and so also for the most perfect glory and happiness wherein he now
lives: It must needs be that this body must exist in some certain and most
happy place.

31
Neither can it proceed but only from trupiety, and from our true reverence,
toward Christ, that we should believe that his body does dwell, not under the
earth, not in the earth, not in the waters, not in a piece of bread, not in
every leaf of a tree, not in the air, or in the celestial speres, but in a
place, as the most happy, fair, and perfect, so the highest of al others:
which we with Ambrose think the Apostle spoke of, when he said, that he was
caught up: 2. Cor. 12.2. and 4.
into the third heaven, and into paradise.

32
To this, the same scripture also teaches, and the Catholic faith believes
and confesses, that the same Jesus Christ, shall come out of that heaven in
the clouds, Phil. 3.20. 1. These, 4.16. 1. These. 4.17.
to judge the quick and the dead: and that we being raised from the dead,
shall be caught up into the air to meet him in the clouds, and so shall be
with him in that heaven for ever.

33
And this heaven, Ioh. 14.2.
which is called the Fathers house, and the heavenly city, and by many other
names. The scripture proves to be placed above all the visible and mooveable
heavens: saying that Christ is ascended above all heavens, Ephesians. 4.16.
and that he is in heaven.

34
For this heaven wherein he is in his body, and wherein we shall be in our
bodies and souls, cannot be some vast and I know not what, uncreated room:
partly, because nothing is uncreated but God, partly, because it is plainly to
the Hebr. Heb. 11.10.
said to be Gods workma^ship.

35
Moreover the chief and principal efficient cause of that moving wherein his
body was carried up into heaven, was the divine nature remaining in him
according to that, to the Phil. 2. God has exalted him, And, he was taken up
(of God) into glory. But a secondary efficient cause was the gift of agility,
which followed his glorious resurrection, bestowed on the humane nature by the
diety, by which agility that flesh ascended up, not held and sustained by
angels or by the clouds, as once Elias was in the fiery chariot, but of it
own accord, and without trouble or difficulty: and therefore that motion was
not a violent motion.

36
Now this ascension of Christ our head, was the cause and the example of our
ascension which shall be into heaven. For since the head is ascended, it must
needs be that the members shall ascend: and as his ascension was, so ours
shall be. For he shall change our vile bodies to be like to his glorious
body: and we shall be caught up into the clouds to meet Christ in the air,
and so we shall be with the Lord for ever.

37
If then ours shall be a true ascension, and that we shall truly be lifted
from the earth into heaven: Therefore Christ's body also, did truly ascend from
earth into heaven, not imaginarily or putatively.

38
And this doctrine of Christ's true ascension into that highest heaven, and his
perpetual abiding there, is most profitable, and full of consolation.

39
For first it serves to strengthen our faith about the certain place: where
with the eyes and hands of our faith we may behold, touch and take hold of the
body of Christ: Then, to establish our hope: namely that it shall be, that
before the resurrection of our bodies, our souls being separated from our
bodies, they shall neither descend beneath the earth, nor shall flote in the
waters or the air, nor roll about with the spheres: but shall be carried
above all these heavens, to that blessed and heavenly house of the Father, into
which Christ in his body is already entered, that they may be ever with Christ.
Lastly, to kindle in our hearts the love and desire of a heavenly life and
conversation: as the Apostle says, If ye be risen with Christ, seek those
things which are above, set your affections on things which are above, where
Christ sits at the right hand of God.

40
Of Christ's sitting at the right hand of the father thus speaks the Apostle:
And has set him (Christ raised from the dead, and carried up into heaven) in
the heavenly places, far above all principallities, and power, and might, and
domination, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but also
in that which is to come: and has made all things subject under his feet
etc. YVhatsoeuer is read otherwise in the holy scripture, or confessed by the
church in the Creedes concerning this sitting, is agreeable unto this.

41
But we ca^ no where read, that for this sitting at Gods right hand, either
Christ Jesus took any other body, (call it howesoeuer) or that in his natural
body, there was any change made of the substance of it, or of any of those
natural qualities and essential proprieties, which it retained after his
resurrection. It is therefore manifest, that in what body Christ rose, and
ascended into heaven, namely, a visible, palpable, and circumscribed body: in
the same he also sits at the Fathers right hand in the highest heavens: and
wheresoever he is, or pleases to be, he keeps still to himself such a body.

42
The Apostle also witnesses, and the church confesses in the Creedes, that
Christ first died was buried, raised from the dead, and taken up into heaven,
before he fare at the Fathers right hand. Therefore either it is false, that
Christ's human nature the^ first received a gift, for substance of his body to
be really every where: or if it be true, then it received it not by the
hypostaticall union, which was made in his very incarnation.

43
Neither is this exception any thing, that by the hypostaticall union, this was
given him; in the first act, as, that if he would, he might be present every
where, but by the sitting at Gods right hand, it was given him, in the second
act, that is, that he was indeed present every where.

44
For besides, that the terms of this distinction, are terms, not taken from
the fountains of Israel, but out of the puddles of sophisters, Christ himself
also refelleth this exception: when speaking not of the first act, but of the
second, that is, of his actual presence, he said both a little before his
death, Where two or three shall be gathered together in my name, there am I in
the midst of them; and after his resurrection, bofore his ascension, he said,
Behold I am with you even to the end of the world.

45
By those sayings it evidently appears, that either Christ spoke not of the
real presence of his body, but only of the presence of his diety, and power
of his spirit: or that he is present to us in the same manner that he was to
the Apostles, namely visibly: seeing he said not I will be, but I am: neither
is there any necessity to alter the sense of those words.

46
Add this, that if he speak of the same real presence of his body, and that
this promise pertained not to the Apostles only, but also to all the faithful
which were then in the world: Christ had not spoken a truth. For he was not
before his death or after his Resurrection, present in a visible presence with
all the faithful, which were then in the world, and which were gathered
together in his name.

47
Wherefore the doctrine of the real and substantial, yet invisible presence
of the body of Christ Jesus on the earth and every where, is not agreeable
with the holy scriptures, but seems to come near to the Maniches, who (as
Augustine shows against Faustus) say that Christ's body does invisiblie hang
on every tree.

48
If Christ also satte not at Gods right hand in his body, before his
resurrection and ascension into heaven, as the wholle Church confesses: then
their doctrine is impious and heretical, which teaches that Christ Jesus,
even from his mothers womb (according to the flesh he took) has sits at
the right hand of Gods power.

49
If this also be true which the Apostle teaches, and the whole scripture
confirms, and the Catholic Church confesses, that Christ Jesus not only
then sat at his Fathers right hand, after he ascended into heaven, but also is
so placed in the same at Gods right hand, as he is never read to sit at such
a right hand in any other place then in heaven: therefore then it cannot only
not be said according to the holy scriptures, that Christ Jesus sits any
other where at God the Father his right hand then in heaven: but also it is
false, that he also so sits in the earth: that he is no less present really
in substance of his body, in the bread of the Lords supper and in every place,
then he is in heaven.

50
For the Apostle also in other places, and specially in the epistle of S. Paul
to the Hebrews denies that he is upon the earth, namely in a corporal
presence, for as much as he sitting at the right hand of the throne of
majesty in heaven, executes his office of priesthood.

51
Moreouet we hold beyond all controversy, that Christ sitting at Gods right
hand, is a figurative speech: seeing God, to speak properly has neither right
hand nor left hand; neither is it lawful to imagine any carnal thing
concerning the seats and thrones in heaven, wherein they are said to sit;
and oftentimes in the scriptures this word sitting, is used besides other
significations, for dwelling, ruling, exercising judgment, and for resting.

52
But that the Apostle Paul meant not by this phrase, that Christ Jesus in his
own body is truly and substantially present in all places: besides that
which has bin already said, it is also evident by that which for declaration
sake he adioyneth.

53
For to this sitting of Christ at Gods right hand, the Apostle adds for
declaration sake, three things: First, that Christ is so placed at Gods right
hand, that he is above all principallitie, that is, that he has no creature
above him, or equal to him, no not in heaven, but is made higher then the
heavens, and al heavenly things: then, he adds, that all things are made
subject to him, that is, that there is nothing beneath him, over which he has
not power and authority: thirdly, that he was given to be a head of the church.

54
Now as we said that whatsoever we have before spoken of the resurrection from
the dead, and so of the ascension, ought to be understood according to the
humane nature of Christ: so we think with the sound fathers, that these
things also must be understood especially according to the same humane nature.

55
The exaltation of Christ's humane nature above al things, may be understood two
ways: either in re-pect of the local placing, as this, he ascended above all
the heavens, that the meaning may be, the humane nature was placed locally
above all created things: or in respect of the excellent pre-eminence of the
dignity and power thereof, and then the meaning may be, Christ even touching
his humane nature was set over all created things, and to him was given power
and authority over all things. For in these two manners any thing of the same
kind is said to be over another, eiin place, or in dignity.

56
If then this saying be understood the latter way: thereupon the vbiquitie
cannot be proved; seeing Christ in that in his humane nature he may use his
authority over all creatures, although he be not in substance of body every
where. If the former way, then he is not every where: seeing that which is
every where, is as well beneath, and at, and within, as above all creatures.

57
But Paul does plainly teach, that Christ (touching his humane nature) did
so rise from the dead, that he was no longer among the dead, and so ascended
into heaven, that he was no longer on earth: and so being exalted above all
creatures, sits at the fathers right hand, that he is nether beneath nor
within created things, seeing all things are put under his feet.

58
Neither can the head be said to be in it own substance, where the feet
are, although it be in them in virtue and operation, and indeed as well the head
to the feet, as the feet to the head are joined together in their substance,
by the sinues and by the soul.

59
But the Apostle says. Christ Jesus is given for a head of the church,
namely, according to his humanity: now the head is above all the body.

60
The Apostle therefore meant nothing less by his words of Christ's sitting at
Gods right hand, then to conclude, that Christ's body in it own substance is
present in all places. Wherefore they do great wrong to the Apostle, which by
their cauills labor to conclude this out of his words.

61
Neither can any such Vbiquitie be proved by any necessary consequence, out of
that article of faith.

62
For although it were granted (which cannot be granted) that by the sitting
at Gods right hand the humane nature is made truly by it self omnipotent, yet
unless it be proved to be so made omnipotent, that it is also made infinite
and immeasurable: it can by no means be convinced that Christ's body in it
own substance is every where present.

63
For so is this the only cause, why God also in his own essence is every
where: that if ye take immeasurablenesse from him, he cannot be said to be
every where in his own essence.

64
And if also ye feign an infinite body, and therefore every where: yet that
it is wholly in all places at once, you shall never prove while the world
stands, unless ye can show, that the same body is also a most simple
essence: seeing. God is therefore wholly every where, nor according to his
parts, but because he is the most simple essence.

65
Wherefore whatsoever the Vbiquitaries do prate and babble, arguing either from
the Hypostaticall union, or the right hand of God, or the words of the supper,
or the diverse kinds of being, or from the saying, all power is given unto me,
and such like speeches: they evermore in this disputation, infer one fallation
(to speak of none else at this time) which is called non causa pro causa:
except by those arguments they could prove the substance of Christ's body to
be made immealurable and infinite, and also most simple, such as is the
essence of God.

66
Yet do we not for all this deny, but the body of Jesus Christ, though it
remain in heaven yet it is truly present unto us, not only in his operation,
but in substance also.

67
But how, or in what manner of presence? surely a true presence, but so as he
is really present in us, by his spirit in us, and by our faith: and (if we may
use similituds) as the head is truly and really present to all the members, yea
to the feet.

68
But how are these present one to another? not in neerenesse of place, (for so
the head of a Pigmey were more present to his feet then the head of a giant)
but by virtue of one soul, and the ioincttures of sinues and ligaments.

69
Seeing then according to the scriptures our bodies and Christ's body are truly
knitt together by the same spirit, so that we are one and the same body under
one and the same head, which God has given to the church, namely Christ, no
man can deny this true presence, without great blasphemy.

70
But for the sitting at the right hand, we believe that the Apostle meant to
signify by this phrase, how Christ according to his humanity, after many and
most grievous labors rubbed through upon earth, and many troubles endured, for
our redemption sake, now gloriously rests in heaven, and so being dearly
beloved of his father lives in exceeding happiness, and appears in Gods sight
in our behalf, and that his intercession and propitiatio^ is most acceptable
to his father: and that he reigns with his father, and by him is appointed to
be the judge which shall at length come to judge the quick and the dead, and
is placed in the celestial throne.

71
For to sit (as Tertullian teaches) is proper to one that rests: and (as
Augustine teaches) to one that dwells, reigns, and does the office of a
judge: neither are any said to sit at the right hand, but such as are dearly
beloved, and near friends.

72
Augustine indeed thus interprets this place: of the creed to the
Catechumeni.

He ascended into heaven, believe it: Lib. 1. ca. 4
he sits at Gods right hand, believe it: To sit, understand to dwell: as
we say of any man, Ibid.
in such a country he has sit three years: so therefore believe ye, that
Christ dwells on the right hand of God, there he is. Let not your heart ask
ye this question, what does he? do not seek, for that which it is not lawful
to find: there he is, it suffices us: he is blessed, and of this blessedness
which is called the fathers right hand, the name of this blessedness it self is
called his fathers right hand. For if we take it carnally, then because he is
at the right hand, the father should be at the left hand: and is there any
reason thou should so set them, the son at the right hand, and the father
at the left? There all is the right hand, seeing there is nothing but blessedness.

Also: this sitting of his beloved, Lib. 2. ca. 4
ye must not take it to be meant of the humane parts, as if the father satt on
the left hand, and the son satt at the right hand: but by the right hand,
understand that power, which that man being entertained of God, received;
namely that he might afterward come to judge, which before came to be judged.

Also: Lib. 3. ca. 7
who is he, that sits at Gods right hand? the man Christ. For in that he is
God, he was ever with the father, and of the father: and when he came forth
unto us, he departed not from the father; for to be God, is to be wholly every
where. Therefore the son is wholly with the father, whole in heaven, whole on
earth, whole in the virgins womb, whole on the cross, whole in hell, whole in
paradise, whether he brought the thief. Not at diverse times or diverse places
do we say he is whole every where, as now whole in one place, and another time
whole in another place, but he is whole always, and in all places.

Also: Ibidem.
But by this that the son is said to sit at the fathers right hand, it is
showed, that the man, whom Christ took upon him, has received the power of a
judge.

Also: Lib. 4. ca. 7
The man, which Christ took on him, now reigns sitting at the fathers right
hand.

Also: Ibidem.
But, in that he is God, and equal to the father, and always judges, he is
ever present: but he shall come a redeemer in that form, wherein he ascended.

73
So far from it therefore is it, that by the fltting at Gods right hand, the
Apostle meant to signify that Christ in the substance of his body is on earth
and every where, that he rather seems to teach them quite contrary: seeing
that in heaven only, and not on this earth men's blessedness consists, and God
is said to dwell in heaven, not on earth, and rather that he reigns in heaven
then on earth: and it is said and believed, that Christ shall come not from
earth, but from heaven to judge both the quick and the dead.

74
Add this, that as gods feet by a certain humane affection or property at not
said to be in heaven, but on earth, according to that saying, Act. 7.49
heaven is my seat, and earth my footestoole: so also we may with good reason
say that his right hand has place in heaven rather then on earth.

75
We therefore conclude, that as by the Apostles doctrine of the resurrection
from the dead, and the ascension into heaven, the Vbiquitie of Christ cannot be
proved, but is rather confuted: so neither, by the doctrine which is of his
sitting at gods right hand, can the same be necessarily inferred.

76
Nay if such an Vbiquitie be admitted, we do not only shake but even quite
overthrow all these articles of faith, of his incarnation in the womb only
of the virgin, of his true death, that is, the true separation of his soul
and body, of his true resurrection of his flesh, of his true and visible
ascension from the earth into heaven, of his true sitting at Gods right hand in
the heavenly places; lastly of his visible return from that place to judge
both the quick and the dead.

77
For a body that is every where, cannot be moved from place to place
according to it whole self, as true philosophy teaches, and christian
theology confirms; which shows, that God therefore is not moved from
place to place, because being immeasurable he fileth all things.

78
Neither can that body also which is every where be rightly said to sit at
the right hand or the left of another, but you must needs co^fou^d the
substance of him that sits, with the substance of the right hand, at which,
and with the substance of him whose right hand he sits at: seeing therefore
even the father, the son, and the holy ghost filling heaven and earth, are
every where, both all and each of them, because they are one and the same
essence.

79
Finally, we think this doctrine of the invisible and vnpalpable presence of
Christ's flesh every where is neither true, nor profitable.

80
Not true indeed, because we could never see the same showed either by any
manifest testimonies of holy scriptures, or any necessary consequences drawn
out of them: nay we have observed the same to be repugnant to the scriptures,
and to the catholic consent of the old church, rightly expounded by the rule
of faith, contained in the Apostles creed.

81
Yea and we see it so contrary to the scriptures, that without a manifest
implying of a contradiction, ye cannot grant both those things which the
creed delivers, and those things which the authors of this Vbiquitary
doctrine do deliver.

82
Neither is it profitable: because that which is not agreeable with gods word,
to propou^d, believe and observe it as agreeable and necessary unto salvation,
is a sin: The Lord saying: Add not nor diminish: and the Apostle; Deuteronomy. 12 32
Romans 14.23 Romans 6.23
All that is not of faith, is sin: and the wages of sin, is death.

83
Finally, because if that opinion of the Vbiquitie of Christ's body should be
believed to be true: it would be a hinderance that a man could not apprehend
and eat with a mind lifted up Christ to the true flesh of Christ Jesus being
in heaven, whereunto notwithstanding, both the Apostle and the church calls
us, saying, lift up your hearts: And, seek those things which are above,
where Christ is, sitting at gods right hand.

84
They the^ do nothing less then eat Christ's flesh, which do not behold the
same in heaven where indeed it is: but imagine him to be really present
every where in his own substance. Aesops dog, leaving the true flesh, did
foolishlie catch at the vain shaddowe of the flesh, because it seemed a bigger
piece.

A question out of the 1. of Ioh. 4.3.
S. John describing Antichrist, says: Every spirit, which confesses not that
Jesus Christ is come in the (true humane) flesh, is not of God: and this is
that spirit of Antichrist.

And seeing that Christ, never laid aside that flesh which he once took, but
carried it with him up into heaven, and shall return again in the clouds in
the same, appare^t unto all me^, to judge the quick and the dead: The question
is, of what spirit they are, and by what name to be called, who make no doubt
with the old heretics, to forge for our Lord Jesus Christ, I know not what
kind of invisible flesh, uncircumcised, vnpalpable, whole, and in his whole
substance; forsooth really existing in all places, in heaven, in the stars, in
the air, in the earth, under the earth, in hell, in all the several parts of
the world, and the parcells of the parts, yea and in the least parcells of the
parcells: against Scripture and against the sound agreement of the whole
catholic church.

Of the dispensation of salvation by Christ. Out of the first chapter of the
Ephesians.
year. 1580.
1
Our Lord Jesus Christ, ver. 7 and 8
in whom we were elected unto salvation, not only once redeemed us, by his
own blood, having obtained remission of sins, and gotten the victory: but
does also daily dispense and communicate unto his, the grace of redemption and
salvation.

2
For it belongs to a perfect redeemer, not only by paying the ransom to
redeem, but also to make the redemption known to them that be redeemed, and
to deliver them quite out of the hands of the tyrant into freedom: as it also
belongs to a good head to impart the life, sense, and motion which it has,
unto the members.

3
Now Christ uses to dispense this grace of salvation by the word of truth,
that is, ver. 13
by the gospel of our salvation: with which we join the Sacraments, as
seals, and instruments of salvation.

4
For by the gospel he makes known unto us the mystery of his divine will,
ver. 9 and 10
concerning our salvation through Christ, and concerning the gathering
together, as well those that are in heaven, as these that are on earth, and
concerning the knitting of them to one head Christ.

5
Neither does he only make known unto us the mystery of salvation by the
gospel, ver. 13
but also effectually calls and draws us to himself, and to the communion
of himself and so to the participation of redemption and salvation.

6
For by the preaching of the gospel, ver. 13 Romans 10
he uses to stir up faith in our hearts: whereby we believe in him, and are
received into his communion.

7
For he gives us his holy spirit, by which he regenerateth us, ver. 13
and seals us with the express image of God, to the full possession of an
eternal inheritance.

8
By the same spirit he stirs up, works, and leads us, to the study of
a holy life, and good works.

9
And if it so be, ver. 14
we fall into sin (such is our frailty) he lifts us up, by repentance
given unto us: and makes us more assured of forgiveness: and by that means,
through the same spirit as it were a pledge, he more and more daily confirms
us in that assurance of salvation.

10
And these benefits Christ bestows on us, never utterly forsaking us, till he
has brought us by his grace, and singular love toward us, from the first
redemption, which is our redemption from the guilt, and servitude of sin, and
from the power of the devil, to the other redemption, namely the full liberty
which consists in the perfect assuring and full possession of the heavenly
inheritance.

11
But our Lord Jesus as he is our redeemer and the head of the whole church,
ver. 22
according to both the natures: so also he co^municateth eternal life and
salvation, not only as he is god, but also as he is man, according to that
same. Believe my son, thy sins be forgiven thee: And immediately after, but
that he might know that the son of man has power to forgive sins: (he
says to the sick of the palsy) arise take up thy bed, and go unto thy
house: where each nature works that which is proper to it, with communion of
the other.

12
For as the natures are so united within themselves in one person, that yet
there is made no change nor confusion among themselves, or among there
proprieties: so also the actions, are so the actions of one and the same
person, that yet they are truly distinguished betwixt themselves: and so
distinguished, that those which proceed from the one nature, and are proper
thereunto, they, although they be done with the communion of the other, yet it
is not lawful to say that they be done by the other, or that Christ does them
according to the other nature.

13
Where fore like as we allow the fathers, when they say, that Christ's
actions in redeeming and saving us, were and are done by god and man: so also
we greatly commend that famous saying of Leo the bishop of Rome, in his epistle
to Flauianus, and we teach that it is with a steadfast faith to be holden:
namely, Each form works with communion of the other that which is proper to
it self: as, the word working that which is proper to the word and the flesh
performing that which is proper to the flesh.

14
For he suffered for us, died, and was buried, according to the flesh: but he
gave the grace of deserving and redeeming to his suffering, by which he redeemed
us, according to his deity: but all these he willed, according to both the
natures.

15
Also he rose from the dead, ver. 20.21
and ascended in a visible and local ascension into heaven, exalted above all
Angels according to his humanity: yet he wrought the same resurrection,
ascension, and exaltation, according to his divinity: but he willed it
according to the will of both the natures.

16
Like as then we believe that Christ redeemed us according to both the natures,
according to that God purchased his Church by his own blood: so also we doubt
not but the same Christ sits at his Fathers right hand and rests in the
heavenly places, governing all things with his Father, and dispenses and
communicates the grace of redemption and everlasting salvation to the wholle
church which is his body, and to every member, according to both his natures:
the word working that which is proper to the word, and the flesh that which
belongs to the flesh.

17
For although he uses the ministry of the word and sacraments by men, to the
imparting of salvation unto us: yet the same Christ, both as he is God, and as
he is man, is properly the very same which calls us, gives unto us faith and
repentance, and he justifies, regenerateth quickens, and brings into
eternal life all that believe, by the working of the power of his might.

18
For this cause also our faith, whereby we take hold of salvation in Christ
and eternal life, must not respect and rely upon either the one or the other
nature of Christ severally, but on whole Christ himself, as the Ephesians were
said to have faith in the Lord Jesus.

19
Whereon it follows, that who so do deny either the one or the other nature
in Christ, or divide the one from the other, or confou^d the^ both together,
so, that they acknowledge him not for true God, and true man in all things
(sin excepted) like unto us, and embrace him not for such, and therefore for
a true and perfect redeemer, they can never be made partakers of redemption and
eternal salvation.

20
For as he that believes in Christ, such as he is, has life eternal: so he
that believes not, cannot have it.

Of those things which are spoken of our Lord Jesus Christ, after the union:
and in what sort they are spoken. Out of the 1. to the Ephesians. Positions.
Anno 1582.
1
THe Apostle writes, that Christ was raised from the dead and therefore he
truly di^^^^^d in another place, The Lord of glory was (...) yea we often
read, how the son of man was delivered unto death. But in all these
enunciations, the speech is ever of the same person, namely the son of God
incarnate. Therefore the person of Christ which is in these propositions the
subject, or that whereof another thing is spoken, is used to be signified by 3.
kinds of names: namely, by those which betoken the divine nature only, and
that sometime in respect of the essence, sometime in respect of the hypostasie
or persons: as, The lord of glory, the only begotten son of God: or which
betoken in like sort the human nature only, as, Man, the son of Mary: or
which betoke^ both natures together, as, Christ, Immanuell, god incarnate.

2
We add hereunto that Christ's very person is signified by those names also
which are taken from the offices of a mediator: as these, Amediatour, a
Redeemer, a Savior, a high priest an Advocate and such like. But these may be
referred to the third kind: because by them are showed and made known both the
natures in one person.

3
The concrete names which have denomination of the natures, as Man of the
humanity, and God of the diety, when in speaking of Christ they be the
subjects, or the first part of the enunciation or sentence, they have two
significations, one formal (as the schools say) and the other material: of
which, by the former is meant the very nature, by the other, the person, which
has such a nature, whereof it takes denomination.

4
For as names in the abstract do signify only the nature and propriety, which
is in a thing so all names in the concreat do betoke^ both the nature and
quality, which is in the thing, and the hypostasis, wherein it is: as (for
examples sake) the name of Just betokens both Justice where with one is made
just, and him, which is Just, both together.

5
Therefore by these Subject names which having their denominations from the
natures do show the person of Christ: sometimes is declared the propriety of
the natures, sometime the unity of the person: and therefore the Subjects must
be understood and expounded according to the diversities of the Praedicates
that is of those things, which are spoken thereof.

6
In this proposition, the son of God is eternal: the subject (namely the
son of God) must be expounded according to the propriety of the nature. But
in this, the only begotten son of God suffered: the subject (the only
begotten son of God) must be understood according to the unity of the person.
For he suffered, which was not only man, but also God: yet the dietie
remaining vnpassible.

7
We deny not, but many times are found words in the abstract, which are the
Subjects, as, (the light) came into the world: as also some which are
Predicats, as Christ is (the light of the world, our righteousness, our
peace:) but these st^^d in stead of concretiues, as the light came into the
world, that is, he which lighteneth us. Wherefore for the manner of such like
words, they are to be referred to some of the foresaid three kinds.

8
Furthermore there are three kinds of attributes which use to be spoken of the
same person of Christ God and man, by what name soever it be signified. For
some are propper to the divine nature, and therefore cannot really be
communicated to the other nature: as, to be impassible, eternal, immeasurable.
Some are proper to the human nature, and therefore cannot altogether indeed
be communicated to the other nature, as, to be made, to be finite, and
passible. And other some propper to the wholle person consisting of both
natures, and therefore common to both natures together, as, to be a mediator,
a redeemer, a Savior.

9
To this third kind pertain those actions which the greek Fathers called the
actions of God and man, or actions divine and human: because in the works of
our redemption, each form works not the property of the other, but of it
self, yet with the communion of the other: the word working that which
belongs to the word, and the flesh performing that which belongs to the
flesh.

10
Of these three kinds of Atributes, we find in our selves an example not
unlike. For in a man, some things are proper only to the soul: as, to be
immortal, to understand, to will: so^e things to the body only, as, to be
mortal, palpable, heavy. Some things common to them both, as be such works, to
the performance whereof, each part works that which is proper to it, with
communion of the other: as, to write, to speak, to run, and to do
whatsoever is done by the ministry of the body, yet not without the virtue and
guidance of the soul.

11
Now of this which has been said of the diverse Subjects and Praedicats,
there follows a diversity also of Praedicatio^. Every Praedication therefore
of Christ is either proper and simple, or else improper and figurative.

12
The proper and simple Prdication falls two ways; one is, when those things
which are proper to one nature, they are predicated or said of the person of
Christ, being expressed by a name either denominated of the same nature, or
proper to the person: as, this our God, or Christ is omnipotent, and every
where present: also, this man, or Christ, suffered and died. The other is,
when such things as are proper to the wholle person, they are said also of the
wholle person signified by a name, that contains both the natures: such as
these are that belong to the office of a mediator, and the honor of an head:
as: Christ, Imanuell, God incarnate, redeemed us, sanctified us, saved us, is a
King, to be worshipped: which are said therefore to be proper to the person,
because they can be severally applied to neither of the natures. Now all such
be proper and simple propositions: because in all which are of the same kind,
the Praedicates be coupled with the Subjects in all those things which are of
the very same kind.

13
The improper and figurative praedication is likewise twofold: one, when as
these things which are proper to the wholle person, either belonging to the
office of a mediator, or to the honor of an head, the same are said of on of
the natures signified either by an abstractiue or a concretiue name: As, the
flesh quickens, the blood washes from sin, God redeemed the Church, the
Mediator of god and men, Man, etc.

The other, when that which is proper to one nature is said of the other nature
signified by a name which is concretiue, and which be tokeneth the person: as,
God suffered and died: man when he was on earth, was also at the same time in
heaven.

14
For in th^se improper propositions of the latter sort, the proprieties of
diverse kinds are coupled as words concretiue: and therefore god is improperly
said to suffer, in as much as the name God in it own propper signification
does betoken the divine essence which cannot suffer: but in respect of the
person being meant, which is also man, it is a true (though an improper)
proposition: and therefore these things are said of the wholle person by a
Synechdoche, whereas indeed they agree not to the same, but only in respect
of one nature.

15
This latter form of an improper speech we call the co^munity of proprieties,
as the greeks do: which Theodoret expounding calls the community of names.
And Damascene, the troop of retribution.

16
For with them (...) was a concretiue word signifying, the propriety of some
nature. And (...) or (...) was, when as the (...) or proprieties of one nature,
were mutually and reciprocally spoken of the concrete name of the other nature,
which name did signify the person: so that it is mere folly, to think that
the Fathers when they spoke of the comnication of the Idiomes, that they meant
to speak of any real powering or communication of the essential proprieties
of one nature, into the other: seeing they write plainly: the unity makes the
names common, but never makes the things common.

17
For if our talk be of the natures themselus, Theod. di^ 3. p. 67. B.
which are in Christ: Theodoret with other fathers, teaches us, that we must
so speak, as we do not say, that those which are proper to the one nature,
are in very deed common to the other: but that we give to either of them
alone, that which belongs to it. Even as that which belongs to the soul,
we give it not to the body, and contrary wise. But if we speak of the person,
we must so frame our speech, that we may declare those things which are proper
to each nature to be truly and indeed common to the whole person: even as
also we give to the whole man really and in truth, as well those things which
belong to the soul, as to the body.

Now his very words after his bringing in of the similitude of the soul and
the body and the whole man follow thus: So we must speak of Christ. And when
we speak of the natures in Christ, we must give to each of them those things,
which do befitt each, and we must know, what things are proper to the
divinity, and what to the humanity, but whenas we speak of the person, we
must make those things, which are proper to the nature common: and must fit
these very same to our Savior Christ: and we must call him both God and man;
both the son of God, and the son of man; both the son of David and the
Lord of David; both the seed of Abraham and the creator of Abraham: and so of
all the rest.

The same doctrine he also confirms out of Amphilochius bishop of Iconium,
and out of other fathers, in many places in his dialogues.

18
Damascene also to expound the same matter, to wit, how the same things which
belong to one nature should be communicated to the other, namely in person:
writes thus: The word does approprsate unto it self those things which belong
to man. For those things which pertain to his holy flesh be his: and he does
(by a manner of mutual praedication) impart those things which are proper to
himself, unto the flesh, by reason of the being of the parts mutually one
within the other, and their hypostaticall or personal union.

19
Out of which place it evidently appears, first, that those things which are
of the flesh are no less given to the word, then the things of the word, to
the flesh: then, that they which belong to the word, are given to the flesh
after no other manner, then they which pertain to the flesh, are given to the
word: lastly, that this manner of giving is called the manner of mutual
pradication, not simply and in the abstractiue names of the natures, but in
the concretiue noting the person.

20
Moreover what this manner of praedication is, and why it is so called, the
same Damascene expounds in the 4. chapter both by example, and by the cause
in these words: This manner of mutual praedication is, when those things
which are proper to one nature, are spoken of the other nature, by reason of
the hypostaticall identitie or personal union of them both; and for that the
one nature is in the other: for example we may say of Christ, this our god
was seen upon the earth and conuersed with men: and this man is uncreated, not
subject to passion, not circumscribed in any place.

And the examples added do manifestly show how one nature does attribute
those things which are proper unto it self to the other, and for what cause:
For God, (in that, by this name is meant the divine essence) was not seen on
earth: but only, in that the person is meant by it, which is both God and man.

21
Therefore we mislike not that received description of the communicating of
proprieties.

The communication of the proprieties, is a praedication, wherein the
propriety agreeable to one nature, is given to the person in a name concrete:
because these two natures, the word and the humane nature taken, are one
existence or person.

22
Thus therefore we judge that the communication of the properties may not
amiss be defined: the communication of the proprieties, is a praedication, or
a manner of speech: wherein the propriety (that is the concrete name
signifying the propriety of one nature) is spoken really of Christ's person
signified by the name of the other nature: and is spoken (only in word) of
the other nature, in the concrete, by reason of the conjunction of the natures
and the personal union thereof.

23
But we say it is all one to be praedicated or said of the person signified by
the co^crete name of the other nature: and to be said of the concrete name of
the other nature signifying the person: as also the propriety, and the
concrete name signifying the propriety of the one nature, are in this matter
alone.

24
For this question was propounded by the fathers against the heretics, not so
much about the things themselves, as about the manners of speaking, which the
holy scripture uses speaking of Jesus Christ: when sometime it says: The
Lord of glory was crucified: sometime, The son of man when he was on
earth, was also in heaven: and other such like: namely, how such phrases
should be understood.

25
For none of any sound judgment ever doubted but as the natures, so also the
essential proprieties of both the natures remained distinct, whole, and
unconfounded in the person of Jesus Christ after the union: so as (for example
sake) neither the deity was made passible and local, nor the humanity
impassible, and uncircumcised: as some heretics falsifying the scriptures
have blasphemed.

26
Now the very foundation of this whole exposition was the true and near
uniting of the two natures within themselves, and a meeting of them into one
and the same person unspeakably made without conversion, without confusion,
without division, without separation,

27
For Damascene declaring this after he had taught, how those things which are
of the flesh, are given to the word, and likewise how the things of the word
are communicated to the flesh, namely, according to this manner of
praedica^ation: he adioyneth the cause thereof, saying: by reason of the
meeting together of the parts one with the other: and the hypostaticall or
personal union: and in the 4. chapter. This is the manner (says he) of
mutual predication, whenas one nature does give the proprieties of one nature
to the other which it does in respect of the personal identitie, and the
joining of the natures one with the other.

Now this joining of the natures one with the other, is the very union, that is
an inward, absolute and most perfect uniting them together. As Damascene both
else where, and especially in his 4. book and 19. chapter expounds it,
saying: But the divine nature once going through the flesh, gave unto the flesh
also, an unspeakable going to the divine nature: which we call the union.

29
We our selves add, that this union is also the final cause of this form of
speaking: because therefore this reciprocal praedication is delivered in the
holy scripture, that the true unity of the natures in one person of Jesus
Christ might be showed: which is the cause, why these verbal praedications can
by no means be said to be vain or to no purpose: seeing they have great use,
showing how the two natures are united into one person without confusion.

30
Moreover, this same communication of the proprieties (for example, in this
proposition God was crucified,) we say to be both verbal, and real, in diverse
respects. For in that, by this concrete word, (God) is meant a person, which is
not only God, but also man; it is a real predication. For because he was man,
therefore he truly and indeed died. But as the deity is meant by the formal
signification, (as they speak) or as God simply is meant thereby: it is a
verbal praedication, and that a true one. For god is truly said to have died,
by reason of the person together meant: and that, which is God indeed died not,
nor could die, although he which is God did truly die.

31
These things thus declared: it is easy to judge of the diverse enunciations,
which be true, and which false, and in what manner of Praedication each one is
to be taken. Neither one nature nor the proprieties thereof can by any means
neither in the abstractiue name nor in the concretiue be predicated or spoken
of the other nature signified in the abstractiue. For it is as false to say,
The human nature, or the humanity, is God: as to say, The humanity is the
dietie. And as false to say, the humanity is immeasurable and infinite: as to
say, the humanity is very immeasurablenesse or infinitenes.

Therefore in all the scriptures is no such kind of speech to be found.

32
Neither can one nature or the proprieties thereof be spoken in the abstract,
of the other nature signified either in an abstractiue or concretiue name. For
both these propositions are false. God is the humanity, and, the Deity is the
humanity.

33
Of either of the natures signified by what name soever, the things that are
proper thereunto may truly be spoken: and that of them both in the concrete:
but of the divine in the abstract also, by reason of the simplicity thereof.
For this proposition is as true and proper, he deity is omnipotent, as this God
is omnipote^t, yea even omnipotency it self. And again, Humanity and a man is
mutable.

34
Of the person expressed by the proper name and that name, Christ is
omnipotent: also, Christ is man, Christ died. Also, Christ is a redeemer, a
mediator. Also, the mediator, is God, is man, is immortal, died, redeemed us.

35
Of the person signified by a name of one nature: This God or only begotten
son of God, is eternal and omnipotent. Also, This man, or, the son of man,
was borne in the last days,

36
Those things which are proper to the wholle person, cannot be spoken (but by a
Synechdoche, a part taken for the wholle:) of one nature signified either by an
abstractiue or concretiue name: as The flesh quickens, God redeemed his
Church.

37
Wherefore this saying of Leo, each forma works that which belongs to it
self, we with Damas. say, to be all one, with this, (and that properly) Christ
works according to each form.

38
So where John said: his blood washes us from sin, and Christ says, my
flesh is meat indeed: also where it is said to quicken, and that it is to be
worshipped: those words are put for concretiues: namely, the flesh of Christ,
for Christ incarnate: and the blood of Christ, for Christ by his blood.

39
For he which said, he that eats my flesh has eternal life: the same said,
He that eats me, he shall live by me. And he which writ, his blood washes
us from sin: the same expounding himself says, Christ shall wash us from
our sins by his blood. And they which taught that Christ's flesh was to be
worshipped: they also expressed the cause, namely, not because it was flesh,
but because it was flesh of God: and therefore that Christians do worship not
flesh properly. but God incarnate.

40
Of the person signified by the name of the one nature, the son of man it
both in heaven and on earth at once. Also, the only begotten, and Lord of
glory was crucified. 8. Rule.


41
Here of follows another: of the one nature signified in a concretiue name,
the things propper to the other may truly be spoken, by reason of the person
together noted: yet not really, but only in respect of the name: As, God
(taken in the formal signification) died: man is eternal,

42
Wherefore we say that those things are praedicated or spoken, by
communication of the proprieties which being proper to one of the natures, are
made common also to the other in the concrete, by the mutual manner of
praedication: namely while they are really attributed to the person, wereof
each nature is a part.

43
For seeing Christ most truly and really is both God and man: we doubt not to
say, and with the wholle Church to teach, that he suffered, namely (for example
sake) according to the one nature, and suffered not, namely according to the
other.

44
And seeing the scripture says, both that God is immortal, and also that the
same died and was crucified: we teach that in the former speech the name of God
is taken essentially, in the latter hypostatically or personally, and therefore
that both these are true in the speech concerning Christ: but that both of them
are spoken of the same in a diverse manner of praedicatio^.

45
Whatsoever things we read to have been really given to Christ in time after
the union: the same may truly and really be spoken of the person, in respect
of the humanity, and therefore also of the humanity it self, but it is to be
understood, that they cannot be spoken in respect of the divinity, and being
signified by a concrete name, but only by communication of the proprieties. An
example of the first. Esai. 11. the spirit of wisdom shall rest upon him etc.
An example of the other, Ioh. 3. He has given unto him (his son, who is from
heaven, who^e the father sent) his spirit above measure. For he (as he is the
only begotten son) cannot be said to have really received the spirit, but
only by communication of the proprieties.

46
But the things which we confess were given after this manner: were not the
essential proprieties of God but only gifts of creation, and (as they call
the^) habitual graces which belong partly to the perfection of Christ's human
nature: partly to the perfecting of the office of a mediator: partly to the
honor of the head of the Church.

47
For the essential proprieties of God are united most really with the human
nature in the same person: but they are not really communicated to it, in it
own very essence.

48
For (to omit almost infinite of other reasons and testimonies of the
Apostles and ancient Fathers) what things Christ received, as Man, in the
essence of his human nature: he received the same, that he might as being
head derive the^ into his members: as Athanasius and Cyril are witnesses: seeing
he therefore sanctified himself, that we also might be sanctified: and the
oil was powered upon Aarons head, that it might run down on al his members
even to the skirts of his clothing.

49
And who (except a mad man) would say that the essential proprieties of God
are derived unto us.

50
The cause also why Christ as he is God, cannot be said to have received gifts
of creation, is by Cyrill assigned to be this, Because as God he needed them
not. Therefore, if also, as he is man, he received the essential proprieties
of God, really communicated unto him: he cannot then be said to have received
the created gifts of the holy ghost. For to that end serves a finite power in
him which is endued with an infinite power really communicated unto him.

Finis.

