THE COLD YEAR. 1614. A deep Snow: In which Men and Cattle have perished, To
the general loss of Farmers, Grasiers, Husbandmen, and all sorts of people in
the Country; and no less hurtful to Citizens. Written Dialogue-wise, in a
plain familiar talk between a London Shopkeeper, and a North-Country-man.
In which, the Reader shall find many things for his profit.



Imprinted at London by W. W. for Thomas Langley (...) where they are to be
sold. 1615.

The great Snow. A DIALOGVE.
The speakers: A Citizen, a North-Country-man. North-Country-man. GOD save you
Sir: here is a Letter directs me to such a sign as that hanging over your
door; (and if I be not deceived) this is the Shop: Is not your name Master
N. B?


Citizen. N. B. is my name (Father:) What is your business?


Nor. I have Letters to you out of the North.


Cit. From whom, I pray?


Nor. From one Master G. M. of Y.


Cit. I know him very well; and if I may hear by you that he is in health. I
shall think you a bringer of good and happy news.


Nor. Good and happy news do I bring you then; (for thanks be to God) health
and he have not parted this many a year.


Cit. Trust me, your tidings warmes my heart, as cold as the weather is.


Nor. A Cup of muld Sack (I think) would do you more good. But to put a
better heat into you, I have from your Friend and mine, brought you two
Bags full of comfort, each of them weighing a hundred pound of current
English money.


Citt. Money is more comfortable to a Citizen, than burnt Wine.
Birlady Sir, the Sack you spoke of, would not go down half so merrily, as
this news: For Money was never so welcome to Londoners (especially tradesmen)
as it is now.


Nor. Why? Is it as scanty here, as with us? I thought if the Silver age had
been any where, your City had challenged it. Me thinks our Northern
Climate, should only be without Silver Mines, because the Sun (the
sovereign breeder of rich Metals) is not so prodigal of his beams to us.
Why (...) have been told, that all the Angels of the Kingdom fly up and down
London: No such matter.
Nay I have heard, that one of our ruffling Gallants in these days, wears
more Riches on his Back, in Hatte, Garters, and Shooe-stringes, then would
maintain a good pretty Farm in our Country, Oh brave doings.
and keep a Plough-land for a whole year.


Cit. We care not how brave our Gallants go, so their names stand not in our
Books: For when a Citizen crosses a Gentleman, I believe it.
he holds it one of the chiefest Cheapeside-blessings.


Nor. I understand you Sir: You care not what Colors they wear, so you keep
them not in Black and White.


Citt. You measure us rightly: for the keeping of some so, (that carry their
heads full high) makes many a good Shopkeeper oftentimes to hide his Head. So
that albeit you that dwell far off, and know not what London means, think
(as you say) that all the Angels of the Kingdom, fly up and down here. We,
whole Wares lie dead upon our hands for want of quick Customers, see no such
matter: but if any Angels do fly, they have either their Wings broken and fly
not far; or else are caught like Partidges, a few in a Couie. Albeit Sir, I
have all this while held talk with you, yet mine eye has run over these
Letters, and acknowledge my self your debtor, in respect an Age so reverend
(as your head warrants you are) has been the Messenger. But I hope Sir, some
greater especial business of your own besides, drew you to so troublesome a
Journey.


Nor. Troth Sir, no extraordinary business: The Countimans hands are now held
as well in his Pocket, as the Shopkeepers. That drew me to London, which draws
you Citizens out of your Houses; or to speak more truly, drives you rather
into your Houses.


Cit. How mean you Sir, the Weather?


Nor. The very same. I have been an old Brier, and stood many a Northerly
Storm: An old man.
the Winds have often blown bitterly in my Face, Frostes have nipped my
Blood, Ysickles (you see) hang at my Beard, and a hill of Snow couers my Head.
I am the Son of Winter, and so like the Father, that as he does, I love to
be seen in all places. I had as leife walk up to the knees in Snow, as to
tread upon Turkey Carpets: And therefore my Journey to see London once more ere
I die, is as merry to me, as if I were a Woman and went a Gossipping; For the
Earth shows now, Earth lies in, all in white.
as if she lay inn, (All in White.)


Cit. Belike then you have heard she has been delivered of some strange
prodigious Birthes, that you come thus far, to see her Childbed?


Nor. I have from my Childhood spent my best days in travel, and have seen
the wonders of other Countries, but am most in love with this of mine own.


Cit. Where, if any be borne never so well proportiond, within a day or two it
grows to be a Monster.


Nor. You say true, and iumpe which me in that: For I have but two Ears; yet
these two Ears bring me home a thousand tales in less then seven dates: Some
I hearken to, some I shake my head at, some I smile at, some I think true,
some I know false. But because this world is like our Millers in the Country,
knauish and hard to be trusted; though mine ears be mine own, and good, yet I
had rather give credit to mine Eyes, although they see but badly, yet I know
they will not couzeu me: these four score years they have not; and that is
the reason I have them my Guides now in this Journey, and shall be my witnesses
(when I get home) again, and sit (as I hope I shall, turning a Crabbe by the
fire) of what wonders I have seen.


Cit. In good sadness Father, I am proud that such a heap of years (lying on
your back) you stoop no lower for them: I come short of you by almost forty at
the least, and me thinks I am both more unlusty, and (but for head and beard)
look as aged.


Nor. Oh Sir! riotts, riotts, surfets ouernights, and early potting it next
morning, stick white hairs upon Young-mens chinnes, when sparing dyets holds
color: Your crammed Capons feed you fat beer in London; Surfets kill more
then the Sword.
but our Beef and Bacon feeds us strong in the Country. Long sleeps and
past-midnights-watchings, dry up your bloods, The Country life and City he
compared.
and wither your cheeks: We go to bed with the Lamb, and rise with the
Lark, which makes us healthful as the Spring. You are still sending to the
Apothecaries, and still crying out, Fetch Master Doctor to me: But our
Apothecaries shop, is our Garden full of Pot-hearbes; and our Docter is a
cloue of Garlic: Besides, you fall to Wenching, and marry here in London,
when a Stranger may think you are all Girls in Breeches, (your chinnes are so
smooth,) and like Cock-sparrows, are treading so soon as you creep out of the
shell, Early Bridal^, make early Burials
which makes your lives short as theirs is: But in our Country, we hold it as
dangerous to venture upon a Wife, as into a Set-battaile: It was 36. ear I was
pressed to that Service; and am now as lusty and sound at heart (I praise my God)
as my yoke of Bullockes, that are the servants to my Plough.


Citt. Yet I wonder, that having no more Sand in the Glass of your life, how
you durst set forth, and how you could come thus far?


Nor. How I durst set forth? If it were 88. again, and all the Spanish
Fire-workes at Sea, I would thrust this old battered Breast Plate into the
thickest of them. We have Trees in our Town that bear Fruit in Winter; I am
one of those Winter-plummes: And though I taste a little sower, yet I have an
Oak in my Belly, and shall not rotte yet (I hope) for all this blustering
weather.


Citt. It were piety you should yet be felled down, you may stand (no doubt)
and grow many a fair year.


Nor. Yes Sir, my growing must now be downward, like an Ear of Corn when it
is ripe. But I beseech you tell me, Are all those News current, which we
hear in the County?


Cit. What are they pray?


Nor. Marry sir, that your goodly River of Thames, The Thames a Nurse to London.
(I call it yours, because you are a Citizen; and because it is the Nurse that
gives you Milk and Honey) Is that (as it is reported) all frozen over again,
that Coaches run upon it?


Cit. No such matt^^*


Nor. When I (...) it I prayed God to help the Fishes; it would (...) hard
world with them, if their Houses were taken (...) their heads Nay Sir, I heard
it constantly affirmed that all the Youth of the City, did muster upon it in
battle Array, one half against the other: And by my truth, I would have
ambled on my bare ten-Toes a brace of hundred Miles, to have seen such a
triumph.


Citt. In sadness (I think) so would thousands besides your self: But
neither has the River been this year (for all the vehement cold) so
hard-hearted, as to have such a glassy crusted floare; neither have our Youth
been up in Arms in so dangerous a Field: Yet true it is, that the Thames
began to play a few cold Christmas Gambols; and that very Children (in good
Array) great numbers, Children turd Soldiers
and with Warlike furniture of Drums, Colors, Pikes, and Gunnes, (fit to
their handling) have sundry times met Army against Army, in-most of the
Fields about the City; to the great rejoicing of their Parents, and numbers
of beholders.


Nor. In good sooth I am sorry, I was not one of those standers by: I have been
brought up as a Scholar my self; and when I was young, our Wars were
wrangling disputations: but now it seems, that Learning surfets, having too
many Scholars; And that we shall need Soldiers, when such young Cockrels
address to a Battle: It shows like the Epitome of War; and it is a wonder
for men to read it. Our Painters in former Ages have not drawn such Pictures.
But you cut me off from what I was about else to know.


Citt. What is that, Father?


Nor. A Bird came flying into the North, and chattered, that Snowfell in such
abundance within and round about the City of London that none without could
enter; nor any within pass ^o (...).


Citt. Fables, Fables A (...) may by the shadow, have some guess how great the
substance is: Your own eye (upon (...) now being in London) can witness that
your Northern song went to a wrong tune.


Nor. And yet by your favor, I think you have not seen your City so whited
this forty years.


Cit. Indeed our Chronicles speak of one deep Snow only, The great Snow 36.
year ago.
memorable to our time; and that was about 34. or 36. years ago.


Nor. Nay, not so much, but of your white Bears, Bulls, Lions, etc. we had
the description as fully, as if with Snow-bals in our hands, your Prentises and
we silly Country clownes had been at their bayting. I remember when I traueld
into Russia, I have there seen white Bears, and white Foxes: But some
credulous fools would needs swear us down, that your City was full of
such Monsters; and that they ran alive in the Strees, and deuowred people: But
I see your Giants, and tirrable heardes of Beasts, have done your City good
service; for in stead of Grass, they have had cold Prouander, and helped to
rid away the greater part of your Snow.


Citt. They have indeed: And yet albeit an Arm from Heaven has for several
years one after another, shaken Whips over our Land, sometimes scourging us
with strange Inundations of Floods; then with merciless Fires, Diverse
warnings, but no amendment.
destroying whole Towns: then with intolerable and killing Frostes, nipping
the Fruits of the earth: also for a long season, with scarcity of Uictuals,
or in therein great plenty, exceedingly sold dear: And now last of all, with
deep and most dangerous Snowes. Yet (as all the former lashes, the prints
being worn out, are forgotten; so of this, we make but a May Game, fashioning
ridiculous Monsters of that, God strikes, and we laugh as if he did but jest.
which God in vengeance poures on our heads; when in doing so, we mock our
own selves, that are more monstrous and ugly in all the shapes of sin.


Nor. You melt (Sir) out of a heap of Snow, A good dis^^llation.
very profitable and wholesome instructions.


Citt. To increase which, I pray good Father, tell me what of your self you
know, or have heard from others touching the effects of this wenderfull Snow,
in those Countries Northward, through which you have traveled?


Nor. My Country affairs (sometimes using Grasing, sometimes following other
profitable courses, as the seasons and advantages of times lead me) have made
me or my Servants, continual traders and travelers into all the North parts
of England: And upon mine own knowledge I can assure you, that at other times,
when Winter has but shown his ordinary tyranny, the Countries of
Cumberland, Northumberland, Yorkshire, Lancashire, and all those adjoining,
have been so hid in Snow, that a man would have thought, there was no more
possibly to be found in the world.


Citt. So then you must conclude, that the heaps of Snow in those former
times, being this year doubled and trebled, the misery that falls with it,
must by consequence, be multiplied.


Nor. Snowes in other parts of England.
Multiplied! I have met with some that have come from the Peake in Darbyshire,
others (since my coming to Town) that have been in Nottingham,
Cambridge-shire, and the I Will of Ely; who verily believe (upon the daily cries
of poor people, not only there, but in many other Countries besides) that
never any Calamity did happen to them so full of terror, and so suddenly to
undo them, their Wives and Children, as this Snow.


Citt. It is lamentable.


Nor. Mine Eyes are witnesses (bad though they be) that some Countries which
stand high, show for all the world, like the Alpyne Hills parting France and
Italy: (I thank God, in younger days I have traveled that way, and
therefore know what I speak) for the heads of those Hills are couerd with
these white Winter-lockes in the hottest days of Summer. And it is to be
feared, that in some of our far Countries, Summer will have made his
progress a good way into our Land, before the Earth will digest these cold
Pellets off from her stomach.


Citt. It is to be feared indeed: the more is the pity.


Nor. Why I will tell you Sir, if you saw some places by which I have passed
but within these three weeks, you would verily think, Freezeland come from
beyond Sea.
that Freezland were come over Sea, swimming on a cake of Ice, and that it was
lodged in England. Nay you would, if you dwelt as coldly and miserably, as some
poor people of our own Nation do, you would almost swear, that those parts
of England lay under the Frozen Zone, and scarce remember there were a Sun in
Heaven, so seldom do his fyres cast any heat upon them.


Citt. But I pray Sir. What are the greatest hurtes and miseries, that people
with you (so far from us) complain of? And what kind of world is it with you
in the Country?


Nor. The world with us of the Country runns upon the old retten wheels; The
world no changeling.
for all the Northern Cloth that is wouen in our Country, will scarce make a
Gown to keep Charity warm, she goes so a-cold: Those that are Rich, had
never more Money; and Covetousness had never less pity. There was never in
any Age, more Money stirring, Money ^eepe^ he^ bed and is not stirring.
(if Curmundgions would let it come forth,) nor ever in any Age more stir to
get Money. Farmers now are slaves to racking prodigal Landlords; and those
Landlords are more servile slaves to their own Riots and Luxury. But these
are the common Diseases of every Kingdom, Old diseases hardly cured
and therefore but common news. But your desire Sir, is to know how we spend
the days of our frosty and snowy-lock'd Age in the Country.


Citt. That I would hear indeed, Father.


Nor. Believe me Sir, as wickedly (you must think) as you can here in the
City: It goes as hard with us, as it does with you, The poor Countrymans
misery.
if not harder. The same cold hand of Winter is thrust into our bosoms, the
same sharp and bitter Air strikes wounds into our bodies: the same Snowy
flakes and flocks of Heaven fall on our Heads, and cover our Houses: the same
Sun shines upon us, but the same Sun scarce heates us so much as it does
you. The poor Plough-mans children sit crying and blowing their Nails as
lamentably, His wife and children.
as the Children and Servants of your poor Artificers: Hunger pincheth their
Cheeks as deep into the Flesh, as it does into yours here. You cry out, you
are undone by the extreme prices of Food and Fuel; and we complain we are
ready to die for want both of Uictualles and Wood. All your care is to provide
for your Wives, Children, and Servants, in this time of sadness: but We go
beyond you in cares; The countrymans care, above the Citizen.
not only our Wives, our Children, and household Servants, are unto us a cause
of sorrow, but we grieve as much to behold the misery of our poor Cattle
(in this frozen-hearted season) as it does to look upon our own Affliction.
Our Beasts are our faithful Servants, and do their labors truly when we
set them to it: they are our Nurses that give us Milk; Kine.
they are our Guides in our Iornies; they are our Partners, and help to enrich
our State: yea, they are the very Upholders of a poor Farmers Lands and
Livings.

Alas then! what Master (that loves his Servant as he ought) but would almost
break his own heartstringes with sighing, to see those pine and mourn, as
they do. Nay, Sheep.
to see Flocks of Sheep lusty and lively to day, and to morrow, lying in
heaps strangled in the Snow.

The Ground is bare, and not worth a poor handful of Grass. The Earth seems
barren, and bears nothing; or if she does, most unnaturally she killes it
presently, or suffers it (through cold) to perish. By which means, the lusty
Horse abates his flesh, Horses, Oxen, Lambe^
and hanges the head, feeling his strength go from him: the Ox stands
bellowing, the ragged Sheep bleating, the poor Lamb shiuering and staruing
to death.

The poor Cottager that has but a Cow to live upon, must feed upon hungry
meals (God knows) when the Beast her self has but a bare Commons; nay, in
searching to fill her belly with those hungry Meals, is perhaps on a sudden,
drowned in a ditch.

He that is not able to bid all his Cattle home, and to feast them with
Fodder out of his Barnes, shall scarce have Cattle at the end of Summer to
fetch in his Harvest: which charge of feeding so many Mouths, is able to eat
a Country-mans estate, it by providence he cannot prevent such storms. Add
unto these Mischiefs, these following Miseries, Hay sold at extreme rates.
that Hay (to feed Cattle) is not only excessive dear, but so scant, that
none almost is to be had: the like of Straw, which is raised to an exceeding
price: Then the spoiling of whole Warrens, the rotting of our Pastures and
Meddowes: And last of all, the undoing of poor Carriers, they being not able,
(by reason of deep Waters, Carriers undone.
deep Snowes, and dangerous Ways) either to transport commodities and
benefits from us to your City, or from your City to us. And thus have I to
fatisfie your desire, given you in a few words a description of an ample, and
our lamentable country Misery, happening unto us, by reason of this cold and
uncomfortable Weather.


Cit. The Story you have told (albeit, it yet makes my heart bleed, to think
upon the calamity of my poor Countrymen;) was uttered with so grave a
judgment, and in a time so well befitting your age, that I kept mine ears
open, and my lips locked up, for I was loath to interupt you till all was
told. But I pray Sir, besides this general hurtes (of which, the whole
Kingdom has a smarting share,) what particular accidents can you report,
worthy to be remembered for the strangeness of them?


Nor. There is no mischief borne alone (you know:) Calamities commonly are (by
birth) Twins; I will therefore (like one of your London Traders,) give over
selling these sad and bad Commodities in gross and whole-saile, and fall to
put them away by retaile.


Cit. As I have been your Customer for the one, so I will pay you ready thanks
(as my best payment) for the other.


Nor. I wish no better; neither do I promise to put these Wares into your
hands for the best that are, but in such sort as they came to me; so I hope you
will receive them.


Cit. Gladly.


Nor. Because then you are a Citizen your self, I will tell you what was
truly reported to me of a mischaunce happening to a couple of Londoners now
since Christmas.


Citt. I hearken to you Sir.


Nor. A Tale of two Londoners ryding into the North.
They two having great occasion to ride into the North, it fortuned that in
passing over a great Heath or Commons, on either side of which, were Woods; and
being not above two Miles (to their thinking) from the next town; yet night
approaching, and the Snow (which then coldly and thickly fell) being by the
wind so sharply driven, and beating in their faces, that they could not look
up to observe the way; they were thereby forced to muffle themselves in their
Cloakes over head and cares, and to trust to the poor Beasts under them, to
guide them to the Town, which they knew was not far off.


Citt. So sir.


Nor. But their Horses, having liberty of Reins given them, sought to receive
as little of the blustering Storms as their Masters did, and turning their
heads as much as they could out of it, left the beaten Path (all hidden in
Snow,) and forsaking the direct way to the Town, had gotten on a sudden into
one of the Woods as least four or five Miles: By which time, the two Londoners
wondering they were not yet at the Town; and being half dead with cold, looked
up, and found themselves not only out of their way, but that the Sky was so
dark, that they had no hope to come into the right way again: Trees they saw
on every side, and thick Groves, but not so much as the glimpse of a Candle a
far off in any house, (which is as a Loadstarre to a discomforted Traveler
in the night,) no neither (for all their listening) could they hear the voice
either of Man or Beast, to assure them that people were not far off from them.


Citt. Most lamentable.


Nor. To stay there still was dangerous; to go forward (they knew not whither)
more dangerous: of two evils, they made choice of the least; and that was, to
trust to the merry of Almighty God, Good (...) and a bad Inn.
to preserve them in that place till morning. Their Horses they tied up, to a
cold Maunger, and to worse Prouander: their Masters had as bad an Inn, as the
Servants: Meat had they none, Fire had they none, no Bed but the Earth, no
Light but the Stars of Heaven.


Citt. You make Water even stand in mine Eyes at the report.


Nor. In this doleful estate chearing up one another the best that they could;
and walking up and down to keep their numbed bodies in heat, behold, one of
the two, what with cold, and what with conceit of so unfortunate an accident,
fell suddenly sick. What comfort was near him? none, but his friend, that
stood at the same door of mercy with him.


Citt. Alack, alack.


Nor. That dangerous cold Fever more and more shaking him; One of them dies.
the last fit that held him, ended both his sickness, and his life.


Citt. Dyed he there?


Nor. There, in the Arms of his Friend, and his mother (the Earth) he dyed.


Citt. What a terror was this to his dessolate Companion?


Nor. How could it be otherwise? Yet God suffering one to live, least the
Fowls of the Air, should have deuowred both, and so their deaths not have bin
known. He, so soon as ever any light from heaven shewen-foorth, took his
way and leave of his dead Friend, to find out some Town; and did so: where,
to some of the dwellers relating the sad story of himself and Friend,
pity (as it could not otherwise choose) so stirred in their bosoms, that
along they went with him to the doleful place and spectacle; which taking up,
and having bestowed due rites of Burial upon it; the other Friend, over
grieuing at the loss of his Companion, and at so rare and unheard of a
Calamity, fell likewise extremely sick in the same Town: And whether he did
recover or not, I have not heard.


Citt. I have not heard of a News that so deeply has struck sorrow into me.


Nor. I believe you: Let black Clouds fly together; here be more of the
same sad color, which I report not for certain truths, but as flying
News; and these they are. I heard, that a company of Horsemen riding
together, Other stran^^ events.
spyed another Horseman ryding singly by himself, some quarter of a Mile
before them in plain view, and on a sudden was vanished clean out of sight;
at which they all much wondering, considering the planenesse of the way; and
misdoubting the worst, noted the place (so near as they could) where they lost
a sight of him: And putting Spurs to their Horse, came, and found both Man
and Horse into a Pit of Snow, struggling and striving for life. Whereupon,
leaping from their Horses, with much ado they saved both Horse and Man, and
drew them forth. In laboring to do which, not far from him, lay three or
four men more, and their Horses under them, buried in the same Pit of Snow.


Citt. To second this report of youres: A Customer of mine, no longer agone
then yesterday, told me here in my Shop, that upon New Market Heath in
Cambridge shire, three men in several places, were found dead in the same
manner.


Nor. Not unlikely. And in many other Countries, many more, both Men, Women, and
Children, have perished, that never will come within reach of our knowledge.


Cit. It is to be feared.


Nor. Amongst so much sour meat, I should do you wrong, if I did not set one
pleasing Dish before you; I will therefore tell you a merry Tale of a Collier,
that happened since this great Snow.


Cit. I shall be glad to hear it.


Nor. I call it merry, in respect of the sudden accident attending on it,
albeit it fell out sadly enough for the poor Collier: And thus it was.


Citt. Come on Sir.


Nor. In my approaching near London, I ouertooke a Collier, A Tale of a Collier.
and his Teame laden, walking as stately as if they scornd to carry Coals;
for their pace was just like that of Malt-mens Horses when they march to London
with full Sackes on their backs. I asked honest Grimme, Why he made no more
haste, to put heat into his Horses and him self, seeing the Weather so cold?
Not so (cried he) no more haste then good; Soft Fire makes sweet Malt: Let
me trotte to day, that I may amble more easily to morrow. If I should put my
Horses into a chafe, they may hap put me into such a cold sweat, as the last
day a Brother of mine (a Coale-carrier too) fell into, which struck him so to
the heart, that five load of Coals cannot yet warm him.


Cit. Belike then, he took an extraordinary cold.


Nor. You shall hear. I prayde my black-facde Gentleman to tell the News out:
And so (his whissle lying still) he reported, That a Collier going to London
with a load of Coals, he himself ryding by, on a little sorry Nagge, it
fortuned that a Gentleman discharging his Birding-peece at Foul, some of the
small Shot flying through a Hedge, happened to tickle my fellow Colliers
Nagge: The Colliers Horse will stand on no ground.
which hot shower put more courage into him, then ever the Whip was able to
give him, insomuch that he ran away with the Collier as fast, as if he had
been ryding to Hell, to serve their Fornaces there with Fyring: the whole Teame
spying their Master in his vn-vsuall post-gallop, and frighted with the noise
of the Piece, left the Highway (their ordinary beaten path,) and as if the
Devil had daunc'd in one of the Sackes, The black Tragedy.
after the Collier they ran, who cried, Hey, and Hoe, and Ree, and Gee; but
none of his carterly Rethoricke was able to stay them, until Cart and Coals
were overthrown, and with the fall, the Axletree broken. By which time, albeit
the Colliers Nagge were half come to his wits, yet the Collier himself
began to be stark mad.


Cit. By my faith he had reason.


Nor. And in that fury (quoth the other Collier) he fell a cursing of Gunnes,
The Collier tickle-it (...) Satyr
bade a Pox of all Powder; cried out, It was a shame, that poor harmless
Birds could not be suffered in such pitiful cold weather, to save themselves
under a Bush, when every lousy Beggar had the same liberty, but that every
paltrie Peter-gunner, must fart Fire and Brimstone at them. But, Hinc illae
Lacrimae.
the woeful spectacle of his Great Coal, turude and grinded into Small, by the
iogging and ioulting: And his Horses being in such a durtie pickle, made him
give over cursing: So that taking his Teame out of the Cart, and tying the
Fore-horse to a Hedge, back gallops my fellow Goose-stealer, to the next Town
for a new Axeltree. In whose unhappy black absence, the former Bird-killer
making another shoot, the whole Teame (now madder then before, as being not
used to such Music, brake from the Hedge; and being out of their Croydon
Caronto, Madd horse play.
up Hill, and down Dale, they fly, as if Wildfire had been tied to their
tails; until at last, happening into a narrow Lane, deeply filled up with
Snow, on they rushe: the first (like ill Company on a Shroue-tuesday) drawing
on the second, and so he the third; and then not being able to turn back,
but struggling and beating way in that cold passing, where none was to be had:
In the end being tired with striving, down the poor Beasts fell, and there
were styffled in the Snow. Thus was the Colliers Tale to me; but what the
lamentations of the other Collier were at his coming back, I think you may
guess.


Cit. Such, that I warrant you, he wept more warm water, then ever he had at
any country Barbers to wash his smutty Face on a Satterday night.


Nor. You have heard of some misfortunes, lately happening unto certain
Grasiers?


Cit. No indeed, Sir.


Nor. A Tale of Grasiers.
Then take it for truth and on my credit, that a good company of them coming
up together to London, with great store both of Sheep and Bullocks, they
lost, by reason of the Snowes and deep Ways, so many of either (especially of
Sheep) that perished in great numbers, even on the way, and before their
faces, that if they had been sold to their value, it had been a sufficient
estate to have maintainde a very good man, and have kept him rich all his life
time.


Cit. I believe you Sir: But I pray Sir, What is your opinion of this strange
Winter? Give me your judgment I beseeth you, of these Frostes and Snowes; and
what (in the school of your Experience) you have read, An old Man is a new
Almanacke.
or can remember, may be the effects, which they may produce, or which of
consequence are likely now to follow.


Nor. I shall do my best to satisfy you. When these great Hills of Snow, and
these great Mountains of Ye be dug down, What is likely to happen upon
this great Snowes.
and be made level with the Waters; when these hard Rocks shall melt into
Rivers, and these white Feathers of Heaven stick upon the backs of Floodes;
and that sudden Thawes shall show, that the Anger of these Winter storms are
mollified: then it is to be feared, that the swift, violent, and irresistable
Land-currents (or rather Torrents) will bear down Bridges, beat down
Buildings, ouer-flow our Corne-fields, ouer-run the Pastures, drown our
Cattle, and endanger the lives both of Man and Beast, traualing on their way;
And, unless Gods hand of Plenty be held open, a Dearth, to strike the Land in
the following Summer.


Citt. You say right. This Prognostication which your Judgment thus looks
into, did always fall out to be true.


Nor. These extraordinary Feauers (shaking a whole Kingdom) have always
other mortal Diseases waiting upon them.


Cit. We are best to fear it; and by fearing, provide against them.


Nor. I pray God (at whose command, the Sun sendes forth his heat, and the
Winds bitter Storms to deface the fruits of it,) that in this last
Affliction sent down in Flakes from the angry Element, all other Miseries may
be hidden, swallowed, and confounded.


Citt. I gladly, and from my heart, play the Clarke, crying, Amen.


Nor. But I pray Sir, now you have melted a great part of our North-country
Snow out of me, How has your City here (with all their Castles, and S.
George a horseback to help it,) borne off the storm?


Cit. Mary, I will tell you how, sir: Just as our London Fencers often times
do in their Challenges: She has taken it full upon the Head.


Nor. Me thinks, and I see it with mine eyes, it cannot hurt you much; for
your Strees are fuller of people then ever they were.


Cit. True sir: but full Streets, make Shoppes empty: It Is a sign that
Tradesmen and Handy-crafts, have either little to do, or else can do little,
by reason of the Weather, The hurt the City takes by this Snow.
when they throw by their Tools, fall and to flinging of Snow-bals. I assure
you Father, the tyranny of this Season, killes all trading (unless in
villainy, which shrinks for no Weather,) so that all commerce lies dead.
Besides, it lessens our Markets for provision, so that all sort of Food was
never more dear: It eats up Firing, and almost starues the Poor, who are not
able to buy Coal or Wood, the rates upon every Frostie Morning, being lifted
up and raised at the pleasure of every paultry Chandler. Men of Occupations,
for the most part lie still; as Carpenders, Bricklayers, Playsterers, and such
like: not one of these, nor of many other, turns Alchimist, for (unless they
be Shooe-makers) none can extract or melt a penny of Silver out of all these
heaps of Snow.


Nor. You now have given me a large satisfaction.


Cit. Nay, if you should walk but along one street only in London; and
that is Thames street, and to see their Cellers and Warehouses full of rich
Merchandise drowned, The dwellers in Thames street.
and utterly spoyld, you would both wonder at the loss, which cannot be set
down; and lament it, albeit you know it to be none of your own.


Nor. I do already (by your report, to which I give much credit) lament it in
others, as if it were mine one I love not these Tragical passions, I suffer
for them upon the reporting. But putting them by, I pray Sir, seeing I have
unladen my self to you here in your shop, send not you me home like a
Colliers Horse, only with an empty Sack on my back: let me have some good
News to carry with me.


Cit. The best, and most noble, that I have at this time, to bestow upon you,
is to request you to step into Smithfield, where you shall see by the careful
providence, The pauing of Smithfield.
care, and industry, of our Honorable Senators (the Fathers of our City)
much Money buried under that durtie Field, by the hyring of hundreds of
Laborers to reduce it (as it is reported) to the fairest and most famous
Marketplace, that is in the whole Kingdom.


Nor. Smithfield made a Market place.
A Marketplace! now trust me, it stands fit for so noble a purpose, and will
be a memorable Monument to after Ages, of the royalty, diligence, wisdom,
and bravery, of this. But where shall your Cheapside Market be then kept, this
must either hinder that, or that this?


Citt. Cheapside shall by this means, have her Streets freed from that
trouble, by sending it hither, if (as it is reported) it prove a Market place.


Nor. It will add that beauty to that spacious place, which in former times
has by Horses and Pa^^ers, and Butter-wiues, been taken from it: Nay, the very
Street it self, by this means, will show like a large new Exchange, or
Rialta; such a commerce of Gentlemen and Citizens will be seen there daily by
walking upon it: I thank you for this News; this goes with me into the
North: And when I hear that the work is finished, I Will take off one ten years
of mine, because I Will come up lustily to London once again, to see such an
honor to your City.


Cit. And when you do, you shall find (as Report already gives it out)
besides the Market, two goodly Receiptes for Water, fairly vuilt, to add unto
it the greater glory and beauty.


Nor. Your City is full of honorable deeds; and ever may it be so. I have
troubled you long: your Money will I bring to you to Morrow morning; in the
mean time, because (as durty your Streets are) I must trot up and down, to
dispatch many businesses. I will for this time, take my leave of you; and the
rather, for that (you see) it has now left snowing.


Cit. Sir, you are most heartily wel-come.


FINIS.

