THE VICTORY OF PATIENCE, And benefit of Affliction, with how to Husband it so,
that the weakest Christian (with blessing from above) may be able to support
himself in his most miserable Exigents.

Together with a Counter poison or Antipoyson against all grief, being a Tenth
of the Doves Innocence, and the Serpents Subtilty.

Extracted out of the choicest Authors, ancient and modern, necessary to be
read of all that any way suffer Tribulation.

By R. Y.

All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution,

2 Timothy 3.12. LONDON, Printed by R. B. and are to be sold at the black Bear in
Paul's Churchyard. 1636.

TO THE READER.
NOthing in this world can be framed so perfect, but it shall have some
delinquensies; to prove that more were in the Comprisor: and it is almost as
easy to find faults, as to make them. To spy the inconveniences of a house
built, is nothing: but to lay the plot well, at first, requires the pate of a
good Contriver. All Alchymists can do well till they come to doing: But there
is a further distance from nothing to the least thing in the world; then
between it and the greatest.

All public actions are subject to diverse, and uncertain Interpretations;
for a great many heads judge of them, and men's censures are as various as their
palats, Matthew. 21. Our writings are as so many dishes; our Readers, guests.
Books are like faces; that which one admires, another slights. Why? Some will
condemn what they do as little understand as they do themselves: Others, the
better a thing is, the worse they will like it. They hate him (says Amos) that
rebukes in the gate, and they abhor him that speaks uprightly, Amos 5.10.
You know, Herod's festered conscience could not endure John Baptists plaster of
truth; a galled back, loves not the curry Comb; a deformed face, loathes the
true glass, nothing is so hateful to the desperately wicked, as good Counsel:
with Balaam they grutch to be stayed in the way to death, and fly upon those
that oppose their perdition. And how should they other then miscarry; who have
a Pirate (the flesh) for their guide? So that if a man should observe the wind
of Applause, he should never sow; or regard the clouds of Aspersion, he
should never reap. But I had rather hazard the censure of some, then hinder
the good of others: yea, I had rather miss of what I expect, then fail to do
my utmost. Wherefore, I present to thee, courteous Reader, a posey of such
flowers as I have gathered abroad. If they be liked (as Phidias said,
concerning his first portrayture) expect more; if not, only this.

To fore-relate their variety, and several worths, were to imitate an Italian
Host, meeting you on the ways, and promising before hand, your fare and
entertainment; Wherefore let it please you to see and allow your cheer. Only,
in general; my Book is a feast; wherein holsomnesse strives with
pleasantness, and variety with both. Each Chapter several is a several dish,
stuffed full of notable sayings and examples (for that is the meat) by which a
man may, not only become more eloquent, but more wise; not alone, able to say
well, but to do well; for quaint and elegant phrases, on a good subject, are
baits, to make an ill man virtuous. Pithy sentences, curious metaphors, witty
apophthegmes, sweet similitudes, and rhetorical expressions (which Aristotle
would have, as it were, sprinkled in the most serious discourses) are to the
mind, as music to the body; which (next to sleep) is the best recreation.
Or as pleasant and delectable Sause, which gives a more savory taste to wholesome,
and profitable Divinity. And thou shall find but few here, which are not both
sinewy, and sharp: mucrones verborum, pointed speeches; either fit to teach,
or forcible to persuade, or sage to advise, and forewarne; or sharp to
reprove, or strong to confirm, or piercing to imprint*

But alas! most men regard not what is written, but who writes: value not the
metal, but the Stamp which is upon it. To these, I say little, as they
deserve little: and turn my speech to all that reserve themselves open, and
prepared, to receive each profitabe instruction, and continual amendment; to
the ingenious Reader, that sucks honey from the self same flower which the
Spider does poison; wishing him to come, that out of this Treatise which he did
not know before; and well note what speaks to his own sin: And perhaps he
may, in this short journey make more true gain, then Salomons Navy did from
Ophir, or the Spanish fleet from the West Indies; for in so doing, he shall
greatly increase his knowledge, and lessen his vices. In one day he may read
it, and ever after, be the better for it.

But methinkes I am too like a careless Porter; which keeps the guests
without doors, til they have lost their stomachs; wherefore, I will detain you
no longer in the porch, but unlock the door, and let you in.

THE BENIFIT of AFFLICTION, and how to husband it so that (with blessing from
above) the weakest Christian may be able to support himself in his most
miserable Exigents.
CHAP. 1. Why the Lord suffers his children so to be traduced, and persecuted,
by his and their enemies: and first, That it makes for the glory of his power.
IN the former Treatises I have proved, that there is a natural enmity and a
spiritual Antipathy between the Men of the World, and the children of GOD;
between the seed of the Serpent, and the seed of the Woman. And that these two
Regiments being the Subjects of two several Kings, Satan and CHRIST, are
governed by Laws opposite and clean contrary each to the other: whereby it
comes to pass, that grievous temptations and persecutions do always
accompany the remission of sins: That all men (as Austine speaks) are
necessitated to miseries, which bend their course toward the Kingdom of
Heaven. For godliness and temptation are such inseparable attendants on the
same person, that a man's sins be no sooner forgiven, and he rescued from
Satan, but that Lion fomes, and roares, and bestirs himself to recover his
loss. Neither can Gods love be enjoyed, without Satan's disturbance. Yea, the
World and the Devil therefore hate us, because God has chosen us. If a
Convert comes home, the Angels welcome him with Songs, the devils follow him
with uproare and fury, his old acquaintance with scorns and obloquie; for they
think it quarrel enough that we will no longer run with them to the same
excess of riot, 1 Peter 4.4. That we will no longer continue miserable with
them: they envy to see themselves casheired, as persons infected with the
plague will scoff at such of their acquaintan^e, as refuse to consort with
them as they have done formerly.

It is not enough for them to be bad themselves, except they rail at, and
persecute the good. He that has no grace himself, is vexed to see it in
another: godly men are thorns in wicked men's eyes, as Job was in the devils;
because they are good, or because they are dearly beloved of God: If a man's
person and ways please God, the world will be displeased with both. If God be
a man's friend, that will be his enemy; if they exercise their malice, it is
where he shows mercy: and indeed he refuses to be an Abel, whom the malice of
Cain does not exercise (as Gregory speaks:) for it is an everlasting rule of
the Apostles, He that is borne after the flesh, will persecute him that is
borne after the Spirit, Gal. 4.29. not because he is evil, but because he is
so much better than himself, 1 John 3.12. Because his life is not like other
men's, his ways are of another fashion, Wisd. 2.15.

I have also showed the Original, continuance, properties, causes, ends, and
what will be the issue of this enmity; and therein made it plain, that as for
the present, they suit like the Harp and the Harrow, agree like two poisons in
one stomach, the one being ever sick of the other: so, to reconcile them
together, were to reconcile Fire and Water, the Wolf and the Lamb, the Winds
and the Sea together; yea, that once to expect it were an effect of frenzy,
not of hope.

It remains in the last place that I declare the Reasons, why God permits his
dearest children so to be afflicted? The godly are so patient in their
sufferings?


With other Grounds of comfort, and Uses: And first of the first.

The Reasons why God suffers the same, are chiefly sixteen; all tending to his
glory, and their spiritual and everlasting good, benefit, and advantage: for
the malignity of envy (if it be well answered) is made the evil cause of a
good effect to us; God and our souls are made gainers by another sin.

The Reasons and Ends which tend to Gods glory, are three.

1 It makes for the glory of his Power. 2 It makes for the glory of his
Wisdom. 3 It makes much for his glory, when those graces which he has
bestowed upon his children, do the more shine through employment.
It makes for the glory of his Power: Moses having declared, in what manner
the Lord permitted Pharaoh to oppress the children of Israel, more and more,
still hardening his heart, shows the reason of it in these words, That I may
multiply my miracles and wonders in the Land of Egypt, That I may lay my hand
upon Pharaoh, and bring out mine Armies, even my people by great judgments,
that my power may be known, and that I may declare my Name throughout all the
world, Exodus 7.3.4. and 9.16.

When that multitude of Amonites and Moabites came to war against Iehosaphat
and the Children of Israel, intending to cast them out of the Lords
inheritance, and utterly destroy them, to the dishonor of God; the Lord by
delivering them from that sore affliction gained to himself such honor and
glory, That (as the Text says) the fear of God was upon all the Kingdoms of
the Earth, when they heard that the Lord had fought so against the enemies of
Israel, 2 Chronicles. 20.29. The judgment was upon some, the fear came upon all;
it was but a few men's loss, but it was all men's warning, 1 Cor. 10.11. When
the Lord brought again the Captivity of Sion (says the Psalmist,) Then said
they among the Heathen, the Lord has done great things for them, Psalm. 126.1,
2.

God provides on purpose mighty adversaries for his Church, that their
humiliation may be the greater in sustaining* and his glory may be greater in
deliverance: yea, though there be Legions of devils, and every one stronger
than many Legions of men, and more malicious than strong, yet Christ's little
Flock lives and prospers; and makes not this exceedingly for our Makers, for
our Gardians glory?

Gods power is best made known in our weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9. Impossibilities
are the best advancers of his glory; who not seldom hangs the greatest waits
upon the smallest wyars, as he does the earth upon nothing: For what we least
believe can be done, we most admire being done; the lesser the means, and the
greater the opposition, the more is the glory of him who by little means does
overcome a great opposition: yea, it is greater glory to God to turn evils
into good by overmastering them, then wholly to take them away.

Now if ^hy very enemies thus honor thee, how should thy friends (bought with
thy precious blood) glorify thee? But the sweetest of honey lies in the
bottom. I pass therefore from the first to the second Reason.

CHAP. 2. That it makes for the glory of his Wisdom.
2 SEcondly, it makes for the glory of his mavelous and singular wisdom
when he turns the malice of his enemies to the advantage of his Church. I
would (says Paul) ye understood brethren that the things which have come unto
me, are turned rather to the furthering of the Gospel. So that my bonds in
Christ are famous throughout all the judgment Hall, and in all other places,
Insomuch that many of the brethren in the Lord, are imboldned through my bonds,
and dare more frankely speak the word, Phil. 1.12, 13, 14. In all other cases
a gentle resistance heightens the desire of the seeker; in this, the strength
of opposition, meeting with as strong a faith, has the same effect.

Again, how admirably did the Lord turn the malice of Joseph's brethren when
they sold him into Egypt. And that devilish plot of Haman against Mordecay and
his people, ^o the good of his Church in general, and of Joseph and Mordecay
in particular? Genesis 45.8.11. Hester 9.1, 2, 3. Their plots to overthrow Joseph
and Mordecay, were turned by a Divine Providence to the only means of
advantaging them. And herein was that of the Psalmist verified, Surely the rage
of man shall turn to thy praise, Psalm. 76.10. It is not so much glory to God
to take away wicked men, as to use their evil to his own holy purposes; how
soon could the Commander of Heaven and Earth rid the world of bad members? But
so should he lose the praise of working good by evil instruments: it
suffiseth that the Angels of God resist their actions while their persons
continue; God (many times) works by contrary means: as Christ restored the
Blind-man to his sight, with clay and spittle; he caused the Israelites to grow
with depression, with persecution to multiply, Exodus 1.12. The blood of the
Martyrs is the seed of the Church, Persecution enlarges the bounds of it, like
as Palms oppressed, and Camomile trod upon, mount the more, grow the faster.
It Is as easiy for God to work without means, as with them; and against them, as
by either; but assuredly it makes more for the Makers glory, that such an
admirable harmony should be produced out of such an infinite discord. The World
is composed of four Elements, and those be contraries: the Year is quartered
into different seasons: the mind of man is a mixture of disparities, as joy,
sorrow, hope, fear, love, hate, and the like: the body does consist and is
nourished by contraries, how diverse even in effect as well as taste (wherein
variety hits the humor of all) are the Birds and Beasts that feed us? And how
diverse again are those things that feed them? How many several qualities have
the Plants that they brouze upon? which all mingled together, what a well
temepred Sallad do they make?

Thus you see that though faith be above reason, yet is there a reason to be
given of our faith. O what a depth of wisdom may lie wrapped up in those
passages, which to our weak apprehensions may seem ridiculous!

CHAP. 3. That the graces of God, in his children, may the more s^ine through
employment.
3 THirdly it makes for Gods glory another way, when those graces which he
has bestowed upon his children, do the more shine through employment, and are
the more seen and taken notice of by the world; surely if his justice get such
honor by a Pharaoh; much more does his mercy by a Moses: now Abraham's faith,
Jobs patience, Paul's courage and constancy, if they had not been tried by the
fire of affliction, their graces had been smothered as so many lights under a
bushel, which now (to the glory of God) shine to all the world; Yea, not only
their virtues, but the gracious lives of all the Saints departed, do still
magnify him even to this day in every place we hear of them, and move us
likewise to glorify God for them: wherefore happy man that leaves such a
president, for which the future Ages shall praise him, and praise God for him.

Who could know the faith, patience, and Valor, of Gods Soldiers, if they
always lay in Garrison, and never came to the skirmish? Whereas now they are
both exemplary, and serve also to put to silence the ignorance of foolish men,
1 Pet. 2.15. One Jupiter set out by Homer the Poet, was worth ten set out by
Phidias the Carver, says Philostratus; because the former flew abroad through
all the world, whereas the other never stirred from his Pedistall at Athens: so
at first, the honor and splendour of Jobs integrity was confined to Vz (a
little corner of Arabia,) yea, to his own Family; whereas by means of the
devils malice, it is now sp^ead as far as the Sun can extend his beams, or
the Moon her influence; for of such a Favorite of Heaven, such a Mirour of the
Earth, such a wonder of the World, who takes not notice? Who could know whether
we be Vessels of gold, or dross, unless we were brought to the Touchstone of
temptation? Who could feel the odoriferous smell of these Aromaticall spices,
if they were not pownded and bruized in the mortar of affliction? The worlds
hatred and calumny to an able Christian, serves as bellows to kindle his
devotion, and blow off the ashes, under which his faith lay hid; like the
Moon, he shines cleerest in the night of affliction: If it made for the honor
of Saul and all Israel, that he had a little Boy in his Army, that was able to
encounter that selected great Giant, Goliath of the Philistims, and overcame
him; how much more does it make for Gods glory, that the least of his adopted
ones should be able to encounter four enemies?

The World. The Flesh. The Devil, and The Death.
The weakest of which, is 1 The Flesh. 2 The World.


Now the Flesh being an homebred enemy, a Dalilah in Sampsons bosom, a Judas
in Christ's company; like a Moath in the Garment bred in us, and cherished of
us, and yet always attempting to fret and destroy us: and the world a
foreign foe, whose Army consists of two wings, Adversity on the left hand;
Prosperity on the right hand;
Death stronger than either, and the Devil stronger than all; And yet that the
weakest child of God only through faith in Christ (a thing as much despised
of Philistims, as David's sling and stone was of Goliath) should overcome all
these four; wherein he shows himself a greater Conqueror, that William the
Conqueror; yea, even greater than Alexander the Great, or Pompey the Great, or
the Great Turk: for they only conquered in many years a few parts of the
world, but he that is borne of God overcommeth the whole world, and all things
in the world, 1 John 5. And this is the victory that overcommeth the world,
even our faith, Verse. 4. and Makes not this infinitely for the glory of God?
Yea, it makes much for the honor of Christians. For, art thou borne of God?
have thou vanquished the world that vanquisheth all the wicked? Bless God for
this conquest. The King of Spaines overcomming the Indies was nothing to it. If
Satan had known his afflicting of Job would have so advanced the glory of God,
manifested Jobs admirable patience to all Ages, made such a president for
imitation to others, occasioned so much shame to himself, I doubt not but Job
should have continued prosperous and quiet; for who will set upon his
adversary, when he knows he shall be shamefully beaten? This being so, happy
are they who when they do well, hear ill; but much more blessed are they, who
^ive so well, as that their backbiting adversa^ies seeing their good works, are
constrained to praise God, and speak well of them.

CHAP. 4. That God suffers his children to be afflicted and persecuted, by
ungodly men, that so they may be brought to repentance.
NOw the Reasons which have chiefly respect to the good of his children in
their sufferings, being thirteen in number, are distinguished as follows:
God suffers his children to be afflicted by them
1 Because it Brings them to repentance. 2 Because it Works in them amendment
of life. 3 Because it Stirs them up to prayer 4 Because it Weanes them from the
love of the world. 5 Because it Keeps them always p^epared to the spiritual
combat. 6 Because it Discovers whether we be true believers, or hypocrites. 7
Because it Prevents greater evils of sin and punishment to come. 8 Because it
makes them Humble. 9 Because it makes them Conformable to Christ their head. 10
Because it Increases their Faith. 11 Because it Increases their Joy and
thankfulness. 12 Because it Increases their Spiritual wisdom. 13 Because it
Increases their Patience.


First, the Lord suffers his children to be vexed and persecuted by the wicked,
because it is a notable means to rouse them out of careless security, and
bring them to repentance, he opens the ears of men (says Elihu) even by
their corrections, that he might cause man to turn away from his enterprise,
and that he might keep back his soul from the pit, Job 33.16, 17, 18. The
feeling of smart will teach us to decline the cause; those bitter sufferings of
Job toward his later end, made him to possess the iniquities of his youth, Job
13.26. Whereby (with Solomon's Evis-dropper, Eccles. 7.21, 22.) he came to
repent of that whereof he did not once suspect himself guilty; it made him not
think so much of what he felt, as what he deserved to feel: Satan's malice
not seldom proves the occasion of true repentance, and so the devil is
overshot in his own Bow, wounded with his own weapon. I doubt whether that
Syrophenician had ever inquired after Christ, if her daughter had not been
vexed with an unclean spirit; yea, whether the devil had been so effectually
cast out, if he had with less violence entered into her, Mark 7. Our
afflictions are as Benhadads best Counselors, that sent him with a cord about
his neck to the merciful King of Israel. The Church of God under the Cross is
brought to a serious consideration of her estate, and says, Let us search and
try our ways and turn to the Lord, Lam. 3.40. Manasses also the King of
Judah, that horrible sinner, never repented of his idolatry, murder,
witchcraft, etc. till he was carried away captive to Babel, and there put in
chains by the King of Ashur. But then (says the Text) he humbled himself
greatly before the God of his fathers, 2 Chro. 33.11, 12. Yea, the prison was a
means of his spiritual enlargement. The body that is surfetted with repletion
of pleasant meats must be purged with bitter pills; and when all outward
comforts fail us, we are willing to befriend our selves with the comfort of a
good conscience, the best of blessings. Affliction is the Hammer which breaks
our rockie hearts; adversity has whipped many a soul to heaven, which otherwise
prosperity had coached to hell: was not the Prodigal riding post thither, till
he was soundly lasht home again to his Fathers house, by those hard-hear^ed
and pitiless Nabals which refused to fill his belly with the husks of the
Swine? And indeed seldom is any man thoroughly awaked from the sleep or sin,
but by a^fliction; but God by it, as it were by a strong purge, empties and
evacuates those surerfluities of malice, envy, pride, security, etc.
whererewith we were before surcharged.

The Serpents enmity may be compared to the Circumcision-knife which was made
of stone, unto Rubarbe which is full of choler, yet does mightily purge
choler; or to the sting of a Scorpion, which though it be arrant poison, yet
proves an excellent remedy against poifon. For this, or any other affliction
when we are in our worldly pomp and jollity, pulls us by the ear and makes
us know our selves: I may call it the Sum of Divinity, as Pliny calls it the
Sum of Philosophy; for what distressed or sick mau was ever lascivious,
covetous, or ambitious? He envies no man, admires no man, flatters no man,
dissembles with no man, despises no man, etc. That which Governors or Friends
can by no means effect, touching our amendment, a little sickness or trouble
from enemies will, as S. Chrysostom observes.) Yea* how many will confess,
that one affliction has done more good upon them, than many Sermons; that they
have learned more good in one days or weeks misery, than many years
prosperity could teach them; untouched fortunes and touched consciences seldom
dwell together; and it is usual for them that know no sorrows, to know no
God: repentance seldom meets a man in jollity, but in affliction the heart is
made pliable and ready for all good impressions; and so the very end which God
aims at in setting those Adders upon thee, is, that thou should pry
narrowly into thine own forepast actions; which if thou do, an hundred to
one thou will find sin, it may be this very sin the cause of thy present
affliction: and until thou do sift and try thine own heart for this Achan,
and find out which is thy Isaac, thy beloved sin, look for no release, but
rather that thy sorrows should be multiplied, as God threatened Eve. The
skillful Chyrurgion when he is launcing a wound, or cutting off a limb, will
not hear the Patient though he cry never so, until the cure be ended; but let
there be once a healing of thy errors, and the Plaster will fall off of it
self; for the Plaster will not stick on when the soar is healed. If the
Fathers word can correct the child, he will fling away the rod, otherwise he
must look to have his eyes ever winterly. Thus as the two Angels that came to
Lot lodged with him for a night, and when they had dispatched their errand,
went away in the morning: So afflictions which are the Angels or the Messengers
of God, are sent by him to do an errand to us; to tell us, we forget God, we
forget our selves, we are too proud, too selfe-conceited, and such like: and
when they have said as they were bid, then presently they are gone. Why then
complainest thou, I am afflicted on every side? Why groanest thou under thy
burden, and criest out of unremedied pain? Alas, thou repentest not; trouble
came on this message to teach thee repentance, give the messenger his errand,
and he will be gone: He that mournes for the cause of his punishment, shall
mourn but a while; he that mournes only for the punishment, and not for the
cause, shall mourn for ever: the soul cannot live while the sin lives; one
of the two must dye, the corruption, or the Person; but Repentance is a
Supersed^as, which discharges both sin and sorrow, moving God to be
merciful, the Angels to be joyful, Man to be acceptable, and only the Devil
to be melancholy.

CHAP. 5 That it serves to work in us amendment of life.
2 SEcondly, the malice of our enemies serves to work in us amendment of life,
the outward cold of affliction does greatly increase the inward heat and
fervor of the Graces of God in us. Indeed no Chastizement (says the Author to
the Hebrews) for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous; But afterward
it brings the quiet fruit of righteousness to them that are thereby
exercised, Hebr. 12.11. God strips the body of pleasures to cloth the soul
with righteousness, and oftentimes strengthens our state of grace by
impoverishing our temporal estate: Oftentimes the more Prosperity, the less
Piety.

It was an observation of Tacitus, that raisiing of the fortune, did rarely
mend the disposition, only Vespasian was changed into the better; few men can
digest great felicity; Many a man has been a looser by his gains, and found,
that that which multiplied his outward estate* has abated his inward. Now who
will esteem those things good which make us worse, or, that evil, which
brings such gain and sweetness? Before I was afflicted (says David) I went
astray, but now do I keep thy Commandments, Psalm. 119.67. Happy was he, John
9. in being borne blind, whose game of bodily sight made way for the
spiritual, who of a Patient became an Advocate for his Savior, who lost a
Synagogue, and found Heaven, who by being abandoned of sinners was received of
the Lord of glory: God rarely deprives a man of one faculty, but he more then
supplies it in another. Hannibal had but one eye, Appius, Claudius, Timelon,
and Homer were quite blind, So was Muliasses King of Tunis, and Ioh. King of
Bohemia; But for the loss of that one Sense they were recompensed in the rest,
they had most excellent memories, rare inventions, and admirable other parts:
Or suppose he send sickness, the worst Fever can come, does not more burn
our blood than our lust; And together with sweating out the Surfets of nature
at the poores of the body, we weep out the sinful corruption of our nature at
the poares of the Conscience; Yea the Author to the Hebrews says of Christ
Himself, that though he were the Son, yet (as he was man) He learned
obedience by the things which He suffered, Heb. 5.8. As in humane proceedings,
Ill manners beget good Laws; So in Divine, the wicked by their evil tongues
beget good and holy lives in the Godly; Nothing sooner brings us to the
knowledge and amendment of our faults, then the scoffs of an enemy, which made
Philip of Macedon acknowledge himself much beholding to his enemies (the
Athenians) for speaking evil of him, for (says he) they have made me an
honest man, to prove them liars: Even barren Leah when she was despised became
fruitful.

So that we may thank our enemies, or must thank God for our enemies; Our
souls shall shine the brighter one day for such rubbing; Yea put case we be
gold, they will but try us; If Iron, they will scower away our rust. The
malice of wicked men serves to the godly, as the Thorn to the breast of the
Nightingale, the which (if she chance to sleep) causes her to warble with a
renewed cheerfulness. These very tempestuous showers bring forth spiritual
flowers and herbs in abundance: Devotion (like fire in fro^ty weather) burns
hottest in affliction. Virtue provoked, adds much to it self: With the Arc
of Noah, the higher we are tossed with the flood of their malice, the nearer we
mount toward Heaven. When the waters of the flood came upon the face of the
earth, down went stately Turrets and Towers; but as the waters rose, the Arc
rose still higher and higher. In like sort when the waters of afflictions
arise, down goes the pride of life, the lust of the eyes; In a word, all the
vanities of the world. But the Arc of the soul arises as these waters rise,
and that higher and higher, even nearer and nearer toward Heaven.

I might illustrate this point by many observable things in nature: We see
Well-waters arising from deep Springs, are hotter in Winter then in Summer,
because the outward cold does keep in and double their inward heat: And so of
man's body, the more extreme the cold is without, the more does the natural
heat fortify it self within, and guard the heart. The Corn receives an
inward heat and comfort from the Frost and Snow which lies upon it: Trees
lopt and pr^ned flourish the more, and bear the fuller for it: The Grape when
it is most pressed and trodden, makes the more and better wine; The dro^^e
gold is by the fire refined; Winds and Thunder cleeres the air; Working Seas
purge the Wine; Fire increases the scent of any Perfume; Pounding makes all
Spices smell the sweeter; Linen when it is buckt and washed and wrung and
beaten, becomes the whiter and fayrer; The earth being torn up by the Plough,
becomes more rich and fruitful; Is there a piece of ground naturally good? Let
it lie neglected, it becomes wild and barren; Yea and the more rich and
fertile that it is of it self, the more waste and fruitless it proves for
want of Tillage and Husbandry; The Razor though it be tempered with a due
proportion of steel, yet if it pass not the Grindstone or Whetstone, is
nevertheless unapt to cut; yea though it be made once never so sharp, if it
be not often whetted it waxes dull. All which are lively Emblems of that truth
which the Apostle delivers, 2 Cor. 4.16. We faint not, for though our outward
man perish, yet the inward man is renewed daily* Even as a Lamb is much more
lively and nimble for sheering. If by enmity and persecution (as with a knife)
the Lord pareth an^ pruneth us, it is, that we may bring forth t^ more and
better fruit; and unless we deg^nerate, we shall bear the better for
bleeding; as Anteus, every time rose up the stronge^ when Hercules threw him to
the ground, because he go^ new strength by touching of his Mother.

O admirable use of affliction; health from a a wound; cure from a disease; out
of grief, joy; gain out of loss; out of infirmity, strength; out of sin,
holiness; out of death, life: yea, we shall redeem something of Gods
dishonor by sin, if we shall thence grow holy. But this is a harder Riddle
than Sampsons to these Philistims.

CHAP. 6. That is stirs them up to prayer.
3 THirdly, because they quicken our devotion, and make us pray unto God with
more fervency. Lord (says Isaiah) in trouble they will visit thee, they
powered out prayers when they chastening was upon them, Isay 26.16. In their
affliction (says Hosea) they will seek thee diligently, Hosea 5.15.

The truth of this may be seen in the examples of the Children of Israel,
Judges 3.9, 15. Elisha, 2 Kings 6.18. Hezekiah, 2 Kings 19.15, 16. Stephen,
Acts 7.59, 60. And lastly, in Iehosaphat, who being told that there was a great
multitude coming against him from beyond the Sea, out of Aram, it follows,
That Iehosaphat feared, and set himself to seek the Lord, and proclaimed a
fast throughout all Judah; Yea, they came out of all parts and joined with him
to inquire of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 20.3, 4, 13. Neither does it make us alone
which suffer, earnest in prayer, but it makes others also labor in prayer to
God for us, 2 Cor. 1.10, 11. And indeed the very purpose of affliction is, to
make us importunate* he that hears the secret murmurs of our grief, yet will
not seem to hear us till our cries be loud and strong; as Demosthenes would
not plead for his Client till he cried to him, but then answered his sorrow,
Now I feel thy cause. We ask and miss, because we ask amiss: we beat
back the flame, not with a purpose to suppress it, but to raise it higher,
and to diffuse it. And a denial does but invite the importunate, as we see in
the Canaanitish woman, Mat. 15. Our holy longings are increased with delays;
it whets our appetite to be held fasting, and whom will not Need make both
humble and eloquent? If the case be woeful, it will be expressed accordingly;
the despair of all other helps, sends us importunately to the God of power;
but while money can buy Physic, o^ friends procure enlargement, the great
Physician and helper is not sought unto, nor thoroughly trusted in. It is
written of the children of Israel, that so soon as they cried unto the Lord,
he delivered them from their servitude under Eglon King of Moab, yet it is
plain, they were eighteen years under this bondage undelivered, Judge. 3.14,
15. Doubtless they were not so unsensible of their own misery as not to
complain sooner then the end of eighteen years: the first hour they sighed
for themselves, but now they cried unto God. They are words, and not prayers,
which fall from careless lips; if we would prevail with God, we must wrestle;
and if we would wrestle happily with God, we must wrestle first with our own
dullness; yea, if we felt our want, or wanted not desire, we could speak to
God in no tune but cries, and nothing but cries can pierce Heaven: the best
men's zeal is but like a fire of green wood, which burns no longer than
whiles it is blown. Affliction to the soul is as plummets to a Clock, or wind
to a Ship; holy and faithful prayer, as oars to a Boat, and ill goes the
Boat without oars, or the Ship without wind, or the Clock without plummets.
Now are some afflicted in reputation, as Susanna was; others in children, as
Elie; some by enemies, as David; others by friends, as Joseph; some in body, as
Lazarus; others in goods, as Job; others in liberty, as John. In all
extremities let us send this messenger to Christ for ease, faithful and
fervent prayer; if this can but carry the burden to him, he will carry it for
us, and from us for ever.

CHAP. 7. That it weanes them from the love of the world.
4 FOurthly, our sufferings weane us from the love of the world, yea, make us
loathe and contemn it, and contrariwise fix upon Heaven, with a desire to be
dissolved. S. Peter at Christ's transfiguration enjoying but a glimpse of
happiness here, was so ravi^hed and transported with the love of his present
estate, that he breaks out into these words, Master, it is good for us to be
here; he would feign have made it his dwelling place: and being loath to depart,
Christ must make three Tabernacles, Mat. 17.4. Whereas S. Paul having spoken of
his bonds in Christ, and of the spiritual combat, concludes, I desire to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is best of all, Phil. 1.22, 23. We
cannot so heartily think of our home above, whiles we are furnished with these
earthly contentments below; but when God strips us of them, straitwayes our
mind is homewards. Whiles Naomies Husband and Sons were alive, we find no
motion of her retiring home to Judah; let her earthly stays be removed, she
thinks presently of removing to her Country: a delicious life, when every
thing about us is resplendent and contentfull, makes us that we have no mind to
go to Heaven; wherefore as a loving Mother when she would weane her Child from
the dug, makes it bitter with Wormwood or Aloes; so deals the Lord with us,
he makes this life bitter unto us by suffering our enemies to persecute and
oppress us; to the end we may contemn the world, and transport our hopes from
Earth to Heaven; he makes us weep in this Vale of misery, that we may the more
eagerly long for that place of felicity, where all tears shall be wiped from
our eyes; and we are very ungrateful if we do not thank him for that which so
overcomes us, that it overcomes the love of the world in us. And this is no
small abatement to the bitterness of adversities, that they teach us the way
to Heaven: the less comfort we find on earth, the more we ^eeke above. When
no man would harbor that unthrift Son in the Gospel, he turned back again to
his Father, but never before. When it ceased to be with Sarah after the manner
of the world, she conceived Isaac: so when it cease to be with us after the
manner of the worlds favorites, we conceive holy desires, quietness, and
tranquillity of mind, with such like spiritual contentments. Zeno hearing
that his only Bark wherein all his wealth was shipped was cast away, cried
out O Fortune, thou have done well to put me into my Gown again to embrace
Philosophy: better the estate perish than the soul. Our wine (says Gregory)
has some Gall put into it, that we should not be so delighted with the way, as
to forget whether we are going. Prosperity is hearty meat, but not digestible
by a weak stomach; strong wine, but naught for a weak brain: The prosperity
of fools destroieth them, Prove. 1.32. Experience shows, that in Countries
where be the greatest plenty of fruits, they have the shortest lives, they do
so surfeit on their abundance: and it is questionable whether the inioying of
outward things, or the contemning of them, be the greatest happiness: for to
be deprived of them is but to be deprived of a Dye, wherewith a man might
either win or lose; yea, does not a large portion of them many times prove to
the Own^r like a treacherous Dye indeed, which flatters an improvident Gamester
with his own hand to throw away his wealth to another? Or to yield it the
uttermost, gold may ma^e a man the richer, not the better; honor may make him
the higher, not the happier: and all temporal delights are but as flowers,
they only have their month and are gone; this morning in the bosom, the next
in the B^some. The consideration whereof, made the very Heathen Philosophers
hate this world, though they saw not where to find a better.

The diseases of the body are the medicines of the soul; the impairing of the
one, is the repairing of the other: Therefore we faint not (says S. Paul)
though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed daily, 2 Cor.
4.16. Lais of Corin^h while she was young, doated upon her glass, but when she
grew old and withered, she loathed it as much, which made her give it up to
Venus. Nothing feeds pride nor keeps off repentance so much as prosperous
advantage. It Is a wonder to see a Favorite study for ought but additions to his
Greatness; God shall have much ado to make him know himself. The cloth that
has many stains must pass through many larders; no less than an odious
leaprosie will humble Naaman; wherefore by it the only wise God thought meet to
sauce the valor, dignity, renown, victories, of that famous General of the
Syrians. If I could be so uncharitable as to with an enemies soul lost, this
were the only way, let him live in the height of the worlds blandishments; for
how can he love a second Mistress that never saw but one beauty, and still
continues deeply enamored on it? We often see, nothing carries us so far from
God, as those favors he has imparted to us. It Is the misery of the poor to be
neglected of men; it is the misery of the rich to neglect their God: many shall
one day repent that they were happy too soon. Many a man cries out, O that I
were so rich, so healthful, so quiet, so happy, etc. Alas, though thou had
thy wish for the present, thou should (perhaps) be a loser in the sequel.
The Physician does not hear his Patient in what he would, yet hears him in
taking occasion to do another thing more conducible to his health. God loves to
give us cooles and heats in our desires, and will so allay our joys, that
their fruition hurt us not: he knows that as it is with the body touching
meats, the greater plenty, the less dainty; and too long forbearance causes a
Surfeit when we come to full food; So it fares with the mind touching worldly
contentments; therefore he feeds us not with the dish, but with the spoone, and
will have us neither cloyed, nor famished. In this life, Mercy and misery,
grief and Grace, Good and bad, are blended one with the other; because if we
should have nothing but comfort, Earth would be thought Heaven: besides, if
Christ tide lasted all the year, what would become of Lent? If every day were
Good Friday, the world would be weary of Fasting. Secundus calls death a sleep
eternal; the wicked man's fear, the godly man's wish. Where the conscience is
clear, death is looked for without fear; yea, desired with delight, accepted
with devotion: why, it is but the cessation of trouble, the extinction of sin,
the deliverance from enemies, a rescue from Satan, the quiet rest of the body,
and infranchizement of the soul. The Woman great with child, is ever musing
upon the the time of her delivery: and has not he the like cause, when Death
is his Bridge from woe to glory? Though it be the wicked man's shipwreck, it is
the good man's putting into harbor: And hereupon finding himself hated,
persecuted, afflicted, and tormented, by enemies of all sorts, he becomes as
willing to die as dine. And indeed, what should thou do in case thou see
that the world runs not on thy side, but give over the world, and be on Gods
side? Let us care little for the world, that cares so little for us; let us
cross ^aile, and turn another way; let us go forth therefore out of the
Camp, bearing his reproach; for we have no continuing City, but we seek one
to come, Heb. 13.13, 14.

CHAP. 8. That it keeps them always prepared to the spiritual combat.
5 FIfthly, the Lord permits them often to afflict and assail us, to the
end we may be always prepared for tribulation: as wise Mariners in a calm,
make all their tacklings sure and strong, that they may be provided against the
next storm, which they cannot look to be long without. Or as experienced
Soldiers in time of peace, prepaire against the day of battle; and so much
the rather, when they look every day for the approach of the enemy. We are often
times set upon, to the end that we may continually buckle unto us the whole
Armor of God, prescribed by Paul, Ephesians. 6.13. to 19. That we may be always
ready for the battle by walking circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise,
Ephesians. 5.15. Therefore redeeming the time, because the days are evil, Verse. 16.
For as those that have no enemies to encounter them, cast their Armor (...)
and let it (...), because they are secure from danger; but when their enemies
are at hand, and sound the Alarm, they both wake and sleep in their armor,
because they would be ready for the assault. So if we were not often in
skirmish with our enemies, we should ^ay aside our spiritual armor; but when
we have continual use of it, we still keep it fast buckled unto us; that
being armed at all points, we may be able to make resistance, that we be not
surprised at unawares. Sampson could not be bound, till he was first got
asleep: Would thou not be overcome, be not secure. Seneca reports of Caesar,
that he did quickly sheath the sword, but he never laid it off. The sight of a
weapon discourageth a Thief. While we keep our Iavelins in our hands we
escape many assaults. So that a Christians resolution should be like King
Alfreds, Si modo victor eras, ad crastina bella pavebas,
Si modo victus eras, ad crastina bella parabas.
If we conquer to day, let us fear the skirmish to morrow.
If we be overcome to day, let us hope to get the victory to morrow.


An assaulted City must keep a careful watch; yea, the provident Fenman mends
his banks in Summer least his ground be drowned in winter. And we must so take
our leaves of all afflictions, that we reserve a lodging for them, and expect
their return.

CHAP. 9. How it discovers whether we be true believers or hypocrites.
6 SIxthly, that we may experimentally know our selves, and be known of others
whether we be true believers or hypocrites. There must be differences among you
(says Saint Paul) that the approved may be known, 1 Cor. 11.19. For as
Thrashing separates the straw, and Wynowing the chafe from the Corn; So
persecution separates the hypocrite from the company of believers, Luke 22.31.
None but a regenerate heart can choose rather to suffer affliction with the
people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin. An easy importunity will
persuade Orpah to return from a Mother in law to a Mother in nature, from a
toylesome journey to rest, from strangers to her kindred, from a hopeless
condition to likelihoods of contentment; A little entreaty will serve to move
nature to be good to it self: to persist in actions of goodness, though
tyranny, torment, death and hell stood in our way; this is that conquest which
shall be crowned with glory; Gold and Silver are tried in the fire, men in the
furnace of adversity; As the furnace proves the Potters Vessel; so do
temptations try men's thoughts, Eccles. 27.5. Behold (says the Angel to the
Church of Smyrna) it shall come to pass that the Devil shall cast some of you
into Prison, that you may be tried, Revel. 2.10. This Child (says old Simeon,
meaning Christ) is appointed for a sign to be spoken against, that the
thoughts of many hearts may be opened, Luke 2.34, 35. O how wicked men manifest
their hatred and enmity against God and his people so soon as Persecution
arises because of the Word! yea by it the malice of Satan and the world are
better known and avoided.

But to come more punctually to the point. Affliction tries whether a man has
grace in his heart or no; Set an empty Pitcher (the resemblance of a wicked
man) to the fire, it crackes presently, whereas the full (which resembles the
Child of God) will abide boiling; Gold imbroidered upon Silk, if cast into the
fire loses his fash^on, but not his weight, Copper loses his fashion and
weight also; Magistracy and misery will soon show what manner of men we be;
either will declare us better or worse then we seemed. Indeed, Prosperity
(says one) best discovers vice, but Adversity does best discover Virtue. Plato
being demanded, how he knew a wise man, answered; When being r^buked he would
not be angry, and being praised he would not be proud: Wicked men grow worse
after afflictions, as water grows more cold after a heat. Nature is like
Glass, bright but brittle; The resolved Christian like Gold, which if we rub
it, or beat it, or melt it, it will endure the test, the touch, the hammer,
and still shine more orient; For Virtues like the Stars, shine brightest in the
night, and fairest in the frost of Affliction. More particularly, Affliction is
a notable means, to try whether we have faith or not; Nothing is more easy
then to trust God, when our Barnes and Coffers are full; And to say, give us
our daily bread, when we have it in our Cubbards; But when we have nothing,
when we know not how nor when^^ to get any thing, then to depend upon an
invisible bounty, this is a true and noble act of faith.

Again touching other graces, how excellently was Jobs patience and sincerity
made known by Satan's malice, when he brought forth those Angelical words;
What? shall we receive good at the hand of God, and not receive evil? Job
2.10. When he stood like a Center unmoved, while the circumference of his
estate was drawn above, beneath, about him, when in prosperity he could say,
if my mouth has kissed my hand; and in adversity, the Lord gives, and the Lord
takes, blessed be the name of the Lord. He was not so like the wicked as they
are like dogs that follow the meat, not the man; Alas they are but bad works
that need rewards to crane them up withal, for neither pain nor loss, much
less the censure of lewd persons will trouble a well planted mind.

Again, God suffers us to suffer much, more especially to try our
perseverance, which is a grace so good and acceptable, that without it there is
nothing good, nor acceptable; And indeed how shall a man show his strength
unless some burden be laid upon his back, or his constancy? The Spaniell
which fawneth when he is beaten, will never forsake his Master; And Trees well
rooted will bear all storms; The three Children walked up and down in the
fiery flames praising God; And a Blade well tried deserves a treble price. How
did the Church of Pergamus approve her self; Yea how was she approved of God
which has the sword with two edges, when she held out in her works even where
Satan dwelt and kept his Throne, I know thy works (says God) and that thou
keepst my Name, and have not denied my faith, even in those days when Antipas
my faithful Martyr, was slain among you, where Satan dwells, yea where his
Throne is, and where some maintain the Doctrine of Balaam, and the
Nicholaitans, and teach that men ought, etc. Rev. 2.13, 14. Persecution is the
Sword whereby our Solomon will try which is the true natural Mother, which the
pretended. Afflictions are the waters where our Gideon will try whether we are
fit Soldiers to fight the Battle of Faith; We are all valiant Soldiers till
we come to fight; Excellent Philosophers till we come to dispute, good
Christians till we come to master our own lusts; But it is opposition that
gives the trial, when Corruptions fight against the graces and cause Argent to
seem more bright in a fable Field; But to go on.

A man is made known whether he be feeble or strong by the provocation of an
enemy: even calm tempers when they have been stirred, have bewrayed
impetuousnesse of passion. Now he that overcommeth his own anger (says Chilo)
overcommeth a strong enemy, but he that is overcome by it, is a whiteliver (
says Hermes) for wrath proceeds from feebleness of courage and lack of
discretion; As may appear in that, Women are sooner angry then men, the Sick
sooner then the healthy, and Old men sooner then Young. Again, its nothing to
endure a small trial or affliction, every Cock-boate can swim in a River,
every Sculler sail in a Calm, every man can hold up his head in ordinary
Gusts; but when a black storm arises, a tenth wave flows, deep calls unto
deep; Nature yields, Spirit faints, Heart fayles; Whereas grace is never quite
out of heart, yea is confident when hopes are adjourned, and expectation is
delayed.

Finally, Affliction and Persecution humbles the spirits of the repentant,
tries the faith and patience of the sincere Christian, but hardneth the hearts
of the ungodly; Wicked men (like some Beasts) grow mad with baiting; If crosses
or losses rush in upon them they fall to the language of Jobs Wife, Curse God
and dye, or to that of the King of Isreal's Messenger, Why should I serve God
any longer? 2 King. 6.33.

CHAP. 10. That it prevents greater evils of Sin and Punishment to come.
7 SEventhly, the LORD by this evil of Chastisement for sins past, preventeth
the evils of sin, and greater punishments for the time to come. The Lord
(says Elihu) corrects man, that he might turn away from his enterprise,
and that he might keep back his soul from the Pit, and that his life should
not perish by the sword, Job 33.17, 18. The sharpness of crosses are Gods
spiritual hedge; This salt does not only preserve from Corruption, but also
eat out Corruption. We are chastened of the Lord (says the Holy Ghost) that
we might not be condemned with the world, 1 Cor. 11.32, Erring souls be
corrected that they may be converted, not confounded; If Paul had not been
buffeted by Satan and wicked men, he had been exalted out of measure, 2 Cor.
12.7. Pride is so dangerous a poison, that of another poison there was
confected a counterpoyson to preserve him from it, God would rather suffer this
chosen Vessel to fall into some infirmity then to be proud of his singular
privileges Least I should be exalted above measure through the abundance of
Revelations; (there was the poison of Pride insinuating it self) I had a
Thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me; There was the
Counterpoyson or Antidote which did at once make him both sick and whole; The
enjoyment of the worlds peace might add to my content, but it will endanger my
soul; how often does the recovery of the body, state, or mind occasion a Relaps
in the soul? Turn but the Candle, and that which keeps me in, puts me out;
The younger brother shall not have all his portion least he run Riot; All the
life of Solomon was full of prosperity, and therefore we find, that Solomon did
much forget God, but the whole life of David had many enemies and much
adversity, and therefore we see by his penitential Psalms, and others, that
David did much remember God: As Salt with its sharpness keeps flesh from
corrupting; So their malice keeps our souls from festering; Bees are drowned
in Honey, but live in Vinegar. Now if sweet meats breed Surfets, it is good
sometimes to taste of bitter, its good somvvhat to unloade when the ship is in
danger by too liberal a ballast. I will tell you a Paradox (I call it so
because few will believe it, but it is true) many are able to say, they have
learned to stand by falling, got strength by weakness. The burnt Child dreads
the fire; A broken bone well set is faster ever after; Like Trees we take
deeper root by shaking; And like Torches, we flame the brighter for bruizing
and knocking: God suffered Satan to spoil Job of his substance, rob him of
his Children, punish him in his body; Yet mark but the Sequel well, and you
shall find, that he was crossed with a blessing. As the Physician in making of
Triacle or Mithridate for his Patient uses Serpents, Adders, and such like
poison that he may drive out one poison with another; Even so our spiritual
Physician is pleased to use the malice of Satan, and wicked men when he
tempereth to us the Cup of affliction, that hereby he may expel one evil^ with
another; Yea two evils with one, namely, the evil of sin, and the evil of
punishment, and that both temporal and eternal. He suffers us to be
afflicted, because he will not suffer us to be damned; such is the goodness of
our heavenly Father to us, that even his anger proceeds from mercy; he
scourges the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of Jesus Christ, 1
Cor. 5.5. Yea, Joseph was therefore abased in the dungeon, that his advancement
might be the greater. Its true, in our thoughts we often speak for the flesh,
as Abraham did for Ismael, O that Ismael might live in thy sight! no, God takes
away Ismael and gives Isaac; he withdrawes the pleasure of the flesh, gives
delight to the soul. The man sick of a burning fever cries to his Physician
for drink; he pities him, but does not satisfy him; he gives him proper
physic, but not drink. A man is sick of a Plurisie, the Physician lets him
blood, he is content with it; the arm shall smart to ease the heart. The
covetous man has a plurisie of riches, G^d lets him blood by poverty; let him
be patient, it is a course to save his soul. So if God scourge us any way, so
we bleed not; or till we bleed, so we faint not; or till we even faint, so we
perish not; let us be comforted: for if the Lord prune his Vine, he means not
to root it up: if he minister physic to our souls, it is because he would not
have us dye in our sins; all is for salvation. What if Noah were pent up in the
Arc, so long as he was safe in it: what if it were his prison, so long as it
was his Fort also against the waters?

I might illustrate the point, and make it plain by sundry and diverse
comparisons. We know, one nail drives out another; one heat another; one cold
another: yea, out of admirable experience I can witness it, that for most
constitutions there is not such a remedy under Heaven for a cold in the head,
or an accustomed tenderness, as a frequent bathing of it in cold water; I can
justly say, I am twenty years the younger for it. Yea, one sorrow drives out
another; one passion another; one rumor is expelled by another: and though for
the most part, contraries are cured by contraries; yet not seldom will
Physicians stop a Lask with a Purge; they will bleed a Patient in the Arm, to
stop a worse bleeding at Nose. Again, in some Patients they will procure a
gentle Ague, that they may cure him of a more dangerous disease. Even so deals
God with us; he often punishes the worser part of man (says S. Jerome,) That
is, the body, state, or name, that the better part (to wit) the soul, may be
saved in the day of judgment. Neither are chastisements any whit less
necessary for the soul, than medicines are for the body: many a man had been
undone by prosperity, if they had not been undone by adversity; they had
perished in their souls, if they had not perished in their bodies, estates, or
good-names. Its probable Naamans soul had never been cleansed, if his body
had not been leaprous: and though affliction be hard of digestion to the
natural man, yet the experienced Christian knows, that it is good for the
soul, that the body is sometime sick; and therefore to have his inward man
cured, he is content his outward man should be diseased; and cares not so the
sins of his soul may be les^ened, though the soars of his flesh be increased.
And why is it not so with thee? I hope thou desire thy souls safety above
all; and thou know, the stomach that is purged must be content to part with
some good nourishment, that it may deliver it self of more evil humors. Of
what kind ^oever thy sufferings be, it is doubtless the fittest for thy
souls recovery; or else God (the only wise Physician) would not appoint it.
Now who would not be willing to bleed, when by that means an inveterate
sickness may be prevented? Yea, it is a happy bloodletting which saves the
life, which makes S. Austine say unto God; Let my body be crucified, or burnt,
or do with it what thou will, so thou save my soul. And another, let me swim
a River of boiling brimstone to live eternally happy, rather than dwell in a
Paradise of pleasure to be damned after death.

CHAP. 11. That it makes them humble.
8 EIghthly, that we may have an humble conceit of our selves, and wholly
depend upon God. We received the sentence of death in our selves (says the
Apostle) because we should not trust in our selves, but in God, who raises us
up from the dead, 2 Cor. 1.9. When Babes are afraid, they cast themselves into
the arms and bosom of their mother. I thought in my prosperity (says David)
I shall never be moved, But thou did hide thy face and I was troubled. Then
turned I unto thee, etc. Psalm. 30.6, 7, 8. When a stubborn Delinquent being
committed was no whit mollified with his durance, but grew more perverse than
he was before, one of the Senators said to the rest, Let us forget him a while,
and then he will remember himself; the Heart is so hot of it self, that if it
had not the Lungs, as Fannes to blow wind upon it, and kindly moisture to cool
it, it would soon perish with the own heat: and yet when that moisture grows
too redundant, it again drownes the Heart. Who so nourishes his servant
daintily from his childhood, shall after find him stubborn. We see then there
is danger in being without dangers; and what says S. Paul? Lest I should be
exalted out of measure, there was given unto me the Messenger of Satan to
buffet me, 2 Cor. 12.7. Our adversaries as well as our sins are Messengers sent
from Satan to buffet us; and the best minds troubled, yield inconsiderate
motions. As water violently stirred sends up bubbles, so the vanities of our
hearts, and our most secret and hidden corruptions (as dregs in a glass) show
themselves when shaken by an injury, though they lay hid before. And so the
pride of man is beaten down as Job speaks, Job 33.17. The sharp water of
affliction quickens our spiritual sight. So proud are we by nature, that
before we come to the trial, we think that we can repel the strongest
assault, and overcome all enemies by our own power; but when we feel our
selves vanquished and foiled by every small temptation, we learn to have a
more humble conceit of our own ability, and to depend wholly on the Lord: and
this is set down, Deuteronomy. 8.2- and 13.3. to the end. We esteem our Inches,
Ellues, till by trial of evils we find the contrary; but then alas, how full
of feebleness is our body, and our mind of impatience? If but a Beesting our
flesh, it swells, and if but a tooth ache, the Head and Heart complain. How small
trifles make us weary of our selves? What can we do without thee? Without
thee, what can we suffer? If thou be not (O Lord) strong in our weakness, we
cannot be so much as weak; we cannot so much as be. Self-conceit and desire
of glory, is the last garment that even good men lay aside: Pride is the inmost
coat which we put on first, and which we put off last; but sore affliction will
make us give all to Him, of whom whatsoever we have, we hold. And we cannot
ascribe too little to our selves, nor too much to Him, to whom we owe more than
we can ascribe. If then I be not humbled enough, let me want the peace or
plenty I have; and so order my condition and estate, that I may want any thing,
save my self.

CHAP. 12. How it makes them conformable unto Christ their Head.
9 NInthly, that we may be conformable to Christ our Head; and like our elder
Brother who was consecrated through afflictions, reviled, buffeted, spit upon,
crucified, and what not? For we must suffer with him, that we may be also
glorified with him, Romans 8.17. When the Jews offered Jesus Gall and Vinegar,
he tasted it, but would not drink; he left the rest for his Church, and they
must pledge him. Whosoever (says our Savior) bears not his cross and
comes after me, cannot be my Disciple, Luke 14.27. For hereunto are ye
called, says S. Peter, For Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example,
that we should follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2.21. Again, The Disciple, says
Christ, is not above his Master, but whosoever will be a perfect Disciple shall
be as his Master, Luke 6.40. Yea, S. Paul made this the most certain testimony
and seal of his Adoption here, and glory afterward; his words are these,
having delivered, that the Spirit of God bears witness with our spirit, that
we are the children of God: and having added, If we be children, we are also
heirs, even the heirs of God, and heirs annexed with Christ: if so be that
we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified with him; making suffering as
a principal condition annexed, which is, as if he had said, it is impossible
we should be glorified with him, except we first suffer with him, Romans 8.16,
17. Whereupon having in another place reckoned up all privileges which might
minister unto him occasion of boasting, he concludes, that what things were
gain unto him, those he accounted loss for Christ, that he might know the
fellowship of his sufferings, and be made conformable to his death, Phil. 3.10.

Again, by suffering we become followers of our brethren who went before us.
Brethren (says S. Paul) ye are become followers of the Churches of God, which
in Judea are in Christ Jesus, because ye have also suffered the same things of
your own Country men, even as they have of the Jews, 1 Thessalonians. 2.14. It was
the lot of Christ, and must be of all his followers to do good and to suffer
evil. Wherefore let us be exhorted in the words of S. Peter, to rejoice in
suffering, forasmuch as we with all the Saints, are partakers of Christ's
sufferings, that when his glory shall appear, we may be glad and rejoice, 1
Pet. 4.13.

CHAP. 13. That it increases their faith.
10 TEnthly, because the malice of our enemies serves to increase our faith for
the time to come, when we consider how the Lord has delivered us formerly. God
has delivered me (says Paul) out of the mouth of the Lion, (meaning Nero) and
he will deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve me unto his
heavenly Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.17, 18. When Saul tells David, Thou art not able to
go against this great Philistime to fight with him, for thou art a Boy, and he
is a man of war from his youth: what says David? Thy servant kept his Fathers
Sheep, and there came a Lion, and likewise a Bear, and took a Sheep out of
the flock, and I went out after him and smote him, and took it out of his
mouth, and when he rose against me, I caught him by the beard and smote him and
slew him; so thy servant slew both the Lion and the Bear. Therefore (mark the
inference) this uncircumcised Philistime shall be as one of them; Yea, (says
he) the Lord that delivered me out of the paw of the Lion, and out of the paw
of the Bear, he will deliver me out of the hands of this Philistine, 1 Samuel
17.33. to 37. Observe how confidently he speaks. The Tree of faith the more it
is shaken with the violent storms of trouble, the faster it becomes rooted by
patience. He can never be a good soldier, that has not felt the toil of a
battle; yea, the more deliverances he had, the greater was his faith: for
after the Lord had delivered him often out of extreme exigents; namely, from
this great Goliath, the cruelty of Saul, the unnatural insurrection of Absalom,
and the unjust curses of Shemei, he was able to say, I trust in God, neither
will I fear what flesh can do unto me, Psalm. 56.4. And in Psalm. 3. I will not
be afraid for ten thousand of the people that should beset me round about,
Verse. 6. And in Psalm. 18. By thee I have broken through an host, and in thy
Name I will leap over a wall. His experience had made it so easy to him, that
it was no more than a skip or jumpe: we men indeed therefore shut our hands,
because we have opened them, making our former kindnesses arguments of sparing
afterward. But contrarily, God therefore gives, because he has given; making
his former favors arguments for more. It is David's only argument, Psalm. 4.
Have mercy upon me (says he) and hearken unto my prayer: Why? Thou have set me
at liberty when I was in distress, Verse. 1. I might likewise here show from 2 Chronicles. 20.29. Phil. 1.12, 13.14. how the delivering of some increases the
faith of others; but I pass that.

That we may live by faith, and not by sense, he first strips us of all our
earthly confidence, and then gives us victory, and not before; lest he should
be a loser in our gain, his help uses to show it self in extremity: he that
can prevent evils, conceales his aid till dangers be ripe, and then he is as
careful as before he seemed connivent. Daniel is not delivered at the
beginning of his trouble, he must first be in the Lions den, and then he finds
it. Those three Servants are not rescued at the Ovens mouth, in the Fo^nace
they are. That is a gracious and well-tried faith, that can hold out with
confidence to the last. The Lion seems to leave her young-ones, till they have
almost killed themselves with roaring and howling, but at last gasp she
relieves them, whereby they become the more courageous. When the Prophet could
say, Out of the depths have I cried unto thee (instantly follows) and not till
then the Lord heard me: the Lord saw^ him sinking all the while, yet lets him
alone till he was at the bottom. Every maine affliction is our Red Sea, which
whiles it threats to swallow, preserves us: now when it comes to a dead lift
(as we say) then to have a strong confidence in God is thankworthy. Hope in a
state hopeless, and love to God under signs of his displeasure, and heavenly
mindedness in the midst of worldly affairs and allurements, drawing a
contrary way, is the chief praise of faith: to love that God who crosses us,
to kiss that hand which strikes us, to trust in that power which kills us; this
is the honorable proof of a Christian, this argues faith indeed. What made
our Savior say to that Woman of Canaan, O Woman, great is thy faith: but this,
when neither his silence nor his flat denial could silence her. Matthew. 15. It
is not enough to say, God is good to Israel, when Israel is in peace and
prosperity, and neither feels nor wants any thing: but God will have us
believe that he is good, even when we feel the smart of the rod, and at the
same time see our enemies (the wicked) prosper. It best pleases him when we
can say boldly with Job, Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him. When our
enemies are behind us, and the Red Sea before us, then confidently to trust
upon God is much worth. When we are in the barren wilderness almost famished,
then to believe that God will provide Manna from Heaven, and water out of the
Rock, is glorious: when with the three Children we see nothing before us but a
fiery Furnace; to believe that God will send his Angel to be our deliverer,
this is heroical, Dan. 3.28. And those which are acquainted with the
proceedings of God well know, that cherishing ever follow stripes, as Cordials
do vehement evacuations, and the clear light of the morning a dark night:
yea, if we can look beyond the cloud of our afflictions, and see the sunshine
of comfort on the other side of it. We cannot be so discouraged with the
presence of evil, as hartned with the islue. Cheer up then, thou drooping
soul, and trust in God, what ever thy sufferings be, God is no tyrant, to give
thee more than thy load; and admit he stay long, yet be thou fully assured he
will come at length. In thee do I trust (says the Psalmist) all the day; He
knew that if he came not in the Morning, he would come at Noone; if he came
not at Noone, he would come at Night; At one hour of the day or other he
will deliver me: and then as the Calm is greater after the Tempest then it was
before; so my joy shall be sweeter afterward then it was before; The
remembrance of Babylon will make us sing more joyful in Sion. If then I find
the Lords dealing with me to transcend my thoughts, my faith shall be above my
reason, and think, he will work good out of it, though I yet conceive not how.

CHAP. 14. That it increases their joy and thankfulness.
11 BEcause our manifold sufferings and Gods often delivering us, does increase
our joy and thankfulness, yea make after-blessings more sweet; By this we have
new Songs put into our mouths, and new occasions offered to praise the Author
of our deliverance. When the Lord brought again the Captivity of Sion (says
David in the person of Israel) we were like them that dream, meaning, the
happiness seemed too good to be true) Then was our mouths filled with
laughter, (says he) and our tongues with joy, The Lord has done great things
for us whereof we rejoice, Psalm. 126.1, 2, 3, 4. And how could their case be
otherwise, when in that miserable exigent, Exodus 14. they saw the Pillar remove
behind them, and the Sea remove before them they looking for nothing but death?
Is any one afflicted? I may say unto him as that harbinger answered a Noble man
complaining that he was lodged in so homely a room; you will take pleasure in
it when you are out of it; For the more grievous our exigent, the more glorious
our advancement, A desire accomplished delights the soul, Prove. 13.19. We
read how that lamentable and sad decree of Ahasuerus through the goodness of
God was an occasion exceedingly to increase the Jews joy and thankfulness,
insomuch that (as the Text says) the days that were appointed for their death
and ruin were turned into days of feasting and joy, and wherein they sent
presents every man to his neighbor, and gifts to the poor, Ester. 9.17.22,
to 28. And this joy and thankfulness was so lasting, that the Jews cease not
to celebrate the same to this day. Gods dealing with us is often harsh in the
beginning, hard in the proceeding, but the conclusion is always comfortable.
The joy of Peter, and the rest of the Church was greater after he was delivered
out of Prison by the Angel, Act. 12. And the joy of Judith and the rest of
Bethulia when she returned with Holofernes head, then if they never had been in
distress, Judith 13. The Lord depreives us of good things for a time, because
they never appear in their full beauty, till they turn their backs and be
going away. Again he defers his aid on purpose to increase our desires before
it comes, and our joy when it is come, to inflame our desires, for things
easily come by, are little set by; to increase our joy for that which has been
long detayned, is at last more sweetly obtained; but suddenly gotten, suddenly
forgotten. Abraham's Child at seventy years was more welcome then if he had
been given at thirty. And the same Isaac had not been so precious to him if he
had not been as miraculously restored as given, his recovery from death made
him more acceptable: The benefit that comes soon and with ease is easily
contemned, long and eager pursuit endeeres any favor: The Wise men rejoiced
exceedingly to find the Star; The Woman to find her piece of silver; the
Virgin Mary to find her and our JESUS: CHRIST always returns with incrase of
joy; yea the LORD keeps us fasting on purpose, that our trial may be perfect,
our deliverance welcome, our recompense glorious. Yea the delivering of some,
increases the joy of others, and causes them to praise God for, and rejoice
in their behalf that are delivered, Acts 12.14. We never know the worth of a
benefit so well as by the want of it, want teaches us the worth of things most
truly. O how sweet a thing is peace to them that have been long troubled with
wars and tedious contentions? How sweet is liberty to one that has been long
immured within a case of walls? How dear a Jewel is health to him that
tumbles in distempered blood? Let a man but fast a meal or two, oh how sweet
is brown bread, though it would not down before? Yea when Darius in a flight
had drunk puddle water, polluted with dead Carcasses, he confessed never to have
drunk any thing more pleasant; the reason was, he always before used to
drink ere he was athirst. We are never so glad of our friends company, as
when he returns after long absence, or a tedious voyage. The nights darkness
makes the light of the Sun more desirable; a Calm is best welcome after a
Tempest: Good things then appear of most worth, when they are known in their
wants; When we have lost those invaluable comforts which we cannot well be
without, the mind has time to recount their several worths; and the worthes
of blessings appear not until they are vanished; When we would have some Fires
flame the more, we sprinkle water upon them; Even so when the LORD would
increase our joy and thankfulness, He allayeth it with the tears of
affliction, misery sweetneth joy, yea the sorrows of this life shall (like a
dark veil) give a luster to the glory of the next, when the LORD shall turn
this water of our earthly afflictions into that wine of gladness, wherewith
our souls shall be satiate for ever. We deceive our selves to think on earth
continued joys would please; Plenty of the choycest dainties is no daynty.
Nothing would be more tedious then to be glutted with perpetual Iollities;
Were the body tied to one dish always, though of the most exquisite delicate
that it could make choice of; yet after a small time it would complain of
loathing and saciety, and so would the soul if it did ever epicu^e it self in
joys, I know not which is the more useful; Joy I may choose for pleasure; but
Adversities are the best for profit; I should without them want much of the joy
I have. Well then, art thou vexed, persecuted, and afflicted by some cruel and
malicious Saul? and is it grievous to thee for the present? Why, that which
has been hard to suffer is sweet to remember, at last our Songs shall be
louder then our Cries.

CHAP. 15. How it increases their spiritual wisdom.
12 Our suffereings make us teachable and increase in us spiritual wisdom.
He delivers the poor in his affliction, and opens their ear in trouble,
Job 36.15. And again, He opens the ears of men even by their corrections,
Job 33.16. We are best instructed when we are most afflicted; Paul's blindness
took away his blindness, and made him see more into the way of life; then
could all his learning at the feet of Gamaliel. And what says Naaman upon the
clensing of his Leprosy? Now I know there is no God in all the earth but in
Israel. O happy Syrian that was at once cured of his Leprosy and his
misprision of God. The Prodigal son regarded not his Fathers admonition so
long as he enjoyed prosperity; That which makes the body smart, makes the soul
wise. Algerius the Martyr could say out of experience, He found more light in
the dungeon, then without in all the world: Yea, what will not affliction teach
us, when even the savagest Beasts are made quiet and docible with abating their
food, and rest, or by adding of stripes? Even as the Clay with water, and the
Iron with fire, are made pliable and apt to receive impression from the
workman; Even so when we are soaked in the floods of sorrow, and softened in
the fire of affliction, we are aptest to receive the impression of Gods Law
into our hearts, when he speaks unto us by his Ministers; If the Lord breaks
us in pieces with the Plow of his Justice, then let the Seedsmen (his
Ministers) sow the seed of his Word, we shall receive it through the furrows
of our ears into the ground of our hearts, and grow up in wisdom and saving
knowledge; yea the soul waxes, as the body wayneth, and is wisest to
prescribe when the bones and sinnewes are weakest to execute: neither do we
hereby become wise for our own souls good only, but affliction makes us wise
and able to do others good also that are in any the like affliction. Blessed
be God (says Saint Paul) which comfort us in all our afflictions, that we
may be able to comfort them which are in any affliction, by the comfort
wherewith we our selves are comforted of God 2 Cor. 1.4. Yea the whole Church,
and every particular member thereof have their wisdom and knowledge improved
even by their greatest enemies. If Arius and Sabellius had not vexed the
Church, the deep mysteries of the Trinity had not been so accurately cleared
by the Catholic Doctors. Subtle arguments well answered, breed a clear
conclusion; heresy makes men sharpen their wits the better to confute it; as
Worme-wood though it be bitter to the taste, yet it is good to clear the eyes:
yea further, the very storms of persecution make us look to our tackling,
patience; and to our Anchor, Hope; and to our Helm, Faith; and to our Card,
the Word of God; and to our Captain, Christ: whereas security, like a calm,
makes us forget both our danger and deliverer. Experience is the best informer,
which makes Martin Luther say, When all is done, tribulation is the plainest
and most sincere divinity. And another most emphatically, That Prayer, Reading,
Meditation, and temptations, make a Divine. So that to be altogether exempt
from misery, is a most miserable thing.

CHAP. 16. How it increases their patience.
13 BEcause the malice of our enemies makes for the increase of our patience,
We rejoice in tribulation, says Paul, knowing that tribulation brings forth
patience, Romans 5.3. My brethren, says S. James, count it exceeding joy when ye
fall into diverse temptations, knowing that the trial of your faith brings
forth patience, James 1.2, 3. Thus the malice of our enemies does both prove
and improve our patience: see it exemplified in Job and David, whose practice
does most excellently confirm this point; you know Job was not so miserable in
his afflictions, as happy in his patience, Job 31.35, 36, 37. And David after
he had been so many years trained up in the School of Affliction, and
exe^cised with continual sufferings from innumerable enemies of al sorts,
became a wonder of patience to all succeeding Ages: as take but notice of his
carriage toward Shimei, and you will say so; when this his impotent Subject
cursed and cast stones at him and all his Men of war, called him Murderer,
wicked man, etc. he was so far from revenging it, when he might so easily, or
suffering others, that you shall hear him make that an argument of his
patience which was the exercise of it, Behold, my son (says he) which came
forth of my bowels seeks my life; how much more now may this Benjamite do it,
2 Samuel 16.11. The wickedness of an Absolon may rob his Father of comfort, but
shall help to add to his Fathers goodness: ^t is the advantage of great
crosses, that they swallow up the lesser. One man's sin cannot be excused by
another, the lesser by the greater: if Absolon be a Traitor, Shimei may not
curse and rebel; but the passion conceived from the indignity of a stranger,
may be abated by the harder measure of our own. A weak heart faints with
every addition of succeeding trouble, the strong recollects it self, and is
grown so skilful that it bears off one mischief with another: as in the
Fable, when the new and old Cart went together, the new made a creaking noise
under the load, and wondered at the silence of the old, which answered, I am
accustomed to these burdens, therefore bear them, and am quiet. So, what a
degree of patience have some men attained unto? What a load of injuries can
some Christians digest, that have been frequent in sufferings, and long
exercised in the School of Affliction? Not that they bear them out of
baseness or cowardlinesse because they dare not revenge, but out of Christian
fortitude because they may not; they have so conquered themselves that wrongs
cannot conquer them. Nay we read of some Ethnicks that could say this of
themselves. When Alcibiades told Socrates that he could not suffer the
frowardness and scolding of Zantippe as he did, Socrates answered, but I can,
for I am accustomed to it. And we read, that Aristides after his exile, did
not so much as note them that were the cause of his banishment, though he were
now advanced above them. Yea Diogenes, rather than want exercise for his
patience, would crave alms of dead men's statues; for being demanded why he did
so, he answered, That I may learn to take denials from others the more
patiently. Now if we can therefore suffer because we have suffered, we have
well profited by our afflictions, otherwise not; to show that there is nothing
so hard and difficult but may be attained to by use and custom: give me leave
to clear it by some familiar instances. We know the custom of any hardship
(whether it be labor, cold, or the like) makes it easy and familiar: you
shall have a common Labourer work all day, like a Horse, without once sweating
or being weary. Let a Scholar or Gentleman but dig one quarter of an hour,
you must give him leave to take breath all the day after. The face that is ever
open, yea, the eye that is twice as much open as shut, is able perpetually to
endure the coldest wind can blow, when as the rest of the parts would complain
of the least blast that is cold. Let him that is next neighbor to the Belfrey
tell me, whether ringing does so molest his silent sleep now, as formerly.
Yea, the fall of the River Nilus which makes a new commer stop his ears, to
the natural inhabitants is not so much as heard. At Milton near Sittingborne
in Kent, is (or lately was) one William Allen a Tailor, that eats between 30.
and forty grains of Opium every day, the tithe whereof would kill him that is
not accustomed thereunto, neither can he sleep (no not live) without it; he
began but with one grain, and so increased the quantity as the operation and
quality of it decreased. If any question the truth of this, they need but
repair to the sign of the Rose in Bucklers Bury and be satisfied: but this is
nothing, for you have slaves in the Turkish Galleys, that will eat near an
Ounce at a time as if it were bread. Neither, in my judgment, is it less rare
for men to drink a Pottle or a Gallon of the richest old Canary every day, as
is usual with some of our Sack-drinkers and Goodfellowes, without the least
inflammation; it has no other operation in them then a cup of Six has with
me, or has had with them in diebus illis.

To conclude, as that Maid which Pliny speaks of, by an accustomary picking
Spiders off the Wall and eating them, digested them into nourishment: And as
Mithridates by his accustomed eating of poison, made his body unpoisonable. So
the godly, notwithstanding they are by nature as a wild As^e Colt, as Zophar
speaks, Job 11.22. Yet by their frequent and accustomary suffering of injuries
these wild Asses are made tame, and the ablest to carry burdens of any
creature: yea, though they were once as fierce and cruel as Wolves, Leopards,
Lions, and Bears, and as mischievous as Aspes, and Cockatrices; yet Christ
will so change their natures, partly by his word, and partly by his rod of
affliction, that they shall now be as apt to suffer evil as they have been to
offer it: What else means the Prophet, when he tells us that the Wolf shall
dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard with the Kid, and the Lion with the
Calfe, so that a little child shall lead them; that the Cow and the Bear,
and the Lion and the Bullock, shall eat straw together; that the sucking child
shall play upon the hole of the Aspe, and the wained child shall put his hand
upon the Cockatrice hole, Isay 11.6. and so forward. And so you see that
according to the ancient proverbiall speech, Use makes perfectness; and that
custom is not unfitly called a second nature. Would thou then attain to an
unconquerable patience, and be able to undergo great trialls hereafter,
accustom thy self to a silent suffering of thy present and smaller griefs,
tongue provocations and the like. If with Milo thou shall but take up a Calfe,
some small cross, and injoyne thy self to carry the like every day a little,
in process of time thou shall be able to carry an Ox, the strongest and
biggest affliction can come.

CHAP. 17. Reasons of Patience. That the godly are patient in suffering of
wrongs, because innocent.
NOw that some may be persuaded to make this use of their sufferings, and that
we may also put to silence the ignorance of others (foolish men who are
mistaken in judging of this matter, supposing it a base thing to suffer
injuries unrevenged) see the Reasons which deservedly makes Gods children so
patiently to suffer wrongs that the men of the world never dream of: And how
through the study of virtue and Christian prudence, they make the servile
passions of their minds (fear and anger) subject to the more worthy faculties
of their souls, reason and understanding.

We bear their reproaches and persecutions patiently.

Either in regard of of Our selves. Our Enemies. Our Selves and our Enemies.
Our Enemies and Others. GOD. CHRIST, and the Saints.
In regard of our selves.
1 Because We are innocent. 2 Because It is more laudible to forgive then to
revenge. 3 Because Suffering is the only way to prevent suffering. 4 Because
Our sins have deserved it, and a far greater affliction. 5 Because Our
sufferings are counterpoysed and made sweet, with more than answerable
blessings. 6 Because Our patience brings a reward with it.


First, they bear the slanders and reproaches of wicked men patiently, for that
they are false and so appertain not unto them. Socrates being railed upon, and
called by one all to naught, took no notice of it, and being demanded a reason
of his patience, said, it concerns me not, for I am no such man. Diogenes was
wont to say when the people mocked him, They deride me, yet I am not derided, I
am not the man they take me for. This reason is of more force from the mouth of
an innocent Christian. If a rich man be called poor, or a sound Christian,
hypocrite, he slights it, he laughs at it, because he knows the same to be
false, and that his Accuser is mistaken; whereas if a Beggar be called,
bankrupt, or a dissembler, hypocrite, he will winch, and kick, and be most
grievously offended at it. Marius was never offended with any report that went
of him, because if it were true it would sound to his praise; if false, his
life and manners should prove it contrary. And indeed, the best confutation of
their slanders, is not by our great words, but by our good works. Sophocles
being accused by his own children, That he grew Dotard, and spent their
patrimonies idely, when he was summoned did not personally appear before the
Magistrates, but sent one of his new Tragedies to their perusal, which being
read, made them confess, This is not the work of a man that dotes. So against
all clamours and swelling opprobies, set but thine innocence and good life;
thou need do no more. That body which is in good health, is strong, and
able to bear the great storms and bitter cold of Winter, and likewise the
excessive and intemperate heat of the Summer: but with a crazie and distempered
body it is far otherwise. Even so, a sound heart and clear conscience will
abide all trialls; in prosperity it will not be lifted up, in adversity it will
not be utterly cast down: whereas the corrupt heart and festred conscience,
can endure nothing; even a word if it be pleasing puffes him up with pride; if
not, it swells him with passion: no greater sign of innocence when we are
accused then mildness: as we see in Joseph, who being both accused and
committed for forcing of his Mistress, answered just nothing we read of, Genesis
39, 17, 18. And Susanna, who being accused by the two Elders of an heinous
crime (which they alone were guilty of) never contended by laying the fault
upon them, but appeals unto God whether she were innocent or no. The History
of Susanna, Verse. 42, 43. And Hanna, whose reply to Ely, when he falsely
accused her of drunkenness was no other, but Nay my Lord count not thy
Handmaid for a wicked woman, 1 Samuel 1.15, 16. Neither is there a greater
Symptom of guiltiness, than our breaking into choler, and being exasperated
when we have any thing laid to our charge, witness Cain, Genesis 49. That Hebrew
which struck his fellow, Exodus 2.13.14. Saul, 1 Samuel 20.32, 33. Abner, 2 Samuel
3.8. Jeroboam, 1 King. 13.4. Ahab, 1 Kings 22.27. Amazia, 2 Chronicles. 25.16.
Vzziah. 2 Chronicles. 26 19. Herod the Tetrarch, Luke 3.19.20. The men of Nazareth,
Luke 4.28, 29. The Pharisees, John 8.47.48. And the High Priest and Scribes,
Luke 20, 19, 20. And this is one reason why the former are compared to Sheep
and Lambs (Emblemes of innocence) which being harmed will not once bleate, and
the latter unto Swine, which will roar and cry if they be but touched. But to
leave these Swine and return to the men we were speaking of.

A good conscience is not put out of countenance with the false accusations of
slandrous tongues: it throws them off, as Saint Paul did the Viper, unhurt.
Innocence and patience are two Bucklers sufficient to repulse and abate the
violence of any such charge; the breast plate of righteousness, the brazen
wall of a good conscience fears no such Canons. The Conscionable being railed
upon, and reviled by a foul mouth, may reply as once a Steward to his
passionate Lord, when he called him Knave, etc. Your Honor may speak as you
please, but I believe not a word that you say, for I know my my self an honest
man. Yea, suppose we are circled round with reproaches, our consciences knowing
us innocent, like a constant friend, takes us by the hand and cheeres us
against all our miseries. A just man, says Chrysostom, is impregnable, and
cannot be overcome, take away his wealth, his good parts cannot be taken from
him, and his treasure is above; cast him into prison and bonds, he does the
more freely enjoy the presence of his God; banish him his Country, he has his
conversation in Heaven, kill his body, it shall rise again: so he fights with
a shadow that contends with an upright man.

Wherefore, let all who suffer in their good names, if conscious and guilty of
an enemies imputations, repent and amend; if otherwise, contemn them, own
them not so much as once to take notice thereof: yea, seeing God esteems men
as they are, and not as they have been; although formerly thou have been
culpable, yet now thou may answer for thy self as Paul did for Onesimus,
Though in time past I was unprofitable, yet now am I profitable: and oppose to
them that sweet and divine sentence of sweet and holy Bernard, Tell me not
Satan what I have been, but what I am and will be. Or that of Beza in the
like case, Whatsoever I was, I am now in Christ a New Creature, and that is it
which troubles thee, I might have so continued long enough ere thou would
have vexed at it, but now I see thou do envy me the grace of my Savior. Or
that Apothegme of Diogenes to a base fellow, that told him he had once been a
forger of money, whose answer was, It Is true, such as thou art now; I was once,
but such as I am now thou will never be. Yea, thou may say, by how much more
I have formerly sinned, by so much more is Gods power and goodness now
magnified. As S. Augustine hearing the Donatists revile him for the former
wickedness of his youth, answered, The more desperate my disease was, so much
the more I admire the Physician: Yea, thou may yet strain it a peg higher,
and say, the greater my sins were, the greater is my honor* as the Devils
which Mary Magdalen once had, are mentioned for her glory. Thus if we cannot
avoid ill tongues, let our care be not to deserve them, and it is all one as if
we avoided them.

CHAP. 18. That it is more laudable to forgive, than revenge.
2 BEcause it is more generous and laudable to forgive, than revenge: certainly
in taking revenge a man is but even with his enemy, but in passing it over he
is superior to him, for it is a Princes* part to pardon; yea quoth Alexander,
There can be nothing more noble, than to do well to those that deserve evil.
Princes use not to chide when Ambassadors have offered them undecencies, but
deny them audience; as if silence were the way royal to correct a wrong. And
certainly he injoyes a brave composednes, that seats himself above the flight
of the injurious claw.

Agathocles, Antigonus, and Caesar, being great Potentates, were as little
moved at vulgar wrongs, as a Lion at the barking of Curres: and who so truly
noble as he that can do ill and will not? You Will confess then it is Princely to
disdain a wrong; and is that all? No, forgiveness says Seneca, is a valiant
kind of revenge: and none are so frequent in pardoning as the courageous. He
that is modestly valiant, stirs not till he must needs, and then to purpose:
who more valiant than Joshua? and he held it the noblest victory to overcome
evil with good: for the Gibeonites took not so much pains in coming to
deceive him, as he in going to deliver them. And Cicero more commends Caesar
for overcomming his own courage in pardoning Marcellus, than for the great
victories he had against his other enemies. Yea, a dominion over ones self,
is greater than the Grand Signiory of Turkey. And indeed, for a man to overcome
an enemy, and be overcome by his own passions, is to conquer a petty Village
with the loss of a large City. Yea, if the price or honor of the conquest is
rated by the difficulty; then to suppress anger in thy self, is to conquer
with Hercules one of the Furies; To tame all passions is to lead Cerberus in
chains: and to endure afflictions and persecutions strongly and patiently, is
with Atlas, to bear the whole world on thy shoulders, as says the Poet. Every
Beast and Vermin can kill: it is true prowes and honor to give life, and
preserve it. Yea, a Beast being ^narl'd at by a Cur, will pass by as scorning
to take notice thereof. I, but is it wisdom so to do? Yes, none more wise
than Solomon: and he is of opinion; That it is the glory of a man to pass by
an offense, Pro. 19.11. We fools think it ignominy and cowardice to put up
the lie without a stab; a wrong without a challenge: but Solomon, to whose
wisdom all wise men will subscribe, was of another judgment. And Pittacus the
Philosopher holds, That pardon is better than revenge, inasmuch as the one is
proper to the spirit, the other to a cruel Beast. How Socrates whom the Oracle
of Apollo pronounced the wisest man alive, and all the rest of Philosophers
approved of it, both by judgment and practice; We shall have occasion to
relate in the reasons ensuing. No truer note of a wise man than this; he so
loves as if he were to be an enemy, and so hates as if he were to love again;
as with fire, the light stuff and rubbish kindles sooner than the solid and
more compact; se anger does sooner inflame a fool than a man composed in his
resolutions. This the Holy Ghost witnesses, Eccles. 7.9. Be not thou of a
hasty spirit to be angry: for anger rests in the bosom of fools. Some have
no patience to bear bitter scoffs: their noses are too tender to endure this
strong and bitter Wormwood of the brain. Others again like tyled houses, can
admit a falling spark unwarmed; it may be coals of Juniper without any danger
of burning. Now what makes the difference? the one has a good head-peece and
is more solid, the other are covered with such light dry straw that with the
least touch they will kindle and flame about your troubled ears: and when the
house is on fire, it is no disputing with how small a matter it came. I confess
I find some wise men extremely passionate by nature, as there is no general
rule but admits of some exception^s: and these as they are more taken with a
joy, so they taste a discontent more heavily. And others again none of the
wisest, who are free from being affected: and as they never joy excessively, so
they never sorrow inordinately but have together less mirth and less
mourning, like patient Gamesters winning and losing are all one. But for the
most part it is otherwise. Yea, impatience is the Cousin German to frenzy. How
often have we heard men that have been displeased with others tear the name of
their Maker in pieces?

And lastly, this of all others is the most divine and Christian like revenge,
witness our Savior Christ, who even then triumphed over his enemies, when
most they seemed to triumph over him, Col. 2.15. And the Martyrs who are said
by the Holy Ghost to overcome the great Dragon, that old Serpent called the
Devil and Satan, in that they loved not their lives unto the death, Revel.
12.11. And holy David, who when he had Saul at his mercy, instead of cutting
off his head, as his servants persuaded him, only cut off the ^^p of his
Garment, and after, thought that too much also. And at another time when the
Lord had closed him into his hands, finding him asleep in the Fort, instead of
taking away his life, as Abishai councelled him, he took away his Spear, and
instead of taking away his blood from his heart, he takes a pot of water from
his head. That this kind of revenge for a man to find his enemy at an
advantage, and let him depart free, is generous and noble, beyond the capacity
of an ordinary man; you may hear Saul himself confess, 1 Samuel 24.17. to 23.
Again, when the King of Syria sent a mighty. Host to take Elisha, and the Lord
had smote them all with blindness, and shut them into Samaria, what does the
Prophet? Slay them? no. Indeed the King of Israel would feign have had it so,
his fingers itcht to be doing: but Elisha commanded bread and water to be set
before them, that they might eat and drink, and go to their Master, 2 King.
6.22.

So we see the cudgel is not of use, when the Beast but only barks: nay, tell
me, how would thou endure wounds for thy Savior, that can not endure words
for him? if when a man reviles thee thou art impatient, how would thou afford
thy ashes to Christ, and write patience with thine own blood.

CHAP. 19. That s^ffering is the only way to prevent suffering.
3 BEcause suffering is the only way to prevent suffering. Revenge being one of
those remedies which (not seldom) proves more grievous than the disease it
self? When once Zantippe the Wife of Socrates, in the open street plucked his
cloak from his back; some of his acquaintance counseled him to strike her:
Yea (quoth he) you say well, that while we are brawling and fighting together,
every one of you may clap us on the back and cry, hoe, well said, to it
Socrates: yea, well done Zantippe, the wisest of the twain. When Aristippus
was asked by one in dirision, where the great high friendship was become that
formerly had bin between him and Estines? he answers, it is asleep, but I will
go and awake it, and did so, least their enemies should make it a matter of
rejoicing. When Philip of Macedon was told that the Grecians spoke evil words
of him, notwithstanding he did them much good, and was withal counseled to
chastise them; he answers, Your counsel is not good; for if they now speak
evil of us having done them go odonely, what would they then if we should do
them any harm? And at another time being counseled either to banish or put to
death one who had slandered him; he would do neither of both, saying, It was
not a sufficient cause to condemn him, and for banishing, it was better not to
let him stir out of Macedonia where all men knew that he lied, thon to send
him among strangers, who not knowing him, might admit his slanders for truth.
And this made Chrysippus when one complained to him that his friend had
reproached him privately, Answer: Ah, but chide him not, for then he will do
as much in public. Neglect will sooner kill an injury than revenge. These
tongue-Squibs or crackers of the brain will dye alone if we revive them not:
the best way to have them forgotten by others, is first to forget them our
selves. Yea, to contemn an enemy, is better than either to fear him or
answer him. When the Passenger gallops by, as if his fear made him speedy, the
Cur follows him with open mouth and swiftness; let him turn to the brawling
Cur and he will be more fierce; but let him ride by in a confident neglect, and
the Dog will never stir at him, or at least will soon give over and be quiet. To
vex other men is but to tutor them how they should again vex us. When two
friends fall out, if one be not the wiser, they turn love into anger and
passion, passion into evil words, words into blows, and when they are
fighting, a third adversary has a fair advantage to insult over them both. As
have you not sometimes seen two Neighbors like two Cocks of the Game peck out
one another eyes to make the Lawyers sport; it may be kill them. As while
Judah was hot against Israel, and Israel hot against Judah, the King of Syria
smote them both; at least Satan that common and arch-enemy will have us at
advantage. For as man delights when two Dogs, or two Cocks are a fighting, to
encourage them and prick them forward to the combat. Even so does Satan deal
with us; controversies like a pair of Cudgels are thrown in by the Devil,
and taken up by malcontents, who baste one another while he stands by and
laughs. Yea, as the Master of the Pit often sets two Cocks to fight together unto
the death of them both; and then after mutual conquest suppeth per-chance with
the fighters bodies. Even so, says Gregory does the Devil deal with men. He
is an enemy that watches his time, and while we wound one another, he wounds
and wins all our souls. Thus like the Frog and the Mouse in the Fable, while
men fight eagerly for a toy, the Ki^e comes, that Prince and chief Foul that
rules in the Air* and snatcheth away both these great warriers; or like two
Emmets in the Molehill of this earth, we fight for the mastery, in mean
while comes the Robin-red-breast and picks both up, and so devours them. But on
the other side, by gentleness we may as much pleasure our selves. It is said
of Aristides when he perceived the open scandal which was like to arise by
reason of the contention sprung up between him and Themistocles, that he
besought him mildely after this manner; Sir, we both are no mean men in this
Commonwealth; our dissension will prove no small offense unto others, nor
disparagement to our selves; wherefore good Themistocles let us be at one
again; and if we will needs strive, let us strive who shall excel other in
virtue and love. And we read of Euclides, that when his Brother (in a
variance between them) said, I would I might dye if I be not revenged of thee;
he answered again, nay let me dye for it, if I persuade thee not otherwise
before I have done: by which one word he presently so won his brothers heart,
that he changed his mind, and they parted friends. And this was David's way of
overcomming, 1 Samuel 24. He whose Harp had wont to quiet Saul's frenzy, now by
his kindness does calm his fury, so that now he sheds tears instead of
blood: here was a victory gotten and no blow stricken. The King of Israel set
bread and water before the host of the King of Syria, when he might have slain
them, 2. Kin. 6.23. What did he loose by it, or had he cause to repent
himself? No: he did thereby so prevent succeeding quarrels, that as the Text
says, The bands of Aram came no more into the Land of Israel; so every wise
Christian will do good to them that do hurt to him; yea, bless and pray for
them that curse him, as our Savior advises: neither is he a fool in it, for
if grace comes (and nothing will procure it sooner than prayers and good
examples) though before they were evil enemies; now they shall neither be
evil nor enemies. It was a witty answer of Socrates, who replied when one asked
him, why he took such a man's bitter railing so patiently; It is enough for one
to be angry at a time. For if a wise man contend with a foolish man, says
Solomon, whether he be angry or laugh, there is no rest, Pro, 29.9. Whereas
gentle speech appeaseth wrath, and patience bridleth the secret pratlings of
mockers, and blunteth the points of their reproach. Rage is not engendered but
by the concurrence of cholers, which are easily produced one of another, and
borne at an instant. When the stone and the steel meets, the issue engendered
from thence is fire: whereas the Sword of anger being struck upon the soft
pillow of a mild spirit, is broken. The shot of the Cannon hurts not wool and
such like yielding things, but that which is hard, stubborn and resisting. He
is fuller of passion than reason, that will flame at every vain tongues puff.
A man that studies revenge keeps his own wounds green and open, which
otherwise would heal and do well. Anger to the soul is like a coal on the
flesh or garment; cast it off suddenly it does little harm, but let it lie, it
frets deep. Wherefore says one, their malice shall sooner cease than my
unchanged patience. A small injury shall go as it comes, a great injury may
dine or sup with me, but none at all shall lodge with me; for why should I vex
my self because another has vexed me? That were to imitate the fool that
would not come out of the pound, saying, they had put him in by Law, and he
would come out again by Law: or Ahab, who because he could not have his will
on Naboth, would be revenged on himself. As the mad man tears his own hair
because he cannot come at his enemies: or little children, who one while
forbear their meat if you anger them; another time if you chance to take away
but one of their Gugawes amongst many other toys which they play withal, will
throw away the rest, and then fall a puling and crying out right. Or Dogs which
set upon the stone that has hurt them with such irefull teeth that they hurt
themselves more than the thrower hurt them; and feel greater smart from
themselves than from their enemy: which makes Archelaus say, it is a great
evil, not to be able to suffer evil. And a worthy Divine of ours, I will
rather suffer a thousand wrongs than offer one, I will suffer an hundred rather
than return one, I will suffer many ere I will complain of one, and endeavor
to right it by contending; for says he, I have ever found, that to strive with
my Superior is furious, with my equals, doubtful, with my inferior, ^ordid
and base, with any full of unquietness. Satyrus, knowing himself choleric,
and in that whirry of mind apt to transgress, when he but suspected ill
language from any, he would stop his ears with wax, lest the sense of it
should cause his fierce blood to sees in his distempered skin. And good
reason; for the Emperor Nerva, by passionate anger got a Fever that killed
him. And the Emperor Valentinianus dyed by an eruption of blood through anger.
And Vinceslaus King of Bohemia, in his rage of choler against his Cup Bearer
fell into a palsy that killed him. Again, Caesar, although he could moderate
his passions having in that civil garboyle intercepted a packet of Letters
written to Pompey, from his Favorites, brake them not open but burnt them
immediately. And Pompey committed those Letters to the fire before he read
them, wherein he expected to find the cause of his grief. All three upon wise
and mature ground, that they might not play booty against themselves in
furthering an enemies spite. And certainly if we well consider it, we shall
meet with vexations enough that we cannot avoid if we would never so feign. And
yet some (as if they did delight to vex their own souls) will be very
inquisitive to know what such an one said of them in private: but had they as
much wit as jealousy, they would argue thus with themselves; small injuries I
would either not know, or not mind, or knowing them I would not know the
Author; for by this I may mend my self and never malice the person.

I might go on and show you that Greece and Asia were set on fire for an
Apple. That not a few have suffered a sword in their bowels, because they would
not suffer the lie in their throats. As how few of these Salama^ders who are
never well, but when they are in the fire of contention, are long lived? The
Raven, the Elephant, and the Heart, which have no gall: (Patient Christians) one
of them outlive many of the other. But two and twenty yards is enough for a
piece.

CHAP. 20. That they bear injuries patiently, because their sins have deserved
it, and a far greater affliction.
4 HE suffers his enemies reproaches and persecutions patiently, because his
sins have deserved it, and a far greater affliction. David felt the spite of
his enemies, but acknowledges his sin to be the cause, 2 Samuel 16.11. Yea,
their revilings and persecutions happily bring to his remembrance, that
himself before his conversion, has likewise censured, reviled, or persecuted
others. It may be his natural, spiritual, or political parents, in some
kind or other: as who can plead innocence herein? Dion of Syracuse being
banished came to Theodorus Court a suppliant, where not presently admitted he
turned to his companion with these words, I remember I did the like when I was
in the like dignity. When thou receivest an injury, remember what injuries thou
have offered: look not to be exempt from the same wrongs which thou have done;
for he that does wrong may well receive it: we may well suffer patienly, when
we know we suffer justly. To look for good and to do bad, is against the law of
Retaliation. Now if we make this use of our sufferings, what more precious than
the reproaches of an enemy? for thereby we shall sooner and more plainly hear
of our faults than by a friend; although neither in a good manner nor to a good
end. We have great need (quoth Diogenes) of faithful friends or sharp
enemies. Every one has use of a Monitor, but friends in this kind are so rare,
that no wise man would willingly forgo his enemy at any rate.

This being premised, namely that we endure nothing from our enemies, but that
we have justly deserved from God. Yea, that we are more beholding to our
greatest enemies touching the knowledge of our selves, than the best friend we
have; how should we not with David refuse to revenge our selves in case any
wicked Shimei rail, curse, or cast stones at us, have we never so much power
and opportunity to do it? Yea, admit some, Abishai would do it for us, how
should we not say, let him alone, suffer him to curse, for the Lord has bidden
him, 2 Samuel 16.11. It has always been the manner of Gods people to look up
from the stone to the hand which threw it, and from the effect to the cause.
What says Joseph to his envious brethren that sold him into Egypt; ye sent
not me hither, but God, Genesis 45.8. And Job being robbed by the Sabeans, they
being set on by Satan, does not say, the Devil took away, or the Sabeans
took away, but the Lord has taken away, Job. 1.21. And David speaking of his
son Absoloms treason, I was dumb and said nothing; why? because it was thy
doing. Psalm. 39.9. And what think you was the reason our Savior Christ held
his peace and answered nothing, as the Text says, but suffered his enemies,
The Chief Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees, and Pilate, to revile him, and
crucify him; but to approve the equity and justice of God the Author thereof?
for although it were blasphemy to say he was a sinner; yet taking upon him the
sins of the whole world, he knew those sins had deserved as much, and
therefore he is silent, Mat. 26.62, 63. Its true, other reasons are given; as
that he answered nothing, because it was now his time to suffer, not to do; his
work was now to be crucified, and not to be dignified; or as another, he spoke
not a word to Herod, because Herod had taken away his voice in beheading John
Baptist: but this without doubt was the maine reason. Even in like manner it is
with the truly gracious; they being wronged do not suffer rage to transport
them as it does beasts, to set upon the stone or weapon that has hurt them,
but they look higher, even to God that occasioned it. Or if they be angry, they
^urne their malice from the person which punishes them, to the sin by whi^^
and for which he came to have leave and power to punish them; and to themselves
for committing such sins. It is not the punishment, but the cause of it makes
them sorrowful: and if in case they do return an answer, it is after the
manner of Epictetus, who would not deny the sins his enemy taxed him with, but
reproves his ignorance rather, in that being unacquainted with the infinity of
his crimes, he lays only two or three to his charge; whereas indeed he was
guilty of a Million: or according to Philip of Macedon his example, who would
not punish Nicanor, although he openly spoke evil of him, saying, when he
heard thereof, I suppose Nicanor is a good man, it were better to search
whether the fault be in us or no: so no sooner shall an holy man's enemy accuse
him of hypocrisy, pride, passion, covetousness; etc. but he will go to God,
and accuse himself, and complain, I am so indeed; yea, with Paul, I am the
chief of all sinners, I am more vile than his terms can make me, and I much
marvel my punishment is no greater than to hear a few ill and bitter words.
And indeed one would think whatsoever is not pain nor sufferance, or admit it
be pain and sufferance, so long as it is not a curse, but a cross, may well
be borne without grumbling. What said that Gentleman in Athens to his friends,
when Ashuerus came and took away half his Plate, as he was at dinner with
them, they admiring that he was not a whit moved thereat? I thank God, quoth
he, that his Highness has left me any thing. Yea, Mauricius that good
Emperor, when he, his wife, and his five sons were taken, his wife and sons
put to death, and himself waiting for the like ^atall stroke, could conclude
thus, Just art thou, O Lord, in all thy ways, and holy in all thy works, as
it is in the Psalms. And a Martyr, when he was burning at a stake; Welcome
flames, my sin has deserved more than here I can be able to suffer. And
certainly they are angry with Heaven for justice, that are angry with them for
injustice. Wherefore if thou have been heretofore so simple a^ to return like
for like, henceforward lay thy hand upon thy mouth, and say with Job, Once have
I spoken, but I will answer no more, ye^, twice, but I will proceed no further,
Job 40.4.5. I will not so much consider how unjust man is that gives the wrong,
as how just God is that guides it. And this would be our meditation in all
other cases, namely, to think whose hand strikes, whether by a Plure^^e, or a
Fever, or a Sword, or what ever the Instrument be; and to conclude, the blow
is Gods, whatsoever, or whomsoever is used as the weapon: yea, it comes not
without our desert, for God is just; nor shall be without our profit, for God
is merciful. And he that does not argue thus, comes short of the very Heathen.
For Socrates could tell the Athenians, when they condemned him to dye, that
they could do nothing but what the gods permitted, and nature had before
ordained. And in common reason, can a Clock go without a weight to move it,
or a keeper to set it? no.

CHAP. 21. They are patient because their sufferings are counterpoysed and made
sweet with more than answerable blessings.
5 HE bears the cross patiently, because it is counterpoysed and made sweet
with more than answerable blessings. What says Job? Shall we receive good at
the hands of God, and not evil? he was content to eat the crust with the
crumme. Indeed his wife (like the wicked) would only have fair weather; all
peace and plenty, no touch of trouble: but it is not so with the godly, who
have learnt better things. Who will not suffer a few stripes from a father, by
whom he receives so much good, even all that he has? Diogenes would have no
nay, but Antisthenes must entertain him his Scholar, insomuch that
Antisthenes to have him gone was forced to cudgel him, yet all would not do:
he stirs not, but takes the blows very patiently, saying, Use me how you will,
so I may be your Scholar and hear your daily discourses I care not. Much more
may a Christian say unto God, Let me enjoy the sweet fruition of thy presence,
speak thou peace unto my conscience, and say unto my soul, I am thy
salvation, and then afflict me how thou please, I am content, yea, very
willing to bear it: for these are privileges which make Paul happier in his
chain of Iron, than Agrippa in his chain of Gold; and Peter more merry under
stripes, than Caiphas upon the judgment seat. Yea, if we well consider the
commodity it brings, we shall rather wish for affliction, than be displeased
when it comes, Col. 1.24. For it even brings with it the company of God
himself, I will be with you in tribulation says God to the disconsolate soul,
Psalm. 91.15. When Sidrack, Mishack, and Abednego were cast into the fiery
Furnace, there was presently a fourth came to bear them company, and that was
God Himself, Dan. 3.23. to 27. Yea, God is not only with them to comfort them
in all their tribulations, 2 Cor. 1.4. but in them: for at the same time when
the Disciples were persecuted, they are said to be filled with joy, and with
the Holy Ghost, Acts 13.52. And as our sufferings in Christ do abound, so our
consolation also abounds through Christ, 2 Cor. 1.5. And lastly he does
comfort us according to the days we are afflicted, and according to the years
we have seen evil, Psalm. 90.15. And if so, our sufferings require patience
with thankfulness, as it fared with Job. The Lord has taken some comfort from
us, but has much more given unto us: therefore blessed be the name of the
Lord. So Satan and the World may take many things from us, as they did from
Job: but they can never take away God from us that gives all, and therefore
blessed be the name of the Lord.

Besides we look for a Crown of glory, to succeed this wreath of Thorns: but
if we are never tried in the field, never set foot to run the race of
patience, how can we look for a Garland? Ten repulses did the Israelites
suffer before they could get out of Egypt, and twice ten more before they
could get possession of the promised Land of Canaan. And as many did David
endure before he was invested in the promised kingdom: many lets came before
the Temple was re-edified.

All men would come to Heaven, but they do not like the way; they like well of
Abraham's bosom, but not of Dives door. But God sees it fit for us to taste
of that cup of which his Son drank so deep, that we should feel a little
what sin is, and what his love was; that we may learn patience in adversity,
as well as thankfulness in prosperity, while one scale is not always in
depression, nor the other lifted ever high; while none is so miserable, but he
shall hear of another that would change calamities with him.

CHAP. 22. That they are patient, because patience brings a reward with it.
6 BEcause patience in suffering brings a reward with it, in reason a man would
forgive his enemy even for his own sake, were there no other motive to
persuade him: for to let pass many things of no small moment, as that if we
forgive not, we can do no part of Gods worship that is pleasing to him: for we
cannot pray aright, 1 Timothy 2.8. We cannot communicate in the Sacrament, but we
make our selves guilty of Christ's blood, 1 Cor. 11.27. Matthew 5.24. We cannot
be good hearers of the word, James 1.21. and that it makes a man captive to
Satan, Ephesians. 4.26, 27. and many the like: If ye forgive men their trespasses
(says our Savior) your heavenly Father will also forgive you; but if you
forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your heavenly Father forgive you
your trespasses, Mat. 6.14, 15. So he that will not be in charity shall never
be in Heaven. And why should I do my self a shrewd turn, because another
would? Yea, when we pray to God to forgive us our trespasses, as we also
forgive them that trespass against us, and do not resolve to forgive our
brethren; we do in effect say: Lord condemn us, for we will be condemned:
whereas he that does good to his enemy, even in that act does better to
himself. It is a singular sacrifice to God, and well pleasing to him to do
good against evil, and to succor our very enemy in his necessity. But we may
perchance heap coals of fire upon the others head, Romans 12.20. though we must
not do it with an intent to make his reckoning more, but our reckoning less?

Again, Blessed is the man, says S. James, that indureth temptation ( viz.
with patience) for when he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of life,
James 1.12. And this made M^ses not only patient in his sufferings, but
joyful, esteeming the rebuke of Christ greater riches than all the treasures
of Egypt. For says the Text, he had respect unto the recompense of the
reward, Heb. 11.26. And well it might; for whereas the highest degree of
suffering is not worthy of the least and lowest degree of this glory, Romans
8.18. S. Paul witnesses, that our light affliction which is but for a moment
(if it be borne with patience) causes unto us a far most excellent and
eternal weight of glory; while we look not on the things that are seen, but
on the things which are not seen, 2 Cor. 4.17, 18. Where note the
incomparablenesse and infinite difference between the work and the wages,
light affliction receiving a weight of glory, and momentany afflictions
eternal glory; answerable to the reward of the wicked, whose empty delights
live and dye in a moment; but their insufferable punishment is interminable and
endless: their pleasure is short, their pain everlasting; our pain is short,
our joy eternal. What will not men undergo, so their pay may be answerable?
The old experienced Soldier fears not the rain and storms above him, nor
the numbers falling before him, nor the troops of enemies against him, nor the
shot of thundering Ordnance about him, but looks to the honorable reward
promised him. When Philip asked Democritus, if he did not fear to lose his
head, he answered, No: for (quoth he) if I dye, the Athenians will give me a
life immortal; meaning, he should be statued in the treasury of eternal fame:
if the immortality (as they thought) of their names, was such a strong reason
to persuade them to patience, and all kind of worthiness; what should the
immortality of the soul be to us? Alas, virtue were a poor thing, if fame
only should be all the Garland that did crown her: but the Christian knows,
that if every pain he suffers were a death, and every cross an hell, he shall
have amends enough. Why, said Ambrose on his death bed, we are happy in this,
we serve a good Master, that will not suffer us to be losers. Which made the
Martyrs such Lambs in suffering, that their persecutors were more weary with
striking, than they with suffering. And many of them as willing to dye as dine.
No matter (quoth one of them) what I suffer on earth, so I may be crowned in
heaven. I care not, quoth another, what becomes of this frail Bark my
flesh, so I have the passenger, my soul, safely conducted. And another* If at
night thou grant me Lazarus boon,
Let Dives dogs lick all my sores at noone.
And a valiant Soldier going about a Christian achievement; my comfort is,
though I lose my life for Christ's sake, yet I shall not lose my labor, yea, I
cannot endure enough to come to Heaven. Neither do they think that God is
bound to reward them any way for their sufferings; no, if he accepts me when I
have given my body to be burned (says the believer) I may account it a mercy.

Thus hope refreshes a Christian, as much as misery depresseth him; it makes
him defy all that men or devils can do, saying, take away my goods, my good
name, my friends, my liberty, my life, and what else thou can imagine; yet I
am well enough, so long as thou can not take away the reward of all, which is
an hundred fold more even in this world, and in the world to come life
everlasting, Mark 10.29, 30.

Now if this be so, how should we not with a great deal of comfort and
security, pass through a sea of troubles, that we may come to that haven of
eternal rest? How should we not cheer up one another, as Jewel did his
friends in banishment, saying, This world will not last ever? And indeed we do
but stay the tide, as a fish left upon the fands. Ob. I but in the mean time
my sufferings are intolerable, says the fainting soul. Answer: Sol. It is no
victory to conquer an easy and weak cross; these maine evils have crowns
answerable to their difficulty, Rev. 7.14. No low attempt a star-like glory
brings; but so long as the hardness of the victory shall increase the glory of
the triumph, endure it patiently, cheerfully.

2 Secondly, as patience in suffering brings an eternal reward with it in
Heaven, so it procures a reward here also: suffer him to curse, says David
touching Shemei, (here was patience for a King to suffer his impotent subject,
even in the heat of blood and midst of war to speak swords, and cast stones at
his Sovereign, and that with a purpose to increase the rebellion, and
strengthen the adverse part) but mark his reason: It may be the Lord will
look upon mine affliction, and do me good: Why? even for his cursing this day,
2 Samuel 16.12. And well might he expect it, for he knew this was Gods manner of
dealing: as when he turned Balaams curse into a blessing upon the children of
Israel, Number. 23. And their malice who sold Joseph to his great advantage.
Indeed these Shem^is and Balaams whose hearts and tongues are so ready to curse
and rail upon the people of God, are not seldom the very means to procure a
contrary blessing unto them; so that if there were no offense to God in it, nor
hurt to themselves, we might wish and call for their contempt, cruelty, and
curses, for so many curses, so many blessings.

I could add many examples to the former, as how the malice of Haman turned to
the good of the Jews: the malice of Achitophel to the good of David, when his
counsel was turned by God into foolishness: the malice of the Pharisees to
him that was borne blind, when Christ upon their casting him out of the
Synagogue, admitted him into the Communion of Saints, John 9.34. The malice of
Herod to the Babes, whom he could never have pleasured so much with his
kindness, as he did with his cruelty; for where his imp^ety did abound, there
Christ's pity did super-abound, translating them from their earthly mothers
arms in this valley of tears, unto their heavenly Fathers bosom in his
Kingdom of glory. But more pertinent to the matter in hand is that of Aaron
and Miriam to Moses, when they murmured against him, Number. 12. where it is
evident that God had never so much magnified him to them, but for their envy.
And that of the Arians to Paphnutius, when they put out one of his eyes for
withstanding their Heresy: whom Constantine the Emperor, even for that very
cause, had in such reverence and estimation, that he would often send for him
to his Court, lovingly embracing him, and greedily kissing the eye which had
lost his own sight, for maintaining that of the Catholic Doctrine: so that we
cannot devise to pleasure Gods servants so much, as by despighting them.

And thus you see how patient suffering is rewarded both here and hereafter,
according to that asseveration of our Savior, Verily I say unto you, there is
no man that has forsaken or suffered any thing for my sake and the Gospels,
but he shall receive an hundred fold, now at this present, and in the world to
come eternal life, Mark 10.29, 30. But admit patience should neither be
rewarded here nor hereafter; yet it is a sufficient reward to it self: for
hope and patience are two sovereign and universal remedies for all diseases.
Patience is a counterpoison or antipoison for all grief. It is like the Tree
which Moses cast into the waters, Exodus 15.25. for as that Tree made the waters
sweet, so patience sweete^s affliction; it is as Larde to the lean meat of
adversity. The taste of goods or evils does greatly depend on the opinion we
have of them, and contentation, like an old man's spectacles, makes those
characters easy and familiar that otherwise would puzzle him shrewdly.
Afflictions are as we use them; there is nothing grievous if the thought make
it not so: even pain it self (says the Philosopher) is in our power if not
to be disanulled, yet at least to be diminished through patience: Patience is
like a golden shield in the hand, to break the stroke of every cross, and
save the heart though the body suffer. A sound spirit, says Solomon, will
bear his infirmity, Prove. 18.14. Patience to the soul is as the lid to the
eye; for as the lid being shut, when occasion requires, saves it exceedingly;
so patience intervening between the soul and that which it suffers, saves the
heart whole, and cheeres the body again. And therefore, if you mark it, when
you can pass by an offense, and take it patiently and quietly, you have a
kind of peace and joy in your heart, as if you had gotten a victory, and the
more your patience is, still the less your pain is; for as a light burden at
the arms end weighs heavier by much than a burden of troble weight, if it be
borne on the shoulders which are made to bear; so if a man set patience to
bear his cross, the weight is nothing to what it would be if that were
wanting; wherefore, says one, being unable to direct events, I govern my
self, and if they apply not themselves to me, I apply my self to them; if I
cannot fling what I would, yet I will somewhat mend it, by playing the cast as
well as I can.

O that all implacable persons who double their sufferings through long study
of revenge would learn this lesson! then would they find that patience can no
less mitigate evils, than impatience exasperates them. A profitable
prescription indeed (may some say) but of an hard execution! hard indeed to the
capacity of a carnal conceit, yea, altogether impossible to flesh and blood.
If thou art only beholding to nature, and have naught but what thou broughtest
into the world with thee, well may thou envy at it, but thou can never
imitate it; for to speak the truth, faith and patience are two miracles in a
Christian. Cassianus reports, that when a Martyr was tormented by the
Infidels, and asked by way of reproach what miracle his CHRIST had done; he
answered, he has done what you now behold, enabled me so to bear your
contumelies, and undergo all these tortures so patiently, that I am not once
moved, and is not this a miracle worthy your taking notice of? Indeed what have
we by our second birth, which is not miraculous in comparison of our natural
condition? It was no less than a miracle for Zacheus, a man both rich and
covetous, to give half his goods to the poor, and make restitution with the
residue, and all this in his health. It was a great miracle that Joseph, in the
arms of his Mistrisse should not burn with lust. It is a great miracle for a
man to forsake Houses and Lands, and all that a man has, yea, to hate Father
and Mother, and Wife and children, and his own life to be Christ's Disciple. It
is a great miracle to rejoice in tribulation and smile death in the face. It is
a great miracle that of fierce and cruel Wolves, Bears, Lions, we should be
transformed into meek Lambs, and harmless Doves: and all this by the
foolishness of preaching Christ crucified. Indeed they were no miracles, if
Nature could produce the like effects: but she must not look to stand in
competition with grace. Saint Paul before his conversion, could do as much as
the proudest natural man of you all; his words are, If any other man thinks
that he has whereof he might trust in the flesh, much more ^, Phil. 3.4. Yet
when he speaks of patience and rejoicing in tribulation, he shows, That it
was because the love of God was shed abroad in his heart by the Holy Ghost
which was given unto him, Romans 5.5. of himself he could do nothing, though he
were able to do all things through Christ which strengthened him, Phil. 4.13.
Have thou then a desire after this invincible patience? seek first to have the
love of God shed abroad in thy heart by the Holy Ghost. Would thou have the
love of God? Ask it of him by prayer; who says, if any of you lack in this
kind, let him Ask of God that gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth
not, and it shall be given him, James 1.5. Would thou pray that thou may be
heard, Ask in faith and waver not, for he that wavereth is like a wave of the
Sea, tossed of the wind, and carried away, Verse 6. Would thou have faith? be
diligent to hear the word preached, for Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.17.
Unto him therefore that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we
can ask or think, I commend thee.

CHAP. 23. Because our enemies are ignorant.
2. Reasons in regard of our enemies are three. 1 because They are ignorant. 2
because They are rather to be pitied, than maligned or reckoned of. 3 because
Their expectation may not be answered.


1 HE well considers the ignorance of his enemies, who being carnal, fleshly,
unregenerate, cannot discern the spiritual objects at which they are
offended. Father forgive them (says our SAVIOR of his enemies) for they know
not what they do, Luke 23.24. Socrates being persuaded to revenge himself of
a fellow that kicked him, answered, if an Ass had kicked me, should I have set
my wit to his, and kick him again; or if a Mastife had bitten me, would you
have me go to Law with him? And when it was told him another time, that such an
one spoke evil of him, he replied; alas the man has not as yet learned to
speak well; but I have learned to contemn what he speaks. Diogenes being
told that many despised him, answered; It is the wise man's portion to suffer of
fools. Aristotle, being told that a simple fellow railed on him, was not once
moved, but said, let him beat me also being absent, I care not; we may well
suffer their words, while God does deliver us out of their hands: for if we go
on in a silent constancy, say our ears be beaten, yet our hearts shall be
free. And this heroical resolution had Saint Paul, that chosen Vessel; I
pass very little to be judged of you; (meaning blind sensualists) or of man's
judgment; he that judges me is the Lord, 1 Cor. 4.3, 4. I regard not (quoth
Plato) what every one says, but what he says, that sees all things. Cato was
much ashamed if at any time he had committed any thing dishonest, but else, what
was reproved by opinion only, never troubled him; yea, when a fool struck him
in the Bath, and after, being sorry for it, cried him mercy, he would not come
so near revenge, as to acknowledge he had been wronged; Light injuries are
made none by a not regarding. The ignorant multitude among the Jews, said,
that S. John had a Devil, and that Christ was a Glutton and a wine bibber; But
what says he by way of answer; Wisdom is justified of her Children, Matthew.
11.18, 19. For if the whole world do contemn a generous Christian, he will
even contemn that contempt, and not think it worthy a room in his very
thoughts, that common receptacle or place of entertainment. And indeed, he
that lets loose his anger upon every occasion, is like him that lets go his
Hawke upon every bayte. Besides, we may apprehend it a wrong, when it is none,
if we take not heed: for those things pass many times for wrongs in our
thoughts, which were never meant so by the heart of him that speaks. Words
do sometimes fly from the tongue, that the heart did never hatch nor harbor;
Wherefore, unless we have proofs that carry weight and conviction with them,
let not our apprehension grow into a suspicion of evil; else while we think
to revenge an injury, we may begin one, and after that repent our
misconceptions; And it is always seen, that a good man's constructions are ever
full of charity and favor; either this wrong was not done, or not with intent
of wrong; or if that, upon misinformation; or if none of these, rashness the
^ault, or ignorance shall serve for an excuse. And indeed, in things that may
have a double sense, it is good to think the better was intended; for so shall
we both keep our friends, and quietness.

CHAP. 24. Because they are rather to be pitied than maligned, or reckoned of.
2 BEcause their adversaries are rather to be contemptuously pitied, than
maligned or reckoned of; and that whether we regard their present, or future
estate.

Concerning the present; If a man distracted (and so are wicked men touching
spiritual things) do rail on us, we are more sorry for him, than for our
selves: let us do the like in a case not unlike. When Julian in a mock asked
Maris Bishop of Chalcedon, why his Galilean god could not help him to his
sight, he replied, I am contentedly blind, that I may not see such a Tyrant as
thou art. Anger alone, were it alone in them, is certainly a kind of baseness
and infirmity, as well appears in the weakness of those Subjects in whom it
reigns, as Children, Women, Old folks, sick folks, yea a soar disease of
the mind. Socrates, hidding good speed to a dogged fellow, who in requital of
his kind salutation, returned him a base answer, the rest of his Company
railing on the^ fellow, were reprehended by Socrates, in this manner; If any
one (quoth he) should pass by us diseased in his body, or distracted in his
mind, should we therefore be angry? or had we not more cause to be filled
with joy and thankfulness, that we our selves are in better case? What need
we return railing for railing? All the harm that a common Slanderer can do
us with his foul mouth, is to shame himself. What need had David to load
himself with an unnecessary weapon? one sword can serve both his enemy and
him: Goliahs own weapon shall serve to behead the Master; so this man's own
tongue shall serve to accuse himself, and acquit thee. Yea, as David had
Goliath to bear his sword for him; so thy very enemy shall carry for thee both
Sword and Target, even sufficient for defense, as well as for offense.

Wherefore in these cases it has been usual for Gods people, to behave
themselves like dead Images, which though they be railed on and reviled by
their enemies, yet have ears, and hear not; mouths, and speak not; hands,
and revenge not; neither have they breath in their nostrils, to make reply,
Psalm. 115.5, 6, 7. If you will see it in an example, look upon David; he was
as deaf and dumb at reproach, as any stock, or stone. They that seek after my
life (says he) lay snares, and they that go about to do me evil, talk
wicked things all the day (sure it was their vocation to backbite and slander)
but I was as deaf, and heard not; and as one dumb, which does not open his
mouth. I was as a man that hears not, and in whose mouth are no reproves,
Psalm. 38.12, 13. This innocent Dove was also as wise as a Serpent, in stopping
his ears, and refusing to hear the voice of these blasphemous Inchanters,
charmed they never so wisely.

And as touching their future estate; Fret not thy self (says David) because
of the wicked men, neither be envious for the evil doers; for they shall soon
be cut down like grass, and shall wither as the green herb, Psalm. 37.1,
2. This does excellently appear in that remarkable example of Samaria,
besieged by Benhadad, and his Host, 2 Kings 7.6, 7. And thus are they to be
contemned and pitied while they live; and when they dye.

3 After death, the Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation
(says Peter) and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be
punished, 2 Peter 2.9. Upon this consideration, when Dionysius the Tyrant had
plotted the death of his Master Plato, and was defeated by Platos escape out of
his Dominions; when the Tyrant desired him in writing not to speak evil of
him, the Philosopher replied: That he had not so much idle time as once to
think of him, knowing there was a just God would one day call him to a
reckoning. The Moon looks never the paler when Wolves houle against it;
neither is she the slower in her motion, howbeit some Sheepherd or Lion may
watch them a good turn.

4 And lastly, if we consider our own future estate, we have no less cause to
contemn their evil words; for it is not material to our well or ill being,
what censures pass upon us; the tongues of the living avail nothing to the
good or hurt of those that lie in their graves; they can neither diminish their
joy, nor yet add to their torment (if they find any,) there is no Common Law
in the new Jerusalem; their truth will be received, though either plaintiff or
defendant speaks it. Nay, suppose they should turn their words into blows,
and (instead of using their tongues) take up their swords and kill us, they
shall rather pleasure than hurt us. When John Baptist was delivered from a
double prison, of his own, of Herod's, and placed in the glorious liberty of
the Sons of God, what did he lose by it? His head was taken off, that it
might be crowned with glory; he had no ill bargain of it, they did but hasten
him to immortality: and the Churches daily prayer is, Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly. Yea, what said blessed Bradford? In Christ's cause to suffer death, is
the way to Heaven on horseback; which has made some even slight the sentence
of death, and make nothing of it. It is recorded of one Martyr, that hearing
the sentence of his condemnation read, wherein was expressed many several
tortures, of starving, killing, boiling, burning, and the like, which he should
suffer; he turns to the people, and with a smiling countenance says; And all
this is but one death: and each Christian may say (of what kind soever his
sufferings be,) The sooner I get home, the sooner I shall be at ease.

CHAP. 25. That their expectation may not be answered.
3 BEcause he will not answer his enemies expectation; in which kind he is
revenged of his enemy, even while he refuses to revenge himself. For as there
is no such grief to a Iester or Iugler, as when he does see that with all his
jests, tricks, and fooleries, he cannot move mirth, nor change the countenances
of them that see and hear him; so there can be no greater vexation to a wicked
and malicious enemy, then to see thee no whit grieved nor moved at his malice
against thee; but that thou do so bear his injuries, as if they were none at
all. Yea, he which makes the trial, shall find that his enemy is more vexed
with his silence, than if he should return like for like.

Dion of Alexandria was wont to take this revenge of his enemies; amongst whom
there was one, who perceiving that by injuring and reviling of him he could not
move him to impatience, whereby he might have more scope to rail; went and
made away with himself, as Brusonius reports. And Mountain tells us of a
Citizen that having a Scould to his Wife, would play on his Drum when she
brawled, and rather seem to be pleased with it, than angry; and this for the
present did so mad her, that she was more vexed with her self, than with him:
but when she saw how it succeeded, and that this would not prevail, in the end
it made her quite leave off the same, and prove a loving wife, that so she
might overcome him with kindness, and win him to her bow, by bending as much
the other way; that so, like a prudent Wife, she might command her Husband by
obeying. And whosoever makes the trial, shall find, that Christian patience,
and magnanimous contempt, will in time either draine the gall out of bitter
spirits, or make it more overflow to their own disgrace: so that the best
answer is either silence, or laughter; or if neither of these will do, a
Cudgel. The best answer to words of scorn and petulancy, says learned
Hooker, is Isaac's Apology to his brother Ismael, the Apology which patience
and silence make, (no Apology) and we have our Saviors president for it: for
when false witnesses rose up and accused him falsely before the Priests,
Scribes, and Elders, it is said, that Jesus held his peace: that infinite
wisdom knew well, how little satisfaction there would be in answers, where the
Sentence was determined, where the Asker is unworthy, the Question captious,
words bootlesse, the best answer is silence. Let our Answer then to their
Reasons be, No; to their scoffs nothing. And yet when the slanders which light
on our persons rebound to the discredit of our profession, it behooves us not
to be silent in answering truly, when as our adversaries are eloquent in
objecting falsely; an indignity which only touches our private persons, may be
dissembled; as Austine replied to Petillian; Possumus esse in his copiosi
pariter, sed nolumus esse pariter vani. But in the other case, the retorting of
a poisoned weapon into the adversaries own breast, is laudable.

It is the weakness of some good natures (the more is the pity) to grieve and
to be angry at wrongs received, and thereby to give advantage to an enemy. But
what would malice rather have, then the vexation of them whom it persecutes? We
cannot better please an adversary, than by hurting our selves: and this is no
other than to humor envy, to serve the turn of those that malign us, and to
draw on that malice, whereof we are already weary: whereas carelessenesse puts
ill will out of countenance, and makes it withdraw it self in a rage, as that
which does but shame the Author, without hurt of the Patient. In a causeless
wrong, the best remedy is contempt of the Author.

CHAP. 26. Because it is for our credit to be evil spoken of by them, and
would be a disparagement to have their good word.
^. Reasons jointly respecting our selves and our enemies are two, 1 Because it
Were a disparagement to have their good word. 2 Because it Is the greatest
praise to be dispraised of them.


1 Because it were a great disparagement unto the godly, if they should have
the good word and approbation of wicked men.

2 Secondly, because it is the greatest praise unto the godly, to be dispraised
of the wicked. These two reasons being near of kin, in speaking of them I
will cast both into the similitude of a Y, which is joined together at one end,
brancht in the middle. And first to join them both together.

The condemnation and approbation of wicked men, is equally profitable and
acceptable to good men: for every word they speak of the conscionable, is a
slander, whether it be good or evil: whether in praise or dispraise, his very
name is defiled by coming into their mouths: or if this do not hold in all
cases, yet (as a Reverend Divine says) it is a praise to the godly, to be
dispraised of the wicked; and a dispraise to be praised of them; their
dispraise is a man's honor, their praise his dishonor: so that when deboysed
persons speak ill of a man, especially their Minister, the worse the better;
for to be well spoken of by the vicious, and evil by the virtuous; to have the
praise of the good, and the dispraise of the bad, is all one in effect, as
Solomon shows; They that forsake the Law (says he) praise the wicked; but
they that keep the Law, set themselves against them, Proverbs 28.4.

Thus much of both Reasons jointly, now of each severally; and First, That it
is a disparagement to a godly man to be well spoken of by the wicked.

When it was told Antisthenes, that such an one who was a vicious person, spoke
good words of him, he answered, What evil have I done, that this man speaks
well of me? To be praised of evil men (says Bion the Philosopher) is as
evil, as to be praised for evil doing. Out of which consideration our Savior
Christ rejected the evil spirits testimony, which though it were truth, yet he
would not suffer the Devil to say, Thou art the Christ the Son of God, or
that Holy One, but rebuked him sharply, and enjoined him to hold his peace,
Luke 4.35. No, he would not suffer the Devils at another time to say, That they
knew him, Verse. 41. And good reason, for he knew that the Devils commendations
would prove the greatest slander of all. Neither would S. Paul suffer that
maid which had a spirit of Divination, to say, he was the Servant of the most
high God, which showed them the way of salvation, Acts 16.17, 18. well knowing
that Satan did it to this end, that by his testimony and approbation, he
might cause them (which formerly believed his doctrine) to suspect him for an
Impostor and Deceiver, and that he did his miracles by the help of some
Familiar spirit. And indeed, if the good report of wicked men, who are set on
work by Satan, did not derogate from the godly, or from the glory of God,
Satan should be divided against himself; and, if Satan be divided against
himself, says ou^ Savior, how shall his Kingdom stand? Now we know he
seeks to advance his Ki^^^dome by all possible means, and conseque^^^ly in
this.

Wherefore if we enjoy any wicked man's love, and have his good word, we may
justly suspect our selves are faulty in one kind or other; for it is sure he
could not do so, except he saw something in us like himself. If every thing
were unlike him, how is it possible he should love us? Difference breeds
disunion, and sweet congruity is the Mother of love. This made Aristotle, when
a Rakeshame told him, he would rather be hanged by the neck, than be so hated
of all men as he was, reply, And I would be hanged by the neck, ere I would be
beloved of all, as thou art; And Phocion, to ask, when the people praised him,
what evil have I done? It was a just doubt in him, and not an unjust in any
that are virtuous like him, which occasioned one to say; their hatred I fear
not, neither do I regard their good will.

Secondly, a wicked man's tongue is so far from being a slander, that it makes
for our credit, to be evil spoken of by them. To be evil spok^n of by wicked
men, says Terence, is a glorious and laubable thing; and another, It is no
small credit with the vile, to have a vile estimation. As a wicked man's glory
is his shame; so the godly man's shame (for doing good) is his glory: and to be
evil spoken of for well-doing, is peculiar to good men, as Alexander used to
speak of Kings. Yea, says Epictetus, It is the highest degree of reputation,
for a man to hear evil when he does well. And Job is of his judgment, which
makes him say, If mine adversary should write a book against me, would I not
take it upon my shoulder, and bind it as a Crown unto me? Yes, I would, etc.
Job 31, 35, 36, 37. And who having the use of Reason (especially sanctified)
will not conclude), that Religion and holiness must needs be an excellent
thing, because it has such enemies as wicked men and wicked spirits? What
says that Ethnic in Seneca, in this behalf; Men speak evil of me, but
evil men. It would grieve me if Marcus Cato, if wise Lae^ius, if the other
Cato, or either of the Scipioes should speak so of me, but this as much
comforts me: for to be disliked of evil men, is to be praised for goodness. O
happy art thou, says Picus Mirandula, who live well amongst the bad; for
thou shall either win them, or silence them, or exasperate them. If thou win
them, thou shall save their souls, and add to thy own glory; If thou silence
them, thou shall diminish of their torment, and prevent the contagion of their
sin; If thou exasperate them thereby to hate and traduce thee for thy
goodness, then most happy, for thou shall not only be rewarded according to
the good which thou do, but much more according to the evil which thou
suffer. And S. Peter; If any man suffer as a Christian (that is, for
righteousness sake) let him not be ashamed; but let him glorify God in this
behalf, 1 Pet. 4.15, 16. The reason is given by Saint Austin, with whom this
speech was frequent; They that backbite me, etc. do against their wills
increase my honor, both with God and good men. Alas, the durty feet of such
Adversaries, the more they tread and rub, the more luster they give the figure
graven in gold; their causeles aspersions do but rub our glory the brighter.
And what else did Judas, touching Mary, when he depraved her in our Saviors
presence, for pouring that precious ointment on his feet? John 12. which was
the only cause that in remembrance of her it should be spoken to her praise,
whersoever the Gospel should be preached throughout the whole world, Mar. 14.9.
O what a glorious renown did the Traitors reproach occasion her? Now to make
some use of this point: If the language of wicked men must be read like Hebrew,
backward, and that all good men do so for the most part, it being a sure rule,
that whosoever presently gives credit to accusations, is either wicked
himself, or very childish in discretion; then let us count their slanders,
scoffs and reproaches the most noble and honorable badges and ensigns of
honor and innocence that can be: And in case we are told that any such person
does rail on us, let our answer be, he is not esteemed, nor his words credited
of the meanest believer which understands any thing of Satan's wiles; And thus
we see, that a man of a good life needs not fear any who has an evil
tongue, but rather rejoice therein; for he shall be praised of Angels in
Heaven, who has, by renouncing the world, eschewed the praises of wicked men
on earth.

CHAP. 27. Because our enemies may learn, and be won by our example.
4 IN the fourth place, one reason why we bear injuries so patiently, is, That
our enemies and others may learn and be won by our example, which often
prevails more than precept: As how many Infidels were won to the Christian
Faith, by seeing Christians endure the flames so patiently? Wherefore in all
things (says Paul to Titus) show thy self an example of good works, Tit.
2.7. Under the general of good works is included Patience, as one maine
special. The servant of the Lord must not strive (says Paul to Timothy) but
must be gentle toward all men, suffering the evil men patiently, instructing
them with meekness that are contrary minded, proving if God at any time will
give the^ repentance, that they may know the truth, 2 Timothy 2.24, 25. Aristippus
being demanded, why he took so patiently Dionysius spitting in his face,
answered, the Fishermen to take a little Gudgion, do abide to be imbrued with
slime and salt water; And should not I, a Philosopher, suffer my self to be
sprinkled with a little spittle, for the taking of a great Whale?

A word seasonably given, after we have received an injury, like a Rudder
sometimes steares a man quite into another course. The nature of many men is
forward to accept of peace, if it be offered them, and negligent to sue for it
otherwise; They can spend secret wishes upon that which shall cost them no
endeavor; unless their enemy yields first, they are resolved to stand out.
But if once their desire and expectation be answered, the least reflection of
this warmth makes them yielding and pliable; We need not a more pregnant
example then the Levites father in Law; I do not see him make any means for
reconciliation; but when remission came home to his door, no man could
entertain it more thankfully, seeing such a singular example of patience, and
good condition in his Son. When Iron meets with Iron, there is a harsh and
stubborn jar; but let wool meet that ruffer mettle, this yielding turns
resistance into embracing; Yea a man shall be in more estimation with his enemy
(if ingenious) having vanquished him this way, then if he had never been his
enemy at all. Thy greatest enemy shall, if he have any spark of grace,
confess ingeniously to thee, (as Saul once to David) Thou art more righteous
than I, for thou have rendered me good, and I have rendered thee evil. And such
a conquest is like that which Euagrius records of the Romans, namely; That
they got such a victory over Chosroes, one of the Persian Kings, that this
Chosroes made a Law; That never after any Kings of Persia should move war
against the Romans. Actions salved up with a freee forgiveness, are as not
done: Yea, as a bone once broken, is stronger after well setting; so is love
after such a reconcilement.

But this is not all; for happily it may (and not a little) further Gods glory,
and make Satan a looser: as thus, let us shake off their slanders, as Paul did
the Viper; and these Barbarians, which now conceive so basely of Gods people,
will change their minds, and say we are petty gods; Yea, will they say, surely
theirs is a good, and holy, and operative Religion, that thus changes and
transformes them into new Creatures. The hope whereof should make us think no
endeavor too much. For if Zopyrus the Persian was content (and that
voluntarily) to sustain the cutting off his nose, ears, and lips, to further
the enterprise of his Lord Darius against proud Babylon; what should a
Christian be willing to suffer, that the Lord of Heaven and Earths cause may be
furthered against proud Lucifer, and all the powers of darkness? But suppose
thy patient yielding produces no such effect, as may answer these or the like
hopes, yet have patience still, and that for two reasons.

1 First, seem you to forget him, and he will the sooner remember himself. 2
It often falls out, that the end of passion is the beginning of repentance.
Therefore if not for his sake, yet at least for thy own sake be silent; and
then in case thou hear further of it from another, if ill, beware of him,
but condemn him not, until thou hear his own Apology, for Who judgment
gives, and will but one side hear,
Though he judge right, is no good Iusticer.

CHAP. 28. Because they will not take Gods Office out of his hand.
5. Reasons in regard of God are three. The 1 has respect to his Office. 2
has respect to his Commandment. 3 has respect to his Glory.


Reason,

1 Because he will not take Gods Office out of his hand, who says, avenge not
your selves, but give place unto wrath, for vengeance is mine, and I will repay
it, Romans 12.19. Peter speaking of our Savior Christ, says, When he was
reviled, he reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not, but
committed it to him that judges righteously, 1 Peter 2.23. And the holy
Prophet of himself, I return not reviling for reviling, for on thee, O Lord,
do I wait, thou will hear me, my Lord, my God; meaning, if I call to thee for
a just revenge, Psalm. 38.13, 14, 15. If the Lord see it meet that our wrongs
should be revenged instantly, he will do it himself; as he revenged the
Israelites upon the Egyptians: and so that all standers by shall see their
fault, in their punishment, with admiration. Now I know, says Iethro, that the
Lord is greater than all the gods; for as they have dealt proudly with them, so
are they recompensed, Exodus 18.11. And as once he revenged David's cause upon
Nabal, For about ten days after the Lord smote Nabal that he died, says the
Text: and it follows, when David heard that Nabal was dead, he said, Blessed
be the Lord, that has judged the cause of my rebuke at the hand of Nabal, and
has kept his servant from evil; for the Lord has recompensed the wickedness
of Nabal upon his own head, 1 Samuel 25.38, 39. And that infinite wrong of
railing Shimei, being left to the Lord, he did revenge it; in giving Shimei up
to such a stupidity, that he ran himself wilfully upon his own deserved and
shameful death. And if the Lord thus revenge the cause of David's personal
wrong, much more will he revenge his own cause: for in this case I may say to
every child of God which suffers for Religion sake, as Iahaziel by the
Spirit of God said unto all Judah, the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and King
Iehosaphat; The battle is not yours, but Gods, wherefore you shall not need to
fight in this battle, stand still, move not, and behold the salvation of the
Lord toward you, 2 Chronicles. 20.15, 17. Yea, it stands upon Christ's honor to
maintain those that are in his work. I but, says the weak Christian, I am
so wronged, reviled, and slandered, that it would make a man speak, like
Aeagles that famous wrestler, that never spoke before in his life. Answer,
There is no such necessity. For first: Who ever was, that was not slandered?
Secondly: let him speak evil of thee, yet others shall not believe him; or if
the evil and ignorant do; yet report from wise and good men shall speak thee
virtuous. Yea, Thirdly: though of some the slanderer be believed for a while,
yet at last thy actions will outweigh his words; and the disgrace shall rest
with the intender of the ill. The constancy of a man's good behavior vindicates
him from ill report: how ever, revenge not thy self in any case: for by
revenging thine own quarrel, thou make thy self, both the Judge, the
Witness, the Accuser, and the Executioner. If thou will see what God has
done, and what he can and will do, if there be like need: hear what Ruffinus
and Socrates write of Theodosius in his wars against Eugenius.

When this good Christian Emperor saw the huge multitude that was coming
against him, and that in the sight of man there was apparent overthrow at hand,
he gets him up into a place eminent, and in the sight of all the Army falls
down prostrate upon the Earth, beseeching GOD, if ever he would look upon a
^infull creature, to help him at this time of greatest need: whereupon there
arose suddenly such a mighty wind, that it blew the Darts of the enemies back
upon themselves, in such a wonderderfull manner, that Eugenius with all his
Host was clean discomfited, and seeing the power of Christ so fight for his
people, was forced in effect to cry out, as the Egyptians did, God is in the
cloud, and he fights for them.

Thus God either preventeth our enemies, as here he did; or delivers his
servants out of persecution, as he did Peter; or else if he crowns them with
Martyrdom, as he did Stephen; he will in his Kingdom of Glory give them
instead of this bitter a better inheritance; pro veritate morientes, cum
veritate viventes.

Wherefore in this and all other ca^es, cast thy burden upon the LORD, and say
with the Kingly Prophet, I will lay me down in peace, for it is thou Lord only
that make me dwell in safety.

CHAP. 29. Because they have respect unto Gods Commandment.
2 BEcause they have respect unto Gods Commandment, who says, By your
patience possess your souls, Luke 21.19. Be patient toward all men, 1 Thessalonians.
5.14. And Let your patient mind be known unto all men, Phil. 4.5.

See, says Paul, that none recompense evil for evil unto any man, 1 These.
5.15. And again, Be not overcome with evil, but overcome evil with
goodness, Romans 12.21. Yea, says our Savior, Love your enemies, do well to
them that hate you, bless them that curse you, and pray for them which hurt
you, Luke 6, 27, 28. And in case thine enemy hunger, instead of adding to his
affliction give him bread to eat; if the thirst, give him water to drink, or
else thou breakest Gods commandment touching patience, Pro. 25.21. Romans 12.20.
and consequently art in the sight of God a transgressor of the whole Law; and
stand guilty of the breach of every Commandment James 2.10, 11. We know the
frantic man, though he be sober eleaven months of the year, yet if he rage
one, he cannot avoid the imputation of madness: If so, let our revenge be
like that of Elisha's to the Amorites, instead of smiting them, set bread and
water before them. Or like that of Pericles, who as Plutarch reports, when one
had spent the day in railing upon him at his own door, lest he should go home
in the dark, caused his man to light him with a Torch. And to do otherwise is
Ammonite-like, to entreat those Ambassadors ill, which are sent in kindness
and love: for these afflictions are Gods Ambassadors, and to handle them
ruffely, yea, to repine or grudge against them, is to entreat them evil. And
certainly, as David took it not well when the Ammonites ill entreated his
Ambassadors; so God will not take the like well from thee, 1 Chronicles. 19. But
secondly, as the Law of God binds us to this, so does the Law of Nature:
Whatsoever you would that men should do unto you, even so do you unto them,
Mat. 7.12. Our Savior does not say, do unto others, as others do unto you;
but as you would have others do unto you. Now if we have wronged any man, we
desire that he should forgive us, and therefore we must forgive him, Lex
Tu^^nois was never a good Christian Law. If I forgive not, I shall not be
forgiven, Mark, 11.26. So to say of our Enemies, as Sampson once of the
Philistines* Even as they did unto me, so have I done unto them, is but an ill
plea. For the Law of God, and the Law of Nature forbids it; and does not the
Law of Nations also? Yes, throughout the whole world, either they have no Law,
or else a Law to prohibit men from revenging themselves.

Oppression or injury may not be righted by violence, but by Law: the redress
of evil by a person unwarranted, is evil.

Ob. But thou will say, the Law does not provide a just remedy in all cases of
injury, especially in case of reproach and slander, which is now the Christians
chief suffering; or if in part it does, yet he that is just cannot be quit in
one Term or two. Nay, if he have right in a year, it is counted quick
dispatch; and he is glad that he met with such a speedy Lawyer.

Answ. If thou know the remedy to be worse than the disease, I hope thou will leave it, and commit thy cause to God, who, (if thou will give him the
like time) will clear thy innocence, and cost th^e nothing.

When we have suffered some evil, the flesh, our own wisdom, like the King
of Israel, 2 Kings 6.21. will bid us return evil to the doer; but the Spirit
or wisdom of God, like Elisha, opposes, and bids us return him good,
notwithstanding him evil: But the flesh will reply; he is not worthy to be
forgiven; I but says the Spirit, Christ is worthy to be obeyed, who has
commanded thee to forgive him. Now whethers counsel will thou follow? It is
not always good to take our own counsel; our own wit often hunts us into the
snares, that above all we would sh^n. We often use means of preservation, and
they prove destroying ones. Again, we take courses to ruin us, and they prove
means of safety. How many flying from danger have met with death? And on the
otherside, found protection even in the very jaws of mischief, that God alone
may have the glory. It fell out to be part of Mithridates misery, that he had
made himself unpoysonable. All humane wisdom is defective; nor does the
Fools Bolt ever miss: whatsoever man thinks to do, in contrariety is by
God turned to be an help of hastening the end he has appointed him. We are
governed by a power that we cannot but obey, our minds are wrought against our
minds to alter us. In brief; man is often his own Traitor, and maddeth to
undo himself. Wherefore^ take the Spirits and the words direction, Render
good for evil, and not like for like, though it be with an unwilling
willingness: as the Merchant casts his goods overboard; and the Patient
suffers his arm or leg to be cut off; and say with thy Savior, Nevertheless,
not my will, but thy will be done.

But yet more to induce thee hereunto, consider in the last place, That to
avenge thy self is both to lose Gods protection, and to incur his
condemnation. We may be said to be out of his protection, when we are out of
our way which he has set us; he has promised to give his Angels charge over
us, to keep us in all our ways, Psalm. 91.11. that is, in the ways of
obedience, or the ways of his Commandments. But this is one of the devils
ways, a way of sin and disobedience, and therefore has no promise or
assurance of protection: yea, if we want his word, in vain we look for his
aid; weftes and strayes, we know, are properly due to the Lord of the Soil.
And then if in case there shall happen any thing amis^e, through thy taking
revenge, what may thou not expect to suffer, and in thy suffering what
comfort can thou have? Whereas if God bring us into crosses, he will be with
us in those crosses, and at length bring us out of them more refined. You may
observe, there is no such Coward, none so valiant as the believer: without Gods
warrant he dares do nothing; with it, any thing. Why, first a calling is a good
warrant, and it cannot want danger to go unsent: sin is the sting of all
troubles; pull out the sting, and deride the malice of the Serpent. Yea, let
death happen, it shall not happen amiss; for the assurance of Gods call and
protection, when a man's actions are warranted by the Word, will even take away
the very fear of death: for death (as a Father well notes) has nothing
terrible, but what our life has made so. He that has lived well, is seldom
unwilling to dye, life or death is alike welcome unto him; for he knows,
whiles he is here, God will protect him; and when he goes hence, God will
receive him. Whereas he that has lived wickedly, had rather lose any thing,
even his soul, than his life: whereby he tells us, though his tongue express
it not, that he expects a worse estate hereafter. How often does guiltiness make
one avoid, what another would wish in this case? Yea, death was much
facilitated by the virtues of a well-led life, even in the Heathen. Aristippus,
as I take it, (though I may be mistaken) told the Sailers (that wondered why he
was not, as well as they, afraid in a storm) that the ods was much; for they
feared the torments due to a wicked life, and he expected the reward of a good
one. Its a sollid and sweet reason, being rightly applied. Vice draws death
with a horrid look, with a whip, and flames, and terrors, but so does not
virtue. And thus much to prove that the godly endure reproaches and
persecutions patiently, because God has commanded them so to do.

CHAP. 30. That they are patient in suffering of wrongs, for Gods glory.
THe child of God is patient in suffering of wrongs, for Gods glory; lest
Philosophy should seem more operative in her Disciples, than Divinity in hers;
lest nature and infidelity should boast it self against Christianity.

It is a saying of Seneca, He that is not able to set light by a sottish
injury, is no Disciple of Philosophy. And the examples before rehearsed show,
that Socrates, Plato, Aristippus, Aristotle, Diogenes, Epictetus, Philip of
Macedon, Dion of Alexandria, Agathocles, Antigonus, and Caesar, were endued
with rare and admirable patience; whereunto I will add four other examples:
Philip of Macedon asking the Ambassadors of Athens how he might most pleasure
them, received this answer, It were the greatest pleasure to Athens, that could
be, if you would hang your self; yet was not moved a jot, for all his might
was answerable to his patience: why? he cared not so much to revenge the evil,
as to requite the good.

Polaemon was not so much as appalled at the by ting of a Dog that took away
the brawne or calfe of his leg; nor Harpalus, to see two of his sons laid ready
dressed in a silver Charger, when Astiages had bid him to supper. And lastly,
when it was told Anaxagoras (as I take it) that he was condemned to die, and
that his children were already executed, he was able to make this answer, As
touching, said he, my condemnation, nature has given like sentence both of my
condemners and me; and as touching my children, I knew before that I had begot
mortal creatures. But what of all this? Let every natural man know, that a
continued patience may be different from what is goodness: yea, let the
virtues of all these Philosophers be extracted into one essence, and that
spirit powered into one man, this Philosopher must be acknowledged to fall short
of a complete Christian guided by the Spirit of God. Or if you will gather out
of Histories the magnanimity of Hector, of Alexander, of Caesar, of Scipio, and
of Scaevola, put them to the rest; yet for patience and constancy, they come
not near that one president laid down in the example of that holy man Job,
and other servants of God in succeeding ages; and that in five maine
particulars.

1 One notable difference between the patience of a Philosopher and a Christian
is, They lacked a pure heart, which is the Fountain of all well doing. 2
Whatsoever they did, was either out of pride to purchase fame to themselves,
thinking their patient suffering a kind of merit, or for some other by
respect: whereas the child of God does it in obedience to the Commandment,
and thinks when he has done that, he falls far short of performing his duty. 3
The aim and end of a Christians patience is Gods glory; of a Philosophers,
nothing less: for how can they aim at his glory, whom they do not so much as
know? And virtues are to be judged, not by their actions, but by their ends. 4
The one does it in faith, which only crowns good actions; the other without.
The want of which, made all their virtues but Splendid^ peccata, shining and
glistering sins, sins, as it were, in a silken Roabe. 5 The Philosopher, and so
all civil and moral men, can forbear; the Christian forgive; they pardon
their enemies, we love ours, pray for them, and return good for evil. And if
not, we no whit savor of Heaven: For if you love them which love you (says
our Savior) what thanks shall you have, for even the sinners do the same?
(such as see not beyond the clouds of humane reason) But I say unto you which
hear, Love your enemies, do well to them that hate you, Luke 6.27, 32, 33.
showing, that if we will ever hope for good our selves, we must return good
for evil unto others. And the better to teach us this lesson, he practiced it
himself, adding example to precept; for when the Jews were crucifying of him,
be at the same time (though the torments of his passion were intolerable,
incomparable, unconceiveable) solliciteth God for their pardon, Luke 23.34. And
this likewise is the practice of the Saints, who strive to imitate their Master
in all things which he did as man: S. Stephen, at the instant while his enemies
were stoning of him, kneeled down and prayed, Lord lay not this sin to their
charge, Acts 7.60. Where is one thing very remarkable; he stood when he prayed
for himself, but kneeled when he prayed for his enemies; hereby showing the
greatness of their impiety, which easily could not be forgiven, as also the
greatness of his piety. It were easy to abound in examples of this kind; how
often did Moses return good unto Pharaoh for his evil, in praying and
prevailing with God for him, to the removal of nine several plagues,
notwithstanding his cruel oppression? And David, what could he have done for
Saul, that he left undone, notwithstanding he so cruelly persecuted him, and
hunted after his life. But what do I tell them of these transcendent examples?
when I never yet heard or read of that Philosopher, which could parallel
Doctor Cooper, Bishop of Lincoln, in an act of patient suff^ring, who, when
his wife had burnt all his Noates, which he had been eight years a gathering,
lest he should kill himself with overmuch study, (for she had much a do to
get him to his meals) showed not the least token of passion, but only
replied, Indeed wife it was not well done, so falling to work again, was
eight years more in gathering the same Notes, wherewith he composed his
Dictionary: which example, I confess, more admires me, than any that ever I
heard of from a man not extraordinarily and immediately inspired and assisted
by the Holy Ghost: and ^ure he that could endure this, could endure any thing,
whether in body, goods, or good name. I know there are some men (or rather two
legged Beasts) that esteem no more of Books and Notes, than Esops Cock did
of the Pearl he found; and these accordingly will say, this was nothing in
comparison of what they suffer; as when once a Hot spur was persuaded to be
patient as Job was, he replied, What do you tell me of Job? Job never had any
suits in Chauncery. And thus you see in the first place, that Nature has but a
slow foot to follow Religion close at the heels; that grace and faith
transcends reason, as much as reason does sense; that patience (rightly so
called) is a Prerogative royal, peculiar to the Saints. It is well if
Philosophy have so much wisdom, as to stand amazed at it.
2 That it is not true Christian patience, except it flow from a good heart.
Secondly, Be done in obedience to Gods command. Thirdly, That we aim at Gods
glory in our sufferings. Fourthly, That it be done in faith. Fifthly, That we
forgive, as well as forbear; yea, love, pray for, and return good to our
enemies for their evil: which being so, what has the hot-spur to say for
himself? And what will become of him, if he repent not, who can afford no time
to argue, but to execute? Yea, what has the more temperate worldling to say
for himself, who has some small piece of reason for his guide? arguing thus,
I would rather make show of my passions, than smother them to my cost, which
being vented and expressed, become more languishing and weak; better it is to
let its point work outwardly, than bend it against our selves; and in reason,
Tallying of injuries is but justice. To which I answer, it is not reason,
especially carnal reason, but Religion, which all this while has been
disputed of, which is Divine and supernatural; and that teaches how good must
be returned for evil, and that we should rather invite our enemy to do us more
wrong, than not to suffer the former with patience; as our Saviors words do
imply: If (says he) they strike thee on the one cheek, turn to him the other
also; If they sue thee at the Law, and take away thy Coat, let him have thy
Cloak also, Matthew. 5.39, 40.

Indeed, the difficulty of the duty, the seeming danger and want of faith in
carnal men, weakneth the force of the strongest reasons; for no more among
Ruffins ^ut a word and a blow, among civil men a word and a Writ can you
expect. But as thrice Noble Nehemiah said to that false Belly-god
betraying-Priest Shemaiah, should such a man (...) ^lee? So the true Christian
will encounter all discouragements and frightning Alarums thus; should such a
man as I fear to do that which my Master, King, and Captain, Christ Jesus
has commanded me, which is of more necessity than life it self.

Here also, if it were as orderly as pertinent, I might take occasion to show
another peculiar and proper adjunct belonging to the patience of a Christan,
which a Philosopher may sooner envy than imitate; yea, it must put him besides
his reason, before he can conceive it possible, namely, That a Christian
rejoices in his sufferings: We rejoice in tribulation (says Saint Paul,)
knowing that tribulation brings forth patience, and patience experience, and
experience hope, etc. Romans 5.3. Yea, S. James goes yet further, and says, My
brethren, count it exceeding joy, when ye fall into diverse temptations; knowing
that the trying of your faith brings forth patience, and let patience have
her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire, lacking nothing, James
1.3, 4. But because this path leads from the way of my intended discourse, come
we to the sixteenth Reason.

CHAP. 31. That they may follow Christ's example, and imitate the patience of
the Saints in all Ages.
16. Reason.

^ IN the sixth and last place, they bear the slanders and reproaches of
wicked ^^n patiently, that they may follow Christ's example, and imitate the
patience of the Saints in all ages.

Christ also suffered for you (says S. Peter) leaving you an example, that you
should follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2.21. And it is written of him, that he was
oppressed and afflicted, yet did he not open his mouth; he was brought as a
Sheep to the slaughter, and as a Sheep before the Shearer is dumb, so opened
he not his mouth, Isaiah 53.7. When he was reviled, he reviled not again,
when he suffered he threatened not, 1 Peter 2.23. He was called of his enemies,
Conjurer, Samaritane, Wine-bibber, etc. was scoft at, scorned, scourged, and
yet he suffered all for us; to the end he might leave us an example, that we
should follow his steps. When the Jews cried out, crucify him, he out cries,
Father, pardon them; being beaten with Rods, crowned with Thorns, pierced with
Nails, nailed to the cross, filled with reproaches, as unmindful of all his
great griefs, he prays for his persecutors, and that earnestly, Father
forgive them. Pendebat, and tamen petebat, as S. Augustine sweetly. O patient
and compassionate love!

Thus Christ upon the cross, as a Doctor in his chair, read to us all a
lectu^e of patience; for his actions are our instructions: Learn we therefore
from him, to suffer Innocently. Patiently.


Will thou, says one, look to reign, and not expect to suffer? Why Christ
himself went not up to his glory, until first he suffered pain: Or will thou, says S. Cyprian, be impatient, by seeking present revenge upon thine
enemies, when Christ himself is not yet revenged of his enemies? Do thou bear
with others, God bears with thee; is there a too much which thou can suffer
for so patient a Lord? But to go on; will thou follow Gods example? Then note,
whereas Christ has in many particulars commanded us to follow his example, yet
in no place, says S. Chrysostom, he infers we should be like our heavenly
Father, but in doing good to our enemies. And therein resemble we the whole
three Persons in Trinity. God was only in the still wind, Christ is compared to
a Lamb, the Holy Ghost to a Dove. Now if we will resemble these three persons,
we must be softly, Lambs, Doves; but if on the contrary we be fierce, cruel,
and take revenge, so using violence, we resemble rather the Devil, who is
called a roaring Lion; and the wicked, who are termed Dogs, Wolves, Tigers,
etc. But secondly, they are patient in suffering of injuries, that they might
imitate the Saints in all ages. They were so, and we are likewise commanded to
follow their steps, as in all things which are good, so especially in this.
Take my brethren the Prophets, says S. James, for an example of suffering
adversities, and of long patience, James 5.10. Brethren, says S. Paul to the
Thessalonians, Ye are become followers of the Churches of God which in Judea
are in Christ Jesus, because ye have also suffered the same things of your own
Contrymen, even as they have of the Jews, 1 Thessalonians. 2.14. And to the
Philippians, Be ye followers of me, Brethren, and look on them which walk so,
as ye have us for an example, Phil. 3.17. And see how he followed his Masters
example; for which amongst us so loves his Benefactors, as S. Paul loved his
Malefactors? he would do any thing (even be rased out of the book of life) to
save them that would do any thing to kill him. Amongst many examples recorded
for thy imitation and mine, behold the Patience of Job, James 5.11. Abraham,
Genesis 20.17, 18. Isaac, Chap. 26.15. Joseph, Chap. 39. David, Psalm. 38.12. to
15. And lastly of Stephen, who when the Jews were stoning him to death,
kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice, Lord, lay not this sin to their
charge, Acts 7.60. A true Scholar of CHRIST: for first, he prayed for enemies;
secondly, for mortal enemies that stoned him; thirdly, in hot blood, at the
time when they wronged him most, as being more sorry for their riot, then for
his own ruin. Now what is it that we suffer, being compared with their
sufferings? even nothing in a manner: Ye have not (says S. Paul to the
Hebrews) yet resisted unto blood: We have passed (says the Prophet) through
fire and water; not fire only, as the three Children; nor water only, as the
Israelites, but fire and water, all kind of afflictons and adversities. For
shame then let us pass through a little tongue-triall without the least
answering or repining.

Now all ye scoffers, behold the patience of the Saints, and stand amazed. That
which you (not for want of ignorance) esteemed base, sottish and unworthy, ye
see has 16. sollid Reasons, as so many pillars to support it, and these hewn
out of the Rock of Gods word. Ye see the child of God is above nature, while
he seems below himself; the vilest creature knows how to turn again; but
to command himself, not to resist being urged, is more then Heroical. Here
then is matter worth your emulation, worthy our imitation.

Again, behold the reasons why God suffers you to deride, hate, and persecute
his people, which are likewise declared to be sixteen in number, and those no
less weighty; of which three concern his own glory; Thirteen our spiritual
and everlasting good, benefit, and advantage. Yea, reflect yet further, you
seed of the Serpent, and see the Original, continuance, properties, causes,
ends, and what will be the issue of your divellish enmity against the seed of
the Woman? And then if you will go on and perish, your blood be on your own
heads, and not on mine; I have discharged my duty.

CHAP. 32. Rules to be observed touching thoughts, words, and deeds, when we
are wronged.
I must needs confess (may some say) you have showed sixteen solid and
substantial reasons of patience, sufficient to persuade any reasonable
creature to embrace it, at least in affection; but is it therefore in all cases
necessary we suffer injuries, without righting of our selves, or being angry.

No: he that makes himself a Sheep, shall be eaten of the Wolf. In some
cases tolerations are more than unexpedient, they inspire the party with
boldness, and are as it were pullies to draw on more injuries; bear one
wrong, and invite more; put up this abuse, and you shall have your belly full
of them. Yea, he that suffers a lesser wrong, many times invites a greater,
which he shall not be long without. As how does David's patience draw on the
insolence of Shemei? Evil natures grow presumptuous upon forbearance. In good
natures and dispositions, injury unanswered grows weary of it self, and dies
in a voluntary remorse; but in those dogged stomachs, which are only capable
of the restraints of fear; the silent digestion of a former wrong, provokes a
second; neither will a Beef brain fellow be subdued with words. Wherefore
mercy has need to be guided with wisdom, lest it prove cruel to it self.

Neither does Religion call us to a weak simplicity, but allows us as much of
the Serpent as of the Dove. It is our duty indeed to be simple as Doves, in
offending them; but we are no less charged to be wise as Serpents, in
defending our selves: lawful remedies have from God both liberty in the use,
and blessing in the success; no man is bound to tender his throat to an unjust
stroke. Indeed, when the persecuted Christians complained against their
adversaries to Julian the Emperor, desiring justice, he answered them as some
of our scoffers may do in the like case, It is your Masters commandment that
you should bear all kind of injuries with patience. But what did they answer?
It is true, he commands us to bear all kinds of injuries patiently, but not
in all cases; besides, said they, we may bear them patiently, yet crave the
Magistrates aid for the repairing of our wrongs past, our present rescue, or
for the preventing of what is like to ensue. But to make a full answer to the
Question propounded;

There are Rules to be observed, 1 touching our Thoughts. 2 touching our Words.
3 touching our Actions.


1 First, touching our Thoughts: He that deceives me often, though I must
forgive him, yet Charity binds me not, not to censure him for untrusty; and
though Love does not allow suspicion, yet it does not thrust out discretion; it
judges not rashly, but it judges justly; it is not so sharp sighted, as to
see a moate where none is, nor so purblinde, but it can discern a beam where
it is; the same spirit that says, Charity believes all things, 1 Cor. 13.
says also, that a fool believes all things, and charity is no fool, as it
is not easily suspicious, so neither lightly credulous.

2 For our tallying of words, as it argues little discretion in him that does
it, so it is of as little use, except the standers by want information of thy
innocence, and his guiltiness which gives the occasion. Wherefore in hearing
thy own private and personal reproaches, the best answer is silence, but the
wrongs and indignities offered to God, or contumelies that are cast upon us in
the causes of Religion, may safely be repaired. If we be meal mouthed in
Christ and the Gospels cause, we are not patient, but zealelesse. Yea, to hold
a man's peace when Gods honor is in question, is to mistake the end of our
Redemption* 1 Cor. 6.20. Neither is there a better argument of an upright
heart, than to be more sensible of the indignities offered to God, then of our
own dangers. And certainly no ingenious disposition can be so tender of his
own disgrace, as the true Christian is at the reproach of his God; as we see
in Moses, who, when Aaron and Miriam offered him a private injury, it is said,
his meekness was such, that he gave them not a word, Number. 12. But when the
people had fallen to idolatry, and he heard them murmr against their Maker,
he spares neither Aaron, nor the people, but in a godly fit of zeal takes on
at them, yea breaks the Tables in pieces, Exo. 32. A meek Lamb in his own
^ause, a fierce Lion in Gods. And in David, who was a man deaf and dumb and
wholly senseless at Shemeis private reproaches, when he cursed him, cast
stones at him, called him murderer, and wicked man, 2 Samuel 16. But not so at
Goliahs public revilings of God, and his Church, no, not at Michols despising
his holy zeal in the public service of God, 2 Samuel 6. In these cases how full
of life and spirit, and holy impatiency did he show himself to be?

3 Touching our actions; whether it be in thine own cause, or in the cause of
God and Religion, thou may not be a revenger. All that private persons can
do, is either to lift up their hands to Heaven for redress of sin, or to lift
up their tongues against the sin, not their hands against the person. Who
made thee a Judge; is a lawful question, if it meet with a person unwarranted.
Object. Every base nature will be ready to offer injuries, where they think
they will not be repaid: he will many-times beat a coward, that would not dare
to strike him, if he thought him valiant: as a Cur that goes through a Village,
if he clap his tail between the legs, and run away, every Cur will insult
over him; but if he bristell up himself, and stand to it, give but a
countersnarle, there is not a Dog dares meddle with him.

Answ. Nevertheless, avenge not thy self, but give place unto wrath, and that
for conscience sake, Romans 12.19. If thou receivest wrong in thy person,
goods, or good name, it is the Magistrates office to see thee righted, and For
this cause ye pay also tribute. He is the Minister of God for thy wealth, to
take vengeance on him that does evil, and for the praise of them that do
well: neither does he bear the sword for naught, Romans 13.4, 5, 6. 1 Peter
2.14. Now in this case, he that has endammaged me much, cannot plead breach of
charity in my seeking his Restitution: I will so remit wrongs, as I may not
encourage others to offer them; and so retain them, that I may not induce God
to retain mine to him. Have you not seen a Crow stand upon a Sheep back,
pulling off wool from her side: even creatures reasonlesse know well whom they
may be bold with; that Crow durst not do this to a Wolf or a Mastiffe; the
known simplicity of this innocent beast gives advantage to this presumption;
meekness of spirit commonly draws on injuries, and the cruelty of ill natures
usually seeks out those, not who deserve worst, but who will bear most.
Wherefore patience and mildness of spirit is ill bestowed, where it exposes a
man to wrong and insultation: Sheepish dispositions are best to others, worst
to themselves. I could be willing to take injuries, but I will not be guilty of
provoking them by lenity; for harmlessenesse let me go for a Sheep; but
whosoever will be tearing my fleece, let him look to himself.

Diogenes the Stoic teaching his auditors how they should refrain anger, and
being earnest in pressing them to patience, a waggish boy spit in his face, to
see whether he would practice that which he taught others: but Diogenes was not
a whit moved at it, yet said withal, I fear I shall commit a greater fault in
letting this boy go unpunished, then in being angry. In some cases, for reason
to take the rod out of the hands of wrath, and chastise, may be both lawful
and expedient. The same which Aristotle affi^med in Philosophy, viz. That
choler does sometime serve as a whetstone to virtue, is made good Divinity by
S. Paul, Be angry, but sin not, Ephesians. 4.21.

For Cautions and Rules to be observed, when we appeal to the Magistrate. 1.
First, let it be in a matter of weight, and not for trifles. 2. Secondly, in
case of necessity, after we have assaied all good means of peace and
agreement. 3. Thirdly, let not our aim and end be the hurt of our enemy; but,
first, the glory of God, secondly, the reformation of the party himself, that
so he which is overcome, may also overcome, and (if it may be) others by his
example, whereby more than one Devil shall be subdued. And thirdly, to procure
a further peace and quiet afterward, as Princes make war to avoid war; yea, in
case we see a storm inevitably falling, it is good to meet it, and break the
force. 4. Let us not be transported either with heat or hate, but begin and
follow our suits without anger, or using the least bitterness or extremity
against the person of our adversary: as Tilters break their Spears on each
others breasts, yet without wrath or intention of hurt; or as Charles the
French King made war against Henry the 7th King of England, rather with an
Olive branch, than a Laurel branch in his hand, more desiring peace than
victory; not using bribery, or any other means to corrupt or hinder justice,
but to seek our own right. 5. And lastly, having used this ordinary means
that the Lord has given us for the righting of our selves, in case we find no
redress, let us rest with quietness and meekness therein, without fretting
or desire to right our selves by private revenge, knowing assuredly, that the
Lord has thus ordered the whole matter, either for our correction, or for the
exercise of our patience and charity; or that he will take the matter into his
own hand, and revenge our cause of such an enemy, far more severely; or for
that he means to deal far better with us, if we commit our cause to him, than
either our selves, or any Magistrate could have done.

To conclude this argument in a word. If thou go to Law.

Maker Conscience thy Chauncery. Maker Charity thy Judge. Maker Patience thy
Councellor. Maker Truth thy Attorney. Maker Peace thy Solicitor.
And so doing thou shall be sure to find two friends in thy suit, that will
more bestead thee, then any ten Judges, namely, God and thy Conscience. God,
who being Chief Justice of the whole world, can do for thee whatsoever he
will, and will do for thee whatsoever is best: thy Conscience which is instead
of a thousand good witnesses, a thousand good Advocates, a thousand good
Iuries, a thousand Clerks of the Peace, and Guardians of the Peace to plead,
procure, pronounce, record, and assure to thee that peace which passes all
understanding.

But I fear I have incited your impatiency, by standing so long upon patience.

CHAP. 33. Use and Application of the former Reasons.
THese latter Reasons being dispatched, return we to make Use of the former;
for I may seem to have left them, and be gone quite out of sight, though
indeed it cannot properly be called a digression: seeing the last point proved,
was; That God suffers his children to be persecuted and afflicted for the
increase of their patience.

First, if God sends these afflictions, either for our Instruction or
Reformation, to scowre away the rust of corruption, or to try the truth of our
sanctification, either for the increase of our patience, or the exercise of our
faith, or the improvement of our zeal, or to provoke our importunity, or for
the doubling of our Obligation; let us examine whether we have thus husbanded
our afflictions, to his glory and our own spiritual and everlasting good. I
know Gods chastisements for the time, seem grievous to the best of his
Children; Yea, at first they come upon us, like Sampsons Lion, look terribly
in show, as if they would devour us; and as Children are afraid of their
friends when they see them maked, so are we. But tell me, has not this roaring
Lion prevailed against thy best part? have thou kept thy head whole? I mean
thy soul free? For as Fencers will seem to fetch a blow at the leg, when they
intended it at the head; so does the Devil, though he strike at thy name, his
aim is to slay thy soul. Now instead of being overcome, do thou overcome?
Has this Lion yielded thee any honey of Instruction or Reformation? Has thy
sin died with thy fame, or with thy health, or with thy peace, or with thy
outward estate? Do thou perceive the graces of Gods Spirit to come up, and
flourish so much the more in the spring of thy recovery, by how much the more
hard and bitter thy winter of adversity has been? Then thou have approved thy
self Christ's faithful Soldier, and a citizen of that Jerusalem which is
above: yea, I dare boldly say of thee, as St. Paul of himself, That nothing
shall be able to separate thee from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus
our Lord, Romans 8.39. To find this honey in the Lion, more than makes amends for
all former fear and grief: and in ease any man, by his humiliation under the
hand of God, is grown more faithful and conscionable, there is honey out of
the Lion ^ or is any man by his temptation of fall become more circumspect
after it? there also is honey out of the Lion, etc. For there is no Sampson, to
whom every Lion does not yield some honey; and thou may foulely suspect thy
self, (if thou be not the better) for thy being the worse. He is no true
borne Christian, who is not the better for his evils, whatsoever they be; no
price can buy of the true believer the gain of his sins: Yea, Satan himself,
in his exercise of Gods Children advantageth them. And look to it, if the
malice and enmity of wicked men has beaten thee off from thy profession, thou
were at the best but a counterfeit, and none of Christ's own bandd. A little
faith, even so much as a grain of Mustard Seed, would be able to remove
greater mountains of fear and distrust out of thy soul, than these: the
damask Rose is sweeter in the Still, than on the Stalk; and a Diamond will
shine even in the dirt.

2 If the malice of our enemies, as it is husbanded to our thrift (by a divine
and supreme providence) does make so much for our advantage and benefit here
and hereafter, as namely, that it opens our eyes no less, than peace and
prosperity had formerly shut them; that nothing does so powerfully call home
the conscience, as affliction; and that we need no other art of memory for sin,
besides misery; if commonly we are at variance with God, when we are at peace
with our enemies; and that it is both hard and happy, not to be the worse with
liberty, as the sedentary life is most subject to diseases; if vigor of body,
and infirmity of mind, do for the most part lodge under one roof, and that a
wearish outside is a strong motive to mortification; if God, the al-wise
Physician, knows this the fittest medicine for our souls sickness, and that
we cannot otherwise be cured; if our pride forces God to do by us, as
Sertorius did by his Army, who perceiving his Soldiers pufft up through many
victories, and hearing them boast of their many conquests, led them of purpose
into the lap of their enemies, to the end that stripes might learn them
moderation.

If this above all will make us pray unto him with heat and fervency; as
whither should we fly but to our Joshua, when the powers of darkness, like
mighty Aramites, have besieged us? If ever we will send up our prayers to him,
it will be when we are be leager'd with evils.

If true and saving joy is only the daughter of sorrow; if the security of any
people is the cause of their corruption; as no sooner does the Holy Ghost in
sundry places say, Israel had rest, but it is added, They committed
wickedness; Even as standing waters soon grow noisome, and Vines that grow
out at large, become wild and fruitless in a small time; if it weanes us from
the love of worldly things, and makes us no less inamored with heavenly; as
Zeno, having but one Fly-boat left him, hearing news that both it and all
therein was cast away, said, O Fortune, thou have done well to send me again to
our School of Philosophy: Whereas if we find but a little pleasure in our
life, we are ready to doat upon it. Every small contentment glewes our
affections to that we like, neither can we so heartily think of our home
above, whilst we are furnished with these worldly contentments. But when God
strips us of them, straightwayes our mind is homeward; if this world may be
compared to Athens, of which a Philosopher said, that it was a pleasant City to
travel through, but not safe to dwell in; if by smarting in our bodies, states,
or names, we are saved from smarting in our souls; if it was good for Naaman,
that he was a Leper; good for David, that he was in trouble; good for
Bartimeus, that he was blind; if with that Athenian Captain we should have
perished for ever, in case we had not thus perished for a while; if our peace
would have lost us, in case we had not a little lost our peace; then refuse
not the chastening of the Lord, neither be grieved with his correction, as
Solomon advises, Proverbs 3.11. And so much the rather, because our struggling
may aggravate, cannot redress our miseries. Yea though the wicked, like some
beasts, grow mad with baiting, yet let us with good old Eli (who was a good
son to GOD, though he had been an ill Father to his sons) even kiss the
very rod we smart withal, and say, It is the LORD, let him do what seems
him good: for whatsoever seems good to him, cannot but be good, howsoever it
seems to us. Yea let us receive his stripes with all humility, patience,
piety, and thankfulness, resolving, as that holy Martyr John Bradford, who
said to the Queen, (how much more did he mean it to the great King of Heaven
and Earth?) If the Queen will give me life, I will thank her; if she will
banish me, I will thank her. if she will burn me, I will thank her; if she
will condemn me to perpetual imprisonment, I will thank her. The stomach
that is purged, must be content to part with some good nourishment, that it may
deliver it self of more evil humors: and the Physician knows what is best
for the Patient; the Nurse better than the infant, what is good and fit for it;
yea, let us take them as tokens and pledges of Gods love and favor, who loves
his Children so, as not to make wantons of them. They that would tame pampered
Horses, do add to their travel, and abate of their provender; as Pharaoh
served the Children of Israel. Which of us shall see pieces of Timber cut and
squared, and plained by the Carpenter; or Stones hewne and polished by the
Mason, but will collect and gather, that these are Stones and Timber which the
Master would employ in some building? if I suffer, it is that I may reign. And
how profitable is that affliction, which carries me to Heaven? Oh, it is a
good change, to have the fire of affliction for the fire of Hell: Who would not
rather smart for a while, than for ever? Its true, these Waspes, wicked men
sting shrewdly, but the Hornet Satan would sting worse a great deal. And not
seldom does the in^liction of a less punishment, avoid a greater; every man
can open his hand to God while he blesses, but to expose our selves willingly
to the afflicting hand of our Maker, and to kneel to him while he scourges us,
is peculiar to the faithful.

Thirdly, If in conclusion the most malicious and damnable practices of our
worst and greatest enemies, prove no other in effect to us, than did the malice
of Joseph's brethren, Mistrisse, and Lord to him: the first in selling of him,
the second in falesely accusing him, the third in imprisoning him; (all which
made for his inestimable good and benefit,) than the malice of Haman to
Mordecai and the Jews, whose bloody decree obtained against them, procured
them exceeding much joy and peace; then Balaks malice to the Children of
Israel, whose desire of cursing them, caused the Lord so much the more to
bless them, Number. 23. Then the Devils spite to Job, who pleasured him more by
his soar afflicting him, than any thing else could possibly have done, whether
we regard his name, Children, substance, or soul; than Judas his treason
against the Lord of life, whose detestable fact served not only to accomplish
his will, but the means also of all their salvations, that either before or
after should believe in him: this should move wonder to astonishment, and cause
us to cry out with the Apostle; O the deepenesse of the riches both of the
wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways
past finding out! Romans 11.33. O the wonderful and sovereign goodness of our
God! that turns all our poisons into Cordials, that can change our terrors
into pleasures, and make the greatest evils beneficial unto us; for they are
evil in their own nature, and work those former good effects, not properly by
themselves, but by accident, as they are so disposed by the infinite wisdom,
goodness, and power of God, who is able to bring light out of darkness, and
good out of evil: yea, this should tutor us to love our enemies; we love the
medicine, not for its own sake, but for the health it brings us; and to suffer
cheerfully whatsoever is laid upon us: for how can Gods Church in general, or
any member in particular but fare well, since the very malice of their enemies
benefits them? How can we but say, let the world frown, and all things in it
run cross to the grain of our minds? Ye^ with thee, O Lord, is mercy, and
plenteous redemption: thou make us better, by their making us worse.

Ob. But perhaps thou have not proved the truth of this by thy own knowledge,
and particular experience.

Answ. If thou have not, thou shall in due time, the end shall prove it, stay
but till the conclusion, and thou shall see, that there is no Cross, no enemy,
no evils can happen unto thee, that shall not be turned to good, by him that
dwells in thee. Will you take Saint Paul's word for it, or rather GODS own
word, who is truth it self, and cannot lie? His words are, We know that all
things work together for the best, unto them that love God, even to them that
are called of his purpose, To. 8.28. And in Verse 35, 36. after he has
declared that Gods chosen people shall suffer tribulation, and anguish, and
persecution, and famine, and nakedness, peril, sword, etc. be killed all the
day long, and counted as Sh^epe for the slaughter, he concludes with,
Nevertheless, in all these things we are more than conquerours, through him
that loved us: and so goes on even to challenge of our worst enemies, Death,
Angels, Principalities, and Powers, things present and to come, height, depth,
and what other creature besides, should stand in opposition. What voluminous
waves be here, for number, and power, and terror; yet they shall not separate
the Arc from Christ, nor a soul from the Arc, nor a body from the soul, nor
an hair from the body, to do us hurt. What says David? Mark the upright man,
and behold the just; for the end of that man is peace, Psa. 37.37. Mark him in
his setting out, he has many oppositions, mark him in the journey, he is full
of tribulations: but mark him in the conclusion, and the end of that man is
peace. In Christ al things are ours, 1 Cor. 3.22. How is that? Why, we have all
things, because we have the haver of all things. And if we love Christ, all
things work together for our good, yea, for the best, Romans 8.28. And if all
things (quoth Luther) then even sin it self. And indeed, how many have we
known, the better for their sin? That Magdalen had never loved so much, if she
had not so much sinned: had not the incestuous person sinned so notoriously, he
had never been so happy. God took the advantage of his humiliation for his
conversion. Had not one foot slipped into the mouth of hell, he had never been in
this forwardness to Heaven: sin first wrought sorrow (says S. Austine) and
now godly sorrow kills sin; the daughter destroys the mother: neither do our
own sins only advantage us, but other men's sins work for our good also.
If Arius had not held a Trinity of Substances with a Trinity of Persons; and
Sabellius an Unity of Persons with an Unity of Essences, the Mysteries of the
Trinity had not been so clearly explained by those great lights of the
Church. We may say here, as Augustine does of Carthage and Rome, If some
enemies had not contested against the Church, it might have gone worse with the
Church. Lastly, suppose our enemies should kill us, they shall not hurt, but
pleasure us, yea, even death it self shall work our good. That Red Sea shall
put us over to the Land of Promise, and we shall say to the praise of God, we
are delivered, we are the better for our enemies, the better for our sins,
the better for death, yea, better for the devil: and to think otherwise even
for the present, were not only to derogate from the wisdom, power, and
goodness of God, but it would be against reason; for in reason, if he have
vouchsafed us that great mercy to make us his own, he has given the whole army
of afflictions a more inviolable charge concerning us, than David gave his Host
concerning Absalom; See ye do the young man, my son Absalom, no harm. Now
if for the present thou lackest faith, patience, wisdom, and true judgment
how to bear, and make this gain of the cross, Ask it of God, who gives to
all men liberally, and reproacheth no man, and and it shall be given thee,
James 1.5. For every good giving and every perfect gift is from above, and
comes down from the Father of lights, Verse 17.

CHAP. 34. That though God disposes of all their malice to his childrens
greater good, yet they shall be rewarded according to their mischievous
intentions.
Ob. IF it be so, that the malice of wicked men makes so much for the behoof
of Gods people; and that whatsoever they do unto us, is but the execution of
Gods will, and full accomplishment of his just decree; it may seem to make on
their side, and not only extenuate their evil, but give them occasion of
boasting.

Ans. Although God disposes it to the good of his children, that he may bring
about all things to make for his own glory; yet they intend only evil in it,
as namely, the dishonor of God, the ruin of men's souls (as I shall easily
prove, when I come to show what is the final cause or end of their temptations
and persecutions) and the satisfying of their own serpentine enmity, and thirst
of revenge. We must therefore learn to distinguish betwixt the act of God, and
of an enemy, as indeed Gods people do; When ye thought evil against me (says
Joseph to his brethren) God disposed it to good, that he might bring to pass
as it is this day, and save much people alive, Genesis 50.20. Yea, the holy God
challenges to himself whatsoever is done in the City, Amos 3.6. but so, as
neither wicked men's sins shall taint him, nor his decree justify them: the
sin is their own, the good which comes of it is Gods, the benefit ours; God
wills the same action, as it is a blessing, trial, or chastisement of his
children, which he hates as the wickedness of the agent. The lewd tongue,
hand, or heart, moves from God, it moves lewdly from Satan: wicked men are
never the freer from guilt and punishment, for that hand which the holy God
has in their offensive actions. To instance in one example or two: Satan did
naught touching Job, but what the Lord upon his request gave him leave to do;
what then? Did God and Belial join in fulfilling the same act? No; sooner
shall Stygian darkness blend with light, the frost with fire, day with night:
true, God and Satan willed the selfsame thing, but God intended good, Satan
ill; Satan aimed at Jobs, and God at his confusion. God used the malice of
Pharaoh and Shemei unto Good; what then? God afflicted his people with another
mind than Pharaoh did; God to increase them, Pharaoh to suppress them. The
sin of Shemeis curse was his own, the smart of the curse was Gods; God wills
that as David's chastisement, which he hates as Shimeis wickedness. The curse
of the Serpent bestowed blessedness on Man; yea, our first parents had been
less glorious, if they had not wanted a Savior. What then? Does Satan merit
thanks? No, but the contrary, for he only intended the final ruin and
destruction of them and all mankind, with the dishonor of their Maker.
Lastly, the Devil does us good in this particular case, for while he assaults
us with temptations, and afflicts us with crosses, he in effect helps us to
Crowns. Yet still no thanks to Satan, for to be charitable is more than his
meaning; it is that divine and overruling providence of God, which we are
beholding unto, and to him give we the thanks. Alas, there is nothing in the
world, be it gall it self, yea the excrement of a Dog, or the poison of a
Serpent, but man's shallow invention can find it is good for something: neither
do two contrary poisons mingled together prove mortal; how much more is God
able to work good by evil instruments? And thus you see that the will of God
may be done thanklessely, when in fulfilling the substance we fail in the
intention, and err in circumstances.

CHAP. 35. Other grounds of comfort to support a Christian, in his sufferings.
And first, that God is specially present with his servants in their
afflictions, takes notice of their sufferings, and allayes their grief.
Quest. WHat other grounds of comfort does the Word of God afford in this case
for the better upholding and strengthening of a weak Christian in his
sufferings.

Answ. We shall bear the cross with the more patience and comfort, if we
consider first, that God is specially present with his servants in their
afflictions, takes notice of their sufferings, and allayes their grief. The
troubles of a Christian are very great for number, variety, and bitterness;
yet there is one ingredient that sweetens them all, the promise of God, I will
be with thee in trouble, and deliver thee, Psalm. 91.15. And thou shall not be
tempted above thy strength 1 Cor. 10.13. Again, Fear not; for when thou
passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and through the floods, that
they do not overflow thee; when thou walk through the fire, thou shall not
be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee, Esaias 43.1, 2. Now as Caesar
said to the trembling Mariner, Be not afraid, for thou carriest Caesar; so, O
Christian, be not afraid, for he that is in thee, for thee, with thee, that
guides thee, that will save thee, is the invincible King Jehovah. And upon this
ground David was so comforted and refreshed in his soul, Psalm 94.19. that
he was able to say, Though I should walk through the valley of the shadow of
death I will fear no evil: Why? For thou art with me, thy Rod and thy staff
shall comfort me, Psalm 23.4. But hear some promises, which more
particularly concern the matter in hand. If ye be railed upon for the name of
Christ, (says Saint Peter) blessed are ye, for the Spirit of God rests upon
you, 1 Pet. 4.14. In fine, that whosoever seeks God truly in affliction, is
sure to find him: and that he is our hope, and strength, and help, and refuge
in troubles, ready to be found, the Scriptures are express, 2 Chronicles. 15.4,
15. Psalm 46.1. and 9.9, 10. Now if we could but remember and lay to heart
these promises, when we feel the greatest assaults or pangs, how could we
want courage? But alas, most of us are like the Prophets servant, 2 Kings 6.
who saw his foes, but not his friends; at least we are apt to think, that GOD
is removed from us, when we any way suffer calamity; as the Israelites do but
want water, and presently they cry, Is the Lord among us, or no? Exodus 17.7.
as if God could not be with them, and they athirst; either he must humor
carnal minds, or be distrusted: this confession could Seneca make, (but like
a Divine,) God is near unto thee, he is with thee, he is within thee: and
surely, if he had not been with these Israelites, they had not lived; if he
had been in them, they had not murmured. We can think him absent in our want,
and cannot see him absent in our sin; yet wickedness, not affliction, argues
him gone: yea, he is then most present, when he most chastises; for as the
sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolations abound through CHRIST, 2
Cor. 1.5. When did Jacob see a vision of Angels, but when he fled for his life,
making the cold earth his bed, and a stone his pillow; or when was his heart so
full of joy, as now that his head lay hardest. Stephen saw great happiness by
Christ, in his peace: but under that shower of stones, he saw Heaven it self
open, Acts 7. Afflictions have this advantage, that they occasion God to show
that mercy to us, whereof the prosperous are incapable; as we further see in
Hagar, Genesis 21.17, 18, 19. And Manoahs Wife, Judges 13.3. To whom the Angel of
the Covenant had not been sent, if they had not been in distress.

It would not become a mother to be so indulgent to an healthful Child, as to
a sick: and indeed some have found their outward castigations so sweetened with
the inward consolations of Gods Spirit, that they have found and confessed
their receipts of joy and comfort, to be an hundredfold more than their
paiments, even in this present life, according to that promise of our Savior,
Mark 10.29*30. So that a Christian is still a gainer in all his losses, yea,
he gains by his losses.

Indeed God may be present with us, and yet we not be pleased; as the
Israelites repined for a King, when the Lord was their King: Or Christ may be
with us, and yet we want something that we desire. Christ was in the Ship, and
yet (say the Apostles) we have no bread. Jesus was at the Marriage, yet, says
his Mother, They have no Wine, Ioh. 2.3. We may want Bread and Wine, and yet
have Christ's company: but if food fail, it is because Manna is to come; if
Wine be absent, yet grace and salvation is present: if God take away flesh,
and gives Manna; deny Sun and Moon, and give us himself, he does us no wrong.

Now why does God, by his promi^e tie himself to be present with us more
especially in affliction, but that he may resist our enemies, sustain us when
we faint, and Crown us when we overcome; but that he may be exact in taking
notice of our particular sufferings; and as David says, Count our wanderings,
put our tears into his bottle, and enter all into his Register, Psalm. 56.8, 9.
All our afflictions are more noted by that God that sends them, than of the
patient that suffers them; every pang, and stitch, and guird, is first felt of
him that sends it: could we be miserable unseene, we had reason to be
heartlesse: but how can it be but less possible to endure any thing that he
knows not, than that he inflicteth not? As he said to Manoah by an Angel,
Thou art barren, Judge. 13.3. so he says to one, thou art sick; to another,
thou art poor; to a third, thou art defamed; thou art oppressed to another;
that all-seeing eye takes notice from Heaven of every man's condition, no less
than if he should send an Angel to tell us he knew it: and his knowledge
compared with his mercy, is the just comfort of all our sufferings. O God, we
are many times miserable and feel it not, thou know even those sorrows
which we might have, thou know what thou have done, do what thou please.

CHAP. 36. That all afflictions, from the least to the greatest, do come to
pass, not by accident, chance, or fortune, but by the especial providence of
God.
2 WE shall bear the cross with more patience and comfort. If we consider,
that all afflictions, from the least to the greatest, do come to pass, not by
accident, chance, or fortune, but by the special providence of God, who not
only decrees and fore appoints every particular cross, Eccl. 3.1. Romans
8.28, 29. but even effects them, and brings them into execution, as they are
crosses, corrections, trials, and chastisements, Isaiah 45.7. Amos 3.6. and
also orders and disposes them, that is, limiteth and appoints the
beginning, the end, the measure, the quality, and the continuance thereof; yea,
he orders them to their right ends, namely, his own glory, the good of his
servants, and the benefit of his Church, Ier. 30.11. Genesis 50.19, 20. 2 Samuel
16.10. Psalm. 39. 9. God uses them but as Instruments wherewith to work his
good pleasure upon us; our adversaries are but as tools in the hand of the
Workman, and we must not so much look to the Instrument, as to the Author;
Gen 45.5. and 50.20. Well may the Priests of the Philistims doubt whether their
plague be from God, or by Fortune, 1 Samuel 6.2, 9. but let a Joseph be sold
into Egypt, he will say unto his enemies, Ye sent not me hither, but God; when
ye thought evil against me, God disposed it to good, that he might bring to
pass as it is this day, and save much people alive: or let a David be railed
upon by any cursed Shemei, he will answer, Let him alone, for he curses, even
because the Lord has bid him curse David. Who dare then say, wherefore have
thou done so? 2 Samuel 16.10. Or let a Micha be trodden upon and insulted over by
his enemy, his answer shall be no other than this, I will bear the wrath of
the Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he plead my cause, and
execute judgment for me, Micha 7.9. The believer that is conversant in Gods
book, knows that his adversaries are in the hands of God, as a Hammer, Axe,
or Rod, in the hand of a smiter; and therefore as the Hammer, Axe, or Rod, of
it self, can do nothing, any further than the force of the hand using it
gives strength unto it; No more can they do any thing at all unto him, further
than it is given them from above, as our Savior told Pilate, John 19.11. See
this in some examples; you have Laban following Jacob with one troop; Esau
meeting him with another, both with hostile intentions, both go on till the
uttermost point of their execution, both are prevented ere the execution: for
stay but a while, and you shall see Laban leave him with a kiss, Esau meet him
with a kiss; of the one he has an oath, tears of the other, peace with both;
GOD makes fools of the enemies of his Church; he lets them proceed that they
may be frustrate, and when they are gone to the uttermost reach of their
teather, he pulls them back to the stake with shame. Again, you have Senacherib
let loose upon Hezekiah and his people, who insults over them intolerably, 2
Kings 18. Oh the lamentable and (in sight) desperate condition of distressed
Jerusalem! wealth it had none, strength it had but a little, all the Country
round about was subdued unto the Assyrian: that proud victor has begirt the
walls of it with an innumerable army, scorning that such a shovell-full of earth
should stand out but one day: yet poor Jerusalem stands alone blockt up with a
world of enemies, helpless, friendlesse, comfortless, looking for the worst
of an hostile fury; and on a sudden, before an Arrow is shot into the City, a
hundred fourscore and five thousand of their enemies were slain, and the rest
run away, 2 Kings 19.35, 36. If we are in league with God, we need not fear
the greatest of m^n; for let the Kings of the Earth be assembled, and the
Rulers come together; Let Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and the
people of Israel, gather themselves in one league against him; it is in vain,
for they can do nothing, but what the hand of God and his Council has before
determined to be done; as Peter and John affirmed to the rest of the Disciples,
for their better confirmation and comfort, Acts 4.26. to 29. Nothing can be
accomplished in the Lower House of this world, but first it is decreed in the
Vpper-Court of Heaven; as for example, what did the Jews ever do to our
Savior Christ, that was not first both decreed by the Father of Spirits, and
registered in the Scriptures for our notice and comfort? They could not so much
as throw the Dice for his coat, but it was prophesied, Psalm 22.18. and Psalm.
69.21. It is foretold that they should give him gall in his meat, and in his
thirst vinegar to drink; the very quality and kind of his drink is
prophesied; yea, his face could not be spit upon without a prophecy; those
filthy excrements of his enemies fell not upon his face, without Gods decree,
and the Prophets relation, Esaias 50.6. Now it must needs comfort and support us
exceedingly, if in all cases we do but duly consider, that inequality is the
ground of order, that superior causes guide the subordinate, that this
sublunary Globe depends on the celestial, as the lesser wheels in a Clock do
on the great one, which I find thus expressed, As in a Clock one motion does
convey
And carry diverse wheels a several way,
Yet altogether by the great wheels force
Direct the hand unto his proper course.


Who is he that says, and it comes to pass, when the Lord commands it
not? Lam. 3.37. Suppose the Legions of Hell should combine with the Potentates
of the Earth to do their worst, they cannot go beyond the reach of their
teather, whether they rise or sit still, they shall by an insensible ordination
perform that will of the Almighty, which they least think of, and most
oppose; yea, (says Austine) by resisting the will of God they do fulfill it:
and his will is done by and upon them, even in that they do against his will.

That even Satan himself is limited, and can go no further than his chain
will reach, we may see, Revel. 20.2. More particularly; he could not touch so
much as Jobs body or substance, no not one of his servants, nor one limb of
their bodies, nor one hair of their heads, nor one beast of their herds, but
he must first beg leave of God, Job 2.6. Nay Satan is so far from having
power over us living, that he cannot touch our bodies being dead; yea, he
cannot find them when God will conceal them, (witness the body of Moses:)
and I doubt not, but as the Angels did wait at the Sepulcher of their and our
Lord; so, for his sake, they also watch over our graves: he could not seduce a
false Prophet, nor enter into a Hog without license; the whole Legion sue to
Christ for a sufferance, not daring other than to grant, that without his
permission they could not hurt a very Swine. Now if it be fearful to think
how great things evil spirits can do with permission, it is comfortable to
think how they can do nothing without permission; for if GOD must give him
leave, he will never give him leave to do any harm to his chosen, he will
never give him leave to do the least hurt to our souls. Now as by way of
concession every greater includes the less, he that can lift a Talent, can
easily lift a Pound; so by way of denial, every greater excludes the less. If
Satan himself cannot hurt us, much less his instruments, weak men: but for
proof of this, see also an instance or two, that a Sparrow cannot fall to the
ground without our heavenly Father; and that without leave from him, our
enemies cannot diminish one hair of our heads, we have our SAVIORS express
testimony, Matthew 10. Let the Powder-Trayt^rs plot and contrive the ruin of
our State never so cunningly and closely, let them go on to the utmost, (as
there wanted nothing but an Actor to bring on that Catholic doomesday;) yet
before the Match could be brought to the Powder, their artificial fireworkes
were discovered, their projection, prodition, deperdition, all disclosed, and
seasonably returned on their own heads. Let Iesabel fret her heart out, and
swear by her gods that Eliah shall dye, yet she shall be frustrate; Eliah
shall be safe. Let the red Dragon spoute forth floods of venom against the
Church, the Church shall have wings given her to fly away, she shall be
delivered, Revel. 12. Let the Scribes and Pharisees with their many false
witnesses accuse Christ never so, yet in spite of malice innocence shall find
abbetors: and rather than he shall want witnesses, the mouth of Pilate shall be
opened to his justification. Yea, let Jonas through frailty run away from the
execution of his embassage and GODS charge, and thereupon be cast into the
Sea, though the waves require him of the Ship, and the fish require him of the
waves, yet the Lord will require him of the Fish: even the Sea and the Fish had
as great a charge for the Prophet, as the Prophet had a charge for Niniveh; for
this is a sure rule, if in case God gives any of the creatures leave to afflict
us, yet he will be sure to lay no more upon us than we are able, or he will
make us able to bear yea, then shall make for our good and his glory; he has
a provident care over all the creatures, even Beasts and Plants: and certainly
we are more precious than Fowls or Flowers, yet the Lord cares for them. Will
the Householder take care to water the Herbs of his Garden, or to fodder his
Cattle, and suffer his Men and Maids to famish through hunger and thirst? Or
will he provide for his Men and Maids, and let his own Children starve?
Surely if a man provide not for his own, He has denied the faith, and is
worse than an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8. Far be it then from the great
Householder, and judge of all the Earth, not to provide for his dear Children
and servants, what shall be most necessary for them. Indeed we may fear our
own flesh, as Saint Paul did; but God is faithful, and will not suffer us to
be tempted above our strength, but will even give the issue with the
temptation, and in the mean time support us with his grace, 2 Corinthians. 12 9.
You have an excellent place to this purpose, Jeremiah the 15.20, 21.

Objection, But we see by experience, that GOD gives wicked men power often
times to take away the very lives of the godly.

Answer. When then? If we lose the lives of our bodies, it is, that we may
save the lives of our souls, Luke 9. Verse 24. and so we are made gainers
even by that loss; again, thou have merited a threefold death, if thou art
freed from the two worser, spiritual and eternal, and God deal favorably
with thee touching thy natural death, he is merciful; if not, thou mus^ not
think him unjust. Though the Devil^ and the World can hurt us, as well as
other men, in our outward and bodily estates, ye^ they can do us no hurt, nor
endanger ou^ souls; they shall lose nothing but their dross, as in Zachary
13.9. Isaiah 12. they cannot deprive us of our spiritual treasure here, no^
eternal hereafter; which makes our Savior say, Fear ye not them which kill
the body, but are not able to kill the soul; but rather fear him which is
able to destroy both soul and body in hell, Mat. 10.28. The body is but the
Bark, Cabinet, Case, or Instrument of the soul; and say it falls in pieces,
there is but a Pitcher broken; the soul a glorious Ruby, held more fit to be
set in the Crown of glory, than here to be trodden under foot by dirty Swine;
and therefore so soon as separated, the Angels convey her hence to the place
of everlasting bliss. Alas, what can they do? they cannot separate us from
the love of God in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.38, 39. Yea, they are so far from
doing us harm, as that, contrariwise, we are much the better for them; In all
these things we are more than conquerours, through him that loved us, Verse 37.
Whatsoever then becomes of goods or lives, happy are we so long as (like wise
Soldiers) we guard the vital parts, while the soul is kept sound from
impatience, from distrust, etc. Our enemy may afflict us, he cannot hurt us.

There is no chastisement not grievous; the bone that was disjoynted, cannot be
set right without pain; no potion can cure us, if it work not; and it works
not except it makes us sick; we are contented with that sickness which is the
way to health, there is a vexation without hurt, such is this: we are
afflicted, not overpressed; needy, not desperate; persecuted, not forsaken;
cast down* but perish not: how should we* when all the evil in a City comes
from the providence of a good GOD, which can neither be impotent nor
unmercifull? It is the Lord, let him do what he will: woe worth us, if evils
could come by chance, or were let loose to light where they list; now they are
overruled, we are safe. In the name of God then, let not the tall stature of
the Anakims, nor the combination of the Edomites, nor the politic counsels of
all the Achitophels and Machivilians, nor the proud looks, nor the big words
of all the Amaziahs combining themselves together, deter or dismay you. Let not
the overtopping growth of the sons of Zerviah seem too hard for you; for GOD is
infinitely more strong and mighty to save us, than all our enemies are to
destroy us; and he has his Oar in their Boat, he has a special stroke in
all actions whatsoever, and can easily overreach and make stark fools of the
wisest; by making their own councels and endeavors like Chusaes, to overthrow
those intentions which they seem to support.

As touching the continuance of afflictions, God so orders and tempereth the
same, in his merciful wisdom, that either they be tolerable, or short,
either our sorrows shall not be violent, or they shall not last; if they be
not light, they shall not be long: grievous and sore trials last but for a
season, 1 Peter 1.6. A little while, John 16.16. Yea but a moment, 2 Cor. 4.17.
He endures but a while in his anger (says the Psalmist) but in his favor is
life: weeping may abide for a night, but joy comes in the morning, Psalm.
30.5. And this had he good expeience of; for if we mark it, all those Psalms
whose first lines contain sighs and broken complaints do end with delight and
contentment, he began them in fear, but they end in joy; you shall see
terrible anguish sitting in the door, irremediable sorrow looking in at the
window, despair bordering in the margent, and offering to creep into the Text;
yet after a sharp conflict, nothing appears but joy and comfort. God loves to
send relief when we least look for it, as Elisha sent to the King of Israel
when he was rending his clothes, 2 Kin. 5 8. Hear what the Lord thy Redeemer
says by Esaiah, For a moment in thine anger. I hid my face from thee for a
little season, but with everlasting mercy have I had compassion on thee, Esaias
54.8. It is but a little for a moment that his anger lasts, his mercy is
everlasting: and I hid my face, never turned my heart from thee. Joseph when he
lay down to sleep, was full of care about his wives being with child, Mat.
1.20. but he awakened well satisfied, Verse. 24. To day a measure of fine flower
is lower rated in Samaria, than yesterday of dung. Although Christ's Star left
the Wise Men for a time, yet instantly it appeared again, and forsook them
not until they had found CHRIST; which was the mark they aimed at, Mat. 2.9.
Yea, its a Rule in nature, that violent things cannot last long: The
Philosophers could observe, that no motion violent is wont to be permanent; and
Seneca concludes, That if the sickness be tedious and lasting, the pain is
tolerable; but if violent, short: so if we suffer much, it shall not be long,
if we suffer long, it shall not be much. Some misery is like a Consumption,
gentle, but of long continuance; other like a Fever, violent, but soon over.
If our sorrows be long, they are the lighter; if sharper, the shorter. The
sharp North-East wind (says the Astronomer) never lasts three days; and
thunder, the more violent, the less permanent. Wherefore cheer up thou
drooping soul; if the Sun of comfort be for the present clouded, it will ere
long shine forth bright again; if now with the Moon thou art in the wayne;
stay but a little, thou shall as much increase; for as days succeed nights,
Summer Winter, and rest travel; so undoubtedly, joy shall suc^ed and exceed
thy sorrow. Thy grief shall dissolve, or be dissolved; yea, it is in some
measure dissolved by hope for the present. The Portingals will rejoice in foul
weather; why, because they know fair will follow: and so may the believer in
his greatest exigents; because God will shortly tread Satan under our feet,
Romans 16.20. Here also the distressed soul may raise comfort to himself out of
former experience; who is he that has not been delivered out of some
miserable exigent? which if thou have, thou may well say unto God with the
Psalmist, Thou have showed me great troubles and adversities, but thou
wilt-returne and revive me, and wilt come again, and take me up from the
depth of the earth, and comfort me, Psalm 71.20, 21. For Gods former actions
are paternes of his future; he teaches you what he will do, by what he has
done: and nothing more raises up the heart in present affiance, than the
recognition of favors or wonders passed: he that has found God present in one
extremity, may trust him in the next; every sensible favor of the Almighty,
invites both his gifts and our trust.

Ob. But thou will say with the Psalmist, thine enemies have long prevailed
against thee, and God seems altogether to hide his face, and to have clean
forgotten thee: and so thou fear he will for ever, Psalm. 13.1, 2.

Answ. It is but so in thy apprehension, as it w^^ with him; Gods deliverance
may overstay thy expectation, it cannot the due period of his own counsels;
for know first, That Gods works are not to be judged of, until the fifth act.
The case deplorable and desperate in outward appearance, may with one smile
from Heaven find a blessed issue: Dotham is besieged, and the Prophets servant
distressed, they are in a grievous case, (as they think) yet a very apparition
in the clouds shall secure them; not a squadron shall be raised, and yet the
enemy is surprised, 2 Kings 6. here was no slacknesse. The Midianites invade
Israel, and are suddenly confounded by a dream, Judges 7. Mistress Honiwood,
that Religious Gentlewoman, famous for her virtues, after she had been
distressed in her mind many years, without feeling the least comfort, not
being able to hold out any longer (as a wounded spirit who can bear?) flung a
Venice-glasse against the ground, and said to a grave Divine that sought to
comfort her, I am as sure to be damned, as this Glass is to be broken: but
what followed, the Glass was not broken: at the sight whereof she was so
confirmed, that ever after to her dying day, she lived most comfortably: much
like that of Apelles, who striving to paint a drop of foame falling from a
Horse mouth, after long study how to express it, even despairing flung away
his Pensill, and that throw did it. Spiritual consolations are commonly late
and sudden; long before they come, and speedy when they do come, even
preventing expectation: and our last conflicts have wont* ever to be the
sorest; as when after some dripping rain, it powers down most vehemently, we
think the weather is changing. Again, in the next place thou must know, that
man's extremity is Gods opportunity; well may he forbear so long as we have any
thing else to rely upon; but we are sure to find him in our greatest
exigents, who loves to give comfort to those that are forsaken of their hopes,
as abundance of examples witness. When had the Children of Israel the
greatest victories, but when they feared most to be overcome? 2 Kings 19.35.
Exodus 14.28, 29. When was Hagar comforted of the Angel, but when her child
was near famished, and she had cast it under a Tree for dead? Genesis 21.15.
to 20. When was Eliah comforted and releeved by an Angel, with a Cake baked on
the coals, and a Cruse of Water, but when he was utterly forsaken of his
hopes? 1 Kings 19.4. to 7. When did God answer the hopes of Sarah, Rebecah,
Rachel, the wife of Manoah, and Elizabeth, touching their long and much desired
issues? but when they were barren and past hope of children by reason of age,
Genesis 18. Judges 13. Luke 1.6, 7. When did our Savior heal the Woman of her
bloody issue, but after the Physicians had given her over, and she becoming
much worse, had given them over, when she had spent all she had upon them: for
to mend the matter, poverty, which is another disease, was superadded to make
her completely miserable. When did Moses find succor, but when his Mother
could no longer hide him: and he was put into the River among the Bull-rushes?
she would have given all she was worth to save him; and now she has wages to
nurse him: she does but change the name of Mother into Nurse, and she has her
son without fear, not without great reward* when Israel was sn so hard a
straight, as either to be drowned in the Sea, or slain by the Sword; how
miraculously did God provide an evasion by dividing the waters? When Rochel,
like Samariah, had a strong enemy without, and a sore famine within; how
miraculously did God provide an evasion, by making the tide their Purveyor to
bring them in an Ocean of shell fish, the like of which was never known before
nor since. When the English had left Cales, and the Spaniard was again
repossest of it; by some neglect or oversight there was an Englishman left
behind; but how did God provide for his escape? its worth the remembering; he
was no sooner crept into a hole under a pair of stairs, but instantly a
Spider weaves a web over the hole, and this diverted them; for when one of them
said, here is surely some of them hid, another replies, What a fool art thou,
do thou not see, its covered with a firm cobweb? and so past him, that in
the night he escaped. O Savior, our extremities are the seasons of thy aid:
even when Fa^x was giving fire to the Match, that should have given fire to the
Powder, which should have blown up men and Monuments, even the whole State
together; thou that never sleep did prevent him, and disclose the whole
design; yea, thou did turn our intended Funeral into a Festival. And why
does the goodness of our God pick out the most needful times for our relief
and comfort? but because our extremities drive us to him that is omnipotent;
there is no fear, no danger, but in our own insensiblenesse: but because when
we are forsaken of all succors and hopes, we are f^^test for his redress; and
never are we nearer to help, than when we despair of help; but because our
extremities give him the most glory, and our comfort is the greater, when the
deliverance is seen before it is expected, his wisdom knows when aid will
be most seasonable, most welcome; which he then loves to give, when he finds
us left of all other props. That merciful hand is reserved for a dead lift,
and then he fails us not; as when Abraham had given Isaac* and Isaac had
given himself for dead; when the knife is falling upon his throat, then, then
comes the deliverance by an Angel, calling, forbidding, commending him.

And indeed our faith is most commendable in the last act, it is no praise to
hold out, until we be hard driven, but when we are forsaken of means, then
to live by faith in our God, is thought worthy of a Crown. O wretched Saul,
had thou held out never so little longer without offering, and without
distrust, Samuel had come, and thou had kept the favor of God, whereas now
for thy unbelief thou art cast off for ever, 1 Samuel 13.10, to 15. To shut up
all in a word, were thy soul in such a straight, as Israel was between the
red Sea, and the Egyptians; the spirits of vengeance, (like those enemies)
pursuing thee behind; Hell and death (like that Red Sea,) ready to ingulfe thee
before, yet would I speak to thee in the confidence of Moses, Exodus 14.13.
Stand still and see the salvation of the Lord. Thy Word, o God, made all, thy
word shall repair all; hence all ye diffident fears, he whom I trust is
omnipotent.

Secondly, Thou must know, that GOD in his wisdom has set down a certain
period of time, within which he will exercise his Children more or less: and
at the end whereof, and not before, he will relieve and comfort them again. As
we may perceive by, Eccles. 3.1. Acts 7.25. Exodus 12.41. Genesis 15.13. Daniel
1.5, 30. Ier. 25.11. Genesis 6.3. Four hundred years he appointed to Abraham
and his seed, that they should be Sojourners in a strange land, where they
should be kept in bondage, and evil entreated, Genesis 15. At the end of which
time, even the self same day, they returned from the land of Egypt: that was
the precise time appointed, and the self same day it was accomplished: and
till then Moses undertook it in vain. Why were they so long kept from it? the
land was their own before, they were the right heirs to it, lineally
descended from him who was the first Possessor of it after the flood: God will
do all in due time, that is, in his time, not in ours; if at any time the Lord
deliver us, it is more than he owes us. Let him (says Saint Augustine) choose
his own opportunity that so freely grants the mercy. Again, he appointed that
the Jews should serve the King of Babylon seventy years; not a day, not an
hour to be abated, Jeremy 25.11. but at the end thereof, even that very
night, Daniel 9. it was accomplished; neither did Daniel, (who knew the
determinate time) once pray for deliverance, till just upon the expiration.
Thirty eight years he appointed the sick man at Bethesda's Poole, John 5.5.
Twelve years to the Woman with the bloody issue, Matthew 9.20. Three Months
to Moses, Exodus 2.2. Ten days tribulation to the Angel of the Church of
Smyrna, Apocal. 2.10. Three days plague to David, 2 Samuel 24.13. Each of these
groaned for a time, under the like burden as thou do: But when their time
which God had appointed, was come, they were delivered from all their miseries,
troubles and calamities: and so likewise ere long, if thou will patiently tarry
the Lords leisure, thou shall also be delivered from thy affliction and sorrow,
either in the Morning of thy trouble, with David, Psalm. 30.5. or at the Noone
of thy life with Job, Chapter 42.10. to the end, or toward the Evening, with
Mr. Glover, that holy Martyr, who could have no comfortable feeling, till he
came to the sight of the stake: but then he cried out, and clapped his hands for
joy to his friend, saying, O Austine, he is come, he is come, meaning the
feeling joy, of faith, and the Holy Ghost, Acts and Monuments, Fol. 1555. in
the last edition save this? Or at night with Lazarus, at one hour or another
thou art sure to be delivered. Be our troubles many in number, strange in
nature, heavy in measure, much in burden, and long in continuance, yet Gods
mercies are more numerous, his wisdom more wondrous, his power more
miraculous, he will deliver us out of all, Many are the troubles of the
Righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of all, Psalm. 34.19. How many or
how great soever they be, or how long soever they continue, yet an end they
shall all have: For the LORD either takes troubles from them, or takes them
from troubles, by receiving them into his heavenly rest, where they shall
acknowledge that GOD has rewarded them as far beyond their expectation, as
he had formerly punished them less than they did deserve: this Doctrine well
digested will breed good blood in our souls, and is specially useful to bound
our desires of release; for though we may be importunate, impatient we may not
be, stay he never so long, Patience must not be an Inch shorter than
Affliction: If the Bridge reach but half way over the Brook, we shall have
but an ill-favored passage. We are taught in Scripture to praise Patience, as
we do a fair day at night; He that endures to the end shall be saved, Matthew.
24.13. Much the better for that light, which will not bring us to bed:
perseverance is a kind, of all in all. But not seldom does the Lord only
release his Children out of extreme adversity here, but withal makes their
latter end so much the more prosperous, by how much the more their former time
has been miserable and adverse. We have experience in Job: You have heard,
says Saint James, of the patience of Job, and what end the Lord made with him:
What end is that; the Holy Ghost tells you: That the Lord turned the captivity
of Job, and blessed his last days more than the first, for he had fourteen
thousand Sheep, and six thousand Camels, and a thousand Yoke of Oxen, and a
thousand she Asses; he had also seven sons, and three daughters, and all his
friends came unto him again with presents, and comforted him for all the evil
that the Lord had brought unto him, Job 42.10. to 14. And in David, who for a
long time was in such fear of Saul, that he was forced to fly for his life,
first, to Samuel, where Saul pursues him; then to Jonathan, where his grief
is doubled; then to Abimelech, where is Doeg to betray him; after that he
flies to Achish King of Gath, where, being discovered, he is in greatest fear
of all, lest the King should take away his life, and lastly when he returns to
his own Ziklag, he finds it smitten and burnt with fire, and his Wives taken
prisoners, and in the midst of all his grief, when he had wept until he
could weep no more, the people being vexed intend to stone him; so that, as he
had long before complained, there was but a step between him and death; but
mark the issue, within two days the Crown of Israel is brought unto him, and
he is anointed King, 2 Samuel 1. and for the present he was able to comfort
himself in the Lord his God, 1 Samuel 30.6. Yea after this, when by that foul
sin of Adultery and Murder he had brought more enemies about his ears (God
and Men, and Devils) having once repented his fault, he was able to say with
confidence, O God thou have showed me great troubles and adversities, but thou will take me up from the depth of the earth, and increase my honor, Psalm
71.21. He knew well enough that cherishing was wont to follow stripes: how often
has a Tragic entrance had a happy end? We read that Michael was condemned to
death by the Emperor Leo, upon a false accusation, but before the execution the
Emperor dyed, and Michael was chosen in his stead. God loves to do by his
Children, as Joseph did by his Father; first, we must have our beloved Joseph a
long time deteyned from us then he robbes us of Simeon, after that sends for
our best beloved Benjamin, and makes us believe he will rob us of all our
Children at once, all the things that are dear to us. But why is it? Even that
when we think to have lost all, he might return himself, and all again with
the greater interest of joy and felicity. The LORD, says Hannah, kills and
makes alive, first kills, and then makes alive, brings down to the
grave, and raises up; the LORD makes poor, and makes rich; brings low,
and exalts; he rayseth the poor out of the dust, and lifts up the beggar
from the Dunghill, to set them among Princes, and to make them inherit the
seat of glory, 1 Samuel 2.6, 7, 8. And why all this, but that in his own might
no man may be strong, verse 9. That which Plutarch reports of Dionysius, how
he took away from one of his Nobles, almost his whole estate, and seeing him
nevertheless continue as jocund and well contented as ever, he gave him that
again, and as much more; Is a common thing with the Lord; and thousands can
witness, that though they went weeping under the burden, when they first
carried the precious seed of Repentance, yet they still returned with joy, and
brought their sheaves with them, Ps. 126.5, 6.

Object. But thou think thou shall not hold out, if God should long delay
thee.

Answ. If he delay thee never so long, he will be sure to support thee as long,
2 Cor. 4.16. his grace shall be sufficient for thee at the least, 2 Cor. 12.9.
Phil. 1.29. which was Paul's answer, and it may suffice all suitors; the
measure of our patience shall be proportionable to our suffering, and our
strength equalled to our Temptations, 1 Cor. 10.13. Now if God do either take
away our appetite, or give us meat, it is enough. The Bush, which was a Type
of the Church, consumed not all the while it burned with fire, because God was
in the midst of it: God waighes out to us our favors and Crosses, in an
equal balance, and so tempers our sorrows, that they may not oppress; and
our joys, that they may not transport us: each one has some matter of envy to
others, and of grief to himself.

Object. But thou have no evidence of Divine assistance, nor thou can not
pray for it to purpose.

Answ. We have the presence of Gods Spirit, and grace many times, and feel it
not; yea, when we complain for want of it (as Pilate asked Christ what was the
truth, when the Truth stood before him.) The stomach finds the best digestion,
even in sleep, when we least perceive it; and whiles we are most awake, this
power works in us, either to further strength or disease, without our
knowledge of what is done within; and on the other side, that man is most
dangerously sick, in whom nature decays without his feeling, without his
complaint. To know our selves happy, is good, but woe were to us Christians, if
we could not be happy and know it not. As touching prayer, every one is not so
happy as Steven was, to be most fervent when they are most in pain; yea it
were miserable for the best Christian, if all his former prayers and
meditations did not serve to aid him in his last streights, and meet together
in the center of his extremity; yielding, though not sensible relief, yet
secret benefit to the soul; whereas the worldly man in this case, having not
laid up for this hour, has no comfort from GOD, or from others, or from
himself. And thus you see that nothing can befall us without the special
appointment of our good God, who not only takes notice of our sufferings, but
sweetneth them with his presence, takes our part, stintes our enemies, and so
orders the whole, that our grief is either short, or tolerable; and that
though he is oftentimes harsh in the beginning and progress, and late in
coming, yet he comes on the sudden, and is always comfortable in the
conclusion. And lastly, that if he defer his help, it is on purpose that our
trials may be perfect, our deliverance welcome, our recompense glorious. And
may not this comfort thee?

CHAP. 37. That stripes from the Almighty, are special tokens and pledges of
his adoption and love.
3. WE shall bear the Cross with more patience and comfort, if we consider,
that stripes from the Almighty are so far from arguing his displeasure, that
contrarily there are no better tokens and pledges of his Adoption and love; As
many (says God) as I love, I rebuke and chasten, Revel. 3.19. My son, says
the Author to the Hebrews, out of Solomon's Proverbs, despise not the
chastening of the Lord, neither faint when thou art rebuked of him: for whom
the Lord loves, he chasteneth; and he scourges every son whom he receives.
If you endure chastning, God offers himself unto you as unto sons: for
what son is it whom the Father chasteneth not? If therefore ye be without
correction, whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards, and not sons,
Hebr. 12.5. to 13. Pro. 3.11, 12. It is the wont of Fathers, to hold in their
own children, when they suffer the children of bondmen to go at large, and
do as they list; yea when diverse children are playing the wantons, if we see
a man take one from the rest, and whip him soundly, we conclude, that alone to
be his Child: Wise and discreet Fathers will force their Children earnestly to
apply themselves to their studdy or labor, and will not let them be idle,
although it be Holy Day; yea constrain them to sweat, and oftentimes to weep,
when their Mothers would set them on their lappes, and keep them at home all
day in the shadow, for burning their white. Jacob is bound prentise, while
profane Esau rides a hunting: Of Elkanah his two wives, Hannah was in more
esteem with God, yet barren; and Peninnah less, yet she was fruitful, 1 Samuel
1. They were all gross in consequences; for Gedeon to argue Gods absence by
affliction, his presence by deliverances, and the unlikelihood of success, by
his own disability, Judges 6.13.15. The valiant man was here weak, weak in
faith, weak in discourse; for rather should he have inferred Gods presence
upon their correction; for wheresoever God chastises, there he is; yea there
he is in mercy: nothing more proves us his, then his stripes, he will not
bestow whipping where he loves not: fond nature, indeed, thinks God should not
suffer the wind to blow upon his dear ones, because her self makes this use
of her own indulgence; but none (out of the place of torment) have suffered so
much as his dear Children. If he had said we are Idolaters, therefore the
LORD has forsaken us, because we have forsaken him, instead of ( the LORD
has delivered us unto the Midianites, therefore he has forsaken us) the
sequel had been as good as now it is faulty; for sins, not afflictions argue
GOD absent; Yea, commonly, the measure of our sufferings is according to the
measure of grace in us, and GODS love to us; he is a chosen vessel unto me
(says God to Ananias touching Paul) therefore he must suffer great things for
my sake, Acts 9.15, 16. Job, for a righteous and upright man, had no fellow, by
the testimony of God himself, Job 1.8. Yet the next news we hear of him, Job
is afflicted in his sons, in his substance, in his body, from the Crown of
the head to the soale of the foot. Saint Austine, when God called him, was
far more assaulted by Satan, than Alipius, because God had endued him with
greater learning and gifts, and intended him an instrument of bringing more
glory to his Name. And lastly, as Christ was anointed with the oil of
gladness above his fellows, Psalm. 45.7. So he was anointed with the oil of
sadness above his fellows: Never any have had so bitter draughts upon earth, as
those he loves best: and that of Saint Austine is a sure Rule, whom God smites
not, he loves not; never was Ierusalems condition so desperate, as when God
said unto her, My fury shall depart from thee; I will be quiet, and no more
angry, Eze. 16.42. Thus not to be angry, was the greatest anger of all: Never
were the Jews more to be pittyed, then when their Prophet delivered these
words from the Lord, Why should ye be stricken any more, Isaiah 1.5. Not to be
afflicted is to be forsaken, as the sick man is in small hope of his life,
when the Physician gives him over; so his soul is in a desperate case, whom
God forbeareth to chastise for his sins. Wherefore lift up your hands which
hang down, because of some so are affliction, and your weak knees, Hebr.
12.12. and know, that the palate is but an ill Judge of the favors of God: As
not to be afflicted argues an absolute defect of goodness; so, if our troubles
be light and few, it is because we are weak and tender, for therefore God
imposes no more upon us, because he sees we can bear no more: when I am
stronger I will look for more, when I am a vessel fit for this strong and new
wine, I shall be filled with it, but not before, Mark 2.22. The Physitiany
will not suffer a milkesoppe to see his vein opened, but makes him wink; or
look another way; The master gives not to his sick servant strong meats, as
he does to the rest, but more dainty far; not because he is worthier than the
rest, but because he is weaker, and in greater need. Will any make choice of a
weak Champion? No more will God, he will either find us fit, or make us fit
to discharge the place he put us in; as when he called Saul to be a King, he
gave him a Kings heart, 1 Samuel 10.9. And when he called the Apostles to that
function, he gave them gifts answerable, so when he calls any to suffer for
him, be it Martyrdom, he gives them the courage of Martyrs, as the times of
Queen Mary witness. But yet, for the most part, he traynes us up by degrees,
and does not make us fit to undergo great matters on the sudden. We must
learn to fence in the School, before we fight in the field; and with wooden
weapons men learn to fight at the sharp; we must encounter with some beasts
or other (I mean unreasonable men) before we fight with that fearful Goliath,
death. And indeed, if we do not learn to give entertainment to smaller
crosses, the harbingers, messengers and servants of death, how shall we be able
to entertain the Lord and Master, when he comes? Wherefore as Iehoram said
to Iehu, when he marched furiously, come thou peaceably? As if he should
say, if thou come peaceably, march as furiously as tho^ will; so let us say
unto God, provided thy afflictions and chastisements be directed to us as
messengers of peace and love, let them march toward us as furiously as thou
please, but in any case let us not be without correction; for as Mariners at
Sea find, that of all storms a Calm is the greatest; so we, that to be
exempt from misery, is the most miserable condition of all other.

Object. But thou fear that God has not pardoned thy sins, and this makes
him so severe against thee.

Answ. Many times after the remission of the sin, his very chastisements are
deadly; as is clear by David's example: no repentance can assure us that we
shall not smart with outward afflictions; that can prevent the eternal
displeasure of God, but still it may be necessary and good we should be
corrected; our care and suit must be, that the evils which shall not be
averted, may be sanctified.

CHAP. 38. That Christ and all the Saints are our Partners, and partakers with
us in the Cross; yea our suff^rings are nothing in comparison of theirs.
4. WE shall bear the cross with more patience and comfort, if we consider
that Christ and all the Saints are our partners and partakers therein; yea, thy
sufferings are nothing in comparison of what others have suffered before thee*
Look upon Abel, thou shall see his elder brother Cain had dominion and rule
over him by Gods appointment, Genesis 4.7. Yea, in the next Verse thou shall see
him slain by his brother. Look upon Job, thou shall see that miseries do not
stay for a mannerly succession to each other, but in a rude importunity throng
in at once, to take away his children, substance, friends, credit* health,
peace of conscience, etc. leaving him nothing but his Wife, whom the Devil
spared on purpose to vex him, as the Fathers think: so that in his own
apprehension God was his mortal enemy, as hear how in the bitterness of his
soul he complains of his Maker, saying, He teareth me in his wrath, he
hates me, and gnasheth upon me with his teeth, he has broken me a sunder,
taken me by the neck, and shaken ^e to pieces, and set me up for his mark:
his Archers compass me round about, he cleaves my raines a sunder, and does
not spare to power out my gall upon the ground, he breaks me with breach
upon breach, and runs upon me like a Giant, Job 16. Now, when so much was
uttered, even by a nonesuch for his patience, what may we think he did feel
and endure? Look upon Abraham, thou shall see him forced to forsake his
Country and Fathers House, to go to a place he knew not, to men that knew
not him; and after his many removes, h^ meets with a famine, and so is forced
into Egypt, which indeed gave relief to him, when Canaa^ could not; showing
that in outward things, Gods enemies may fare better than his friends: yet he
goes not without great fear of his life, which made it but a dear purchase;
then he is forced to part from his brother Lot, by reason of strife and debate
among their Heard^men; after that Lot is taken prisoner, and he is constrained
to ^age war with four Kings at once, to rescue his Brother; then Sarah his
wife is barren, and he must go childlesse, until (in reason) he is past hope;
when he has a son, it must not only dye, but himself must slay him: look upon
Jacob, you shall see Esau strive with him in the womb, that no time might be
lost; after that you shall see him fly for his life, from a cruel Brother to
a cruel Uncle; with a staff goes he over Jordan, alone, doubtful, and
comfortless, not like the son of Isaac. In the way he has no bed, but the
cold earth; no pillow, but the hard stones; no sheet, but the moist air; no
Canopie, but the wide Heaven* at last he is come far to find out an hard
friend, and of a Nephe^ becomes a servant; after the service of an hard
Apprentiship has earned her whom he loved; his wife is changed, and he is not
only disappointed of his hopes, but forced to marry another against his will:
and now he must begin another Apprentiship, and a new hope, where he made
account of fruition: all which fourteen years he was consumed with heat in
the day, with frost in the night; when he has her whom he loves, she in
barren: at last being grown rich, chiefly in wi^es and children, accounting
his charge his wealth, he returns to his fathers house, but with what comfort?
Behold Laban follows him with one troop, Esau meets him with another, both
with hostile intentions; not long after, Rachel, the comfort of his life dies;
his children, the staff of his age, wound his soul to death; Reuben proves
incestuous, Judah adulterous, Dina is ravished, Simeon and Levi are murtherous,
Er and Onan are stricken dead, Joseph is lost, Simeon imprisoned, Benjamin (his
right hand) endangered, himself driven by famine in his old age to dye among
the Egyptians, a people that held it abomination to eat with him. Now, what
son of Israel can hope for any good days, when he hears his fathers were
so evil? It is enough for us, if when we are dead we can rest with him in the
Land of promise. It were easy to show the like of Joseph, Jeremy, David,
Daniel, John Baptist, Peter, Paul* and all the generation of Gods children and
servants: For as the Apostle gives a general testimony of all the Saints in
the old Testament, saying, That some endured the violence of the fire, some
were rackt, others were tried by mockings and scourgings, bonds and
imprisonments, some stoned, some h^^ne in sunder, some slain with the sword,
some wandered up and down in Sheeps skins, and Goats skins, being destitute,
afflicted, and tormented, some forced to wander in wildernesses and mountains,
and hide themselves in dens and caves of the earth, being such as the world was
not worthy of, Heb. 11. So Ecclesiastical History gives the like general
testimony of all the Saints in the New Testament and succeeding ages; and it is
well known, that our Savior Christ's whole life, even from his cradle to his
grave, was nothing else but a continued act of suffering; he that had all,
possessed nothing, except the punishment due to our sins, which lay so heavy
upon him for satisfaction, that it pressed his soul as it were to the
nethermost hell, and made him cry out in the anguish of his spirit, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? So that to be free from crosses and
afflictions, is the privilege only of the Church triumphant.

Now the way not to repine at those above us, is to look at those below us; we
seldom or never see any man served with simple favors. It is a great word
that Zozomen speaks of Apollonius, That he never asked any thing of God in all
his life, that he obtained not. Yea we think he speeds well, that lives, as it
were, under a perpetual Equinoctial, having night and day equal; good and
ill fortune in the same measure: for these compositions make both our crosses
tolerable, and our blessings wholesome. We that know not the afflictions of
others, call our own the heaviest; every small current is a torrent; every
Brook a River; every River a Sea: we make our selves more miserable than we
need, than we should, by looking upon our miseries in a multiplying glass; we
measure the length of time, by the sharpness of our afflictions, and so make
minutes seem hours, and days months. If we be sick, and the Physician
promises to visit us to morrow with his best relief, with what a tedious
longing do we expect his presence? Our imagination makes every day of our
sorrow appear like Iosuahs day, when the Sun stood still in Gibeon. The summer
of our delights is too short: but the winter of our affliction goes slowly of;
we are so sensible of a present distress, and so ungrateful for favors past,
that we remember not many years health so much, as one days sickness, it is
true, former meals do not relieve our present hunger, but this cottage of
ours ruins straight, if it be not new daubed every day, new repaired. What
then? shall to days Ague, make us forget yesterdayes health, and all Gods
former favors? if he do not answer us in every thing, sha'l we take pleasure
in nothing? Shall we slight all his blessings, because in one thing he crosses
us, whereas his least mercy is beyond our best merit? but if we think of our
deliverance from the fire of hell, this is cause enough to make us both patient
and thankful; though the trifles we delight in be taken from us. Lord take
away what thou please for thy glory, and my good, so long as thou savest me
from the fire of hell, and thy everlasting wrath. Neither is there a better
remedy for impatience, then to cast up our receipts, and to compare them with
our deservings. If thou look upon thy sufferings, thou shall find them far
easier than thy sins have deserved; nothing to what thy fellow Saints, and
Christ thy elder brother has suffered before thee: at a Lions den, or a fiery
furnace not to turn tail, were a commendations worthy a Crown, do but
compare thy own estate with theirs, and thou shall find cause to be
thankful that thou art above any, rather than of envy or malice, that any is
above thee, to domineere and insult over thee; yea, compare thine own estate
with thine enemies, thou shall see yet greater cause to be thankful; for if
these temporary dolors which God afflicts his people with, are so grievous to
thee, how shall thine and Gods enemies endure that devouring fire, that
everlasting burning? Isaiah 33. ver. 14.

CHAP. 39. That the more we suffer here (so it be for righteousness sake) the
greater our reward shall be hereafter.
FIfthly, We shall bear the Cross with more patience and comfort; if with
Moses we shall have respect unto the recompense of reward, which is promised to
all that, notwithstanding what they shall suffer, persevere in well doing.
Great are our trials, but salvation will one day make amends, when we shall
have all tears wiped from our eyes, when God shall turn all the water of our
tears into the wine of endless comfort; Yea, when our reward shall be so much
the more Joyous, by how much more the course of our life has been grievous.

First, see what promises are made to suffering, Blessed are they which mourn,
says our Savior, for they shall be comforted, Mat. 5.4. Blessed are they
which suffer persecution for righteousness, for theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven, Verse 10. Blessed shall ye be when men revile you, and persecute you,
and say all manner of evil against you for my sake falsely. Rejoice and be
glad, for great is your reward in Heaven, Verse. 11.12. Behold, says God, it
shall come to pass, that the Devil shall cast some of you into prison, that
ye may be tried; and ye shall have tribulation ten days; yet fear none of
those things which thou shall suffer. For be but thou faithful unto death, and
I will give thee the crown of life, Revel. 2.10. A Crown without cares,
without rivals, without envy, without end; And again, Blessed is the man that
endures temptation; for when he is tried he shall receive the crown of life,
James 1.12. And lastly, Whosoever shall forsake Houses, or Brethren, or
Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands, for my names
sake, he shall receive an hundred fold more, and shall inherit everlasting
life, Mat. 19.29. This is a treasure worthy our hearts, a purchase worth our
lives. Now who is there that shall hear these promises, and compare the
seed-time with the Harvest, look up from the root to the fruit, consider the
recompense of the reward, and will not choose rather to suffer adversity with
the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season? Hebrews
11.25. Who will not be willing to suffer with Christ, that he may also reign
with him? 2 Timothy 2.12. Who will not suffer these light afflictions which are
but for a moment, when they cause unto us a far more excellent and eternal
w^ight of glory? 2 Cor. 4.16, 17. Was Lazarus for a time extreme miserable? he
is now in Abraham's bosom. Yea, blessed Lazarus, thy soars and sorrows soon
ceased, but thy joys are everlasting. Now me thinks if thou but considerest
that thy pains will shortly pass, but thy joy shall never pass away; it
should prove a notable sovereign Cordial to strengthen thee; not only against
reproaches which attend thy profession, but even against fire and faggot. Who
would not be a Philpot for a month, or a Lazarus for a day, or a Stephen for
an hour, that he might be in Abraham's bosom for ever: nothing can be too much
to endure for those pleasures, which endure for ever.

Its true, If in this life only we had hope in Christ, we were of all men the
most miserable, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 15.19. But thou must consider,
that as this life is our hell, and the wickeds heaven, John 16.20. So the next
life shall be their hell, and our Heaven, Verse. 21.33. As Dives was in Abraham's
bosom, when Lazarus was in torments; so Lazarus was in Abraham's bosom, when
Dives was in torments, Luke 16.23, 25. And herein we fare no worse than Christ;
did not his spirit pass from the cross into Paradise? Did not he first
descend into hell, and then had his ascension? suppose thy sufferings be great,
what then? Assure thy self, that every pang is a prevention of the pains of
hell, and every respite an earnest of Heavens rest; and how many stripes do
thou esteem Heaven worth? Its true, flesh and blood is so sensual, that it
feels a little pain in the finger, a great deal more than the health of the
whole body. But let us better consider on it, and behold at once the whole
estate of a Christian, we shall see his peace exceed his pain; yea, we shall
see both the torments present, and the glory following: hope makes absent joys
present, wants, plenitudes, and beguiles calamity, as good company does the
way. The poor Traveller in thinking of his Inn, goes on more cheerfully, and
the bondman in calling to mind the year of Iubilee. When the Apprentice calls
to mind that his years of covenant will now shortly expire, and then he shall
have his freedom confirmed, the very remembrance thereof makes many
laboursome works seem more light, and l^sse grievous unto him, neither does
he afterward repent it. Did it ever repent Jacob, when he came to inherit his
Fathers blessing, that he had endu^ed a long exile, and tedious bondage? Or
Joseph, when he was once made Ruler in Egypt, that he had formerly been sold
thither, and there imprisoned, and he had never been a Courtier if he had not
first been a prisoner? Or did it repent the Israelites when they came to
inherit the Land of promise, that they had formerly been forty years passing
through a forlorn wilderness? Or which of Gods servants did ever repent that
they had passed the apprentiship of their service here, and were now gone to be
made free in glory? If so, let us do and suffer cheerfully, patiently,
courageously, what God imposes upon us: knowing that after we have swet and
smarted but six days at the utmost, then comes our Sabbath of eternal rest,
which will make amends for all; knowing that death ends our misery, and begins
our glory, and a ^^w groans are well bestowed for a Preface to an immortal
joy. Let the^ our eyes be continually on the joys which follow, and not on the
pain which is present; the pain neglected and unregarded cannot be very
discomfortable. But that there i^ reward promised to those which suffer in
Christ's cause, i^ not all; for our reward shall be answerable to our
sufferings, the greater our sufferings are here, the greater shall our reward
be hereafter; the malice of our enemies shall make for the increase of our
happiness, M^t. 16.27. The deluge of calamities may ass^u^e us, but they shall
exalt us. Suffering for the Gospel is no inferior good work, and every one
shall be rewarded, though no^ for, yet according to his works, Psalm. 62.12.
Romans 2.6. Revel. 22.1^. The greater degree of grace we attain to here, the
greater degree of glory we shall have hereafter. They that turn many unto
righteousness, s^^^l shine as the stars in the Kingdom of Heaven, Dan. 12. 3.
And they that suffer Martyrdom shall be clothed with long white roabs, and
have Palms in their hands, Rev. 6.9, 11. Neither would those Saints in the old
Testament, which were ^a^ked and (...), be delivered, or accept of their
enemies fair offers, to the end they might receive a better resurrection, and
a more glorious reward^ H^b. 11.15. A^^^, when we look to the reward, we could
not wish our work easier, or our burden lighter: When we are judged, we are
chastened of the Lord, because we should not be condemned with the world, 1
Cor. 11.32. If we be not chastened here, we shall be condemned hereafter. Now
whether had you rather rejoice for one fit, or always? You would do both,
which may not be; you would be both Dives and Lazarus, have happiness both
here and hereafter* pardon me, it is a fond covetousnes, and idle singularity
to affect it: What that you alone may fare better than all Gods Saints? That
God should straw Carpets for your feet only, to walk unto your Heaven; and
make that way smooth for you, which all Patriarchs, Prophets, Evangelists,
Confessors, and Christ himself have found rugged and bloody? Away with this
self-love, and come down you ambitious sons of Z^bedee, and ere you think
of sitting near the Throne, be contented to be called unto the Cup. Now is
your trial. Let your Savior see how much of his bitter potion you can pledge,
then shall you see how much of his glory he can afford you. In all Feasts the
coursest meats are tasted first: be content to drink of his Vinegar and Gall,
and after you shall drink new Wine with him in his Kingdom. Besides, without
some kind of suffering, how shall your sincerity be approved* Even nature is
jo^und and cheerful whiles it prospers; but let God withdraw his hand, no
sight, no trust; the Mother of Micha, while her wealth lasts, can dedicate a
good part of her silver to the Lord, but now she has lost it she falls a
cursing, Judges 17.1, 2, 3. We all are never weary of receiving, soon weary of
attending; we are ready to shrink from Christ, so soon as our profits or
pleasures shrink from us; but if with the Needle of the Compass, in the midst
of tempestuous weather, we remain always unmovable, and stayed upon one
point, it is a sign the Loadstone of the Gospel has changed our hearts, and
we are governed by Christ, as the Needle is by the North Pole. Wherefore if God
should not frame outward things to thy mind, do thou frame thy mind to
endure with patience and comfort what he sends; and this will be an Odor
smelling sweet a S^^^^fice acceptable and pleasant to God: yea, herein thou
shall approve thy self with David, a man after Gods own heart; and you know
that as David was unto God according to his heart, so was God unto David
according to his.

CHAP. 40. Application of the former Grounds.
ANd so you have the res^^ue of the grounds of comfort; it remains that I
should apply them: For this Doctrine, though it be better understood than
practiced, as Cassandra was better known than trusted; yet being both known,
applied, and duly trusted to, will, (like the Sun) not only delight our
understandings with its contemplation, but also warm and quicken our
affections. Wherefore is there any weak Christian so white livered with
Nicodemus, that the reproaches and persecutions which attend his profession,
make him ashamed of Christ, or cause him to think that it is in vain to serve
the Lord, whereby, he is frighted out of the narrow way that leads to life?
Let him draw near, for I chiefly direct my speech unto him: are afflictions
and persecutions so necessary and profitable, as has been showed? does not
God only gain glory by our sufferings, but do they also bring u^ to
repentance and amendment of life, (...) up to prayer, we^^e (...) from the love
of the world, keep u^ always prepared for our enemies assaults, discover
whither we are sincere or no, make us humble, improve all Christian graces in
us? Is God more specially present with us in afflictions* cannot our enemies
diminish one hair of (...) head^ without Gods special leave and appointment?
Has he promised that we shall not be tempted above our strength? Are these
stripes the chiefest ^okens and pledges of Gods love and adoption? Were none of
his children ever exempted from the like? And lastly, shall ou^ moment^ny
sufferings be rewarded with everlasting glory? Yea, shall our glory be
inc^eased (...) our sufferings have been more? Then (...) them serve as so
many restoratives to thy fainting spirit; yea, lift up thy hands which hang
down, and strengthen thy weak knees, Heb. 12.12. For I suppose ignorance of
these things to be the cause of thy drooping; and that thou have never been
conversant in the book of God* or if thou have* that thou did never
seriously ponder these Scriptures which have formerly been rehearsed; for
had thou seriously considered them, thou would not have dared to make that
an occasion of grief and prejudice, which the Spirit of God makes the
greatest cause of joy, and confirmation that can be. For what can be spoken
more express, direct, and significant? What demonstrations can be given more
sollid? What Fortifications or Bulwarks so strong and safe against the
affronts of Satan, and the World? Thou say thou art persecuted for
welldoing, and therefore think it a strange thing. God says it is, and ever
has been common to all his children, not Christ himself excepted: Thou
think thy self miserable, God says thou art blessed: Thou say thou art
hated of the world, God says, thou art beloved of Christ, who has chosen thee
out of the world: Thou think it a shame to be reproached, God says, it is
thy glory: Thou grievest at it, God says, thou have great cause to rejoice,
for it shows thee to be borne of God, thine enemies to be the seed of the
Serpent: Thou say tha^ al things go cross with thee, God says, that all
things shall wo^^ together for the best; it may be the increase of thy
^emporall happiness; how ever that it shall be for the improvement of thy
graces here, for the advancement of thy glory hereafter. Thou think it a
sign of displeasure, God says, it is to thy Enemies a token of perdition* but
to thee of salvation: Thou think thy self near forsaken, God says, The
spirit of glory and of God rests upon thee: Thou say, thou shall one day
perish, God says, that neither things present, nor things to come shall ever
be able to separate thee from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord: Thou think the Lord does not hear thee, because he does not presently
answer thee in the things that thou requirest; I tell thee, it were ill for the
best of us, if we were permitted to be our own choosers: Let Peter have his
desire, and his Master shall not dye, so Peter himself and the whole world had
been lost; in unfit supplications we are most heard, when we are repelled: our
God oftentimes does answer our prayers with merciful denials, and most
blesses us in crossing our desires. We may ask either bad things to a good
purpose, or good things to a bad purpose, or good things to a good purpose, but
in an ill season. Now if we ask what is either unfit to receive, or unlawful
to beg, it is a great favor of our God to be denied: granting is not always
the effect of love; if so, then had Paul been less loved than Satan: Satan
begd but once, and had his prayer granted concerning Job: S. Paul begd thrice
that he might not be buffetted, yet was denied. Satan begd his shame, who
envied his success? S. Paul that freedom from temptation, which would have
been worse had then wanted: yea, if granting were always an effect of love,
then was our blessed Savior less loved than Satan; for the Lord would not let
the Cup of his passion pass from him upon his earnest prayer, which he made as
he ^as Man. But you must know that denyals in some cases, are better than
grants; the Lord will not take away the body of sin from us upon our earnest
prayers, yet he grants us that which is equivalent, viz. Grace, to subdue
our corruptions, and withal takes away the occasion of pride, which is better;
for certainly he is more supported of God, that has grace given him to conquer
a (...) as had the Martyrs, in being (...) those tortures, than another who is
excused to fight. Again, we must not measure Gods hearing of our suit by his
present answer, or his present answer by our own sense; touching the first,
Zachary a long ^^me ^alled of a son for all his prayer but when he had even
forgot that prayer, he had a Son; the Angel brings him good news, Luke 1.13.
Thy prayer is heard: When did he make this prayer? Not lately, for then he was
grown old, and had given over all hope of a child so that this request was
past over many years, and no answer given.

2. To prove that we are not to judge of GODS answering our prayers by our
own sense, I need (...) to instance the Woman of Canaan (is what can speed
well, if the prayer of faith from the knees of humility succeed not) and yet
behold, the further she goes, the worse she fares; her discouragement is
doubled with her suite: It is not good (says our Savior,) to take the
Childrens bread, and cast it to dogge^; here was told comfort, yet stay but a
while, he cleares up his brows and speaks to her so comfortably, that 'twere
able to secure any heart, to dispell any fears. O Savior, how different are
thy ways from ours, when even thy severity argues favor! The trial had not
been so sharp, if thou had not found the faith so strong, if thou had not
meant the issue so happy: it is no unusual thing for kindness to look sternly
for the time, that it may indeare it self more, when it lists to be discovered.

It was cold comfort that the Criple heard from Peter and John, when he begged
of them an alms, Silver and Gold have I none: but the next claws, rise up and
walk, made amends for all. O God, we may not always measure thy meaning by
thy semblance; sometimes what thou most intendest, thou show least: in our
afflictions thou turn'st thy back upon us, and hidest thy face from us, when
thou most mindest our distresses. So Jonathan shot the arrows beyond David,
when he meant them to him; So Joseph calls for Benjamin into hands, when his
heart was bound to him in the strongest affection; so the tender mother makes
as if she would give away her crying Child, whom she hugges so much closer in
her bosom. If thou pass by us whiles we are struggling with the tempest, we
know it is not for want of mercy, thou can not neglect us: Oh let not us
distrust thee if thou come, it is to relieve us, if thou stayest, it is to
try us: howsoever, thy purpose is to save us. Surely God will work alone, and
man must not be of his council. Wherefore many times he deals with wicked
men, as Eutrapilus sometime^ did with his subjects; who, when he was minded to
do a poor man a mischief, would give him abundance of wealth, whereas
contrarily his Children find themselves croft with a blessing. As when Isabel
Queen of England was to repasse from Z^^l^^d into her own kingdom* wit^ ^n
Army, in favor of her son against her husb^nd, had utterly been cast away,
had she come unto the Port intended, being there expected by her enemies: but
providence, against her will, brought her to another place* where she safely
landed. And indeed how infinitely should we int^ngle our selves, if we could
sit down and obtain our wishes; do we not often wish that, which we after,
see would be our confusion; because we ignorantly follow the flesh and blinded
appetite, which looks on nothing but the shell and outside; whereas God
respects the soul, and distributeth his favor for the good of that and his
glory. It is an argument of love in the father, when he takes away the childs
knife, and gives him a book. We cry for riches, or liberty, or peace, they are
knives to cut our fingers; wherefore God gives us his word, the riches of
Verity, not of Vanity; He gives us that glorious liberty to be the Sons of
God, he gives us that peace which the world cannot give, nor take away:
wherefore let the Christian understand God his Physician, tribulation his
Physic; being afflicted under the Medicine, thou cryest; the Physician hears
thee not according to thy will, but thy weal; thou can not endure thy
malady, and will thou not be patient of the remedy. No man would be more
miserable, than he that should cull out his own ways: What a specious show
carried Midas his wish with it* and how did it pay him with ruin at last?
Surely, I have seen matters fall out so unexp^^^edly, that they have tutored
me in all (...) neither to desp^ire nor presume; not to despair, for God can
help me; not to presume, for God can cross me: One day made Marius Emperor,
the next saw him rule* and the third he was stain of hi^ Soldiers. Well then,
if with Paul, thou have besought the Lord often, that thy present affliction
might depart from thee, and can not be heard in the thing which thou
desire, know that thou art heard in that which is more conducible to thy
profit, and consequently rejoice more in that thy petition is denied, th^n if
it had been granted. This was the use which Saint Paul made of Gods denial,
and he knew what he did; though he had as much to boast and rejoice of, as any
one living, yet, says he, Of my self I will not rejoice, except it be of min^
infirmities; That is, afflictions, reproaches persecutions, inward temptations,
fears, distrusts, etc. But in these I will very gladly rejoice; Why? That the
power of Christ may dwell in (...)* Note his reason, he had heard God say, that
his power was made Perfect through weakness, 2 Cor. 12.8, 9. Neither had he
only cause to rejoice in his infirmities, but all Gods people have the same
cause to rejoice; for what the spirit of comfort speaks in this, and in all the
former places recited, do equally belong to thee for thy consolation, with all
the regenerate; for whatsoever was written aforetime, was written for thy
learning and mine, that we through patience, and comfort of the Scriptures
might have hope, Romans 15.4. beleevest thou the former Scriptures spoken by
CHRIST, and his Apostles? I know that thou beleevest with some mixture of
unbelief, and art almost persuaded, not only to do, but to suffer chearefully
for well doing. But why do thou not altogether believe, that it is a blessed
and happy thing thus to suffer, Matthew. 5.10, 11, 12. That thou have great cause
to rejoice and be glad, that thou art counted worthy to suffer rebuke for
Christ's Name, Acts 5.41. Thou see it is not for nothing that Christ says,
Blessed and happy are ye when men revile you and persecute you; That Saint
James says, Count it exceeding joy, when ye fall into diverse temptations,
James 1.2. It is not for nothing that Saint Paul says, I take pleasure in
infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, i^ persecutions, in anguish, for
Christ's sake, etc. 2 Cor. 12.10. That Peter and John, when they were beaten and
imprisoned, departed from the council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy
to suffer rebuke for Christ's Name, Acts 5.41. For even bearing the Cross with
Christ, is as great a preferment in the Court of heaven, as it is in an earthly
Court for the Prince to take off his own Roabe, and put it on the back of one
of his servants.

Indeed it is hard for Job, when the c^rr^rs of God fight against him, and the
Arrows of the Almighty sticks so fast in him, that the venom thereof has
drunk up his spirit, Job 6.2, 3, 4. to think it a special favor and
dignity; but so it was, being rightly considered. It was hard for Joseph's
brethren to hear him speak roughly unto them, take them for spies, and commit
them to prison, Genesis 42.30. and think it is all out of love; much more hard
for Simeon to be culd out from the rest, and committed toward, while his
brethren are set at liberty, verse 24. and yet it was so; yea he loved him
best, whom he se^med to favor least: yet such is the infirmity of our nature,
that as wealte eyes are dazzled with that light which should comfort them, so
there is nothing more common with Gods Children, then to be afflicted with the
causes of their joy, and astonished with that which is intended for their
confirmation. Even Man^a conceaves death in that vision of God, wherein alone
his life and happiness did consist, Judges 13.22. But what has been the
answer of God always to his Children in such their ecstasies, but this? Fear
not Gideon, Iud. 6.23. F^are not Joseph, Mat. 1.10. Fear not Zachary, Luke
1.12, 13. Fear not Paul, for I am with thee, and no man shall lay hands on
thee, to do thee h^rt, etc. Acts 18.9, 10. The words are often repeated (as
Pharaohs dreams was doubled) for the surenesse. Yea to the end that we should
be fearelesse in all our sufferings, so long as we suffer not as evil doers, 1
Peter 4.15. Fear not, As one well notes, is the first, word in th'Annuntiation
of Christ's conception, and the first word in the first Annuntiation of his
birth, and the first word in the first Annuntiation of his Resurrection, and
almost the last words in his last exhortation a little before his death, are,
Let not your hearts be troubled, and be of good comfort; strengthening his
followers, and sweetning his cross by diverse forcible reasons, Luke 21. Mark
13. And the words of dying men have ever been most emphaticall, most
effectual: nay more than all this, if yet thou will not be comforted, look
but John 16.20. and thou shall have thy Savior assure thee by a double bond,
his Word I say. his Oath Verily, verily, I say unto you, that though for the
present you do fear, and sorrow, and weep, yet all shall be turned into joy,
and that joy shall no man be able to take from you, Verse 22.

FINIS.
Imprimatur.
Thomas Weeks, Cap. Domest. Land. Episc.

Errata.
Page 17. lin. 12. full careere, read, our full car^ere. p 21. l. 24. burn
our blood, r. burn up our blood. p. 37. l 15. Luke 22.31. r. Luke 22.3, 4. p.
77. l. 7. Genesis 49. r. Genesis 4.9. p. 94. l. 17. Theodorus, r. Theodorus. p. 115.
l. 7. Luke 23, 24. r. Luke 23.34. p. 117. l. 2. for if the whole world, r. so
if the whole world. p. 143. l. 6. Ammorites, r. Aramites. p. 147. l. 10. sin is
the sting; r. 2. Sin is the sting. p. 154. l. 12. Hotspur, r. Swash-buckler. p.
160. l. 29. again, r. worth. p. 165. l. 1. repaired, r. repayed. p. 165. l.
11. at the reproach, r. of the reproach. p. 168. l. 17. Ephesians. 4.21. r. Ephesians.
4.26. p. 170. l. 6. maker, r. make.

THE TABLE.
A
AS our sufferings Abound, our consolations ^bound also, 189, 190 We are apt to
think God Absent in trouble, 189 If his enemy Accuse him, he will more accuse
himself, 98 Distinguish between the good which is of God, and the evil which
is of man in the same Action, 184 to 187 Never the freer from guilt or
punishment for that hand which God has in their offensive Actions, ^85, 186
Gods former Actions are patterns of his future, 207 Rules for our Actions, 166
to 171 Nothing Accomplished here, which is no^first decreed in Heaven, 196, 197
Suffering a notable sign of our Adoption, 52 to 54 Adversity teaches the way
to Heaven, 30 That all Afflictions come by the special providence of God, 193,
to 222 Every maine Affliction is our red sea* 5^ Affliction brings
repentance, (...) Seldom awakened but by Affliction, 16, 17 Affliction makes
known the graces of God in us, 10 to 14 One Affliction does us more good then
many Sermons, 17 Affliction makes us importunate, 25 to 29 Our enemies may
Afflict us, cannot hurt us, 203 Our Afflictions shall be tolerable or short,
either light or not long, not violent, or not last, 204 We that know not the
Afflictions of others, call our own the heaviest, 234 Sins, not Afflictions,
argue God absent, 224 Afflictions not good of themselves, but by accident, 179
Afflictions come upon us like Sampsons Lion, and make us afraid, 172 Affliction
works amendment of life, ^0 to 25 Affliction the sum of Divinity, 17
Affliction the best Schoolmaster, 15 to 25 We are Afflicted, not over-pressed,
203 Affliction keeps us always in a readiness, 35, 36 Affliction makes us go
to God by prayer, 25 to 2^ If not better for Affliction, we are worse, 173 All
things are ours, 181 What makes the Angels rejoice, makes men pow^e and
stomach, 2, 3 Anger sometimes a virtue, 168 For God not to be Angry with a man
is the greatest anger of all, 225 Anger a kind of baseness, and infirmity,
118 If God do not Answer us in every thing, we take pleasure in nothing, 235
The best Answer, no answer, 124 A mock Answer may clean change their minds,
133, 134, 135 Be Angry but sin not, 16^ Many have died by passionate Anger, 92
A^^^r a sore disease of the mind, 119 Application of the grounds of comfort,
246 to 249 We cannot Ascribe too little to our selves, 49 to 52 Sore Affliction
will make us ascribe all to God, 49
B
BAnds of some imbolden others, 7 We must Bear with others, God bears with
us, 158 If we are without correction, we are Bastards and not sons, 222 Satan
must Beg leave of God before he can touch a hair of our heads, or a beast of
our herds, 198 199 The weak Christian Believes with some mixture of
unbeleefe, 276 To Believe against reason and without knowledge of means, is
heroical, 58, 59 None but evil men will Believe their evil reports, 139 The
several Benefits of affliction, 24^ The sin theirs, the good which comes of it
Gods, the Benefit ours, 185, 186 The praise of faith to Believe above hope, 39,
40 No such coward, none so valiant as the Believer, 147 Much the better for our
enemies, 203 We best know the worth of a Benefit by the want of it, 59 to ^4 We
are the Better for our being the worse, 180 God does most Bless us in crossing
our desires. 249 The more they cross or curse us, the more God will bless us,
108 to 111 Paul's Blindness took away his blindness, 65 If sick, or in
prison, or Blind, or ^a^e, we are the better for it, 176 The Blood of the
Martyrs is the seed of the Church, 8 The Body but the Bark, Cabinet, Case, or
Instruments of the soul, 102 Good for the soul that the Body is sometimes
sick, 48 Diseases of the Body are as medicines to the soul, 31 He that is
Bor^e of God overcommeth the world, 12, 13 The Bondsman goes on cheerfully when
he calls to mind the year of jubilee, the Traveller when he thinks upon his
Inn, 240
C
ASsurance of Gods Call takes away the very fear of death, 147 Carelessenesse
puts ill will out of countenance, 124 125 In some Cases to chastise may be
lawful and expedient, 168 Look up from the stone to the hand, from the effect
to the Cause, 96 Superior Causes guide the subordinate, 197 One day may make a
great Change, 255 He that will not be in Charity shall never be in Heaven, 104
Either Chastened here, or condemned hereafter, 243 The worse we were, if
Changed, the more honor to us, 79, 80 Whom the Lord loves he Chastens, 222 We
are Chastened that we may not be confounded, 43 to 49 It were ill for us if
permitted our own Choosers, 249 Christ's actions our instructions, 157, 158
Christians put down Philosophers in patience, 148 to 157 Christ did first
descend into hell, and then had his ascension, 240 Christ and all the Saints
our partners and partakers in the cross, 229 to 237 Christ overcame by
suffering, 84 Persecution inlargeth the Churches bounds, 7, 8, 9 Cherishing
ever follows stripes, 58, 59 Comforted according to the days they are
afflicted, 101, 102 When we find no Comfort abroad, we seek it at home, 16
Affliction brings the Company of God himself, 101, 102 The less Comfort we
find on Earth, the more we seek it from above, 30 The worldly man, on his
bed of sickness, has neither Comfort from God, or from others, or from
himself, 221 Satan's Commendations the greatest slander, 128, 129 If we have
not already, we shall find in the Conclusion that all is for the best, 180 He
the greatest Conqueror that overcomes his own lusts, 12, 13 Not to Condemn a
man before we hear him speak, 136 Spiritual Consolations late, but sudden,
209 When our Conflicts are most grievous, they are near at an end, 209 The
Christian so conquers himself that wrongs cannot conquer him, 69 Conscience as
a thousand witnesses, Advocates, etc. to plead procure, pronounce, etc. 170 To
Contemn their Contempt, 117 Every small Contentment (...) our affections to
the world, 175 The best Confutation of slanders is by our good works, 75
Controversies like a pair of Cudgels are thrown in by the Devil, 88 A good
Conscience like a true and constant friend, 75 to 80 By affliction we are made
Comfortable to Christ our elder brother, 52, 53 To be exempt from misery, the
most miserable Condition of all, 227 A good man's Constructions ever full of
charity and favor, 117 We must not be of Gods Council, 253 A good Conscience
will not be put out of countenance, 75 to 80 Our Corruptions never appear,
till shaken by an injury, 49 to 52 Maine evils have Crowns answerable, 108
God weighs to us favors and Crosses in an equal balance, 220 Bearing the
Cross with Christ, a great preferment, 257 Our Crosses prove blessings, 43 to
49 A sound spirit, will bear the greatest Cross, 111 Nothing but Cries can
pierce Heaven, 27 That it is for our Credit to be evil spoken of, 126 to 130
The Cross is counterpoysed and made sweet, with more than answerable
blessings, 100 to 104 Patience breaks the stroke of every Cross, 111 The
sharpness of Crosses, Gods spiritual Hedge, 43 to 49 To be free from Crosses
and afflictions, the privilege of none but the Church triumphant, 233 The
Cudgel not of use when the beast but only barks, 85 They can bear injuries
out of Custom, 67 to 73 Custom a second or new nature, 69 to 73 Custom makes
any thing familiar and easy, 69 to 72
D
WHo would not be a Lazarus for a D^y, to be in Abraham's bosom for ever, 239
We are afflicted, that we may not be Damned, 43 to 49 Danger in being without
dangers, 45 to 52 We should b^ Deaf and dumb at reproach, 120 Death has
nothing terrible in it, but what our life ha^h made so, 147 Death in Christ's
cause the way to heaven on Horseback, 122 The Martyrs even slighted Death, 122
Even Death it self shall work our good, 181 He that is faithful unto the
Death, shall have the crown of life, 238 Death ends our misery, and begins our
glory, 241 Death, the wicked man's fear, the Godly man's with, 33, 34 If God
Defer his help, it is on purpose that our trials may be perfect, our
Deliverance welcome, our recompense glorious, 2^^ The highest Degree of
suffering not worthy the lowest degree of glory, 105 The greater Degree* of
grace, the greater degree of glory, 242 If God Delay us never so long, he will
support us as long, 219 The Saints would not be delivered from Death, 243 Their
Delights momentany, their punishment interminable, 105 Every Deliverance makes
us more confident, 54 to 59 Gods Delivering some, increases the faith of
others, 56 The more our Deliverances, the greater our faith, 54 to 59 Our
comfort is the greater when the Deliverance is seen before it is expected, 212
Our Saviors suit which he made as man, denied, 250 Denials sometimes better
than grants, 250 If God Denies us what we ask, he gives us that which is
better, 46 God rarely Deprives a man of one faculty, but he more than supplies
it in another, 21 No better remedy for impatience, then to cast up our
receipts; and compare them with our Deservings, 235 Gods people bear injuries
patiently, because their sins have Deserved them, 94 to 100 What ever we
suffer, we have Deserved more, 94 to 100 We endure nothing from our enemies,
but what we have Deserved from God, 94 to 100 Without suffering we cannot be
C^rists Discipl^s, ^2 to 54 We resem^^^ the Devil if we (...) cruel 158 The
Devil wounded with his own weapon, 15 to 25 Some as willing to Dye as di^e,
106, 107 A Christian parley about Difficulties, 155 Let none D^sp^ire for God
can help, none presume, fe^ing God can cross them, 255 Let none Dismay us
with the^^ p^oud looks, nor big words, 203 We are too sensible of a prese^^
Distress, ungrateful for favors past, 234 Hypocrites Discover themselves
when persecution comes, 37 to 43 Prosperity Discovers (...) 38 to 43 Affliction
Discovers (...), 3^ to 43 It is the lot of all Gods people (...) suffer e^ill,
^3 A D^minion over ones self the greatest conq^^st, 80 85
E
THing (...) 61, 62 Actions to be ^^dged by (...), 151 The End (...) the
uprig^^ man is pea^e, 181 Enmity be^weene the good and bad, 1, 2, 3 E^equality
the gro^nd of O^de^, 197 Our Enemi^s both prov^ and (...), 67 to 73 We sooner
and more plain^y (...) Enemy, 94 to 100 The (...) Devil himself, do much
pleasure us, 178 ^ 10 The Churches Enemies benefit the Church, 66 Our Enemies
more to be pitied than maligned, 118 to 123 Better the Es^ate perish than the
soul, 30 To behold at once the whole Estate of a Christian, and not his
present condition alone, 240 If we compare our own Estate with our enemies, we
have yet greater cause to be thankful, 235, 236 The Evil of affliction,
prevents the evil of sin, 43 to 49 Thank God we Escape so, 94 to 100 Overcome
Evil with goodness, ^42 Evils do not come by chance, neither can they light
where they list, 203 God Esteems us according to what we are, 78, 79 He
speeds well here that lives under a perpetual Equinoctial of good and evil,
233 Gods goodness makes our greatest Evils beneficial unto us, 179 The
redress of Evil in a private person, is evil, 144 All the Evils that can
befall us, make for our inestimable good and benefit, 178 Our care and ^uit
must be to have those Evils sanctified which cannot be averted, 228 Examin^
whether we have well husbanded our afflictions, 171 to 174 Many Examples of
Gods aid in extremity, 208 To be an Example to them and others, 133 to 137
Example will soo^est prevail, 133 to 137 To raise comfort from former
Experience, ^^7 Experience the best informer, 67 Our Ex^^^mities drive us to
him that is ^^^^potent, 211 Man's Extremity is Gods opportunity, 209 He that
has found God present in one Extremity may trust him in another, 207 All our
former prayers and meditations, serve to aid us in our last straights, and
meet together in the center of our Extremity, 221 In all Extremities we must
send faithful and fervent prayer to Christ for ease, 28 A great Evil, not to
be able to suffer evil, 92
F
WE learn to stand by Falling, 4^ It would Fare worse with us, were we our
own choosers, 32 Fathers hold in their own children, when they suffer the
children of bondmen to do as they list, 223 God has much ado (...) reclaim
one of the worlds Favorites, 3^ Gods Former favors, arguments of more, 54 to
59 Hard for us to think it a special Favor and dignity to suffer, but so it
is, 256 Of which many examples, 256, 257 Every sensible Favor of the Almighty,
invites both his gifts, and our trust, 207 Nothing carries us so Far from God,
as his favors, 32 No man ever* served with simple Favors, 23^ The Palate an
ill Judge of the Favors of God, 22^ Nothing more raises up the heart in
present af(...), than the (...) of Favors and wonders past, 207 (...) Devils
can do, 107 A strong Faith is not discouraged either with Gods silence or flat
denial, 57 Their Faith, valor, and patience, best made known by affliction,
10 to 14 The want of Faith made the Philosophers virtues but shining sins, 151
The praise of Faith to hold out to the last, 54 to 59 The Tree of Faith takes
deeper root by shaking, 54 to 59 Suffering increases our Faith, 54 to 59 Do we
Fear, and sorrow, and weep for the present, yet all shall be turned into joy
everlasting, 259 Fear we not them which can only kill the body, but God that
can cast both body and soul into hell. 202 The answer of God to his people in all then ex^asies, has ever been Fear not, fear not, etc. 258, 259 We may
Fear our own flesh as Paul did, but we have no cause, for God will support us
with his grace, 201 In all Feasts the coursest meats are tasted first, 244 Few
men can digest great felicity, 20 We must learn to Fence in the School,
before we fight in the field, 226 A F^^ver does not more burn up our blood,
then our lust, 21 The Philosophers could Forbear, Christians Forgive, 15^
While we Fight one with another, the Devil overcomes both, ^^8 ^ 120 85 ^
Fervent when most in pai^e, 221 The Flesh and blinded appetite looks on
nothing but the shell and outside of things, 254 Motions of revenge come from
the Flesh, the Spirit suggests better things, 145 God scourges the Flesh that
the spirit may be saved, 43 to 49 God makes Fools of the enemies of his
Church, 195 196 Evil natures grow presumptuous upon Forbearance, 162 to 165 If
God a little Forget us, we presently remember our selves, 49 to 52 We cannot
pray aright except we forgive, 103 Nor communicate aright, 103 Nor be good
hearers, 103 Yea, if we pray, it is that we may be condemned, 104 In reason a
man would Forgive his enemy for his own sake, 103 to 115 Not to be afflicted,
is to be Forsaken, 225 Whosoever Forsakes any thing for Christ, shall receive
an hundred fold more, 238 When we are made Free in glory, it shall not repent
us that we endured a hard and strict apprentiship here, 241 A good change to
have the Fire of affliction for the fire or hell, 177 Anger inflames a Fool
sooner than a wise man, 82, 83 Prosperity makes us Forget God, adversity to
remember him, 4^ to 49 We must Forgive y^^ not be forgive^* (...), 1^^, 144 If
we Forgive we shall be forgiven, but not else, 104 Forgiveness the most
valiant kind of revenge, 81 82 Mo^e la^dable to Forgive than revenge* 80 to 85
More generous, more wise to Forgive than revenge, 80 to 85 If we Forgive not,
we can do no part of Gods worship aright, 103, 104 Like Vines, we bear the
more and better Fruit for paring and pruning, 24
G
OF^-^imes Gain brings los^e, 20, 21 We Gain by all our losses, 190 At a
Lions Den or a fiery Furnace not to giv^ our, were truly Generous, 235 No
General Rule but admits of some exceptions, 83 Gentle speech appeaseth wrath,
85 to 94 I^ Guilty of an enemies imputations, amend, otherwise contemn them.
75 to 80 Guiltiness makes one fear what another would wish, 147 Our end in
suffering must be the Glory of God, 151 Look upon his present torments together
with the Glory following. ^48 A Glorious thing to be evil spoken of by evil
men, 127 to 133 Our first parents had been less Glorious, if they had not
wanted a Saviou^, 186 It furthers Gods glory, and makes Satan a looser, 195,
136 God does resist our enemies, sustain us when we faint, and crown us when
we overcome, 191, 192 God wills that as our chastisement, which he hates as the
wickedness of the agent, 186 God takes exact notice of our particular
sufferings, 191, 192 If we are in l^^gue with God, we need not fear the
greatest of men, 196 God may be present, yet we not be pleased, 190 God is
specially present with us in affliction, 187 to 193 God forbeares so long as we
have any thing left to rely upon, 209 God scourges every son whom he
receives, 2^2 The will of God may be done thankfully, 186 If God comes, it is
to releeve us, if he stay, it is to try us, 253 Either God must humor us, or
be distrusted, 189 God wills that, as it is a blessing, trial, or chastisement
to us, which he (...) us the wickedne^^^ of the agent, 185, 186 God will not
bestow whipping where he loves not, 224 If God deny our suit, it is to make us
more importunate, 26 We suffer wrongs patiently for Gods glory, 148 to 157
Moses and David meek Lambs in their own cause, fierc^ Lione in Gods, 165 God
cannot neglect us, if we distrust him not, 253 The praise and thanke^d we only
to God, 186 The sight of our own weakness makes us wholly rely upon God, 49
to 52 We must commit our cause to God, 137 to 142 God punishes the worse, to
spare the better part, 43 to 49 God will maintain his own cause, 139 God
therefore gives because he has given, 54 to 59 Gods goodness turns all our
poisons into Cordials, 179 Godliness and persecution inseparable, 1, 2, 3 We
must acknowledge that God is good even when he strikes, 58 To be more sensible
of Gods dishonor than our own credit, a noat of uprightness, 165 Gods people
grieve more for the cause, than the punishment, 15 None out of the place of
torment, have suffered so much as the Godly. 224 Of which diverse examples,
224, 225 The Good we get by affliction should make us suffer cheerfully, 179
Every Good thing is from above, 183 Even sin it self works our Good, 181 In
doing Good to our enemies, we do more good to our selves, 104 God can easily
work Good by evil instruments, 186 Examples of returning good for evil, 151,
152 Not to do Good for evil, is to entreat those Ambassadors roughly which
are sent in kindness and love, 143 All things shall work together for our
Greatest good* 180 The Good and bad irreconciliable, 3 It must needs be Good
which evil men and Devils oppose, 127, to 133 To do good to them that hurt
us, 142 The greatest praise is to work Good by evil instruments, 7, 8, 9 If
ever we hope for Good our selves, we must return good for evil unto others,
151 Goods and evils are as we apprehend them, 111 Wicked men grow worse, Good
men better by affliction, 39 The Good things of the world make us worse, 21 If
Gold, it will try us, if Iron, it will scowre away our rust, 22 Not to be
Meale-mouthed in the Gospels cause, 164 165 The Graces of Gods children are
made exemplary and they also put their enemies to silence by being tried, 10 to
14 Graces, like the Stars, shine brightest in the night of affliction, 10 to
14, 39 Graces grow the faster for tempestious showers of affliction, 22 He is
more supported of God that has Grace give^ him to conquer, than another that
is excused to fight. 25^ Granting not always the effect of love, 250 Satan's
request Granted, Paul's suit denied, 250 No greater symptom of Guiltiness,
then breaking into choler when accused, 75 to 80 Our Grief shall issdolve, or
be dissolved, 206 Repentance a supersedeaus for all Grief, 19 Not over much
Grieved when afflicted, 176
H
A Sound Heart and clear conscience will abide all trials, 75 to 80 To no at
whose Hand strikes, whether by a Sword, Pluresie, etc. 99 Woe were to us if we
could not be Happy and know it not, 220 Paul Happier in his chain of Iron,
than Agrippa in his chain of Gold, 101, 102 We may be Happy too soon, 32 A
pure Heart the Fountain of all well-doing, 150 The Heart does not hatch all
which the tongue speaks, 117 Patience saves the Heart, though the body suffer,
111 That which is Hard to suffer, is sweet to remember, 59 to 64 He that has a
go^^ Head-peece, seldom passionate, 82, 83 We are never nearer Help, than
when we despair of help, 212 To days Ague makes us forget yesterdayes
Health, and all former favors, 234 How many stripes do we think Heaven
worth, 240 If we think upon our deliverance from Hell fire, it may make us
both patient and thankful, 235 This life is our Hell, the wickeds Heaven, the
next shall be their Hell, and our Heaven, 239 God loves to show his Help, when
he finds us left of all other props, 212 We must not measure Gods Hearing of
our suit, by his present answer, nor his present answer, by our own sense, 251
In un^it supplications we are most Heard when repelled, 249 Heresies make for
the good of Gods Church, 181 Good to Hear what is spoken of us, not who speaks
it, 93 He Hides his face, never turns his heart from us* 205 A Man's Honor to
pass by an offense, 8^, ^3 Their reproach occasioneth God to (...) us the
more, 103, 110 No praise to hold out, until we be Hard driven, 212 God loves
to give comfort to those that are forsaken of their Hopes, 20^ Of which many
examples* 209 to 213 Hope makes absent joys present, wants, plenitudes, etc.
240 Honey out of the Lion, 247 Gods enemies Honor him, 5, 6 Their dispraise a
man's Honor, their praise his dishonor, 1^7 to 133 No Sampson to whom every
Lion yields not some honey, 173 Hope refreshes as much as misery depresseth,
107 What will not Hope of reward make us do or suffer, 105, 106 Affliction
makes Humble, 49 to 52
I
Jacob bound prentise, while profane Esau rides a hunting, 223 Impatience the
Cosin-german to frenzy, 83, 84 Consideration of our enemies Ignorance, may make
us patient, 125 to 12^ Ignorance of the Scriptures, a maine cause of drooping,
247, ^48 Our Imagination makes every day of our s^^row like Ioshuas day, ^5^
Though we may be Importunate, impatient we may not be, stay he never so long,
216 Gods people behave themselves in case of wrong like dead Images, 119, 120
The Impatient, like Children, Fools, Madmen, yea, like Dogs, 91, 92 No
greater sign of Innocence when accused than mildness, 75 to 80 Bare Injuries,
not because they dare not revenge, but because they may not, 69 Patient
Enduring brings a Crown, 104 to 115 Nothing can be too much to Endure for
those pleasures which endure for ever, 239 God uses our enemies but as
Instruments to work his good pleasure on us, 193 to 222 We must take
Injuries, but not provoke them by lenity, 167 Many times what God most
Intends he shows least, 252 We must not so much look to the Instrument as
to the Author, 193 to 222 More beholding to a Providence than our own
Endeavor, 145, 146 Thinking to revenge an Injury, we may begin one, 117 Light
Injuries are made none by a not regarding, 116 We cannot Endure enough to come
to Heaven, 20^ Best Instructed when most afflicted, 64 to 67 If we knew how
profitable afflictions are* we would Endure any thing, 46 to 50 Innocence makes
a man patient, 7^ to 80 Though they go weeping under the burden when they
carry the precious seed of repentance, yet still they return with Joy, and
bring their sheaves with them, 219 Christ always returns with increase of
Joy, 59 to 64 We are usually afflicted with the causes of our Joy, and astonished
with that which is intended for our confirmation, 258 Our sorrows soon cease,
but our Joys are everlasting, 239 Weeping may abide for a night, but Joy
comes in the morning, 204 Out of grief arises Joy, gain out of loss, 25
God allayeth our Joy with the tears of affliction, to increase it, 59 to 64
Affliction increases our Joy and thankfulness, 59 to 64 Let our eyes be on
the Joys which follow, not on the pain which is present, 242 Their reward
shall be according to the Intent, what ever the issue be, 184 to 187 Not Judge
of Gods proceeding until the last act, 9 To Justify God in his judgments, 94
to 100 They but hasten us to Immortality, 122
K
THe Lord first Kille^h and then makes alive, 21^ Suppose they Kill us, they
still rather pleasure than hurt us, 1^^ Usual for Kindness to look sternely
for a time, 25^ Kiss the Rod we smart withal, 176 Our enemies Know neither
what they say, not what they do, 115 to 118 The Nurse Knows better than the
Infant what is good and fit for it, 117
L
SIlence or Laughter the best answer to scoffs, 124 He which breaks one Law,
breaks all, 142, 143 Lawful remedies allowed by God, 163 Not go to Law for
trifles, 168 Our aim and end in going to Law, must not be the hurt of our
enemy, but first, The glory of God; secondly, the reformation of the party, and
others; thirdly, a further peace and quiet afterward; fourthly, without heat
or hate; fifthly, without using extremity, as more desiring peace, than
victory, 168, 169 In case we find no redress, to rest contented with
meekness and quietness, 169 Meditations, when the Law gives no redress, 169
170 To commit our cause to God who is Chiefe-Justice of the whole world, and
both can and will do what is best, 169, 170 To make Conscience our Chauncery
when we go to Law, 170 To make Charity or Judge when we go to Law, 170 To
make Patience our Counselor when we go to Law, 170 To make Truth our
Atourney when we go to Law, 170 To make Peace our Solicitor when we go to
Law, 170 (...) Leprosy cured his leprosy, 65 (...) and happy not to be worse
with Liberty, 174 A wicked man had rather lose his soul than his Life. 147 A
delicious Life makes us that we have no mind to go to Heaven, 29 Life and
death alike welcome to the believer, 147 The Dungeon gives more light than the
Sun, ^5 God orders, Limiteth, and appoints, the measure, quality, und
continuance of every cross, 193 to 22^ God will have us Live by faith, and not
by sense, 54 to 5^ Suppose we Lose our lives yet we gain by that loss, 201,
202 If we Lose our lives, it is that we may save our souls, 201 He that
has Lived well, is seldom unwilling to dye, 147 If we lost our lives, we
shall not lose our labor, 107 Whether the bodies Loss has made the soul a
gainer, 172 They cannot separate us from the Love of God, 20^ Tokens and
pledges of Gods Love and favor, 177 Never any have had so bitter draughts upon
earth, as those God loves best, 225 The good we have by our enemies, should
tutor us to Love them, 179 As troubles arise, our Lusts decline, 23
M
THat we have been vicious Magnifies the power and goodness of God, makes for
our credit, 79, 80 Cautions and rules to be observed, when we appeal to the
Magistrate, 68 to 171 We may crave the Magistrates aid, 164 to 171 The
Magistrates office to right our wrongs; 166 to 169 When displeased with others,
they tear the name of their Maker in pieces, 84 To turn our Malice from the
person to the sin, 97 to 100 Malice makes a man captive to Satan, 103, 104 As
the outward Man decays, the inward Man is renewed, 22 to 25 Infidels won by
seeing the Martyrs so patient, 133 The Martyrs overcame by dying, 84 Commonly
the Measure of our sufferings according to the measure of grace in us, and Gods
love to us, 224 To live by faith when forsaken of Means, is thought worthy a
crown, 212 God not seldom works by contrary Means, 8 All one with God to
work, with, without or against Means, 8 Mecknesse of spirit draws on
injuries, 167 Peter more Merry in prison, than Caiphas on the judgment seat,
101, 102 Gods least Mercy beyond our best merit, 235 Afflictions Gods
Messengers sent to do an errand to us, 49 to 52 God more Mighty to save us,
than all our enemies to hurt us, 204 Nothing by our second birth but is
Miraculous, in comparison of our natural condition, ^10 ^11 Diverse Christian
Miracles, 110, 111 Patience a Miracle, 112 A Miserable thing to be exempt from
miseries, 227 None so Miserable, but some others would change calamities with
him, 103 We make our selves more Miserable, by looking upon our miseries in a
multiplying glass, 234 We learn More by one weeks Misery, than many years
prosperity could teach us, 17,
N
Mild Natures best to others, worst to themselves, 167 Nature jocund whiles it
prospers, 244 Nature must not stand in competition with grace, 113, 114 Need
will make us both humble and eloquent, 27 Neglect will sooner kill an injury
than revenge, 85 to 94 He truly Noble, that can do ill and will not, 80 to 85
Nothing but is good for something, 286
O
ENough for One to be angry at a time, 90 Oppo^^ion may not be righted by
violence, but by law, 144 (...) the ground of Order, 9 God disposes of every
cross to his glory and Our good, 193 to 222 In Outward things Gods enemies may
fare better than his friends, 230 If Outward things frame not to our minds,
frame we our minds to be content with what God sends, 112, 244, 245 A
question whether the enjoying or contemning of Outward things be the greater
happiness, 31 The Outward man diseased, that the inward man may be cured, 43
to 49 The enjoyment of Outward things might endanger my soul, 43 to 49
P
EVery Pang a prevention of the pa^^es of hell, and every respite an earnest of
Heavens rest, 240 Even Pain diminished with patience; 111 Our Pains will
shortly pass, but our joys shall never pass away, 239 We feel a little
Pain in the finger, a great deal more than the health of the whole body, 240
Our Pain short, our joy eternal, 105 Christ past from the Cross into
Paradise, 240 Philosophers Pardon their enemies, we love ours, 151 Passionate
men short lived, 92 to 95 He fuller of Passion than reason, that flames at
every vain puff, 90, 91 Patient, because God commands us, 142 Patience a
counterpoyson against grief, 110 to 115 Patience as Larde to the lean meat of
adversity, 110 111 Hope and Patience, two universal remedies, 110 to 115
Patience sweetens affliction, 110 to 115 The Patient outlive the passionate,
92 to 95 A continued Patience may be different from what is goodness, 150
Patience in imitation of Christ and the Saints, 156 to 162 Patience sometimes a
Pully to draw on more injuries, 162, 163 How Patient our Savior was, 157 158
The way to be Patient, 72, 73 Many will accept of Peace, that will not sue for
it, 134, 135 Our Peace would lose us, if we did not a little lose our peace,
176 God gives that Peace, which the world can neither give nor take away, 254
An idle singularity to affect Peace both here and hereafter, 243 First to assay
all good means of Peace and agreement, 168 We had Perished, if we had not
perished, 176 Perseverance a kind of all in all, 216 God gives us Physic,
that we may not dye, 46, 47 The Physician knows what is best for the patient,
177 Philosophers came short of Christians in patience, 184 to 157 We cannot
Pleasure Gods servants more then by despighting them, 104 to 115 Gods People
choose rather to suffer adversity, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin, 23^
Their Pleasure short, their pain everlasting, 105 We cannot Pleasure our
selves more than by a silent suffering, 88 Plenty of the choicest dainty no
dainty, 63 Their Plots to destroy us, do much advantage us, 7, 8, 9 Not the
Punishment but the sin troubles them, 97 to 100 The evil of Punishment, expels
the evil of sin, 43 to 49 The infliction of a less Punishment oft-times
prevents a greater, 178 To think that God will not Protect and provide for
his, were to derogate from his wisdom, Power, and goodness, yea 'twere
against reason, 181 to 184 That a strong opposition makes for the glory of Gods
Power, 4 to 7 Gods Power best appears in our weakness, 6 If we want faith,
Patience, and wisdom, to make a right use of the cross, we must pray for it,
183 Our praise to be dispraised of them, 127 to 133 They that forsake the Law
Praise the wicked, 127 They are words and not Prayers which fall from careless
lips, 27 Private persons may not revenge, 166 Our Present sufferings the
fittest and wholesomest physic, 48 God lets us blood to prevent a worse
mischief, 43 to 49 Five Prerogatives of a Christians patience, 150, 151 The
Privileges which redownd to us by suffering, 247 Pride first put on, and last
put off, 94, etc. To have Profi^ed by affliction, an evident sign we belong to
God, 172* We are ready to shrink from Christ, when Profits or pleasures
shrink from us, 244 A recapitulation of several Promises, 248, 249.256, 257.
Prosperity feeds pride, and keeps off repentance, 32 Commonly the Lord makes
our latter end so much the more Prosperous, by how much more our former time
has been miserable and adverse* 216, to 220 Of which many examples, 216 to
220 The more Prosperity, the less piety, 20 to 25 Prosperity too strong wine
for a weak brain, 31 If the Lord Prune his Vine, he means not to root it up,
46 To avenge our selves, is to lose Gods Protection, 146, 147 We are kept low,
that we may not be Proud, 44 The Purpose of affliction is to make us earnest
with God, 26
Q
Our Quarrels make both Devil and Lawyers sport, ^8
R
RAge not engendered but by the concurrence of cholera, 85 to 94 If we suffer,
it is that we may Reign, 177 Suffer with Christ, and Reign with him, 239
Reasons of affliction, sixteen, 4 Whereof three concern Gods glory, 4 to 14
Thirteen our good, 14 to 73 Whether our wisdom be improved, or our lives
Reformed, by what we have suffered, 172 The godly may well Rejoice in
tribulation, 256 S. Paul Rejoiced in nothing more than afflictions, reproaches,
persecution, etc. 255 The godly rejoice always, the wicked for a fit only, 243
No Release without repentance, 18, 19 God loves to send Releese when we least
look for it, 205 Religion and persecution inseparable, 1, 2, 3* Religion
allows as much of the Serpent as of the Dove, 163 We can neither endure the
malady, nor the Remedy, 254 Persecution will follow Remission of sins, 1, 2, 3
The end of passion the beginning of Repentance, 136 Repentance can only prevent
the eternal displeasure of God, 22^ Repentance removes affliction, 18, 1^
Affliction makes us repent of f(...) we never dreamt of, 15 The way not to
Repine at those above us, is to look at those below us, 233 The Reproach of an
enemy brings us to see our faults, 94 Judas his depraving Mary, turned to her
great Renown, 132 Lawful to seek Restitution, 167 It is enough that when we
are dead, we shall Rest in the Land of Promise, 232 Some carnal Reasons for
revenge answered, 154 CHRIST not yet Revenged of his enemies, 15^ Both the Law
of Nature, and Law of Nations forbids revenge, 14^, 144 If we miscarry in
seeking Revenge, (...) no comfort, 146, 147 He that takes Revenge, makes
himself both Judge, witness, accuser, and executioner, 139, 140 To Revenge is
to take Gods office out of his hand, 137 to 142 The Lord will Revenge our
wrongs, 121.137 to 142 Revenge a remedy worse than the disease, 85 to 94
Patience the most divine and Christian-like Revenge 84 Great is their Reward
which suffer for righteousness, 237, 238 The more we suffer, the greater our
Reward, 237 to 246 Were every pain we suffer a death, and every cross an
hell, yet we shall have amends enough, 106, 107 Patience shall have a temporal
Reward also, 108 to 115 If not, patience were a sufficient Reward to it self,
110 to 115 We shall bear the cross more comfortably, if we think upon the
Reward promised, 237 to 246 Patient, because patience brings a Reward, 103 to
115 Hope of Reward should make us patient, 102 Our Reward answerable to our
sufferings, 242 The greater our sufferings here, the greater our Reward
hereafter, 242 Rich men neglect God most, 32 Rules to be observed in suffering,
162 to 179
S
SAtan can do any thing by permission, nothing without, 198 199 Satan is
limited, and can go no farther than his chain will reach, 198, 199 God will
never give Satan leave to do the least hurt to our souls, 199 Satan enjoined
silence, 128, 129 If Satan cannot hurt us; much less his instruments weak
men, 199, 200 Our Saviors whole life from his cradle to his grave a continual
act of suffering, 233 The Saints patience, 159 to 162 To search whether the
report be true or no, 97, 98 Their scoffs noble badges of honor and
Innocence, 132 If beaten off from our profession wiith scoffs, we are but
counterfeits, 173 The Scriptures written for our learning patience, comfort and
hope, ^^6 Security the cause of corruption, ^75 Affliction separates the good
and bad, 37 to 43 We take deeper root by shaking, 45 We remember one days
sickness more than many years health, 234 The sick servant has not strong
meats given him, as the rest have, 226 An enemy most vexed with silence, 123
to 126 Silence the way royal to correct a wrong, 80 to 85 Silence will either
drayne the gall ou^ of bitter spirits, or make it more overflow to their own
disgrace, 124 Silence in case of personal wrongs, but not in the causes of God
and Religion, 125 Our Savior a pattern for silent suffering, 96, 97 Silence
one kind of revenge, 123 to 126 Affliction discovers whether we are sincere or
not, 37 to 43 Sin the sling of all troubles, 147 Our sincerity cannot be
approved without suffering, 244 Chastisements (after the sin is remitted) may
be deadly, 227 Every word they speak of us is a slander, be it good or ill,
127 to 133 A slanderer does but shame himself, 119 None ever was that was not
slandered, 139 Better smart for a while than for ever 177 Our songs shall be
louder than our cries. 64 Commonly they know not GOD that know no sorrows, 18
The soul cannot live while the sin lives, 19 GOD regards the souls good,
and his own glory, 254 Our souls shall loose nothing but their dross, 202
The soul waxes as the body waineth, 66 We have the presence of Gods spirit
and grace many times, and feel it not, 220 To rejoice when they speak evil
of us, 132 The sharp water of affliction quickens our spiritual sight, 49 to
52 To be evil spoken of for well doing peculier to the godly, 127 to 133 If
God stay long, yet he will be sure to come at l^ngth, 58, 59 Steven a true
Scholar of Christ, 159, 160 Of all storms a calm the greatest, 227 A stout
Christian bears off one mischief with another, 68, 69 Though the Devil
strikes at our names, his aim is to slay our souls, 172 We may well take a
few stripes, where we receive so much good, 100 to 103 Receive his stripes with
all humility, patience, pie^y and thankfulness, 176 That stripes from the
Almighty are special tokens and pledges of his adoption and love, 222 to 229
Nothing more proves us Gods than his stripes, 22^ Not bound to tender our
throats to an unjust (...), 162 to ^^^ Our sufferings may aggravate, cannot
redress our miseries, 176 A man that studies revenge, keeps his wounds
green and open, 91 We must suffer with Christ that we may reign with him, 52
to 54 Our sufferings are registered, our tears botled up, 191 192 We suffer
here that we may not suffer hereafter, 43 to 49 Our sufferings far less than
our sins have deserved, 235 By suffering we become followers of all the
Saints, 53, 54 Our patience shall be proportionable to our sufferings, and our
strength equalled to our temptations, 219 Our sufferings nothing to what others
have suffered, of which diverse examples, 229 to 237 When God calls us to
suffer he gives answerable strength and courage, 226 We shall suffer no more
than we are able to bear, 200 Than shall be for our good, 200 Suffering the
only way to prevent suffering, 85 to 94 We may well suffer patiently, when we
know we suffer justly, 94 to 100 When we suffer, we bethink our selves of
what we (...) 94, 95 (...)cious, nor lightly credulous, ^64 Love does neither
allow suspicion nor thrust o^t discretion, 164 After we have swet and smarted
six days, ^omes a Sabbath of eternal rest, 241 To fulfill the substance, when
we fail in the i^^^^ition, and err in circumstances, is sinful, 186
T
TO tarry the Lords leisure, 214 The Lord either takes troubles from us, or us
from troubles, 215 The water of our lakes shall be turned into the wine of
endless comfort, 237 to 246 Our suffringe make us teachable, 64 to 67 Prayer,
reading, meditation and contemplation, makes a Divine, 67 With Job we must not
only be patient, but thankful, 102 We may thank our enemies, or must thank
God for our enemies, 22 Rules touching our thoughts, 164 God has set down a
certain period of time when to deliver thee, and till then thou must wait, 213
Of which many examples, 213 to 215 We measure the length of time by the
sharpness of our afflictions, 2^^ God will do all in due time, that is, in
his time, n^^ in our^* ^^^ In some cases ^^^^ration unexpedien^, 162 to 171 We
may well suffer their tongues, so long as we are delivered out of their hands,
116 The lewd tongue or hand moves from God, it moves lewdly from Satan, 185 186
Their evil tongues make us live good lives, 22 A man of a good life fears not
him that has an evil tongue. 127 to 133 God trains us up by degrees, 226 Our
enemies cannot cannot deprive us of our spiritual treasure here, nor eternal
hereafter, 202 203 Be our trials great, salvation will one day make aamends for
all, 237 to 246 Affliction tryes our sincerity, perseverance, and constancy, 40
to 43 We esteem our inches Else, till by trial we find the contrary, 49 to
52 Tribulation the most sincere Divinity, 67 Tribulation increases patience,
67 to 73 Men tried in the furnace of adversity, as gold in the ^ire, 37 to 4^
If our troubles be light and few, it is because we are weak and tender, 2^6
Many and great are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers them
out of all, 215 Pass through a sea of troubles to the haven of eternal rest,
107 Kiss the hand which strikes us, trust in that power which kills us, 57 58
We are not trusted with all our portion, lest we should spend it, 43 to 49
V
VEx them when they wrong us, and they will wrong us more, 85 to 94 The
impatient vex themselves, because another has vexed them* 91, 92 To vex as an
enemy, is to further an enemies spite, 125 To vex other men is to tutor them
how they should again vex us, 85 to 94 The victory which is got by mildness
is perpetual, 135 Love is stronger after such a reconcilement, 135 The noblest
victory to overcome evil with goodness, 80 to 85 A great victory gotten and
no blow stricken, 89 Our good behavior will vindicate us from ill report, 139
Vice draws death with a horrid look, but so does not virtue, 148 Afflictions
as we use them, 111 Use and application of the 32 reasons, 171 to 184
W
WAnt teaches the worth of things most truly, 59 to 64 When we Want nothing
here, we forget our home above, 175 ^etter Want any thing than our selves, 45
to 52 Affliction makes us Watch and prepare, 35, 36 Christ's Ways different
from ours, 251, 252 Afflictions Weane us from the love of the World, 28 to 35
The persecutor more Weary than the persecuted, 106 Never Weary of receiving,
soon weary of attending, 244 We may well suspect our selves, if they speak
Well of us, 127 to 13^ W^^l^h like a treacherous dye, 31 It Whe^s our appetite
to be held fasting, 26, 27 The Wicked like some beasts grow mad with b^iting,
176 Wicked men hate the godly, 1, 2, 3 None but simple or wicked men Will
believe their slanders, 132 In resisting the Will of God they do fulfill it,
197, 198 The Churches enemies do even perform that Will of the Almighty which
they least think of, and most oppose, 197, 198 We must ^aste of our Saviors
bitter potion, before (...) drink his Wine of endless comfort, 243, 244 We
(...) them that we may Win them, 133 to 137 That which makes the body smart,
makes the soul Wise, ^^ to 67 It makes for the glory of his Wisdom, 7, 8, 9 A
Wise Christian will do good to them that do hurt to him, in policy, 85 to 94
Stripes make us Wise, 64 to 67 It is the Wise man's portion to suffer of fools,
116 A Wise man regards not what fools say, 115 to 118 All humane Wisdom is
defective, 145, 146 Its enough for Wisdom to be justified of her children, 116
Simple as Doves in offending others, but Wise as Serpents in defending our
selves, 163 Mercy ought to be guided by Wisdom, 162 to 171 Could we sit down
and obtain our Wishes, we should strangely entangle our selves, 253, 254 Look
to the reward, and thou would not wis^ the Work easier, 2^^ We must not set
our Wit to theirs, 115 to 118 Our own Wit will befoole us, 145, 146 Gods
dealing in this particular, should move Wonder to astonishment, 178 Afflictions
so overcome us, that they overcome the love of the World in us, 30 If we be
Gods servants, the World and the Devil will let fly at us, 1, 2, 3 This World
pleasant to travel through, but not safe to dwell in, 175 The very Heathens
rather hated than loved this World, 31 This World will not last ever, 107, 108
Our actions at last will outweigh their Words, 139 Their Words can do us
neither good nor hurt, 121 Their Words must be spelled backwards, 132 He which
cannot endure Words for Christ, would never endure wounds for him, 85 If we
cannot avoid ill Words, our care must be not to deserve them, 79, 80 Rules
touching our Words, 164 to 167 Gods Works not to be judged until the fifth
act, 208 If we would prevail with God, we must Wrestle, 27 So to remit
Wrongs, as not to encourage or provoke them, 167 We may commit a greater Wrong
in putting up an injury, than in punishing the doer of it, 168
Y
Yielding, the only way of overcomming, 8^
FINIS.

