THE BOOKS of Solomon namely.

Prouerbia Ecclesiastes Cantica canticorum. Sapientia. Ecclesiasticus or Jesus
the son of Syrach.
The Proverbs of Solomon.
The praise of wisdom. We may not harken unto the voluptuous prouocacyon and
intisynges of sinners, wysdom complayneth to be despised of all men, and
Prophecieth destruction unto her despysers.

Capi. Primo.
THe Proverbs of Solomon the son

That the very simple might have wit and that young men might have knowledge,
and understanding.

By hearing, the wise man shall come by more wysdom, and he that is endued with
understanding, shall obtain wit to parceaue a parable, and the interpretacion
thereof, the words of the wise, and the dark speeches of the same

Job. 28. d Eccle. 1. c Psa. 26. b Prou. ix. c
The fear of the Lord, is the beginnynge of wisdom: but fools despise
wisdom, and instruction.



My son, consent not unto sinners, if they entyse the, and say, come with
us, we will lay wait for blood, and lurk privily for the innocent without a
cause we shall Psa. 124 a
swalowe them up like the hell, and devour them quick, and whole, as those
that go down into the pyt.

So shall we find all manner of costely riches, and fill our houses with
spoils.

Cast in thy lot among us, and let us have all one purse.

My son, walk not thou with them, refrain thy foot from their way.

For Psa. 14. a
their fete run to evil, and are hastye to shed blood.

But in vain is the net laid forth before the birds eyes.

Yea, they them selves lay wait one for an others blood, and one of the^
would slaye an other.

These are the ways of al such as be couetouse, that one would rauyshe
another life,

Pro. 13. ^
Wysdom cries without, and puts forth her voice in the streets.

She calls before the congregation in the open gates, and shows her words
through the City saying.

O ye children, how long will you love chyldishnes? how long will the scorners
delight in scornynge, and the unwise be enemies unto knowledge?

O turn you unto my correccyon, lo, I will express my mind unto you, and make
you understand my words.

Esa. 55. b Iere. 8. a
I have called, and ye refused it: I have stretched out my hand, and no man
regarded it, but al my counsels have ye despised, and set my correction at
naught

Therefore shall I also laughe in your destruction, and mock you when that thing
that ye fear, comes upon you, even when the thing that ye be afraid of,
falls in suddenly like a storm, and your mysery like a tempest, yea when
trouble and heaviness comes upon you.

Then shall they call upon me, but I will not hear, they shall seek me earlye,
but they shall not find me.

And that because they hated knoweledge, and received not the fear of the
Lord, but abhorred my council, and despised all my correction.

Therefore shall they eat the fruits of their own way, and be filled with
their own inuencyons.

For the turninge away of the unwise shall slaye them, and the prosperity of
foles shall be their own destruccyon.

Pro. 3. d
But who so harkeneth unto me, shall dwell safely, and be suer from any fear of
evil.

: Wisdom is to be embraced and set by, which teaches fear and knowledge,
wisdom directs us in the way of God. And an aduouterous woman is to be
eschued.

Capi. ii.


For if thou cryest after wisdom, and call for knowledge if thou sekest
after her as after money, and dyggest for her as for treasure, then shalt
thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God.

Iaco. 1. a Eccle. 1. a and.7. c
For it is the Lord that gives wisdom, out of his mouth comes knowledge and
understanding.

He preserves the welfare of the rightuous, 3. Re. 3. b and.4. d
and defends them that walk syncerely, he keeps them in the right pathe,
and preserves the way of such is serve him with godlynes.

Then shall thou understand ryghtuousnesse,

When wisdom enters in to thine heart, and thy soul deliteth in knowledge then
shall council preserve the, and understanding shall keep the.

That thou mayeste be delivered from the evil way, and from the man that
speaks froward things.

From such as leave the right paths and walk in the ways of darckenesse,
which rejoice in doing evil, and delight in wicked things, whose ways are
crooked, and they froward in their paths.

That thou may be delivered also Pro. 5. a and.7. a
from the strange woman, and from her that is not thine own, which gives
sweet words, and which forsakes the husband of her youth, and forgets
the couenaunte of her God.

For her house is inclined unto death and her paths unto hell.

Al they that go in unto her, come not again, neither take they hold of the
way of life.

Therefore, walk thou in the way of such as be virtuous, and keep the paths
of the ryghtuous.

For the Just shall dwell in the land and they that be perfect, shall remain in
it, but the ungodly shall be roted out of the land, and the wicked doers, shall be
roted out of it.

The Commandments of God, must be dilygently regarded: and observed.

Capi. iii.
Deuteronomy. 11. a
forget not thou my law, but se that thyn heart keep my commandments.

For they shall prolonge the days and years of thy life, and bring the peace.

Let mercy and faythfulnes never go from the, bind them about thy neck, and
write them in the tables of thine heart

So shall thou find favor and good understanding in the sight of god, and
men,

Put thy trust in god, with all thyn heart, and lean not unto thyn own wit

In all thy ways, have respect unto

Esa. 10.2
Be not wise in thine own conceyte but fear the Lord and depart from evil,
so shall thy nauel be whole, Romans 12. c
and thy bones strong.

Tob. 4. b
Honor the Lord with thy substance, and with the fyrstelynges of al thine
increase Deuteronomy. 21. a Mal. 3. b Exo. 23. c and.34. c Heb. 12. b Apoc. 3. d
(give unto the pore) so shall thy barnes be filled with plentuosnes, and thy
presses shall flow over with sweet wine.

My son despise no the chastenynge of the Lord, neither faynte when thou
art rebuked of him.

For whom the Lord loves, him he chasteneth, and yet delyteth in him, even as
a father in his own son.

Well is him that fyndeth wisdom, and opteineth understanding, for the
gettinge of it is better then any marchaundyse of silver, and the profyt of it
is better then gold.

Prou. 8. a
Wisdom is more worth then precyouse

Upon her right hand, is long life and upon her left hand, is riches and
honor.

Her ways are plesaunt ways, and al her paths are peaceable.

She is a Gene. 2. b
tree of life to them that laid hold upon her, and blessed is he that keeps
her fast.

With wisdom has the lord laid the foundacio^ of the earth, and through
understanding has he stablyshed the Heavens.

Through his wisdom the deapthes break up, and the Clouds drop down the dew.

My son, let not these things depart from thine eyes, but keep my law and
my council, so shall it be life unto thy soul, and grace unto thy mouth.

Then shall thou walk safely in thy way, and thy foot shall not stumble.

Pro. 1. d
If thou sleapest, thou shalt not be afraid, but shall take thy rest, and
sleep

Thou nedest not to be afraid of any sudden fear, nether for the violent
russhynge in of the ungodly, when it comes.

For the lord shall stand by thy side and keep thy foot, that thou be not
taken.

Withdraw no good thing from them that have need, so long as thine hand is
able to do it.

Say not unto thy neighbor, go thy way and come again, to morrow will I
give the, where as thou haste now to give him.

Intend no hurt unto thy neighbor seeing he does dwell in rest by the.

Strive not lyghtely with any man, where as he has done the no harm.

Pro. 1. c
Follow not a wicked man, and chose none of his ways, for the Lord abhors
the froward, but his counsel is among the ryghtuous

The curse of the Lord is in the house of the ungodly, but he blesses the
dwellynges of the ryghtuous.

As for the scornful, does not he laugh the^ to scorn? but he gives grace
unto the lowly

The wise shall have honor in possession, but shame is the promocion that
fools shall have.

Wysedom and her fruits, and her ways, ought to be sought.

Capi. iiii.
Hear, O ye children, the father

For I have given you a good doctrine forsake not ye my law.

For when I my self was my fathers dear son, and tenderly beloved of my
mother he taught me also, and said unto me.

Deu. 6. b 11. c. 32. g
Let thine heart receive my words, keep my commandments, and thou shall
live.

Get the wisdom, and get the understanding, forgette not the words of my
mouth, and shrynke not from them.

Forsake her not, and she shall preserve the, love her, and she shall keep the.

The chief point of wisdom, is that

* Make much of her, and she shall promote the.

Yea, if thou embrace her, she shall bring the unto honor.

She shall make the a gracyous heed, and garnishe the with a crown of glory

Hear my son, and receive my words and the years of thy life shall be many.

I have showed the, the way of wisdom, and led the in to the right paths.

So that if thou go therein, there shall no straitness hinder the, and when
thou ruimest, thou shall not fall.

Take fast hold of doctrine, and let her not go, keep her: for she is thy
life.

Psalm. 1. a and.27. a
Come not in the path of the ungodly, and walk not in the way of the wicked.

Eschew it, and go not therein, depart aside, and pass over by it.

For they can not sleep, except they have first done some myschefe, neither
take they any rest, except they have first done some harm.

For they eat the bread of wickedness and drink the wine of robbery.

The path of the righteous shynneth as the light, that is ever brighter and
brighter unto the perfect day.

But the way of the ungodly is as the Deuteronomy. 6. ^ and.11. c
or they be aware.

My son, mark my words, and enclyne thine ear unto my sayenges.

Let them not depart from thine eyes but keep them even in the midst of thine
heart.

For they are life unto all those that find them, and health unto al their
bodies.

Keep thine heart with all dilygence, for thereupon hangs life.

Put away from the a froward mouth and let the lips of sclaunder be far
from the.

Let thine eyes behold the thing that is right, and let thine eye lyddes
look straight before the.

Ponder the path of thy fete, and let al thy ways be ordered a right.

Deuteronomy. 5. d and.27. d
Turn not aside, nether to the right hand, nor to the left, but witholde thy
fore from evil.

* (For the Lord knows the ways that are on the right hand). As for the
ways that be on the lift hand, they be froward. For he shall dyrect thy
goynges, and thy ways shall he guide in peace.

He warns to eschew whordome, he forbyddeth wastful spendyng, he wylleth us
to live of our own labors. Men must love their wives

Capi v.


Pro. 2. b and.7. a
Apply not thou thy self to the desceytfulnes of a woman.

For the lyppes of an harlotte are a droppyng honey comb, and her throat is
softer then oil.

But at the last, she is as bitter as wormewod and (her tongue) as sharp as a
two edged sword.

Her fete go down unto death, and her steps pearse through unto hell.



Hear me now therefore (O my son) and depart not from the words of my
mouth.

Keep thy way far from her, and come not nigh the doors of her house.

That thou give not thy strength unto other, and thy years to the cruel.

That other men be not, filled with thy goods, and that thy labors come not
in a strange house.

Yea, that thou mornest not at the last (when thou have spent thy body and
goods) and then say, Alas, why hated, I nourtour: why did my heart despise
correccyon?

Wherefore was not I obediente unto

I am come almost into al mysfortune in the myddest of the multitude and
co^gregacyon.

Drink of the water, of thine own well, and of the ryuers that run out of
thine own sprynges.

Let thy wells flow out abroad, that there may be ryuers of water in the
streets, but let them be only thine own, and not strangers with the.

Let thy well be blessed, and be glad with the wife of thy youth.

Loving is the hynde, and friendly is the roo, let her breasts alwaie satisfy
the and hold the ever content with her love.

My son, why wylt thou have pleasure in an harlotte, and embrace the bosom
of an other woman?

Job. 31. a and.34. c
For every man's ways are open in the syghte of the Lord, and he pondereth
all their goynges.

The wickedness of the ungodly shall catch him self, and with the snares of
his own sins shall he be trapped.

He shall dye without amendment, and for his great folyshnes: he shall go
astraye.

The slothful and slougyshe is prycked and styrred to work. The scysmatyke
is reproved. Aduoutrye ought to be earnestly avoided.

Capi. vi.
Pro. 17. a and.20. e
if thou be surety for thy neighbor, and haste fastened thine hand for an
other man thou art bound with thine own words, and taken with thine own
speech.

Therefore, my son, do this, and thou shall be discharged, when thou art come
into thy neighbors danger.

Go thy ways then soon, and entreat thy neighbor, let not thine eyes
sleep, nor thine eye lyddes slomber.

Save thy self as a do from the hounde and as a bird from the hand of the
fouler. Go to the Emmet (thou slouggarde) consider her ways and learn to be
wise. Pro. 13. a Pro. 24. d Pro. 30. c
She has no gide, no teacher, no leader: yet in the summer she prouydeth her
meat, and gathers her food together in the harvest. How long will thou
sleep, thou slouggyshe man? when wylt thou arise out of thy sleep? Yea sleep
on still a little, sloumber a little, fold thyn hands together a little, that
thou may sleep: so shall poverty come unto the as one that trauaylethe by the
way, and necessity like a weaponed man. A dissemblyng person, a wicked man
goes with a froward mouth, he wynketh with his eyes, he tokenethe with his
fete, he poynteth with his fingers, he is ever ymagenyng mischief, and
frowardnes in his heart, and causes discord. Therefore shall his destruction
come hastily upon him suddenly shall he be al to broken, and not be healed.

Pro. 12. ^
These six things does the Lord hate, and the seuenthe he utterly abhors.

A proud look, a dissembling tongue, hands that shede innocents blood, any
heart that goes about wicked ymaginacyons, Psalmus. 14. a. Pro. 1. a
fete that be swyft in ronnynge to do myschefe, a false wytnes that brings up
lies, and such one as sows discord among brethern.

My son, keep thy fathers commandment, and forsake not the law of thy
mother.

Put them up together in thine heart, and bind them about thy neck,

That they may led the, where thou go, preserve the when thou art a sleep,
and that when thou awakest thou may talk of them.

For Psalmus 119.
the commandment is a lantern, Pro. 5. a. and.7. a.
the euel woman and from the flateryng tongue of the harlotte, that thou lust
not after her beutie in thine heart, and least thou be taken with her fair
lokes.

An harlot will make a man to beg his bread, but a married woman will hunt
for the precyouse life.

May a man take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be brent?

Or can one go upon hot coals, and his fete not be hurt.



Exo. 22. a
Men does not utterly despise a thief that steals to satysfye his Soul, when
he is hongrye, but if he may be gotten, he restores again seven times as
much or else he makes recompense with all the good of his house.

But who so co^mytteth aduoutrye with a woman, he is a fool, and brings his
life to destruccyon.

He gets him self also shame, and dishonor, such as shall never be put out

For the yelousy and wrath of the man will not be entreated, no though thou
would offer him great gifts to make amends, he will not receive them.

God ought to be feared and honored, his commandments ought to be kept,
wanton appetytes and desires ought to be shouned.

Capitulo. vii.
MY son Deu. 6. b. and.11. a,
keep my words, and

Keep my commandments and my law, even as the apple of thine eye, and thou
shalt live.

Bind them upon thy fyngers, and write them in the table of thine heart.

Say unto wisdom, thou art my sister, and call understanding thy kinswoman,
Pro. 2. b. and.5. a.
that she may keep the from the strange woman, and from the harlotte which
gives sweet words.

For out of the wyndowe of my house I looked through the latysse, and beheld the
simple people, and among other young folks I spyed one young fool, going over
the streets, by the corner in the way toward the harlottes house in the
twylight of the euenyng, when it began now to be night and dark.

And behold, there met him a woman in Eccle. 9. d
an harlottes apparel (a disceitfull) wanton and an unsteadfast woman, whose
fete could not abide in the house now is she without, now in the streets, and
lurketh in every corner, she caughte the young man, kyssed him, and was not
ashamed, saying, I had a vow of peace offerynges to pay, and this day I
perform it.



I have decte my bed with couerynges and clothes of Egypt.

My bed have I made to smell of Myrre Aloes, and Cynamon.

Come let us lie together, and take our pleasure till it be day light.

For the good man is not at home, he is gone far of.

He has taken the bag of money with

Thus with many sweet words she overcame him, and with her flattering lyppes
she entysed him to follow her as it were an ox led to the slaughter, and like
as it were a fool to the stocks, to be punished, so long till she had
wounded his liver with her darte, like as if a bird hasted to ye snare, not
knowing that the parell of his life lies thereupon Hear me now therefore. O my
children, and mark the words of my mouth.

Let not thine heart wander in her ways, and be not thou dysceaued in her
paths.

For many one has she wounded and cast down, yea many a strong man has been
stayne by means of her.

Her houses are ye way unto hell, and bring men down into the chambers of
death.

The praise of the wisdom of God.

Capi. viii.
Does not * wisdom cry? does

Stands she not in the hye places in the streets and ways? does she not cry
before the whole City, and in the gates where men go out and in?

It is you, O ye men (says she) whom I call (unto the children of men) do I
lift up my voice.

Take heed unto knowledge, O ye ygnoraunt, be wise in heart, O ye fools.

Give ear, for I will speak of great matters, and open my lyppes to tell
things that be right.

For my throat shall be talkyng of thy truth, and my lyppes abhor ungodliness.

All the words of my mouth are ryghtuous, there is no frowardnes: nor falsheed
therein.

They are plain, to such as will understand, and right to them that find
knowledge.

Receive my doctrine, and not silver, and my knowledge more then fine gold

For Pro. 3. b
wisdom is more worth then precious stones, ye al things that thou can
desire, may not be compared unto it.

I wisdom, have my dwelling with knowledge, and prudent council is mine own.



I can give council, and be a guide, I have understanding, I have strength.

Deuteronomy. 17. d Sapi. 6. a
Through me, Kings reygne, through me, Princes make just laws.

Through me, do Princes bear rule, and all Judges of the earth execute
judgment.

I am loving unto those that love me and Luke. 11. b
they that seek me early, shall find me.

Riches and honor are with me, ye excellent goods and ryghtuousnes.

My fruit is better then gold and precious stone, and mine increase more worth
then fine silver.

I will guide the in the way of ryghtuousnes, and in the street of judgment.

That I may send prosperity to those


: Sapi. 9. b.
The lord him self had me in possessyon

Eccl. 24. ^
I have been ordained from everlasting, and from the beginning or ever the
earth was made.

When I was borne, there were neither depthes nor sprynges of water.

Before the foundacyons of the mountains were laid, ye before all hills was
I borne.

The earth and all that is upon the earth was not yet made, no not the ground
it self.

Sapi. 9. b
For when he made the heavens, I was present, when he set up ye depthes in
order, when he hanged the clouds above, when he fastened the sprynges of the
deep.

When he shut the sea wythyn Gene. 1. a. Job 2.6. a and.38. a Psalmus 104.
certain bounds, that the waters should not go over their marks.

When he laid the foundacyons of ye earth I was with him, ordering all
things, delitinge daily, and reioysinge always before him.

As for the round compass of this world, I make it joyful, for my delight is
to be among the children of men.

Therefore harken unto me, O ye children, blessed are they yt keep my ways.

O give ear unto nourture, be wise, and refuse it not.

Blessed is the man that hears me, watchynge daily at my gates, and gyuynge
attendaunce at the poostes of my doors.

For who so finds me, finds life, and shall obtain favor of the Lord.
But who so offends against me, hurts his own soul. And all they that hate
me, are the sowers of death.

Wisdom moves all men to embrace her. The property of a whore.

Capi. ix.
Wisdom has builded her self

She has sent fourth her maidens to cry upon the highest place of the City

Who so is ignoraunte, let him come hither.

And to the unwise she said, O come on your way, eat my bread, and drink my
wine, which I have poured out for you.

Forsake ygnoraunce, and ye shall live and se that ye go in the way of
understanding.

Who so reprouethe a scornful person, gets him self dishonor, and he
that rebukes the ungodly, stayneth him self.

Reprove not a scorner, leest he owe the evil will but rebuke a wise man, and
he will love the.

Give a discrete man but an occasyon,

Job. 28. d. Psa. 111. b Pro. i. a
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and ye knowledge of holy
things is understanding.

Eccle. 1. c
For through me thy days shall be prolonged, and the years of thy life shall be many

If thou be wise, thy wisdom shall do thy self good, but if thou thynkest
scorn thereof. It shall be thine own harm.

A folyshe retchlesse woman, full of words, and such a one as has no
knoweledge, sits at the door of her house, and in the hye places of the
City, to call such as go by, and that walk streighte in their ways.

Who so is ignorant (says she) let him come hither, and to the unwise she
says, stolen waters are sweet, and the bred yt is privily eaten, has a good
taste

And he does not considre, that they are but dead which be there, and that her
gestes are in the deep of hell. For he that will be joined unto her, shall go
down to hell, but he that auoidethe from her, shall be saved.

: In this Chapter, and in all that follow unto the thyrtie, the wise man
exhorts by diverse Sentences, which he calls Parables, to follow virtues
and flee vices. And shewethe also what profet comes of wisdom, and what
hynderaunce proceeds of folyshnes.

Proverbs of Saloman. Capi. x.
A Pro, 1^. c
son makethe a glad father, but an indiscreet

Pro. 11. a Eccle. 5. b
Tresures that are wickedly gotten, profyt nothing, but righteousness
delyuereth from death.

Psa. 34. b
The Lord will not let the soul of the ryghtuouse suffer hunger, but he
puts the ungodly from his desire.

An idle hand makes poor, but a quycke labourynge hand, makes rich.

Who so regardethe lesynges, fedeth the wind, and does but follow birds that
have taken their flight.

Who so gathers in Summer, is wise, but he that is slougishe in harvest,
brings him self to confusion.

Blessings are upon the head of the ryghtuous, and the mouth of ye name of
the ungodly keeps myschefe in secret.

Psa. 112. a
The memoryall of the Just shall have a good report, but the name of the
ungodly shall stynke.

A wise man will receive warning, but a fool will sooner be smytten in the
face.

Psa. 23. a
He that leads an innocente life, walks sureli but who so goth a wrong way
shall be known.

Eccl. 27. d
He that wynketh with his eye, will do some harm, but he that has a folish
mouth, shall be beaten.

The mouth of a ryghtuouse man is a vain of life, but the mouth of the
ungodly keeps myschefe in secret.

Evil will steareth up strife, 1. Pet. 4. b and.1. Cor 13. b
but love covers the multitude of sins.



Wise men lays up knowledge, but the mouth of the foolish is nigh destruccyon.

The rich man's goods are his strong hold, but pouerte oppresses the poor.

The righteous labors to do good but the ungodly uses his increase unto
sin.

To take heed unto the chasteninge of nourture, is the way of life, but he
that refuses to be reformed disceaueth him self.

Pro. 11. b
Dissembling lips keep hatred secretli, and he that speaks any sclaunder is
a fool.

Where much bablinge is there must needs be offense, and he that refrayneth
his lips is wise.

An innocent tongue is a noble treasure but the heart of the ungodly is
nothing worth.

The lips of the rightuous, feed a whole multitude, but foles, shall dye in
their own folly.

The blessing of the Lord: makes rich men, Job. 42. c Eccl 11. b ps. 126.
a. ma. 6. c. d
as for careful travail, it does nothing thereto.

A fool does wyckedly, and makes but a sport of it, nevertheless it is
wisdom for a man to beware of such.

The thing that the ungodly are afraid of, shall come upon them, but the
ryghtuous shall have their desire.

The ungodly: is like a tempeste that passes over and is no more seen but the
ryghtuous remains sure for ever.

As vyneger is to the teth, and as smoke

The fear of the lord makes a long life, but the years of the ungodly
shall be shortened.

The pacyent abidinge of the righteous shall be turned to gladness, but the
hope of the ungodly shall perish.

The way of the Lord gives a courage unto the godly, but it is a fear for
wicked doers.

psa. 124. a
The rightuous shall never be overthrown, but ye ungodly shall not remain in
the land.

psalm. 36. b.
The mouth of the just will be talkinge of wisdom, but the tongue of the
froward shall peryshe.

The lips of the rightuouse are occupied in acceptable things, but the mouth
of the ungodly takes them to ye worste.

Capitulo. xi.
A Pro. 16. b and.20. c
False balaunce is an abhominacyo^ unto the Lord, but a true weight pleases
him.

Where pride is there is shame also and confusion, but where as is lowlines
there is wisdom.

The innocent dealing of the just shall lead the^, but the wickedness of such as
dyssemble, shall be their own destruccyon.

Pro. 10. a. Eccle. 5. b
Riches help not in the day of vengeance, but ryghtuousnesse delyuereth from
death.

The righteousness of the innocente ordreth his way, but the ungodly shall fall
in his own wyckednes.

The righteousness of the just shall deliver them, but the wicked shall be taken
in their own ungodliness.

Sapi. 5. b.
When an ungodly man dies, his

The ryghtuous shall be delivered out of trouble, and ye ungodly shall come in
his stead.

Through the mouth of the dissembler is his neighbor destroyed, but through
knowledge shall the just be delivered.

When it goes well with the rightuous, Pro. 14. d.
the City is merry and when the ungodly peryshe, there is gladness.

When the just are in welthe, the City prospers, but when ye ungodly have
the rule, it decays.

A fool brings up a sclaunder of his neighbor, but a wise man will keep it
secret.

Pro. 10. c.
A dissembling person will discover preuy things, but he that is of a

3. To. 12. a
Where no good counsel is, there the people decay, but where as many are that
can give counsel, there is welthe. Pro. 6. a 27. c
He that is suertie for a stranger, hurts him self, and he that medleth not
with sureteshyp, is sure.

A gracyous woman mainteineth honestye, as for the wicked, they maynteyne
riches.

Psalmus. 37. c.
He that has a gentle liberal stomach is merciful but who so hurts his
neighbor, is a tyrant.

The labor of the ungodly prospers not, but he yt sows righteousness shall
receive a sure reward.

Like as righteousness brings life, even so to cleave unto evil, bryngethe
death.

The Lord abhors them that be of a perverse heart, but he has pleasure in
them that are of an undefiled conversation.

It shall not help the wicked, though they lay all their hands together but
ye sede of the rightuous shall be preserved.

A fair woman without discrete manners, is like a ringe of gold in a swines
snoute.

The desire of the rightuous is acceptable, but the hope of the ungodly is
indignacyon.

Psalmus. 37. d. and.112. d.
Some man gives out his goods and is the richer, but the nygarde (having

2 Cor. 9. d
He that is liberal in geuinge, shall have plenty, and he that waters, shall
be watered also him self. Psa. 1. a Iere. 17. b


Who so hoordeth up his corn, shlabe cursed among the people, but blessing
shall light upon his head that gives food.

He that labors for honesty, fyndeth his desire, but who so seeks after
myschefe, it shall happen unto him.

He that trusts in his riches, shall have a fall, but Psalm. 13. a Iere. 17. b
the ryghtuouse shall floryshe as the grene lefe.

Who so makes disquyetnesse in his own house, he shall have wynd for his
heritage, and the fool shall be servant to the wise.

The frut of the ryghtuous is a tree of life, and he that endeavors him self
to win men's sowles is wise.

1. Pe. 4. d
If the ryghtuouse be recompensed upon earth, how much more then the ungodly
and the sinner?

Capi. xii.
WHo so loves wisdom, will be

Genesis 4. a
A good man is acceptable unto the lord, but the wicked will he condemn

A man can not endure in ungodliness but the rote of the rightuous shall not be
moved.

A steadfast woman is a crown unto her husband, but she that behauethe her
life vnhonestlye, is a corrupcyon in his bones.

The thoughts of the ryghtuouse are right, but the ymaginacio^ of the ungodly
are disceytfull.

The talking of the ungodly is how they may lay wait for blood, but the
mouth of the ryghtuouse will deliver them.

Psa. 17. f
Or ever thou can turn the about,

A man shall be commended for his wisdom, but a fool shall be despised.

Eccl. 10. d
A simple man which labourethe and works, is better the^ one that is gorgyous
and lacks bread.

A ryghtuous man regards the life of his catel, but the ungodly have cruel
hertes.

Eccl, 20. d
He that tylleth his land, shall have plentuousnes of bread, but he that
follows ydylnes, is a very fool.

Who so has pleasure to continue at the wine, leaves dishonestye in his own
dwelling.

The desire of the ungodly hunteth after myschefe, but the rote of the
ryghtuous brings forth fruit.

The wicked falls into the snare through the malice of his own mouth, but the
just shall escape out of parell.

Every man shall enjoy good: according to the fruit of his mouth, and after
the works of his hands shall he be rewarded.

Look what a fool takes in hand, he thinks it well done, but he that is wise
will be counseled.

A fool utters his wrath in all the have

A just man will tell the truth, and show the thing that is right, but a
false wytnes disceaueth.

A sclaunderous person prycketh like a swearde, but a wise man's tongue is
wholesome.

A true mouth is ever constaunt, but a dissembling tongue is soon changed

They that ymagyn evil in their mind will disceyue, but the cou^cellers of peace
shall have joy following them.

There shall no mysfortune happen unto the just, but ye ungodly are full of evil

The Lord abhors disceytful lyppes but they that labor for truth: Prou. 9. d
pleases him.

He that has understanding

A dilygent hand shall bear rule, but

Pro. 15. b and.17. d. Eccle. ^0 c
Heaviness dyscorageth the heart of man, but a good word makes it glade again.

The ryghtuous is lyberall unto his neighbor, but the way of the ungodly will
disceyue them selves.

A dysceytfull man shall not find the thing that he hunteth for, but 2. Ti
vi. b Hebr. 13. a
he that is content with that he has, is more worth then gold.

In the way of ryghtuousnes there is life, and in the same way there is no
death.

Capi. xiii.
A Wise son will harken unto his fathers warning, but he that is scornful,
will not here, when he is reproved.

A good man shall enjoy the frut of his mouth, but he yt has a froward mind
shall be spoiled.

He that keeps his mouth, keeps his life, but who so speaks unadvised,
finds harm.

The slougarde would feign have, and cannot get his desire, but ye soul of the
dilygent shall have plenty.

A ryghtuouse man abhors lies, but the ungodly shameth both other and
himself.

Ryghtuousnes keeps the innocent in ye way, but ungodliness does overthrow the
sinner.

Psa. 37, b and.112. a. Pro. 11. c
Some men are rich, though they have nothing, again, some men are pore having
great riches.

With goods every man delyuerethe his life, and the poor will not be
reproved.

The light of the ryghtuouse makes Pro. 24. c
the candle of the ungodly shall be put out.

Among the proud there is ever strife but among those that do al things with
aduysement, there in wisdom

Hastily gotten goods are soon spent but they that be gathered together with
the hand shall increase.

Long taryeng for a thing that is dyfferred, greueth the heart, but when the
desire comes, it is a tree of life.



A desceytful son shall have no good, but a dyscrete servant shall do full well
and his way shall prospere.

The law is a well of life unto ye wise, that it may keep him from the snares
of death.

Good understanding gives favor but hard is the way of the despisers.

A wise man does all things with discrecyo^, but a fool will declare his folly.

An ungodly messanger falls into mischefe, but a faithful Ambassatoure is
wholesome.

He that thinks scorn to be reformed, comes to pouerte and shame, but who
so regards correccyon, shall come to honor.



He that goes in the company of wise men, shall be wise, but who so is a
companyon of fools, shall be hurt.

Mischefe follows upon sinners, but ye righteous shall have a good reward.

He that is virtuous, leaves an enherytaunce unto his chylders children, Job.
27. c.
and the riches of the sinner is laid up for ye just.

There is plentuousnes of fode in the feldes of the poor, Eccle. 30 a. Hebre.
3. b.
but some gather with out discrecyon.

Psalms. 34. b.
He that spares the holds him ever in nurtoure.

* The ryghtuous eats, and is satisfied, but the belly of the ungodly has
never enough.

Capi. xiiii.
Wise women uphold their house, but a folyshe wife plucketh it

He that walks in the right path of ye Lord fears him but he that turns
him self away from his ways, dispyseth him.

In the mouth of the foolyshe is the bostinge of pride, but the lyppes of ye
wise wylbe ware of such.

Where no oxen are, there the crybbe is emptye, but where the oxen labor,
there is much fruit.

A faithful witness will not dissemble, but a false record will make a lie.

A scorneful body seeks wisdom, and fyndeth it not, but Pro. 8. a.
knowledge is easy to come by, unto him that will understand. Se that thou
meddle not with a fool, in whom thou perceyuest to be no knoweledge,

The wisdom of him that has understanding, is to take heed unto his way but
the folishnes of ye unwise disceiueth

Fools make but a sport of sin, but there is favorable love among the
rightuouse.

The heart of him that has understanding will nether despair for any sorrow nor
be to presumptuous for any sudden joy.



Pro. 16. c Deuteronomy. 12 a Esa. 55. b.
There is



An unfaithful person shall be filled with his own ways, but a good man
shall live of his fruits.

An ignoraunte body believes all things, but who so has understanding, looks
well to his goynges.

*
(A disceytfull son shall have no good, but a discret servant shall do full
well, and his way shall prospere.)

A wise man fears, and departs from euel, but a fool goes on presumptuously

An impatient man deals folyshly, but he that is well advised, does other ways

The ignorant have folyshnes in possessyon, but the wise are crowned with
knowledge.

The evil shall bow them selves before the good, and the ungodly shall wait at
the doors of the ryghtuouse.

The poor is hated even of his own

Who so despyseth his neighbor does a mysse, but Psa. 41. d
blessed is he that has pytye of the poor.

*
He that puts his trust in the lord loves to be merciful.

They that imagyn wickedness, shall be disapoynted, but they that muse upon good
things, unto such shall happen mercy and faythfulnes.

Dylygent labor brings riches, but where many vain words ar, truly there is
scarceness.



A faithful wytnes delyuereth souls, but a liar disceyueth them.

The fear of the lord is a strong hold and his children are under a suer
defense.

The fear of the lord is a well of life to avoid the snares of death.

The increase and prosperity of the comens

He that is pacyent, has much understanding, but he that is sone displeased
provoke foolyshnes.

A merry heart is the life of ye body, but rancoure consumes away the bones.

Pro. 17. a Mat. 25. d
He that does a poor man wrong, blasphemeth his maker but who so has pity of
the pore, does honor unto god

The ungodly is afraid of every parel but the rightuous has a good hope eue^
in death.

Wisdom rests in the heart of him that has understanding, and he shall be
known among them that are unlearned

Pro. 11. b
Ryghtuousnes settethe up the people, but wyckednes brings folk to
destruction.

A discrete servant is a pleasur unto the King, but one that is not honest
provoked him unto wrath.

Capi. xv.
A Pro. 25. c.
Soft answer puts down displeasure, but froward words provoke unto anger.

The tongue of such as be wise, uses knowledge a right as for a folysh mouth
it blabbeth out nothing, but foolyshnes

The eyes of the Lord look on every place, both upon the good and bad.

A wholesome tongue is a tree of life, but he that abusethe it, has a broken
mind.

A fool despyseth his fathers correccyon, but he that takes head when he is
reproved, shall have the moare understanding.

Where ryghtuousnesse is plentyfull there is very great power, but the
imaginacyon of the ungodly shall be rooted out.

The house of the ryghtuouse is full of

A wise mouth pours out knowledge but the heart of the folyshe does not so.

Pro. 21. d. Ecclesi. 34. c. Esaie. 66 a.
The Lord abhors the sacryfyce of ye ungodly, but ye prayer of the ryghtuous
is acceptable unto him.

The way of the ungodly is an abhominacion unto the Lord, but who so follows
ryghtuousnes, him he loves.

He that forsakes the right way, shall be sore punyshed, and who so hates
correccyon, shall dye.

Hell and perdicyon are known unto ye Lord, how much more then the hertes of
men?

Sapi. 2. c.
A scorneful body loves not one yt rebukes him, neither will he come unto the
wise.

A merry heart makes a cherefull countenance, Pro. 12. d. and.17. d. Eccle.
30. c
but an unquiet mind makes it heavy.

The heart of him that has understanding, does seek after knowledge, but ye
mouth of fools is fed with foolishnes.

All the days of the poor are miserable, but a quiet heart is as a continual
feast.

Psalmus 26. b. 1. Ti. 6. b.
Better is a little with the fear of ye Lord, the^ great treasure with sorrow.

Better is a mess of pottage with love, then a fat ox with evil will.

Pro. 15. a.
An angrye man steareth up strife, but he that is pacyent, stilleth discord.

The way of a sloughfull man is as it were hedged with thorns, but the way

Pro. 10. a.
A wise son makes a glad father, but an indiscreet body shameth his mother.

A fool reioyseth in foolyshe things, but a wise man looks well to his own
goynges.

Unadvised thoughts shall come to naught, but where as men are that can give
counsel, there is steadfastness.

A joyful thing is it when a man gives a conuenyent answer.

And very plesaunte is a word spoken in due season.

The way of life leads unto heaven, that a man should be ware of hell beneth.

The Lord will break down the house of the proud, but he shall make fast
the borders of the wyddowe.

The Lord abhors the ymaginacyons

The covetous man roteth up his own house, but who so hates rewards shall
live.

*
Through mercy and faith are sins pourged, and through the fear of ye Lord
does every one eschew evil.

A righteouse man museth in his mind how to do good, but the mouth of ye
ungodly brings forth evil things.

The Lord is far from the ungodly, but he hereth the prayer of ye righteous.

Like as the clerenes of the eyes reioyseth the heart, so does a good name feed
the bones.

The ear that harkeneth of the reformacyon of life, shall dwell among the
wise.

He that refuses to be reformed, despyseth his own soul, but he yt
submytteth him self to correccyon, is wise. The fear of the Lord is ye
right science of wisdom, and lowliness goes before honor.

Capytulo. xvi.
A Man may well

Pro. 21. a. Psalm. 33. b
A man thinks all his ways to be clean, but it is the Lord that Judges the
minds.

psalm. 37, a.
Commyt thy works unto the lord and look what thou deuisest, it shall prospere.

The Lord does all things for his own sake, ye and when he keeps ye
ungodly for the day of wrath.

The Lord abhorteth all such as be of a proud heart, there may nether strength
nor power escape.

*
The beginning of a good life is to do ryghtuousnes, for that is more accepted
unto God, then to offer up sacrifices



When a man's ways please the Lord he makes his very enemies to be his
friends,

Better is it to have a little thing with ryghtuousnes, then great rentes wrong
fully gotten.

pro. 19. c
A man deuyseth a way in his heart but it is the Lord that orders his
goynges.



Pro, 11. a and.20. b.
A true measure and a true balaunce are the Lords, he makes al weyghtes.

It is a great abhomynacion when kings are wicked, for a kings seat should
he holden up with ryghtuousnes.

Ryghtuous lyppes are pleasant unto Kings, and he that speaks the truth
shall be beloved.

The kings despleasure is a messa^ger of death, but a wise man will pacify him

The chereful continaunce of the king is life, and his loving favor is as ye
evening dew.

prove. 3. a
To have wisdom in possessyon is better then to have gold, and to get
understanding, is more worth the^ to have silver.

The path of the rightuous is to eschew evil, and who so looks well to his
way; keeps his own soul.

Presumptuousnes goes before destruccyon, and after a proud stomach there
follows a fall.

Better is it to be of humble mind with the lowly, the^ to deuid the spoils
with the proud.

He that handles a matter wisely, opteynethe good, and psalm. 2. b
blessed is he, that puts his trust in the Lord.

Who so has a wise understanding shall be called to counsel, and he that can
speak fair, shall have the more learning.

Understanding is a well of life unto him that has it, as for the
chasteninge of fools, it is but foolishnes.



Fair words are an honey comb, a refreshynge of the mind, and health of ye
bones.

Pro. 14. b Deu. 12. a. Esa. 50. b.
There is a way that men think to be right, but the end thereof leads unto
death.

A troublous soul disquyeteth her self for her own mouth has brought her
thereto.

An ungodly person stereth up evil, and in his lips he is as whote
burninge fire.

A froward body causes strife, and he that is a blab of his tongue, makes
deuysyon among Princes.

A wicked man begileth his neighbor and ledeth him in the way that is not
good.



Age is a crown of worship, if it be found in the way of ryghtuousnes.

A pacient man is better then one strong and he that can rule him self, is
more worth then he that wynneth a city.

The lottes are cast into the lap, but the ordering thereof stands all in
the Lord.

Capi xvii.
BEtter is a dry morsel with

Eccle. 10. d
A discrete servant shall have more rule, then the sons that have no
wisdom, and shall have like heritage with the brethren.

Like as silver is tried in the fire, Sapi. 3. a 1. pe. 1. b.
and gold in the furnace, even so does the Lord prove the hertes.

A wicked body holds much of false lyppes, and a froward person gives
ear to a disceytfull tongue.

Who so laugheth the poor to scorn, Pro. 14. d Job. 31. c.
blasphemeth his Maker, and he that is glad of an other man's hurt, shall not be
unpunished.

Chylders children are a worship unto the elders, and the fathers are the
honor of the children.

An eloquent speech becomes not a not a prince.

Liberalyte is a precious stone unto him that has it, for where so ever he
becomes, he prospers.

Who so covers an other man's offense, seeks love, but he that discloseth
the fault, settethe the Prince against him self.

One reprofe only does more good to him that has understanding, then an
hundredth strypes unto a fool.

1. Reg. 120
A sedicious person seeks myschefe, and therefore is a cruel messaunger sent
against him.

It were better to come against a she Bear robbed of her whelyes, the^ against
a fool *
(trusting) in his foolyshenes.

Rom 12. b 1. Tes. 5. b
Who so rewards evil for good, the plage shall not depart from his house.

He that sows discord and strife, is like one that dyggeth up a water broke
but an open enemy is like the water yt breaks out and renneth abroad.



What helps it to give a fool treasure in his hand, where as he has no
mind to bye wisdom.

Who so buyldeth his house to hye, seeks destruccio^, and he that refuses to
learn, shall fall into myschefe.

He is a friend that always louethe, Pro. 1. a
and in aduersite a man shall know who is his brother.

Pro. 9. a
Who so promyseth by the hand, and is suertye for his neighbor, he is a fool.

He that deliteth in sin, loves strife and who so sets his door to hye,
seeks after a fall.

Who so has a froward heart, opteyneth

An unwise body brings him self in to sorrow, and the father of a fool can
have no joy.

Pro. 12 d. and. 15. b Eccle. 30. a Eccle 2 c and. 8. a
A merry heart makes a lusty age, but a sorrowful mind dries up the bones.

The ungodly takes gifts out of the bosom, to wrest the ways of judgment

Wisdom shynethe in the face of him that has understanding, but the eyes of
toles wandre through out all lands

Pro. 19. b.
An indiscreet son is a grefe unto his father, and an heaviness unto his mother.

To punyshe an innocent, and to smite the Princes that give true judgment, at
both evil.

1. Ioh. 1. b. and.3. a
He is wise and discrete, that tempereth his words, and he is a man of
understanding, that makes much of his Spirit.

Ioh. 13. a.
Ye, a very fool (when he holds his tongue) is counted wise, and to have
understanding, when he shuts his lyppes.

Capi. xviii.


A fool has no delight in understanding, but only in those things where in
his heart reioyseth.

When the ungodly comes, the^ comes also disdain, and so there follows
shame and dishonor.

The words of a man's mouth are like deep waters, and the well of wisdom is
like a full stream.

Pro. 24. c.
It is not good to regard the person of ye ungodly, or to put back ye rightuous
in judgment.

A fools lyppes are ever brawling, and his mouth provoke unto battle.



The words of a sclaunderer ar very wou^des, and go through unto thein most
parts of the body.

*
Fear casts down him that is slouthful, and the souls of such as live in
voluptuousnes shall honger.

Who so is sloughtful and slack in his labor, is the brother, of him that is
a waster.

The name of the Lord is a strong castle, the Rightuous flies unto it, and
shall be saved.

But the rich man's goods are his strong hold, yea he takes them for an
hye wall round about him.

After pride comes destruccyon, and

Eccle 11. b
He that gives sentence in a matter before he hear it, is a fool, and worthy
to be confounded.

A good stomach dryueth away a man's disease, but when the sprite is vexed, who
may bide it.

A wise heart labors for knowledge, and a prudent ear seeks understanding

Liberalyte brings a man to honor and worship, and sets him among
great men.

The ryghteous accuses him self first

The lot pacifyeth the varyaunce, and parts the myghtie a sunder.

A brother that is grieved with sin, is more worth then a very strong castle,
and they that hold together are like the bar of a palace.

A man's belly shall be satysfyed with ye fruit of his own mouth, and with the
increse of his lyppes shall he be filled.

Death and life are in the instrument of the tongue, and they that love it, shall
enjoy the fruit thereof.

Pro. 24. c.
Who so fyndeth a (good) woman finds a good thing, and receyuethe an wholesome
benefyte of the lord.

*
He that puts away a good woman puts away a good thing, but he that
keeps an harlotte, is a fool and unwise.

The pore makethe supplycacyon, and prays mekely, but the rich gives a a
roughe answer.

A friend that delyteth in love, does a man more frendshyp, and sticks faster
unto him, then a brother.

Capi. xix.
Pro 28. a
is the pore that lives godly, then the blasphemer that is but a fool.

Where no discrecyon is, there the soul is not well, and who so is swyft on
foot stembleth hastily.

Foolyshnes makethe a man to go out of his way, and then is his heart
impatient against the lord.

Riches make many friends, but the poor is forsaken of his neighbor.

Deu 19. b
A false witness shall not remain unpunished, and he that speaks lies, shall
not escape.

The multitude hangethe upon great men, and every man favors him that
gives rewards.

As for the poor, he is hated among at his brethren, ye his own friends
forsake him, and he that gives crede^ce unto words, gets nothing.

He that is wise, loves his own soul

A false witness shall not remain unpunished, and he that speaks lies,
shall peryshe.

Pleasure becomes not a fool, much more vnsemeli is it, a bond man to have
the rule of Princes.

A wise man can put of displesure, and it is honor to let some fautes pass.

Pro. 28. c.
Kings disfauoure is like ye roryng of a Lion, but Psa. 233. a
his frenshyppe is like the dew upon the grass.

Pro. 17. d
An vndescrete son is the heaviness of his father, pro, 27. b
and a braulinge wife is like the top of an house, where through it is ever
droppynge.

House and riches may a man have by the heretage of his elders, but Pro. 18. d
a dyscrete woman is the gift of the Lord,

Slouthfulnes brings in sleep, and an ydell soul shall suffer honger.



He that has pytie upon the poor, lends unto the lord, and look what he
lays out it shall be paid him again.

Christen thy son while there is hope but let not thy Soul be moved to slay
him.

For great wrath brings harm, therefore let him go, and so may thou teach
him more nurture.

O give care unto good counsel, and be content to be reformed, that thou may
be wise here after.

Pro. 16. v
There are many deuyces in a man's heart, nevertheless the counsel of the lord
shall stand. *
(for ever)

It is a man's worship to do good, and better it is to be a poor man, the^ a

The fear of the lord preserves the life, ye it gives ple^tuousnes,
without the visitacion of any plage.

Pro. 26. b
A slothful body hydeth his hand in his bosom, and disdayneth to put it to
his mouth.

If thou smytest a scornful person the ygnorau^t shall take better head,
Prou. 11. b
and if thou reprouest one that has understanding, he will be the wyser.

He that hurts his father, or shuts out his mother, is a shameful and an
unworthy son,

My son, hear no more the doctrine that leads the unto errors from the
words of understanding.

A false witness laugheth judgment to scorn, and the mouth of the ungodly
eats wickedness.

Punyshementes are ordained for the scorneful, and stryppes for foles backs

Capi. xx.
Wine makes a man to be scorneful

Who so delyteth therein, shall never be wise.

Pro. 19. b.
The king ought to be feared as the roryng of a Lyo^, who so provoke him unto
anger, offends against his own soul,

It is a man's honor to keep him self from strife, but they that have pleasure
in brawling, are fools every one.

A slouthful body will not go to plowe for cold, therefore shall he go a
begginge in Summer, and have nothing.

Wise council in the heart of man, is like a water in the deep of the earth,
and a man that has understanding draws it forth.

Many there be that are called good doers, but where shall one find a true
faith full man.

Psalmus. 37. c.
Who so leads a godly and an innocent life, is rightuous and happy shall his
children be whom he leueth behind him.

A King that sytteth in Judgment, and looks well about him, drives away
all evil.

1. Ioha^. 1 d 3. re. 8. c. 2. Pa. 6. g. Eccle. 7. c.
Who can say, my heart is clean, I am innocent from sin?

To use two manner of weightes, or two manner of measures, both these are
abominable unto the Lord.

A child is known by his conuersacyon, whether his works be pure and right.

As for the hearing of the ear, and the syghte of the eye, the Lord has
made them both.

Delight not thou in sleep, lest thou come unto poverty, but open thine eyes,
that thou may have bread enough.

they give it a good word.

A mouth of understanding is more worth the^ gold, many precious stones, and
costely jewels.

Pro. 9. a. and, 17. c.
Take his garment that is suertie for a stranger, and take a pledge of him for
the unknown man's sake.

Every man lyketh the bread that is gotten with disceyte, but at the last
his mouth shall be filled with gravel.

Through council the things that me^ deuyse, go forward, and with discrecio^
ought war to be taken in hand.

Meddle not with him that bewrays secrets, and is a slaunderer, and
dysceyueth with his lyppes.

Exo. 20. b. Leui. 20. b. Deu. 27. c.
Who so curses his father and mother, his light shall be put out in the midst
of darkness.

^re, xv. a.
The heritage that comes in hastily at the first, shall not be praised at

Math 5. c. To. 12. c.
Say not thou, I will recompense euel, but put thy trust in the Lord, and be
shall defend the.

Pro. 11. a. and. 16. b.
The Lord abhors two manner of weightes, and a false balau^ce is an euel
thing.

Iere. 10. d.
The Lord orders every man's goinges how may a man then understand his own
way?

It is a snare for a man to blaspheme that which is holy, and the^ to go about
with vows.

1. Reg. 15. ^
A wise king destroys the ungodly and brings the whele over them.

The lantern of the Lord is ye breath of man, and goes through all the inward
parts of the body.

Pro. 29. b
Mercy and faithfulness preserve the King, and with loving kyndnesse his seat
is holden up.

The strength of young men is their worship, and a greye head, is an
honor unto the aged.

Wounds drive away evil and so do stripes the inward part of the body.

Capi. xxi
4. Reg. 1. c.
Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, like as are the rivers of water, he
may turn it whither soever he will.

Every man thinks his own way to be right, but the Lord judges the
hertes.

Miche. 6 b
To do ryghtuousnes and judgment is more acceptable to the Lord then Sacrifice.

A presumptuouse look, a proud stomach, and the lantern of the ungodly is
sin.

The devices of one that is diligente, bring plentuousnes, but he that is
unadvised, comes unto pouerte.

Who so hoordeth up riches with ye disceytfulnes of his tongue, he is a fool,
and like unto the^ that seek their own death.

The robberies of the ungodly shall be their own destruccio^, for they will
not do the thing that is right.

The ways of the froward are strau^g but Titum. 1. c
the works of him yt is clean, are right.

Pro. 25. d.
It is better to dwell in a corner under the house top, the^ with a brauling
woman in a wide house.

The soul of the ungodly wishes euel and has no pytie upon his neighbor.

Pro. 19. d
When the scornful is punyshed, the ignorant take the better head, and when a
wise man is warned, he will receive the more understanding.

The ryghtuous wisely consydereth ye house of the ungodly, and he sees that
God overthrows ye ungodly for their own wickedness.

Ma. 18. d.
Who so stops his ear at the cryenge of the poor, he shall cry him self
and not be herd.

A preuy reward pacifieth displeasure and a gift in the bosom, stilleth
furyousnesse.

The just deliteth in doing the thing that is right, but the workers of
wickedness abhor the same.

The man that wandreth out of ye way of wisdom, shall remain

Pro. 23. c.
He that has pleasure in bankettes, shall be a poor man.

Who so delyteth in wine and delycates,

The ungodly shall be given for the rightuous, and the wicked for the Just.

Eccle. 25. c
It is better to dwell in a wilderness, the^ with a chiding and an angrye
woman.

In a wise man's house there is great tresure and plentuousnes, but a folishe
body spends up all.

Who so follows righteousness and mercy, finds both life, ryghtuousnes,
and honor.

A wise man wynneth the City of ye mighty, and as for ye strength that they
trust in, he brings it down.

Pro. 12. b.
Who so keeps his mouth and his tongue, the same keeps his own Soul from
troubles.

He that is proud and presumptuous, is called a scorneful man, which in wrath
dare work malicyously.

The voluptuousness of ye slouthful is his own death, for his hands will not

He coueteth and desires all the day long, but the Ryghtuouse is always
geuynge, and keeps nothing back.

The sacrifice of the ungodly is abhominacion, how much more when they offer
the thing that is gotten with wickedness.

Pro. 19. a.
A false witness shall perish, but he that will be content to hear, shall
always have power to speak him self.

An ungodly man goes forth rashely, but the just refourmeth his own way.

Esaie. 1. b. and.4.6. b
There is no wisdom, there is no understanding, there is no council against
the Lord.

Psalmus. 33. c.
The horse is prepared against the day of battle, but the Lord gives ye
vyctory.

Capi. xxii.
A Ecclasi. 41 b. Ecclesia. 7. a.
Good name is more worth the^

The rich and poor met together, the Lord is the maker of them all.

A wise man sees the plage, and hydeth him self, but the foolyshe go on still
and are punyshed.

The end of lowlynes and the fear of God is riches, honor, prosperytie, and
health.

Thorns and snares are in the way of the froward, but he that does keep his
soul, will flee from such.

Teach a child in his youth what way he should go, for he shall not leave
it, when he is old.

The rich rules the poor, and ye borower is servant to the lender.

He that sows wyckednes, shall reap sorrow, and ye rod of his cruelty
shall peryshe.

Eccle. 31. d
He that has a loving eye shall be blessed, for he gives of his bread unto
the poor.



Cast out the scorneful man, and so shall strife go out with him, ye variaunce
and sclaunder shall cease.

Who so deliteth to be of a clean heart and of gracyous lyppes, the King shall
be his friend.

The eyes of the Lord

The slothful body says, there is a Lion without, I might be slain in ye
street.

Pro. 23. c,
The mouth of an harlotte is a deep pytte, wherein he falls that the lord is
angrye with all.

Foolyshnes stycketh in the heart of the land, and the rod of correccyon
shall drive it away from him.

Who so does a poor man wrong to increase

My son, bow down thyn ear, and harken unto the words of wysdom, apply
thy mind unto my doctrine, for you shall be excellent if thou keep it in thin
heart, and practyse it in thy mouth, that thou may put thy trust in the lord.

I have showed the this day the thing that thou know.

Have not I warned the very often with council and learning? yt I might show
the truth, and that thou with the verite myghtest answer them that send unto
the?

Se that thou rob not the poor, because

Make no friend ship with an angrye wylfull man, and keep no company with the
furious, lest thou learn his ways, and receive hurt in thy soul.

Prou. 6. a and.11. b. and.27. c
Be not thou one of them that bind their hand upon promise, and art sureti for
debt, for if you have nothing to pay they shall take away thy bed from under
the.

Pro. 23. b Deu. 27. c
Thou shalt not remove the land marcke, which thy fore elders have set.

See thou not, that they which be dylygent in their business, stand before
kings and not among the simple people.

Capi. xxiii.


Measure thine appetyte, and if thou wylt rule thine own self, be not over
gredy of his meat, for meat begileth and disceyuethe.

Take not over great travail and labor to be rych, beware of such purpose

Eccl. 27. a Iere. 17. b ^ Ti 6. b
Why wylt thou set thine eye upon the thing, which suddenly vanishes away

For riches make them selves wings and take their flight like an Aegle into
the air.

Eat not thou with the enuyous, and desire not his meat, for he has a
marvelous heart.

He says unto the, eat and drink, where as his heart is not with the.

Yea, the morsels that thou have eaten shall thou parbrake, and lose those swet

Tell nothing into the ears of a fool for he will despise the wisdom of thy
words.

Pro. 22. d. Deu. 27. ^
Remove not the old land mark, and come not within the field of the fatherles.

For he that delyuereth them, is mighty, even he shall defend their cause
against the.

Apply thine heart unto correccyon, and thine ears to the words of knowledge.

Pro. 13. d Eccle. 30 a
Witholde not correccyon from the child, for if thou beatest him with the rod,
he shall not dye thereof.

for If thou smite him with the rod thou shall deliver his soul from hell.

My son, if thy heart receive wisdom, my heart also shall rejoice, yet my
reins shall be very glade, if thy lyppes speak the thing that is right.

Pro. 24. a and c.
Let not thine heart be gelous to follow sinners, but keep the still in ye fear of
the Lord abiding shall not be in vain.

My son give ear and be wise, so

Pro. 21. c.
Keep no company with wine bybbers and riotous eaters of flesh, for such as be
dronkerdes and riotous shall come to poverty, and he that is given to much
sleep, shall go with a ragged cote.

Give ear unto thy father that begat the, and despise not thy mother when she
is old.

Labor for to get the truth, sell not away wisdom, nourtour, and
understanding (for a rightuous father is marvelous glad of a wise son, and
delyteth in him) so shall thy father be glade, and thy mother that bare the,
shall rejoice.

My son give me thine heart, and let thine eyes have pleasure in my ways.

Pro. 22. b
For an whore is a deep grave, and an harlot is a narowe pyt.

She lurketh like a thief, and brings unto her such men as be full of vice.

Who has woe? who has sorrow? who has strife? who has braulyng? and who has
wounds without cause?

Or who has red eyes?

Even they that be ever at the wine, and seek excess.

Look not thou upon the wine, how red it is, and what a color it gives in
the glass.

It goes down softely, but at the last it bytteth like a serpent, and stingeth
as an Adder.

So shall thyn eyes look unto strange women, and thine heart shall muse upon
froward things

Ye thou shall be as though thou steptest in ye myddeste of the sea, or upon
the top of the maste.

They wounded me (shalt thou say) but it has not hurt me, they smote me, but
I felt it not.

When I am well wakened, I will go to the drink again.

Capi. xxiiii.
BE Pro. 23. d and.24. c.
not thou gelous over wicked

For their heart ymagineth to do hurt and their lyppes talk of myschefe.

Through wisdom is an house builded, and with understanding is it set up

Through discrecyon shall the chaumbers be filled with all costly and pleasau^te
riches.

A wise man is strong, ye a man of understanding, is better then he that is
myghtie of strength.

For with discrecion must wars be taken in hand, and where as are many that
can give counsel, there is the victory.

Wisdom is an hye thing, yea even to ye fool, for he dare not open his mouth
in the gate.

He that ymagineth mischefe, may well be called an ungracious person.

The thought of the foolyshe is sin, and the scornful is an abhomynacion
unto men.

If thou be ouersene and neclyge^t in time of need, then is thy strength but
small.



If thou wylt say I knew not of it.

Thynkest thou that he which made the hertes, does not consider it? and that
he which regards thy soul, sees it not?

Shall not he recompense every man according to his works.

My son eatest thou honey and the sweet honey comb, because it is good and
sweet in thy mouth.

Even so shall the knowledge of wisdom be unto thy soul, as soon as thou
have gotten it.

And there is good hope, ye thy hope shall not be in vain.

Lay no preuy wait wyckedly upon the house of the rightuous, and disquiet not
his restyng place.

Psa. 37. d
For a just man falls seven times, and ryseth up again, but the ungodly fall
into wyckednes.

Pro. 17. a
Rejoice not thou at the fall of thine enemy, and let not thine heart be glade
when he stombleth.

Leest the lord (when he sees it) be an grye, and turn his wrath from him
unto the.

Pro. 23. b and.24. a
Let not thy wrath and gelouse move the to follow the wicked and ungodly.

And why? the wicked has nothing to Job 21. b
the candle of the ungodly shall be put out.

Pro. 13: a Pro. 20. a
My son, fear thou the Lord and the king, and keep no company with the
sclaunderous, for their destruction shall come suddenly, and who knows the
aduersite of them both?

These are also the saynges of the wise

Pro. 18. b
It is not good to have respect of any person in judgment.

He that says to the ungodly, thou art ryghtuous, him shall the people curse,
ye the coment ye shall abhor him.

But they that rebuke the ungodly, shall be commended, and and a rich blessing
shall come upon them.



First make up thy work that is with out, and look well unto that which thou
have in the feld, and then buyld thine house



Say not, I will handle him, even as he has delte with me, and will reward
every man according to his deed

I went by the field of the slouthefull and by the vyneyarde of the folyshe
man.

And lo, it was al covered with nertels and stood full of thystels, and the
stone wall was broken down.

This I saw, and considered it well, I looked upon it, and took it for a warning

Pro. 9. b.
Ye sleep on still (I say) a little, slomber a little, fold thine hands
together yet a little, so shall pouertye come unto ye as one that trauayleth by
the way and necessyte like an armed man.

These also are the parables of Solomon, which the men of Ezekyah king of
Judah copyed out.

Capi. xxv


The heaven is hye, the earth is deep, and the kings heart is unsearchable.

Take the dross from the silver, and there shall be a clean vessel thereof.

Take away ungodliness from the Kings sight, and his seat shall be stably shed
in ryghtuousnes.

Put not forth thy self in the presence of the king, and preace not in the
place of great men.

Luc. 14. b
For better is it that it be said unto the, come up hither, the^ thou to be
set down in ye presence of the prince who^e thou seyst with thine eyes.

Eccl. 8. a. Mat. 5. c.
Be not hasty to go to the law, leest happlye thou order thy self so at ye
last that thy neighbor put the to shame.

Handle thy matter with thy neighbor

*
Grace and frendshyppe does deliver which se yt thou keep for thy self leest
thou be reproved.

A word spoken in due season, is like apples of gold in a silver dyshe.

The correccyon of the wise is to an obedient ear, a golden cheine and a
jewel of gold.

Like as the cold of snow in ye harvest so is a faithful messaunger to the^
that send him for he refreshes his masters mind.



With pacyence is a Prince pacified, and Pro. 15 a. Genesis 32. a 1. Re. 25. a.
with a soft tongue is rigorousnes broken.

If thou find honey, eat so much as is sufficient for the, leest thou be
ouerfull and parbracke it out again.

Withdraw thy foot from thy neighbors house leest he be weary of the, and so
abhor the.

Who so bears false witness against his neigheboure, he is a very spear, a
swearde, and a sharp arowe.

The hope of ye ungodly in time of need, is like a rotten toth and a slipperi
foot.

Who so takes away a man's garment in the cold wether, is like vyneger upon
chalk, or like him that syngeth songs to an heavy heart.

*
Like as a moth hurts a garment, and a worm ye tree, so does the heuines of a
man hurt the heart.

To. 12. c 1. To. 30. b.
If thine enemy honger, feed him, if he thirst, give him, drink, for so shall
thou heap cooles of fire upon his heed, and the Lord shall reward the.

The North wind dryueth away ye

Pro. 21. a.
It is better to sytte in a corner under the rofe, then with a brauling woman in
a wide house,

A good report out of far country, is like cold water to a thyrstie soul.

A ryghtuous man

Like as it is not good to eat to much honey, Eccle. 3. c.
even so he that will search out hye things, it shall be to heavy for him.

He that can not rule him self, is like a City which is broken down, and
has no walls.

Capi. xxvi.
Like as snow is not mete in summer, nor rain in harvest, even so

Like as the bird and the swalowe take their flight and flee here and there,
so the curse that is given in vain, shall not light upon a man.

Psalmus. 32. b.
Unto the horse belongs a whyppe, to the Ass a bridle, and a rod to the
fools back.

Give not the fool an answer after his foolyshenes, leest thou become like
unto him, but make the fool an answer to his foolishness, leest he be wise
in his own conceyte.

He is lame of his fete, ye dronken is he in vanite, that commytteth any thing
to a fool.



He that sets a fool in hye dignity, that is even as if a man did cast a
precyouse stone upon the galouse.

A Parable in a fools mouth is like a thorn that pricketh a dronken man in
the hand.

A man of experience discerns al things well, but who so hireth a fool,
hireth such one as will take no head.

2. Pe. 2. d.
Like as the dog turns again to his vomit, eue^ so a fool begins his
foolyshnes again a fresh.

If thou see a man that is wise in his own conceyte, there is more hope in a
fool then in him.

Pro. 22. b.
The slothful says, there is a Leoparde

Like as the door turns about upon the thressholde, even so does ye
slothful welter him self in his bed.

Pro. 16. c.
The slothful body thrusts his hand into his bosom, and it greueth him to
put it again to his mouth.

The slogard thinks him self wiser then

Who so goes by and medlethe with other men's strife, he is like one that
takes a dog by the ears.

Like as one shoteth deadly arrows and darts out of a preuy place, eue^ so
does a dyssembler with his neighbor.

And then says he *
(when thou art taken) I did it but in sport.

Where no wode is, there the fire goes out.

Even so where the backbyter is taken away, there the strife cease.

Eccle. 28 b
As Cooles kendle heat, and wood the fire, even so does a braulyng fellow
steare up varyaunce.

A sclaunderers words are like flatery

Venymous lyppes and a wicked heart are like a potsherde covered with silver
dross.

An enemy shall be known by his talking, and in the mean season he ymagineth
mischefe, but when he speaks faier, believe him not, for there are seven
abhomynacyons in his heart.

Who so keeps evil will, secretly to do hurt, his malice shall be showed
before the whole congregacyon.

Eccle. 10. d Ec. 27. d.
Who so dyggeth up a pyt, shall fall therein, and he that weltreth a stone, shall
stomble upon it him self.

A dissembling tongue hates one that rebukes him, and a flaterynge mouth
works myschefe.


MAke not thy booste of to morrow Luce. 2. c. Eze. 28. a. Iam. 4. b.
for thou know not what may happen to day.

Let an other man praise the, and not thine own mouth, ye other folks
lips, and not thine.

The stone is heavy and the sand weighty, but a fools wrath is heuier the^
they both.

Wroth is a cruel thing, and furyousenesse is a very tempest, ye who is
able to abide envy?

An open rebuke is better the^ a secret love.

Faithful are the wounds of a lover, but the kysses of an enemy are cruel.

He that is full abhors an honey co^be but unto him that is hu^gry, every
sower thing is swear.



The heart is glad of a sweet ointment and savor, but a stomach that can give
good counsel, reioyseth a man's neighbor.

Thine own friend, and thy fathers friend se thou forsake not, but go not into
thy brothers house in time of thy trouble.

For better is a friend at hand, the^ a brother far of.

My son, be wise, and thou shall make me a glad heart, so that I shall make
answer unto my rebukes.

A wise man seeing the plage, will hyde him self, as for foles they go on
still, and suffer harm.

Prou. 10. c
Take his garment that is suertie for a stranger, and take a pledge of him for
the unknown man's sake.

He that is to hasty to praise his neighbor

Pro. 19. b
A brawling woman and the rofe of the house droppynge in a raynye day, may
well be compared together.

He yt refraynethe her, refrayneth the wind, and holds oil fast in his
hand Like as one iron whetteth an other, so does one man confort another.

Who so keeps his fyg tree, shall enjoy the fruytes thereof, even so he that
wayteth upon his master, shall come to honor.

Like as in one water there appear diverse faces, even so diverse men have diverse
hertes.

Eccle. 1. a.
Like as

Eccl. 14. a. and.27. c.
Silver is tried in the moulde, and gold in the furnace, and so is a man, when
he is openly praised to his face.

*
The heart of a wicked man seeks after mischefe, but a true heart seeks for
knowledge.



Se that thou know the number of thy catell thy self, and look well unto thy
stocks.

For riches abide not always, and the

The heye grows, the grass comes up, and herbs are gathered in the
mountains.

The lambs shall cloth the, and for the gotes thou shalt have money to thy
husbandrye.

Thou shall have gotes milk enough to feed the, to uphold thy household, and
to sustain thy maidens.

Capi. xxviii.
THe ungodly flies when no man

Luci. 26. c
Because of sin, the land does often change her Prince, but through men of
understanding and wisdom a Realm endurethe long.

One poor man oppressynge an other by vyolence, is like a continual reyne yt
destroys the fruit.

They that forsake the law, praise the ungodly, but such as keep the law,
abhor them.

1. Cor. 2. d
Wicked men discern not the thing that is right, but they yt seek after the
Lord discuss all things.

Pro. 19. a
A poor man leadynge a godly life is better then the rych that goes in
froward ways.

Who so keeps the law, is a child

Who so increases his riches by vau^tage and wynnyng, let him gather them to
help the poor withal.

Prou. 1. b
He that turns away his ear from hearing the law, his prayer shall be
abhomynable.

Who so ledeth the ryghtuous into an evil way, shall fall into his own pytte,
but the Just shall have the good in possessyon.

The rich man thinks him self to be wise, but the pore that has
understanding, can perceive him well enough.

Ecce. 10. a Pro. 29. a
When ryghtuous men are in prosperyte, then does honor florysh, but when the
ungodly comes up, the state of men changes.

He that hydeth his sins, shall not prospere, but Job. 13. c Psa. 32. b 1.
Job. 1. b
who so knowledgeth the^ and forsakes them, shall have mercy.

Well is him that stands always in

Like as a roarynge Lion and an hongry Bear, even so is an ungodly prince over
the poor people.

Where the Prince is without understanding, there is great opression and
wrong, but if he be such one as hates covetousness, he shall long reygne.

Gene. 4. b
He that by vyolence sheddethe any man's blod, shall be a rennagate unto his
grave, and no man shall be able to succor him.

Pro. 10. d
Who so leads a godly and an innocente life, shall be saved, but he that goes
froward ways, shall once have a fall.

Pro. 12. b. Eccl. 20. d
He that tylleth his land, shall have plentuousnesse of bread, but he that
folowethe ydylnesse, shall have pouertye enough.

A man that deals faithfully, shall be filled with blessings, and 1. Ti. 6. b
Pro. 23. a
he that makes haste to be rich, shall not be vngyltye.

To have respect of persons in judgment

He that will be rich al to sone, has an euel eye, and consydereth not that
pouertye shall come upon him.

He that rebukethe a man, shall find more favor at the last, then he that
flatereth him.

Ma. 15. a
Who so robs his father and mother, and says it is no sin, the same is
like unto a destroyer.

He that is of a proud stomach, steareth up strife, but he yt puts his
trust in the Lord, shall be well fed.

He that trusts in his own heart, is a fool, but he that walks wisely,
shall be safe.

2. Cor. 9, b
He that gives unto the poor, shall not lack, but he that turns away his
eyes from such as be in necessytie, shall suffer great poverty him self.

Pro. 28. b and.29. a
When the ungodly are come up, men are feign to hyde them selves, but when they
peryshe, the Ryghtuouse increase.

Capi. xxix.


Pro. 28. b Eccl. 10. a
When the Ryghtuouse have the over hand, the people are in prosperyte, but when
the ungodly bears rule, there the people mourn.

Who so loves wisdom, makes his father a glad man, Prou. 5. a Luke. 15. c
but he that keeps company with harlottes, spends away that he has.

With true judgment the king settethe up the land, but if he be a man that
is covetous, he turnethe it up side down.

Who so flattereth his neighbor, lays a net for his fete.

*
The syn of the wicked is his own snare, but the ryghtuous does sing and
rejoice.

The rightuous considerethe the cause of the poor, but the ungodly regards
no understanding.

Wicked people bring a City in decay, but wise men set it up again.

If a wise man go to law with a fool (whether he deal with him fryndely: or
roughly) he gets not rest.

The blood thyrstye hate the Ryghtuous, but the just

A fool pours out his Spirit al together, but a wise man keeps it in till
afterward.

If a Prince delight in lies, all his servants are ungodly.

The pore and the lender met together

Pro. xx. d.
The seat of the King that faithfully judges the pore, shall continue suer for
evermore.

The rod and correccyon minister wisdom, but if a child be not looked unto he
brings his mother to shame.

When the ungodly come up, wyckednes increases, but the ryghtuous shall se
their fall.

Nurtour thy son with correccio^, and thou shall be at rest, ye he shall do
the good at thine heart.

When the word of God is not preached, the people peryshe, but well is him that
keeps the law.

A servant will not be the better for words, for though he understand, yet
will he not regard them.

If thou see a man that is hastye to speak unadvised, thou may trust a
fool more then him.



An angrye man steareth up strife, and he that bears evil well in his mind,
does much evil.

After pride comes a fall, Job. 22. d
but a lowelye spyryte bryngethe great worship,

Who so kepethe company with a thief hatethe his own soul, he hearethe
blasphemies, and tellethe it not forth.

He that fearethe men, shall have a fall, but who so puts his trust in
the Lord is without danger.

Many there be that seek the Princes favor, but every man's Judgment
commethe from the Lord.

The ryghtuousse abhorrethe the ungodly, but as for those that be in the the
right way, the wicked hate them.

*
A child that kepethe the word shall be without destruction.

The pureness of the word of God, and what we ought to require of God, with
certain wonderful things that are in this world.

Capi. xxx.
THe words of

Who has clymmed up into heaven?

Who has come down from thence?

Who has holden the wind fast in his hand?

Who has comprehended the waters in a garment?

Who has set all the ends of the world?

What is his name, or his sons name can thou tell?

Psa. 19. ^
All the words of God are pure and clean, for he is a shyld unto al the^, that
put their trust in him.

Deuteronomy. 4. a and.12. d
Put thou nothing unto his word leest he reprove the, and thou be found a
liar.



Remove fro me vanyte and lies, give me nether pouerti, nor riches, only grant
me a necessary living.

Lest if I be to full, I deny the, and say Exo. 5. c Deuteronomy. 8 c and.31. c Job,
21. b.
who is the Lord?

And lest I being constreyned through poverty, fall unto stealing, and take
ye name of my god in vain.

Accuse not a servant unto his master lest he speak euel of the, and thou be
hurt.

There is a generation that curses their father, and does not bless their
mother.

There is a Generation that think the^ selves clean, and yet is not cleansed
from their fylthynes.

There is a Generation that has a proud look, and does cast up their eye
lyddes.

There is a generation whose teeth are swerdes, and with their chawebones they
consume and devour the Simple of the earth, and the poor from among men.

The horse leache has two daughters cryeng bring hither, bring hither.

There be three things that are never

The grave, a woman's womb, and ye earth that has never water enough.

As for fire, it says never hoo.

Exo. 21. v. Deu. 27. c
Who so laughteth his father to scorn and sets his mothers commau^deme^t at
naught, the ravens pike out his eyes in the valleye, and devoured be he of the
young Aegels.

There be three things to hye for me, and as for ye fourth, it passes my
knowledge.

The way of an Aegle in the air, the way of a Serpent over a stone, the way
of a ship in the sea, and the way of a man with a young woman.

Such is the way also of a wife that breaks wedlock, which wypeth her
mouth like as when she has eaten, and says, As for me, I have done no
harm.

Through three things the earth is disquieted, and ye fourth may it not bear.
Through a servant that bears rule, through a fool that has to much bread
through an ydell house wife, and through an ha^dmaide^ yt is heir to her
mastresse.



The emmettes are but weak people Pro. 6. a.
yet gather they their meat together in the harvest.

The Conyes are but a feeble folk, yet make they their couches a monge the
rocks.

The Greshoppers have not a guide, yet go they forth together by heaps.

The spider labors with her hands and is in Kings places.

There be three things that go still ye but the going of the fourth is the good
lie of all.

A Lion, which is strongest among beasts, and gives place to no man.

A greyhound strong in the hinder parts: A ram also, and a King, against
whom no man aryseth up.

If thou haste done folyshly wha^ thou waste in hye estate, or if thou haste
taken evil council, then lay thine hand upon thy mouth.

Who so chyrmeth milk, makes butter, and he that rubbeth his nose, makes it
blede, Eue^ so he that causes wrath, brings forth strife.

The words of king Lamuell, and the lesson that his mother taught him.

Kings ought to judge justly. The property of an honest married wife.

Capi. xxxi.
MY son, thou son of my body, O my dear beloved Son, give

O Lamuel, give Kings no wine, give Kings and Princes no strong drink,
leest they being dro^ken forget the law, and regard not the cause of the
poor, and of all such as be in aduersytie.

Give strong drink unto such as be conde^pned to death, and wine unto those
that mourn that they may drink it, and forget their misery and aduersyte.

Be thou an advocate, and stand in judgment thy self, to speak for all such
as he domme and suckerles.

Open thy mouth, defend the thing yt is lawful and right, and the cause of
the poor and helpelesse.



The heart of her husband may safely trust in her, so that he shall have no
need of spoils.

She will do him good and not euel all the days of her life.

She occupyeth woll and flax, and labors gladly with her hands.

She is like a merchants ship that brings her vytayles from a far.

She is up in the night season, to provide meat for her household, and fode for
her maidens.

She consydereth land, and byeth it, and with the fruit of her hands she
pla^teth a vyneyarde.

She gyrdeth her loins with strength, and courageth her arms.



She lays her fingers to the spyndell and her hand takes hold of the distaf.

She opens her hand to the poor, ye she stretches forth her hands to
such as have need.

She fears not that the cold of winter shall hurt her house, for all her
household folks are double clothed.

She makes her self fayer ornaments her clothing is white sylke and purple.

Her husband is much set by in the gates, when he sits among the rulers
of the land.

She makes clothe of sylke and sells

Strength and honor is her clothyng, and in the lattre day she shall rejoice.

She opens her mouth with wisdom and in her tongue is the law of grace.

She looks well to the ways of her household, and eats not her bred with
ydilnesse.

Her children shall arise, and call her blessed, and her husband shall make much
of her.

Many daughters there be yt gather riches together, but thou go above the^
all.

As for favor, it is disceitful, and beutie is a vain thing, but a woman yt
fears ye lord, she is worthy to be praised.

Give her of the fruit of her hands, and let her own works praise her in
the gates.

The End of the Proverbs of Solomon.
The book of the Preacher, otherwise called Ecclesiastes.
All that is in this world is vanite,

Capi. Primo.


Eccle. 12. c
Al is but vanyte (says the Preacher) All is but plain vanyte. For what else
has a man, of al ye labor yt he takes under the sun? One give racyo^
passes away, an other comes, but ye earth abides still. The Sun aryseth,
the sun goes down, and returns to his place

Job. 14. b.
Al sloudes run into the sea, and yet the sea is not filled, For look unto
what place ye waters run, thence they come to slow again. All things are
so hard that no man can express them. Pro. 17. Ge. 14. b. c
The eye is not satisfied with sight, ye ear is not filled with hearing.
Eccle. 3. b.
The thing that has been, comes to pass again, and the thing that has be
done, is done again, there is no new thing under the sun. Is there any thing
whereof it may be said, lo this is new: For it was long agoo in the times that
have been before us. The thing that is past, is out of remembrance. Even so
the things that

Thus I have considered all the things what were error and folishnesse. And I
perceived, that this also was but a vexacyon of mind, for where much wisdom
is, there is also great travail and dysquyetnesse, and *
the more knowledge a man has, the more is his care.

Abundance of riches, of pleasure and of buyldyng are vain things.

Capi. ii.


So I thought in my heart, to withdraw my flesh from wine, to aplye my mind
unto wisdom and to comprehe^d folishnes until the time yt (among al ye
things which are under ye sun) I might se what were best for me^ to do so long
as they live under heaven 3. Re. 3.4.5.6.7.
I made gorgyous fair works. I builded me houses, and planted 3. Re. 4.9
I made poles of water, to water ye grieve and fruteful trees with all. I bought
servants and maidens and had a great household. As for catel and sheep I had
more substance of the^, the^ al they that were before me in Jerusalem. I
gathered silver and gold together, eue^ a treasure of kings and lands. I
provided me syngers and women, which could play of instruments, to make me^
mirth and pastime. I gate me psalteries and so^ges of music. And I was greater
and in more worship, then al my predecessors in Jerusalem. For wysdom remained
with me and look what so ever mine eyes desired I let the^ have it, and wherein
so ever my heart delited, or had any pleasur, I with held it not from it. Thus
my heart reioysed in all that I did, and this was my portion of al my travail.
But when I consydred all the works that my hands had wrought, and all the
labor that I had taken therein, so, al was but vain and vexacion of mind,
and nothing of any value under the su^ne. The^ turned I me to consider wysdom,
error, and folyshnes (for what is he among me^ that might be compared to me
the king in such works) and I saw, that wysdom excels folyshnes, as far as
light does darkness For a wise man has his eyes in his heed that this also was
but vanytye. For the wise are ever as little in remembrance as the folyshe,
and all the days for to come shall be forgotten, ye the wise man dies as well
as the fool. Thus began I to be weary of my life, in so much that I could
away with nothing that is done under the sun, for all was but vanytie and
vexacyon of mind. Yea I was weary of al my labor, which I had taken under the
sun, because I should be feign to leave them unto an other man yt comes
after me. And who knows whether he shall be a wise man or a fool? And yet shall
he be lord of al my labors which I with such wysdom have taken under the
Sun. This is also a vain thing. So I turned me to refreine my Eccle. 5. d.
Is it not better then for a man to eat and drink, and his Soul to be meri in
his labor? Ye, I saw yt this also was a gift of god. For who will eat or go
more lustely to his work the^ I? And why? he gives unto man, what it pleases
him, whether it be wisdom, understanding, or gladness. But unto ye sinner he
gives werynesse *
(and superfluous care) that he may gather and heap together the thing that
afterward shall be given unto him, whom it pleases God. This is now a vain
thing, ye a very disquietnes and vexacyon of mind.

Al things come in their time, and pass away in their time.

Capi. iii.
EVerye thing has a time, ye all

There is a time to be borne, and a time to dye.

There is a time to plant, and a time to pluke up the thing, that is planted.

A time to sleye, and a time to make whole.

A time to break down, and a time to build up.

A time to weep, and a time to laugh

A time to mourn, and a time to dance.

A time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones together.

A time to embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing.

A time to win and a time to lose

A time to spare, and a time to spend.



Eccl. 20. a 31. d. 32. a
A time to keep scylence, and a time to speak.

A time to love, and a time to hate.

A time of war, and a time of peace

What has a man else (that does any thing) but werynes and labor? For as
touching the travail and carfulness which god has given unto men. I see
that he has given it them, to be exercysed in it. All this has he ordained
marvelous goodly, to every thing his due time. He has planted ignorance also
in the hertes of me^, that they should not co^prehe^de the ground of his works,
which he does from the beginnynge to the end

al his labor, that same is a gift of god I considered also that what so ever
god does, it continues for ever, and that no thing can be put unto it, nor
taken from it and that God does it to the intent, that men should fear him.
Eccle. 1. d.
The thing that has been, is now, and the thing that is for to come has been
before time, for god restores again the thing that was past. Moreover, I saw
under the Sun ungodliness in the stead of Judgment, and iniquyte in stead of
ryghtuousnes. The^ thought I in my mind, god shall separate the ryghteous from
the ungodly, and then shall be the time and judgment of al

Sapi. 2. a.
Who knowethe the spirit of man that goes upward, and the breath of ye beast
that goes down into the earth? Wherefore I perceive, that there is nothing
better for a man, then to be joyful in his labor, for that is his portion.
But who will bring him to se the thing that shall come after him?

The miseries of ye innocent. The superfluous labors of men. The child that
is poor and wise etc.

Capi. iiii.
Abac. 1. d Eccle. 5. b.
considered all the violent wrong that is done under the sun, and behold the
tears of such as were oppressed, and there was no man to comfort them, or that
would deliver and defend the^ from the violence of their oppressors. Wherefore I
Judged those yt are deed, to be more happy the^ such as be alive, ye him that
is yet unborn to be better at ease then they both because he sees not ye
miserable works that are done under the sun.

yet is there no end of his careful travail, his eyes can not be satisfied with
riches, *
(yet does he not remember him self, and say. For whom do I take such
travail? For whose pleasure do I thus Genesis 41. b 1. Re. 16 c 3. Reg 13 e 2.
par. 33. s 4. Re. 25. a
Some one comes out of prison, and is made a king: and an other which is
borne in the kingdom, comes unto poverty. And I perceived that all men
living under the Sun, go with the second child, that comes up in the
stead of the other. As for the people that have been before him, and that come
after him they are innumerable: yet is not their joy ye greater through him.
This is also a vain thing and a vexacion of my ade. When thou co^mest into
the house of God keep thy foot and draw nigh, that thou may hear, 1. Re. 15.
e
that is better then the offeringes of fools, for they know not what evil
they do.

A monycyon to be ware of rayshe communycacyon. We ought not to merueyle at the
oppressyon of the poor. The couetouse is not satisfied with his riches.

Capi. v.
Deu. 23. d. Baruc. 6 c
If thou make a vow unto God, be not slack to perform it. As for foolyshe
vows, he has no pleasure in the^. If thou promise any thing, pay it: for
better it is yt thou make no vow the^ that thou should promise, and not
pay. And why? where as ar many dremes and many words, there are also diverse
vanities: but look that thou fear God Eccle. 4. a Abac. 1. a.
if thou seyst the poor to be oppressed:

Where as much riches is, there are many also that spend them away. And what
pleasure more has he yt possesses them, saving that he may look upon them
with his eyes? A labouryng man sleapeth swetlye, whether it be little or Job. 1.
d. Ti. 6, b,
Like as he came naked out of his mothers womb, so goes he thither again,
and caryeth nothing away with him of al his labor. This is a miserable plage,
that he shall Eccle. 2. d,
Therefore me think it a better and a fayrer thing, a man to eat and drink,
and to be refreshed of all his labor, that he takes under the Sun all ye
days of his life which god gives hi^, for this is his porcio^. For unto
who^esoeuer god gives richesse, goods, and power he gives it him to enioie
it, to take it for his portion and to be refreshed of his labor: this is the
gift of God. For he thinks not much how long he shall live, for so much as
God fylleth his heart with gladness.

The miserye of the rich and covetous. The difference of a fool and wyseman.

Capi. vi.
all that his heart can desire: and yet god gives him not leave to enjoy the
same, but an other man spends the^. This is a vain thing and a miserable
plage. If a man begette an hundred chyldrenne, and live many years, so that
his days is good for man living, in the days of his vain life which is but
a shadow? Or who will tell a man, what shall happen after him under the Sun?

That which passes our strengthes and wits ought we not to seek after.

Capi. vii.
A Pro. 22. a
Good name is more worth then Cant. 1. a
a precious ointment, and the day of death is better then the day of birth.
It is better to go into an house of mournyng, the^ into a banketing house. For
there is the end of all men, and he that is living, takes it to heart. It is
better to be sorye the^ to laughe, for when the contenaunce is heavy, the heart
is reformed. The heart of the wise is in the mournyng house, but the heart of
the folyshe is in the house of mirth. Pro. 17. a
It is better to give ear to the chastenyng of a wise man, the^ to hear the
song of foles For the laughing of foles is like ye crackyng of thorns under a
pot. And that it but a vain thing. Who so does wrong, makes a wise man
to go out of his wit, and destroys a gentle heart. The end of a thing is
better the^ the beginning. The pacyent of spirit is better then the hye
minded. Be not hastily angry in thy mind, for wrath rests in the bosom of
fools. Say not thou: What is the cause, that the days of the To. 12. c.
be thou nether to rightuous nor over wise, that thou perish not, be nether to
unrighteous also nor to foolysh leest thou dye before thy time. It is good for
ye to take hold of this, and not to let yt go out of thy hand. For he that
fears God, shall escape them all. Wisdom gives more courage unto the wise,
then ten mighty men of the city: 3. Re. 8. c. 2 par. 6. g. Pro 20. b. 1. Ioh.
1. d.
for there is not one Just upon earth yt does good and synneth not. Take not
head unto every word that is spoken, leest thou hear thy servant curse the,
for thine own heart knows, that thou thy self also haste oftymes spoken even
by other me^. All these things have I proved in wisdom. I will I said be
wise, Job. 18. c.
but she went farther fro me then she was before, ye, and so deep that I
might not Pro. 7. d.
a woman is bitterer then death: for she is a very angle, her heart is a net,
and her hands are cheynes. Who so pleases God, shall escape from her, but the
sinner will be taken with her. Behold (says the preacher) this have I
diligently searched out and proved, that I might come by knowledge: which as
yet I seek, and find it not. Among a thousand men I have found one, but not
one woman among all. Lo, this only have I found, yt Genes. 1. d
god made man Just, and right but they sought many inuencyons.

The Kings commandment ought to be obeyed. Gladness is one of the chief
things under the Sun.

Capi. viii.
WHo is wise? Who has knoweledge Pro. 17. d Job. 9. d.
but malice puts it out of favor. I must keep the Kings commandment,
and the oath that I have made unto God. Be not hastye to go out of his sight,
and se thou continue in no evil thing: for what so ever it pleases him, that
does he. Like as when a king gives a charge, his Commandment is mighty.
Even so Job. 9. b.
who may say unto him: what do thou? Leu. 1^. a
Who so keeps the co^mau^demente, shall feel no harm, but a wise man's heart
discerns the time and manner. For every thing will have oportunite and
judgment, and this is ye thing that makes me^ full of carefulnes and sorrow.
And why? A man knows not what is for to come, for who will tell him? Nether is
there any man that has power over the spirit, to keep still ye spirit, nor to
have any power in ye time of death: it is not he also that ca^ make an end of
the battle, neither may ungodliness deliver them that meddle with all. All these
things have I consydred, and applied my mind unto every work that is done
under the Sun? how one man has lordshipe upon an other to his own harm.
For Psalmus 37. c.
I have often seen the ungodly brought to their graves, and fallen down from
the hie holy place: in so much that they were forgotten in ye city, where they
were had in so hye and great reputacyon. This is also a vain thing. Because
now that evil works are not hastily punyshed, the heart of man gives world
(and that of such a fassio^, that I suffered not mine eyes to sleep neither day
nor night) I understood of al ye works of God, but it is not possible for a
man to attain unto ye works that are done under the Sun: and though he
bestow his labor to seek them out, yet can he not reach unto the^: ye
though a wise man would undertake to know the^, yet shall he not find them.

A man wottethe not by the ryghtuousnes of his own works, whether he be
worthy of love or hate. A man ought to live merelye with his wife. A praise of
wisdom.

Capi. ix.
For all these things purposed I in Job. 9. c
with the good and clean as with the unclean: with him that offerethe, as
with him that offers not, like as it goes with the Virtuous, so goethe it
also with the Sinner. As it happens unto the perjured, so happens it also
unto him that is afraid to be forsworn. Among all things that come to pass
under the Sun, this is a misery that it happens unto all a like This is the
cause also that the hertes of men are full of wickedness, and mad foolyshnes is
in their hertes as long as they live, vnytl they dye. And why? As long Mat.
6. b.
let thine head lack none ointment. Pro. 5. c
Use thy self to live joyfully with thy wife whom thou love, all the days
of thy life, which is but vain, that God gives the under the sun, all the
days of thy vanity, for that is thy portion in this life, of al thy labor
and travail that thou take under the sun. What so al thy power, for in the
grave thou go to, there is nether work, council, knowledge nor wisdom. So I
turned me unto other things under the sun, and I saw in running, it helps
not to be swyft: in battle, it helps not to be strong to feding it helps
not to be wise: to riches, it helps not to be suttel: to be had in favor it
helps not to be cunnyng: but that al lives in time and fortune. For Luke.
21. d
a man knows not his time, but like as ye fish are taken with ye angle, and
as the birds are catched with the snare. Even so are men taken in the parlous
time, when it comes suddenly upon them. This wisdom have I seen also under
the Sun and me thought it a great thing. There

Sapi. 6. a 3. Re. 22. c 1. Re. 17. c
For wisdom is better the^ harness but one vnthryft alone, destroieth much
good.

The dyfference betwyxte a fool and a wise man. Fortunate and happy is that
Realm which has a wise Prince.

Capi. x.
A Deed fly does corrupt sweet ointment and makes it to stynke.

Even so oftymes he that is made of for wisdom and honor, is abhorred:
because of a little foolyshenes. Romans 1 2. b
be not neglygent then in thine office: for he that can take cure of himself,
auoideth Pro. 26. a Eccl. 27. d
But he that dyggeth up a pytte, shall fall there in him self, and who so
breaks down the hedge a serpent shall byte him. Who so remoueth stones, shall
have travail withal, and he that heweth wood, shall be hurt there with. When an
iron is blonte, and psa. 104. ^
wine makes them merry, but unto money are all things obedyent. Wyshe the
king no euel in thy thought, and speak no hurt of ye rich in thy preuy
chaumber: for a bird of the air shall betraye thy voice and with her feathers
shall she bewraye thy words.

Richesse ought to be destrybute unto the nedy.

Capi. xi.
Send

them all, let him remember the days of darkness, which shall be mani: and that
follows, all things shall be but vanytie.

Be glad then (O thou young man) in thy youth* and let thine heart be merry in
thy young days, follow ye ways of thine own heart, and the lust of thine eyes:
but be thou sure, that God shall bring the into judgment for all these
things.

From youth: ought we to consider and regard the goodness of God.

Capi. xii.
PVt away dyspleasure out of thine of music shall be brought low, when men shall
fear in hye places, and be afraid in the streets: when the Almonde tree shall
florishe and be laden with the greshoper and when al lust shall pass (because
when man goethe to his long home, and the Eccles. 1. a
Al is but vanite (says ye precher) al is but plain vanytie. The Preacher was
yet more wise, and taught the people knowledge: he gave good head, sought out
the ground, and set forth many parables, his diligence was to find out
acceptable words, right scripture, and the words of truth. For Hebre. 4. c
the words of the judge al works and secret things, whether they be good or
evil.

The end of the book of the Preacher, otherwise called. Ecclesiastes.
The Ballet of Ballettes of Solomon, called in Laten Canticum Canticorum.
A mystical song of the spiritual and godly love, between Christ the spouse
and the church or congregacyon his spousesse. Salomo^ made this Balade or
song by him self and his wife, the daughter of Pharao, under the shadow of
him self fygurynge Christ, and under the person of his wife ye Church.

Capi. Primo.
The voice of the Church. Eccle. 7. a
a sweet smellyng oyntmente, therefore do the maidens love the draw thou me
unto the, we will run after the.


The spousesse to her companions. The King has brought my into his preuy
chambers. We will be glad and rejoice in the, we think more of thy love then
of wine. They that be ryghtuous love the.


The voice of the Church in persecution. Gene. 25. b 2. Par. 3. c
the tents of the Cedarnes, and * as the hangynges of Salomo^ but yet am I
faier and well favored with al. Marvel not at me that I am so black for why?
the sun has shined upon me.


The voice of the Synagoge. My mothers children had euel will at me they made me
a keeper of the vyneyardes but mine own vineyard have I not kept


The voice of the church to Christ. Tell me of him whom my Soul loves
where thou fedest, where you make them to rest at the noone days, for why
shall I be like him, that goes wrong about the flocks of thy companions?


Christ to the Church. If thou know not thy self (O thou say Exodus 14. c
the host of Pharaos charettes have I compared the, O my love. Thy chekes and
thy neck is bewtyfull as the turtles, and hanged with spanges and godly
iewelles: a neck band of gold will we make the with silver buttons.


The voice of the Church. When the King sytteth at the table he shall smell
my Nardus: a bondell of Myrre is my love unto me: he will lie betwyxte my
breasts. A cluster of grapes in Cant. 4. a
O how fayer art thou (my love) how fayer art thou: you haste doves eyes


Christ to the Church. O how faier art thou (my beloved) how well favored
art thou?


The Church to Christ. Our bed is decte with flowers, the selynges of our
houses are of Cedre tree, and our balkes of Cypress.


Capi. ii.
The voice of christ. I Am the Lilye of the field, and Rose of the valleys:
as the Rose among the thorns: so is my love among the daughters,


The voice of the Church. Like as the appletre among the tres of the wood, so
is my beloved among the sons. My delight is to sit under his shadow, for his
fruit is sweet unto my throat he brings me into his wine seller, and loves
me specialli well. Refresh me with grapes, comfort me with apples for I am
sick of love. Canti. 8. a
his left hand lyethe under my heed, and his right hand


The voice of Christ. Canti. 3. b
I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem by the Roes and hyndes of ye field,
that ye wake not up my love, nor touch her, till she be content her self.


The voice of the Church. Me think I hear the voice of my beloved: lo, there
comes he hoppynge upon the mountains, and leapyng over ye little hills. My
beloved is like a Roo, or a young heart. Behold, he stands behind our wall,
he looks in at ye window, and pepeth through ye gate. My beloved answered and
said unto me.


The voice of Christ. O stand up my love, my beutyful, and


The voice against the herytykes. Get us the Foxes, ye the little foxes, that
hurt the vynes, for our vynes bear blossoms.


The voice of the Church. Canti. 7 ^
My love is mine, and I am his, which fedeth among the roses, until ye day
break, and till the shadows be gone.

Come again (O my beloved) and be like as a Roo, or a young heart upon the
wide mountains.


Capi. iii.
The voice of the Church which is chosen out of the Heathen.


The church speaking of Christ.


The voice of Christ. Canti. 2. b
I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes and hindes of the field,
yt ye wake not up my love nor touch her, till she be content her self.


The voice of the Sinagoge, marueylinge in it self at the Church of Christ.


The voice of the Church. Behold, about Salomons bedstede there stand
fourtye valeaunt men of the most mighty in Israel. They hold swerdes every
one, and are expert in war Every man also has his swearde upon his thyghe,
because of fear in the night: King Solomon had made him self a palace of the
wod of Libanus, the pilers


The church speaking of Christ. Go forth (O ye daughters of Sion) and behold
King Solomon in ye crown, wherewith his mother crowned him in ye day of his
marriage, and in the day of the gladness of his heart.


Capi. iiii.
The voice of Christ. O Cant. 1. d. Cant. 6. a
How fayer art thou my, love hid within. Thy neck is like the tower of David
builded with bulworkes whereupon there hang a thousand shyldes, ye all the
weapons of the Geauntes. Canti. 8. a
Thy two breasts ar like two twyns of young Roes, which feed among roses.


The spouse speaks to himself. O that I might go to the mountain of Myrre,
and to the hill of frankensence till the day break and till the shadows be
past away.


The voice of Christ speaking to the Church.

O how fayer are thy breestes, my sister, my spouse? Thy breasts, ar more
plesaunte then wine, and the smell of thine oyntmentes passes all spyces. Thy
lips, O my spouse, drop as the honye comb, ye milk and honey is under thy
tongue, and the smell of thy garments is like the smell of Lybanus. A well kept
gardeyne, is my sister, my spouse, a well kept waterspryng, and a seized well.
The fruits that sproute in the, are like a very Paradyse of Pomgarnates with
swet fruytes: as Cypress, Nardus, and Saffro^, Calamus, and Synamoin, with all
sweet smelling trees: Myrre, Aloes, and all the best spyces, a well of gardens
a well of lyuinge waters, which run down from Lybanus.

Up thou North wind, come thou South wind, and blow upon my garden, that the
smell thereof may be carried on every side: ye that my beloved may come in to
my gardeyne, and eat of the sweet fruytes that grow therein.


Capi. v.
Christ speaks to the church. I Am come into my garden, O my sister, my
spouse: I have gathered my


Christ speaks to the Apostles. Eat, O ye friends, drink and be merye, O
ye beloved.


The voice of the Church. I sleep, and my heart waketh, I hear the voice of
my beloved, when he knocks.


Christ to the Church. Open to me, O my sister, my love, my dove, my derlynge:
for my heed is full of dew, and ye locks of my hear are full of the night
drops.


The voice of the spousesse. I have put of my cote, how can I do it on again?
I have washed my feet, how shall I fyle them again.


The voice of the Church speaking of Christ.

I stood up to open unto my beloved, and my hands dropped with Myrre, and ye
Myrre ran down my fingers upon ye lock. I opened unto my beloved, but he
was departed and gone his way.

Now when he spoke, my heart was gone: I sought him, but I could not find
him: I cried upon him, nevertheless he gave me no answer.


The Church complayneth of her persecutours. So the watchemen that went about
the City, found me, smote me, and wounded me, Ye they that kept the walls,
took away my garment fro me.


The spousesse speaks to her companyons. ye tell him how that I am sick for
love.


The voice of the Sinagoge Who is thy love above other lovers, O thou fairest
among women? Or what can thy love do, more then other lovers, that thou
chargest us so straytly.


The church answeryng of Christ. As for my love, he is white and red colored,
a singular person among many thousands, his head is as the most fine
gold, the locks of his hear are busshed and black as a crow, his eyes as
as the eyes of doves by the water brokes washen with milk, and remaining in a
plentuouse place. His chekes are


Capi. vi.
The voice of the Synagoge speaking to the Church.


The voice of the Church. My love is gone down in to his gardeyne, unto the
sweet smelling beds, that he may refresh him felfe in the gardeyne, and
gather roses. My love is mine and I am his, which fedeth among ye roses.


Christ to the Church. Thou art pleasant (O my love) even as louelynesse
it self, thou art fayer as Jerusalem, fearful as an army of men, with their
banners. Turn away thine eyes fro me, for they have set me on fire Canti. 2. c


Thy heary locks are like a flock of 1. Re. 11. a
.xi Queen's.lxxx. wives, and damesels without number. mother, and dear unto her
that bare her. When the daughters saw her, they said she was blessed. Ye the
Queen's and wives praised her.


The voice of the synagoge. What is she this, that pepeth out as the morning?
fayer as the moon, clear as the sun, and fearful as an army of men with
their banners.


Christ to the Synagoge. I went down into the nut gardeyne, to se what grew
by the brokes, and to look if the vineyarde floryshed, or if the pomgranates
were shot forth.


The voice of the Synagoge. I knew not that my Soul had made me the people
that be under trybute.


Christ to the Synagoge. What will ye see in the Sulamyte? She is like me^ of
war that be in a dau^ce


The voice of the Church calling again the Synagoge. Turn again, turn
again, O thou perfect one: turn again, turn again and we will look upon
the.


Capi. vii.
Christ to the Church. O How pleasant are thy treadynges is like a round
goblette, which is never without drink. Thy womb is like a heap of wheat
that is set about with roses. Cant. 4. a
Thy two breestes are like two

Thy neck is as it were a tower of yuery: thyn eyes also are like the water
poles that are in Hesebon, beside the port of Bathrabbim: thy nose is like ye
tower of Libanus, which looks toward Damascus. That heed that standethe upon
the is like Carmel, and the bear of thy head is like the Kings purple,
folden up in playtes.

O how fair and lovely art thou, my darlinge, in pleasures? Thy stature is
like a Palm tree, and thy breasts like a cluster of grapes.


The spouse speaking of the Cross. I said I will clyme up into the palm tree,
and take hold of his brau^chesse.


The Spouse speaking to the spousesse.

This shall be puer and clear for my love, his lips and teth shall have their
pleasur

There will I turn me unto my love, and he shall turn him unto me.


The Church speaking unto Christ. O come on my love, we will go forth into
the field, and take our lodgyng in the villages. In the morning will we go se
the vyneyarde: if it be spronge forth,


Capi. viii.
The voice of the Patriarchs* speaking of Christ. O That I might find the
without, Canti. 2. a
His left hand shall be under my head, and his right hand shall embrace me.


The voice of Christ. I charge you, ye daughters of Jerusalem, that ye wake
not up my love, nor touch her, till she be content her self.


The Sinagoge speaking of the church. What is she this, that comme up from the
wyldernes, and leueth upon her love?


The voice of the spouse, before the spousesse. I waked the up among the apple
trees where thy mother brought ye into ye world


The church speaking to Christ


Christ speaking of the Church to the Sinagoge. Our sister is but young, and
has no breasts: what shall we do for our sister, when she shall be spoken
for?


The answer of Christ for the Church If she he a wall, we shall build a
silver bulwerke there upon, if she be a door, we shall faste^ her with borders
of Cedre tree


The Church answers unto the Sinagoge. I am a wall, and my breasts like
towers, then was I as one that has found favor in his syghte.


The synagoge speaking to the Church. Solomon has a vyneyarde at Baal Hamon,
and this vyneyarde delivered he unto the kepers: that every one for ye fruit
thereof should give him a thousa^de pieces of silver.


The voice of Christ. My vyneyarde is in my sight: thou (O Solomon) must have
a thousand, and the kepers two hundred with the fruit. Thou that dwelleste in
the gardeyns, O let me hear thy voice, that my companions may harken to the
same.


The voice of the Church speaking unto Christ. O get the away, my love, and
be as a Roo, or a young heart upon the sweet smelling mountains.


The End of the Ballette of Ballettes of Solomon called in Latten, Canticum,
Canticorum.
The book of wisdom.
An exortacion for Judges, and rulers to love wisdom. The spyrite of wisdom
hates falshed, dyssimulacyon, and hypocrysye, rebukes vnryghtuousnesse, and
abhors wicked doers.

Capi. Primo.
^^ar. 15. a
For he will be found of them that tempte him not, and appears unto such as
put their trust in him. As for froward thoughts, they be separated from
God, but virtue (if it be allowed) refourmeth the unwise. And why? wisdom
shall not enter in to a froward Soul, nor dwell in the body that is subdued
unto sin. For the holy ghost abhors feigned nurtoure, and with draws him
self from the thoughts that are with out understanding: and where
wickedness has the upper hand, she flees from thence. Galat. 5. c
For the spyrite of wisdom is loving, gentle, and gracyous, and will have no
pleasure in him that speakethe evil with his lyppes. Esaias. 6. a Iere. 23. d
Iero. 7. c
For God is a wytnes of his reins, a true searcher out of his heart, and an
hearer of his tongue. For the spyrite of the Lord fylleth the round compass
of the world, and the same that up holds al things, has knowledge also of
the voice.

Therefore he that speaks vnryghtuouse 3. Reg. 2. g Mat. 6. a Hebre. 4 ^
neither may he escape the Judgment of reprofe. And why? Inquisicion shall be
made for the thoughts of the ungodly, and the report of his words shall come
unto god, so that his wickedness shall be punished. For the ear of gelousy
hears al things, and the noise of the grudgynges, shall not be hyd. Therefore
beware of murmuring, which is nothing worth, and refrain your tongue from
slander. Luke 12. ^
For here is no word so dark and secret, that it shall go for naught: and ye
mouth that speakethe lies, slayth the soul.

O seek not your own death in the error through the words of your own
hands. Deu. 4. c
For God has not made death, neither has he pleasure in the destruccio^ of
the living. For he created all things, that they might have their being: ye
all the people of the earth has he made that they should have health, that
there should be no destruction in them, and that the kingdom of Hell should
not be upon earth (for ryghtuousnesse is everlasting and immortal, but
unrighteousness brings death.) Nevertheless, the ungodly call her unto them,
both with words and works, and while they think to have a friend of her,
they come to naught: for ye ungodly that are confederat with her, and take her
part: are worthy of death.

The ymagynacions and desires of the wicked, and their counsel against the
faythefull.

Capi. ii.
Job. 7. a Mat. 22. b 1, Cor. 15. d
and when a man is ones gone, he has no more joy: nor pleasure, neither know
we any man that tourneth again from death, for we are borne of naught: and we
shall be hereafter as though we had never ben. e For our breath is a smoke in
our nostrels, and the words as a spark to move our heart. As for our body it
shall be very ashes yt are quenched, and our soul shall vanishe as the soft
air. Our life shall pass away as ye trace of a cloud, and come to naught as
the myste that is driven away with the beams of the Sun and put down with
the heat thereof. Our name also shall be forgotten by little and little, and no
man shall have our works in remembrance.

For our time is a very shadow that 2. pa.. 30. c Esa. 22. b and.16. c Sapi.
5. b
there is no retournynge, for it is fast sealed, so that no man comes again.
Come on therefore, let us enioie the pleasures that be present, and let us seen
use the creature like as in youth. We will fyl our selves with good wine, and
oyntmente, there shall no flower of the time go by us. We will crown our selves
with roses before they be withered. There shall be no fayer medowe but our lust shall
go through it. Let every one of you be partaker of our voluptuosnes. Let us
leave some token of our pleasure in every place, for that is our portion, else
get we nothing. Let us oppress the poor ryghtuous, let us not spare the wydow
nor old man, let us not regard

Let the law of unrighteousness be our auctorytie, for the thing that is feeble
is nothing worth. Therefore let us defraude the ryghtuous, and why? he is not
for our profit, ye he is clean contrary to our doings. He checked us for
offendynge against the law, and slaundereth us as transgressors of all
nurtoure. He makes his boost to have the knowledge of god, John 7. a Esaias. 7. a
ye he calls him self Gods son, He is the bewraier of our thoughts: It
greueth us also to look upon him, for his life is not like other men's, his
ways are of an other fassion. He countethe us but vain persons, he
withdraws him self from our ways as from filthiness, he commends greatli
the latter end of the Just, and makes his booste that God is his father. Let
us se then if his words be true, let us prove what shall come upon him: so
shall we know what end he shall have.

Psalm. 2^. a Mat. 27. e Iere. 11. d
that we may know his dignity, and prove his patience. Let us condemn him
with the most shameful death: for like as he has spoken, so shall he be
rewarded.

Such things do the ungodly ymagyn, and go astraye, for their own
wickedness has blinded them. As for the misteryes of God, they understand
the^ not: they neither hope for the reward of ryghtuousnesse, nor regard the
worship that holy souls shall have. Gene. 2. a. Gene. 3. a Ioh. 2. d
For God created man to be undestroyed, ye after the image of his own likeness
made he him. Nevertheless, through envy of ye deuel came death unto the
world, and they that hold of his side, do as he does.

The conseruacyon and assurance of the ryghtuouse. The reward of the fayth^^ll

Capi. iii.
But the souls of the ryghtuouse Deuteronomy. 32. a Sapi. 5. a. Hebre. 11 ^
and the pain of death shall not touch the^. In the sight of the unwise they
appear to dye, and their end is taken for very destruccyon. The way of the
rightuous is judged to be utter destruccyon, but they are in rest. And though
they suffer pain before me^, Romans 8. c. 1. Cor. 5. a 1. Petri. 1 c
yet is their hope full of immortality. They are punished but in few things,
nevertheless, in many things shall they be well rewarded. For God proves
them, and finds them mete for him self: ye as the gold in the furnace does
he try them, and receives them as a burnt offeringe, and when the

Mat. 13. e 1. Cor 15. e Mat. 19. c 1. Cor. 6. a.
The ryghtuous shall shine as ye sparks that ren through the red bushe. They
shall judge the nacyons, and have dominion over the people, and their lord shall
raygne for ever. They yt put their trust in him, shall understand the truth,
and such as be faithful, will agree unto him in love: for his chosen shall have
gifts and peace. Ma. 25. d
But the ungodly shall be punisshed according to their own ymagynacions, for they
have despised the ryghtuous, Esa. 5 6. b
For unto him shall be given the special gift of faith, and the most
acceptable porcyon in the temple of God. For glorious is the fruit of good
labor, and the rote of wisdom shall never fade away. As for the children of
aduouterers,

If they dye hastily, they have no hope neither shall they be spoken to in ye
day of knowledge. For horrible is the death and end of the vnrightuouse

Of the chaste generacyon of the faithful and of their felicity. Of the death
of the rightuous, and of the condempnacyon of the unfaithful.

Capi. iiii.
O How fayer is a chaste generation Iere. 17. b Mala. 1. a Mat. 7. c.
and ye things that are planted with horedome, shall take no deep rote, nor
lay any fast foundation, Though they be grene in the branches for a time,
yet shall they be shaken with the wind, for they stand not fast, and through
the vehemence of the wynd they shall be roted out. For the imperfect brau^cesse
shall be broken, their fruit shall be unprofitable and sower to eat, ye mete
for nothing. And why? all the children that are borne of the wicked, must
bear record of the wyckednes against their fathers and mothers, when they be
asked Age.
yet shall he be in rest. Age is an honorable thing. Nevertheless it
stands not only in the length of time nor the multitude of years: but a man's
wysdom is the graye here, and an undefiled life is ye old age. He pleases god
and was beloved of him: so that where as he lived among sinners, he translated
him. Hebre 11. d
Ye suddenly was he taken away, to the intent yt wickedness should not alter his
understanding, and that ypocrysye should not begyle his soul. For ye crafty
bewytching of lies make good things dark, ye unsteadfastness also and wickedness
of voluptuous desire turn aside ye understanding of the simple. Though he was
soon deed, yet fulfilled he much time. For his soul pleased god therefore
hasted he to take him away from among the wicked. This the people see and
understand it not: they lay not up such things in their hertes, how that
the loving favor and mercy of god is upon his Saynctes, and that he has
respect unto his chosen.

Thus the ryghtuous that is deed, condempneth Psalm. 2.
So that they them selves shall dye hereafter (but without honor) ye in
shame among the dead for evermore.

For without any voice, shall he hurste those that be put up, and remove them
from the foundacions, so that they shall be laid wast unto the highest. They
shall mourn, and their memorial shall perish So they being afraid shall
remember their sins, and their own wyckednes shall bewraye them.

The constauntnesse of the ryghteous before their persecuters. The hope of the
unfaithful is vndurable and vayur. The blessedness and fortunatenes of the
saints and godly.

Capi. v.
Mat. 19 c
against such as have delte extremely with them and taken away their
labors.

When they se it, they shall be vexed with horrible fear, and shall wonder at
the hastynesse of the sudden health, gronynge for a very destresse of mind
and shall say within themselves, having inward sorrow, and mournyng for very
anguyshe of mind. These are they, whom we sometime had in derision, Sapi. 3. a
and iested upon. We foles thought their life very madness, and their end to be
without honor. But lo, how they are counted among the children of god, and
their porcyon is among the Saynctes. Therefore we have erred from the way of
truth, the light of ryghtuousnes has not shyned unto us, and the sun of
understanding, rose not up upon us. We have we ryed our selves in the way of
wickedness and destruccyon. Tedious ways have we gone: but the way of the Lord
we have not known. What good has our pride done unto us? Or what profit has
the 1. Pa. 30. c Sapi. 2. b Pro 30. b
as a ship that passes over ye waves of water which when it is gone by, the
trace thereof cannot be found, neither the path of it in the floudes. Or as a
bird yt flyethe through the air, and no man can se any token where she is
flowen, but only hears the noyce of her wings, beatyng ye light wynd,
partyng the air through ye vehemence of her flyghte, and flyethe on shaking
her wings, where as afterward no token of her way can be found Or like as
when an arrowe is shot at a mark, it parts the air, which immediately
comes together again, so that a man can not know where it went through.
Even so we in like manner as soon as we were borne, begane immediately to draw
to our end, and have showed no token of virtue, but ar consumed in our own
wyckednes.

Such words shall they that have sinned speak in the hell: Job. 8. a
for the hope of the Psalm. ^. b Pro. 10. d and 11. a Jacob. 1. b
like as the smoke which is dispersed here and there with the wind, and as the
remembrance of a starunger that taryeth for a day, and then departs. Psa.
39. a
But the ryghtuous shall live foreuermore, their reward also is with the lord,
and their remembrance with the highest. Therefore shall they receive a glorious
kyngdo^e and a beutyful crown of the Lords hand: for with his right hand
shall he cover them, Ephe. 6. b
and with his own arm shall he defend them, his gelousy also shall take
harness, and shall arm the creature to be avenged of the enemies. He shall
put on ryghtuousnesse for a breast plate, and take sure judgment instead of an
helmet. The inuyncyble shylde of equytie, shall he take, his cruel wrath shall
he sharpen for a spear, and ye hole compass of ye world shall fight with him
against the unwise.



The calling of Kings, Princes, and Judges: which are also exhorted to
search wisdom.

Capi. vi.
Wisdom is better then strength, Wysdom Eccle. 9. d Psalm. 3. b Kyng^s. Romans
13. a
Hear therefore (O ye Kings) and understand O learn ye that be Judges of the
ends of the earth.

Give ear ye that rule the multitudes, and delight in much people. For the
power is given you of the lord, and the strength from the highest: which shall
try your works and search out your ymagynacyons. How that ye being
officers of his kingdom, have not executed true judgment, have not kept the
law of righteousness, nor walked after his will. Horrybly and that right soon
shall he apere unto you: for an hard Judgment shall they have that bear rule.

Mercy is granted unto the simple, but they that be in auctorite shall be sore
punyshed. Eccle. 10. ^
For God which is Lord over al, shall except no man's person, neither shall he
stand in awe of any man's greatness: for he has made the small and great and
cares for all alyke.

But the myghtie shall have the sorer punishment. Unto you therefore (O ye
Kings) do I speak, yt we may learn wisdom and not go amysse: for they that
keep ryghtuousnes, shall be ryghtuously iuged and they that are learned in
ryghtuouse things, shall find to make answer. Wherefore set your lust upon
my words and love them, so shall ye come by nourtoure. Wisdom is a noble
thing, and never fades away: ye she is easeli seen of them that love her,
and found of such as seek her.

She preuenteth them that desire her, Romans 13. b
and love is ye keeping of her law. Now the keeping of laws is perfeccyon
and an incorrupt life, and an incorrupt life makeeh a man familier with God.
And so the desire of Nu. 27. c
If your delight be then in royal seats and cepters (O ye Kings of she
people) set your lust upon wisdom, that ye may raygne for evermore. 2. Re.
14. c 3. Reg. 3. a
O love the light of wisdom, al ye that be rulers of the people. As for
wisdom what she is, and how she came up. I will tell you, and will not hyde
the mysteryes of God from you: but will seek her out from ye beginnynge of the
Natiuite, and bring the knowledge of her in to light, and will not keep back
ye truth: Nether will I have to do with consuminge envy, for such a man shall
not be partaker of wisdom. But the multitude of the wise, is ye welfare of the
world, and a wise King is the vpholdynge of the people. O receive nurtour
then through my words, and it shall do you good.

Wysdom ought to be preferred before all things.

Capi. vii.
I My self also am a mortal man, like cares. For there is no king that has had
any other beginning of birth. Al me^ the^ have one entrau^ce unto life, Job. 1.
c 1. Ti. 6. b
and one going out in like manner.

Job. 28. b.
for all gold is grauel unto her, and silver shall be counted but claye before
her sight. I loved her above welfare and beuti, and purposed to take her for my
light, 3. Reg. 3. b Mat. 6. d
for her shine cannot be quenched. All good things came to me with her, and
innumerable riches through her hands. I was glad in them all, for this wisdom
went before me, and I knew not yt she was my mother of all good things. Now
as I my self learned unfeignedly, so do I make other me^ partakers of her, and
hyde her richesse from no man, for she is an infinite treasure unto men, which
who so use, become partakers of the love and frendshyp of God, and are except
unto him for the gifts of wisdom.

it is he that leads unto wisdom, Sapi. 3. a
and teaches to use wisdom a right. In his hand are we and our words, ye^
al our wisdom, our understanding and knowledge of al our works. For he has
given me the true science of these things: so that I know how the world was
made and the power of the elements ye beginning, ending, and myddeste of the
times how the times altar, how one goes after an other, and how they are
fulfilled the course of the a yer: ye ordynaunces of the stars: the natures
and kyndnes of bestes: ye furyousnes of bestes: the power of the wyndes, by the
ymagynacyons of men: the diversities of young pla^tes, the virtues of rotes,
and al such things as are secret and not looked for, have I learned. For the
workemayster of al things has taught me wisdom.

In her is ye spyryte of understanding things because of her clennes. For she
is the breath, of ye power of God, and a pure clean expressing of the clerenes
of almighty God. Hebre. 1. a
Therefore ca^ no undefiled thing come unto her: for she is the brightness of the
everlasting light, the undefiled myrrour of the majesty of God, and the image
of his goodness.



The effects of wisdom.

Capi. viii.


Who so has the company of God, commends her nobility, ye the Lord of al
things him self, love her. For she is the scolemastresse of the nurtour of
God and the choser out of his works. If a man would desire riches in this life:
what is richer then wysdom, that works al things? thou wylt say:
understanding works. What is it among al things that works more then
wisdom? If a man love virtue and ryghtuousnesse, let him labor for wisdom,
for she has great virtues. And why: she teaches sobernes, and prudence,
righteousness, and strength, which are such things as men ca^ have nothing more
profitable in their life. If a man desire much knowledge, I have sharp
understanding, so that I shall be marvelous in the sight of great men, and the
faces of Princes shall wonder at me. When I hold my tongue, they shall abide my
leisure: when I speak, they shall look upon me: Job. 26. c.
and if I talk much, they shall lay their hands upon their mouth

Moreover by the means of her. I shall obtain immortalyte, and leave behind
me an everlasting memoryall, among them that come after me. I shall set the
people in order, and the nacyons shall be subdued unto me. Horrible tiraunte
shall be afraid, when they do but hear of me among ye multitude. I shall be
counted good, and mighty in battle. When I come home, I shall find rest with
her: for her company has no bitterness, and

Now when I considered these things by my self, and pondred the^ in my
heart, how that to be joined unto wisdom is immortalytye, and great pleasure
to have her frendshyp: how that in the works of her hands are infinite
riches: how that, who so keeps company with her shall be wise, and that he
which talks with her shall come to honor. I went about sekyng, to get her
unto me. For I was a child of a ripe wit, and had a good understanding. But
when I grew to more understanding I came to an undefiled body. Nevertheless
when I perceived that I could not keep my self chaste, Jacob. 1. b Chastity.
except god gave it me (and that was a point of wisdom also to know whose
gift it was) I stepped unto the Lord, and besought him, and with my hole heart
I said after this manner.

A Prayer of Solomon to obtain wisdom.

Capi. ix.
O God of my fathers, and Lord of 3. Reg. 3. d Gene. 1. c
and ordained man through thy wysdo^, that he should have domynyon over the
creature which thou have made: that he should order the world according to
equity and ryghtuousnes, and execute judgment with a true heart, give me wisdom
which is ever about thy seat: Psa. 115 b
and put me not out from among thy children: for I thy servant and son of
thy handmayden am a feeble person of a short time, and to young to the
understanding of Judgment and thy laws. And though a man be never so perfect
among the children of men, 1. Pa 29. b
yet if thy wysdom be not with him he shall be nothing regarded. But thou have
chosen me to be a king unto thy people, Exo. 25. d Actu. 7. f Hebre. 8. b
thou have commanded me to build a Temple upon thy holy mount, and an altar
in ye city wherein thou dwell: a likeness of thy holy Tabernacle which thou
have prepared from the beginning and thy wisdom with the which knows thy
works which also was with ye, Prou. 8. c John. 1. a
when thou made the world, and knew what was exceptable in thy sight, and
right in thy commandments.

O send her out of the holy heuens and from the trone of thy majesty, that
she may be with me, and labor with me: that I may know, what is acceptable
in thy sight. For she knows and understands al things: and she shall lead
me soberli in my works, and preserve me in her power. So shall my works be
acceptable, and the^ shall I govern thy people ryghtuously, and be worthy to
sit in my fathers seat. Esa. 40. b Romans 11. d 1. Cor. 1. b.
For what man is he, that may know the council of God? Or who can think
what the will of god is? For the thoughts of mortal men ar miserable, and our
forecastes ar but uncertain. 1. Cor. 5. a
is heavy unto the soul, and the earthly mansion keeps down the understanding
that museth upon many things. Very hardly can we discern ye things that are
upon earth, and great labor have we or we can find the things which are
before our eyes: Who will the^ seek out the ground of the things that are done
in heaven? Oh Lord, who can have knowledge of thy understanding and meaning,
except thou give wisdo^e and send thy holy ghost from above? yt the ways of
them which are upon earth may be reformed: that men may learn the things that
are pleasant unto the and be preserved through wisdom.

The delyueraunce of the ryghtuous comes through wisdom.

Capi. x.
Wisdom preserved the first man, Genes. 1. d and.2. d
took him out of ye mold of ye eatth, and gave him power to rule all things.
When the unrighteous went away in his wrath from this wisdom the brotherhed
perished through ye wrath of murder. Again, Gene. 4. b
Ge. 6.7.8.
when the water destroyed the hole world, wysdom preserved the ryghtuous
through a poor tree, whereof she was gouerner her self. More over when wickedness
had gotten the upper hand, so that the nacyons were puffed up with pride, she
knew the ryghtuous, preserved him fauteles unto God, and Genesis 19. c
what time as the fire fell down upon the five Cities: Like as yet this day the
unfruitfully, wast, and smokyng land gives testimonye of their wyckednes: ye
the unripe and untimely fruytes that grow upon the trees.

And for a token of a remembrance of the unfaithful soul, there stands a
pillar of salt. For all such as regarded not wysdo^ gat not only this hurt,
that they knew not the things which were good but also left behind them unto
men, a memoryal of their foolishnes: so that in ye things wherein they sinned,
they could not be hyd. But as for such as take heed unto wisdom, she shall
deliver the^ from Genesis 28. d
wysdom led him the right way, shows him the kingdom of god, gave him
knowledge of holy things, made him rich in his labors, and brought to
pass ye things that he went about. In the disceitfulnes of such as defrauded
him, she stood by him and made him rich. She saved him from the enemies, and
defended him from the dysceiuers. She made him strong in battle, and gave
him victory, that he might know, Genesis 37. ^ Acto. 7. b
how that wysdom is stronger then al things. When the rightuous was sold, she
forsook him not, but delivered him from sinners. She went down with him into
the dongeon, and failed him not in the bands: till she had brought him the
scepter of the Realm, Genesis 41. ^
and power against those that opressed him. And those that had accused him,
she declared them to be liars, and brought Exo. 1. d. ^ 3.4.5.7.9.


She delivered the ryghtuous people: and fauteles sede, from the nacyon that
oppressed them, She entered into ye soul of the servant of God, and stood by
him in wonders and tokens against the horrible king. She gave the ryghtuous ye
reward of their labors, and led them forth a merueylous way, on the day
time she was a shadow unto them, and a light of stars in the night season.
Exo. 14. ^


She brought them through the red see, and carried them through the great water
she drowned their enemies in the sea and brought them out of the deep. So ye
rightuous took the spoils of the ungodly, and praised thy holy name, o Lord,
and magnified thy victorious hand with one accord. Exodus 15. a Psalm. 8. a
Math. 2. b
For wisdom openethe the mouth of the dum, and makes the tongues of babes to
speak.

: The miracles done for Israel. The vengeance of sinners. The great power
and mercy of God.

Capi. xi.
Exo. 16. a
so that they went through the wilderness that was not inhabyted, and pytched
their tents in the waste deserte. Exo. 17. b
They stood against their enemies and were avenged of their adversaries. When
they were thyrstye, they called upon the and water was given the^ out of ye
rock and their thyrst slakened out of the hard stone. For by ye things, where
through their enemies were punished, were they helped in their need. For unto
ye enemies you gave man's blood instead of living water. And where as they
had scarcenes in the rebuke when the children were slain thou gave unto
thine own a plentuous water unlooked for declaring by ye thirste that was at ye
time, how thou woldeste bring thin own unto honor, and slaye

Deuteronomy. 8. a
For when they were tried and nourtured with fatherly mercy, they knowledged
how the ungodly were judged, and punished through ye wrath of god. These have
thou exhorted as a father, and proved them: but unto the other thou haste been
a boisterous king, laid hard to their charge, and condempneth them.

Where they were absente or present, their punyshement was alike. For their
grefe was double: namely, mourning, and the remembrynge of things paste. But
when they perceived that their punyshmentes did them good, they thought upon
the lord, and wundered at ye end. For at the last they held much of him, of
whom in the out casting they thought scorn, as of an abiecte.

Nevertheless the rightuous did not so when they were thyrsti: but even like as
the thoughts of the folish were, so was also their wyckednes. Sapi. 7 c Roma.
1. c
Where as certain men now, through error, did worship dom Serpents and vain
beasts, thou sendest a multitude of dom beasts upon them for a vengeance
that they might know that wherewith a man sins, by the same also shall he
be punished. Len. 26. d Sapi. 16 a Iere 8. c.
For unto the almyghtie hand, that made the world of naught, it was not
impossible to send among them an heap of beeres, or wod Lions, or cruel bestes
of a strau^g kind, such as are unknown, or spoute fire, or cast out a
smokyng breath, or shote horrible sparks out of their eyes, which might not
only destroy them with hurtynge, but also kyl the^ with their horrible sight.
Ye without these bestes might they have been slain with one wind, being
persecuted of their own works, and Roma. 2. a
Thou have mercy upon al, for thou have power of al things and make the, as
though thou saw not ye sins of men, because they should amend. For thou
love all the things that are, and hate none of the^ whom thou have made:
neither dyddest thou or deyne or make any thing of evil will.

How might any things endure if it were not thy will? Or how could any
thing be preserved, except it were called of the: But thou sparest all, for
all are thine, O Lord, thou lover of souls.

: The mercy of God toward sinners, the works of God are unreprovable God
gives leisure to repent us.

Capi. xii.
O Lord, how gracyous, and sweet Deuteronomy. 9. ^ 12. d. 18. b
for they committed abhomynable works against the: as wytchecrafte, sorcery,
and ydolatrye: they slew their own children without mercy, they eat up men's
bowels, and devoured the blood: ye because of such abhomynacyons, misbyleues,
and offeringes, thou show the fathers of ye desolate souls by the hands of
our forefathers, that ye land which thou love above all other might be a
dwelling for the children of God.

Nevertheless thou sparedst them also with one roughe word to destroy them
together: But thy mind was to drive them out by little and little, Exo. 23. d
Deuteronomy. 7. d
giving them time and place to amend, knowing well that it was an unrighteous
nacyon, and wicked of nature, and that their thought might never be altered:
for it was a cursed sede from the beginning, and feared no man: yet have thou
pardoned their sins. For who will say unto the why have thou done that? Or
who will stand against thy judgment? Or who will come before thy face, an
auenger of unrighteous men. Or who will blame ye, if the 1. Pe. 5. a
yt carest for all things yt thou may declare how yt thy judgment is not
unright there dare neither king ne tiraunt in thy sight require accomptes of
them who^e you have destroyed. Job. 9. a
For so much the^ as thou art rightuous thy self, thou orderest all things
rightuously, and punyshest even him that have not deserved to be punysshed, and
take him for a stranger and an alyaunt in the land of thy power. For thy
power is the beginni^g of righteousness: and because you art Lord of all things
therefore art you gracious unto all. When men think the not to be of a full
strength, thou declarest thy power, and boldli deliuerest thou them over that
know ye not But thou Lord of power iudgest quietly and orderest up with great
worship, for

Wherefore where as men have lived ignorauntly and vnryghtuously you haste
punyshed the^ sore, Sapi. 11. c Roma. 1. c
even through ye same things that they worshypped: for they went astraye very
long in ye way of error, and held the beasts which even their enemies
dispysed for Gods living as children of no understanding Therefore haste thou
sent a scorneful punishment among them, as among the children of ignorance.
As for such as would not be reformed by those scorns and rebukes, they felt
the worthi punishment of God. For the things that they suffered, they bare
them vnpacie^tly, being not content in them, but unwilling And when they
perished by the same things that they took for gods, they knowledged the^
that there was but one true God, whom before they would not know therefore came
the end of their dampnacion upon them.

All things be vain, except the knowledge of God. Ydolatryes and Ydolles are
mocked.

Capi. xiii.
Roma. 1. c Vain philosophers.
Vain are al men, which have not the knowledge of God: as were they that out
of the good things which are seen knew not him, that of him self is
everlasting. Neither took they so much regard of the works that are made, as
to know who was ye craftesman of them: but some took the fire some ye wind or
air, some the course of ye sterres, some the water, some took sun and moon,
or ye lights of heaven, which rule the yarthe for Gods. But though they had
such pleasure in their beutye, yt they thought them to have been gods, yet
should they have known how much more fayrer he is that mad them, for the maker
of beutye has ordained al these things. Or if they merueled at ye power and
works of them they should have perceived thereby that he which made these
things is myghtyer then they.

For by the greatness and beutye of the Roma. 1. c
why did they not rather find out the Lord thereof. He mocketh the ydolaters.
But unhappy are they, and among the dead is their hope that call them
Gods, which are but the works of men's hands: gold, silver, and the thing
that is found out by cunnyng, the symilitude of beasts, or any vain stone
that has been made by hand of old. Or as when a carpenter cutteth down a
tree out of the wode, and pareth of the bark of it cunnynlye, and so with the
one part makes a vessel to be images.
he gives it some proporcyon, facyoneth it after the similitude of a man or
makes it like some beast, streketh it over with read, and paynteth it, and
look what foul spot is in it he casts some color upon it. Then makes he a
co^uenyent Tabernacle for it, sets it in ye wall and makes it fast with
iron, providing so for it, leest it happen to fall, for it is well known that it
can not help it self. And why? it is but an image, and must of necessity be
helped.

in hand (whether it be to obtain any thing or to work) he prays unto him
that can do no manner of good.

The detestacion and abhominacion of images. A curse of them and of him that
makes the^ The euels that come of Ydolatrye.

Capi. xiiii.
Again, an other man purposynge Gene. 6. ^
and are saved.

For in the old time also when ye proud gyau^tes peryshed, Genesis ^. ^
he (in whom the hope was left to increase ye world) went into ye ship which
was governed through thy hand, and so left sede behind him unto the world.
Psalmus 114. b and 134. c Bar. 6. d Psalm. 7. a
For happy is the tree where through righteousness comes, but cursed is the image
of wood, that is made with hands, ye both it and he that made it. He because
he made it: and it, because it was called god where as it is but a frail thing.
For the ungodly and his ungodliness are both like abominable unto god. Even so
the work and he that made it also shall be punished together. Therefore shall
there a plage come upon the images of the hethe^, for out of ye creature of god
they are become an abhominacion, a temtacyon unto the souls of men, and a
snare for the fete of the unwise. And why? ye sekyng out of images is the
beginning of horedom and the bringyng up of them is the destruction of life.
For they were not from the beginning, nether shall they continue for ever. The
welthi idelnes of me^ has found them out upon earth, therefore shall they come
shortly to an end.

Thus by process of time, and through long custom, this error was kept as a
law and tirauntes compelled men by violence to honor images. As for those yt
were so far of, that men might not worship them presently, their pictur was
brought from far (like the image of a king who^ they would honor) to the
intent yt with great diligence they might worship him which was far of, as
though he hade ben present. Again, ye synguler cunning of the craftsman gave
the ignorant also a great occasion to worship images. For the workman willing
to do him a pleasur that set him a work, labored with all his cunninge to make
the image of ye best facion. And so through the beute of ye and offered them and
did sacrifice in the night season, Deuteronomy. 18. b Iere. 8. a and. 19. a
or else held unreasonable watches: so yt they kept neither life nor marriage
clean: but either one slew an other to death malyciously, or else grieved his
neighbor with aduoutrie.

And thus were al things mixed together: Image worshyppers.
either they are mad when they are merry, or prophecye lies, or live ungodly, or
else lightly forswere the^ selves for in so much as their trust is in the
ydols, which have nether soul nor understanding, though they swear falsely,
yet they think it shall not hurt them. Therefore comes a great plage upon
them, and that worthily: for they have an euel opinion of God, geuyng head unto
ydols sweringe unjustly to disceiue, and despysynge ryghtuousnes: for their
sweringe is no virtue, but a plage of them yt sin and goes ever with the
offense of the ungodly.

The voice of the faithful praysynge the mercy of god, for whose graces sake
they serve not Ydols.

Capi. xv.
But thou o, our God, art sweet, long

Nevertheless they that love such euel serves, that knows ye potter him self
So with his vain labor he makes a God of the same claye: this does eue^ he
which a little before was made of earth him self, and within a little while
after (when he dies) turns to ye earth again

Images.
They count our life but a pastyme, and our conuersacyo^ to be but a market,
and that men should ever be getting, and that by euel means. Now he that of
earth makes frail vessels and images, and knows him self to offend above
all other.

Psa. 113. d
are unwise, unhappy, and exceeding proud unto their own souls for they judge
all the ydols of ye heathen to be gods, which nether have sight to se, nor
noses to smell, nor ears to hear, nor fingers of hands for to grope: and as
for their fete, they are to slow to goo: for man made them and he yt has but a
borrowed spiryt facyoned the^. But no man can make a God like unto him: for
seeing he is but mortal him self, it is but mortal yt he makes with
unrighteous hands. He him self is better the^ they whom he worshippeth, for
he lived though he was mortal, but so did never they. Ye they worship bestes
also, which are most miserable: for compare things that can not feel unto
them, and they are worse then those. Yet is there not one of these beasts that
with his sight can be hold any good thing, neither have they given praise nor
thanks unto God.

The punishment of Ydolaters, and the benefytes done unto the faithful.

Capi. xvi.
FOr these and such other things Nu. 21. a
and given them their desire that they longed for: a new and strange taste
preparing them quayles to be their meat, to the intent that by the things
which were showed and sent unto the^, they that were so gredye, might be
withdrawn even from ye desire that was necessary. But these wtin short time
were brought unto pouerte and tasted a new meat: For it was requisite that
(without any excuse) destruccio^ should come upon those which used tyranny, and
to show only unto the other, how their enemies were destroyed. For when the
euel wodnes of the bestes came upon them, they peryshed through the stinges of
cruel serpents.

Exo. 12. d
As for them when they were bytten with greshoppers and flies they dyed, for they
were worthi to perish by such: But neither the teth of dragons nor of venomus
worms overcame thy children, for thy mercy was ever by the^ and helped them.
Therefore were they punyshed to remember thy words, but hastily were they healed
again: leest they should fall into so deep forgetfulness, that they might not use
thy help.

Lord, which heals all things. It is thou, O Lord, Deuteronomy. 31. ^ 1. Reg. 2. d
that haste power of life and death: thou ledest unto dethes door and bryngest
up again. But man through wickedness sleeth his own Soul and when his
spirit goes forth, it turns not again, neither may he call again the
soul that is taken away: It is not possible to escape thy hand. Exodus 9.
For the ungodly that would not know the, were punyshed by the strength of
thine arm: with strange waters, hayles, and raynes were they persecuted, and
through fire were they consumed. For it was a wondrous thing that fire might
do more then water, which quenches al things, but the world is the auenger
of the ryghtuous Sometime was the fire so tame, that the beasts which were
sent to punyshe the ungodly, brent not: and that because they should se and
know that they were persecuted with the punishment of god. And sometime brent
the fire in ye water on every side, that it might destroy the unrighteous
nation of the earth. Again Exo. 16. a
and sent them bread ready from heaven, without their labor, being very
pleasant and well gusted. And to show thy richesse and swetnes unto thy
children, thou gave every one their desire, so that every man might take what
lykes him best. But the snow and yse abode the violence of the fire, and melted
not, yt they might know that the fire burning in the hayle and rain,
destroyed ye fruit of the enemies, the fire also forgate his strenght again,
that ye righteous might be norished. For the creatur that serves the (which
art the maker) is fearce in punyshyng the unrighteous, but is easy and gentle
to do good, unto such as put their Deuteronomy 8. a Mat. 4. a
o Lord, whom thou love, might know that it is not nature and the growing
of fruytes yt fedeth men, but that it is thy word which preserves them that
put their trust in the: for look what might not be destroyed with the fire, as
soon as it was warmed with a little sun beam, it melted: that all might know
that thanks ought to be given unto the before the sun rise and that thou
oughteste to be worshypped before the day spring: for the hope of ye
unthankful shall melt away as the winter yse, and perish as water that is not
necessary.

The judgments of God upon the Egyptyans.

Capi. xvii.
GReat are thy judgments, o Lord Rom 11. d Exodus 10 ^
that will not be reformed with thy wisdom. For when the unrighteous thought
to have thy holy people in subieccyon, they were bound with the bonds of
darkness and long night, shute under the rofe, thynking to escape ye
everlasting wisdo^e. And while they thought to be hyde in darkness of their
sins they were scattered abrod in ye very myddest of ye dark coueryng of
forgetfulness, put to horrible fear and wonderously vexed for the corner
where they might not keep them from fear: because the sound came down and
vexed the^: ye many terrible and strange visions made them afraid.

No power of the fire might give the^ Exodus 7. b
At the which (when they saw nothing) they were so afraid, yt they thought
the thing which they saw to be ye more fereful. As for the sorcery and
enchau^tement that they used, it came to derisyon, and the proud wisdom was
brought to shame for they that promised to drive away the fearfulnes, and
dread from ye weke souls were sick for fear them selves, and that with
scorn. And though none of the wonders feared the^, yet were they afraid at the
bestes which came upon them, and at the hyssynge of ye serpents. In so much
that with trymbling they swowned, and said they saw not the air, which no
man yet may escape. For it is an heavy thing, when a Psa. 45. a
And look how much less the hope is within, the more is the vncerte^te of the
matter for ye which he is punyshed. But they that came in ye mighty night
slepte the sleep that fell upon them from under and from above: sometime were
they afraid through ye fear of the wonders, and sometime they were so weke that
they swowned with al: for an hasti and sodeyne fearefulnes came upon them.
Afterward, if any of the^ had fallen he was kept and shut in prison, but
without cheynes. But if any dwelte in a village, if it had been an heard or
husba^dman he suffered intolerable necessytie: for they were al bound with one
cheine of darkness.

Whether it were a blasyng wind, or a sweet song of the birds among the
thycke branches of the trees, or the veheme^ce of hasty runnyng water, or
great noise of the falling down of stones, or the plaieng and runnyng of
beestes who^ they saw not, or the mighti noise of rorynge beestes, or the
sound that answers again in the hye mountains, it made the^ swowne for
very fear. For all the earth shyned with clear light, and no man was hyndered
in his labor. Only upon them there fell an heuye night, an image of darkness
that was to come upon them. Ye they were unto them selves ye most heavy and
horrible darkness.

: The free light that the Israelytes hade in egypt. The persecucyon of the
faithful The Lord smote all the first borne of Egypt. The syn of the people
in the wilderness. Aaron stood bytwyxte the live and the deed, with his
censour.

Capi. xviii.
Nevertheless thy holy had a very magnified the and they that were vexed before
(because they were not hurt now) thanked the, Exo. 13. a
and besought the, O God, that there might be a difference. Therefore had they
a burning pyller of fire to lead them in the unknown way, and thou gave
them the son for a free gift without any hurt. Reason it was that they
should want light, and be put in the Prison of darkness, which kept thy
children in captiuytye, by whom the vncorrupt light of the law of the world
was for to be given. When they Exodi. 1. c
thou brouggtest out the hole multitude of the chyldrenne and destroiedst these
in the mighty water. Exo. 14. c.
Of ye night were our fathers certified before, yt they knowinge unto what oaths
they had given crede^ce, might be of good chere. Thus thy people received ye
health of the ryghtuous, but the ungodly were destroyed. For like as thou have
hurt our enemies, so haste thou promoted us whom you calledste before. For the
ryghtuous children of the good men offered secretly, and ordered the law of
ryghtuousnes unto unity, that the Just should receive good and evil in like
manner, singing praises unto the father of al me^. Again there was herd a
disacordyng voice of the enemies, and a pyteous cry for children that were
bewailed. The master and the servant were punyshed in like manner For they all
together, had innumerable that dyed one death,

Neither were the living suffycient to bury the deed, for in the twincksing of
an Exodus 11. c
the nobliest nation of them was destroyed. As often as god helped the^ aforeier
would it not make the^ believe, but in ye destruction of the first borne, they
knowleged that it was the people of God. For while al things were still, and
when the night was in the myddeste of her course, thy almighty word, o Lord,
lept down from Heaven out of thy royal Trone as a roughe man of war, in the
midst of the land that was destroyed: and the sharp swearde performed their
straight commandment, standing and fyllyng all things with death, ye it
stood upon the earth, and reached unto the heaven. Then the sight of the euel
dremes vexed them suddenly, and fearfulness came upon the^ unawares.

Then lay there one here, an other there, half deed, half quick, and showed
wherefore they peryshed. The temptacio^ of death touched the ryghtuous also,
and amongst the multitude in the wilderness there was insurreccyo^, but thy
wrath endured not long. Nu 16. g.
For ye fautles man went in all the have, and took the battle upon him,
brought forth the weapon of his mynistracion: even prayer, and the censours of
reconcilyng: set him self against the wrath, and so brought ye mysery to an
end declaryng thereby, yt he was thy servant. For he overcame not the
multitude with bodyly power, nor with weapons of might but with the word he
subdueth him that vexed him, putting the in remembrance of the oath and
couenaunte made unto the fathers. For when the deed were fallen down by heaps
one upon an other, Ex. 28. b. c
he stood in the midste, pacified the wrath, and parted the way unto ye living.
And why? in his long garment was all the beutye, and in the four rows of ye
stones, was the glory of the fathers graven, and thy majesty was written in the
crown of his heed. Unto these the destroier gave place and was afraid of them:
for it was only a temptacion worthy of death.

The death of the Egyptyans, and the great joy of the Hebrews. The meat that
was given at the desire of the people. The elements serve not only to the will
of God, but also the will of man.

Capi. xix.
AS for the ungodly, the wrath came Exo. 14. a
they devised an other foolishnes, so that they persecuted them in their
fleyng, whom they had cast out before with prayer. Whorty necessity also
brought them unto this end, for they had clean forgotten the things yt
happens unto them before. But the thing that was wantyng of their
punisheme^t, was requysite so to be fulfilled upon them with torments, that
thy people might have a marvelous passage through, and that these might find
a strange death. Then was every creature facioned again of new according to
the will of their maker, obeyinge the people went that were defended with thy
hand, seeing thy wondrous and marvelous works. For as ye horses, so were they
fed, and lepte like lambs praysynge the, o lord, which had delivered them
And why? they were yet myndefull of ye things yt happened while they dwelt in
the land, how the ground brought forth flies instead of catel, and how the
river scrauled with ye multitud of frogs Exo. 17. c Number. 11. g
what time as they were disceiued with lust: and desired delycate meats. For
when they were speaking of their appetite ye quayles came up to them from the sea, and punyshementes came upon the sinners, not without the tokens which came
to pass before by the vehemence of ye stremes: for they suffered wortheli
according to their wickedness, they dealt so abhominably and churlyslye with
strangers. Some received no unknown gestes, some, brought the strangers
into bondage yt did the^ good Beside al these things there were some that not
only received no strangers with their wyls, but persecuted those also, and did
them much evil, that received the^ gladly. 3. John. b.
Therefore were they punyshed with blyndnesse, like as they yt were covered with
sodeine darkness, at the doors of ye ryghtuous, so that every one sought the
entrance of his door. Genesis 19. ^. 3. Reg. 6, d


Thus the elements turned into the^ selves, like as when one tune is changed

The end of the book of wisdom.
The book of Jesus the Son of Sirach: which is called in Laten, Ecclesia
sticus. or Jesus

The Prologue of Jesus the Son of Syrache unto his book.
Many and great men have declared wisdo^e unto us, out of ye law, out of the
Prophets and out of other that followed them. In the which things Israel
ought to be co^me^ded by the reason of doctrine, and wisdom: Therefore they
that have it, and read it, should not only them selves be wise there through,
but serve other also with teaching and writing.

After that my grau^dfather Jesus had given diligent labor to read the law,
the Prophets and other books that were left us of our fathers, and had well
exercysed himself theri^: he purposed also, to wryt some thing of wyesdom, and
good manners: to the intent yt they which were wyllyng to learn and to be wise
might have the more understanding, and be ye more apt to lead a good
conversation.

Wherefore I exhort you to receive it louyngly, to read it with diligence, and
to take it in good worth, though our words be not so eloquent as ye famous
orators. For the thing that is written in ye Hebrew tongue, sounds not well,
when it is translated into an other spech. Not only this book of mine, but also
ye law, the Prophets, and other books, sound far otherwise, then they do,
when they are spoken in their own language.

Now in the.xxxviii. year when I came into Egypt, in ye time of Ptolomy
Euerges, and continued there al my life, I gat lyberte to read and wryt many
good things. Wherefore I thought it good and necessary, to bestow my
diligence and travail to interpret this book. And co^sydering that I had
time. I labored and did my best to perform this book, and to bring it unto
light: that the strangers also which are disposed to learn might apply them
selves unto good manners and live according to the law of the Lord.

Wisdom proceeds and comes of God. A praise of the fear of God.
Ryghtuousnes is a degree to come by wisdom.

Capi. Primo.
3. Reg. 3, b and.4. c Job. 28. a. Iacabi. 1. a
and has been ever with him, and is before all time. Who has nombred the
sand of ye see the dropes of the rain and the days of the time.

Who has measured the heygth of heaven the breadth of ye earth, and the depnes
of the sea? Who has sought out the ground of Gods wisdom, which has been
before al things? Wysdom has been before al things, and the understanding of
prudence from everlasting. (gods word in the heyghte, is ye well of wysdo^, and
the everlasting commandments are the entrau^ce of her.) Unto who^ has ye
rote of wisdom been declared? Or who has known her wit? Unto who^ has ye
doctrine of wisdom be^ discovered and showed: and who has understand ye
manifold entrau^ce trone, being a god of dominion: he has created her through
ye holy ghost: he has seen her, nombred her, and measured her He has poured
her out upon al his works, and upon all flesh, according to his gift: he
gives her richlye unto the^ that love him. The fear of the lord is worship,
and tryumphe, gladness, and a joyful crown. The fear of the Lord makes a
merry heart, gives gladness, joy and long life. Who so fears the lord it
shall go well with him at the last, and in the day of his death he shall be
blessed.

The love of God is honorable wisdom: Psa. 110 b Prou. 9. b
and was made with ye faithful in the mothers womb: it shall go with the chosen
women, and shall be known of the ryghteous and faithful. The fear of the Lord
is the right gods service, that preserves and iustifyeth ye heart and gives
mirth and gladness. Who so fears the Lord, shall be happy: and when we
have need of conforte* he shallbe blessed. To fear God is the wisdom that
makes rich, and brings al good with her. She fills ye hole house with her
gifts, and the garners with her treasure. The fear of the lord is the crown
of wysdom, Fear of the Lord.
and gives plentuous peace and health. He has sent her and nombred her:
knowledge and understanding of wysedom has he poured out as rain: and them
that held her fast, has and take good head what thou speak. Mark well
these things, lest thou happen to fall, and bring thy soul to dishonor,
and so God discover thy secrets, and cast the down in the myddest of the
Congregacyon: because you woldeste not receive the fear of god, and because thy
heart is full of faynednes and disceite.

He exhorts the servants of God to ryghtuousnes, love, understanding, and
pacyence, and exhorts him that fears god, to believe, to hope and to love:
because God never confounded nor forsakes them that trust in him, A curse upon
the subtle, fear, and impacyent of heart

Capi. ii.
MY son, if thou will come in to Mat. 4, a 2. Tim ^. b 2. Pet. 4. b
stand fast in righteousness and fear, and arm thy soul to temptacyon,
settle thine heart, and be paciente: bow down thine ear receive the words
of understanding and shrink not away, when thou art entysed. Hold the fast
upon god, join thy self unto him and suffer, that thy life may increase at
the last. What so ever happens unto the, receive it: suffer in heaviness, and
be pacyente in thy trouble For like as gold and silver ar tried in the fire,
even so are exceptable men in ye furnace of aduersytie.

Sapi. 4. a Pro. 17. a
Believe in God, and he shall help the, order thy way a right, and put thy trust
in him. Hold fast his fear, and grow therein. O ye that fear the Lord, take
suer hold of his mercy, shrynke not away from him, that ye fall not. O ye yt
fear the Lord believe him, and your reward shall not be emptye. O ye that
fear the Lord put your trust in him, and mercy shall come unto you for
pleasure: O ye ye fear the Lord set your love upon him and your hertes
shall be lyghtened.

Psalm. 30. a Esai. 26. a
Who ever continued in his fear and was forsaken? Or whom did he ever
despise, that called faithfully upon him? For God is gracyous and merciful, he
forgeueth sins in the time of trouble, and is a defender for all them that
seek him in the truth. Who be unto him yt has a double heart wicked lips,
and evil occupied hands, and to ye sinner that goes two manner of ways. Woe
be unto them that are lose of heart, which put not their trust in God, and
therefore shall they not be defended of him. Woo be unto them that have lost
pacyence, forsaken the right ways, and are turned back in to froward
ways. What will they do, when the Lord shall begin to visyt them?

They that fear the Lord, will not mystruste his word, and they that love
Ioh 14. ^
will seek out the things that are pleasant unto him and they that love him
shall fulfill his law. Romans 13. b
They that fear the Lord will prepare their hertes, and humble their souls
in his sight. 2. Re. 24. c
They that fear the Lord keep his commandments and will be pacyent till
they se him self, saying: better it is for us to fall into the hands of ye
lord, then into the hands of men: for his mercy is as great as him self.

: To our father and mother ought we to give double honor. Of the blessing
and curse of the father and mother. No man ought over curyously to search out
the secrets of God.

Capi. iii.
THe children of wisdom are a Fathers.
and their exercise is obedience and love. Hear me your father (O my der
children) and do thereafter, that ye may be safe. Exo. 20. b Deuteronomy. 5. b Ephe.
6. a
For the Lord will have ye father honored of the children, and look what a
mother commands her children to do, he will have it kept. Who so honors
his father, his sins shall be forgeuen him and he that honors his mother
is like one that gathers treasure together. Who so honors his father: shall
have joy of his own children, and when he makes his prayer he shall be
heard. He that honors his father, shall have a long life, and he that is
obedyent for ye Lords sake, Ephe. 6. a
his mother shall have joy of him. He that fears ye Lord, honors Genesis
27. d and.49. a Deuteronomy. 33. a
that thou may have his blessing: for the blessing of ye father builds up
the houses of the children, but ye mothers curse roteth out ye foundacions
Rejoice not when thy Father is reproved for it is no honor unto the, but a
shame For the worship of a man's father, is his own worship, and where ye
father is with out honor, it is the dishonestye of ye son My son, make much
of thy father in his age, and grieve him not as long as he lives. And if his
understanding fail, have pacye^ce with him, and despise him not in thy
strenght. For the good deed yt thou show unto thy father, shall not be
forgotten: and when you thy self want it shall be rewarded the (and for thy
mothers offense, thou shall no be recompensed with good, ye it shall be founded
for the inryghtuousnes) and in the day of trouble thou shall be remembered: thy
sins also shall melte away, like as ye yse in the fayer warm wether.

He that forsakes his father, shall come to shame: and he that defyeth his
mother is cursed of god. My son, perform thy works with louinge meekness,
so shalt you be loved above other men. The greater you art, ye more humble thy
self (in all things) and thou shalt find favor in the sight of God. Pro.
25. d. Romans 12. a Deuteronomy. 4. a
For great power belongs oneli unto God, and he is honored of the lowly.
Seek not out the things yt are above thy capacytie, and search not the
ground of such things as are to myghtie for ye: but look what God has
commanded the, think upon that always and be not curious in many of his
works For it is needful for the to se with thine eyes, the things that are
secret. Make not thou to much search in superfluous things, and be not
curyous in many of his works: for many things are showed unto the already,
which be above the capacytie of men. The medlinge with such has begyled many
a man, and tangled their wits in vanytie. Now he that loves peril, shall,
peryshe therein.

An hard heart shall fare evil at the last (an heart that goes two ways,
shall not prospere: and he that is froward of heart: will ever be the wurse and
wurse.) A wicked heart shall be lade^ with sorrows and the ungodly sinner will
heap one sin upon an other. The counsel of the proud has no health, for the
pla^te of syn shall be roted out in them. The heart of him that has understanding
shall perceive high things, and a good ear will gladly harken unto wysdom. An
heart that is wise and has understanding, will abstain from sins, and
increase in the works of ryghtuousnes. Psa. 40 a Deuteronomy. 4. d Mat. 5. a
Water quenched burning fire, and mercy reconcileth sins. God has respect
unto him that is thankful he thinks upon him against the time to come, so
that when he falls, he shall find in a strong hold.

Alms must be done with all mekenes. The study of wisdom and her fruit. A
judge ought to be merciful. An exortacion to eschew euel and to do good.

Capi. iiii.
Deu. 15. d Mat. 23. c
Despise not an hu^gry soul, and defye not ye pore in his necessytie: grieve
not the heart of him that is helpelesse, and with draw not the gift from the
nedeful Refuse not the prayer of one yt is in trouble, and turn not away thy
face from the nedy. Cast not thine eyes aside from the poor, that thou give
him not occasyon to speak evil of the. For if he complain of the in ye
bitterness of his soul his prayer shall be heard: even he that made him, shall
hear him. Be courteous unto the company of the pore, humble thy soul unto the
elder, and bow down thy head to a man of worship. Let it not grieve the to
bow down thine ear unto the pore, but pay thy det, and give him a friendly
answer, and that with mekenes. Deliver him that suffers wrong from the hand
of the oppressoure, and be not faint herted when thou sit in judgment.
Genesis 14. c Exo. 2. b
Be mercyful unto the fatherles as a father, and be in stead of an husband
unto their mother, so shall you be as an obedient son of the hygheste, and he
shall love the more then thy mother does. Wysdom bretheth life into her
children receives them that seek her, and will go before them in the way of
ryghtuousnes He that loves her loves life: and they yt seek her diligently,
shall have great joy They that keep her, shall have the heritage of life: for
where she enters i^, there is ye blessing of God. They that honor her, shall
be the servants of the holy one and they that love her, are beloved of God
Who so gives ear unto her, shall judge the hethen: and he that has respect
unto Ephe. 5. b Mat. 10* c
eschew the thing that is euel, and for thy life, shame not to say the truth.
For there is ashame that brings sin, and there is a shame that brings
worship and favor. Accept no person after thyn own will, Leui. 19. d
that thou be not confounded to thine own decaie. Be not ashamed of thy
neighbor in his aduersyte, and keep not back thy counsel when it may do
good, neither hyde the wisdom in her beuty, For in ye tongue is wisdom
known, so is understanding, konwledge, and learning in the talking of the
wise and stedfastnes in the works of righteousness. In no wise speak against
the word of truth, but be ashamed of ye lies of thine own ignorance. Shame
not to confess thin error, submyt not thy self unto eury man because of sin.
Withsta^de not the face of the might, and strive not against ye streme. But
for the truth strive thou unto death, and God shall fight for the against thine
enemies. Be not hasty in thy tongue, neither slack and negligent in thy
works. Be not as ye Lion in thyn own house, destroing thy household folks and
oppressynge them that are under the. Let not thine hand be stretched out to
receive, Act. 20. a.
and shut when thou should give

In riches may we not put any confydence. The vengeance of god ought to be
feared, and to repentance may we not be slow.

Capi. v.
Trust not unto thy riches, and say Luke. 12. b Eccle. 1^. ^
I have enough for my life (For it shall not help in the time of vengeance
and temptacion.) Follow not the lust of thine own heart in thy strength, and
say not: tushe, how have I had strength, or who will bring me under because of
my works? for doubtless god shall avenge it? And say not: I have committed mo
sins, but what evil has happened me? For the almighty as a pacient
rewarder. Because thy sin is forgeuen the, Romans 6. a Eccle. 21. a
be not therefore without fear neither heap one sin upon an other. And say
not: tushe, the mercy of the lord is great, Eccl. 16. b
he shall forgive me my sins, be they never so many. For like as he is
merciful so goes wrath from him also, Pro. 10. a and.11. a Ezech. 7. b Sepho.
1. c
Trust not in wicked riches, for they shall not help the in the day of
punishment and wrath. Be not carried about to every wind, and go not into every
way: for so does the sinner that has a double tongue. Stand fast in ye way
of the lord be steadfast in thy understanding, abide by the world, and follow
the word of peace and righteousness. Be gentle to hear ye word of god, Iaco.
1. ^.
that thou may understand it, and make a true answer with wisdom. Be
swifte to hear, but flow and pacie^t in giuynge answer. If thou have
vnderstnadyng, shape thy neighbor an answer: If no, lay thine hand upon
thy mouth: leest you be trapped in an indiscreet word, and so confounded.
Honor and worship is in a man's wise talking, but the tongue of the indiscreet,
is his own destruccyon. Be not a pryue accuser as long as thou live, Leui.
19. d
and use no sclau^der with thy tongue. For shame and sorrow goes over the
thief, and an evil name over him that is double to^ged: but he that is a preuy
accuser of other men, shall be hated enuyed and confounded. Se yt thou justify
the small and great alyke.

It is the propertye of a sinner to be evil tonged. The doctrine and good
council of the wise is to be enbraced wisdom should bescarched for. The profit
thereof.

Capi. vi.
BE not thy neighbors enemy for Romans 12. c Phili. 2. a
Be not proud in the deuyce of thine understanding, leest thy leaves wyther,
and thy fruit be destroyed, and so thou be left as a dry tree For a wicked
soul destroys him that has it, makes him to be laughed to scorn of his
enemies (and brings him to the porcyon of the ungodly. Eccl. 20. b
) A sweet word multiplieth fre^des and pacyfieth them that be at varyaunce,
and a thankful tongue will be, plentuous in a good man. Hold frendshyp with many,
nevertheless

Friends.
If thou gettest a friend, prove him first and be not hastye to give him
credence. For some man is a friend, but for a time and will not abide in the
day of trouble And there is some friend that turns to enimite, Deuteronomy. 23. b
add. 23. b. Mich 7. a Mat. 10. c Eccl. 37. a
and takes part against ye: and if he bnowe any hurt by the, he tells it
out, again, some friend is but a companyon at the table, and in the day of
need he continues not. But a sure friend will be unto the even as thine own
self, and deal faithfully with thy household folk if thou suffer trouble and
aduersite he is with the, and hides not himself from the Depart from thyn
enemies, ye and beware of thy friends. A faithful friend is a strong defense:
who so fyndeth such one Eccle. 5. a
but you shall eat of her fruits right so one O how excedyng sharp is wisdom
to unlearned me^: an unsteadfast body will not remain in her. Unto such she is
as it were a touchestone, and he casts her from him in all ye haste, for
wisdom is with him but in name, there be but few that have knowledge of her. But
with the that know her, she abides even unto the appering of god. Give ear, my
son, receive my doctrine, and refuse not my counsel. Put Mat. 6. a
and be not weary of her bands. Come unto her with thy hole heart, and keep her
ways with all thy power. Seek after her and she shall be showed the: and when
thou have her, forsake her not. For at the last thou shall find rest in her,
and that shall be turned to thy great joy. Then shall her letters be a strong
defense for the, and her yoke a glorious raymente. For the bewtye of life is in
her and her hands are the couplinge together of salvation. Ye a glorious
raiment is it, thou shall put it on, and the same crown of joy shall thou
wear, My son, if thou wylt take heed, thou shall have understanding and if
thou will apply thy mind thou shall be wise. If thou will bow down thin
ear, thou shall receive doctrine and if thou delight in hearing, thou shall be
wise. Stand with the multitude of such elders as have understanding, and
consent unto their wisdom with thine heart that thou may hear al godly
sermons, and that ye worthy sentences escape the not. Eccle. 5. a
And if thou see a man of du^rete understanding, get the sone unto him, and let
thy foot tread upon the steps of his doors. Psalm. 1. a
Let thy mind be upon the commandments of God, and be earnestly occupied in
his laws: so shall he stablishe thy heart, and give ye wisdom at thine own
desire.

We must forsake euel, and yet not iustifye our selves. The behavior of the
wise toward his wife, his friend, his children his servants, his father and
mother, prestes. etc.

Capi. vii.
Psa. 142 a Eccle. 7. c. Job. 9. a e Luke. 18. b.
neither unto the king for the seat of honor. Justify not thy self before
God (for he knows ye heart) and desire not to be reputed wise in the presence
of ye king. Make no labor to be made a Judge, except it so were, that you
could mightily put down wyckednes: for if thou should stand in awe of
the presence of the mighty, thou should fail in geuynge sentence. Offend
not in ye multitude of the city, Eccle. 12. ^
and put not thy self among the people. Bind not two sins together, for in
one sin shall thou not be unpunished. Say not tushe, God will look upon ye
multitude of my oblacyons, and when I offer to ye highest god, he 1. Re. 2. b.
Laugh no man to scorn in ye heaviness of his soul, for god (which sees al
things) is he yt ca^ bring down, and set up again. Accept no lesyng against
thy brother, neither do the same against thy friend. Use not to make any manner
of lie: for the custom thereof is not good, Mat. 6. b.
Make not many words when thou art among ye elders: and when you prayest,
Romans 12. d
make not much babbling. Let no laboryous work be tedyouse unto the, nether
the husbandrye which the almyghtye has created. Make not thy boast in ye
multitude of thy wickedness, but humble thy self eue^ from thyn heart: and
remember yt the wrath shall not be long in tarieng, and yt the vengeance of ye
flesh of the ungodly is a very fire and worm. Give not over thy Leuit. 19. c
entreat him not euel, nor the hirelynge yt is faithful unto the. Love a
discrete servant as thin own soul defraud him not of his lyberte, nether leave
him a pore man If you have catell, Deuteronomy. 25 a Eccle. 30 a
look well to the^: and they be for thy profit keep the^. If thou have sons,
bring the^ up in nurtur and lerning and hold them in awe fro their youth up If
thou have daughters, keep their body and show not thy face chereful toward
the^. Mary thy daughter, and so you shall perform a weighty matter: but give
her to a man of understanding. If thou have a wife after thine own mind,
forsake her not (but commit not thy self to ye hateful.) Honor thy father
from thy hole heart and forget not ye sorrowful travail yt thy mother had with
ye: Eccle. 3. a Tobi. 4. a
remember that thou wast borne through them, and how Deuteronomy. 12. a
Fear the Lord with all thy soul, and honor his minystres. Love thy maker
with all thy strength, Nu. 18. b. c
and forsake not his servants Fear the Lord with all thy Soul, and honor
his priests. Give the^ their portion of the first fruits and increase of ye
earth, like as it is commanded the give the^ the shulders, and their appointed
offeringes and fyrstlinges. Reach thin hand unto the pore, that God may bless
the with plentuousnes. Gala. 6. b Tobi. i. d
Be lyberal unto all me^ living: yet let not but do good eue^ to the^ that are
deed. Let not the^ that weep be without comfort, but mourn with such as mourn.
Romans 12. b Mat. 25. a
Let it not grieve the to visit the sick, for that shall make ye to be beloved
What so ever thou takeste in hand, remember the end, and thou shalt never do
amiss.

Against thy better is no stryuynge. Of the death of thyn enemy may thou
not rejoice, nor depsyse thy neighbors, nor the words of the wise.

Capi. viii.
Strive not with a mighty man, Math. 5. c Eccle 31. a
lest turns himself away from syn, and cast him not in the teeth withal:
Galat. 6. a 2. Cor. 2. b
but remember that we are frail every chone. Think scorn of no man in his
old age, for we wax old also. Leui. 19. g.
Be not glad of ye death of thyn enemy, but remember that we must dye all the
sort of us (and feign would we come into joy.) Despise not the sermons of such
elders as have understanding, but acquainte thy self with the wise sentences of
them: Eccle. 6. c
for of the^ thou shalt learn wysdom and the doctrine of understanding, and
how to serve great men without complaint. Go not from the doctrine Eccle. 26 a
Le^de not unto him that is mightier the^ thy self: If thou lendest him, count
it but lost. Be not suerty above thy power: if you be, then think suerly to
pay it. Go not to law with the judge for he will judge according to his own honor.
Travail not by the wai with him that is brainles, lest he do the euel: for he
follows his own wylfulnes, and so shalt thou perish through his folly. Gene.. b
Strive not with him that is angry and cruel, and go not with him in to ye
wyldernes for blod is Pro. 20. d Esaias. 3. a. Eccle. 9. c and.37. a. b.
and where there is no help, he shall murder the. Take no counsel at foles, for
they love nothyg but the things that please them selves. Make no counsel
before a stranger, for you canste not tell what will come of it. Open not thin
heart unto every man, lest he be unthankful to the, and put the to reprofe.

The ieoperdes of chastnes are to be eschued. An old friend is to be prefarred
before a new. The glory and riches of sinners. Ryghtuous me^ should be bydden
to geste. Labor is the chief thing in a work man, and wisdom in a Prince.

Capi. ix,
BE not gelouse over the wife of thy Prou. 5. a.
manner of thing lest thou destroy both thy self and thine heritage. Go not
about gasing in every lane of the city, neither wander thou abrod in the
streets thereof Turn away thy face from a bewtiful woman, and look not upon ye
fairenes of other. Math. 5. c
Many a man has perished through Genesis 34. a 2. Reg. 11. a Iudit. 10. and.11.12.
An aduouterous woman shall be trodden under foot as mire, of every one that
goes by ye way. Many a man wounderyng at ye bewtye of a strange woman, has
been cast out, for her words ki^dle as a fire. Sit not with an other man's wife
by any means, lie not with her upon the bed, make no words with her at ye
wine lest thine heart consent unto her, and so thou with thy blood fall into
destruction. Forsake not an old friend, Old friends.
for the new shall not be like him,

A new friend is new wine, let him be old and thou shall drink him with
pleasure. Desire not the honor and riches of a sinner, for thou know not
what destruccyon is for to come upon him. Delight not thou in the thing that the
ungodly have pleasure in, being suer that ye ungodly shall not be accepted until
their grave. Keep the from the man that has him, make no faut, lest he happen
to take away thy life. Remember yt thou go in the mydst of snares, and upon
the bulwarks of ye city. Eccl. 8 a c and.37. a b.
Beware of thy neighbor as nygh as thou can, and meddle with such as be wise
and have understanding Let just men be thy geftes, let thy mirth be in the
fear of god, let ye remembrance of god be in thy mind and let al thy
talking be in the commandments of the highest. Deuteronomy. 6. b. and.11. c 3.
Reg. ^. b
In the hands of craftesmen shall the works be commended so shall the princes
of ye people in ye wisdom of their talking. A man full of words is perylous in
his cite: and he yt is temerarious and paste shame in his talking, is to be
abhorred.

Of Kings and Judges Pyrde, and covetousness, are to be abhorred. Labor is
praised.

Capi. x.
A Wise judge will order his people kings. Pro. 29. b.
and where a man of understanding bears rule, there goes it well, As the
judge of ye people is him self eue^ so are his officers and look what manner of
man ye ruler of the city is such are they that dwell there in also. An unwise
destroieth his people but where they that be in auctorytie are men of
understanding, 3. Re. 12. a
there the cite prospers. The power of the earth is in the hand of God, and
when his time is, he shall set a profitable ruler upon it, in the hand of god
is the power of man, and upon the scrybes shall he lay his honor. Remember no
wrong of thy neighbor, and meddle thou with no unrighteous works. Leuit. 19.
c
Pride is hateful before god and man and all wyckednes of the hethen is to be
abhorred. Because of unrighteous deling wrong, Iere. 17. a Dani. 4. c
blasphemies, and diverse disceyt a realm shall be translated from one people to
an other. There is nothing worse proud Princes, and let up the meke in their
stead. God has withered ye rotes Sapi. 6. b Luke. 1. d 14. b. 18. b. Gene.
19. a
and planted the lowly among them, God has overthrown the lands of the
hethen, and destroyed them out of the ground. He has caused them to wyther
away, he has brought the^ to naught, and made the memoryal of them to cease
from out of the earth. (God has destroyed the name of ye proud, and left
the name of the humble of mind.) Pride was not made for man, neither
wrothfulnes for men's children: the sede of man that fears God, shall be
brough to honor, but the sede which tra^sgresseth the commandments of the
Lord, shall be shamed. He that is the ruler among brethren is holden in honor
among them, and he regards such as fear the lord The glory of the rich,
of the honorable, and of the poor is the fear of God.

Despise not thou the Just poor man, Pro. 17. a 1. Re. 12. b
Unto the servant that is discrete, shall the free do service. He that is wise
and well nurtured, will not gruge when he is reformed, and an ignorant body
shall not come to honor. Be not proud to do thy work, and dispayer not in the
time of aduersite. Better is he that labors and has ple^tuousnes of al
things, the^ he that is gorgyous and wants breed.

My son, keep thy soul in mekenes

The praise of humilite. After the outward aperaunce ought we not to judge. Of
hedy and rash judgment. The rich is not without offense. Al things come of
God. All men are not to be brought into thy house.

Capi. xi.
Gene. 41. f Dani. 6. a
THe wysdom of him that is brought low, shall lift up his heed, and shall make
him to sit among great men. Commend not a man in his beutye, neither despise a
man in his utter apperance. The Be is but a small be among the fowls,
Actu. 12. d
yet is her fruit exceeding sweet. Be not proud of thy raiment, and exalte
ot thy self in the day of thy honor: for the works of ye highest only are
wonderful ye glorious, secret, and unknown ar his works. 1. Reg. 15 ^ 1.
Hest. 67
Many tirau^tes have been feign to sit down upon the earth, and the unlikely
has worn the crown.

Many mighty men have been brought low, and the honorable have been delivered
in to other men's hands. Deuteronomy. 13. b and.7. b Iosue. 7. c and.20. c Pro. 18. b
Conde^pne no man before thou haste tried out the matter, and when thou have
made inquisicyon, then refourme ryghtuously. Mat. 19. c 1, Ti. 6. b. Pro. 10. c.
meddle not with many matters: and if thou will be rich, thou shall not get it,
and though thou re^nest thy way before: yet shall thou not escape. There is some
man that labors, and the more he weryeth him felfe, the less he has.
Again, some man is slothful, has need of help, Job. 13. c
wants strength and has great pouerte and Gods eye looks upon him to good,
sets him up from his low estat, and lifts up his heed, so that many men
marvel at him Job. 1. c Eze. ^^. a.
Prosperyte and aduersytie, life, and death, poverty and richesse come of the
Lord. (Wisdom, nurtour, and knowledge of the law are with god: love, and the
ways of good are with him. Error and darkness are made for sinners: and they
that exalte the^ selves in evil, wax old in euel.) The gift of god remains
for the rightuous and his good will shall have prosperity for ever. Luke. 12. d
Some man is rich by living nigardly, and that is the porcyon of his reward in
that he says: Luke e 12. c
now have I gotten rest and now will I eat and drink of my goods my self
alone. And yet he co^sidereth not that ye time draws nigh (and death
approaches) yt he must leave all thse things unto other men, and dye him
self. Stand thou fast in thy co^uenaunte and exercise thy self therein, and
remain in the work unto thy age. Continue not in the works of sinners but
put thy trust in god, and bide in thine estate: for it is but an easy thing in
ye sight of god, to make Eccle. 18. c
When thou art in welfare, forget not adversity: and when it goes not well
with ye, have a good hope that it shall be better, For it is but a small thing
unto God, in the day of death to reward every man according to his ways:
The aduersite of an hour makes one to forget al pleasure: and when a man
dies, his works are discovered. Praise no body before his death, for a man
shall be known in his children. Bring not every man in to thine house, for the
disceitfull lays wait dyuersly. Like as a partrych

Unto whom we ought to do good. Enemies ought to be escheued.

Capi. xii.
WHen thou will do good, know

Gala. 6. a Tim. 5. a
Do good unto the unrighteous, and thou shalt find great reward, though not
of him: yet (no dout) the lord him self shall reward the. He stands not in
a good case that is always occupied in euel, and gives no alms: for the highest
hates ye sinners, and has mercy upon them that show the works of repentance.
Give thou unto such as fear god and receive not a sinner. As for the ungodly
and sinners, he shall recompense vengeance unto them, and keep them to the day
of wrath. Give thou unto ye good, and receive not the sinner: do well unto him
that is lowly, but give not to ye ungodly Let not the bred be given him, that
he be not mightier then thy self therein: For so shall thou receive twice as
much euel, in all the good that thou do unto him.

And whi? the highest hates sinners, and shall reward vengeance to the
ungodly In prosperity, a friend shall not be known, and in aduersytie an enemy
shall not be hyd. For when a man is in wealth, it greueth his enemies: but in
heuines and trouble a man shall know his friend. Trust

Who will have pytie of the charm, that is stynged of the serpent, or of al
such as come nigh the bestes? Even so is it with him that keeps company with a
wicked man: and lappeth him self in his sins For a season will he bide with
the, but if thou Ier. xli. b
and ymagineth disceyte in his heart, to throw the into the pit: ye he ca^ weep
with his eyes, and if he may find oportunite: he will not be satisfied with blod
if aduersite come upon the, thou shall find him there first, and though he
pretend to do the help, yet shall he undermine yt. he shall shake his head, and
clap his hands over the for very gladness: and whyl he makes many words, he
shall disgyse his countenance.

The companyes of the proud, and of the rich are to be eschued* The love of
God. Like do company with their like.

Capi. xiii.
WHO SO TOUCHES pytch, shall be filled with all: and he rich deals
vnryghtuously, and threteneth withal but the poor being oppressed and
wrongfully dealt withal, suffers scarcenes, and gives fayer words. if thou be
for his profit, he uses the: but if thou have nothing, he shall forsake the.
As long as thou have any thing of thine own he shall be a good fellow with
the: ye he shall make the a bare man, and not be sorye for the? if he have
need of the, he shall defraude the: and (with a preuy mock) shall he put the in
an hope, and give the all good words, and say: what want then? Thus shall
he shame the in his maet until he have supte the clean up twyse or thryse, and
at the last shall he laugh the to scorn. Afterward, when he seith that thou
have nothing, he shall forsake the, and shake his head at the. (Submyt thy
self unto God* and wait upon his hand, Beware shall he tempte the, and (with
a preuy mock) shall he question the of thy secrets. The unmercifully mind of
his shall mark thy, words he shall not spare to do the hurt, and to put the
in prison. Be ware, and take good head to thy self, for thou walk in parel
of thy ouerthrowyng. Now when thou hear his words ii. Cori. vi. c
What fellowship should an holy man have with a dog: How can the rich and the
poor agree together: The wylbe Ass is the Lions pray in the wyldernes, even
so are poor men the meat of the rich. Like as the proud may not away with
lowlynes, even so do the rich abhor the poor* if a rich man fall, his
friends set him up again: but when the poor fallethe, his aquayntaunce
forsake him* if a rich man fall into an error, he has many helpers he
speaks proud works, and yet men iustifye him. But if a poor man go wrong
he is punished: ye though he speak wisely, yet can it have no place. When the
rich man speaks, every body holds his tongue: and look what he says, they
praise it unto the clouds. But if the poor man speak, they say: What fellow
is this? And if he do amysse, they shall destroy him. Richesse are good unto
him that has no syn in his conscience, and pouerte is a wicked thing in the
mouth of the ungodly. The heart of man changes his countenance, whether it
be in good or evil. A cherefull countenance is a token of a good heart, for
else it is an hard thing to know the thought,

The of^ence of the tongue. (...) is but a vain thing Happy is he that
contynueth in wisdom.

Cap. xiiii.
Eccle. 16. c and.xxv. c, Jacob. ^. a
that has not fallen with the word of his mouth And is not pricked with the
conscyense of syn. Happy is he that has no heaviness in his mind, and is not
fallen from his hope. It becomes not a covetous man and a nygarde, to be
rych, and what should a nygarde do with gold. He that with all his
carfulness heapeth together vnryghtuously, gathers for other folks and an
other man shall make good chere with his goods He that is wicked unto him
self, how should he be good unto other men. how can such one have any plesur
of his goods: There is nothing worse then when one disfauoureth him self, and
this is a reward of his wickedness. if he do any good, he does it not knowing
thereof, and against his will, and at the last he declares his vngracyousnes. A
nigard has a wicked eye, he turns away his face: Pro. 17. c. Eccle. ^.
and despises his own soul. A covetous ma^s eye has never enough in the
porcyon of wickedness, until the time that he wyther Eccle. 4. Tobi. 4. b, Luke.
16. b
Do good unto thy friend before thou dye: and according to thy habilyte reach
out thine hand and give unto the poor Be not disapoynted of the good day, and
let not the porcyon of the good day, ouerpasse the. Shall thou not leave thy
trauayles and labors unto other men.

In the deuidyng of the heritage, give and take, and sanctify thy soul. Work
thou r^ghtuousnesse before thy death, for in the hell there is no meat to
find. Al flesh shall fade away like grass, Esaie. 1^. ^ i. Pe. i. d. Jacob.
i. b
and like a florishyng leaf in a grene tree. Some grow some areca down ne:
even so is the generacyon of flesh and blood: one committed to an end, an
other is borne. All transitorye

The goodness that follows him which fears god, god rejects and casts
of the sinner, god is not the auctor of evil.

Capi. xv.
HE that fearethe god, will do good: obtain wysdom. As an honorable mother
shall she mete him, and as a virgin shall she receive him. mat. ^. ^. Ioh. 4. a
With the breed of life and understanding shall she feed him * and give him
the water of wholesome wysdom to drink. if he be constaunt in her, he shall not
be moved: and if he hold him fast in her, he shall not come to confusion. She
shall bring him to honor among his neighbors, and in the mids of the
congregation shall she open his mouth.

With the spirit of wisdom and understanding shall she fill him and cloth
him with the garment of glory. She shall hepe the treasure of mirth ande joy
upon him and give him an everlasting name to heritage. Folysshe men will not
take hold upon her: but such as have understanding will mete her (Folysshe
men shall not see her) for she is far from pride and disceit. Men that go about
with lies will not remember her: but men of truth shall be found in her, and
shall prospere even unto the beholding of god. Praise is not semelye in the
mouth of the ungodly, for he is not sent of the LORD. For of God comes
wisdom, and the praise shall stand by the wisdom of god, and shall be
plentuous in a faithful mouth, and the lord shall give her unto him. Say not
thou, It is the Lords fault that I am goue by for thou shall not do the thing
that God hates. Say not thou: he has caused me to do wrong, for he has no
need of the ungodly. God hates abhominacion of error, and they that fear
God will love none such. Genes. 1. d.
God made man from the beginning, and left him in the hand of his council. He
gave him his commandments and precepts: if thou wylt observe the
commandments, Iere. 1. b.
and keep acceptable faithfulness for ever, they shall preserve the. He has set
water and fire before the, reach on thine hand unto which thou will. Before
man is life and death good and euel: look what him lyketh, shall be given him.
For the wisdom of god is great and myghtie in power, and beholds all men
continually. The eyes of the Lord are upon them that fear him, and he knows
all the works of man. He has commanded no man to do ungodly, nether has he
given any man space to sin.

Of unhappy and wicked children. No man can hyd himself from god. An
exhortacion to the receiving of instruccion.

Capi. xvi.
God, is better, then a thousand ungodly. And better it is for a man to dye
without children, then to leave beh^nd him such children as are ungodly. For by
one that has vnderstndynge, may a whole city be vpholden but though the
ungodly be many, yet shall it be wasted through the^ many such things has
mine eye seen, and greater things then these have I herd with mine ears.
Eccle. 21. b
In the congregatyon Gene, vi. a
which were destroyed, trustyng to their own strength Neither spared he them
among whom Loath which was a Ge. xix. ^.
stranger, but smot them and abhorred them because of the pride of their
words. He had no pytye upon them, but destroyed all the people, that were so
stout in sin And for so much as he over awe not the six hundredth thousand,
Nu. xiiii. r and.xxvi. t
that gathered them selves together in the hardness of their heart: it were
meruel if one being hard necked should be free. For mercy and wrath is with
him: E^cle. v. a
he is both mighty to forgive and to pure out displeasure. Like as his mercy
is great, even so is his punishment also, he judges a man according to his
works. The ungodly shall not escape in his spoil, and the long pacyence of
him that shows mercy shall not bide behind.

All mercy shall make place unto every man according to the worthynesse of
his works, and after the understanding of

My son, harken thou unto me, and learn understanding, and mark my words
with thine heart. I will give the a suer doctrine, and plainly shall I
instruct the (mark my words then in thine heart for in ryghtuousnesse of the
Spirit do I speak of the wonders that God has showed among his works from
the beginning. And in the truth do I show the knowledge of him.) God has
set his works in good order from the beginning, and part of them has he
sundered from the other. He has garnysshed his works from everlasting, and
their begynnynges, according to their generacyons. None of them hyndered an
other, nether was any of the^ disobedient unto his words. After this, God
looked upon the earth, and filled it with his goods. With all manner of
living beasts has he covered the ground, and they al shall be turned unto
earth again.

The creation of man, and the goodness that god has done unto him. Of alms
and repentance.

Capi. xvii.
GOd shape man of the earth, and made Gene, i. d
and clothed him with his own strength He gave him the number of days and
certain time, ye and gave him power of the things that are upon earth. He
made all flesh to stand in awe of him, so that he had the domynyon of all
beasts and fowls. He made out of him an helper like unto him self, and gave
them dyscrecion and tongue, Gene. ii. d.
eyes and ears, and a heart to understand, and filled them with instruccion
and understanding. He created for them also the knowledge of his spirit,
filled their hertes with understanding, and showed them good and evil. He set
his eye upon their hertes, declarynge unto them his great and noble works:
that they should praise his holy name together, rejoice of his wonders, Exo ^^.
a. Deu. 4. v. and.ix.
and be telling of his noble acts. Beside this, he gave them instruccion, and
the law of life for an heritage He made an everlasting covenant with them,
and showed them his righteousness and iudgem^ntes. They saw his glory with
their eyes, and their ears hard the majesty of his voice. And he said unto
them: beware of al unrighteous things he gave every man also a commandment
concerning his neighbor.

Their ways are ever before him, and are not hyd from his eyes. To. xiii. a.
Deu. iii. c, and.x. c.
He has set a ruler upon every people, * but Israel is the Lords porcyon. Al
their works ar as the sun, in the sight of God, and his eyes are always
lokynge upon their ways. All their unrighteous are manifest unto him, Eccl.
xxixb.
and all their wyckednesses are open in his sight. The mercy that a man
shows is as it were apurse with him, mat. 33. c.
and the grace that is given to man preserves him as the apple of an eye. At
the last shall he awake, and reward every man upon his head, and shall turn
them to gether into the nethermoste parts of the earth. Acre. iii, c.
But unto them that will repent, he has given the way of righteousness. As for
such as be weak, he comforted them, suffered them, and sends them the
porcyon of the verytie.

O turn then unto the Lord, forsake thy sins, make thy prayer before the
Lord do the less offense, thine again unto the Lord, forsake thine
vnryghtuousnesse, be an utter enemy to abhominacion, learn to knew
ryghtuousnes and judgments of God, stand in the portion that is set forth
for the and in the prayer of the most hie God. Go in the porcyon of the hole
Psalm. vi^ ^ Es. 38. d
with such as be living and give thanks unto god. Who will praise the Lord
in the hell? Abide not then in the error of the ungodly, but give him thanks
before death. As for the deed, thanckfulnes peryshed from him as nothing: Give
thou thanks in thy life, ye while thou art living and whole shall thou give
thanks, and praise God, and reioise in his mercy. O how great is the loving
kyndnesse of the Lord, and his mercyful goodness unto such as turn unto him.
For all things may not be in man: and why the son of man is not immortal,
and he has pleasure in the vanyte of wickedness. What is moore clear then the
Sun? yet shall it fail Or what is more wicked then the thing that flesh and
blood has ymagyne and that same shall be reproved? The Lord sees the power
of ye hie heaven: and al are but earth and ashes.

The marvelous works of God, the misery and wretchedness of man. Against God
ought we not to complain. Pray must we continually.

Capi. xviii.
Gene. i. a. Psalm, c.v. a Eccle. 45. d
God only is ryghtuouse and remains a victorious king for ever. Who shall
be able to express the works of him? Who will seek out the ground of his
noble acts. Who shall declare the power of his greatenes? Or who will take upon
him to tell out his mercy? As for the wondrous works of the Lord, there may
nothing be taken from them, nothing may be put unto them, neither may the
ground of them be found out. But when a man has done his best, he must begin
again, and when he thinks to be come to an end, he must go again to his
labor. What is man Whereto is he worth: Psalm. cx. a.
What good or evil can he do. if the number of a man's ii. Pe. 3. b
it is much. Like as the drops of rain are unto the sea, and as a gravel
stone is in comparison of the sand: so are these few years to the days of
everlasting.

Therefore is the lord paciente with them and pours out his mercy upon them.
He saw and perceived the thoughts and ymaginacyons of their heart, that they
were evil: therefore heaped he up his merciful goodness upon them, and showed
them the way of ryghtuousnes. The mercy that a man has, reaches to his
neighbor: but the mercy of god is upon all flesh. He chasteneth, he teaches
and nourtoureth: ye even as a shepehearde turns again his flock: so does
he all them that receive chastenynge, nourtour and doctrine. Esa. xlvi. a
Mercyfullis he unto them that stand in awe of Pro. 1^ a. ^ 25. c. Eccle. xli.
b.
Shall not the dew cool the heat: even so is a word better then a gift Is not
a frendlye word a good honest gift? but a gracyous man gives them both. A
fool shall cast a man in the teeth and that roughlye, and a gift of the nygarde
puts out the eyes. Get the out rightousnes before thou come to judgment.
Learn before thou speak, and go to physycke or ever thou be sick i. Corin.
xi.
exame^ judge thy self before the judgment came, and so shall thou find
grace in the syghte of God. Humble thy self before thou be sick, and in time
of thy disease show thy conversation. Let not to pray always, and stand not
in fear to be reformed unto death, Luke. 18. a Tes. vx. e.
for the reward of god endures for ever. Before thou prayest, prepare thy
soul, and be not as one that tempted god. Think upon the wrathful
indignation that shall be at the end, and the hour of vengeance, Ecle. xi. d,
when he shall turn away his face. when thou haste enough: remember the time
of hunger: and when thou art rich, think upon the time of pouerte and
scarsnes. From the morning until the euenige the time is changed and all
such things are sone done in the sight of god. A wise man fearethe god in all
things, and in the days of transgression he keeps him self from sin. A
discrete man has pleasure in wisdom, and the yt fyndeth her, makes much of
her. They that have had understanding, have delte wisely in words, have
understand the truth and ryghtuousnes, To. vi. b. and.xiii. c.
and have sought out wise sentences and iugeme^tes. Follow not thy lusts, but
turn the from thine own will. For if thou geuest thy soul her own desires,
it shall make thine enemies to laugh ye to scorn. Take not thy pleasur in
great voluptuousness, and meddle not to much withal. Make not to great chere
of ye thing that thou have wun by auau^tage, leest thou fall into pouerte, and
have nothing in thy purse.

wine and whoredom bring men to pouerte. In thy words must thou use
dyscrecion. The differaunce of the wisdom of God and man, whereby thou may
know what is in a man. Correction must be vesd without anger

Capi, xix.
A Labouryng man that is given unto gene. 19. ^ i. i. Re. xi. a
make wise men rennagates: and put men of understanding to reprofe: and he that
accompanyeth aduouterers, shall become a wicked man. Mothes and worms shall
have him to heritage, ye he shall be set up to a greter example, and his soul
shall be roted out of the number. iosu. 22. c.
He that is hasty to give credence, is light minded, and does again him self.
Who so reioyseth i^ wickedness shall be punished: he that hates to be
reformed, his life shall be shortened and he yt abhors babbling of words,
quenches wyckednes. He yt offe^deth against his own soul, shall repent it: and
he that reioiseth in wickedness, shall be punished

Ecle. 21. d and.17. c.
let it be deed with in ye: and be suer, thou shall have no harm thereby. A sole
trauaileth with a word, like as a woman that is pained with bering of a child.
Levi. xix. d mat. 17. b.
Like as an arow shot in a dogs thygh, so is a word in a foles heart. Tell thy
friend his faut least he be ignorant, and say. I have not done it, or if he
have spoken, that he do it no more Reprove thy neighbor, yt he keep his Eccle.
14. a and x^v. a Iame. ^. b
what is he, yt has not offended ^ his tongue. Give thy neybour warnyng, before
thou threaten him, and give place unto ye law of the lord. The fear of god is
al wisdom, and he that is a right wise man, keeps the law. As for the doctrine
of wyckednes, it is no wysdom, and the prudence of siners is no good
understanding: it is but wickedness and abhomin^cion and a blasphemyng of
wisdom A simple man of small understanding that fears God, is better then
one yt has much wysedom, and transgresses ye law of the hiest. A craftye
suttell man mat. vi.
and disguiseth it: and because he should not be known: he preue^teth ye. And
though he be so weak that he can do the no harm, yet when he may find
oportunite, he shall do some euel. A man may be known by his face and one that
has understanding, may be perceived by the look of his countenance. A man's
garment, laughter, Eccle. 31. ^
and going, declare what he is.

Of correction and repentance, of the gift of the wise man and of the sole, of
lyinge.

Cap. xx.
SOme man Eccle. 31. d
reproves his neighbor often times, but not in due season. to bear evil will:
for he yt knowlegeth him self openly, shall be preserved from hurt and
destruction. Like as when a gelded man through desire and lust defyleth a
maiden, even so is it with him that uses violence: and unrighteous in the
law, O how good a thing is it, a man that is reproved, to show openly his
repentance, for so shall thou escape wylful syn. Some man keeps scile^ce, and
is found wise: but he yt is not a shamed what he says, is hateful. Some man
holds his tongue, Eccle, iii. a. Eccle. 32. c
because he has not the understanding of the laguage: and some man keeps
scylence, waiting a convenient time* A wise man will hold his tongue till he se
opportunity, but a wanton and indiscreet body shall regard no time. He that
uses many words, shall hurt his own soul and he that takes auctorite upon
him vnryghtously: shall be hated, some man has often times prosperity in wicked
things Again: some man gets much, and has harm and loss. There is some
gift that is nothing worth. Again there is some gift, who se reward is
double? Some man gets a fall for being to proud, and some comes to
worship from low estate. Some man byeth much for a little Eccl. 18. ^.
A wise man with his works makes him self to be loved, but the favors of
fools shall be poured out. The gift of ye unwise shall do the no good: for his
eyes are seven fold, He^ shall give little, and say he gave much: he opens
his mouth and cries out, as it were one yt cries out wynd. To day he lends,
to morrow asks he again, and such a man is to be hated, The fool says: I
have no fre^d I have no thank for all my good deeds ye eue^ they that eat my
bread, speak no good of me. O how often, and of how many shall he be laughed to
scorn. He takes a more perelous fall by such words the^ if he fell upon the
ground: even so shall the falls of wicked me^ come hastly. In the mouth of him
that is untaught, are many vnco^uenient and vnmere words A wise sentence shall
not be allowed at ye mouth of the fool, for he speaks it not better, then a
man that is accustomed toly, but they both shall have destruccio^ to heritage.
The co^dicions of liars are dishonest, and their shame is ever with the^

A wise man shall bring him self to gene 41. ^. Dani. 11. g. Pro. x 1. b.
and.2.8. v.
He that tylleth his land, shall increase his heap of corn: he yt works
ryghtuousnes, shall be exalted, and he that pleseth great me^, shall escape much
euel Eccle. ^3 a Deu. 17. b Eccle. ^^ ^
Rewards and gifts blind ye eyes of the wise, and make him dom, that ^e
cannot tell men their faults Wisdom that is hyd, and tre^ure that is horded up
what profit is in the^ both? Better is he that keeps his ignorance secret,
the^ a man that hides his wisdom.

(...) repe^taunc^ of si^. we may not hepe syn upon syn. Th boldenes of an
heretic. The end of sinners. Of the sole and of the wise man Of him that
curses the devil.

Capi. xxi.
Ec. 5. ^. 7 d and.^^^. ^. p^al. Psalm. ^^. a Luc. 1^ c.
MI son, if thou haste sinned, do it no more: but pray for thy foresynnes,
that they may be forgeuen the. Fle from sin, even as from a Serpent: for if
thou come to ny her, she will byte the The teth thereof are as the teth of a
lion, to sley ye souls of me^ The wickedness of man is a sharp two edged
sweard, which makes such words that they can not be healed. Sirne and wrong
deling shall wast away a ma^n goods, and thorough pride a rych house sh^lbe
brought to naught: so ye riches of the proud shall be roted out? Exo. iii. b. ^
xxii. c
The prayer of the pore goes out of the mouth, and comes unto the ears, and
his vengeasice (for defense) shall come, and that hastly who so hates to be
reformed, his a token of an ungodly pecion, but he that fereth god, will come^
cr him self. A mighty man is known a far of by his tongue but he that has
understanding, perceives Eccle. 16 a.
The congregation of the ungodly is like stubble gathered together, their end
is a flame of fire. The way of the ungodly is set with stones, but in their end
is hell, darkness and pains: He that keeps the law, will hold fast the
understanding thereof, and the end of ye fear of god is wysdom and
understanding. He yt is not wise: will not be taught in good but the unwise man
abou^deth in wickedness: and where bitterness is, there is no understanding. The
knowledge of ye wise shall flow like water that r^nneth over and his council is
like a fountayn of life The heart of a fool is like a broken vessel he can keep
no wysedom. When a man of Eccle, 19. b,
A fool lyfteth up his voice with laughter,

Learning is unto a wise man a Jewel of gold, and like an armeler upon his
right arm. A foolysh man's foot is sone in his neighbors house: but one yt
has experience, shall be ashamed at the person of the mighty. A fool will pepe in
at ye window into the house, but he yt is welnurtered, will stand without. A
folysh man stands harkening at the door, but he yt is wise, will be ashamed,
The lips of ye unwise will be telling folysh things but ye words of such as
have understanding, shall be weyed in ye balaunce. The heart of fools is in
their mouth, by ye mouth of ye wise is in their heart. When the ungodly curses
the blasphemer, he curses his own soul, A preuy accuser of other men shall
detyle his own soul, and be hated of every man (but he that keeps his tongue:
and is dyscrete, shall come to honor.)

The purgation of the sloughtfull. Of the foolyshe son and daughter, we must
have discrecyon how and to whom we ought to preach of sorowynge upon the
deed. A fool is not to be much talked withal. Iniuties and wrongs do break
frendshyp and amytie,

Cap. xxii.
A Sloughtfull body is molded of a father and her husband: the ungodly shall
regard her, but they both shall despise her. The playeng of music is not mete
where heaviness is, even so is the correccion and doctrine of wisdom: ever
unpleasant

Talk no^ mu^he with a fool, and go not with him that has no understanding then
lead, And what should a fool be called else but lead. prove. 37.
Sand, salt, and a lump of iron is esyer to bear then an unwise, folyshe,
and ungodly man. Like as the band of wood bound together in the fou^dacio^ of
the house ca^ not be loused: eue^ so is it with the heart that is stablyshed in
the thought of council. drive away a friend, Be faithful unto thy neighbor in
his poverty, that you may rejoice with him also in his prosperity: Abide
steadfast unto him in ye time of his trouble, that thou may be heir with him
in his heretage. Like as ye vapoure and smoke goes out at ye oven before ye
fire, eue^ so euel words, rebukes and thretnynges go before blodsheding Be not
ashamed to defend thy friend: as for me, I will not hyde my face from him though
he should do me no harm. Who so ever hears it, shall beware of him Who shall
set a watch before my mouth and a suer seal upon my lyppes, Psalm. c.xli. a
that I fall not, with them: and that my tongue destroy me not.

A prayer against pride, lechery, and glotony Of oaths, blasphemy, and of wise
communicacion. of the three kyndnes of sins, Many sins proceed of aduoutry^.
Of the fear of god.

Cap. xxiii.
and that my sins excede not, lest I fall before mine enemies, and so my
aduersarye rejoice. O Lord thou father and god of my life, leave me not in
their imaginacio^. O let me not have a proud look, but turn away all
voluptuousnes fro me. Take fro me the lusts of ye body, let not the desires of
uncleanness take hold upon me, and give me not over into an unshame fast and
obstynate mind. Hear me (O ye children) I will give you a doctrine, Exo. xx.
d. Ecc. 27. ^ Mat. v. d
Let not ye namynge of god be continually in thy mouth: (and meddle not with the
names of saints, for you shalt not be excused of the^) for like as a servant
which is often punished cannot be with out some sore, eue^ so what so ever he be yt
swereth and names god, shall not be clen purged from syn, A man that uses much
sweryng, shall be filled with wyckednes, and the plage shall never go from his house
If he begyle his brother, his faut shall be upon him: if he knowledge not his syn,
he makes a double offense, and if he swear in vain, he shall not be found
rightuous Ieu. 24. c
But they yt fear God eschew all such, as lie not weltringe in sin Use not
thy mouth to dishonest and fyl thy talkyng, for in it is the word of sin
Remember thy father and thy mother, Ephe. v. a
when thou art set among great men: leest god forget the in their sight, and
lest thou doting in thy custom, suffer rebuke, and wish not to have been borne,
and so curse the day of thy natiuite. The man that is accustomed with the words
of blasphemi will never be reformed all the days of his life. To sin twyse
is to much but the third brings wrath and destruccyon: An hot stomach
cannot be quenched (even like a burning fire) till it have swalowed up some
th^ng^, even so an unchaste man has no rest in his flesh

Al breed is sweet to an whoremonger he will not leave of, till he have his
purpose. A man that breketh wedlock, and regards not his soul, Esai. 29.
but says. Tu^h who seith me? I am compased about with darkness. the wales cover
me no body sees me whom need I to fear. The hiest will not remember my sins.
He understands not that his eyes se al things for all such fear of men
drives away the fear of GOD from him: for he fears only the eyes of men,
and co^sidereth not that the eyes of the Lord are much clerer then the son,
beholdynge all the ways of men and the ground of ye deep and lokyng even to
men's hertes in secret places. The lord god knew all things or ever they were
made, and after they be brought to pass also he looks upon the^ al. The same
man shall be openly punished in the streets of the city, and shall be ch^se abroad
like a young horse fool: and when he thinks leest upon it, he shall be taken
Thus shall he be put to shame of every man, because he would not understand
the fear of the Lord.

And thus shall it go also with every wife. that leaves her husband, and gets
enheritaunce by a strange marriage. First she has been unfaithful unto ye law
of the hiest* secondly, she has forsaken her shall not be put out, And they yt
remain, shall know, that there is nothing better, the^ the fear of God. and
that there is nothing sweter then to take heed unto ye commandments of the
lord. A great worship is it to follow the lord. for long life shall be received
of him.

A praise of wisdom procedyng forth of the mouth of god. of her works and
place where she rests

Cap. xxiiii:
Wisdom shall praise her self, and in every people and in every nacyon, and
with my power have I trodden down the hertes of all, both hye and low. In all
Prou. 8. c
I was created from the beginning and before the world, and shall not leave of
unto the world to come. Exodus 31. a
In ye holy habitacio^ have I served before him and so was I stablyshed in
Syo^. Psalm. 13^ a
In ye holy City rested I in like manner: and in Jerusalem was my power, I took
root in an honorable people, eue^ in ye porcyon of the lord and in his
heritage, and kept me in the fulness of the saints. I am set up an hye like a
Ceder upon Libanus and as a Cypers tree upon ye mount Hermon. I am exalted like
a palm tree in Cades and as a rose pla^t in Jericho. As a faier Olyue tree in
ye field: and am exalted like as a planteyne tree by the water side. I have
given a smell in the streets, as ye Cinnamon and Balm, that has so good a
savor: ye a sweet odor have I given as it were Mir of the best. I have made
my dwelli^ges to smell as it were of Rosi^ Balbanum, of Cloves, and Incense, and
as Lybanus when it is not hewn down and mine odoure is as the pure Balm. As
ye Terebynt have I stretched out my branches, and my branches at the
branches of honor and loving favor.

^^hu^. 15. a
As ye vine have I brought forth fruit of a sweet savor, and my flowers ar the
fruit of honor and riches. I am the mother of bewte, of love, of fear: of
knowledge and of holy hope. ^ob. 14. a
In me is al grace of life and truth. In me is al hope of life and virtue. O
come unto me al ye yt be desirous of me, and fyl your selves with my fruytes:
for my spirit is sweter the^ honey and so is my enheritaunce more then the honey
comb: the remembrance of me endures for evermore. They that eat me shall
have ye more honger: and they that drink me, shall thyrst the more. Who so
herkeneth unto me, shall not come to confusion: and they that work in me, shall
not offend. They that make me to be known, shall have everlasting life.

Al these things ar the book of life, the covenant of the hiest, and the
knowledge of ye truth. Exo. 20. a (...). 24. a
Moses commanded the law in ye precepts of ryghtuousnes for an heritage unto
the house of Jacob, ^salmus. 1^. b.
and committed the promises unto Israel. (Out of David his servant he ordened
to raise up a most mighty King, syttyng in the seat of honor for evermore.)
Acts. 7 b. Deuteronomy. 4. a and.29. b
This fylleth with wisdom: like as the flood of Physon, and as the floude of
Tigris, when Iosue. 3. c
This brings a plentuous understanding like Euphrates, and fylleth it up, as
Iordane in the time of harvest. This makes nurtur to break forth as the
light, and as the water Giho^ in ye harvest. The first has not known her
perfectly, no more shall ye last seek out the ground of her. For her thought is
fuller then the sea: and her council is profunder then the great deep.

I wisdom have cast out floudes. I am as a great waterbroke out of ye river. I
am as the river Doryx, and as a water condyte am I come out of the gardein of
pleasure, I said: I will water the garden of my young plants, and fyl the fruit
of my birth. So my waterbroke became exceeding great: and my river aproched
unto the sea. For I make doctrine to be unto al men as light as the fayer
morning, and I shall make it to be ever the clearer. I will pearse through all
the lower parts of the earth, I will look upon al such as be a sleep, and
lyghten al them that put their trust in the Lord. I shall yet pour out
doctrine, like as prophecye, and leave it unto such as seek after wysdom, and
their generacions shall I never fail unto the holy everlasting world. Eccl. 33.
b
Behold, how that I have not labored for my self only, but for all the^ that
seek after the truth.

Of three things which pleases God: and of three which he hates. Of nine
things that be not to be suspect, and of the tenth chefelye of the malice of a
woman.

Capi. xxv.
Genesis 13. b Rom 11. a
The unity of brethren, Ex. 40 a
ye love of neighbors, and man and wife that agree well together Three things
there be which my soul hates, and I utterly abhor the life of the^ A poor
man that is proud, A rich man that is a liar, Gene. 18 b
and an old body that doteth, and is unchaste. If thou have gathered nothing in
thy youth, what wylt you find then in thine age. O how plesau^t a thing is it:
when graye heeded men ar discrete: when the elders can give good counsel* O how
comely a thing is wysdom unto aged men: ye understanding and council is a
glorious thing. The crown of old me^ is to have much experyence: the tenth
will I tell forthvnto men with my tongue. A man that while he lives, has joy of
his children, and seith ye fall of his enemies. Well is him that dwells with
a houswyfe of understanding Eccl. 19. c and 24. a. Iame. 3. c
and that has not fallen with his tongue, and yt has not been feign to serve
such as are unmeet for him. Well is him, yt findethe a faithful friend: and well
is him, which talks of wisdom to an ear that hears him. O how great is
he, yt finds wysdom and knowledge? Yet is he, not above him, that fears ye
lord. The fear of god has set it self above al things Blessed is the man,
unto who^ it is granted to have the fear of god. Unto who^e shall he be
lykened: yt keeps it fast? The fear of god is the beginning of his love and
the beginning of faith is to cleue fast unto it. The heuines of the heart is all the punishment, and the wickedness of a woman goes above al. Al punysheme^t and
plage is nothing in comparyson of the plage of the heart, even so all wickedness
is nothing to ye wickedness of a woman.

What soever happens unto a man wrath above ye wrath of a woman. I will rather
dwell with a Lion and dragon then to keep house with a wicked wife. E^o. ^1. a
The wickedness of a woman: changes her face, she shall moffel her
countenance as it were a Bear, and as a sack shall she show it a mo^ge thy
neighbors, her husband is brought to shame among his neighbors, and when he
hears it: it makes him to syghe. All wickedness is but little to the
wickedness of a woman, the porcyons of ye ungodly shall fall upon her.

Eccl. 42. b 2. Re. 11. a. and.13. a
Look not to narowly upon the bewtye of a woman, leest thou be provoked in
desire toward her. The wrath of a woman is dishonor and great confusion. If a
woman get ye mastrie, then is she contrary to her husband. A wicked wife
makes a sorry heart an heavy countenance and a dead wound. Gene. 3. a ^ Ti. 2.
b
(Weak hands and feeble knees is a woman that her husband is not the better
for.) Of the woman came the beginning of sin, and through her we all are
deed. Give thy water no passage no not a little neither give a wicked woman her
will. Ye she walk not after thy hand, she shall co^founde yt in the sight of
thy enemies. Cut her of the^ from thy flesh, yt she do not all way abuse the

The praise of a good woman. Of the fear. of three things and of the fourth Of
the Ielouze and dronken woman.

Of two things that cause sorrow, and of the third which moves wrath.

Capi. xxvi.
Happy is the man that has a virtuous Iudi. ^6. a
He yt gets her gets a scorpyo^, A dronke^ woman is a be known in the
pride of her eyes and eye lyddes Eccl. 42. b
If thy daughter be not shame fast, hold her straightly, leest she abuse her
self through over much liberty Beware of all the dishonestie of her eyes and
marvel not if she do against the.

Like as one that goes by the way and is thyrstie, so shall she open her
mouth and drink of every next water that she may get. By every hedge shall she
set her down and open her quyuer against every arow. A loving wife reioyseth
her husband, and fedeth dis bones with her wisdom. A woman of few words is a
gift of god, and to all well nurtured minds may nothing Cant. 5. d
Like as ye golden pillars are upon ye sockettes of silver, so are ye fair
legs upon a woman that has a constant mind. Perpetual are the foundacyons,
yt be laid upon a whole stony rock, so are the commandments grieve my heart,
and in ye third is a displeasure come upon me. When an expert man of war
suffers scarsnes and pouerte When me^ of understanding and wisdom are not
set by: And when one departs from righteousness unto sin. Who so does such
ye Lord has prepared him unto ye swearde. There be two manner of things which
me think to be hard and perilous: a marcha^t cannot lightly keep him from
wrong neither a tauerner him self from sin.

Of the pore that would be rich. The probacio^ of ye man that fears God. The
vnconstantnes of a fool. The secrets of a friend are not to be uttered. The
wicked ymagyneth evil, which returns upon him self.

Capi. xxvii.
BEcause of pouerte have many Sapi. 3, a 1. Pet. 1. a
so does temptacio^ of trouble try rightuous me^ Mat. 7. b
The tree of the field is known by his fruit so is ye thought of ma^s heart
known by his words. Praise no man except thou have herd him, for a man is
known by his words. If you folowest ryghtuousnes, thou shall get her and put
her upon the as a fayer garment. And thou shalt dwell with her, and she shall
defend the for ever, and in the day of knowledge thou shall find stedfastnes.
The birds resort unto their like, so does ye truth turn unto the^ yt be
occupied withal. The Lyo^ wayteth the pray: so do the sins lurk upon the
works of wickedness. The talking of him that fears god, is nothing but
wisdom: as for a fool, he changes as the Moon. If thou be among the
indiscreet, keep thy word to a conuenyent Eccl. 22. b
Much swearynge makes the hear to stand up: and to strive with such,
stops the ears.

The strife of the proud is bloodshedyng, and their blaspheminge is heavy to
hear. Eccl. 19. b and.22. d.
Who so discouerethe secrets, leaseth his credence, and fyndeth no friend
after his will. Love thy friend, and bind thy self in faithfulness with him: but
if thou bewraiest his secrets: you shall not get him again. For like as the man
is that destroys his enemy, so is he also that deals falslye in the
friendship of his neighbor, Like as one that lets a bird go out of his
hand, cannot take her again. Pro. 10. b
ymagineth some euel: and no man shall take him from it. When thou art present,
he shall hyely commend and praise thy words: but at the last he shall turn his
tail, and slander thy saying. Many things have I hated but nothing so euel,
for the lord himself Exodus 21. b
who so casts a stone on hye, it shall fall upon his own head, and he that
smyteth with gyle wou^deth himself. Who so dyggeth a pit: shall fall therein: (and
he that lays a stone in his neighbors way, shall stomble thereon) and he that
lays a snare for an other shall be taken in it himself. H^ste. 7. b Psalm. 7. b
Pro. 26. c Eccl. 10. a
Who so gives a wicked noisome counsel, it shall come upon himself, and he
shall not know from whence The proud blaspheme, and are scorneful but
vengeance lurketh for them as a lyo^ They that rejoice at the fall of ye
ryghtuous, shall be taken in the snare, anguysh of heart shall comsume the^ before
they dye. Anger and rygorousnes ar two abominable things, and the ungodly
has the^ both upon him.

We ought not to desire vengeance but to forgive the offense Of the vices of
the tongue, and of the dangers thereof.

Capi. xxviii.
Deuteronomy. 32 c Romans 12. c
that seeks vengeance, shall find vengeance of the Lord, which shall surely
keep him his sins. Math. 5. b 6. b. 18. b
Forgive thy neighbor the hurt that he has done the, and so shall the sins
be forgeuen ye also: when thou prayest A man yt bears hatred against an
other, how dare he desire forgeuenes of God He that shows no mercy to a man
which is like him self, how dare he ask forgeuenes of his sins? If he that
is but flesh bears hatred and keeps it, who will in treat for his sins?
remember the end and let enmyte pass: which seeks death and destruction: and
abide you in the commandments. Remember the commandment the highest, and
forgive thy neighbors ignorance. Eccle. 8. a
Beware of strife, and thou shall make thy sins fewer. For an angrye man
kyndeleth variau^ce, and the ungodly disquieteth friends, and puts dyscorde
among them that be at peace. Pro. 26. c
The more wood there is, the more vehement is the fire: and the myghtier that
me^ be, the greater is the wrath: and the longer ye strife endures, the more
it burns. An hastye braulyng kyndeleth a fire, and an hasty strife shedeth
blood: A tongue also that bears Eccle. 21. c
The sclaunderer and double tonged is cursed, for many one yt be fre^des
sets he at variau^ce. The third tongue has disquieted many one, and driven
them from one land to an other. Strong cities of the rich has it broken
down, and overthrown the houses of great me^ (the strength of ye people has
it brought down and been the decay of mighty nations) The third tongue has
cast out many an honest woman, and robbed the^ of their labors. Who so
harkeneth unto such, shall never find rest, and never dwell safely. The stroke
of the rod makes yedders, but the stroke of the tongue smytteth the bones in
sunder. There be many that have peryshed with ye sweard, but many

How we ought to lend our money, and do alms Of a faithful man aunswerynge
for his friend. Of lyberalytie and hospitality.

Capi. xxix.
Deuteronomy. 15. a Luce. 6. d.
let him le^de unto his neighbor: and he yt is able, let him keep the
commandment. Lend unto thy neighbor in time of his need, and pay thou thy
neyboure again in due season. Keep thy word, and deal faithfully with him,
and you shall always find the thing that is necessary for ye. There have been
many, yt when a thing was lent them, rekened it to be found, and made the^
travail and labor, yt had helped them. While they receive any thing they
kiss the hands of such as give the^ and for their neighbors good they
humble their voice. But when they should pay again, they keep it back, and
give evil words, and make many excuses by reason of the time: and though he
be able, yet gives he scarce the half again, and rekeneth the other to be
found. And if he with hold not his money, yet has he an enemy of him, and
that undeserved. He neighbors sake, and bury it not under a ston: where it
rusteth and corrupts, gather thy tresure after the commandment of the hiest:
Mat. 6. c Luce. 12. d i. Ti. 6. d Tobi. 4. b Dani, 4 d Luce. 12. d Acts. 10 d
and so shall it bring the more profyt then gold: Lay up the alms in the heart
of the poor, and it shall keep the from all evil. A man's alms is as a purse
with him and shall keep a man's favor as the apple of an eye and afterward shall
it arise and pay every man his reward upon his heed. It shall fight for the
against thine enemies, better then the shyld of a grant or spear of the
mighty. A good honest man is suretye for his neighbor: but a wicked person
lets him come to shame Forget not the frendshippe of thy suerty for he has
given his soul for the. The ungodly despyseth the good deed of his suretye,
and the unthankful and ignorant leueth his suertye in danger. Some man
promyseth for his neighbor and when he has lost his honest, he shall forsake
him Suertyshyp has destroyed many a rych man: and removed them as the waves in
ye see. Mighty people has it driven away and caused them to wander in strange
countries. An ungodly man transgressing the commandment of the Lord, shall
fall into an euel suertyshyp: and though he force him self to get out, yet
shall he fall in to Judgment.

help thy neighbor out after thy power and beware that thou thy self fall not
in such det. Eccl. 39. ^
The chief thing yt keeps in the life, is water and bred: clothyng and
loggyng, to cover the shame. Better is it to Psa. 35. b 1. Ti. 6. b. Hebr. 13. a
Be it little or much yt thou haste hold the content with all, and thou shall
not be blamed as a vagabound: for a miserable life is it, to go from house to
house: and where a man is friend, he dare not open his mouth, though one be
lodged, and have meat and drink, yet shall he be taken as vnworthi, and hear
many bitter rough words, namely thus: Go thy way thou stranger, and prepare a
table for thy self and feed me also of that you haste. Away thou strange (so
that he regards his honor no more) my brother comes into my house, and so
he tells him ye necessite of his house. These things ar heavy to a man that
has understanding: namelye ye forbyddyng of the house, and that the lender
casts him in the teeth.

Of the correccion of children Of the commodytye of health. Death is better
than a sorrowful life. Of hyd wisdom. Of the joy and sorrow of the heart.

Capi. xxx.
Pro. 13. c and.23. b
holds him still under correction that he may have joy of him afterward
(and that he grope not after his neighbors doors) Deuteronomy. 6. a
He that teaches his son shall have joy in him, and need not to be ashamed
of him among his aquayntau^ce. Whosoever enfourmeth and teaches his son greueth
the enemy: and before his fre^des he may have joy of him. Though ye father
dye, yet is he as though he were not deed: for he has left one behind him yt
is like him. In his life he saw him and had joy in him, and was not sorry in
his death, nether was he ashamed before the enemies. For he left behynd him an
aue^ger against his enemies, and a good doer unto the friends. For the life of
children he shall bynd the wounds together and his heart is grieved at every cry.
An untamed horse will be hard, and a wanton child wylbe wylful. If thou bring
up thy son delycatly, he shall make the afraid, and if thou play with him he
shall bring ye to heuines. Laughe not with him, lest you Eccle. 7. c
Give him no liberty in his youth, and excuse not his folly Bow down his neck
while he is young hit him on the sides while he is yet but a child, lest he
wax stubburne, and give no more force of the, and so shall thou have heaviness
of soul. Teach thy child, and be diligent therein, lest it be to thy shame
Better is the pore being whole and strong then a man to be rich, and not to
have his health: health and welfare is above al gold and a whole body above al
tresure. There is no riches above a found body, and no joy above the joy of
ye heart. Death is better then a wretched life, and eternal rest better then
continual sycknes. The good things yt are put in a close mouth are like as
when meat is laid upon the grave. What good does the offering unto an Ydol?
Bell. d.
For he ca^ nether eat, taste, nor Pro. 12. d. 15 b. 17. d. Eccl. 38. e Pro. 14.
b
Give not over thy mind into heaviness, and vex not thy self in thin own
council. The joy and cherefulnes of the heart is the life of man, and a man's
gladness is the prolongyng of his days Love thine own soul, and comfort thin
heart: as for sorrow and heuines, drive it far from the, for heuines has
slain many a man, and brings no profit: 2. Co. 7. b
zele and anger shorte^ ye days of ye life: carefulnes and sorrow bring age
before ye time, unto a meri heart eueri thing has a good taste yt he eteth

We ought to give dilygent head to honestye. Of them that take pain to gather
riches. The praise of a rich man without a fault, we ought to the dronkennes
and follow sobernes.

Capi. xxxi.
1. Ti. 6. b.
Travail and carefulnes for riches takes away the sleep and makethe the
flesh to consume. When one lies and takes care, he wakethe ever up, like as
great sycknes breaks the sleep. The rich has great labor in gathering his
riches together, and then with ye pleasure of his riches he takes his rest and
is refreshed. But who so labors and prospers not, he is pore, and though
he leave of, yet is he a beggar. He that loves riches, shall not be iustyfied:
and who so follows corrupcio^, shall have naught thereof. Eccle. 8. a
Mani a one ar come in great misfortune by the reason of gold: and have found
their destruction before the^. It is a tree of falling unto them that offer it
up, and al such as be folysh fall therein. Blessed is ye rich, which is found
without blemish: and has not gone after gold, nor hoped in money and
treasures. Where is there such a one? and we shall commend him and call him
blessed, for great things does he among his people. Whosoever is tried, and found
perfect in such things, shall be commended and praised. Who might offe^de and
has not offended? Who could do evil, and has not done it? Therefore shall
his good be stablyshed, and ye whole congregation shall declare his almesses. If
thou sit at a great man's table, open not thy mouth wid upon it: and make not
many words. Remember, that an euel eye is a shrew. What thing created is worse
the^ a wicked eye? therefore wepeth it before Mat. 7. ^
Ponder by thy self what thy neighbor would feign have, and be discrete in
eueri point. Eat ye thing yt is set before ye manerly, as it becomes a man:
and eat not to much, lest thou be abhorred. Leave you of first of al because
of nurtour, lest thou be he whom no man may satisfye, which may turn to thy
decay. When thou syttest among many men, reach not thyn hand first of all.
Eccl. 37. d
O how well content is a wyseman with a little wine? so that in sleep you shalt
not be sick thereof nor feel any pain. A swet wholesome sleep shall such a one
have, and feel no inward grefe. He rises up by times in ye morning: and is
well at ease in him self. But an insatiable eater slepeth unquietly, and has
ache and pain of the body. If thou feleste that you haste eaten to much, arise,
go thy way, cast it of thy stomach, and take thy rest: and it shall ease the
so yt thou shall bring no sickness unto thy body. My son, hear me, and
despise Romans 12. c
In all thy worckes be dylygent and quycke, so shall there no sickness happen
unto the. Pro. 22. a
Who so is liberal in dealinge out his meat many me^ shall bless him: and
praise him with their lips: and the same is a suer toke^ of his love, and
faythfulnesse. But he yt is unfaithful in meat, the whole city shall compain
of him: and that is a suer experience of his infydelytie and wickedness. Ephe.
5. d Iudi. 13. a
Be not thou a wine bibber: for wine has destroyed many a man. The fire proved
ye hard iron, eue^ so does wine prove yt hertes of the proud, when they be
dronke^.

(...). 31. a (...). 4 c
Wine soberly dronken, quickens ye life of man. If thou drink it mesurably,
thou shall be temperate. What life is it, that may continue without wine?
(What takes away ye life? eue^ death) Wine was made from the beginning to
make me^ glad (and not for dro^kennes.) Wine mesurablye dronke^ is a reioisyng
of the soul and body. (A mesurable drink is health to soul and body.) But if
it be dronke^ with excess, it makes bitterness and sorrow unto ye mind.
Dro^kennes fills the mind of the foolish with shame and ruin, minished the
strength and makes wounds. Eccl. 20 a
Rebuke not thy neighbor at ye wine, and despise him not in his mirth Give him
no despiteful words: and prease not upon him with contrary saienges.

Of the discrecyon and praise of the preacher, and of the hearer. Of the fear,
faith, and confidence of God.

Capi. xxxii.
IF thou be made a ruler, Deu. 17 d Romans 12. b
pride not thy self therein, but be thou as one of the people. Take diligent
care for them and look well thereto: and when you have done al thy dewte, sit the
down: yt thou may be merry with them, and receive a crown of honor. Talk
wisely and honestli, for wisdom becomes ye right well Hinder not music.
Speak not where there is no audience: Eccle. 3. a Eccl. 20 a
and pour not forth wisdom out of time, at an importunyte Like as ye
Carbuncle stone shyneth that is set in gold, so does a song garnishe ye wine
feast: and as ye Smaragde that is set in gold, so is ye swetnes of Music by
ye mirth of wine. (Give ear, and be still, and for thy good behauour, thou
shall be loved.) Thou young man, speak that becomes the, and that is
profitable, and yet scarce when thou art twice asked. Co^prehende much with
few words. In many thing be as one that is ignoraunte, give ear, hold thy
tongue withal. If thou be among men of hier auctoryte, desire not to compare
thy self unto the^: and when an elder speaks make not many words therein
Before the thunder goes lightenyng, and before nurtor and shamefastnes goes
love and favor. Stand up by times, and be not the last: but get ye home
soon, and there take thy pastyme, and do what thou will: so that thou do no
euel, and defy no man. But for all things give thanks, unto him that has
made the, and replenished the with his goods.

way where thou may fall, nor where you may stomble against the stone.
Give not thy self into a laboryous slyppery way and beware of thine own
children, (and take heed of them that be of thine own household.) In all thy
works put thy trust in god from thy whole heart, for yt is ye kepinge of the
commandments. Who so believes Gods work, takes head to ye commandments:
and he that puts his trust in the lord, shall want nothing.

The delyueraunce of him that fears god. The answer of the wise. The little
discresion of a fool. Man is in the hand of god, as the earth is in the hand
of the potter* we ought not to dispose our selves to become subject to other.

Capi. xxxiii.
THere shall no euel happen unto

A wise man hates not the law, but an ypocrite is as a ship in ragyng
water. A man of understanding gives crede^ce unto the law of god, and the law
is faithful unto him. Be suer of the matter, the^ talk thereof: Be first well
instruct, thou may thou give answer. The heart of ye folysh is like a cart
whele, and his thoughts ren about like ye axeltre, Like as a wild horse that
naieth under every one that sytteth upon him: so is it with a scorneful friend.
Why does one day excel an other, seeing all ye days of the year come of the
sun? The wysdom of the lord has so parted them a sunder, and so has he
ordained ye times and solemn feasts. Some of them has he chose^ and hallowed
before other days. And al men are made of the Gene. 2. ^
ground, and out of the earth of Romans 9. c
so are men also in the hand of him that made them: so that he may give them
as it lyketh him best 1. Cor. 6. c
Against euel is good and against death is life: so is the ungodly against
such as fear God. Behold these are the works of ye hiest, and there are ever
two against two, and one set against an other. I am a waked up last of all, as
one yt gathers after in harvest. In the gifts of god and in his blessing I
am increased, and have filled my wine press, like a grape gatherer Eccl. 24. c
Behold how I have not labored not only for my self, but for all such as
love nurtour and wisdom

Hear me O ye great men of the people do nothing. Eccle. 7. c
If thou have a (faithful) servant, let him be unto the as thyn own soul:
(i^treate him as a brother) for in blood haste thou gotten him. If thou have a
servant, hold him as thy self: for thou have need of him as of thy self.
If thou intreatest him euel, and kepest him hard, and make him to be proud
and to ren away from the, thou can not tell what way thou shall seek him.

Of dremes, diuinacions: and enchaunteme^tes We ought to confute vain hope and
lying. The praise of them that fear god. Of diverse works of men. God does not
allow the works of an unfaithful man.

Capi. xxxiiii.
come not of god, set not thine heart upon them. For dreams have deceived many
a man, and they failed, that put their trust therein. The law shall be
fulfilled without lies, and wisdom is sufficient

When I was yet in error, I learned much also: ye I was so learned, that I
could not express it al, and came often in parel of death therouer, till I was
delivered from it (through ye grace of God.) Now I se, that they which fear
God, have the right spirit: for their hope stands in him, that can help
the^. And the eyes of the Lord are on them that love him. Who so fears the
Lord, stands in awe of no man, and is not afraid, for the Lord is his hope
and comfort.

Blessed is the soul of him that fears Par. 16. b
For ye eyes of the Lord have respect unto them, that love him. He is their
mighty proteccion, and strong ground: A defense for the heat, a refuge for
the hot none day, a succor for stomblynge, and an help for falling. He
sets up the Soul, and lighteneth the eyes: He gives life and blessinge.

He that gives an offeringe of unrighteous, good, his offering is refused, and
ye scornful dealinges of ye unrighteous: please not god (The Lord is theyrs
only, yt patiently abide him in ye way of the truth and of righteousness. The
highhest does not allow the gifts of ye wicked. Pro. 15. a
) And God has no delight in ye offerynges of ye ungodly, nether may sin be
reconcyled in ye multitude of oblacyons. Who so brings an offering out of
the goods of the poor, does even as one that kills the son before the
fathers eyes.

De^. 24 c Ecc^e. 7. c
He that defraudeth the laborer of his hyre, is a blood shedder. When one
builds and an other breaks down, what profyt have they the^ but labor.
When one prays and an other curses, whose voice will the Lord hear? Nu.
19. b
He that washes him self because of a deed body, and the^ touches the dead
again, what does his watching? Pro. 26. b 2. Pe. 2. b
So is it with a man that fasteth for his sins, and does them again: who will
hear his prayer? Or what does his fasting, help him?

: It is well done to pray, and to do sacrifice. The prayer of the fatherless,
and of the wydowe, and him that humbles him self.

Capi. xxxv.
WHo so keeps the law, Iere, 7. c*
brings offerynges enough. He that holds fast the commandment, offers
the right health offeringe. He that is thanckfull and recompe^seth, Hebre. 13c
Phili. 4, c
offers fine flower. Who so is merciful and gueth alms, yt is the right
thanckoffring God has pleasure, when one departs from sin and to forsake
unrighteousness reco^cileth us with him. Exo. 43. a
Thou shall not appear empty before ye lord: Gene. 4. a
for all such is done because of the commandment. The offering of ye
rightuous makes ye altar fat, and a swet smell is it before ye hiest. The
offering of ye rightuous is acceptable unto god, and shall never be forgotten.
Give god his honor with a cherful heart: and keep not back the firstlinges of
thy hands. In all thy gifts show a merciful cou^tenau^ce and halow thy tithes
unto god with gladness Give unto god, 2. Cor. 9. b
according as he has enryched and prospered the, Tob. 4. b
and look what thine hands is able, give with a cherful eye: for the Lord
recompenseth, and gives the seven times as much again. Give no unrighteous
gifts, for such will he not receive. Beware of wro^geous offringes, for ye
Lord is a rightuous judge: and regards no ma^s person: He accepts not the
person of ye poor, but he hears the prayer of the oppressed. He despyseth
not the desire of the fatherles, Iudi. 4. b
nor ye wydow when she pours out her prayer before him Does not god se the
tears that re^ down the chekes of the wydow? Or hears he not the complaint,
over such as make her to weep. For from her chekes do the teres go up unto
heaven, and the lord which hears them, does accept them: Who so serves god
after his pleasure: shall be accepted and his prayer reaches unto ye clouds
Tren. 3. d ^^te. 10. a
The prayer of him that humbles him self, goes through the clouds, till she
til he give every man after his works, and reward the^ after their doings til
he have delivered his people mai^teyned their cause, and rejoiced then in his
mercy. O how fair a thing is mercy in ye time of anguishe and trouble? It is
like a cloud of rain yt co^methe in ye time of a drouth.

A prayer to god in the person of all faithful men with the praise of a good
woman.

Capi. xxxvi.
Have mercy upon us, O Lord, thou Make the time short, rememberthe covenant
that thy wondrous works may be praised. Let the wrath of the fire consume
them that live so careless: and let the^ perysh that do thy people hurt. Smit in
sonder the head of the princes, that be our enemies, and say: there is none
other but we.

Exo. 4. e.
whom thou have lykened to a first borne son.

O be merciful unto Jerusalem the city of thy sa^ctuary, 1. par. 6. g.
the city of thy rest. Fyl Sio^ with thy unspeakable virtues, and thy people
with thy glory. Give witness unto thy creature, whom thou made from the
beginning, and raise up the prophecyes that have been showed in thy name.
Reward them that wait for the, that thy Prophets may be found faithful. O
Lord hear the prayer of thy servants according to the blessyng of Aaron
over thy people (and gyde thou us in the way of ryghtuousnes) yt al they which
dwell upon ye earth, Nume 6 d
may know, that thou art the Lord the eternal god, which is from
everlasting. The belly deuoureth al meats 1. Cor. 2. b.
so does an heart of understanding mark falls words. A froward heart gives
heuines, but a man of exeperie^ce lyfteth him up again The woman receives
every man, yet is one daughter better the^ a other. A fayer wife reioiseth her
husband: and a man loves nothing better. If she be loving and virtuous withal:
the^ is not her husband like other men. He yt has gotten a virtuous woman,
has a goodly possession: she is unto him an help, and pyller where upon he
rests. Where no hedge is there the goods are spoiled: and where no huswife
is, there the frendles mourns. Like as there is no credence given to a robber,
yt goes from one cite to an other: So is not the man believed, that has no
rest, and must turn in, where he may abide in the night.

How a man should know friends: and cou^cellers, and search the company of a
hoolye man.

Capi. xxxvii.
EVerye friend says: I will be heaviness unto death, when a companyon and
friend is turned an enemy?

O most wicked presumpcyon: From whence art thou spronge up to cover the
earth with falshed and dysceyte? There is some companyon, which in prosperity
reioyseth with his friend: but in the time of trouble, he takes part against
him. There is some companion that mourns with his friend for the belisake:
Eccle. 6. b
but when trouble comes, he takes hold of ye shild Forget not thy friend in
thy mind, and think upon him in thy richesse. Seek no counsel at thy kinsme^:
and hyde thy counsel from such as bear the no good will

Eccle. 8. c. and. 9. c
Every counseler brings forth his council. Nevertheless, there is some that
counceleth, but for his own profit: Beware of the cou^seler, and be aduysed
before whereto thou will use him, for he will counsel for him self. Lest he cast
the lot upon the, and say unto the. Thy way and purpose is good, and
afterward he stand against the, and look what shall become of the.

Ask no counsel at him, that suspecteth or at a merchant, how dear he will
chepen thy wares toward his: or at a bier of selling: Or at an enuyous man,
of thanks geuinge: Or at the vnmercyful of loving kindness, (or at an dishonest
man of honesty.) Or at the slouthful, of workynge: Or at an hyrelynge which
has no house, or profyt or wealth. (An idle body would not gladly here speak of
much labor.) Take no such folks to counsel but be dilygente to seek council
at a virtuous man that fears God, such one as thou know to be keeper of
the commandments, which has a mind after thine own mind, and is sorry
for the when thou stomblest

And hold thy council fast in thine

And above all this pray the highest, that he will lead thy way in faythfulnes
and truth. Before al thy works ask counsel first: and or ever thou do any
thing, be well advised. There be four things yt declare a changed heart,
wherout there spryngeth euel and good, death and life and a masterful tongue that
bableth much Some man is apt and well instruct in many things, and yet very
unprofitable unto him self. Some man there is, that ca^ give wise and prudente
council, and yet is he hated, and contynueth a beggar: for that grace is not
given him of God, to be accepted. An other is robbed of all wisdom yet is he
wise unto him self, and the fruit of understanding is commendable in his 1.
Cor. 6. c. and. 10. c.
For all things are not profitable for all men, nether has every soul
pleasure in every thing. Be not gredy in every eating, and be not to hasty
upon al meats. Ecc. 30. b.
for excess of metes bri^geth sickness and glotony comes at ye last to an
unmeasurable heat. Through surfeit have many one peryshed: but he yt dieteth him
self temperatly, prolongeth his life.

A Phisicyon in sickness ought we to pray. to find a Physycyon which
heals by prayer, The bewepynge of the dead. Sadness, wisdom, Artificers or
craftesmen.

Capi. xxxviii.
Honor the Phisycyon, honor Exo. 15. d. 3. Re. 4. c.
Was not that bitter water made sweat with a tree? that men might learn to
know the virtue thereof.

The Lord has given me, wisdom, and understanding, that he might be
honored in his wounderous works. With such does he heal me^, and takes
away their pains: Of such does ye Apotecary make a confeccion, yet can no man
perform al his works. For of the Lord comes prosperous wealth over all ye
earth.

My son, despise not this in thy sickness, 2 Pa. 16. d Esa. 38. a.
pray unto the Lord, and he shall make the whole. Leave of from syn and order
thy hands a right: cleanse thine heart from al wickedness. Give a sweet
sauoured offering, and ye fine flower for a token of remembrance: make the
offering fat, as one that gives the first fruytes, and give rowme to ye
Phisycion. For the Lord has created him, let him not go from ye: for thou
have need of him. The hour may come, that the sick may be helped through
the^, when they pray unto the Lord, that he may recover, and get health to
live longer, He that sins before his maker, shall fall into the hands of
the Phisycion.

My son, Eccle. 22. e
bring forth thy tears over the dead: and begin to mourn, us if thou
had suffered great harm thy self: and the^ cover his body after a
conuenyent manner, and dispyse not his buryall: Enforce thy self to weep, and
provoke thy self to mourn, 1. Tes. 4.
and make lamentacyon expedyently: and that a day or two, leest thou be evil
spoken of: and then comfort thy self because of ye heaviness. Prou. 12. d and.
17. d Eccle. 30. c
For of heaviness comes death ye heuines of the heart breaks strength
Heaviness and poverty greueth ye heart in temptacyon and offense. Take no
heaviness to heart, drive it away, and remember the last things. Forget it
not for there is no turnynge again. Thou shall do him no good, but hurt thy
self Remember his Judgment, thine also shall be like wise: unto me yester day
unto the to day. 2. Re. 12. a
Let the remembrance of the dead cease in his rest, and comfort thy self
again over him, seeing his spirit is departed from him. The



A wise man. The works of God. Unto the good, good things do profit: but
unto the evil: even good things are evil.

Capi. xxxix.
ye saienges of famous men, and preasseth to the understanding of darcke
sentences of wisdom. He seeks out the misterye of secret saynges, and
exercyseth him self therein continually.

He does service among great men, and appears before the Prince: He goes in
to a strange country, and trauaileth through it: look what good or euel is
among men, he proves it and seeks it out. He purposes in his heart, to
resort earli unto the Lord that made him, and to pray before the Highest God.
He opens his mouth in prayer, and prays for his sins. When the great
Lord will, he shall be filled with the Spirit of understanding, that he may
then pour out wise sentences, and give thanks unto the Lord in his prayer.

He shall order his deuyce, and lead his knowledge a right, and give him
understanding of secret things. He shall show forth the science of his
learning, and rejoice in the couenaunte of ye law of the Lord. The whole
Congregation shall commend his wisdom, and it shall never he put out. The
remembrance of him shall never be forgotten, Ec. 44. b.
and his name shall continue from one generacyo^ to an other. His wisdom shall
be spoken of, among the people, and the whole Congregation shall openly declare
his praise. While he lives, he has a greater name then a thousand beside,
and after his death, the same name remaynethe unto him. Yet will I speak of
no men of understanding, for I am full as ye Moon.

Gene. 1. d.
All the works of the Lord are exceeding good, and al his commandments are
mete and convenient in due season.



Gene. 7. b
In his commandments is every thing acceptable and reconcyled, and his health
cannot be minished. The works of al flesh are before him, and there is
nothing hyd from his eyes. He seyth from everlasting to everlasting, and
there is nothing to wonderful or hie unto him. A man need not to say then, what
is this or that? For he has made all things to do good unto man. His
blessyng shall run over as the stream, and moisture the earth like a floude
of water. Like as he makes the water for drouth, so shall his wrath fall upon
the heathen.

Osee. 14. a Romans 3, d
His ways are plain and right Eccle. 29. c
All things necessary for the life of man are created from the beginning:
water, fire, iron, and salt, meel, wheat, and honi, milk, and wine, oil,
and clothing. 1. Ti. 4. a
All these things are created for the best to the faithful: But to the
ungodly shall all these things be turned to the hurt and harm. There be
spirits that are created for vengeance, and in their rigorousnes have they
fastened their torments. Mat. 25. d
In the time of the end they shall pour out their strength, and pacyfie the
wrath of him that made them. Ecc. 40. b
Fire, hasle, honger and death: al these things are created for vengeance.

The teeth of wild noisome beasts, the Scorpions, Serpents: and the sword
are created also for vengeance, to the destruccyon of the ungodly. They shall
be glade to do his Commandments: and when need is, they shall be ready upon
earth and when their hour is come, they shall not ouerpasse the commandment
of ye Lord.

Gene. 1. b.
All the works of the Lord are good, and he gives every one in due season,
and when need is so that a man need not to say this is worse then that. For in
due season they are all pleasant and good: And therefore praise the Lord with
whole heart, and mouth, and give thanks unto his name.

: Many myseryes light in a man's life. All things pass away, but a fyrme and
stable faith remains Of the blessing of the rightuous, and prerogatyffe of
the fear of God.

Capi. xl.
A Great travail is created for all men, and an heavy yoke upon the children
of Adam from the day that they go out of their mothers womb, till they be
buried in (the earth) ye mother of all things: namely, their thoughts and
ymaginacions, fear of the heart, counsel, medytacyons, longing and desire,
the day of death: from the highest that sytteth upon the glorious seat, unto
the lowest and most simple upon the earth: from him yt is gorgyously arrayed and
wears a crown, until him that is, but homely and symply clothed. There is
nothing but wrath, zeal, fearfulness, unquietness, and fear of death,
rygorous, anger, and strife. And in the night when one should rest and sleep
upon his bed, the sleep changes his understanding and knowledge.

A little or nothing is his rest, in ye sleep as well as in the day of labor.

He fears and is disquieted in the visyo^ Eccle. 39. e
these things are all created against the ungodly, and for their sakes came
the floude also. Gene. 7. d. and. 3. d.
All that is of the earth, shall turn to earth again: and all waters ebb
again into the sea. Al brybes and vnryghtuousnesse shall be put away, but
faythfulnesse and truth shall endure for ever. The substance and goods of the
ungodly shall be dried up: and shrink away as a water floude, and they shall
make a sou^de like a great thonder in the rain.

Eccl. 41, b
The children of the ungodly shall not obtain many branches: and the unclean
roots upon the hye rocks shall be rooted out before the grass by the water
side and upon the river banks.

Frendlynesse and lyberalytie in ye increase and blessing of God, is like a
paradise and gardeyne of pleasure: such mercy also and kyndnes endures for
ever. 1. Ti. 6 b Phil. 4, b
To labor and to be content with that a man has: is a sweet plesaunt life
and that is to find a treasure above all treasures. To begytte children and to
repaier the city, makes a perpetual name but an honest woman is more worth
the^ they both. Eccl. 32. a
Wine and minstrelsye reioise the heart, but the love of wysdo^ is above them
both.

Pypynge and harpynge make a sweet noise, but a friendly tongue goes beyond
them both. Thine eye desires favor and beutie, but a grene sede time rather
then they both: A friend and companyon come together at opportunity, but above
them both is a wife that agrees with her husband. One brother helps an other
in ye time of trouble, but alms shall deliver more then they both. Gold and
silver faste^ the fete, but a good counsel is more pleasant then they does.
Temporal substance and strength lift up the mind, but the fear of the Lord
more then they both. The fear of the Lord wants nothing, and needs no
help. The fear of the lord is a pleasant gardeine of blessyng, and nothing
so bewtyful as it is. My son lead not a beggars life, for better it were to
dye then to beg. Who so looks to an other man's table, takes no thought for
his own living, how to uphold his life, for he fedeth him self with other
men's meat: But a wise and well nurtoured man will beware thereof. Begging is
sweet in the mouth of the unshamefast, but in his belly there burns a fire

Of the remembrance of death. Death is not to be feared. A curse upon them
that forsake the law of god. Good name and fame. An exhortacion to give head
unto wisdom. Of what things a man ought to be ashamed.

Capi. xli.
O DEATH, how bitter is the remembrance of the, to a man that seeks rest and
comfort in his substance and riches, unto the man yt has nothing to vex
him, and that has prosperity in all things, ye unto him that yet is able to
receive meat? O death how acceptable and good is thy judgment unto the
nedeful, and unto hi^ whose strength fails, and that is now in his last age,
and that in all things is full of care and fearfulnes: unto him also that is
in dispaier, and has no hope nor patience? Be not thou afraid of death:
remember, them that have been before ye and that come after the: this is ye
judgment of the lord over all flesh. gene. 8. d.
And why would thou be against this pleasure of the hiest. Whether it be ten,
an hundredth, or a thousand years: death asks not how long one has lived.

Ec. 40. c.
and so are they that keep company with the ungodly The inheritance of ungodly
children shall come to naught, and their posterite shall have perpetual shame
and confusion. The children complain of an ungodly father: and why? for his
sake they are rebuked and despised. Woe be unto you, (O ye ungodly) which have
forsaken ye law of the Hiest god: if ye be borne, ye shall be borne to
cursynge, if ye dye, the curse shall be your porcyon. Eccle, xi. d


All that is of the earth, shall turn to earth again, so go the ungodly
also out of the curse into destruccio^, The sorrow of men is in their body: but
ye same of ye ungodly shall be put out. Eccle, 22. a.
Labor to get the a good name, for that shall continue surer by the: then a
thousand great treasures of gold. A good life has a number of days, but a
good name endures ever.

Eccle. xx. d.
My children, keep wisdom in

Be ashamed of whoredom, before father and mother, Be ashamed of lesyng,
before the Prince and men of authority Of sin, before the Judge and Ruler.
Of offense, before the Congregation and people. Of unrighteous: before a
companion and friend: Of theft, before thy neighbors. Roma. i. b.
As for the truth of god and his covenant, be not ashamed thereof. Be ashamed
to lie with thine elbowes upon the bread: Be ashamed to look upon harlottes, Be
ashamed to turn away thy face from thy friend: Be ashamed to take and not to
give. Be ashamed also to look upon an other man's wife: and to make many
trifling words with her maiden, or to stand by her bed side. Be ashamed to
upbraid thy friend: when thou geuest any thing, cast him not in the teethe
withal.

Secrets may not be opened The law of God must be taught. A daughter. A
woman. God knows all things, ye even the secrets of the heart.

Capi. xlii.
him a good man: to deal faithfullye with thy neighbor and companyon, to
destribute the heritage unto the fre^des: to be dilygente to keep true measure
and weyghte: to be content, whether thou gettest much or little, to deal
truly with temporal goods in byenge and selling to bring up children with
dilygence, to correct an euel servant, to keep that thine is from an euel
wife, to set a lock where many hands are what thou deliuerest and gave out
to be kept, to tell it, and way it, to write up all thy outegeuynge and
receiuynge, to enfourme ye unlearned and unwise: Of the aged, that are judged of
the ionge. If thou be dilligent in these things, truly thou shall be learned
and wise, and accepted of al men.

The daughter makes the father to watch secretly, and the carfulness yt he
has for her, takes away his sleep ye in the youth, lest she should ouergrow
him, And when she has an husband, leest she should be hated, leest she should
be defiled or rauyshed in her virginity, or gotten with child in her fathers
house (Or when she comes to the man) lest she behave her self not right, or
continue unfruitful. If thy daughter be wanton, keep her straytelye, leeste
she cause thine enemies to laugh ye to scorn and the whole City to give the an
euel report, and so thou be feign to hear thy shame of every man, and be
confounded before all the people Eccl. 25. c.
Behold not every bodies bewtye, and have not much dwelling among women.
For like as the worm and moth comes out of clothinge, gene. iii. d
so does wickedness come of women.



Job. 42. a.
No thought may escape him, neither may any word be hyd from him He has
garnished the hye excellent works of his wisdom, Esa. 29. c.
and he is from everlasting to everlasting. Unto him may nothing be added
neither can he be minished, he has no need also of any man's council. O how
amiable are al his works, and as a spark to look upon. They live all, and
enduer for ever: and when so ever need is, they are all obedient unto him. They
are all double, one against an other: he has made nothing that has fault or
blemyshe, Deu. 32. a
He has stablyshed the goods of every one, and who may be satisfied with
his glory, when he seith it.

The sum of the creacion of the works of god.

Capi. xliii.
THE Glory of the Heygthe, is Psalm. 8, a.
a marvelous work of the hyeste. At noone it burnethe the earth, and who may
abide for the heat thereof. Who so keeps an oven when it is hot, three times
more does the su^ne burn upon the monutaynes, when it bretheth out the fyrye
beams and shyneth with the bryghtnesse of it, it blyndeth ye eyes. Great is
the lord yt made it, and in his commandment he causes it to re^ hastily.
gene, i. b
The moon also is in all, and at convenient season it shows ye times and is
a token of the time. Exo. xii. a
The token of the solemn feast, is taken of the Moon, a light that
minisheth and increases again. The month is called after the Moon, it
grows wonderously in her chaungynge.

gene. ix. a
Look upon the rain bow, and praise him that made it, very beutifull is it in
her shine. He compassethe the Heaven about with his clerenes, and glory, the
hands of the highest have be^ded it. Through his commandment he makes the
snow to fall, and the tho^der of his judgment to smite hastelye. Through his
commandment the tresures are opened, and the clouds fle as the fowls. In
his power has he strengthened ye clouds, and broken the hail stones.

The mountains melte at the sight of him, the wynd blows according to his
will. The sound of his thonder beats the earth, and so does the storm of the
North: ye whirle wind also lights down as a fethered foul, casts out,
and spreads the snow abroad, and as the greshoppers that destroy all, so
falls it down. The eye maruayleth at ye bewty of the whiteness thereof, and
the heart is afraid at the rain of it. He pours out the frost upon earth,
like salt and when it is frosen, it is as sharp as the prick of a thistle.

When the cold Northwind blows hard Crystal comes of the water.

In his word he stylleth the wind In his council he sets, the deep, and
(the Lord) Jesus planted it. They that sail over the sea, tell of the parelles
and harms thereof: and when we hear it with our ears, we marvel thereat. For
there be strange wondrous works, diverse manner of nyce beasts and
whalefishes. Through him are all things set in good order and performed,
and in his word all things enduer.

psalm. xcvi. a. Psalm, cvi. a.
O magnyfye him with all your power, and labor earnestly, yet are ye in no wise
able sufficiently to praise him. Who has seen him, that he might tell us. Deu.
v. c John. i. b.
Who can magnify him so greatly as he is: For there are hyd yet greater
things then these be as for us, we have seen but few of his works. For the
lord has made all things, and given wisdom to such as fear god.

The praise of certain holy men, Henoche, No^, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

Capi. xliiii.
LET us commend the noble Exo. xviii. c
They led the folk through the Council and wisdom of the Scribes of the
people. wise sentences are found in their instruccyon, They sought the
sweetness and melodye of Music, and brought forth ye pleasant songs in
Scripture. They were rich also, and could comfort and pacify those that
dwelt with them. All these were very noble and honorable men in their
generacions, as were well reported of in their times. These have left a name
behynd them, so that their praise shall always be spoken of. Afterward there
were some, whose remembrance is gone gene. vii. d.
They came to naught and perished, as though they had never ben: and became
as though they had never be borne, ye and their children also with them.

Nevertheless these are loving me^ but continue by their posterity. Their
chyldrenne are an holy good heritage: Their sede endured fast in the
couenaunte. For their sakes shall their children and sede continue for ever,
and their praise shall never be put down. Their bodies are buried in Peace,
but their name lives for evermore. The people can speak of their wisedomme,
and the congregation can talk of their praise. Ec. 49. 6. gene. v. 6.
Enoche walked right and acceptably before the lord. Therefore was he
translated for an ensample of amendment unto the Generacions.

gene. vi. s and.7.8.
Noe was a steadfast and Ryghtuousman, and in the time of wroth he became a
reconcilinge. Therefore was he left a remenante unto the earth, when the
floude came. An everlasting covenant was made with him, that al flesh should
gene. ix. c
perish no more with the water. Abraham was a gene. xvii. a
great father of many people: in glory was there none like unto him. He kept
the law of the Highest, and came into a covenant with him He set the
covenant in his flesh, and when he gene. xxii. a
was proved, he was found faithful: Therefore swore god unto him with an oath,
that he would bless al people in his sede, that he would multiplye and increase
him as the dust of the earth and exalte his sede as the Stars: ye and that
his sede should have the possessyon, and enheritaunce of the land from see to
see, and from the river unto ye borders of the world.

gene. xxvi. a
With Isaac did he stablyshe the same couenaunte, for Abraham his fathers sake:
ye that gracious blessing and health of all men, and covenant did he
stablyshe with Isaac, and made it to rest upon the head of Jacob. He knew him
ge. xxviii. c. 29.30.
in that he prospered him so well and richely, and gave him an heritage, and
sundred his porcyon by it self, Iosue. xviii an. xix.
and parted it among the twelve Tribes. Merciful men brought he out of him
which found favor in the sight of all flesh:

The praise of Moses, Aaron, and Phynches.

Capi, xlv.
MOSES Exo. ix. a Acts. 7. c.
beloved of God and great in the sight of kings, gave him Commandment before
his people, and showed him his glorious power, Nu. 12. a.
He stablyshed him with faithfulness and meekness, and those him out of all
me^. For he heard his voice, and led him in the dark cloud Exo. xix. d.
and there he gave him the commandments, ye the law of life and wisdom that
he might teach Jacob his covenant, and Israel his laws.

Exo. xxviii.
An everlasting covenant made with him, and gave him the preesthode in the
people. He made him glorious in bewtyfull array, and clothed him with the
garmente of honor He put perfect joy upon him, and gyrded him with strength.
He decte him with side clothes, and a tunicle, with an ouerbodye cote, also a
gyrdle. Round about made he him belles of gold, and that many, Exo. xxviii
that when he went in, the sound might he heard, that they might make a noise
in the Sanctuarye, and give the people warnyng. The holy garmente was wrought
and broderd with gold, yelowe ^ilke and purple. And in the brestlappe there
was a goodly work wherein was fastened light and perfectness.

Upon the same also there was a work fastened, and set with costly precious
stones, all bound with gold: Exo. iiii.
and this he brought in his ministracion. The stones were fastened for a
remembrance, after the number of the twelve Tribes of Israel. Upon his miter
there was a plate of puer gold, a graven image of holiness, a famous and
noble work, garnished and pleasant to look upon. Before him were there seen
no such fayer ornaments, and these it behoueo^ him always to use: There might
none other put them on, but only his children and his childers children
perpetuallye. Daily performed he his burnte offringes two times. Leui. 8. a
Moses filled his hands, and anointed him with holy Oil.

This was now confirmed him with an everlasting covenant, and to his sede as
the days of Heaven, namely, yt his childrenne should always minister before him:
and perform the office of the Preesthoode, and wysh the people good in his
name. Before all men living chose he him, that he should offer ince^ce before
the lord, and make odours for a sweet sauoure and remembrance, that he should
reconcile ye people of the lord with him again. Deu. 17. c and.xxi. a. Mala.
ii. a
He gave him authority also in his commandments, and in the Couenaunte,
that he should teach Jacob the statutes and testimonies

Nu. 6. a.
Therefore there stood up certain against him, and had envy at him in the
wyldernes: namely, they that were of Dathan, and Abirams side, and the furious
Congregation of Chore. This the lord saw and it displeased him, and in his
wrathful indignacion were they consumed. A great wonder did he upon them, and
consumed them with ye fire. ^ Beside this, he made Aaron yet more honorable and
glorious. He gave him an heritage, and parted the first fruytes unto him. Nu.
xvii. b Exo. xxv. f Leui. 24. b.
Unto hi^ specially he appointed the bread for sustenaunce (for the priests
did eat of the offringes of the Lord) this gave he unto him and his sede.
Else had he no heritage nor portion in the land and with the people. Deu.
xii. d. and.xviii. Eze. 44. a
For the lord him self in his portion and inheritance.

The third noble and excellent man is Phinches the son Eleazer, which pleased
the God of Israel, because he had ye zeal and fear of the Lord. For when the
people were turned back, he put hi^ self forth right soon, and that with a
good will, to pacify the wrath of the Lord toward Israel. Therefore was
there a couenaunte of peace made with him, that he should be the principal
among the righteous and the people, that he and his posterity should have the
office of the Preesthood for ever (Like as there was made a covenant with
Dauyd of the Trybe of Judah, that from among his sons only there should be a
King:) And that Aaron also and his seed should be the heritage, to give us
wisdom in our heart, to Judge his people in ryghtuousnesse, that his goods
should not come in to forgetfulness, and that their Honor might enduer for
ever.

The praise of Iosue. Caleb, and Samuel.

Capi. xlvi.
MANLI and strong in battle was Jesus the Son of Naue, Iosu. xii. e Nu.
27. b. Deu. 34. a Iosue. i. ^
to punysh the enemies that rose up against Israel, that Israel might
optaine their inheritance. O how great, noble, and excellent was he when he
lift up his hand, and drew out his swearde against the Cities? Who stood so
manly before him? For the Lord him self brought in the ennemies. Stood not
the son still at his commandment, Iosue. x.
and one day was as long as ^wo? He called upon the hieste and most mighty,
when the enemies preased upon him on every side: and ye lord heard him with
the hail stones. They smote the Heythenesse people myghtely and in falling
down: they slew al ye adversaries, so that the Hethen knew his host, and all
his defense, that the lord him self fought against them, for he followed upon
the mighty men of them.

Nu. xiiii. a
In the time of Moises also heand Caleb the son of Iephune, did a good work,
which stood against the enemies withhelde the people from sin, and stylled
the wicked mourning. Nu. 26. ^.
And of six hundredth thousand people of foot they two were preserved, to
bring them into the heritage, namely, a land that flows with milk and
honye. Iosu. 24. ^
The Lord gave strength also unto Caleb, which remained with him unto his age
so that he went up into the Hye places of the land, and his sede conquered
the same for an heritage, that all the chyldrenn^ of Israel might see, how
good a thing it is, to be obediente unto the Lord. And the Judges or rulers
(every one after his name) whose heart went not a whoringe, nor departed from
the Lord and that forsook not the Lord unfaithfully, whose remembrance has a
good report, ye their bones florysh out of their place, and their names
shall never be changed (but honor remains still with the children of those
holy men.)

Samuel the prophet beloved of the 1. Re. x. a. and.xvi. b.
ordained a King and anointed the Princes over the people. In the law of the
Lord, he Judged the congregation, and the lord had respect unto Jacob. The
prophet was found dilygente in his faithfulness, and he is known faithful
in his words. 1. Re. vii. a
He called upon the Lord the Almyghtye, when the enemies preased upon him on
every side, what time as he offered the suckynge lambs. And the Lord thondred
from heaven and made his voice to be heard with a great noise. He discomfyted
the Princes of Tire, and al ye Rulers of the Philistines. ^re. xx. a.
Before his last end he made protestacion in the syghte of the Lord, and his
anointed, that he took neither substance nor good of any man, no not so much
as a shoo and no man might accuse him. After this he told, that his end was
at hand and showed the King also his end and death, and from the earth lift
he up his voice in the Prophecy, that the ungodly people should peryshe.

The praise of Nathan, David and Solomon.

Capi. xlvii.
2. Re. xii.
there rose up a Prophet called Nathan: For like as the fat is taken away
from the offeringe, so was David chosen out of the Childrenne of Israel He
took his pastime with the Lions and as with Kyddes, and with Bears like as
with lambs. 1. Reg. 17. f
Slew he not a Gyaunte when he was yet but young, and took away the rebuke
from his people? What time as he took the stone in his hand, and smote down
the proud Golyath with the sling. For he called upon the Hiest Lord, which
gave him strength in his right hand, so that he overthrew the mighty Giaunt in
the battle, that he might set up the horn of his people

* Thus brought he him to worship above all Princes, Re. 18. b.
and made him to have a good report in the praise of the Lord that he should
were a crown of glory. ii. Re. v. b.
For he destroys the enemies on every side, roted out the Philistines his
adversaries, and brake their horn in sunder, like as it is broken yet this day
In all his works he praised the Hiest and holiest, and ascribed the honor
unto him. With his whole heart did he praise the Lord, and loved god that
made him. 2. pa. 26. a.
He set fingers also before the Altar, and in their tune he made sweet
songs. He ordained to keep the holy days worshypfully, and that the solemphne
feasts through the whole year should be honorably holden, with praysynge the
name of the Lord, and with syngyng by times in the morning in the

The Lord took away his sins and exalted his horn for ever. He gave him
the covenant of the kingdom, and the trone of worship in Israel:.2 reg. 2.
d 3. Re. 3, c
After him there rose up the wise son called Solomon, and for his sake he
drove the enemies away far of. This Solomon raygned with Peace in his time
(for God gave him rest from his enemies on every side, that he might build him
an house in his name, and prepare the Sanctuary for ever / like as he was well
instruct in his youth and filled with wisdom and understanding, as it were
with a water floude. he covered and filled the whole land with symilytudes and
wise prudent sentences.

3. re. x. d. 3. re. xi.
He gathered gold as tyn, and he had as much silver as lead he was moved in
inordinate love toward weme^, and was overcome in affeccion. He stained his
honor and worship, ye his posterity defiled he also, in bringing the wrath of
the lord upon his children, 3. re xii. e. 2. re. 7. c.
and sorrow after his joy, so that his kingdom was divided, and Ephram became
an unfaithful and an vnco^stant kingdom. Nevertheless god forsook not his
mercy, neither was he utterly destroyed: because of his works that he should
leave him no posterity. him a very foolyshnesse of ye people, and such one as
had no understanding 3. re. xii. b
even. Roboam, which turned away the people through his counsel, and
Jeroboam the son of Nabat, 3. re. xii. d.
which caused Israel to sin, and showed Ephraym the way of ungodliness: In
so much that their sins and misdeeds had the upper hand so sore that at the
last they were driven out of the land for the same: ye he sought out and
brought up al wickedness, til the vengeance came upon them.

The praise of Eliah, Elizeus, Hezekiah, and Esaias.

Cap. xlviii.
THEN stood up 3. re. 17. ^
Eliah the prophette as a fire, and his word 3. re. 18. c. 4. re. 1. c.
One that was dead raised he up from death, 3. reg. 17. c.
and ^. re. xix.
And ordained Prophets after him. 4. reg. 2. c
He was taken up in the storm of fire, in a Charette of horses of the Lord.
He was ordained in the reprouinges in time to pacifye the wrath of the Lord.
Luke. 1 a
to turn the hertes of the fathers unto the children and to set up the
Tribes of Jacob again Blessed were they that saw the, and were garnished in
love, for we live in life (but after death we shall have no such name Elias was
covered in the storm, but Helyzeus was filled with his spirit. 4. Reg. 2. c
iii. iiii.
and after his death his body prophesied. He did wonders in his life, and in
death were his works marvelous For all this, 4. reg. xiii. d iiii. reg. b. 6.
7. 1^:
the people amended not, neither departed they from their sins, till they
were carried away prisoners out of the land, 4. Reg. 1^. b
and were scatred abrod in all countries, so that of the^ there remained but a
very little people, and a prince unto the house of David. Howbeit some of them
did right, and some heaped up ungodliness.

Hezekias made his City strong, conveyed water into it, dug through ye
stony rock with iron, 2. Pa. 32. a* 4. reg. 18. c. Esa. 36. a
and made up a well 5. reg. xix. g.
and remained steadfastly in the way of David his father, as Esaias the great and
faithful Prophet in the syghte of God, had commanded him. 4. re. xx. b. Esa.
38. b
In his time the Son went backward, and he lengthened the Kings life. With
a right spirit prophesied he, what should come to pass at the last, and to
soch as were sorrowful in Syon he gave consolation, wherewith they might
comfort them selves for evermore. He showed things that were for to come and
secret, or ever they came to pass.

Of Josiah, Hezechiah, David, Ieremye, Ezechiell* zorobabell, Jesus, Nehemiah,
Enoch and Joseph.

Capi. xlix.
4. re, 22. a and.xxiii. 1. pa. 34 a
Josias is like as when the Apotercarye makes many precious sweet smelling
things together. His remembrance shall be swet as honey in all mouths, and as
the playeng of Musycke at a bankette of wine. He was appointed to turn the
people again, and to take away all abhominacion of the ungodly. He directed
his heart unto the Lord and in the time of the ungodly he set up the worship
of God again. All Kings (except David: Hezechiah, and Iosyah committed
wickedness, for even ye Kings of Judah also forsook the law of God. For they
gave their horn unto other, their honor and worship also to a strange
people,

Therefore, was the elect Cyty of the 4. re. 25. b
and the streates thereof lay desolate and wast, in the land of Ieremye, for
they entreated him evil, which nevertheless was a prophet ordained from his
mothers womb that he might root out, break of, Iere. 1. a.
and destroy, and that he might build up, and plant again, Eze. 1. a.
Ezechiell saw the glory of the Lord in a vision, which was showed him upon
the charette of ye Cherubyns. For he thought upon the enemies in the rain, to
do good unto such as had ordered their ways a right. And the bones of ye
twelve prophets flourished from out of their place for they gave comfort and
consolation unto Jacob, and delivered them faithfully. Agg. ii. a. 1. Es. iii.
a. 3. Esd. 5. a
How shall we praise zorobabell, which was a ring in the right hand

Agge. ii. c. and.ii. a.
So was Jesus also the Sun of 2. Esd. i, a. 2. Es. 7. a.
which was prepared for an everlasting worship.

And Nehemyas is always to be commended, which set up for us the walls that
were broken down, made ye ports and bars again, and builded our houses of
the new: But upon earth is there no man created like Enoche, for he was taken
up from the earth. gene. v. c. Eccl. 44. c. Heb. xii. a gene. xli. f, 42. a.
45. e.
And Joseph: which was Lord of his brethrenne, and the vpholder of his
people: his bones were covered and kept. Seth and Sem were in great honor
among the people: and so was Adam above all the beasts, when he was created.

Of Simon the Son of Oniah.

Capi. l.
SIMON ^. Mac. 3.4.
the Son of Onyas the hie Priest, which in his life Moan when it is full: He
shyned as the Sun in the Temple of God. He is as bryghte as the rain bow in
the fayer clouds, and florisheth as flowers and Roses in the spring of the
year, and as lylyes by the rivers of water. Like as the branches upon the
mount Libanus in the time of Summer, as a fire and in sense that is kyndled.
Like as an whole ornament of puer gold, set with all manner of precious stones,
and as an Olyue tree that is fruitful, and as a Cypres tree which grows up an
hie.

When he put on the garment of honor, and was clothed with all beauty When
he went to the holy Altar, to garnyshe and took of the drynk offrynge, and
poured in of the wine: so he poured upon the bottom of the Altar a good smell
unto the highest Prince.

Then began the sons of Aaron to singe, and to blow with trompettes, and to
make a great noise, for a remembrance and praise unto the Lord.

Then were all the people afraid, and fell down to the earth upon their faces,
to worship the Lord their God, and to give thanks to the Almyghtye GOD They
song goodly also with their voices, so that there was a pleasant noise in the
great house of the lord. And the people in their prayer: be sought the Lord
the highest, that he would be merciful, till the honor of the Lord were
performed.

which has increased our days from our mothers womb, and dealt with us
according to his mercy, that he will give us the ioyfulnes of heart: and peace
for our time in Israel. Which faith fully keeps his mercy for us evermore
and always delyuereth us in due season

There be two manner or people that I

I Jesus the son of Syrach Eleazarus of Jerusalem, have tokenned up these
informacions and documentes of wysdomme and understanding in this book, and
poured out the wisdom of my heart. Blessed is he that exercyseth him self
therein, and who so takes such to heart, shall be wise for ever. if he do these
things, he shall be strong in all. For the light of the lord, leads him.

The praise of Jesus the son of Syrach.

Capi, li.


Thou have been my helper, from soch as stood up against me, and haste
delivered me, after the multitude of thy mercy, and for thy holy names sake.

Thou haste delivered me from the roarynge of them: that prepared the^ selves
to devour me: out of the hands of such as sought after my life: from the
multitude of them that troubled me, and went about to set fire upon me on
every side, so that I am not burnt in the myddest of the fire. From the deep
of hell, from an unclean tongue, from lieng words, from the wicked King, and
from an unrighteous tongue. My soul shall praise the Lord unto death, for my
life drew nigh unto hell dounwarde.

They compased me round about on every side, and there was no man to help. I
looked about me, if there were any man that would socoure me: but there was
none. Then thought I upon thy mercy, O LORD, and upon thy Acts that thou
haste done ever of old, namely, that thou delyuerest such as put their
trust in the, and ryddest them out of the hands of the Heathen.

Thus lift I up my prayer from the earth, and prayde for deliverance from
death. I called upon the LORD: the Father of my Lord, that he would not leave
me without help, in the day of my trouble, and in the time of the proud: I
will praise thy name continually, yelding honor, and thanckes unto it, and so
my prayer was heard. Thou sauedst me from destruction, and delyueredest me
from the unrighteous time. Therefore will I acknowledge and praise the, and
magnify thy name, O LORD.

When I was yet but young, or ever I Temple, and sought her unto the last. Then
flourished she unto me, as a grape that is soon ripe. My heart re^oysed in her,
then went my foot the right way ye from youth up, sought I after her, I bowed
down mine ear and received her I found me much wisdom, and prospered
greatly in her. Therefore will I ascribe the glory unto him, that gives me
wisdom: for I am advised to do thereafter.

I will be gelouse to clean unto the thing that is good, so shall I not be
confounded. My soul dath wrestled with her, and I have been diligent to be
occupied in her I lift up mine hands on hye, then was my soul lyghtened
through wysdom, that I knoledged my folyshnes. I ordered my soul, after her,
she and I were one heart from the beginning and I found her in clennesse. And
therefore shall I not be forsaken.

Eccl. lv. a.
O come unto me ye unlearned, and dwell in the house of wysdomme, withdraw not
your selves from her, but talk and commen of these things, for your Souls
are very thirstye. I opened my mouth, and spoke.

O come and by wisdom without monye, bow down your neck under her yocke,
and your soul shall receive wisdom. She is hard at hand, and is content
to be found. Behold with your eyes. Eccl. vi. ^
how that I have had but little labor, and yet have found much rest. O
receive wisdom, and ye shall have plentuousnesse of silver and gold in
possession. Let your mind rejoice in his mercy, and be not ashamed of his
praise. Work his work by times and he shall give you your reward in due
time.

Here ends the book of Jesus, the son of Syrache, which is called in Latin
ECCLESIASTIcus.
FINIS huius libri.
Imprynted at London in Paul's churcheyarde at the sign of the Kings arms by
Wylliam Bonham.


