Certain Chapters of the proverbs of Solomon drawn into meter by Thomas
sterneholde, late grome of the kings Magesties robes.

Imprynted at London by John Case, dwelling in Peter college rentes, for
Willyam Seres.

Cum priuilegio ad immendum solum,

To the right worshipful, and my singular good Master, sir Thomas Spek knight,
one of the gentilmen, of the kings majesty's most honorable privy chamber,
your most bounden servant to command at all times, Ihon Case wysheth
worship, health, and prosperity, with increase of virtue.

Considering the duty and service which I owe to your good mastershyppe, I
have no less then just cause with cheerful and ready heart, to offer the same
unto you. As well for that your maistershyppe has not only showed manifold
benifites to my poor friends, but also unto me, being one among al other left
able to acquit any part of your goodness, my power and ability being,
small, mine heart and mind being ready. In token whereof I have dedicated
this little book unto your maistershyppes name, desiering you according to
your accustomed gentleness to take the same in good part, and also for a
testimonye, that if I were able by any other mean to gratifye your
maistershyppe, that I would be as ready as any manne living. The copye of this
book was delivered me by a friend of mine being sometime servant unto
master Thomas Sterneholde, whereby it is to be coniectured, that the same were
put in meter by him, yet not so parfectly perused, by reason of sudden
death, as perchance he would have done, if he had longer lived.
Notwythstandynge, I trust your mastershyppe nor any other shall think the^
worthy to lie in a corner, and never to appear abroad. In hope whereof I have
caused the same to be prynted, and have dedicated the same unto you, as the
first fruits of my good will, toward your maistershippe. Thus desierynge
God to prospere you in all worship and encrese of virtue.

Your good maistershyps most humble servant at al times to command John Case.

DO al your deeds with good advice cast in your minds always the end
Wit bought is of to dear aprice, the tried trust take as your friend.
For friends I find there be but two, of countenance and of effect:
Of the one sort there are inoughe, but few been of the other sect.
Also beware the venune sweet, of filed words and flattery:
For to deceive, they be most mete, that best can play hypocrisy.
let wisdom rule your deed and thought
so shall your works be wiseli wrought
Who list to lead a quiet life, who list to rid him self from strife:
Give care to me, mark what I say, remember well, bear it away.
Hold back thy tongue at meat and mele speak but few words, bestow the^ well
By words the wise man you shall espy by words a fool thou shall sone try.
A wiseman can his tongue make cease, a fool can never hold his peace.
Who loves rest, of words beware, who loves words, is sure of care,
For words oftymes, me^ have be^ she^t for silence kept, few them repent.
Two ears, one tongue, only thou have, ino things to hear, then words to wast
A fool in no wise ca^ hi forbear, he has two tongues, and but one ear.
Be sure thou keep a steadfast brain, lest that thy words put y^ to pain.
Words wisely set are worth much gold ye price of rashness is sone told
If time require words to be had, to hold thy peace I hold the mad.
Talk only of neadful verities, strive not for triflyng fantasies.
With sobernes the truth boult out, affirm nothing wherein is doubt.
Who to this song will take good head and spend no mo words then he need.
Though he be a fool and have no brain he shall by this great wisdom gain.
Speak while time is, else hold ye still, words out of time often things do spil.
Say well, and do well, are things twain twice blessed is he, in who^ both do rain
Say well is sure a worthy thing, of say well great goodness does always sprig
Saiwel from dowel differ a leter saywel is good, but dowel is better.
Say well is ruled by man somedeale, do well to god does wholly appeal.
Saywel is good, and does many please do well is better, and does the world ease
Saiwel cause mani to scripture cleue for lack of dowel, they quickly leave.
If saiwel and dowel, were ioind in fraim al were well and wo^ne, got were ye
game
Say well in danger of death is cold do well is earnest, and wo^derous bold
When say well for fear does tremble and quake,
Do well is ^oconde, and good cheer does make.
Finis.
The proverbs of Solomon, traunslated into English meter.
Argumentum. Cha. i.
The wisdom of the Lord our God, does call upon us still:
That we ^e far from wicked men, and follow not their will.
My son thy father hark unto and to his lore incline.
Forsake you not thy mothers law but sure let it be thine
For that shall cause grace ple^tiful, to light upon thine head:
And on thy neck shall be a chain, and stand the in good stead.
Therefore (my son) take you good head when sinners do the tempte,
For though that they do the entyce, to them do not consent.
If they shall say, come thou with us, let us lay wait for blood:
And causeles kill the innocent, and spoil them of their good.
Let us them swallowe quycke and hole let us devour them all:
As those that slide into a pit, so shall they take their fall.
And we shall costelye riches find, to do therwyth our will:
And with the spoils ye we shall get we may our houses fill.
Cast in thy lotte among us now, a man of that thou art:
And then we will have all one purse, and thou shall have thy part.
But walk you not with the^ (my son) their paths do thou refrain:
Their feet are hasty blood to shede all ill they do retain.
But all in vain the net is laid, before the birds eyes:
Yet one an others blood to spyll, much all they do devise.
And they the^ selves their own dear blud this way do hurt and noye:
And their own Souls do quite deprive of all eternal joy.
This is the way of gredy men and this is all their feate:
For to beryue his brothers life: his riches for to get.
Without therefore does wisdom call and puts forth her voice:
Behold for in the open streates, to you she makes noise.
She calls before the multitude, that all men may her know.
And in the town gates openly, her words she does now show.
Oh folysh men and fond says she how long will ye delight:
And foleishe schole^and ye unwise, to wisdom bear such spyte.
Oh turn to my correction, I will my mind express:
And I will make you understand my words both more and less.
Sense then that I have called you and ye refuse my name:
And have put forth mine hand also, and ye forsake the same.
And al my counsels ye have had, in mocking and despite.
And also my correction, have set at naught and light.
Therefore will I laughe joyfully, in your destruction:
And mock you when the plage you fear shall justly on you come.
And wha^ yt which you fear so much full suddenly does fall:
And troubles and great heuines, shall come upon you all.
The^ when you do upon me crave, I will not hear your mind:
Though you seek me, and that early yet shall you not me find.
And why? I say because that you, my knowledge so abhorde:
And cast away against my will, the fear of God the Lord.
I said before they did refuse, my counsels every one:
And did not cease for to despise, my good correction.
To eat the fruit of their own way the Lord shall them constrayne:
With y^ device he shall them fill, of their insensate brain.
And for the fall of the unwise, he shall them slaye anon:
And eke the wealth of foles shall be, their own confusion.
But who to me that gives ear, shall dwell safely I say:
And have enough, and need not fear by night, nor yet by day.
Argumentum. Cha. ii.
It is here taught that we should learn Gods wisdom to obtain:
The wealth also that comth thereof is here described plain.
MI son receive you these my words, the which shall be right wise
And keep thou my commandments, my son I the advice.
So that thine ears may evermore to wysedomes schools enclyne:
Apply thine heart to understand such things as he divine.
For if thou after wisdom cry, and still upon his crave:
And calleste on for knowledge gift because thou would her have.
And seek for her as you would seek for money in the dust.
And dygge for her as treasure that in earth is hid and trust.
The^ shall you right well understand, the fear of god the Lord:
And of his law the knowledge find, according to his word.
For god alone does give to us, his wisdom for to speak:
Out of his mouth does knowledge spring and understanding eke.
The rightuous men he does preserve in welfare through his might.
He does defend the innocent, that walk his way aright,
He does them keep straight in his paths that they go not astraye:
He does direct his holy ones, to walk right in his way.
If thou be such, you shall the^ learn by justice for to deal:
With every man in equitye, throughout the commen weal.
In judgment right thou shalt likewise all other men excel:
And every good path unto the, the lord shall show full well.
If wisdom enter in thine heart, and knowledge in thy spryte:
Then understanding good counsel, shall the preserve vpryght.
That thou may so deliuerd be from every wicked way:
And from those men yt froward things do always speak and say.
The which do leave ye way of light and walk in darckenes still:
And which rejoice most iocundly, when they have done full ill.
Which do delight in wyckednes.
Whose ways are vile and vain:
Whose crooked paths ar slau^derouse from them do thou refrain.
That also from the strange woman deliuerde thou may be:
And from his eke that is not thine: or was not wedde to the.
Which speaks fair, and does forsake the husband of his youth:
And does forget the comnaunt made, of God and of his troth.
Take heed, her house enclineth fast to death, as I the tell:
Her paths are sure the ready way, that leads down to hell.
And they also that go to her, shall not come out again:
Nor take hold of the way of life, I tell the this is plain.
That thou may walk in the sure way whereof I do the tell:
And keep ye paths of ryghtuousnes, then shall thou do right well.
For why^the just shall ever live, in joy that does not cease:
The innocente remain on earth in wealth, and eke in peace.
But the ungodly shall be plucte, out of the land I say:
And wicked men chased shall be, out of the fame for aye.
Argumentu^ Cha iii.
Sure trust in god ought al men have and not in their own brain
The wicked man thou shall not fear, ne yet the skorner vain.
MI son, forget not you my law but have it still in sight:
And let thine heart observe my words so shall you walk aryght.
For sure they shall prolo^g thy days thine years, and life also:
And being the peace and quietness, and rydde the out of woe.
Let mercy nor yet faythfulnes, henceforth from the depart:
Bynd them about thy neck (my son) and write them in thine heart.
And so shall you great favor wine, of god and eke of men:
In understanding perfitlye, expert thou shall be then.
With all thine heart to god the lord put confidence and trust:
And lean thou not in any wise to thine own wit and lust.
In all thy ways have thou respect unto the living lord:
He shall thy doings order well according to his word:
Be not to wise in thy conceyte, but fear god in thine heart:
In haste also from wyckednes, endeavor to depart.
So shall thy nauyll still (my son) continue hole and sound:
Thy bones also and body shall, with lively strength abound.
Honor the lord, and to him give the best of thy substance:
And thy first fruits of thine increase his glory to advance.
So shall thy barnes be filled full, and that with plentuousnes.
Thy presses all shall ouerflowe, with wine of great swetenes.
The bitter scorge of god thy lord, (my son) do not despise:
And when thou art rebukte of him, faynte not in any wise.
For look who^ that ye lord does love his rod shall on him light:
Eve^ as the father whypes his son to know him self aryght.
Yet does the lord nevertheless love his aflycted still:
Even as the father does his child, when he has beat his till.
Full well is he therefore I say, the which does wisdom find:
And understanding to obtain, does set his heart and mind.
For marchau^dice there is none such throughout the world so round.
There is no silver nor yet gold, wherein such wealth is found.
More worth the^ al ye gold on earth, let wisdom be to the:
To her all thing thou canste desire, compared may not be.
On her right hand attendaunt is long life, with color grene:
And honor stands on her left hand, with riches well besene.
Her ways also right pleasant are which pleasure does not cease:
Her paths likewise are nothing else but unity and peace.
She is a tree of life to them, that lay hold on her right:
And bleste are they that keep her fast, with all their power and might.
In wisdom eke the living Lord full well the earth did found:
And we his word ye heavens he made the earth to compass round.
And through the wisdom of the lord the waters brake up all:
The clouds also pour down yeraine that on the earth does fall.
My son, let not these things depart at no time from thine eyes:
But keep my law and counsels all, by the in any wise.
So shall it be eternal life, the soul for to embrace:
Thy mouth shall be replenished with virtue and with grace.
Then shalt thou be right^ sure to walk full boldly in the way:
Thy feet shall never slyppe from the by night, nor yet by day.
If thou do stepe at any time, thou nedst not be afraid:
But swetely stepe, and take thy rest, for god will be thine aid.
And though that the ungodly me, rushe in with vyolence:
Thou shall not be afraid at all, for god is thy defense.
The lord will stand fast by thy side, and help the at thy need:
And keep the safe, and suffer not, thine enemies to proceed.
And such as would to other men do good with all their heart:
And have thereto sufficient, to let is not thy part.
And if thy self thou able be, thy neighbor to releue:
Help him with such as you may spare and gladly to him give.
Refuse not to do good to them to whom it does belong:
^^^yle that thy right hand able is to do it them among:
And if thy friend do ask of the say not, get thou thy way:
To morrow come again to me, or else some other day.
And then I will give the (you sayste) where as thou may it now:
Even out of hand, and if thou will, this god does not allow.
Inte^d not to thy neighbors hurt where he no harm has meant:
And where to live in rest and peace he settes his whole entente.
Strive not (my son) we any ma^^ where as he does no woo:
Nor follow thou the unjust man, but hye the fast him froo.
For why the way of scorners all. the Lord does clean deteste:
And for to talk with simple men the Lord is pleased best.
Create scarcitye the lord does se^^^ where wicked men abide:
But he does bless the godly men and shall for them provide.
The lord shall laugh at skornefull men and meek them to their face:
But to the lowly he will give, his goodness and his grace.
The wise with their possessions, in honor shall remain:
But shame is the promocion that folyshe men obtain.
Argumen. Cha. iiii.
How sagely and how fatherly, he does us here advise:
That we from evil our hertes refrain and study to be wise.
YE children hear your father no^ how he does you exhort:
Take heed yt you do wisdom^ lern^ which shall be your confort.
And I will give you good reward and therwythe will you fill:
If you will not forsake my law, but study therein still.
For when I was the only son, of both my parents dear:
And tenderly beloved was, of father and mothere.
Then he taught me full louyngely and unto me did preach:
And thus he said full oftentimes as I will you now teach.
Se that thou do receive (said he) my words into thy breast:
And keep the^ well, so shall thou live in perfect joy and rest.
In vnderstadynge busilye, apply thy self always:
Let not the same depart from the by night, nor yet by day.
And wisdom never suffer thou, from the for to digress:
If thou love her she shall preserve, and keep the from distress.
The chiefest point of wisdom is, that thou do take in hand:
Before al goods wisdom to get, and learn to understand.
Make much of her and she shall the, promote to power and might:
And if thou her embrace, she shall to honor bring the right.
For she will make thine head truly both good and gracious:
And we a crown shall garnysh it, that is full glorious.
My son, therefore embrace with speed the words I say to the:
So that thy years in joy and peace on earth prolonged be.
The ways of wisdom unto the
I shall make fair and plain:
And in the paths of equitye, shall leave the to remain.
So that thou may walk well in them and have none hinderaunce:
And when you runst, thou shall not fall, nor have an evil chance.
Of wisdom the^ sure hold take you and do not let her god:
In keeping her, thou shall surely, defended be from woo.
And in the path come not (my son) of the ungodly train:
Nor walk thou in the wicked way, of them whose life is vain.
From the ill trade of naughty men, depart thou clean aside:
And se that thou go far from them, and keep the still awyde.
They can not steep till they have done some harm or else mischefe:
Nor take their reaste till they have wrought to some man woe or grief.
For they do eat the bitter bread of wyllfull wyckednes:
And drink the wine of common spoil and all ungodliness.
The pleasant paths of godly me^ appear both light and gaye:
And to al men more bright do shine then does the lyghtsome day.
But the ill way of wicked men, to darckenes is comparde:
Wherein men fall, or they beware, or else do escape full hard.
My son, mark well my words th^^^^e that I do to the tell:
And to the same thine ears enclyne, and understand them well.
And se that from thy faithful mind, thou letst them not depart:
But keep them still full steadfastly, in the mydst of the heart:
For they are life unto al those that chances them to find:
And health of body eto al such, as bear them in their mind,
My son also keep well thine heart for therein rests life:
And put from the a froward mouth, and lyppes that causen strife.
And let thine eyes with diligence, behold that which is right:
And eke thine eye lyddes look before directly in the light
Marcke well thy paths, lest yt thy fete hap suddenly to slide:
So shall thy gate be sure inoughe, whether thou go or ride.
Turn not aside on the left hand, For yet unto the right:
But keep away from wyckednes, thy fete with all thy might.
The perfect paths the Lord does know that led the way of light:
The wicked ways the lord also considers aryght.
But such as walk in godliness the lord will keep and save:
And all their iourneys prosperre so that they none harm shall have
Argumen. Cha. v.
All harlottes ^e, thine honor save thy pe^es spend not in vain
Of thine own f^oure enjoy the fruit, strange love also refrain,
Mi son give ear, and that with speed my wisdom follow you:
With good pretense to wisedoms scole thine ears se that you bow
So that thou do regard always. my right and good counsel:
And you thy lyppes may nurtour keep, like wise in speaking well.
The flattrynge lyppes of wyck^^^, hore^^ may well compared be:
To honey combs which do distyll as we do often see.
Whole words appear unto thine ears as smoth as any oil:
But you art like without good head, to take the shame and foil.
An in the end the pleasure paste, assured may thou be:
The bitter taste of wormwood shall more pleasant seem to the.
And so likewise more sharp she is, then sword of stele well wrought:
Which on both sides with cutting edge man's life does bring to naught.
Forsakte she has the pathe of life, unsteadfast is her way:
So yt thou shall it never know what ever she does say.
Her fete do lead the way to death her steps do lead to hell:
The same be always wandering, and in no place can dwell.
Give ear therefore my son always, and berke well unto me:
And on the words of my wise mouth, attendaunte se thou be.
Estraunge thy self as far from her as ever that thou may:
And come not nie her doors nor house by night nor yet by day.
And do thou not thine honor give unto an other one:
Nor yet the fruit of thy long years, to such as be thy fone.
That with thy riches other men, their houses do not fill:
Nor we thy pains a strangers house be stufte against thy will.
Lest that you mourn, but all to late upon a woeful day:
When you haste spent both life and good and be compelde to say.
Alas why did I nourtour hate why did mine heart despise:
The learning pure yt I was taught which would have made me wise
Why was I not obediente, to them that did me teach:
And harkened not to them the which so much to me did preach.
Wherefore almost all care and grief, is casten me upon:
In the mydst of the multitude, and congregation.
To use the drink of thine own well is sure a pleasant thing:
And of the brook that flows from, the head of thine own spring.
Suffer the same to ouerflowe, as ryuers to the bryncke:
That water pure the neady may, of them at all times drink.
Yet let them be thine own only, if need of them thou haste:
And the strange man keep well from them if long they may not last
Likewise be glad of thine own wife depart you not her froo:
A loving hynd thou shall her have, ^ treadely be the Roo.
The breasts of her se that always. disaunt be to the:
And with her love hold the co^tente so shall you best agree.
Wherefore (my son) why wylt thou have in harlottes such delight:
And doste embrace thy neighbors wife
And do to him such spyte.
Remember that of each man's life, the trade in the Lords sight:
Apeareth plain, which he does judge according unto right.
And of ma^s steps we watchful eyes the nombre has he told:
And does his ways we judgment tight consider and behold.
The wyckednes of an ill man shall catch him self at last:
And we the snares of his own sin he shall be trapped fast.
Because he would not learned be death shall him overcome:
And headlong for his folyshnes, to Satan shall he run.
Argumen. Cha. vi.
Here art thou warned of suretishippe, and douthfulnes to ^^e:
Of doctrine false beware the sleygh^ and ^^e adultery.
MI son if thou a suretye be, or promise for thy friend:
Thou haste thy hand so fastened it will not be vntwind.
And bound you art in thine own words as fast as thou may be:
And taken art in thine own speech, till he acquiteth the.
Discharge thy self for you art come into thy neighbors debt:
Seek then all means, and se if thou thy neighbor canste entreat.
Refrain thine eyes from to much sleep and to thy self beware:
As does you do the blouddy hounds, or bird the fowlers snare.
The little ant (thou slouthful man) to thine example take:
And learn of her for to be wise, and purueyaunce to make.
For where she has no governor, for master her to learn:
Nor wytty king under whose rule, ^^all holden is the stern.
Yet nature does in her this work without any other gyde:
In somer time with busy care, for winter to provide.
Dew long wylt you (oh slougysh man) in idleness remain:
And give the whole to rest and sleep, and stackest to take pain.
Go to, go to, stepe hardely, and slumbre out thy fill:
With folded arms lie down to rest and take thou thine own will.
As one that iourneth by the way, so pouertye shall come:
And also like a weponed man, on the shall fiercely run.
But if thou be industrious, and well thy labor plye:
Thine heruest shall be plentiful, and yield abundauntlye.
And as the rivers great and dep^, increase by rage of rain:
So shall thy barnes be stuffed full of corn, and eke of grain.
And thou shall stand nothing at al, in fear of any lack:
The woeful bag of beggary, shall never grieve thy back.
A wicked man, and he that is replenished with gyle:
Does always seek maliciouslye, with lies the to begyle.
He serves to none use at all, he flereth with his eyes:
And with his fingers meneth craft and gives him self to lies.
And he does always exercise.
Come mischyefe for his part:
And causer is of much discord, through malice of his heart.
With have therefore remediles, some ill shall on him fall:
From him his life shall taken be. ^ven he thynkes lest of all.
Six things there be on earth my son which god does hate full sore
The seventh above the other six the lord does most abhore.
A proud disdainefull look the lord, does utterly refuse:
A lyinge tongue with filed words deceitefully does use.
The hurtful hands which haste do make the giltles blood to spyll:
And can not else them selves refrain, til they have done some ill.
In heart yt does his evil thoughts to this only employe: which way to work
most wickedness and other men to noye.
The fete also which ready be great sins for to commite:
And in one place can never stand till they some mischief hitte.
A witness false that does his lips deceitfully apply:
And covertly his neighbor grieve, with some new forged lie.
The sower of discord is worse, when brethren does agree:
And he yt does cause louinge friends great enmies for to be.
But thou my son, my counsels al print sure into thine heart:
Do not forsake thy mothers law nor lay the same aparte.
Commend them to thy memory, bind them thy neck about:
And where thou go, lead the^ with the, then stepe and have no doubt.
And when you wakst out of thy stepe in them se thou delight:
For my precepts a lantarne are, and to thy fete a light.
In which thou maiste without peril, pass safely on thy way:
For nurtour is if thou it take, to life a ready stay.
The same shall the preserve also, from her that lives amyse:
And also from the harlots tongue, which so deceytfull is.
Let not her beutye the inflame her beckes are very hokes:
To catch thine heart into her snare, through her deceytful worckes.
To bring a man to beg his bread, it is an harlots guyse:
But for the life of honestye, the godly does devise.
May any man the stamynge fire, in his bare bosom bring:
But that it shall his clothes burn, and cause his flesh to wrynge*
Or may a man on read bote coals barefote pass on his way:
And yet the same him never grieve: no no, I dare well say.
Eue^ so I think that the same man that does an harlote see:
And uses him to touch her often, vngiltye can not be.
The there is not despised of al, that steals for very need:
Dis gredy womb, and hongry guts, in hongre for to feed.
The utmost is, if he be found, seuentymes to yield again:
Or else to make amends wythal, his goods that do remain.
But if thou be in whoredom found with any neghbours wife:
Thou plaist the fool, for ye do bring, destruction on thy life.
Thou gettest thy self rebuke and shame whereof none can the rydde:
Dishonor eke thou purchasest, which never shall be hid.
For why^hir husbands wrathful ire entreated can not be:
Though you give gifts, amends to make as much as is in the.
Argumen. Cha. vii.
In this he does all men exhort. to wisdom for to cleave.
he shows eke the harlots tricks wherewith she does deceyve.
MI son mark well mi counsels al and lay them up in store:
Observe well my commandments by the for evermore.
And honor thou the lyuyng-lord so shall thou be right sure:
To rain in joys celestial, which ever shall endure.
And other gods fear not at all, in men have thou no trust:
And this doing thou shalt be sure to live emonge the just:
The^ keep thou my commandments lo, once again I say,
Even as the apple of thine eye, by which thou see the day.
And eke about thy fingers ten, se that thou do them bind:
And write the^ in thine heart with speed, and prynt them well in mind.
And se that thou to wisdom say thou art my sister dear:
And understanding call likewise thy kynsewoman full near.
For wisdom shall the safely keep from women that be ill:
So that on harlots fyled words thou shall not set thy will:
As I by chance sat down to se the folly of young men.
And kept me close wtin mine house and pepte out now and then.
Behold I saw a young fool pass the corner of the streate:
And hyed as fast as he might goo, and harlette for to mete.
And so toward the harlots house he took his way full right:
Thinking to escape and not be seen, when it was almost night.
And sodainlye there met with him, an harlot proud and bold:
Which always set her whole delight, to mock both young and old.
For in her heart deceyte was hid, and wantonness also:
Which she declard by her attire, and tokens other mo.
Whose feet could not abide wtin, the house, but ran about:
Now here now there, in each blind lane, within, and eke without.
She caught the yo^g man kissing him, and shamed not to say:
I made a vow which to perform,
I purposed this day.
Wherefore came I to mete the now, and to behold thy face:
And thus I have by hap the found: my way as I did trace.
My house is decte we painted clothes, of Egypt the to please.
My bed does smell of Sinamon, of myrre and Aloes.
Come ou therefore and let us lie together all this night.
And let us twain our pleasure take, till it be broad day light.
Mine husband is not now at home he is gone far away:
With him he took the money bag, and coins not home to day.
And thus we many flattering words she did him overcome:
And also through her lyinge lips, anon she had him won.
Immediately he followed her, much like unto an ox: which led is to a
slaughter house, where he is kylde we knockes,
Or like unto the folysh lamb, that skyppeth in the leese:
When that the boucher fetches him, men's appetite to please.
He thinks not how shamefullye, to prison he is brought.
Where his body suffers woe, for folly by him wrought.
This harlote vile, of this young fool so changed had his heart:
And had anon wounded to death his liver with her dart.
That like a bird he made great haste to fall into the gyn:
Not knowing of the fowlers art, until that he was in.
For love I speak full fatherlye and counsel the eftsone:
Mark well my words we diligence observe them well my son.
Let not thine heart in harlots snares at any time be caught:
Be not deceived, refuse her sight her paths be very naught.
Her house my son is the right way that leads unto hell.
The chambers of the same to deathe', may be compared well.
Argument Chap. viii.
The wisemen does commend to us the son of god most hye,
Which is the word that al things made, and was eternally.
How can you say (oh mortal me^) that wisdom does not cry
And prudence eke exalt aloude her voice incessauntlye?
In places all, as in the tops of hills that be full stepe,
And in the plain and wide countries, and valeis that be deep,
In common places, and nigh the same in churches and in streets,
And in the gates of Cities great where many people metes.
The mighty word, the son of god does call unto mankind,
Which was before the heavens were made and vttreth thus his mind.
O sons of men to you I speak and earnestly do cry,
My wisdom learn to understand and keep it faythfullye:
Oh harken well, and give good ear of wayghty things and wise:
My lyppes shall speak, mine heart shall still, much godliness deuyse.
My talk shall be on virtuous things wherein I most delyght.
My lyppes abhor the wicked man for all his power and might.
My counselles all, and my precepter, be rightuous and straight;
There is in them no wyckednes, nor any manner sleyght.
To such as do them understand they be but very plain:
And not to hard for them to keep, if there of they be feign.
Before great heaps of worldly goods, chose thou my disciplyne:
My doctrine is of greater price, then is the gold so fine.
As lyghtsom days with his bright beams excels ye dark night:
When that the skies are full of sterres or moan does give her light.
Even so truly does wisdom pass, and far above excel.
All wordely wealth: to it nothing, may be compared well:
I which am the eternal word, and equal in all might.
To god, which al things has made and created aryght.
Assystaunte am, from time to time,
In counsels that are lust:
And likewise am of al good though(...) the geuer when I lust.
And he which has the fear of god, sure prynted in his breaste:
Does hate all vice, all pride of heart, and utterly deteste.
The wicked paths in which to walk ill men have their delyght:
The double tongue his neighbors hurt which works with despite.
I only give unto man's heart, good counsel to devise:
To deal upright in equity, and justice exercise.
All wisdom does proceed from me as from the very spring,
All wordly strength, and fortitude to man alone I bring.
By me ye kings their power do take and rule the earth thereby,
And wholesome laws are stablished, and kept accordingly.
By me also all Magistrates the people keep in awe,
And judges give their sentences according to the law.
And such as do unfeignedly love me, I love again,
And when they call, great haste I make to rid them out of pain.
All wordly goods be given to me to do with them my will,
And I have power whom that I list with joy on earth to fill.
And I likewise of heavenly gifts have plenty and great store,
With me does grace celestial, remain for evermore.
No treasure in the world so void, comparde may justly be:
Unto the fruit and perfect welthe, which do proceed from me.
The tried gold and silver fine, which does on earth remain:
And stones of price unto the same, may well be compted vain.
And in the ways of righteousness, to walk is my delight:
And in the place where judges do, according unto right.
I do also the godly men. through mercy to me call:
And plentuously do them enriche, with grace celestial.
With god I have been hitherto and was eternally:
Before the earth was created, my father stood I bye.
I was begotte long time before the waters did surrownde:
The earth, or that the mighty hills were settled on the ground.
I was likewise before the flouddes, had made them selves away:
Or that the earth or little hills, were brought unto their stay.
And when yt god ye heavens did make,
I was even then at hand:
And when the depes he did commau^d not to surround the land,
And when also the fyrmament, he made as we now see:
And running sprynges of water pure commanded for to be.
And when that he unto the seas, assygned a certain place:
And willd the flouddes not to excede, their bonds in any case.
And when likewise the earth he made immovable to stand:
I was with him, and to each thing, did put mine helpinge hand.
I did rejoice, and day by day,
I did delyght in men:
Great pleasure eke I had to be in company of them:
Wherefore my sons enclyne your hertes and harken unto me:
Most bleste he is that in my ways, delyteth for to be.
And does the same keep fayethfully, as I to him have taught:
And spedlye makes haste to void the thing which seems naught
Give ear, give ear I say mi sons and learn for to be wise:
He is a fool and wicked man, that does the same despise.
And happy is the man that does, hear me with good intent.
And he also whose watchful eyes, on me are always bente.
For he that has obtained me, of perfect bliss is sure:
And God to him the life will give that ever shall endure.
And who that does against me sin does bring his soul to care.
Mine enemies shall of dredeful death be wrapped in the snare.
Argumen. Cha. ix.
From sinfulnes the son of god, does call both young and old:
And shows plain the wyckednes, of ha^lottes proud and bold.
The wisdom high of god above, equal with him in might:
Which from the first beginning was from heaven descended right.
And here on earth the shape of man disdained not to take:
Which being done, unto him self a princely house did make.
Wherein were wrought of marble fine pillars both large and wide,
The same thereby that he might cause for ever to abide.
And then anon great quantity, of vitailes did he stay,
With wholesome metes, and pure good wine his table did he lay.
And the^ sent fourth his handmaides all and gave them to their charge
To bid all men unto his house, which was so fair and large.
And said also full lovingly. if any fool there be,
Let him resort unto mine house and come straight unto me.
To synneful men he spoke likewise resort to me with speed,
And of my bread eat you your fill prepared for your need.
And drink the wine before you sit and leave your ignorance,
Walk in the trace among the good where wisdom ledeth the dance.
If than thou do the skornefull man admonish to repent,
Thou do nothing but work i vain for he will not relent.
He yet amend his wicked life whereby he does provoke
The just and everlasting god to plage him with his stroke.
And in the same iniuriouse, unto thy self thou art:
And wynneth hate: for thy good will, he sets not a farte.
But if thou doste, yea bytterlye, rebuke him that is wise:
He will the love, and at no time thy good counsel despise.
The wise man does aduertismente, always turn to the best.
And by the same more ready is, all vice for to deteste,
For who so does the rightuous teach of this thing may be sure:
He will make haste lerning to win, and therein will endure.
The fear of God the first point is, his wisdom to obtain.
Of wisdom he shall never mysse, in whom gods fear does rain.
To such will god send joyful days and will their years increase:
And all their good will multyplye, that they may live in peace.
The wyseman does all ill escape, and nothing does he lack:
The skornyng men great sin does bear upon his woeful back.
Of pratynge whores and impudent, it is the mounted guyse.
With flattryng words and whorish tricks to tyce in the unwise.
A shameless whore of godliness, does know nothing at all:
In open streates she sytteth down, that men she may there call.
As they do pass from place to place, their business to do.
If any man do want his wit, let him go her unto:
To whom she will not stycke to say, and boldly to him tell:
The water that by stealthe is got, all other does excel.
And so likewise the stolen bread, although the same be sour:
Much sweater is then other bread, at large while men devour.
But in thine heart my loving sone print this my saying well,
Whosoever by her is overcome descends unto hell.
And who that does contrary wise her wicked way deny,
Unto his soul winth quietness and saved shall be thereby.
Argument. Chap. x.
The wise man with the folyshe man is here compared plain,
The fear of god commended is and living got with pain.
The wise son does his father fill with gladness and with joy,
But the unwise with sorrow does his mother hurt and noye.
And treasure gotten wickedly shall profit thee nothing,
But wisdom shall deliver thee from death and from his stryng.
The lord will not his holy ones in honger to abide,
But the ungodly keep he will, from their desire full wide.
An idle hand the thrifty man, does make both pore and bare:
But yet the hand in labor quyke the neady cries from care.
The wyseman does in somer time, hyz fruits lay up in store:
That he thereby in winter cold may help him self the more.
But who so that in harvest time a slouggardes part does play:
A fool him shows and is compelde, to beg an other day.
With beuty decked is the bright face, of cuery ryghtuous one:
But past all shame the wicked are, with their presumption.
Of wisdom eke the memory, shall have a good report:
Even so the name of wicked men, shall sone to shame resort.
A wise man will admonished be and that is sign of grace:
A fool will rather then he so do, be strycken on the face.
Who so that leads a gyltlesse life, does walk a way right sure:
If thou treadste in the wicked trace, thou she weste thy self vnpure:
The wicked man beware my son, lest he do the some harm.
Dute of the mouth of folyshe men, all wyckednes does frame.
The ryghtuous mouth does make much peace, and is the well of life:
The wicked mouth contrary wise, does always stir up strife.
And envy eke the mother is, of cursed words and fell:
But love does hyde full gentilly the words not spoken well,
The lyppes of them that understand of wisdom have no lack:
But the scourge does only belong, unto a folyshe back.
Wise men does good knowledge keep more surer then their land:
But nygh to their destruction, draw folyshe men and fond.
The richmans goods are his strong hold, wherein his trust is all.
If pouertye oppress the pore, the rych man's help is small:
The good is wont to neadye men, part of his goods to give.
And of his store his neighbors lack with plenty to releue.
But to bestow in vanities, the wicked do not cease:
Such goods as he should well employ unto his neighbors ease.
Take heed therefore and chastisment receive with all thine heart:
If thou refuse aduertisemente, thou playest a folyshe part.
Dissemblinge lyppes are very cause, of hatred and despyte:
A Fool he is which slaunderouslye, his neighbors fame does byte:
Of many words and idle talk, offenses do arise.
But well is he that can refra^ne, his tongue from tellyng lies.
The tongue which is all innocent a noble treasure is:
The cruel heart of wicked men delyght to do amyse.
The ryghtuous does with their fair speech a multitude endame:
For to embrace much godliness And to ^sc^ue all sha^^.
And so likewise the folyshe men, are lightly caught in snare:
Of their own words, and trapped fast or they thereof beware.
The blessing of the lord only, of riches sends store:
Thy travail is the instrument whereby he gives more.
If God do not increase thy corn, and bless it with his hand:
Then shall thou labor but in vain in tyllynge of thy land.
A fool in vice rejoices still, for why, he does not care:
Yet nevertheless, I the advice, of such one to beware:
For at the last with misery, the wicked peryshe shall.
When godly men shall prospere well, and dread nothing at all:
Ungodly men shall vanyshe quyte, and never turn again:
Much like unto an hurlynge storm, mixed with hail and rain.
The ryghtuous shall continue still, and hereof be right sure:
In rest and peace of conscience for ever to endure.
As vinegre good with his sharp taste does set on edge the tethe:
And the thycke smoke unto the eyes, is cause of pain and grief.
A slouthful man and ^^ggysh beast, the good does so offend:
When they in vain would have him thryue and he will not amend.
The fear of god does bless the good, and the years does prolong:
As for the years of wicked men, shall not continue long.
The good does bide in patience and shall be glade therefore:
The wicked shall for all their haste, peryshe for evermore.
The ways of god does courage give unto all godly men:
But such as live in wyckednes, great fear does find in them.
The ryghtuous shall at no time fall, but steadfastly shall stand:
The wicked men shall dwell in life, no long time on the land.
The mouth also of godly men, in wisdom does delight:
The lyinge tongues of froward men, against the troth does fight.
The ryghtuouse lyppes are occupied in wisdoms talk only:
Ungodly men abuse their tongues, in shame and blasphemy.
Argumen. Cha. xi.
To deal upright here ar we taught, and humble for to be:
And mercy eke commended is, joined with simplicity.
IN the lords sight, and in his eye it is a thing most vile
with subtle weight or mesure false thy neibour to begile
But god the lord contrary wise, in truth does most delyghte:
It is his will that all men should, with other deal vpryght
The equal weight and balau^ce just, to god right pleasant be.
When that the same unto all men, do yield with equitye.
Rebuke and shame do follow pride, in whom that it does rain:
But where there is humility, great wisdom does remain.
Who does not hate will, heart, nor mind throughout ye world so wide
The fierce and proud disdainful man which is addicte to pride:
Who does not love unto their power the man of humble sprite.
The way which in doing good to other does delyght:
The symplenes and meaning true, which godly men assaye:
Does them direct in holiness and in the perfect way.
The wicked craft and wyly sleyghtes which in the ill are found:
Do at the last cast down the^ selves, and lay them on the ground.
The day that God in dome shall sytte to judge both good and bad:
What shall the^ the goodz us preuayl, which in this world we had.
The justice yet and ryghtuousenesse, which Christ to man did bring:
From death shall safe deliver him, and from his deadly stynge.
The meaning true of simple men, shall hold them still vpryght.
The wicked train shall headlo^g fall, for all their power and might.
The godly folk through righteousness deliuerd be at last
The wicked in their own deceyte, shall trapped be full fast.
When death arests the wicked man, with his most dreadful darte:
His hope is gone, for on his goods, only he set his heart.
The just man is, by the lords help, delivered from ill:
In steed of whom the wicked man, tormented shall be still.
Beware also dissembling men, for they will sone betraye:
Their faithful fre^d through flattring words what so their mouth does say
But yet the just and fayethfull men, their knowledge shall defend:
From all the snares of fyled words, which wicked men intend.
If that perchance an honest manne, to wealth advanced be:
If that perchance an honest man, to wealth advanced be:
The hole city wherein he dwelth, rejoice as well as he.
And if so be a wicked man, do happen to decay,
All men be glade that he so sone is vanished away.
And so likewise through godly men, a city shall increase:
To which by their good governance is brought both rest and peace.
So that the same in noblenes, all other shall excel:
As in a rank of ladies fair, some one does bear the bell.
But through the mouth of wicked which honestye do hate:
Hole contries and great regions are set at strife and bate.
Whereby at length ye same be brought to ruin and decay:
And from a fall by no means can, the^ selves uphold and stay.
Who so that does his friend despise, does show but little wit,
By this it semes to live on earth, that he is nothing fytte.
The wise man can even when he list, from talk his tongue reframe:
Whereby he scapes the dangerous ill, of hatred and disdain?
The flattrynge man and famed friend that does nothing but gloss:
Of his dear friend vnfayethfullye, the secrets does disclose.
But faithful friends whose doings are vpryght and also just:
In no wise will bewraye the things committed to their trust.
And where there lackes a governor both politic and wise.
The people which be under him, shall fall and never rise.
But happy is that region, whose ruler has the grace:
The talk of godly cou^selours to follow and embrace,
Who so is bound for stau^gers dets, does bring him self to care.
And is compeld the same to pay,
Though he be pore and bare.
But he shall live in quietness, and have no fear at all:
Which takes head by surety ship, lest he in danger fall.
A woman which is gracious, and does apply her mind:
To virtuous schole upon the earth, is sure great grace to find.
An idle hand can at no time, to welthines attain.
But he is sure the same to win, that labors with pain.
The man in whose heart mercy works him self does profit most:
For mercy from internal pain, does rydde his simple ghost.
The cruel man far otherwise, with malice and debate:
Even such as ought be nere to him, does persecute and hate.
Of the vain worckes of wicked me^, no profit comth at all:
Their doings are not parmanente, but sure to have a fall.
But who so does seek ryghtuousnes and practice her in deed.
Is sure to have eternal joy for his reward and need.
And mercy does prepare the way that leads unto bliss:
If thou be given to wyckednes, of death thou shall not miss.
The livynge lord does most abhor, The man whose heart is ill.
And only bent to wyckednes, with whole intent and will.
But he does most rejoice in such, that in his word delight:
And lead their lives accordyngely, in simplenes of sprite.
A woman which in bewtye does, all other far amend:
And has no good conditions, her bewty to amend.
Unto a ring of pure good gold, a man may well compare:
The which a sow in her foul nose, continually does bear.
The just men do rejoice in good, and holiness embrace:
But bent unto all filthiness, the wicked run their race.
And some there be ye with their goods their neighbor does releue,
And yet the same do still increase, though they do largely give
And some there be contrary wise that others rob and pyll:
Of riches great, yet for all that, they be but beggars still.
The soul of him most blessed is, and never shall have need:
Which in his store we gladsome heart the hongry men does feed.
And so like wise he never shall, for lack of drink decay:
That unto him does reche the cup, that trauailth by the way.
The people curse most bitterly, the tyller of the ground:
Which in his barnes no corn at all, will suffer to be found.
In time of derth, although he have, great plenty and great store:
But kepes it close even purposelye, to make the price the more.
But blessed is he in all men's mouths, that when the corn is skant:
Brings forth his grain, and suffers not the market for to want.
He rises well, and in good time, for good things that does call:
The naughty worckes of wicked me^, shall sone oppress them all.
Who so in his vain riches does, put confidence and trust.
Is sure hereof when he thynkes lest, to fall into the duste.
Where as the just and faithful man, shall prospere still in peace.
Even as a tree in the spring time, does budde forth and increase.
And who ye does through folly bring his household cut of frame.
Shall wash his goods, and in the end sustain rebuke and shame.
And then at length for lack of wit, and spoylynge that was his:
Against his will the wysemans need to serve he shall not mysse.
The tree of life or heavenly joy, is even the very gain:
And fruit that just and rightuous men, shall repe for all their pain.
Finis.
In this chapter does Solomon, prove all things vain to be:
Which raineth underneath the sun, save only gods truth and verity
I Solomon David's son, king of Jerusalem:
Chosen by god to teach the Jews, and in his laws to lead the^.
Confess under the son, that every thing is vain:
The world is false: that man is frail and al his pleasures pain.
Alas what stable fruit, may Adams children find:
In that they seek by swette of brows the travel of the mind.
We that live on the earth, draw toward our decay:
Our children fill our place a while, and then they fade away.
Such chaunges makes the earth, and does remove for none:
But serves us for a place, to play our parts upon.
When that the restless Sun, westwarde his course has run:
Toward the east he hyes as fast, to rise where he begun.
When hoory Bore as has, blown forth his frosen blaste:
Then zephirus with his gentle breath, dissolues the ice as fast.
Floudes that drink up small brokes and swell by rage of rain:
Discharge in seas which the^ repulse, and swallowe straight again.
These worldely pleasures lord, so swyft they run their race:
That scarce our eyes may the^ discern they hyde so little space.
What has been, but is now, the like hereafter shall:
What new devise grounded so sure that breadeth not the fall*
What may be called new, but such things in times paste,
Has time buried, and does reuyue, and time again shall waste.
Things paste right worthy fame, has now no brute at all:
Even so shall dye such things ye now, the simple wonders call.
I that in Dauides seat, syrte crowned and rejoice,
That with my septer rule the Jews and teach them with my voice.
Have searched long to know, all things under the sun:
To se how in this mortal life, a surety might be won.
This kyndeled will to know, strange things for to desire,
God has graft in our gredy breasts, a torment for our hyre.
The end of each travail, fortwyth I sought to know:
I found it vain mixed with gall, and burdned with much woe.
Defaultes of natures works, no man's hand may restore:
Which be in number like the sand, upon the salt floude shore.
Then vauntynge in my will, I began call to my mind:
What rules of wisdom I had taught that elders could not find.
And as by contraries, to try most things we use:
Men's solyes and their errors eke, I began them all peruse.
Thereby with more delight, to knowledge for to clyme:
But this I found an endless work, of pain and loss of time.
For he to wysedomes schole, that does apply his mind:
The farther that he wades therein, the greater doubt shall find.
And such as enterprice, to put new things in ure:
Of some yt sh(...) skorne their deuyse, may we^^ them selves assure.
Rom^ ^ensife fancies then, I g(...) mine heart revoke:
And gave me to such sporting plays as laughter might provoke.
But even such vain delights, when they most blinded me:
Always me thought a smilyng grace a king did ill agree.
Then sought I how to please, my bealy with much wine:
To feed me fat with costely meats of rare delites and fine.
And other pleasures eke, to purchase me with rest:
In so great choice to find the thing that might content me best.
But lord what care of mind, what sudden storms of ire,
What broken stepes endured I: to compass my desire.
To build me houses fair, then set I al my cure:
By pryncely acts thus straue I still to make my fame endure.
Delicious gardens eke, I made to please my sight:
And graft therein all kind of fruit, that might the mouth delyghte.
Lively sprynges by conduites, from their old course I drew.
For to refreshe the fruitful trees, that in my garden grew.
Of cattle great increase, I bredde in little space,
Bondeme^ I had and gave the^ wives who served me with their race.
Great heaps of shining gold, by sparynge began I save:
Furnished with such thing of price, as fittes a prince to have.
To hear fair women sing. sometime I did rejoice:
Ravished with their pleasant tumes and swetenes of their voice.
Lemmans I had so fair, and of so lively hue:
That who so gased in their face, might well their beuty rue.
Never erst sat there king, so rich in Dauides seat:
Yet still me thought for so small gain the travel was to great:
From my desirous eyes, I had no pleasant sight:
Nor from my heart no kind of mirth, that might give them delight.
Which was the only fruit, I rept of all my pain:
To feed mine eien, and to rejoice my heart with all my gain.
But when I made my count, with how great care of mind:
And hertes unrest that I had sought, so wastefull fruit to find.
Then was I stricken straight, with that abused fire:
To glory in that goodly wit, that compaste my desire:
But fresh before mine eyes: grace did my faults renew:
What gentle calling I had fled, my ruin to pursue.
What ragyng pleasures paste, peril, and hard escape:
What frensies in mine head had wrought the liquore of ye grape.
The error that I saw, that their frail hertes does move:
Which strive in vain for to compare with him that sittes above.
In whose most perfect works, such craft appears plain:
That to the least of them there may, no mortal man attain.
And like as lyghtsome day, does shine above the night:
So dark to me did folly seem and wisdoms beams as bright.
Whose eyes did seem so clear, mo^es to discern and find:
But will had closed folyes even, who groped like the blind.
Yet death and time consumes, all wit and wordely fame:
And look what end that folly has, and wisdom has the same.
Then said I thus (oh Lord) may not then wisdom cure,
The woeful wrongs and hard co^flictes, that folly does endure*
To sharp my wit so fine, then why took I this pain:
Now well I find this noble search, may eke be called vain.
As slanders loathsome, brute sou^des, folies judge reward:
Are put to silence all by time, and brought to final regard,
Even so does time devour the noble blaste of fame:
Which should resou^d the glory great that does deserve the same.
Thus present chaunges chase, away the wonders paste:
Ne is the wisemans fatal threde, yet longer sponne to last.
Then on this wretched vale, our life I lothed plain:
When I beheld our fruteles pains, to compass pleasures vain.
My travail thus I spent, has me produced loo:
An heir unknown shall repe ye fruit that him the sede did sow.
But whereunto the Lord, his nature shall enclyne:
Who can forknow into whose hands, my goods I shall resygne*
But Lord, how pleasant sweet, seems the idle life:
That never charged was with care, nor burdened with strife.
And vile the gredy trade, of them that toil so sore:
To leave to such their travails fruit, that never swette therefore.
What is that pleasant gain, which is that sweet releife:
That should delay the bitter taste, that we feel of your grief.
The gladesome days we pass, to seek a simple gain:
The quiet night by broken stepes, to feed a resteles brain.
What hope is left us then, what conforte does remain,
Our quiet hertes for to rejoice, with the fruit of our pain.
If that be true who may, him self so happy call:
As I whose fre ^ sumptuous spence, does shine beyond them all.
Surely it is a gift, and favor of the Lord:
Liberally to spend our goods, the ground of all discord.
And wretched hertes have they, that let their treasure molde:
And carry the rod that scourges the^ that glor^^^^ their gold.
But I do know by proof, whose riches bear such brute,
What stable wealth may stand in wast and heapynge of such fruit.
LIke as the sterneles boat, that sails with every wind:
The slipper tope of worldely wealth, by cruel proof I find,
Skant has the seed whereof, that nature forms man:
Received life, when death him yeldes to earth where he began.
The graffed plants with pain, whereof we hoped fruit:
To rote the^ up which blossoms spread then is our chief pursuit.
And shredde the spraies whose groth, we labored with pain:
Each froward threatenynge chere, of fortune makes us plain:
And every pleasant train of her, rejoice our hertes again.
Aunciente walls to race, is our unstable (...):
And of their wether beaten stones to build some new devise.
New fancies daily spring, which fade returnyng moo:
And now we practice to attain that straight we must forgo.
Sometime we seek to spare, that afterward we wast:
And that we travail for to knytte, for to vniosse as fast.
In sobre silence now, our quiet lyppes we close:
And we unbridled tongues forthwith our secret hertes disclose.
Such as in folded arms, we did embrace we hate:
Whom straight we reconcile again, and banishe all debate:
My seed with labor sown such sede produces me:
To waste my life in contraries that never shall agree.
From god these heavy cares, are sent for our vnrestes:
And we such burdens for our wealth He fraughteth still our breasts.
All that the lord has wrought, has bewty and good grace:
And to each thing assigned is his propre time and place.
And granted eke to man, of all the worlds estate:
And of each thing wroughte in the same to argue and debate.
Which act though it approach, the heavenly knowledge most:
To search the natural course of things yet all is labor loss.
But the wandrynge eyes: that long for surety sought,
Found ye by pain in certain wealth might in this world be boughte.
Who lives in delight, and sekes no gredy thrifte:
But frelye spendes his goods may think it is a secret gift.
Fulfilled shall he be, what so the lord intend: which no diuice of man's wit
may, appayre ne yet amend.
Who made all things of naught, that Adams children might:
Learn for to dread ye lord ye wrought such wonders in their sight.
The grissy wonders paste. which now are out of mind:
To be renewed in our days, the lord has so assinde.
Lo, thus this careful scourge, does steal on us unware:
Which when the flesh has clean forgote he does again repair.
When I in this vain search, had wandered fro my wit
Behold I saw a royal throne, where justice should have sytte.
Instead of whom I saw, with fierce and cruel mode:
Where wrong was set that cruel beast and drank the gyltles blood.
Then thought I thus, the day the lord shall sit in dome:
To vewe h^^ (...), and choose the pure, the spotted have no rome.
Yet by such scourges sent, that each agreued mind:
Like brute beasts that in their rage and fury by their kind.
His error may confess, when he has wresteled long.
And with suffraunce may him arm, the sure defense of wrong:
For death that of the best, the carren does devour,
Unto the noble kind of man, presence the fatal hour.
The perfect fourine that god, has given either to man:
Or other beast, dissolve it shall, to earth where he began,
And who can tell if that, the soul of man assende,
Or with the body of it dye, and to the groude descend.
Wherefore each gready heart, that riches ^^kes to gain:
Gather may (...), that springet (...) his pain.
A ^^cane convenient wealth, I mean to take in worth:
And with an hand of largest in, measure pour it forth.
For treasure spent in life, the body does sustain:
The heir shall wast the hoorded gold amassed with much pain.
Ne may foresyght of man, such order give in life:
For to foreknowe who shall enjoy, their gotten goods with strife.
Domine deus salutis uicae.
O Lord upon whose will, depends my welfare:
To call upon thy holy name, sins day nor night I spare.
Grant that the just request, of this repentaunt mind:
So perce thine ears ye in thy sight, some (...) find.
My soul (...) full, with grief (...) paste:
My restles b^dye does consume, and death approaches fast.
Like them whose fatal threde, thine hand has cut in twain:
Of whom there is no farther brute, which in their graves remain.
Oh lord thou haste me cast, headlonge to please my foo:
Into a pytte all bottomeles, where as I plain my woo.
The burden of thy wrath, it does me sore oppress:
And sundry storms thou have me sent of terror and distress.
The faithful friends are fled, and banished from my sight:
And such as I have held full dear, has set my frendshyp light.
My duraunce does persuade, of fredome such despair:
That by the tears yt bayne my breast, mine eye light does ^ppayre.
Yet did I neu^^ care, thine aid for desire:
With humble heart and stretched hands for to appear thine ire.
Wherefore do thou forbear in the defense of thine?
To show such tokens of thy power, in sight of Adams line.
Whereby each feeble heart, with faith might be so fed:
That in the mouth of thine elect, thy mercies might be spredde.
The flesh that fedeth worms, can not thy love declare:
Nor such set forth thy faieth as dwell, in the land of despair.
In blind endured hertes, light of thy lively name:
Can not appear ne ca^ not judge, the bryghtnes of the same.
Nor blasted may thy name, be by the mouth of those:
whom death has shitte in silence so, as they (...),
The lively (...), that in this world delyght:
Nor be the trumpe yt must resownd, the glory of thy might.
Wherefore I shall not cease, in chief of my distress.
To cal^on the till that the sleep, my weary bones oppress.
And in the morning eke, when that the sleep is fled:
With flouddes of salt repentaunte tears to wash my restles bed.
With in this careful mind, burdened with care and grefe:
Why do thou lord appaese, that should be his relefe.
My wretched state behold, who^ death shall strayghte assail:
Cast not from the thaflicted still, that never did but wayle.
The bread lo, of thine ire, has trod me under feet:
The scourges of thine angry hand, has made death seem full sweet.
Like as the roringe waves, the sonken ship surrounde:
Great heaps of care did follow me, And I no succoure found.
For they whom no mischaunce, could from my love divide:
Are forced to my greater grefe, from me their face to hyde.
Inte domine sperauf.
In the lord have I hoped, let me not feel the blame:
At any time I the beseech, of disapoynted shame.
But me defend and keep, deliver as I trust:
Now through thy might weout the which there may no man be just.
Give ear and rydde me sone, my fortress before me:
In whose defense thou shall me save, if I defended be.
For thou are wont to be, mine hold and my succor:
And for my (...) be thou both, my guide and (...) fortour.
Thou shall vntangle me. from snares that they have hid,
To take me with: for without the my self I can not rydde.
Into thy cure I shall, betake my simple sprite:
Thou have and shall deliver me, most just in thy behyght.
Allowed I have not them, that fettes their ends in vain:
Mine only hope both all and some, in the does sure remain.
Let me (oh lord enjoy) thy mercies often assayde:
By troubles for thou did regard, wherein my life was stayed.
And have not suffered me, with enmyes power be paynde.
But rather have thou set at large, my steps that were restraynde,
Rewe o^^ne now (oh good lord) at hand^ my da^^n^^r loo:
Mine eye, my life (...) my flesh, alas does fre^^ for woo.
Most of my days and years, in troubles wasted are:
My strength decaieth, my bones do quail such mischefe me does mar.
Dread of my many foes, has made my friends to swerve,
And they me abhor without cause, of whom I good deserve.
I am cast as forgote, as deed in death does steru^:
As a broken pot of who^ the shardes, for nothing more can serve.
I heard the assembles say, and threaten woo and strife:
As though it semde by one consent, I were not worthy life.
But I oh lord in the, setting my sure belief:
D^ know thou art, what me befall, my god and hole relief.
My ^^me is in (...), shall ensue.
Deliv^ (...) ntes power, which does my life pursue:
Show yet thy friendly chere, unto thy simple slave:
According to thy natyue ruthe, thou me defend and save.
Imputed for no mock, lord let it be to me:
That in my need mine only healpe, I seek only at the.
The wicked has the mock, and hold their peace in hell:
Buried might althey be now, of further help that tell.
And let that mouth be dombe, that wountes his lyppes to lies:
Speaking slanders of the just man with proud disdainefull cries.
What plenty and what wealth, have thou laid up for those:
That honor the, that hope in the for whom thou do disclose.
All openly at eye, (...) full many a no (...):
That Adams line (...) much and learn ^hre^r to dread.
Thou do bestow them right, before thy look and face:
Which is debarde from wicked me^, they may not have that grace.
Where thou do them defend, from threats of mighty power:
From venim tongues thou do the^ hyde within thy pleasant bower.
Far above all lands, thy mercies I have found:
And wondrous worckes in my defense as city walled round.
I have thought me or this, far cast out of thy sight:
But yet even then thou heardeste my voice my prayer day and night.
Love ye therefore the Lord, his goodness which do taste:
The simple for he does defend, rewards the proud as fast.
Be of good cheer all ye, that hope of (...) good turn:
For he will (...) still your hertes that trust in his return.
Miserere mei deus.
For thy great mercies sake have mercy lord on me:
For thy goodness do clean away, my great impuritie.
My misdeades put away, and eftsone^ make me clean
From sin and all impuritie, the for to serve again.
For now I do confess, my faults done unto the:
And mine offense is never from, the presence of mine eye.
To the, even I to the, have done this fore offense:
And this misedede, I show my fault, not ferynge thy presence.
But if thou wylt vouchsafe, of this me now to ease:
And give thy word to me, I shall not the displease.
Then named shall thou be, a god both ius^^^^^ true:
Most constaunte (...) promises not changing them a (...).
Yea then I say thou shall, be counted just in deed:
Condemning them that will not turn and call for help at need.
All thing is known to the, and nothing from the hid.
Even how of sin I had no lack when I was conceived.
For why? to it also, my mother was in thrall:
And when that I conceived was by her I had my fall.
And though it were not small, which by her then I had:
Yet in the troth is thy delight, which wisdom make me glade.
If thou (oh lord) wylt cleanse, and purge me fro my sin,
With I soap washte I shall be clean, a new life to begin.
If thou will put away, my sin, and me renc^^e:
Then shall I be that was once blake, as w^yte as is the knew.
When thou shall me rejoice, and draw to mirth again.
Then will my bones be void of woe, which thou sometimes did pain.
Thy face for thy names sake, do turn from mine offense:
And for thy mercyes great I crave, preserve me now from thence.
Oh Lord make clean mine heart, that I in me reserve:
And yt thy sprite within my breast, always may me preserve.
For thy benignity, forsake me not (or lord)
He take away thy blessed spirit, lest that I be abhorde.
But rather grant to me, ^^e confort of thy hand:
Ar^ with thy sprite as principal (...) me to wythstand.
If that thou wylt this grant, then in^ers shall I tell:
Their life how that they shall appoint in joy (...) o well.
And those that overthrown, and thral to sin be made:
They shall repent and turn again, by seeing of my trade.
Oh aucthour of mine health, from murder make me free:
Thy righteousness mi mouth shall tell and praise it certainly.
Release my tongue oh Lord, whereof thou have the cure.
That then it may declare abroad, thy praise, and eke thy power.
If that I should apply, in presence for to bring:
The outward sacrifice, oh lord, it would please the nothing.
He yet wylt thou regard, as though thou had respect:
The offering ye the heat does (...), which we to the direct.
The sacrifice wherwyth, the lord is pleased son
It is the sprite (...) peni^^nt, that (...) none.
It is the heart of truth, with dolor stricken sore:
Thou canste not Lord despise these twain no not for evermore:
To Sion lord always, declare thy gentleness:
Jerusalem the walls thereof, again may have redress.
The sacrifices then, shall be pleasant to the:
Which shall declare as tokens true, our inward purity.
I mean the purged offering, and eke oblation:
On aulters when we, calves shall lay, thy name to call upon.
Against nigardy, and riches.
No wight in this world, that wealth can attain:
Unless he believe, that all is but vain.
And look how it comes so leave it to god:
As tides use their times, to ebb and to floo.
This mucke on the molde, that men so desire,
Does work them much woo, and move them to ire.
With grief it is got, with care it is kept:
With sorrow sone lost, that long has been repte.
And woe worth the man, that first dolue the molde:
To find out the mine, of silver or gold.
For when it lay hid, and to us unknown:
Of strife and debate, the seed was not sown.
Then lived men well, and held them content,
With meat drink and cloth, without any rent.
Their houses bu^^^ore, to (...) selves in:
For cas^e^s and toures, were then to begin.
No town had his wall, they feared no war:
Nor enemies host, to seek them affare.
So led they their lives, in quiet and rest:
Till hoorde began hate, from east unto weste.
And gold for to grow, a lord of great price:
Which changed the world from virtue to vice.
And turned all thing, so far from his kind:
That how it should be, is ^orne out of mind.
For (...) bear now, the (...) and the brute:
And only ^he cause, of all our pursuit.
Which makes among us, such (...).
And shall till we seek, the right way again.
When marriage was made, for virtue and love:
Then was no divorce, gods knotte to remove.
When judges would suffer, no brybbes in their sight:
Their judgments were then according to right.
When prelates had not, possessions nor rent:
They preached the truth, and truly they went.
When men did not flatter, for favor nor mede:
Then kings herd the troth, and how the world yede.
And men unto honor, through virtue did rise:
But all this is (...),
(...) a^y my^^^
For money (...) all: and (...) a god:
(...) ^ot to be, for Ch^^^^ ^^bode.
And bade th^^^^ should, take nothing in hand:
But for the lords love, and wealth of the land.
And wills us full often. that we should refrain.
From wrestyng his will, to make our own gain,
For covetous folk, of every estate:
As hardly shall enter, within heaven gate.
As through a nedles eye, a camel to crepe:
Why do these mad men, then hoorde up and keep.
Yea more then may serve, the^ selves to suffyce:
As though ^^fite bliss, should that way ary^,
But if they would (...) to synke in their br^^^
What trouble of mind what unquiet rest:
What mischief, what hate, this money does bring:
They would not so toil, for so vile a thing.
For they that have much, are ever in care:
Which way to win, and how for to space:
Their slepes be unsound, for fear of the thief:
The loss of a little, does work them much grief,
In seeking their lack, they want that they have:
And subject to that, which should be their slave.
They never do know, while riches do raygne:
A friend of effe^^, (...) that does fame.
For flatterers sake, where (...) does dwell:
And (...) at the loureth, they bide them farewell.
The poor do^^ them curse, as often as they want:
In having so much, to make it so skante.
Their children sometime, do wyshe them in grave:
That they might possess, that riches they have.
And that which they win, with travail and strife:
Often times as we see, does cost them their life.
Lo, these be the fruits, that riches bring forth:
With many other moo, which be no more worth.
For money is cause, o^ ^^^ther and thef^
Of battle of bloddeshedd^ which should god we^^^^^
Of rauyne, of wrot^^^ of false wytness (...)
Of treason conspired (...) and eke of forw^^^^nge.
And for to be short, and knytte up the knotte,
Few mischefes at al, that money makes not.
But though it be ill, when it is abused:
Yet nevertheless, it may be well used.
Nor I do not find, that men be denide:
For sufficient things, them selves to provide.
According as god, has put them in place.
To have and to hold, a time and a space.
So it be well won, and after well spente:
For it is not th^^^s, (...) that ^ntent.
And (...), (...) skyll:
(...) me^e, to use at (...) will.
As priests should not take, promotions in hand:
To live at their case, like lords of the land.
But only to feed, gods flock with the truth:
To preach, and to teach, without any slouthe.
Nor folks should not need, great riches to win.
But gladely to live, and for to flee sin.
His will for to work, that is their souls health:
And then may they think, they live in much wealth:
For in this vain world, (...) be (...) in: nothing but (...) mischief^ and
sin.
Temptation, vntrou^^^ contention and (...)
Then let us not (...) by so vile a life (...)
But lift up our (...) and look through our faith:
Beholdynge his mercies, that many times says.
The just men shall live, by their good belief:
And shall have a place, where can be no grief.

