THE PSALMS of DAVID Translated Into LYRICK-VERSE, according to the scope, of
the ORIGINAL.

And Illustrated, with a Short Argument, and a breife Prayer, or Meditation;
before, and after, every Psalm.

By GEORGE WITHER.

Imprinted In the Neatherlands By Cornelis Gerrits van Breughel. M. DC. XXXII.

To the MAJESTY of the most Virtuous and highborne Princess ELIZABETH
PRINCESS of Great Britain, QVEENE of Bohemia, COUNTESS of the Palatinate of
the Rhyne etc.
Most excellent Princess
I May fail in Vulger Titles; But, in my valuation of your heroical Virtues, I
cannot be deceaved. Therefore, I am the less curious in common Attributes. For,
those Acco^plishments, which in my repute, are your greatest glory, are well
manifest in that, which is the greatest temporal honor; even in those
Virtues, which have conquered a Kingdom for you, in the hearts of many millions
of people: And procured you thousands of affectionate servants (who never saw
your Majestive) Not only in your own Territories, and in the Dominions of your
Friends; But, in the Cities and Kingdoms of your Enemies also: And, they who
are unwilling to confess this, to give you honor; have honored you, in
discovering it by their envy.

Among those, who are in Affection, your Ma.ties loyal servants, I am one:
and, in my own Country, great multitudes have took notise of a special
Obligation, which I had, above many others, to honor and serve you. For, I do
hereby most humbly, and thanckfully acknowledge; that, when my over-forward
Muse first fiutterd out of her neast, She obtained the preservation of her
endangered Liberty, by your gracious favor: and perhaps, escaped also,
thereby, that Pinioninge, which would have marred her flieng forth, for ever
after.

Which extraordinary Clemency (in so great a Princess, to a person so
vndeservinge) did not only much magnify your noblenes, in the opinion of
others, but so chayned my heart also, to the love of your princely Goodness; that
(allthough I was hitherto compelled to smother my unprofitable thanckfulnes in
my breast, because I wanted means to discover it according to my desires) I
have eversince, been spiritually present with your Ma.tie (and with God, for
you, by my Prayers) in all your Afflictions, and Exaltations. And, feign I
would have effected something, which might have witnessed, that I had a Heart,
though not a Fortune, to be serviceable in the best manner.

My Muse, was the hopeful st means I had of this ambition; and by her, I,
awhile promised myself, some healp. But (after I came to better understanding)
I preceaved, her over-early Flights into the world, had (in her prime growth)
so spent those times of opportunity whereby she should have enabled her self,
for brave Attempts; that she could never be strong enough, to make wing half
so high as my Desires.

Yet, by your Ma.ties royal Father, of blessed Memory (who, a little before
his death, was pleased to honor me with his gracious respect) I was commanded
to perfect a Translation of the Psalms, which he understood I had begunn; and
by his encouragment, I finished the same about the time of his Translation to a
better Kingdom. Wherein, God so enabled me, that many have well approoved
thereof; and, I, lately resolving to make it public (wanting other Testimony
of my thanckfulnes) conceived it would be no dishonor to your Ma.tie if before
the same, I convayed your beloved Name to that Nation, who so dearly affect
you.

But, when I had well considered thereon I thought it would be a very pertinent
complement, so to do. For, they were Afflictions or Deliverances from
Afflictions, which were occasions of every Psalm: Therefore, none but they who
have been afflicted, cann relish the sweetness, or understand, the depth of
these Raptures; And therefore also, they who come nearest in their Christian
sufferings to those whom they personated, shall best feel, and understand their
meaning. In which (if I be not more a stranger to your Highness, then I thinck
I am) you have been honored above all the kings and princes of the world: and,
in my opinion you have had more occasion to make personal Application of these
Hymns unto your self, then any of them.

And, there is no shame (most excellent Princess) in the Cross of Christ.
For, the highest honor consists not in wearing a crown; but, in a Crown that
has many Thorns in it; and the more Thorns the more honorable. Though the
sonns of men, do skoffingly turn this glory into shame, and seek after
Vanities; yet, they who shall sit nearest unto Christ Jesus in his Kingdom,
must drinck deepest of his Cupp: And, your Highness has (in my Observation)
more largly, pledged him, then many other. For, in all these Hymns (all which,
are prophecies of such things as pertain to Christ, and his Mystical body)
there are few passages, communicable to his Members, but (even in my own
knowledge) your Ma. may apply them unto your self, as a dependant on him. And,
God let me not live, if I do not thinck, that more honors you, then to be
Empress of the world.

And, because it is the greatest honor to come so near, both to the Type and
the Prototype, of our sufferings, as your Ma. has done; and, to bear so many
marks of the Lord Jesus. Because also, some skoffing Ismaelites have mentioned
these Glories to your Dishonor; I will to your Praise, repeat some few, out of
those many which are appliable to your Ma. and, they shall be such, that most
will confess, they are the very same Afflictions, whereof (as a type of
Christ) king David complained.

He, was exalted by God; and, yet, cast down. He was annonited king, and yet
enjoyed not the Kingdom. He was driven from his own possessions, and
compelled to soiourne in a foreign Land. Kings and Rulers, were confederated
against him. He, was remooved from his Kindred; and his Acquaintance were set
far off. His enemies were powrefull, and too strong for him. His adversaries
were multiplied: Yea, they insulted over his calamities; and many judged his
cause so bad, that they pronounced him forsaken of God. The proud, forged lies
against him. False witnesses laid things to his Charge which he knew not.
Princes, sat and spoke against him. The mighty, persecuted him without a
Cause. They had almost consumed him upon earth. They waited to destroy him. The
Bands of the wicked robbed him. They spoke of peace unto him when they purposd
war. Trouble, and anguish, took hold upon him: and, he was persecuted, when
God had smitten him. The Ungodly reioiced in his Adversity; and cried There,
there, so we would have it. He was reproched of his Neighbors. He was the
scorn of fools. The Drunckerds made songs of him. They said he was cast
down, and should never rise again: And many other suchlike passages, there
are, which my memory confusedly retains. In all which, (together with your
Royal Consort,) you have heene a partaker, in such measure, as Christians of
inferior Degree, cannot communicate in the like Sufferings, in the same sense.

Nor are these things, only, Appliable unto your Highness in an extraordinary
manner; But all those consolations, Hopes, Deliverances, promises of Mercy,
Favors enjoyed, Resolutions of Praise, and Thanksgiving, with others of this
nature, throughout the Psalms; are in a singular manner, pertine^t also to you:
and (no doubt) so applied, by your Ma: in your own heart, as occasion is offered.

Which, when I had considered (for, your Highness, as a glorious Member of
Christ Jesus, is often in my serious and retired thoughts) And, I, remenbring
also, that, long since, I vowed a Pilgrimage to your Ma.tie (so soon as I
could be furnished with some Present) I thought this my endeavor would not be
impertine^tly presented: therefore, I thus prepared the same; and, am now come,
to accomplish my Vow. Which I humbly desire, may be acceptable to your Ma.tie
I doubt not, but you often peruse this Book in other Translations. Yet, these
Meditations, may, perhaps, occasion (either now, or hereafter) some use or
application of them, to your extraordinary comfort. Howsoever; It is, in my
own esteem, the best Jewel, that I have: and, if it were answerable to my
humble Affections, it would be the richest that ever was presented to a
Princess.

But, lest my overlong Epistle become tedious, I will thinck, by my self,
what, I have more to Say; cravinge pardon for thus presuminge, upon my hopes of
your Acceptance; and, for my conceiving it possible, that (after so many
years) the memory of his Name should be retained, with your Highness; who
has, in all this time, produced unto your veiwe, no Testimony that he retains
any Memorial of the benifits, which he long ago received, by your favor. I
distrust not, the obtaining of that which I desire; for, my heart tells me I am
thanckfull; Some live, who have heard me profess it; God, it witness of it,
every time I come unto him for my own Soul; And I am, in all that I am.

Your MAJESTY'S Most humble and Long-professed servant GEORGE WITHER.

A Preface to the Reader.
THis Translation, long since, finished in blurred papers (and often called
for) I, lately, made legible to others: and it had my leave, to seek a public
Pass into the world: which if it merit to obtain; Be the fault theirs who
shall oppose it. I waited long, to see a more exact performance: But, none
appearing, answerable to the dignity of our English-Muses, I have sent forth
my Essay, to provoke others, to discover their endeavors, on this subject;
that, choice being had, the best might receive the best Approbatton.

I have had more care, to suite the Capacity of the Vulger, then to observe
those Critiscismes which arride the Learned: yet, I hope, with so much
descretion, that the best Judgments shall have no cause to despise it. For,
though the Language be plain, it is significant; and such a Dialect as is
likely to continue unchanged, when fantastical expressions will grow as
unfashionable as our clothes. It is also breifer, by above a fourth Part, then
the Translations which I have yet seen, in any language of Europe: and
preserves, likewise, the words of the Prose; the fulness of the Sense, and the
relish of the Scripture phrase, as well as any of them. Which, considering how
much other vulger Tongues have ignorantly been preferred before our, (how
difficultly the Hebrewismes are contracted; how much the often Transition from
one Matter, and from one Person to another, interrupts breife knitting of
things together; and how much the frequent Rimes, and other things considerable
in Lyrick Translations, interrupt such Breifnes) is a great honor to our
Language: Especially, seeing my Brevitie, has made no Psalm obscurer; But
rather, so easy to be understood, that some Readers have confessed, it has
been instead of a Comment unto them, in sundry hard places.

If you expect such elegant-seeming Paraphrases, as are composed by those, who
selecting easy and Passionate Psalms, have trimmed them up with Rhetorical
Illustrations, (suitable to their fancies, and the changable garb of Affected
Language) I shall deceave your expectation: For, I have purposely avoided those
Descants, and confined my self to the grave, and simple Language of the Text:
And I was thereby the better kept from wandering after mine own sense, as in
their Circumlocutions they have done. Beside; their Versions are sitted rather
to be Read, then Sung: which gives a greater Liberty to the Translator. For,
though it be most graceful in a reading -Poem, when the Period is cast,
sometime into one part of the Line or Stanza, and sometime into another: Yet,
in a Lyrick Composition, where the same Staff is often reiterated to one Tune;
the Periods, and words of the same Quantity, must be always observed in the
same Places. For, if there be not allwaies a decent pawse in the Matter, when
the Tune is ended; or, if in the singing, the natural quantity of the word be
adulterated; or, if we be not careful, that a full-point fall not, where the
Tune is in the height of a continueng strain; It will sound very absurdly to
a iuditious ear: as may appear, by offering to sing some of those Composures,
which are plausible in Reading.

I have used some, variety of Verse; Because, Prayers, Praises, Lamentations,
Tryumphs, and subjects which are Pastoral, Heroical, Elegiacall, and mixed (all
which are found in the Psalms) are not properly expressed in one sort of
Measure. Yet, respecting the^ who cannot attain to many Tunes, I confined my
self to such kinds of Uerse as I found in the old Psalmebook; fitting them in
such manner, that every Psalm in this Book, may sung to some Tune formerly in
use, either in the single, or in one of the double Translations.

And, because some will thinck to examine my Version by the Prose Translations,
I do here inform them; that the Language of the Muses, in which the Psalms
were Orignally written, is not so properly expressed in the prose dialect as in
verse: and, that there is a poetical emphasis, in many places, which requires
such an alteration in the Grammatical expressio^, as will seem to make some
difference in the judgment of the Common Reader; whereas, it gives best life
to the Author's intention; and makes that perspicuous, which was made obscure,
by those mere Grammatical Interpreters, who were not acquainted with the
proprieties, and Liberties, of this kind of writing.

I do likewise inform them, that I have not always used the Metaphor which is
in the Original; but, otherwhile (tendering the vulger capacity) do express it,
by what it signifies. For, the Hebrewismes, being in some places obscure (as
where the Tongue is interpreted, Glory; and in many other suchlike
perticulers) I do use, expressions best agreeable with our English Dialect, and
the vulger Capacity.

Moreover, when the Repetition of the same word or Clause; Or when two or three
Synonama's together in one sentence as (Hear, give ear, attend) or, where
either a Periphrasis, or a transposition of some words, seems not so
graceful in English, as in the Hebrewe; nor so powrfully to express the
meaning of the Holy Ghost, by the same Idioms of speech: I have not
superstitiously tied my self to the Hebrewe phrase, nor to any strict Order, or
number of words (except some Mystery seemed thereby touched upon) but, using
rather brevitie where Circumlocution appeared needles, and affecting the
Dialect most proper to our own Tongue; I labored to deliver the meaning of the
Original Text, as powrefully, as plainly, and as breefly, as I could.

For that Cause, I have not every where observed the same Tense; But, used the
pretertense, the Presenttense, and the Future-tense, indifferently, one for the
other, in some Actions attributed to God. For, most things, which God is said
in this book, to have done for his people, or against his enemies; he now
does, and will do hereafter. That, also, which he will do, he may be said to
do now, and to have done heretofore; because, all time is present with God.
Nevertheles, I have herein taken such care; That I confounded not History and
Prophecy; But, in these places, have religiously observed the proper Tenses;
and wheresoever else, I found it material, so to do.

And, whereas, I perceaved that this particle FOR, is not always. a Causual;
Nor this particle BUT, an exceptive, in every place; But (as YEA, NAY, and
other such like words in our English) sometime rather inserted as supplements,
only, becoming the Dialect, (or merely customary) without any material
significancy, according to their ordinary use; And, finding that those
Particles, in the English, did in some places, either obscure the sense, or
make less powrefull the expression thereof, by interrupting a natural
connextion of the sentenses; I have there, waved or quallyfied, the use of
those words.

For like Reasons, I have in some places, kept the Person unchanged, throughout
the Psalm, which is sometime varyed in the Hebrewe (as in the 18 and 104
Psalms) But, with such heed, that where any work (according to the School
distinction Ad intra, or ad Extra) seems more proper to one distinct Person of
the Trinity, the^ to the other (or where else it is Material) I have retained
the Person according to the Original.

And, in regard some abuse the prophetical Imprecations, as if David had given
exemplary warrant of Cursing their enemies, I have (to prevent that
profanation) otherwhile expressed that by the Future tense, which many do
translate by the imparative mood; whereby, those passages, the more plainly
appear, prophetically intended. In all which, let what I have done, be duly
weighed, (not rashly condemned) by those who shall by some prose Translations,
examine my Paraphrase. For, I hope I have preserved the lawful freedoms of an
Interpreter, in all these things: Seeing, I have not therein followed my own
opinion only; but the warrant of best Hebrew Grammarians, the Authority of the
Septuagint, and Chaldea^ paraphrase, the example of the ancient and of the
best modern prose Tra^slators, together with the general practice and
allowance, of all orthodoxe Expositors.

Before every Psalm I prefixe a short Preface, partly declaring the Scope and
use thereof; not thereby limiting either their Scope or use. For, every Psalm
is diverse ways useful, according to the several parts it has; or according
to the many Ages, Estates, and necessities of the Church, or her particular
members. But, that, which I have intended in my breef Prefaces, and in those
Meditations after the Psalms; is, to show the unlearned, how to make some good
uses, of those many, to which they serve.

Much more might be said as considerable (if it would not make this Preface
overlarge) for, so it fares with some of us, that when we have taken much
pains to do well, we must take as much more to prevent misconstructions; and
thinck our double pains, well rewarded, if at last, we may escape without a
mischeef. But (how ever I shall be censured) I cann be well pleased when I have
recollected my self: and, though I seek to avoid Rubbs that are cast into my
way; Yet, I can skip over them, or contemn them, if I find it more trouble
some, then profitable, to remove them.

Though others may perform this, more exactly; yet, Goodmen will confess, I
have been honestly employed herein, and attempted an honorable work. But, if I
have so endeavored; That it manifestly appears to be better, then, what the
partiality of this Age will accept, (and that Mumpsimus, must still be
preferred before Sumpsimus) Then, this Work, shall become the Judge of those
partial Judges; And, to their disgrace, gain esteem, hereafter, in despite
of their envy.

I regard the Censorious approbation of none, but such, as are (in their under
standing, at least) both Divines and Poets: For, they, only, are competent
Judges, who know how much the Phrases or Mysteries confine the Translator;
what Proprieties are to be observed in both Languages; and what Liberties, and
restraints, belong to a Lyrick-poem.

And, -- but, I will now say no more save this; If I have pleased my Readers, I
am glad: if not; Yet, I am glad, I have honestly endeavored it. And, (being
assured my labor shall not all be lost) I will sing, and be Merry, by my self,
in the Use of this Translation, until others please to sing it with me; or,
until a more exact Version, shall be produced, and allowed.

Fare well,
THE PSALMS OF DAVID.
Psalm. I.
It shows wherein Happiness consists; Illustrates the present and future
estate both of the Just and unjust; and comforts the Righteous by declaring
Gods approbation of their Way. It may be sung for an incoragment in the right
Path. etc.

THe man is blessed, who neither straies,
Where Godles counselors have gone,
Nor stands in the Sinners ways,
Nor sits on the Scorners throne.
For, in Gods Law his pleasures be;
Thereon, he day and night bestows.
And, therefore shall be like a tree
Which near unto the river grows.
2.
His fruits, in season, he does give,
Green leaves he shall for ever wear:
All things he takes in hand shall thrive
But, thus the Sinner does not fare.
For, Wicked men with e'vry wind,
Like dust or chaff, are blown aside,
And therefore shall no standing find,
When they their Judgment must abide,
3.
Nor place, nor fellowship have they,
Among those men that are upright:
For, God approoves the Just-mans way
But, Sinners path-waies perish quite.
Grant oh merciful God, that shunning all the paths and seats of impiety, we
may exercize and rest our selves in the true love and practice of thy Law: and
that (being planted in thy Church, and refreshed by the living waters of thy
Word) we may flourish to our comfort and in due time, so fructify to thy
glory, that we may be numbered among thine Elect; be justified in the general
judgment; and become partakers of eternal blessedness in the kingdom of heaven,
through Jesus Christ our lord, Amen.

Another of the same.
Blessed is he, who neither straies
Where the Godles man misguideth,
Neither stands in Sinners ways,
Nor in Scorners chair abides:
But, in Gods pure Law delights,
Thereon muzing, days and nights.
2
Like a tree set near the springs,
He does always freshlie flourish,
Still, his fruits he timely brings,
And his leaf shall never perish:
Every thing shall prosper to,
Which he undertakes to do.
3
Thus, the wicked shall not fare,
But, be like such dustie matter,
As the whirl-winde here and there,
On the spacious earth does scatter:
Nor shall they withstand their doomes,
When the day of Judgment comes.
4
Neither have they place, or stay,
In the righteous congregation:
For, God knows the Just-mans way,
With a gracious approbation:
But, those paths that Sinners tread,
To assured ruin lead.
Psa. 2.
It is a prophecy of Christ and his kingdom, Act. 4. declaring the vain fury
of his Opposers; the wrath of God against them; his eternal Decree concerning
that King; and the power and extent of his kingdom. etc. It exhorts Kings, and
subjects also, to fear and serve him. It may be sung to increase Faith amid the
Churches persecutions etc.

WHat mooves the Gentiles to repine?
What makes the people foolish grow,
That Earthly Kings do thus combine,
And Rulers meet in Counsel so?
The Lord, and his beloved Christ,
Rebelliously they disobay:
His power (say these) let us resist
And break, and cast their cords away,
2
But, God who sitts in heaven above,
Their foolish purpose will deride:
His anger shall their torment prove,
And, them, in wrath he then shall chide,
Even IN (says God) my King did place
Upon my holy Syon hill.
And, by the Lord, what vttred was
To me (says Christ) now sing I will,
3
Thou art my Son begot by me
This day; and (if thou make demand)
The gentiles I will give to thee,
And make thee King of e'vry land.
An iron scepter thou shall sway,
And (if thy Lore they follow not)
Thou shall compel them to obey
Or break them like an earthen pott.
4
Then Kings be wise; and Rulers learn
To serve the Lord, with awful joy:
Yea, kiss the Son, lest wroth he turn
And overthrow you in your way.
For, when his wrath inflamed grows,
(Though but a little moon'd he seem)
Then blessed are all who shall repose
Their constant hopes, and faith in him.
Blessed Son of God, begotten before all time (and by. thy Father, appointed
to be King over the whole world) let thy Kingdom come, and all the oppositions
of thy adversaries, be turned to thy glory. let thy grace erable us to pluck
down that Antichrist, which the world, the flesh or the Devil shall seek to set
up against thee in the Temple of our hearts; that we yealding due obedience to
thee and thy commands, may escape thy burning indignation, sincerely embrace
thy Gospel, and with awful joy persevere in the way leading to that felicity
which is prepared for those who put their trust in thee. Amen.

Another of the same.
SUch uproars mad, why do the Gentiles make?
What follies do the people doat upon?
Earths Kings conspire, and Rulers counsel take,
Against the Lord, and his Anointed-one.
Oh come! and let us break their bands (they say)
Come, let us cast from us, their cords away.
2
But God in heaven deriding their design
Shall (vexing them) his mind in wrath declare:
Who e're (says he) repines this King of mine
On Syon fitts; 'twas I that placed him there.
And, what the Lord himself, to me has told,
(Concerning him) I purpose to unfold.
3
Thou art my son, this day begot I thee;
Demand therefore (he said) and I will give
The Gentiles, thine inheritance to be;
And rule of all the world thou shall receive.
An iron mace; thou shall upon them lay;
And break them like a sherd of potters clay.
4
Therefore ye Kings and Rulers be more wise:
Come serve the Lord your God, with awful joy.
And kiss the Son; lest, if his wrath arise,
You be destroid, and perish from the way.
For, when inflamed his burning anger grows,
Right blessed are all who trust in him repose.
Psa. 3.
Apsalm of David when he fled from Absalom his Son. It mistically Prophesied
the multitude of Christ's foes; their bitter censures; the great love of God;
the effects of Prayer; Christ his Death and Resurrection; the confusion of his
Adversaries, and the safety of his Elect. etc It is useful to strengthen faith
in our temptations etc.

MY foes, how many Lord are they!
What swarms of them there be!
And of my soul, how many say,
In God no part has he!
Yet thou art, Lord, my praise, my guard;
Thou did my head vprear:
And from thy holy-hill, have heard,
What my entreaties were.
2
I lay and slept, and safe arose;
Because thou brought me aid:
And though tenn thousands me enclose,
I will not be afraid.
Rise, Lord my God; and from all foes
Me safe, now also, make:
Their Jaw Bone smite, and let thy blows
The teeth of Sinners break.
3
For, saving health, alone to thee,
To thee, oh Lord, pertaines:
And whosoever thy people be,
Thy peace on them remains.
Sweet Jesus who being causesly compassed about with all those innumerable
emnities and persecutions which we deserved, did nevertheles (trusting in
the power of thy God head) ly down without fear, sleeping (as it were) in the
midst of them by a voluntary Death, and wake again the third day, by the same
power, to the confusion of thy foes: Grant we pray thee, that the multitude of
our corporal and spiritual enemies never make us despair of thy mercy; but
that in all troubles and temptations, we reioicing and trusting in thy love,
may be kept harmles; and confess that our salvation, is by thee only, who
live and raignest world without end. Amen.

Psa. 4.
To the cheef musician on Neginoth a Psalm of David. It vpraides those who
deride the Truth, and exhorts to faith and Repentance. The common with of
world-lings, and the desire also of a faithful-soul, is here expressed. It
serves to confirm us against the scorns of Atheists, and mere carnal men. etc.

OH God my Righteousness, give ear;
Enlargd I was by thee:
My humble suite, now also, hear,
And pity take on me.
Vain Sonns of men, how long will ye
My glory thus abuse?
Though lies you seek, assured be
That God the just will choose.
2
Yea God will hear me when I cry,
Fear therefore to offend;
And, on your bed search privately
Your thinckings, and amend.
Make Righteousness your sacrifize,
On God, assurance place.
For worldly Goods, the world-ling cries;
But grant me, Lord, thy grace.
3
For, thou my heart have joyed more
Then corn and wine's increase:
Thou make me safe, and I, therefore,
In thee will sleep in peace.
Olthou fountain of all righteousness, and free justifier of thne Elect,
seeing, by thy common grace we are some:-what enlarged from our natural bondage;
grant a full delverance from all our corruptions, by thy special favor. Let
neither frailties, discouragments, nor alurements, incline unto vanity: But,
so cause us to consider whom thou chusest, that with a filial fear we may
refrain from sin; and having our inward man renewed, as well as our outward
actions reformed, we may offer the true sacrifize of righteousness, Encourage us
also through, assurance of thy favor, that contemning the desire of
world-lings, and reioicing more in thy gracious aspect, then in all temporal
advantages, we may ly down to sleep our last sleep without horror; and rest in
the firm hope of a glorious Resurrection. Amen.

Psa. 5.
To the cheef musician on Neginoth a Psalm of David. It beseeches audience of
God, for sundry respects; and prays that he would subvert his Adversaries,
and be merciful to his Church. It may be useful when we are oppressed by the
enemies of Christ, for his Cause etc.

LOrd, weigh my thoughts, my words attend,
My King, my God, incline thine ear:
My suites I will to thee commend,
And thou my voice betime shall hear.
I will, oh Lord, betimes arise,
And pray, and wait for thy supplies.
2
For, thou in sin have no delight,
No evils, in thy dwellings be;
The fool abides not in thy sight,
The wicked are abhord of thee.
Thou root'st out all who falsehoods prate,
And blood, and guile, in man, do hate.
3
But, I, in thy abounding grace,
Thy house will visit in thy fear,
And worship in thy holy-place;
Oh teach me, Lord, thy Justice there:
Unto my vewe, thy way disclose,
Because of them, that are my foes.
4
Their words and thoughts are false and naught;
Their throat is like a gaping grave:
Therefore, oh God, let them be caught
And fall by what they plotted have,
Yea, seeing they thy foes have binn,
Expose them to their swarms of sin.
5
But, cheer up those who trust in thee,
That such as well thy name affect,
May, still, therein triumphant be,
And joy that thou do them protect.
For Lord, the just thou shall reward;
And, sheild-like, make thy grace their guard.
Oh, sovereign Lord God, make us both timely and diligent seekers of thy
grace. Let the due consideration of thy perfections, and of our natural
unworthines cause us humbly to attend on thee; unfeignedly frequenting thy
Congregation; and there, truly serving thee according to thine own ordinance.
Instruct us fully in thy way, left our spiritual adversaries draw us into
error: Let our experience of their malice and subtilety, keep us the more
cautious: Let them be taken in their own snares to thy glory, and let the
faithful always rejoice in thy protection, through, Jesus Christ, our Lord.
Amen.

Psa. 6.
To the cheef musician on Neginoth upon Sheminith a Psalm of David. It bewailes
the miseries and corruptions of the humane nature, and with penitential
expressions emplores Gods mercy etc. It may be sung when oppressed by our sins
and infirmities, we have invoked God, and received comforts.

LOrd, in thy rage correct me not;
To me, oh! do not roughly speak,
Nor chide me when thy wrath is hott
But, pity me, for I am weak.
Oh Lord, vouchsafe to cure my pains;
For, through my bones, the torments go:
My heart is vexed, and much complains,
Good God! how long shall this be so?
2
Return, and help my soul oh Lord;
Me, let thy mere compassion save:
For, who in death shall thee record,
Or give thee praises in the grave?
With groans I tire; and in the nights
My bed in floods of tears does swim;
Through in-ward greefs, and foes despights,
Mine cies decay, my sight grows dimm,
3
But, Sinners, now depart fro me:
God hears my suite, my plaint, my cry;
Which let my foes with blushing see,
And vexed, and grieved, my presence fly.
Most awful God, speak favorably to us, in this day of thy offered grace,
lest in the day of thy wrathful indignation we be cast into hell sire. Behol'd
our frailties, our torments, and our horrible distempers: Observe into how
great perils our desperation may cast us, and have mercy (oh lord) have mercy
upon us miserable offenders. Turify our poluted flesh; enlighten our bleared
eyes; cure our wounded hearts; cheer our afflicted spirits; revive our fainting
souls, and chase away all our malicious accusers; that we (escaping the
dungeon in which thy praise is forgotten) may magnify thy mercies in the land
of the living; to the vexation of malignant spirits, and to the honor of thy
name, for ever and ever. Amen.

Psa. 7.
Shiggaijon of David which he sung to the Lord concerning the words of Chush
the Benjamite. It is the Complaint of an innocent, unjustly accused, and
referring himself to be judged according to his inno-cency. It may be used,
when the true Church or any members thereof are slandred by their foes etc.

LOrd God, on thee I do depend,
Me, from the spoiler save:
Lest Lion-like my soul he rend
When I no helper have.
For, if oh Lord my God, in this,
My hands found guilty be;
If I rewarded him amiss
That was at peace with me.
2
Nay, I to him did mercy show
Who sought my causeles blame;
Else, let my foe my soul pursue
And overtake the same.
Yea, let hlm tread (when down I fall)
My life into the clay;
And, in a dust-heap, there-withall,
Mine honor let him lay.
3
Oh Lord! thy self, in wrath advance,
For, wroth my spoilers be:
According to thine ordinance.
Arise, and judge thou me
That multitudes to thee may come,
(For their sakes) great appear:
Yea judge them Lord, and give me doom
As just, ag I am clear.
4
Confound the sinners wickedness;
But, still, the just maintain:
For, thou (oh God of righteousness)
Can search both Heart and Reine.
God is my shield, and he protects
The Godly from decay.
His doomes are just, and he corrects
The wicked every day,
5
Except they turn, his blade he whetts,
A bow, still bent, he has:
He, shafts for persecutors getts,
And instruments of death.
For, lo; with mischeeues being bigg,
They first conceive a sin;
Next, bring forth lies; then pitt-falls digg,
Where, they themselves fall in.
6
Thus, on their heads, their mischeeus all
Do justly tumble down;
And wicked men's devises fall
On their devizers crown.
For which, the justice of the Lord,
I Will strive to glorify;
And, will, in songs of praise, record
The name of God, most high.
Eternal God, defend us from slanderous accusations, and from that roaring Lion
who is always ready to devour us: And, though our accusers are often so
malicious, that in respect of them we may have some appearance of innoceny;
yet, cause us so to acknowledge our selves guilty in thy sight, that we may be
Iustifed by the righteousness, which we have by imputation from thy dear son:
for, we have no Innocence but his; No Savior but he; nor dare we (in our
greatest purity) appear any where, but at the Throne of thy mercy. which let
us, who seek the same, always obtain; and let the severity of thy justice,
fall only on our Adversaries who despise thy grace; that both in mercy and
justice, thou may be magnifyed for ever and ever. Amen.

Psa. 8.
To the cheef Musician upon Gittith a Psalm of David. It sings the glory,
power, and dominion of Christ; and magnifies the love of God in the admirable
exaltation of the humane nature, by the incarnation of his Son etc. It may be
used, to praise God for the great priveledges which we have received thereby.

HOw famous, Lord, our God, appears
Throughout, the world, thy glorious Name?
Above the height of all the Spears,
Thou spreadst the splendour of thy fame.
The mouths of babes, thy power to show;
And sucklings tongues, thou did ordain:
To stopp the mouth of every foe;
And, their avengings to restrain.
2
When on the heavens I six mine eye,
And moon and stars (thy creatures) heed;
Why cares God for man (think I)
Or why regards he his seed!
He was below thine Angels placed,
And, higher, now advanced is he:
To rule thy works, him raisd thou have,
And, at his feet, all creatures be.
3
Over herds and flocks, in stall and sold,
Over cattle which at random go,
The sov'raigne place he now does hold
And, over fowls and fishes, to.
Yea, rule throughout the sea, he bears,
And over all within the same:
How famous, Lord our God, appears
Throughout the world, thy glorious Name!
Most glorious Lord God, thou so lovedst the humane nature, that it pleased
thee to be made man; by the mouths of babes and sucklings magnifienge thy great
power; and by humbling (as it were) of the Deity for a time, to exalt the
Manhood for ever. For this thy inexpressible humiliation, and incomprehensible
favor, we submissively prostrat our souls, and bend the knees of our bodies
to the honor of thy Name; beseeching thee, that as all other creatures are
obediently subjected to thy Sonns Dominion, so we may truly submit our wills
to his good pleasure; and in Act, word and thought, be thanckful for our many
priveledges, by his blessed Incarnation, Resurrection, and Ascension, now and
for ever. Amen.

Psa. 9.
To the cheef Musician upon Muth-labben a psalm of David. Herein, the faithful
praise God, for many good causes, and exhort others to do the same. It may be
used, to praise the Lord, for his many fold mercies vouchsafed to his Church;
and, for his just judgments on their foes. etc.

NOw, Lord. with all my heart, and voice,
Thy wondrous works I, le magnify:
Of thee, I Will sing; Of thee, rejoice;
And praise thy name (oh God most high)
For, thou did put my foes to slight;
They fell, and fled out of thy sight.
2
My lawful cause thou do uphold;
Thou fit'st enthroned; thou judge right;
The Gentiles, are by thee contrould;
The wicked, thou destroiest quite:
And, thou their names away do blot,
For evermore, to be forgot.
3
Thy slaughters, now, thou cruel Foe,
Are to an end, for ever, brought;
Those Towns which thou did overthrowe,
Are nameles now, and out of thought:
But, God still sits on his throne,
Preparing judgment thereupon.
4
The world, he shall uprightly doom;
And, justly judge the nations all.
The pore, when times of trouble come,
He gardeth, like a castle wall.
And, they who seek and know his name,
Are safe, by trusting in the same.
5
To God, therefore, in Syon sing;
To nations all, make known his deeds:
For, when to light, he blood will bring,
He poremens wrongs, and criengs, heeds.
Now also, Lord, thy grace I crave:
Oh! mark what woes, and foes I have.
6
Thou sav'st me from the gates of hell
That I thy praise, with cheerful voice,
To Syon's daughters may reveal,
And in thy saving-health rejoice.
The Gentiles, had a pitt-fall wrought;
But, they themselves therein were caught.
7
Their Nets have their own feet en-inar'de,
And, God is by his judgments known;
The Sinners hands have trapps preparde,
Whereby them selves were ouerthrowue. Shiggaijon. Selah.

Thus, down to hell the wicked go,
As, all who fear not God shall do.
8
There is a time to mind the pore,
Their hope shall not, for ever, fail;
To judge the Gentiles Lord, therfere,
Arise, and let not man prevail.
The Nations fright, until they see,
That they are men as others be. Selah.
UUe have often experience, oh God, that by thy favor all oppressions,
insultings, and secret cruelties, shall come to an end; and that thy Mercies,
and thy Justice, shall everlastingly continue, both for the savegard of thy
servants, and to reward the wicked, according to their deserts. Let this
experience, therefore, be always remembered when we are persecuted or afflicted,
and let our confidence be ever so fixed upon thee, that we may neither be
discouraged in Adversity, nor forgetful in prosperity, to magnify thy
mercies; but, be ready upon all occasions, to glorify thee, both for the
suppression of our foes, and for all our other deliverances, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

Psa. 10.
The Pride, Cruelty, Profaneness, and Fraud of Antichrist, Atheists, and
Hipocrites is described: God is invoked to redress it: his Dominion
acknowledged, and his merciful regard of the afflicted is, confessed. It may
be used, when we are oppressed by temporal or Spiritual Oppressors.

THy face, oh Lord, why do thou hide,
And stand aloof, so far?
Lo, Sinners, merely out of pride,
The Spoil of poremen are.
Ensnare them, by their own devise,
For, of their Lust they boast
And praise those Freindes to Avarice,
Whom God abborreth most.
2
Their scornful eyes regard not thee,
Their hearts do thee denay.
Too high for them thy judgments be;
Still grievous is their way.
They snuff, and slight their greatest Foes,
And (come what mischeeves will)
Within their hearts, they do suppose,
That they shall prosper still.
3
Their mouths, with cursings overflowe,
Their tongues, lie. swear, and vaunt:
The pore to catch and overthrowe,
Obscured paths they haunt.
They watch, unseene, for simple-men,
To ceaze them vn-aware.
They lurck like Lions in their denn,
And slielie them ensnare.
4
To catch the pore, by lowly shows
Their strength, does help them on,
They think in heart. that God nor vewes,
Nor cares what is done.
But, rise oh Lord, thy power to show;
Leave not the pore forgot.
For, why should Sinners slight thee so
And think, thou mind'st them not?
5
Thou see, yea see their wickedness,
That punishd it may be:
And lo, the pore and Fatherles,
Commit their Cause to thee.
Lord God (their helper) break the strength
Of every wicked-one;
Search out their sins, and thou (at length)
Shall cause them to have none,
6
Our ever-lasting king thou art:
Thou, from the Realm likewise,
Have forced the Gentiles to depart,
And heard the poremans cries.
Their hearts thou shall establish to,
And hear and judge, the pore;
That, earth-bred man, the Orphans foe,
May them oppress no more.
Almighty God, seeing our safety consists in thy loving presence, be thou
near at hand, to defend and assist in all extremities. Abate the malice and
wickedness of our foes, and let their pride, fraud, and cruelty, make us the
more heedfull that we depart not willingly out of thy protection. Uouchsafe
also, so to reign in our souls, to the suppression of all intrusions, that
(our affections being ordered by illuminated Reason, and sanctified by Grace)
Christ may have the sole dominion there; and, that we may sincerely embrace him
with our whole hearts; honor him with all our faculties; confess him with our
tongues; and glorify him by our works, together with thee, oh father, and the
blessed Spirit, now and for ever. Amen.

Another of the same.
LOrd, why stand thou so far?
Why at need, am I forsaken?
Poremen, wrondg'd by Tirants are;
Let them in those guiles, be taken,
Which by them contrived were.
2
For, in boast, the Sinner says;
That, his longings he possesses:
He, the Covetous does praise,
(And their practices he blesses)
Though the Lord abhors their ways.
3
Proud and lofty looks, has he,
God, nor seeking, nor believing:
All his Courses greevous be;
And thy judgments (past conceivinge)
Are too high for him to see.
4
With contempt he sleights his foes,
Fearing neither falls nor sliding:
From his mouth much cursing flows,
Underneath his tongue, still hiding,
Mischeef, sin, and guilefull shows.
In blind paths, he lurks and pries,
Harmles men to spoil and murder:
At the pore he darts his eyes,
And (unseene) his drifts to further,
Like the denned lion, lies.
He does watch the pore to spoil,
Whom he snares and overthrows:
For, to take him in his toil,
He with humble crowchings boweth,
Ceazing him by force, the while.
Then, in heart, thus muzeth he;
God shall slightly pass it over;
Hide his face, and never see:
But, rise Lord, thy strength discover,
That the meek aven'gd may be.
Let not Sinners mock thee so,
As if thou did naught regard it:
Lo: thou see, yea see them do
Spightfull wrong; and, to reward it,
Thou shall set thy hand there-to.
Thou, art poremens hopeful stay,
Orphans helper, in oppression:
Break the Sinners arms I pray,
Search thou after his transgression,
And, then, purg it all away,
God who reigns for evermore,
From his land, the Gentiles drives;
Hears, and chears, and helps the pore;
And, the Orphane so reviveth,
That, he fears not, as before.
Psa. 11.
To the cheef Musician a Psalm of David. The faithful soul (being tempted to
despair) makes fast the Anchor of his Hope by considering Gods power, his love
to such as trust in him, and his hatred to their unfaithful adversaries etc. It
may be used, to comfort us in desperate temptations, and imminent perils,

IN God, my trust is placed still;
Then, wherefor do you say,
That, as a bird unto the hill,
My soul should fly away?
For, lo, their bow the wicked bend,
And arrows they prepare,
That they, unseen, their shafts may send,
At such as needy are.
If overthrown the Ground-works lie,
What cann the best men do?
Gods holy seat, is heaven on high,
And he must look thereto.
Mankind, with closd, and open eyes,
(Even righteous men) God proves;
And, him he does, in soul, despize,
That wicked Courses loves.
For wicked men, the Lord prepares,
(And raines into their eupp)
A storm of brimstone, fire, and snares,
Which they must swallow up.
But, being in himself upright,
He, justice does affect;
And, godly men, have in his sight,
A look of good respect.
Permit not oh God! the accusings of our consciences, nor the bitter censures
of others, (whether justly or unjustly pronounced) to overthrow our hopes of
thy Mercy. Let not the groundworks of our faith be undermined by any
Temptation; but, seeing thou serchest the secrets of our hearts, and find
that (raked up among our many frailties and corruptions) there are yet
unquenched in our souls, the smokings of that fire, which was first kindled by
thy grace; Re-inflame, we pray thee, our spiritual affections to thee and thy
law. That, when malicious offenders receive the bitter draught prepared for
them, we may thanckfully take the Cupp of Salvation, and rejoice in thy
gracious favors, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Psa. 12.
To the cheef Musician upon Sheminith, A Psalm of David. The elect are prayed
for; The circumventions and insultings of the wicked are mentioned, with a
promise of redress; and the stabilitie of Gods word is declared. It may be
used when heresy, or profaneness begins to spread. etc.

HElp Lord; for, no Good man is left:
All faithfulness is quite bereft,
And from the race of men departs:
They, lies unto their neighbors, tell;
Upon their lips, fair speeches dwell,
When falsehood lurketh in their hearts.
2
But, God shall cut their lips that gloze,
And, pluck away the tongues of those
Who proudly make their vauntings, thus:
We of our tongues will masters be;
Our lips are ours, and who is he
That shall have Lord-ship over us?
3
But, I (says God) will now arise,
Even for the sighengs and the cries
Of those that wronged or greeved are:
And, I will them in saftie set,
Beyond their power, who in their nett,
The poremans footsteps would ensnare,
4
Gods words refinde, the Test will bide,
Like silver seav'n times purifide;
And, God will keep them ever true:
Though, for a while, men lewd and base,
Do sit in honors higest place,
And, every where their folly show.
Consider (oh Lord) the general unfaithfulness which now overpreads the whole
earth; Observe the falsehood, pride, hypocrisy, and insolences of the
Adversaris of Truth; Behold the sufferings of thy small flock; Convert or
confound their oppressors; fulfill thy gracious promises made to the pore in
Spirit; preserve thy word from being made frustrate or perverted, by those
wicked-ones, who are now exalted, both in church and commonwealth, to thy
dishonor; and (when they have acted their follies, during the time which thou
shall permit) let thy purified word prevail to the purging of this corrupt
world, and to the increasing of the number of thy elect, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

Psa. 13.
To the Cheef Musician a Psalm of David. It expresses hearty longinges after
spiritual Consolations, and shows the perplexties of a soul, seeking rest in
her own Counsels etc. It may besung, when feeling our natural defects, and
the malice of our foes, we desire the comforts of the Holy-glost etc.

HOw long forgetst thou me!
Shall thus obscured be
Thy cheerful face, oh Lord, for aye?
Still, in my soul, shall I
Perplexed, and muzing lie,
With heart oppressed all the day?
2
My God! shall still my foe,
Insult upon me foe?
Hear, and mine eyes enlighten thou:
Else, death will me surprise;
And then mine enemies,
Will say; we have prevailed, now.
3
For, they who malice me,
Will Joy my fall to see:
But, Lord, thy mercies I will mind.
I Will in thine aid rejoice,
And praise thee, with my voice;
Because, to me thou have been kind.
Dear God; insufferable is a troubled spirit seeking rest in it self. Or in
any thing without thee. when thou art absent, the presence of all temporal
consolations do but increase torment; and unless thou speak peace to our
souls, all thy creatures help to aggravate our afflictions. Revive therefore our
hearts by thy sweet presence; Enlighten the eyes of our minds that we sleep
not in sin, and so cbear us by the light of thy Countenance that our foes
insult not over us: but grant rather, that we reioicing in thy Salvation, may
both live and die with Comfort, to the honor of thy blessed Name. Amen.

Another of the same.
OH Lord, how long will thou draw back,
And hide thy face fro me?
How long shall I selfe-Counsell take
And, greev'd in spirit be?
How long shall my oppressors thrive,
And, I their scornings bear?
Lest, of my life, it me deptive,
Behold, oh Lord, and hear.
2
For, else my foes will say, in boast,
That I the foil have had,
And, they who now afflict me most,
Will of my fall be gladd.
But, in my heart, are hopes of thee
Which health and joy will bring;
And, thou have dealt so well with me
That I thy praise will sing.
Psalm. 14.
To the cheef Musician a Psalm of David. It shows man's general corruption,
and our natural estate before we become regenerated by Gods especial Grace
etc. We should sing it to mind us, what we are of our selves, and how much we
should desire a Renovation.

THe fool, his God in heart denayes;
And, quite corrupt mankind is grown:
Their walkings are in hateful ways;
Upright, or good, there is not one.
The Lord, from heaven declinde his eye,
And, all the sonns of men he scannd!
That he from thence might search and try,
Who did him seek, or understand.
2
But, all of them corrupted were,
All men beside the way are gone,
He saw not one deal justly there,
Not one man good; oh no, not one,
So brutish are Transgressors all.
That they like bread my people eat:
On God, (likewise) they never call;
And, therefore is their terror great.
3
For, God preserves the faithful seed,
Even them who righteous ways affect;
And, though his Counsel none does heed,
Yet, God, the poreman will protect.
Would we Gods aid from Syon had,
Which must his folk, from thraldom bring!
For, Jacob would thereof be glad,
And Israel should rejoice and sing.
Acknowledginge (oh! most gracious Redeemer) our general corruption, and that
in us there is no goodness; we humbly beseech thee (by the Salvation promised
out of Syon) to deliver us from our spiritual captivity; and so to sanctify
our poluted nature, that our terrors may be removed; our lives amended; thy
evangelical counsels hartelie embraced; and that we (becoming true Israelites
inwhome there is no guile) may at last be saved by thy Mercy, and rejoice
among the faith full in thy new Jerusalem, for ever and ever. Amen.

Psa. 15.
A Psalm of David. It questions and answers, who shall be admitted into Gods
famelie (to wit) such as are sanctified in thought, word, and deed, etc. It is
useful to inform us, what our Conversations ought to be, who profess our
selves to be of God's household.

LOrd, who shall rest within thy tent,
Or on thy holy hill?
But, he that is truly innocent,
And shows mercy, still.
Whose heart emploies a truth-full tongue;
And none by slander greeves:
Who neither does his neighbors wrong;
Nor lies of them believes.
2
Who favors those that fear the Lord,
And, sinners does abhor:
Who shifts not from his promised word,
Though to his loss he swore.
Who putts not coin to griping loan,
Nor takes a wicked fee,
He, doubtless, is a blessed one,
And, shall vnmooved be?
Flesh and blood, oh God, is neither able to fulfill thy law, nor to enter
into the kingdom of heaven before it be purged and sanctified by the precious
body and blood of thy dear Son. Seeing, therefore, thou requirest that both our
outward and inward man should be conformable to that example of perfect
Righteousness which he has left who is gone up, before (into thy holy
Tabernacles, to prepare mansions for all who desire to be followers of him)
make us we beseech thee, so obedient to the discipline of the Catholic Church
(his dwelling place on earth) that we may have his righteosnes imputed; and be
kept immovable in thy favor, until we shall be translated to those heavenly
habitations, where thou live and raignest world without end. Amen.

Psa. 16.
Michtam of David. It is a literal prophecy of Christ. Act. 2. 25. and it has
relation to the communion of saints, The sole-mediatorship of Christ, his
resurrection, and his sitting at the right hand of God, etc. It is useful to
confirm us in these articles of our faith before mentioned, etc.

SAve me, oh Lord; for, I have laid
My trustfull hope, alone, on thee:
And, to thy self, my Soul has said,
That thou (oh Lord) her Lord shall be.
My goods, to thee are nothing worth:
But, in their use I will declare,
That I affect thy Saints on earth;
And, such as well-deservers are.
2
All they who serve another God,
Shall gain increase of greefs and blame;
Their drinck-oblation staind with blood,
I Will nor prefer, nor speak their Name.
God is my birthright, and my share;
He fills my Cupp; maintains my Lot;
Fair portions, my divisions are,
And pleasant places I have got.
3
The Lord be praisd, who wrought it so:
For, he in this, did me advize.
My Reins, by night, informed me to;
And, God I place before mine eyes.
Who stands at my right hand so near,
That, me no fears of chaing molest:
It both my heart and voice, does cheer;
My flesh likewise, in hope does rest.
4
For, Lord, thou neither wilt permit
That left in hell my soul should lie;
Nor will thou suffer in the Pit,
Thy holy-one to putrify.
But (through life's pathway) me shall bring,
Where, in thy sight (at thy right hand)
All Joys, and each delightful thing
For ever, and for ever, stand.
Grant, oh Lord, our souls may so truly affect thee, that thy pore members may
reap the fruits of our charitable affections. Let us continue so constant
also, in thy true worship, that all our offerings may be made acceptable by the
mediation of Christ Jesus, and that we may inherit our portion with him: So,
his blessed Soul and body (against which nor hell nor corruption could
prevail) shall draw after him, our souls, out of the hell of an aflicted
conscience, and our bodies from the graves of sin, and mortality, to enjoy
with him, a joyful resurrection at his right hand; and the fullnes of all
pleasures, in thy glorious presence, for evermore. Amen.

Another of the same.
PReserve me Lord; for, I on thee depend;
And, for her Lord, my soul professes thee.
Though to thy self, my wealth no profit lend,
Thy Saints on earth, my love shall thereby see.
But, they shall feel their sorrow still increased,
Whose offerings are to other Gods addressed.
2
Their bloudie-drinck-oblation to present,
Or, with my lips so name them, I disdain:
Thou art my Lot, where with I am content;
Thou for my cupp, a portion shall maintain.
To me, the Lines a goodly share divided;
And praisd be God, that me so well has guided.
3
My reins likewise, instruct me in the night:
Before mine eyes, the Lord still seems to stand;
And, sure, I shall preserved be upright,
Because, the Lord remains at my right hand.
It glads my heart; with joy my tongue now sings;
And, hopeful rest, unto my fleash it brings.
4
For why; my soul thou shall not leave in hell,
Nor let thy holy-one corruption see:
But, unto me, thy path of life reveal,
Which thither tends, where joies perfections be;
Even thither, where at thy right hand attending,
Those plaesures are, which never shall have ending.
Psa. 17.
A prayer of David, It personates Christ's members in persecution desiring
succor, and comforting the^ selves in hope of the blessed vision of God, after
their Resurrection; etc. It is useful, when we have considered the quality of
our foes, and by faith applied unto our selves, the innocence of Christ, with
an affection thereunto.

LOrd, hear my cause, my suites, my cries.
Which from unfeigned lips do flow;
To rightful things decline thine eyes,
And, from thy self, let sentence go.
My secret thoughts are in thy sight;
Thou vew'st them, in the darkest night.
2
Thou trid'st my fault, and foundst it none;
For, from offense I kept my tongue:
And (as for things by others done)
My words preserved me from wrong.
Oh! be thou pleased, my course to guide;
And stay my feet, lest else they slide.
3
On thee I call; for thou will hear:
Lord, hear, and my complaint attend.
Let thy great love to me appear,
And thy right hand my life defend;
Even that right hand which from their foes,
Gards them, who trust in thee repose:
4
From Tiraunts, me beseiging-round,
From Sinners, who my harm assay,
Lord, as thine eye-ball keep me sound;
And, over me, thy wings display.
For, they with fatt, quite round are clad;
And, haughty braggs, their mouths have made,
5
Me, in my ways, they have withstood,
And sought about with downe-cast eyes,
Like lions (when they hunt for food)
Or lions whelp, which lurking lies.
But, rise, resist; and foil them Lord:
From Sinners, guard me, by thy sword.
6
Lord, from those world-lings guard thou me,
Who in this life, their lot receive;
Who full of wealth, and children be,
And for their babes large portions leave.
To wake from sin, and look on thee,
In thine own form, cententeth me.
Accept oh Lord, our weak endeavors, and so teach us to moderate our thoughts,
to govern our tongues, and to order our conversations; that no temporal or
spiritual adversary, may justly accuse or harm us. Take us into thy special
protection; because, our foes are powrfull, crew!, and deligent in seeking our
destruction: but, above all, keep us from the poluted conversations and
affections, of those whose belly is their God; and whose portion of happiness,
is in this life; that when we shall awake out of our graves, we may appear in
thy righteousness; rejoice in our happy lot; and be fully satified in the
fruition of thee, who live and raignest world without end. Amen.

Psa. 18.
A Psalm of David the servant of the Lord, who sung unto the Lord, the words of
this song, when the Lord delivered him from the hand of al his foes, and from
the hand of Saul. It mystically declares Gods maiestical proceeding in the
work of our redemption. And it may be used to praise God for our deliverances,
by the Incarnation, resurrection, and exaltation of Christ; and for the
benifits which we receive thereby.

I Love the Lord; for, my support,
My horn of health, is he:
My Rock, my trust, my Shield, my fort,
And, often has helped me.
He merrits praise; for, when I cry
Me, from all foes he saves;
Though wrapped in pangs of death, I lie
And plungd in sorrows waves?
2
Yea, when by death and hell en-snar'd,
I sought the Lord, in fear;
My God, within his Temple heard,
And my complaints did hear:
Earths groundwork shook to feel his ire;
The trembling hills, did quake:
His nostrills fum'de, his mouth breathed fire,
Which burning coals did make.
3
Then, down he came, and heavu he bowed
His feet thick darkness hid.
A flieng Cherube he bestrode;
The winged winds, he ridd.
A duskie fogg, his Covering was;
Dark waters were his tent:
Before the brightness of his face,
Clouds. fire, and hayle, he sent.
4
The Lord, from heaven did also make
His thunders to be heard:
Yea, when that great Almighty Spoke,
Both fire and hail appeared:
His darts, on every side he threw,
Till they dispersed were:
His burning Lightninghs, flashing flewe,
And caused them to fear.
5
When he did frown, a dreadful blast
He from his nostrills blowed,
Which, up the seas low Depths did cast,
And, Earths foundation showed,
Then down he sent, and from among
Great floods, advanced me;
And from those foes that were too strong;
He likewise guarded me.
6
They in my Cares did me prevent;
But, still, God was my hope:
He, for his love-sake, succor sent,
And gave me larger scope.
The Lord, my Righteousness observed,
His favor he bestowed;
And, as mine innocence deserved,
So, he his mercy showed.
7
For, in Gods ways my walkings were,
From him I have not stepped;
Still in my sight, his judgments are,
And I his laws have kept.
In him, I instifide became;
For, I did leave my sin:
And, as I just and righteous am,
Rewarded I have binn.
8
As he my hands did guiltles find,
He, so did me require:
For, to the meek the Lord is kind,
To righteous men upright.
Among the pure, he will be pure,
And, on the froward frown.
The poreman he will make secure,
And, pluck the proud-man down.
9
My Darkness, God shall brightness make;
My Lamp, enlight he shall.
By him, I through an Army brake,
And overleap'd a wall,
Gods way is right, pure is his word;
He saves if sought he be:
For, who is God, except the Lord,
Or who cann save but he?
10
About my Loins, he strength did bind,
He, set my pathway straight:
He, made my feet out runn the Hind,
And raised me to this height
My hands to fight; my Arms to bend
A bow of steel, he taught;
His Buckler, he to me did lend,
And, saving-health it brought.
11
His right hand has supported me,
His love has made me great;
My stepps, by him enlarged be,
And, safe my feet are set.
I did pursue (yea took) my Foes,
And slew til all were slain.
They fell down wounded by my blows,
And could not rise again.
12
For, he (to fit me for the war)
With power, did me indue,
And, those who my opposers are,
Beneath my feet he threw.
To conquer them, who me envide,
Me, strong enough, he made.
They cride, and (though to God they cride)
Replies, nor helps, they had.
13
Then, as the dust which whirl-windes toss,
So small, I them did beat;
And threw them forth, as my rie-drosse,
Which lies about the streat.
Thus, from the peoples vp-roares freed,
I (through his grace) became:
And, now to be the Gentiles Head;
By him, advanced I am.
14
A nation shall my Servants be,
which knows me not, as yet:
As Soon as they have heard of me,
Themselves they shall submit.
The stranger shall stand out no more;
But, in his Bullworks fear:
Oh praise the living Lord, therefore;
Aloud, Gods praise declare.
15
Let God, my saving-health, be praisd,
By whom to pass it came,
That, I above the people raisd,
And thus avenged am.
Above all them that me oppose,
He does exalt my throne;
And, saves me from all my foes,
Even from the Cruel-one.
16
Among the gentiles, now, therefore
I Will thanck him for the same;
My song shall be for evermore,
In honor of his Name.
His king, and his anointed-one
He gloriously has freed;
And, everlasting mercy shown
To David and his seed.
Vouchsafe, most gracious Lord, according to thy accustomed mercy, to be still
our Protector; and let thy Name be always glorified for the miraculous
deliverances of thy Church, now and in all Ages; especially for the great work
of man's general redemption. Instruct us in the spiritual warfar; enable us
against all our visible and invisible foes; subdue unto us all our own
rebellious Affections; deliver us out of all our sufferings; Give us victory
over every temptation; Increase thy kingdom by the calling of those, who are
not yet thy People; And make us unfeignedly thanckful unto thee for these, and
all the rest of thy mercies through Jesus Christ, our Lord, Amen.

Psalm. 19.
To the cheef Musician a Psalm of David. It declares the universal preaching
of Gods Divinity by the book of his Creatures, and it is a prophecy of the
general pub^iation of the Gospel, Romans 10. It shows a so, the properties, of
the divine word. It may be used to praise God for the priveledges which we have
by his word; and, as a prayer for sanctification, etc.

GOds glory, shines among the Spears;
The heavens, his handle-works disclose;
Their daily speech, his power declares;
And e'vry night, his wisdom shows.
Their language, in all tongues is found;
Their Line, about Earths globe, does runn:
Through-out the world their words do sound;
And, there is the Palace of the Sunn.
2
He Bride-groome-like, refreshed appears,
When he forgoes his lodging place;
Or gyant-like, when up he rears
And chears himself, to runn a Race.
His Iorn^ies are from thence begun,
Even where, the bounds of heaven are set;
And, he quite round the world does runn,
Refreshing all things with his heat.
3
God's Rule is plain, and souls convarts;
His witness firm, and makes wise:
His laws are just, and glad our hearts;
His Precepts pure, and clear our eyes.
His blamles Fear is vn-confin'de,
Both true and right, are all his doomes,
More worth then gold (even gold refin'de)
More sweet, then honey in the combs,
4
Moreover, they thy servant warn,
By keeping them, he profit winns:
But, Lord, his guilt who cann descerne?
Oh! therefore purge my secreat sins.
From daring Crimes. thy sarvant save,
And, let them bear no sway in me:
So, I the less rebuke shall have,
And, from the great-offence, be free.
5
Oh! when I speak, let every word,
And every muzing of my heart,
Be pleasing in thy sight, oh Lord,
For, thou my strength, and savior art.
No excuse is lest, oh merciful Father, if we be ignorant of thee, or
uncomfortable to thy will: for, by the book of thy Creatures, it was long-since
declared unto the whole world. which Text, being corrupted by humane
Inventions, thou did explain it again in the volumes of the Prophets: Since
then, it was more illustrated by the writings of the Apostles; And the prime
scope of all these Books, thy blessed Spirit daily preaches and interprets
throughout the world, by ordinary or extraordinary means. The power, truth,
purity, sweetness, and profitabelnes of this divine word we do, or must,
confess also, to be evident, Nevertheles (because we have much wilful
ignorance, and many secret corruptions, we humbly pray thee, so
extraordinarily to enlighten our darkness, and to purge our concealed
polutions, that (we being illuminated and sanctified by the holie-ghost) the
unpardonable Sin may be avoided, and we made acceptable to thee in Christ
Jesus, Amen.

Psa. 20.
To the cheef Musician A Psalm of David. It is a prayer for spiritual graces,
with a protestation of affiance in God; and it mistically touches the
Prest-hood and royal dignity of Christ etc. It may be used to desire Gods
acceptance of us in his Son; and may serve, in some cases, as a prayer for
christian princes and pastors. etc.

THe Lord, at need, vouchsafe thee grace,
Let Jacobs God, thy cause defend,
Protect thee from his holy-place,
And, strength to thee from Syon send.
Thy gifts, let him remember, still,
Let him accept thy Sacrifize, Selah,
Thy hearts request, let him fulfill,
And, prosper all thou shall devise.
2
We will rejoice thy peace to see,
And in Gods name our Ensigns wave,
When al thy suites are granted thee:
For, God (I know) his Christ will save.
By his right-hand's almighty force,
God hears us from his holy-hill.
Some trust in charrets, or in horse,
But, we Gods Name remember, still.
3
In that regard, we raised are,
And stand upright, when they do fall.
Oh! let the king, our prayers hear,
And save us, Lord, when we do call.
Assist us mercifully oh God, in all our Aflictions; Accept the Sacrifise
offered for us by Christ Jesus, the high-preist of our seules; and in his
Mediations, grant unto us, all our faithful petitions; That so (renouncing al
temporal Assurances, and trustinge only in thy defense) we may arise from
those sins, into which many fall without repentance; and that we may be made
partakers of thy Salvation, with our kingly Mediator, who lives and
raighneth with thee oh father, and thy holy-spirit, world without end. Amen.

Psa. 21.
To the cheef Musician a Psalm of David. It is a literal prophecy of the
kingly dignity of Christ, mentioninge some of his royal prerogatives, etc. It
may be used as a thanckfull commemoration of the pre-eminence of our spiritual
king. etc.

LOrd, in thy strength, how joies the king?
And, of thine aid, how glad is he?
His hearts desires, in every thing,
Have been bestowed on him, by thee Selah.
With blessings, thou did him prevent,
With purest gold, thou cowud'st his head,
To ask for life, was his intent;
And, he of endless life, has sped.
2
Through thy defense, he famous grows,
And, is to high preferment reard;
On him, thy blisse-evernal flows,
Thy gracious looks his heart have cheered.
Through thy mere love, the king shall stand
Still firm, if he on thee tepose.
And, Lord, thy hand (even thy right hand)
Shall search, and find out all thy foes.
3
As ovens, hot with flames, will do,
So, thou shall scorch them in thine ire:
And, in thy wrath consume them so,
As if they burned in the fire.
Yea, thou shall from the race of man,
Root out their fruit, and pluck their seed;
Because, to wrong thee, they begann,
Although they could not act the deed.
4
Thou shall expose them (as it were)
A Mark, within thy shooting-place;
Thy stringed shafts thou shall prepare
And, stick thine Arrows in their face.
Thus, be thou still exalted, Lord,
By thine own power, thy trophies raise:
And then, with joye we will record
Thy Matchles might, in songs of praise.
Blessed be thy Name, oh God, for that high preferment which thou have
ouchsafed the Manhood, by assuming the same to thy Deity, and by bestowing
thereon a soveraigntie, over all the rest of thy Creatures. Give us humility to
ascribe all the glory thereof to Christ Jesus; Hear all our petitions in him;
Teach us by his example, so to trust in thee, that we may obtain the
priveledges of his glorious kingdom, and become partakers of that Life-eternal
to which he ascended. So; escaping those terrible Judgments which thou
inflictest on thy malicious foes, we shall behold their confusion, to the
exaltation of the power, to whom he all honor and glory, now and for
evermore. Amen.

Psa. 22.
To the cheef Musician upon Aijleth Shaha^ A Psalm of David. It is a prophecy
of Christ his passion, unfolding diverse passages thereof, and me^tioning also
the calling of the Gentiles, etc. It may be sung to commemorate the Passion,
and some other mysteries of our Redemption, etc.

WHy have thou, oh my God, my God.
Why have thou me forgone?
Why, nearer is not thy abode;
To hear and help my moan?
Unheard of thee, I cry whole days;
Whole nights the same I do;
Yet, thou art Isr'els cheifest praise,
And, thou art holy to.
2
Our fathers did on thee depend,
And. thou did them secure:
They cride, and thou did them defend;
Their faith did them assure.
But, I, pore worm, an Abject am,
No man, but one forlorn:
The people make of me their game,
Their proverb, and their scorn.
3
When me they vewe, their heads they nod,
Make mouths, and jeering, say;
God was his hope, now then, if God
Him loves, him save he may.
But, thou did guard me in the womb,
Thou did convay me thence:
At nurse, my hope thou did become,
And, keptst me eversince.
4
Er'e-since my birth, my God thou art;
My trust is all in thee:
Oh! do not far fro me depart,
For, perils compass me.
Strong Bulls (even herds of Bashan race)
Beset me round about:
They stand wide-gaping in my face;
Like Lions, roaring-out.
5
Like water, I am pour'de aside;
My bones are strained apart:
Even potsherd-like, my strength is dride;
Like wax, dissolues my heart.
Unto my Jaws, my tongue is glew'd;
For, thou did me confound.
With cruel dogs I am persu'de;
By Sinners, closed round.
6
My hands and feet, they nailed fast;
My bones apparent were:
Upon my vesture, lots they cast,
My garments they did share.
Thine aid, therefore, no more delay,
But, Lord my strength, draw near,
Cause not the sword, my soul to slay,
Nor dogs to rend my dear.
7
Me, from the mouths of Lions, guard,
As I, in former days,
From horns of unicorns was heard:
So, I will sing thy praise.
Thy fame, I Will in thy church record,
My brethren being there.
Oh! praise him ye that fear the Lord,
And Jacobs offspring are.
8
Him, oh ye seed of Israel, fear;
For, he does nor despize
Afflicted souls, nor stop his ear,
Nor turn from them his eyes.
But, when thy cry, their cries are heard;
For which, his praise I sing:
And, in great throngs, where God is feared,
My vows to him I Will bring.
9
The meek shall feed till they are full,
And praise the Lord therefore.
All ye, who seek him in your soul,
Shall live for evermore.
The worlds far ends, to mind shall call
Their duty to the Lord:
And, he of heathen kingdoms, all,
Shall see him self ador'de.
10
For, his the kingdom is, indeed,
All nations, rules he.
Earths fatlings on his bread shall feed,
And, thanckful they shall be.
Yea, they shall all before him bow
Whose lodging is the grave,
For, none but he has power enough,
The soul from death to save.
11
A seed, whom he shall count his own,
Shall then, to God return;
And, make his Acts of Justice known
To people yet unborn.
Oh! thou glory of Israel, and the hope of all who trust in thee; seeing by a
voluntary humiliation, thou have in thine own person felt the bitterness of
reproaches, the cruelty of persecuters, the sharpnes of poverty; the extreme
torments of the flesh, the strongest Agonies of the soul, and every horror
which may affright us (when in our greatest trials and temptations we seem (as
it were) utterly for saken both of God and man) remember (oh remember) thine
own passion, and have mercy upon us. Hear us, when we cry; help us, when we
can cry no longer: And when all our strength fails, let thy power plnck us
out of our tormenters Jaws; that we and they whom thou have promised to
collect from al places and Ages of the world, may meet in thy heavenly
kingdom, to glorify thee, for ever and ever. Amen.

Psa. 23.
A Psalm of David. The Christian soul acknowledges Christ her pastor
enritching, feedinge, retoicinge, reforming, beautifieng her, and providing for
her an eternal habitation, in this own presence etc. It may be sung to praise
God for the benifits herein mentioned, etc.

THe Lord my Pastor daignes to be,
I nothing, now, shall need:
To drinck sweet springs he brings me,
And on green Meads to feed.
For his Namesake, my heart he glads,
He makes my ways upright:
And, I, the vase of deaths black shades,
Cann pass, without affright.
2
Thy staff, thy presence, and thy rodd,
My joyful comforts are,
And, thou before my foes (oh God)
My Table shall prepare.
Oil on my head. poured out thou have,
My Cupp does over-flowe,
And thou, on me, whilst life does last,
Thy favors wilt bestow.
3
Yea, Lord, thy goodness and thy grace,
Shall always follow me:
And, in thy house, my dwelling place
For evermore shall be.
Keep us, oh thou faithful Sheapherd of our souls, that the Devil take us not
out of thy fold, nor entise us from thy pastures by fair alurements. Setle us
in thy Church, Refresh us by thy Spirit, Instruct us by thy Sacraments, Guide
us by thy example, reform us by thy father'y correction, and so comfort us by
thy presence; that we may acknowledge, there is no need of those beggarly
assistances whereon worldlings depend; and, that we may walk without
repininge, through the aflictions of this life; and without fear, through the
shadows of Death, to those mansions, which thou have appointed for thy chosen
flock; in the kingdom of heaven. Amen.

Psa. 24.
A psalm of David. It describes the largnes of Christ's inheritance, and shows
who are members of his Church. Then, by a poetical prosopopeia, the everlasting
Gates are summoned to give passage for the Ascension of that glorious King, It
is used, in commemoration of the Ascension.

THe Earth's the Lords, with her increase;
The world, and all her goods:
He founded it upon the seas,
And laid it on the Floods.
What man is he that shall have grace
To climb the hill of God?
Or Who shall in his holy-place,
Obtain their free abode?
2
Sure, they whose hands are innocent,
Whose meanings are upright.
Whose hearts to folly are not bent,
Who swear, without deceit.
Such, gain from God, a blessed meed,
And, from their faviour grace:
And, such (oh Jacob) are their seed
Who truly seek thy face.
3
Ye Gates, lift up your heads on high,
(Ye doors which last for aye)
The king of glory passeth-by,
Unclose, and give him way.
Who is the king of glory? tell,
Oh tell! who might he be?
The Lord, who does in strength excel,
That glorious king, is he.
4
Ye Gates, aloft your Arches heave,
(Ye doors that have no end)
Unto the king of glory, give
Free passage to ascend.
Who is the king of glory? say,
Oh say! who might he be?
The Lord of Armies in array,
That glorious king is he.
Seeing thou have evidently declared, oh Christ the King of glory, who they
are whom thou will admit into that kingdom whither thou art aseended; and who
are truly of that spiritual seed, to whom thy promises appertain. Grant, we
beseech thee, that we may make our Election sure, by the works of
regeneration, and not be deluded by the false persuasions of a fruitles faith.
So, all thy Creatures, shall give both way, and assistance, to our Ascension
after thee; to whom with the father and holy-spirit, be ascribed all praise,
power, and glory, now and for evermore. Amen.

Psa. 25.
A Psalm of David. It contains many petitions of an afflicted penitent Soul;
declares the excellence of the Law of Grace, and the priveledges of the
regenerate etc. It may be used when we are dejected by the sight of our
guiltines, and are truly penitent, etc.

I Lift my soul to thee;
My trust in thee is placed:
Oh let me, Lord, nor scorned be,
Nor by my foe disgraced,
But, keep reproaches all
From those who thee attend,
And, let on them Confusion fall
That without Cause offend.
2
Thy ways to me me impart,
Let me thy Truth be taught;
For, thou, oh God, my Savior art:
Whom I have always sought.
Be still, to me as kind
As thou of old have binn;
And, bear thou not those faults in mind,
which I have erred in.
3
But, grace to me afford,
Ev'u for thy goodness sake;
As thou art good, and gracious, Lord,
On me compassion take.
Direct al those that stray,
In judgment, guide the meek,
And, them inform thou in thy way,
That humbly, thee de seek.
4
For, Truth and Mercy, Lord,
Are found in all thy ways,
By every one who keeps thy word,
And thy Commands obayes.
Remit (though great they are)
My sins, for thy Name sake,
And, suffer him who thee does fear,
His chosen-path to take.
5
Then, easd his heart shall grow,
His seed the Land shall fill,
And, he that fears the Lord, shall know
His Counsels, and his will.
Mine eyes attend on thee,
That thou may me release:
In mercy, Lord, return to me
Forlorn and in destresse.
6
My greefs enlarged are;
Oh come, and me releeve.
My sorrows heed, regard my care,
And all my sins forgive.
Observe, oh Lord, my foes;
Mark how abused I am;
And (since I trust in thee repose)
Defend my soul from shame.
7
Yea, keep thou me upright;
Because. I hope in thee:
And, from all wrongs, and all despite,
Let Israel saved be.
Remember not, oh Lord, our offenses; but of thy mere Mercy blot out all our
transgressions. Let neither the follies of our youth, nor the greatness of any
other sins, deprive us of thy wonted compassion. Consider our weakness, our
sufferings, and the condition of our adversaries, as motives of thy pity; That
our sins being remitted, our fetters unloosed, and thy secrets (even the
mysteries of Savinggrace) revealed; we may in true meeknes. follow him, who is
the way, the Truth, and the Life; and be kept by thy special Grace from all
future sins and dangers, unto our lives end. Amen.

Another of the same,
A Loft, I raise my soul, oh Lord, to thee;
And I in thee alone, my trust have placed,
By those therefore, that seek to mischeeve me,
Oh, let me not be shamed, nor disgraced.
Confound not those who seek to do thy will;
But, shame those me^ that Causeles have offended,
Direct thou me in thy Truths pathway, still;
For (Lord my health) on thee I have attended.
Eternal God, in mercy, thinck on me,
As it has been of old thy gracious fashion:
Forgot, let all my youthful errors be;
For thy love sake, Remember thy compassion.
Great is thy grace, and great thy Justice, Lord:
Therefore, thy ways to sinful men thou showest
Healp to thee meek, thou do, likewise, afford
When he is iudgd; and guid'st him where tho^ go,
In all thy ways, both Truth and Mercy be,
For such, as have thy league, and word observed:
Keep therefore, Lord, thy grace in store for me;
(For thy namesake) though I have ill deserved.
Let those, in whom thy sacred fear is found,
In their desired pathway, Lord, persever.
Make true content, in all their souls abound;
And, let their seed, poslesse the land, for ever.
No man oh Lord, who stands in fear of thee,
Shall from thy league or Counsels, be debarred.
On thee, therefore, mine eyes attending be,
That from the net, my feet may be vnsnared;
Pleased be, in love, to visit me again;
For, lo; despised I am, and sore destressed.
Quit me, from all my sorrows and my pain;
For, my hart-greefs (oh Lord) are much encraesed,
Regard my wants; Behold, and mark my woes;
Remitting all wherein I have offended.
See, See, oh Lord, what numbers are my foes;
And, what despights to me they have intended.
To help and save my soul, entreated be:
Thou art my Guard, oh! keep me vndisgraced,
Upright, and pure; because, I trust in thee:
And, from all Cares, let Israel be released.
Psalm. 26.
A Psalm of David. It setts down some marks of the true church and of her
members; and personates her, iustifieing her self against the secret
imputations of her foes (from whom she desires to be distinguished) etc. It is
useful for those members of Christ, who are falsely accused. etc.

GIve sentence, now, oh Lord, with me;
For, I have walked aright;
And, since I have relide on thee,
Preserve me still upright.
Prove thou my heart and Raines, oh God;
Search there, what thou can find:
For, I the Paths of Truth have trodd;
And, bear thy love in mind.
2
With wicked men I have not sat,
Nor with dissemblers gone:
Profane Assemblies I do hate,
And shunn the sinners throne.
With hands washed clean in simplenes,
I Will round thine Altars go;
And there; in songs of thanckfulnes,
Thy wondrous works I Will show.
3
For, I that place affect, oh God,
Where thou so much art fam'de:
Therefore, with sinners, thirsting blood,
Oh! let me not be named.
Their hands (their very righthands) be
with bribes, and mischeefs fraught:
But, Lord, redeem and pity me;
For, I truths Paths have sought.
4
In steadfast ways, with fixed feet,
Firm standing, I possess:
For which, where great Assemblies meet,
I, will the Lord confess.
Give us grace, oh Lord, so to avoid the society, and practices of wicked
men; that neither our consciences may accuse us, to be wilfully guilty of
their crimes, nor thou condemn us for hypocrites, when thou serchest and
iudgest the secrets of our hearts. Join, to the purity of manners. a sincere
devotion; that honesty and Religeon (being knit and married together in our
souls by thee) may never be divorced, Let our zeal also to thy house, and our
Love to thy Service, be such as may distinguish us from profane worldlings;
and so linck us by charity to thy faithful members, that we may continue thine
to our lives end. Amen.

Psa. 27.
A Psalm of David. It expresses confidence in God. and a longing to enjoy
the priveledges of his sanctuary. It vows also to seek and serve him; desires
Gods assistance, and exhort, to faith and perseverance etc. It is useful, for
all Christians, to these purposes.

GOd is my light, my health mine Aid;
My life's defense: whom should I fear?
When wicked foes my death assayd,
They tript, and fell, and ruinde were.
I, therefore, will nor faint, nor fly,
Although an host beseigeth me;
If God, will not this boon deny,
For which, I Will now a suitor be.
2
Even that he grace to me afford,
My lifetime in his house to spend;
To vewe the beauty of the Lord.
And in his Temple to attend.
For, in his Tent, when dangers threat,
In secret, he should me enclose;
Upon a Rock, my footing set,
And, raise my head above my foes.
3
Then, in God's house, a Sacrifise
Of praises, I would also give:
Hear therefore, Lord; and let my cries
A gracious Answer, now receive.
When thou do bid me seek thy face;
Thy face I Will seek, my heart replies:
Reject not therefore, nor disgrace.
Thy Servant who on thee relies.
4
Oh Lord, who did my soul preserve
When, me my parents did forsake;
(Because of them who me observe)
Now, plain to me, thy path-waies make.
Yea, from the pleasure of my foes,
Protect me Lord: for, lo; with lies,
False witnesses do me oppose;
And, cruel words they do devise.
5
That, had I not belief to see
Gods grace (within that land of bliss
Where endless life shall granted be)
My soul had fainted, long e're this.
Attend thou still upon the Lord,
And faint thou not (who e're thou art)
Attend I say, upon the Lord;
And, he shall fortify thy heart.
It is an unspeakable favor oh Lord, to live where we may peaceably assemble
in thy house, and obtain thy comfortable presence in thy blessed word and
Sacraments. How many, oh God! how many? are deprived of this consolation? And,
oh how long? and with how little sense of our happiness, have we enjoyed this
great blessing? Grant unto us, we beseech thee, mere thanckfulnes, lest thou
justly withdraw thy abused grace; Give in due time, this great Benifit, to
all who unfeignedly desire it for thy glory: In the mean while, vouchsafe them
patience, to sustain their burden without fainting; and let the hope of that,
which is prepared for thie saints, in the Land of the living, stir up them and
us, to a faithful performance of our whole duty toward thee, through the
assistance of thy holyspirit, Amen.

Psa. 28.
A Psalm of David, It craves Gods assistance, imprecates his Judgments against
the wicked, professes assurance in the divine protection, and ascribes glory,
and power, and thancks, to the Almighty, etc. It may be used as a prayer, and
protestation of our faith in persecution.

OH Lord My strength, I cry to thee,
Give ear, and Silence do not keep:
Lest, not unlike to those I be,
Which down descend, into the deep.
Observe my Cries, and what I pray,
When to thine Arc, my hands I rear:
With sinners, pluck me not, away,
Who speak of peace, yet purpose war.
2
Give them what their ill deeds require;
As they deserve, so them reward.
For their lewd works, pay them their hire,
Because, thy works they naught regard.
Yea, seeing they thy works despize,
Destroy them, never to be raisd:
But, hear my suite, and heed my cries,
And be thou, Lord, for ever praisd.
3
For, thou art, Lord, my shield, mine aid;
My strength, of whom I hopeful am:
Thereof, my heart is well apaid,
And, of thy praise, my Songs I frame.
Thy Christ, thou always shall protect:
Thou art his rock; and, saved by thee,
Thine heritage and thine Elect,
(Blessed, fedd, and magnifide) shall be.
Immortal God, so many and so great perils do always threaten us, that we are
still at the brinck of destruction; and unless thou be gracious, we shall soon
be swallowed up. Hear us therefore, when we call on thee, in the Mediation of
Jesus Christ; and gather us not among Hypocrites, or notorious Malefactors:
But, when they shall receive their due reward, who by a dissembled Unity,
trouble the peace of thy Church, or dishonor thy Name, by Atheism or
prophanes; let us reap the fructe of our hopes, to our joyful exaltation among
thine elect, and to the glorifieng of thy Mercy, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Psa. 29.
A Psalm of David It mistically expresses the power of Gods voice (or
evangelical word) over all sorts of people, in all places. It may be used to
praise God, for having thereby (according to this prophecy) converted those,
who were naturally as obdurate as trees, mountains, feilds, and
brute-creatures.

AScribe, ye Mighty, to the Lord,
Ascribe al power and same:
Let him be in his house adored,
And, honor ye his Name.
The Lord, commands, with his voice,
The seas, and greatest Flood;
And, when the thunder makes a noise,
It is the voice of God.
2
With power, the God of glory, speaks,
And, awful are his words.
His voice, the strongest cedars breaks,
That Libanon affords.
Even Libanon and Shirion to,
He makes to start (through fear)
As Unicorns and Bullocks do,
That young and frightful are.
3
God's voice, between the flames does fly,
God's voice, the Desert shakes:
God's Voice, does (adesh terrify,
The Hind, it Calfeles makes.
Yea, with his Voice, the thickest grove,
To plainest veiwe he lays;
And, in his Temple, those things move
All tongues, to sing his praise.
4
The Lord, likewise, does in the Flood
An endless rule possess;
And, blesses all the Folk of God,
With fortitude, and peace.
Honor and praise, be given to thee, oh Lord God, for the powrful preaching of
thy word, let the sound of thie voice be still in our ears. When we rage like
a troubled sea, let it calm us; UUhen we are like over-loftie Cedars, let it
humble us; when me are as immovable as mountains (in our own opinions) let
it shake us, when we are wanton like young Bullocks, let it tame us; when we
are as rude, or barren as a wilderness, let it civilize and make us fructful;
when we are pregnant with any, mischeef, let it make our conceptions abortive;
when we are ensnared among, the thick bushes of ignorance, or worldly Cares,
let it discover a passage out of error, and disentangle our hearts from carnal
affections: that, the whole world may be subjected unto thee; and that we and
al tongues may praise and magnify thy Name, for ever and ever Amen.

Psa. 30.
A Psalm or song of the dedication of the house of David. It seems a
thancksgivinge for the resurrection of Christ, whose true house or Temple, was
his Body. It confesses Gods gratiousnes, and man's weakness, etc. We may use it,
when, arising from our sins, we resolve to dedicate our selves as temples to
the holy ghost.

LOrd God, thy praise I will declare;
For why, thou me have magnifide?
My foes insultings thou did bar,
And, sav'dst me, when for help I cride.
Yea, from the dungeon and the pit,
Thou keptst my soul and life, oh Lord;
Let all thy saints (remembering it)
With praise, thy holiness record.
2
Thy wrath, abides not long in thee,
But, in thy favor, life appears;
And, joy shall in the morning be,
Though, overnight, there may be tears.
In my advancement, once I said,
That nothing should my foot remove;
Because, my mountain thou had laid
So firmly, Lord, by thy mere love.
3
Yet, when thy face thou did but hide,
I quickly was oppressed, again;
And, then, to thee again I cride;
And in my cry, did thus complain.
What profit will my blood afford,
When, I, shall to the grave descend?
Oh! cann it sing thy praises, Lord?
Or cann the dust thy truth comend?
4
Lord, hear, and pity take on me;
To succor me, thy help employ:
That, changed to songs, my sighs, may be;
My mourning-weeds to robes of joy,
So, I, for ever, with my tongue
Will praise the, (oh my God my Lord)
And, in a never-ending song,
Thy mercies, thanckfully record.
Sweet Jesus, so great are thy Mercies, that in a night thou convertest into
trivmphs, the most desperate Afflictions; yea, in the very moment of greatest
horrors, thou strangly infusest inexpressible joys: yet, such is our
corruption, that upon thy favors, we often build those false assurances which
beget more pride then thanckfulnes; and so, we are justly shaken again from
our confidence; tha(...)akinge the foundation thereof more firm (by true
humiliation grounded merely on thy mercies) we way stand immovable for-ever.
Oh! grant, that by meditating thy voluntarie-humiliation we may descend to the
true Annihilation and renouncing of our selves, and that by virtue of thy
Burial and Resurrection we w^^ escape the Dungeons of the Grave and Hell;
Change the mourning-garme^t of our flesh, into the robes of immortality, and
praise thee for thy mercies, world without end, Amen.

Psa. 31.
To the cheef Musician a Psalm of David. It personates Christ and his Church in
persecution; contains a large intermixture of many petitions, complaints etc,
and admirably fets forth the variety of affections, incident to a soul,
working out salvation with star and trembling. It is useful in great agonies
and afflictions of mind, etc.

BEcause, I do on thee depend,
(That shamed I may not be)
Lord, in thy Justice me defend,
And, quickly hear thou me.
Be still my rock, my walled-bowre;
And, me vouchsafe to save:
For, thou art my defensive tower,
And, all the strength I have.
2
Be pleased (for thy namesake) to come
And be my hopeful stay;
Direct thou me, and pluck me from
Those netts my foes do lay.
Thou art my strength, and unto thee
My spirit I commit:
For, thou Lord God of Truth, art he
Who have redeemed it.
3
I, them abhor who lies approve;
But, Lord, I trust in thee:
And of thy grace, and in thy love,
My whole reioicings be.
For, me thou did from cares discharge;
Thou knew'st my soul in woe:
My fettred feet thou did enlarge,
And keptst me from my foe.
4
Have mercy, Lord, for I am vexed;
Mine eyes with greef decay:
In soul and flesh, I am perplexed;
Greef, wastes my life away.
My years, with sigheng, shortened are;
My sight, to fail beginns:
My bones consume, my strength does wear;
And, al is for my sins.
5
My scornful foes do me vpraid;
My neighbors, more then they:
My friends, to see me are afraid,
And, far they fly away.
As one long dead, (unthought upon)
Even pot-sherd like, I fare.
I flander'd am of many a one,
And, round me, terrors are.
6
Yet (when to take my life fro me
They plotts against me laid)
Relieng still, oh Lord, on thee.
Thou art my God, I said,
Thou know the times, when me to take
From my persueng soes:
Therefore, to me (for mercy sake)
Thy cheerful face disclose.
7
Lord, let me not be made ashamed,
Because, thy help I crave:
But, let the wicked be defamed,
And, silenced in the grave.
Their lieng lips, for ever close,
Who murmur in despite,
Disdainful words, in scorn of those,
Whose courses are upright.
8
Oh! what great favors will thou show,
To such as honor thee.
And bring to pass, in public vewe,
For them that faithful be?
Thy secret presence shall prevent
The Tyrants hautie wrongs;
And, they shall in thy privie-tent
Avoid the strife of tongues.
9
Praise God; for, when I rash lie thought,
That I quite lost had binn;
Me, to a warlike Town he brought,
And, honored me therein.
My suites, and cries, he likewise heard:
Ye saints of his, therefore,
The Lord your God, with good regard,
Love, honor, and adore.
10
The faithful, he does keep from harm,
And their proud foes contemn.
Be bold: and he your hearts will arm
Who put your trust in him.
Our sins (oh Lord) bring on us many great afflictions: They consume our
flesh, blind our eyes, rott our bones, fright our hearts, and afflict our
consciences: They cause us to be vprayded, scorned, betrayed, and persecuted,
by our foes; They make us to be envyed, contemned, reproched, and abused among
our neighbors; They occasion, that we are miscensured, for sake^, yea and
forgotten of our best affected friends; and (which is worst of all) they bring
on us thy displeasure, and make us almost desperately to forsake thee. Deliver
us (oh deliver us) from these evils: but especially from the sins which
occasion them. Thou art our sole refuge, and the God into whose hands we have
committed our spirits: So embolden us therefore, in thy grace, that we, and the
rest of thy Saints (seeing how great favors thou bestowest on all them that
fear thee) may praise thy Name, for ever and ever, Amen.

Psa. 32.
A Psalm of David Maschil. It shows the free forgivenes of sin by grace, Rom,
4. 6. The danger of hidinge, the benifit of confessing our sins, and the power
of timely prayer; It exhorts also, that we do not brutishly abuse the grace of
God etc, It should be sung, to remember us of Gods mercies, and of these
duties, etc.

A Blessed estate, that man is in
Whose crimes the Lord forgives, and hides!
Even he, to whom God lays no sin,
And in whose heart no fraud abides.
Till I, my faults, did open lay,
My bones with pain were tired out:
Thy hand oppressed me night and day,
And, I became like Summers drought.
2
My Trespass, I reveald therefore:
I showed my secret faults to thee;
And vowed to hide my sins no more:
So, thou, their guilt forgavest me.
For this: the Just, on thee shall call,
At seasons when thou may be found:
And he shall have no harm at all,
Though mighty Floods enclose him round.
3
Thou art, oh Lord, my hiding place,
Wherein; (when peril greatest grows)
From dangers, thou shall me release,
And, me with songs of health enclose. (Selah.)
Thus, thou do also seem to say:
I will instruct thee with mine eye,
And, so inform thee in the way;
That thou shall never walk awrie.
4
Then, be not like the Horse or Mule,
That void of understanding be;
Which thou with Bitt, and Raines, must rule,
Lest, else, they fling, or fall on thee.
The Sinners plagues grow more and more;
But, they find grace, who trust in God.
Let just, and righteous men therefore,
With Shouts, proclaim their joye, abroad.
It is not, oh gracious Redeemer, our Innocence, or any good which of our
selves we can perform, that iustifies us in thy sight; but thy free grace, thy
hiding, and thy not-imputing our sins. That, which thou expect est and
acceptest from us, toward the procuring of this favor, is nothing else but
humbled souls, contrite spirits, unfeigned hearts, and sincere confessions;
which, thou thy self also, must prepare and help perfect in us, or we shall
never perform them: no, though all the dangers and torments of the world were
before our eyes. Take therefore, from us, our brutish ignorance; curb our
headstrong wilfulnes; Rain our unbridled appetites; instruct us, by thy
favorable aspect; and, so guide us by the bridle of reason, and religeous awe;
that (we being governed according to thy will) thou may be found of us in all
troubles, at all seasons; and, we rejoice in thy mercy, for ever and ever, Amen.

Psa. 33.
It exhorts to praise God; declares who are most obliged thereunto; In what
manner we should perform this duty; and for what principal causes etc. We
should often use it to put us in mind how much we are obliged to praise God,
etc.

YE Righteous, in the Lord rejoice:
For, praise with Godly men does suit:
Praise God with Psaltry, Harp, and Voice,
And on the twice-five-stringed Lute,
To him, new ditties, sing and play;
And tune them to the loudest kay.
2
For, God is righteous in his word,
His Actions, full of truth appear:
His Bounty, all the world has storde:
His Darlings, Truth, and Justice are.
The Heavens were formed when he but spoke;
His breath, did all their Armies make.
3
The seas huge waves, aloft he reared,
The Deeps, as up in store, he laid:
Oh! let him through the world be feared,
And make Earths-dwellers all afraid.
For, his Commandings are fulfilled;
And all is done as he has willed.
4
God, makes the Gentiles proiects vain,
And, brings the Peoples plotts to naught:
But, his decrees, for aye remain,
And, everlasting is his thought.
Most surely blessed therefore are those,
Whom for his own, the Lord has chose.
5
For, God from heaven. does cast his eye,
The Sonn's of men to veiwe and know:
Yea, from his dewlling place on high,
He marketh all on earth below:
Their hearts, alike, he shapeth to,
And heeds, even every work they do.
6
Great Armies cannot save a king,
No strong-mans power his life preserves,
The strength of horse, vain succors bring;
But, those who fear him, God observes:
And, whosoever on him depends,
From dearth, and death, he them defends.
7
Our soul upon the Lord shall wait,
Who has our shield and shelter binn;
And, he shall be our hearts delight;
Because, his Name, we trusted in.
Oh! let us Lord, still succored be,
As we repose our trust in thee.
Blessed God! at thy word allthings were created, and by thy providence they
are still governed. Thou have fashioned the hearts of all men, to be in some
measure capable of thy grace; and observest how they emploie that Talent. Thy
eternal decree remains firm; and therefore, theie whom thou chusest shall be
blessed for ever. Neither their own strength, nor any power (but thine) is
able to keep them safe: Thou therefore, on whom their soul waits, shall
prevent the famine of that which is the means of their preservation; and
thereby, keep them from total or final-falling. Lord, make us, to rejoice in
this unspeakable mercy. Increase our faith, and continue us in the means
whereby we are to make our Election sure. We believe it is already granted;
and yet we pray for it, because it is our duty; and because we cannot choose
but pray for that, which we believe, and hope, to obtain, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

Psa. 34.
A Psalm of David when he changed his behavior before Abimeleck, who drove
him away and he departed. It seems to typefy Christ, who being (as it were)
disguised by taking our nature, and infirmities, became thereby contemptible to
the great-ones of the world. We should sing it to praise God. for discovering
to us, what is hid from the wordly wise, etc.

NOw shall the Lords, eternal praise,
The subject of my song be made:
My Soul shall sing it, all her days;
The meek shall hear it, and be glad,
Let others come, and ready be,
To join in praising of his Name:
For, when I cti'de, he helped me;
And kept away my feared blame.
2
He lightneth such as him observe,
And, no disgrace upon them falls:
He hears the pore, and will preserve
From all his troubles, when he calls.
His Angell-gards, will them enclose,
Who, of his God head, awful be:
Therefore, his goodness, unto those
Who trust in him, come Taste, and See.
3
Yea, fear the Lord, ye Saints of his:
For, he to such will al things grant.
The Lions whelps their food may miss,
But, they that serve him, nothing want.
Ye Children come, attention give;
And I will teach The Almighty's fear,
How, ye long time on earth may live,
And, gain a blessed-being, here.
4
Your tongues from slandrous words preserve,
Dissembling, let your lips eschew;
Ill deeds avoid, good works observe,
Seek peace, and after it pursue.
For, God beholds such as those,
And hears the Righteous when they pray:
But, wicked men he does oppose,
And, roots their Name and Fame away,
5
The Lord, will hear the Righteous cry;
From dangers he will them assure;
He, to the broken heart is nigh,
And, wounded Spirits, he will cure.
Although the Just has many greeves,
The Lord so helps, that they are gone;
In all his troubles, him releeves,
And keeps him sound, in every bone.
6
By sin, the sinners death is wrought:
He shall not thrive, that hates the Just.
But, God his servants lives has bought;
And, fails none that in him trust.
Hear us oh merciful God, in cur present necessities, and preserve us from
those future evils which we may justly fear. Enlighten our understandings,
rectify our affections, guide our tongues, sanctify our actions, cure our
deseased bodies, and heal our wounded souls. Let thine Angels, guard us; let
thine own eyes, watch over us; and let us be so instructed in thy fear; that
when our lion-like adversaries are empty, we may be filled with thy goodness,
and delighted in thy sweetness: Grant, also, that when their memorial perishes,
we (being preserved sound both in soul and body) may ^nicie the promised
blessing os long-life, even of life-eternall in thy heavenly kingdom, for ever
and ever, Amen.

Another of the same.
AT al times with my tongue I Will bless the Lord;
To sing of him I never will forbear,
But, in my Soul, his praise with mirth record;
And publish what the meek shall joy to hear,
Come, therefore, help his praises to declare;
To magnify his Name, let us agree.
Discharged I was, by him, of all my fear;
And, when his aid I sought, he aided me.
Enlightened are their eyes that look on him;
And, no disgrace or shame, or those cann fall:
For, he in all their troubles helps them;
And hears the pore, when he on him does call.
God's Angell-gards, round those that fear him, be
Encamped still to keep them from their Foes.
His greatness, and his goodness, taste, and see;
For, all are blessed, who trust in him repose.
In him, let all his Saints, confine their fear;
For, poverty from such resttained is.
Kept hungry, often, the whelps of Lions are,
But, they who fear the Lord, no goodness miss.
Let me from you (ye babes) attention gain;
That, I the fear of God to you may show.
Mark also this (all ye that would attain
Long life on earth, and happy days, to know)
No sland'rous tales envre your tongues to tell;
And, let your lips dissembling speech eschew:
Of wicked words beware; Uprightly deal;
Enquire our Peace, and after it pursue.
Placed are Gods eyes, upon the Righteous race;
He to their cries, an open ear does lay:
Quite opposite to sinners, is his face;
And from the land, he roots their name away.
Right willingly, the Lord inclines his ear,
To hear, and save the righteous, when they cry.
Sinn-wounded souls, and hearts that broken are,
He never shunns; but, unto such is nigh.
Though many greefs, upon the Godly fall,
The Lord, will every one of them remove.
Unbroke, even all his bones, preserve he shall;
But, sin, the death of sinful men shall prove.
Who so does hate the Just, shall hated be,
For, God his faithful servants will redeem,
Yea, all their souls from thral he sets free,
And leaves none, that put their trust in him.
Psa. 35.
A Psalm of David. It contains diverse petitions, and prophetical Imprecations,
concerning the Adversaries of Christ, and of his members; and perticulerly
mentions some of those misusages which he suffered by the Jews etc. We may
properly sing it, when we commemorate the Passion etc.

WIth such oh Lord, as me oppose,
Vouchsafe to plead my right;
And, pleased be to war on those,
Who now against me fight.
Both shield and Buckler, take in hand;
Rise, for my help, I pray:
Bring out the spear, and for me stand,
In my Persuers way.
2
Say to my soul; Thy health, I am;
And, bring to shameful wrack,
All those who seek my death or shame;
Yea, shamed repel them back.
Let them before God's Angel fly,
As chaff, before the wind;
Let them before God's Angel fly.
Through paths, unsafe and blind.
3
Since pitts they dug; and, therein snares
For me, unjustly, laid;
Let them be slain at vn-awares,
In their own trapps, betraide.
Then, Lord, in thee, my soul shall joy;
Thy help, my mirth shall be:
And, all my bones, oh Lord, shall say,
That none cann equal thee.
4
Thou sav'st thee pore, and men oppressed,
From those that are too strong:
Thou free'st the pore, who are destrest,
From such as do them wrong.
False witness rose, and charged me
With words I never said;
And, that my soul might spoiled be,
They, Good with Ill, repaide.
5
Yet, when great sickness them oppressed,
In sackcloth cladd, I mourned:
I fasted; and, into my breast,
My prayers back returned.
I greev'd for them, as men bemone
A Brother or a friend;
And sadly walked, as when that one
Bewailes his Mothers end.
6
But, when my greefs did me besett,
Their Merry-meetings were:
The baser sort, in private met,
And, none did scofs forbear.
Yea, at their Feasts, in mock of me,
The Scorners gnash'd their teeth.
No longer, Lord, spectator be,
But, save my soul from death.
7
My Darling, from the Lion save:
So, thy great love, oh Lord,
Where many folk their meetings have,
I Will to thy praise record.
Oh! let not those who me despize,
Deride my pore estate;
Or, lear on me with scornful eyes,
Whom they unjustly hate.
8
They seek not Peace, but Projects lay
For them that peaceful be:
With gaping mouths, AH! HA, say they,
Our wish, we now do see,
Thou saw it; Therefore, make no pawse,
Nor absent, long, abide:
But, wake, arise, and let my cause
By thee, Lord God, be tri'de.
9
Lord, judge me in thy righteousness,
That they deride not me;
And say in heart, this Fall of his
Is that, which we would see.
Oh! never give them cause to say,
We have devoured him quite;
But, shame, and root them out, for aye,
That in my harm delight.
10
Let them, with shame, and scorn, be cladd;
That have my soul deseas'd:
And, let them trivmph and be gladd,
Who in my cause are pleased.
The Lord be praised, let all men say,
That wish thy Servants Peace:
And, with my tongue, I Will all the day,
Extol thy Righteousness.
Oh blessed Redeemer! let thy gracious assistance be always ready to guard us
from the furious malice of our Foes: And, seeing their condition is not hidd
from thee, let thy judgments be executed upon all those who shall continue
unrepentant in their wickedness; that thy Justice may be glorified, as well as
thy Mercy. Make us, also, mindful (oh Christ) from what height of glory, thou
did voluntarily humble thy self; to what extreme contempt thou wort, abased;
how vnkindiie, yea, how despightfully handled (even by those for whose
Redemption thou were pleased to descend) And, by thy example teach us to be
humble, patient, and charitable in our sufferings; that bearing thy cross, and
imitating thy virtues; we may be pertakers of thy exaltation, who live and
raignest, world without end. Amen.

Psa. 36.
To the cheef Musician, a Psalm of David the servant of the Lord. It mentions
the impiety and corruptions of the wicked. It declares also, the infinite
Love, mercy, sweetness, and Justice of God etc. It may be sung to bring to
consideration, God's goodness, when the over-flowings of ungodliness circumvent
us?

MY heart, within me, says;
That, Sinners fear not God:
And, their self-pleasing course, displaies
Their hateful guilt abroad.
Their words, are wicked wiles;
Nor wise, nor just are they:
Upon their bedds they study Guiles,
And, cursed is their way.
2
The heavens, thy Mercy fills;
Thy Truth does reach the sky:
Thy justice, Lord, or'e-topps the hills,
And, deep thy judgments lie.
Thou sav'st both man and beast;
For, Lord, thy grace excells;
And, underneath thy wings, in rest,
Mankind securely dwells.
3
With daineties of thy house,
They shall replenished be;
And, streams of bliss, they shall carowse:
For, Life does flow from thee.
Thy light is, Lord, our light:
Therefore (where thou art known)
Prolong thy grace, that men upright,
May make thy works, their own.
4
Let not the foot of pride,
Oppose, or hinder me;
Nor let me be remoov'd aside,
By hands that wicked be.
For, thence the overthrowe,
Of Sinners, first begann;
And, when they fell, they fell so low,
That, rise they never cann.
UUee confess (oh Lord) that by the corruption still remaining in our own
hearts, we are plainly informed, how Sin, being first conceived in thought,
will at last break forth into public Act, if thy great Mercy prevent not.
Uouch safe us, therefore, not only thy common grace, which thou spreadest over
all; but be pleased also, to displaie over us, the wings of thy special
Mercies, that being nourished in thy house with spiritual Banquets (such as thy
word, thy Sacraments, and the Illuminations of thy Spirit) we may escape the
falling into those offenses from which there is no risingagaine; Let thy
Saving-grace, be extended also to those who yet know thee not, to the
multiplieng of thy Elect, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Psa. 37.
A Psalm of David. It proposes many counsels, and experimental Arguments, to
move us, not to be offended at the Prosperity of world-lings, and to persuade
a patient perseverance in well-doeng etc. It is useful, to keep us contented
with our estates, and hopeful in all temptations, and afslictions etc.

AT Sinners, take thou no offense,
Nor vex thy self, at such as they:
For, they shall soon be swept from hence,
And, like the grass consume a way.
Believe in God, and live upright;
So, where thou dwell'st, thou shall be fedd:
And, if in him, thou take delight,
Of all thy hopes, thou shall be spedd.
Commit thou, to the Lord, thy way;
Trust him, and all shall well be done:
Thy Justice shall outshine the day,
Thy judgment, pass the sunn at noone.
Delight in God; his leisure bide;
And, fret thou not that others thrive;
But, thy displeasure lay aside;
Lest, thou offense, by vexing give.
Expect awhile, and thou shall see
The wicked fall; and men upright
Possessors of the land to be,
When Sinners dwellings vanish quite.
For, meek-men shall possess the land,
And, peace enjoy (at full) therein;
Though wicked men, do them withstand,
Conspire, and gnash their teeth, and grinn.
God, sees and mocks the Sinners end.
His Blade, in vain he draws to smite,
He shall his Bow as vainly bend,
To slay the pore, and men upright.
His Blade, even his own heart shall gore;
His bow shall break; and, that small share
The Right'ous has, shall profit more
Then all their heaps, that wicked are.
It shall be so; because, the Lord
(Who breaks their arm, that are unjust)
To Godlie-men, will healps afford,
Which never shall deceive their trust.
Known to the Lord, are all their ways;
Their heritage will always last.
They shall not fear in ev'll-daies:
Nor empty be, when others Fast.
Lewd men (and they who part have took
Against the Lord) shall, then, become
Like fatt of Lambs, or like the smoke,
Which melts, or quite away does fume.
Much, borrowe those; but, never pay.
The Righteous lends, and mercy shows.
Where he does bless, right blessed are they;
Where he does curse, a curse ensues.
No course he takes, but God will guide
His feet; and in his way delight:
He falls not quite, although he slide;
Because, God holds him, still, upright.
Olde-age and youth, I now have seen,
Yet, saw no Iust-man, or his seed,
Forlorn or beg: For, they have been
So kind; that they find healp, at need.
Proceed thou in this way, therefore,
Depart from Sin, tread virtues path;
That thou may live for ever more:
For, God, in Judgment, pleasure has,
Quite, roots he out the Sinners race;
But, still, his saints preserved are.
The Land, they fully shall possess;
And, safely dwell, for ever, there.
Right fit; for, they discreetly talk,
The Law of God, they ponder, still,
And in their ways, directly walk;
Though Sinners wait, their life to spill.
Still, therefore, God will them defend,
And, clear them, when araign'd they be.
If thou, likewise, on him attend,
God, in the Land, will prosper thee.
The Sinners fall, thine eye shall veiwe:
For, I have seen them, like the Bay,
Spread wide, and make a goodly show
Then, suddenly consume away.
Veiwe thou the Just; Observe them all;
For, peace their later days attends:
But, wicked men together fall;
And, mischeef brings them to their ends,
Which comes to pass, because the Just,
The Lord (at need) their helper have:
For they in him do put their trust,
And, them from Sinners, he does and save.
Almighty God! make us contented with our portion, without meddling in what
appertains to others. Let not the prosperity of the wicked, cause us to be
envious, fretfull, or discouraged; considering the ficklenes, and peril of
their estate: But, give us grace to be rather careful, that we discharge our
own duties. Make us faithful, cheerful, patient, meek, charitable, prudent,
diligent and constant in the ways of well-doeng; that so we may be delivered
from despaires, scorns, slanders, conspiracies, persecutions, wants, and all
other temporal disadvantages of this life; and be justified in sight of the
whole world at the Resurrection: where, it will be evident, that the
florishings of the wicked were never worth our envy; and that (according to
thy word) the later end of the Righteous, is the beginning of Blessedness, for
ever more. Ame^.

Psa. 38.
A Psalm of David to bring to Remembrance. It is a penitential Psalm,
emploring the pacification of God's wrath, and expressing our natural miseries,
and corruptions etc. It is useful when we feel the guilt and punishment of
Sin, with a true repentance, and hearty desire of pardon and e.

LOrd, chide not when thou wroth shall be,
Nor in thy rage, my sin chastise;
For, deep thy shafts do stick in me,
And, strict, thy hand upon me lies.
Pains in my flesh, thy frowns have bredd;
My faults have robbed my bones of rest:
My floods of Sin, have drowned my head,
And by their weight I am oppressed.
2
My wounds corrupt, and foul they grow;
My Crimes have causd that thus I fare:
With sorrows, I am pressed low;
And, all day long, my mournings are.
My Raines are gripped, and sore deseas'd;
Throughout my body I am sore:
A wastinge-greef on me has ceased;
And paind at heart, aloud I roar.
3
Oh Lord! thou know what things I want;
My mournings are not hidd from thee:
My strength decays, my heart does pant,
Mine eyesight also fails me.
My friends and kindred, shunn my greef;
My lovers, hide themselves away:
And, they who seek to take my life,
Close-engines, to ensnare me, lay.
4
Yea, they who for my harm awaite,
Speak words, that full of mischeef are:
Yet, how, al day they muze deceit,
I (hearing) will not seem to hear.
Nay, I have stood, as mute, as he
Whose tongue is partcht, whose throat is dry,
Whose ears deprived of hearing be;
And, in whose mouth is no reply.
5
For, I oh Lord, on thee rely,
And, answer I expect from thee:
Oh! therefore, now attend my cry,
Lest else my foes insult on me.
For, if my foot but slip aside,
They, in my fall, them selves delight;
My feet (alas) are prone to slide,
And, still, my greefs are in my sight.
6
Behold, for my offense I greeve;
And, my transgressions I bewail:
Yet, still, my foes increase and live;
Yea, still, my causles-foes, prevail.
Moreover, they, who render ill
For doeng well; have me with stood,
And, borne me hate for my good will,
Because, I love the thing that is good.
7
Lord, go not far, therefore, from hence;
From me, my God! depart not far:
But, make thou speed in my defense;
Because, from thee, my succors are.
Most awful God! dreadful is thy frown when we behold thee angry for Sin:
loathsome are our sins, when they appear to a wounded conscience: and
insufferable our afflictions when our consciences accuse us: We have sinned,
oh Lord, (we have sinned) and are therefore tormented both in soul and body:
yet, we beseech thee deal not with us according to our sins; but, for thy
mercie-sake vouchsafe us a favorable correction, and those remedies and
consolations which thou know best for our infirmities: When thou art
offended, our foes are not only mischeevous vexations, but our kindred also
forsake us; our best beloved friends afflict us; and (which is yet more) we our
selves are our own tormenters. Whatsoever therefore, betides us (or whosoever
is injurious) we have nothing to reply, nor any to accuse, but our selves.
Oh! pity our distempers, hear us, help us, and deliver us, for the bitter
passion sake of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Psa. 39.
To the cheef Musician to Iduthun a psalm of David. The Prophet resolves a
patient watchfulnes over the tongue; Bemoanes the vanity, and misery of
mankind, and petitions for God's mercy, etc. It may serve to instruct and
comfort us, during the provocations of the wicked, and in other afflictions,

IVow'd to keep my ways upright,
And, that in words, I none would wrong.
While sinners were, therefore, in sight,
I shut my lips, and stayed my tongue:
What er'e they said, I silent stood;
Refraining words, though they were good.
2
But, greefs did then to stir beginn,
Which, hot in me, my heart did make;
My thoughts inflamed a fire within,
Which loosed my tongue, and then I spoke.
Lord, of my end, inform thou me;
And, what my days, and frailties, be.
3
For, lo, my life is but a spann;
It seems as nothing, in thine eyes:
Even at his best, most vain is man,
And, like the shade away he flies,
He tires himself, with needles pains,
And knows not who shall reap his gains.
4
On thee, therefore, I do attend;
My trust, oh Lord, I place on thee.
From all my sins, my soul defend;
From flouting-fooles, preserve thou me:
For, I forbear to speak a word,
Because, it was thy doeng, Lord.
5
Thy hand, with blows, does me afflict;
Oh! take thy heavy strokes away.
When thou for sin do man correct,
Thou, Moth-like sretst their Form away.
Therefore, no cause of doubts remain,
That every man is wholly vain.
6
Lord, hear my suite; my criengs hear;
Let not my tears vnmention'd go:
For, as thy Guests, my Fathers were,
(And strangers here) even I, am so.
Oh! spare, and grant me strength, I pray,
Before I pass from hence, for aye.
Give us Grace, oh Lord, that our tongues neither offend, by indiscreet or
evil speakings, nor by continueng silent when we ought to speak. Remember us
how short and vain our lives are, and how foolish it is to weary our selves,
and consume our time, for that with we may never enjoy; loosing, in the mean
while, assured blessings. Enable us to sustain the cross (which thou shall
lay upon us) without repininge, and lay no more on us then thou shall make us
able to bear. Deliver us from the scorn of fools; but especially, from
those transgressions, by which our beauty is consumed. Mark our tears, hear
our cries, and spare us in this our pilgrimage, until we have atained the
strength by which we may stand firm in thy favor, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Psa, 40.
To the cheef Musician a Psalm of David. It is applied unto Christ, Hebr. 10.
It praises God for our Redemption, declares the abolishing of the Ceremonial
Law, the obedience of Christ, and the preaching of the Gospel, etc. It is
useful to commemorate Christ's obedience; to give praise for former
deliverances, and to pray for future preservation.

MY constant hopes on God are set,
Who, when I cride, gave ear to me:
He brought me from the myrie-pitt,
Even from the denn, where horrors be.
Upon a Rock, my feet he placed;
He settled there, my standing fast.
2
And, that his praise I might declare,
A new-made song, to me he taught;
Which many men shall hear, with fear,
And, to depend on God, be brought.
For, they, who trust in him, are blessed:
And, they who pride and lies, detest.
3
Those wonders, Lord, which thou have wrought;
Those things (my God) so many are
Which thou concerning us have thought;
That none cann them to thee declare:
O Lord! to order them to thee,
Is far too great a task for me.
4
No offerings thou do now require,
But, only, that thy words I hear:
No Sacrifize consumed in fire,
By thee, for sins, desired are.
Then, Lo, (I said) I come, to be
That, which thy Book foretold of me.
5
I joy to do thy will, oh God!
Thy Law, is in my heart enrowld;
And, Lord, thy Justice, all abroad,
In great Assemblies, I have told.
Thou know. my lips thy Truth reveald;
And. that my heart has naught conceald.
6
I, made thy faithful-dealing known;
I, did thy saving-health declare;
I have not kept thy Love vnshowne,
Nor hidd thy Truth, where hearers were,
Therefore, to me thy mercy show;
Thy Truth, and Love, Lord, make me know.
7
For, mischeeves more then cann be told,
Have now enclosed me round about;
My sins, on me have laid such hold,
There is no place of looking out:
Their number does my hairs out go,
And, therefore, faint my heart does grow.
8
Oh Lord! vouchsafe my life to save,
With speed oh God! assist I pray;
That they with shame, a fall may have,
Who seek to take my Soul away:
Let those that wish amiss to me,
With shame and scorn, repelled be.
9
With rooting-out, those men require,
(And pay them with deserved shame)
Who in those words of scorn delight,
Which bring on me, disgrace, or blame,
But, give him joy in his desires,
Who after thee, oh Lord, enquires.
10
Let them who love thy saving-health,
Confess thee Lord, for evermore:
For, thou art mindful of my wealth,
And, heedest me, though I am pore.
Lord God my helper, make thou speed,
To help me, still, at every need.
Almighty God, by whose divine power, Jesus Christ was raised out of the
myrie pit of the Grave, and with tryvmph ascended from the Dungeons of Hell,
into the highest heavens: Grant, that by his example we may continually offer
up the sweet, and ever acceptable Sacrifize, of Obedience to thy Will. UUrite
thy Law in our Hearts; Let our Tongues publish thy Righteousness, and thy Truth,
to all the world. And, though our manyfold Sins make us unworthy of thy grace,
yet deliver us from that shame and punishment which they deserve. that our Foes
may be disappointed of their hope; and that, we, (together with all thy Saints)
may joyfully confess thy great Mercy, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Psalm. 41.
To the cheef Musician, a Psalm of David. It declares the reward of Charity
toward, the pore members of Christ; expresses the Hypocrisy of his foes;
Beseeches God's assistance, and praises him for our exaltation by Christ. It
is useful, for these purposes aforementioned. etc.

THe man is blessed that heeds the pore,
From dangers, God will him repreeve;
He will preserve his life, therefore,
And, unto him preferment give.
The Lord, will guard him from his foes,
When him they labor to surprise;
Refresh him, when that weak he grows,
And, make his bed, when sick he lies.
2
In mercy, cure my Soul I pray;
For, Lord, even thee. I did offend.
Vile words, of me, my foes do say;
And, wish my fame and Life, had end.
When me they spy, fair shows they make:
But, in their hearts my harm desire;
Which when they come abroad, they speak,
Where all my foes, my wrong conspire.
5
Some ill desease has he (they sedd)
He Is down, and shall no more arise:
Nay, he whom I have loved and fedd,
(My trusted-freind) did me despise.
But, help me Lord, and raise, me now,
That, I their dealings may requite.
I shall thereby, thy favor know,
If thou prevent my Foes despite.
6
Thou do maintain my Righteousness,
And, in thy sight-still placest me:
The Lord, the God of Israel, bless;
Oh! let him blessed for ever be. Amen. Amen.
Infuse into us, oh Christ, such brotherly compassion, and such true Charity
toward thy pore members, that we may obtain all timely consolations in this
life, and be well-comed with Come ye blessed, at the last-day. UUee confess,
there is a desease in our souls, disenabling us to perform this duty; and,
as we are neither truly compassionate to others, nor faithful acknowledgers
of thy love to us; So, we find others justly unmerciful, in our Afflictions,
and increasing our vexations, by neglect, conspiracies, or bitter Censures:
Yea, they whom we have cherished and releeved, in their wants and sorrows,
do vnthanckfully take part with our Oppressors. Oh! deliver us therefore, from
our own vnthanckfullnes, and want of charity, that we may be comforted by
others, in our need; and become more perfect and constant, in all good works,
to the praise and glory of thy Name. Amen.

Psalm. 42.
To the cheef Musician Maschil for the Sonns of Chorah. It mistically
expresses a Christian man's estate wandering through the Hopes, Doubts, and
Fears, of this life etc. It is useful, when inward or out ward afflictions
tempt to despair of God's love; or, when we are hindered from frequenting his
assemblies, etc.

LOrd, as that Heart which water wants,
So, longs, my soul for thee:
Eternal God! so thirsts and pants
My soul, thy face to see.
My tears, are day and night my meat:
And, when I hear them say,
Where is thy God? the greef of it
Consumes my heart away.
2
For, heretofore I went among
Thy folk on holy days;
Them, to thy house, I ledd along,
And, there we sung thy praise.
My Soul, why art thou so oppressed:
In me, why art thou sad?
Still, praise thou God, and on him rest;
For, he will make thee glad.
3
My Soul, oh God! is faint in me,
Yet, thinck on thee I will,
Though Iordans land I cannot see,
Nor Hermons little Hill.
The, deepes upon each other call,
When thy loud storms descend;
And, over me, thy Billows fall.
But, Lord, thou help wilt send.
4
For day and night, I Will sing and pray
Oh God (my life) to thee:
My God my Rock; to thee, I Will say,
Why thus forsak'st thou me?
Why am I suffered still to mourn,
Afflicted by my foes?
UUhere is thy God? they say in scorn;
And, through my bones it goes.
5
My soul, why art thou so oppressed?
Why art thou sad in me?
Still praise thou God; and on him rest
For; he my God will be.
How desirable (oh Holy Ghost the Comforter) are thy consolations to afflicted
souls! and how thirstely swallowed, being mingled with our tears! Our sins
often greeve thee; therefore, thou justly greevest us to make us sensible of our
unkindness: Therefore, we are sometime censured as Hypocrites; and have all
our piety and devotion mentioned with scorn, to our vexatio^: Therefore,
mischeeves like waves, follow us, one after another; yea, and therefore also, our
own consciences so accuse us, that we are sometime sorrowful to the death,
and almost desperate of thy favor. But, blessed Spirit, speak thou (oh speak
thou) comfortably to our scules; and to whatscever outward misery thou expose
us, (yea though we appear miserable to our selves) be thou still our God, and
our Comforter, that our sorrows may at the last be turned into joy, to thy
glory and our everlasting consolation. Amen.

Psa. 43.
The Prophet prays for assistance, promises to be thanckefull, and
concludes, with rowzing up his dejected Soul to persevere in praising, and
relieng on God. It may be sung, to keep us vndiscouraged in our spiritual
greevances.

LOrd, judge thou me and plead my right
With such as cruel be;
From wicked men, that use deceit
Oh God! deliver meet.
For, since thou Lord, my fortress art
Why should thou fro me go?
Why should I walk so sad in heart
Oppressed by my foe?
2
Me, let thy light and Truths bright rays,
Unto thy dwelling bring:
And, at thine Altars, to thy praise
Oh! God my Joy, I Will sing.
My Soul, why art thou so oppressed?
Why art thou sadd in me?
Still praise thou God, and on him rest:
For he my God will be.
When our scules are afflicted, expose us not (oh God to suffer long, the
scorns of our Adversaries; nor leave us to the terror of those cruel
judgments which our own consciences do often pronounce against us: But, when
we are most severely judged by the world, and by our own selves, do thou
absolve us: Depart not from us, when we are compassed about with injuries,
neither give us over to those melancholy cogitations which will oppress our
hearts when sorrow has entered into our souls. But, let the truth of thy
promises, and the light of thy countenance, so appear to us, that we may be
revived thereby; to the increase and continuance of our consolation; and, that
(depending always on thee as our sole comforter) we may magnify thy Name for
ever and ever. Amen.

Psa. 44.
To the Cheef Musician, for the Sonns of Chorah. The Church pleads for Gods
mercy, because he is her ancient deliverer; and because he is yet her only
Trust, though she has long sustained the scorns and oppressions of Tyrants,
etc. It may be used, when the Church or commonwealth is afflicted, etc.

Oh God! thy work's in Ages past
We heard our fathers tell:
How, thou the Gentiles forth did cast,
And, broughtst them, there to dwell.
For, nor their sword nor Arm it was
By which that land they gaind
But, Lord, thy hand, thine arm, thy grace,
And favor, them sustained.
2
Oh Lord my God, my king thou art,
Thy Jacob. still, defend,
And, we shall those through thee subvart
That harm to us intend.
We. through thy Name shall tread them low,
That us resist, oh Lord;
For, I depend not on my bow,
Nor trust I to my sword.
3
We from our foes were kept by thee,
And thou did work them shame:
In thee therefore, much joy'd were we
And, we did praise thy Name.
Yet, now disgraced, thou throw'st us by;
Our Host thou do forsake:
Before our foes, thou make us fly
And, spoils from us they take.
4
Thou make us the Gentiles meat,
And, us like sheep they slaie;
We, scattred, and for sale, are set
To those, who nothing pay.
At us our neighbors laugh and ieer,
Of us, they proverbs make:
The people round us, mock and fleer;
At us, their heads they shake.
5
Disgrace is always in my sight;
And, redd with shame, I grow,
To hear the scornful words of spite,
And, railings of my foe:
Yet, we, O Lord, forget not thee,
Nor from thy covenant stray;
Nor changed in our hearts are we,
Nor gone out of thy way.
6
Nay, though (oppressed, in death's black shade)
We lodged with Dragons, lie;
Thy Name, we nor forgotten had,
Nor to strange Gods did cry.
Yea Lord, thou know (who know each thought)
That, daily, for thy sake,
We fare like sheep, to slaughter brought
And, so our deaths we take.
7
Lord, wake, and rise; why sleepst thou so!
Reject us no for aye.
Why should thou disrespect our woe,
And hide thy face away?
Behold, even to the dust we make
Our souls and bodies bend:
Redeem us for thy mercy sake;
Arise, and us defend.
Deliver us, oh Lord, from all our adversaries: and make us to be still
mindful what we have aunciently heard concerning thee, from others; and what
experience we our selves have had of thy judgments and Mercies, from time to
time: that, neither our prosperities make us arrogate any thing to our selves,
nor our Afflictions or persecutions cause us to blaspheame, or forget thee.
Yea, though we should become the scorn and laughing stock of our Neighbors, a
prey to our foes, and be always as the sheep appointed for slaugher; yet, keep
us unchanged in the true Religeon, and in our love to thee: That, thou (to
whom both our outward Trialls, and our inward sincerity, is ever known)
may in due time, help and save us whom thou have redeemed, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

Psa. 45.
To the Cheef Musician upon Shosannim for the Sonns of Chorah Maschil. It is,
as it were, Christ's marriage-song, and setts forth the glory of that
bridegroom and of his Spouze. It is useful to stir up our spiritual
affection to Christ's, etc.

MY tongue shall prompt the writers penn,
My thoughts of thee, oh King! to tell:
For, thou excellst the Sonns of men;
And, on thy lips, all graces dwell.
God, will thee bless, for evermore.
Great Conqueror, unto thy side,
With honor, gird thy sword, therefore,
And, forward in thy Triumphs ride.
2
Thy Righthand shall, by deeds upright,
(By Truth, and Meeknes) wonders do:
Thy shafts, thy foes, to death shall smite,
And, make the people serve thee to.
Eternal is thy Throne of state;
Thy Scepter, from all wrong is free;
Thou Justice love, thou Sin do hate;
And, therefore, God anointed thee.
3
Yea, thine own God, thy head anoints,
Even with his oil of Ioyfulnes;
And, thee (above thy Mates) appoints,
The place of Sov'raigne to possess.
The precious Robes, which thou put'st on
Of Aloes, Cassia, and of Mirrh,
Smell round about thine yv'rie throne,
When, they thy heart have cheared, there.
4
Kings daughters, have at all times been
Among thy Maids of honor, found:
And, at thy righthand, stands the Queen,
In Ophir gold, arayd, and crowned.
Hear, daughter, and my words respect;
Forget thy fathers kindred, now:
And, that the king may thee affect,
Him, for thy Lord, acknowledge thou.
5
Then, shall the Daughters come from Tire,
And, bring rich presents unto thee;
The wealthy, shall thy grace desire,
And, Suitors, for thy favors be.
The Daughter of the King, does wear
An upper garment wrought with gold:
But, if her inside should appear,
You, all perfections would behold.
6
Her, to the king, present they shall,
In Robes which are by needels wrought;
Even with her fellow Virgins all,
(Attending her) she shall be brought.
They shall into his palace come,
With joyful heart, and merry cheer:
And, she, shall in her fathers Room,
To be her comforts, Children bear.
7
Great kings, (on earth) she, them shall make;
And, cause, that men in future days,
Such notice of her Name shall take,
That nations all, shall sing her praise.
Most amiable Bridegroom of our seules, (whose excellencies ravish, with
spiritual affections, all those who cann apprehend the beamings of thy
majesty, with true faith.) Proceed on, in the manifestation of thy power;
Inflame our heart: by the vision of thy perfections; make our persons acceptable
by the reflection of thy beauties; enrich us outwardly with the golden
embroideries of goodworks; adorn us inwardly with the Jewels of Divine
graces; and let thy holie-Spirit brings us unto thee, acompanied with so many
vnpoluted Affections; that, thou may take pleasure in our comelines; and,
that we, forgetting our carnal desires, (and wholly renouncing our selves) may
have our full contentation in thy dear embraces; and enjoy all the priveledges
belonging to thy Spouze, for ever and ever. Amen.

Psa. 46.
To the cheef Musician for the sonns of Chorah, a song upon Alamoth. It
expresses on Assurance of God's protection, and the reasons thereof, with an
exhortation also, to take notise of God's power. It is useful to us, for those
purposes, etc.

God, is my strength, when dangers are;
A ready healp approoved:
Therefore, we would not stand in fear,
Though all the world were moved.
No, though the Floods had flowed-o're
The highest earthly dwellings;
And Seas did make the hilly shore,
To tremble at their swellings. (Selah.)
2
There is a River, which does glad
The place where God resideth;
And, happy is that City made,
Because, he there abides.
Her, vn-remoov'd, and firm to set,
He, timely undertakes;
And, though Realms rave, and heathens frett,
Earth melts, when he but speaks.
3
The Lord of hoasts, our part will take;
Us, Jacobs God, protecteth. (Selah,
Oh come therefore, and notise take
What wonders God effects:
What wast, and spoils, when he shall please,
Among mankind he sends;
And, how he makes, both war and peace,
As far as land extends.
4
He cutts the spear, he breaks the bow,
And, he the Charret fireth:
Be still, says he, and also, know
Your God the samer equireth.
I will divulge my fame abroad
To every ethnic Nation.
The Lord of Hoasts, even Jacobs God,
(With us) is our Salvation. (Selah)
No distrust have our souls, oh Lord, of thy loving protection; yet, when the
contract betwixt thee and us was first published, the whole world of our
enemies raged at our preferment; and all the Corruptions of our Nature did
furiously oppose our union: And, but that we were strengthened by thy
continual presence (and refreshed by the ever-flowing River of thy grace) they
had shaken (and perhaps overthrown) our Constancy. Oh! continue thy assistance
to our comfort, and their further vexation. Protect us from every evil;
confirm us in all goodness; and so break the weapons and engines of ungodliness;
that, all the world may extol thy works; and, we continue, for ever, in thy
Salvation, through Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

Psa. 47.
To the cheef Musician, a Psalm for the Sonns of Chorah. It provokes to
reioicinge, for the Ascension of Christ; praises him, for subiecting the world
to his spiritual dominion; and for uniting Jews and Gentiles etc. We should
use it to those purposes.

TO God, all people, joyfully
Clapp hands, with exultation;
For, dreadful is the Lord, most high,
Great king of every Nation.
He, unto us, by his great power,
Much people has subjected;
And, made our heritage, the flower
Of Jacob, his elected. (Selah)
2
With trumpets, and with merry noise,
Is God the Lord ascended:
Oh! let him be (with joyful voice)
In songs of praise, commended.
Of God our king, the praise now sing;
Sing praise, and honor do him.
The Lord, of all the world is king;
Sing praise, with knowledge, to him,
3
God sitts upon his holy throne
Over all the Gentiles raigninge;
And, calls every willing-one,
To Jacobs God pertaininge.
For, unto God (whom every tongue
With high applause commends)
The worlds protection does belong;
And, he the same defends,
Eternal Son God, great in power, terrible in Judgment, King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords; who sitting on the right hand of thy Father, have subjected the
world to thy Dominion, and elected unto thy self out of all Nations those
willing-ones who are obedient to thy Call. Oh grant, that we may not hide thy
Talent, or belie thy bounty (by their persuasions, who tell us that, thou
expectest to reap where thou sowedst not) but, let us thanckfully, acknowledge
thy Common grace: When we are perticulerly called, let us runn unto thee by
thy assisting Spirit; and obtain that special Favor, which makes a sure
Election, and from which there is no falling. So, we shall see that Truth, at
which so many slumble; and with cheerful hearts, and triumphant voices, ascribe
our salvation, wholly, to thee; and all honor, and power, and glory, to thy
majesty, now and for ever more. Amen.

Psa. 48.
A Psalm and song for the Sonns of Chorah. It extolls the Lord, and the place
of his dwelling; confesses his mercy, his Bounty, and exhorts others to
consider and publish he same. We, above many other Nations, should use this,
to praise God for our Syon, etc.

THe Lord is great, and great his Fame
Should in his holy mountain be:
For, Syon is a goodly Frame;
The praise of all the world, is she.
She northward stands, and she does hight
The City of the King of might.
2
The Lord, is known to be her guard;
For, when great kings against her came,
They much admired; admiring, feared;
And, fearing, fledd away with shame:
Even with such pangs, and suchlike fear,
As women that in travail are.
3
For, thou, did raise an Eastern wind,
Which all the ships of Tarsus brake:
And, Lord of Hoasts, now true we find,
What others of thy City spoke:
Yea, we have heard, and now we see,
That, God will still her keeper be. (Selah)
4
Within thy Temple, we oh God,
Upon thy loving-kindnes thought;
Thy Name is published abroad;
With Justice, thy Right Hand is fraught:
And, in thy Judgments, Syon shall
Rejoice, with Judah's daughters all.
Through Syon go; about her walk,
Her Bullworks mark, her Turrets heed;
That, of her beauties you may talk
And, tell her glories to your seed:
For, God in life, will be our guide;
And, in our death, our God abide.
Thou art worthy oh Lord God, to receive honor, and praise and power; for, thou
have beautified, and so fortified thy City the Catholic Church; and thy
ancient promises concerning her, are so graciously fulfilled, that many
famous Nations, Kingdoms and potentates, (who despised and opposed her small
beginning) having, since, vewed her (with reverence terror and admiration) are
driven back from their Idolatries and ashamed of their malicious Intentions.
Make us oh God! faithful Citizens of this thy City, and delighted, so to
observe and publish the beauties and priveledges thereof, that the number of
her inhabitans may be increased, and that we and they, may there live, under
they protection, for ever and ever. Amen.

Psa. 49.
To the cheef Musician a Psalm for the Sonns of Chorah. It declares the common
vanity, and the solly of men in honor etc. It is useful, to comfort the weak
Christian against the scandalls of the Cross; and strengthens him that is
offends at the prosperities of the wicked etc.

Ye dwellers all on earth, give ear,
Both rich and pore, and high, and low;
For, musings deep, I will declare,
And, wisdom from my tongue shall flow.
Dark Problems I will harken out,
A Ridle to my harp, I Will sing;
For, of that day, what should I doubt,
Which, all my faults, will round me bring?
2
They, who their trust in Riches have,
And, glory in their wealths increase,
Their brothers life, shall neither save,
Nor with his God, procure him peace.
For, souls redemptions are so dear,
That, no man cann sufficient have
To purchase life, for ever, here;
Or, escape the Dungeon of the grave.
3
Men see, both fools and wisemen die,
And, that their gettings others wast:
Yet, to their Names, their lands they tie,
And, thinck their house will ever last.
But, man's vain honor soon decaies,
Even as the brutish creature dies:
And, (though their seed, their course do praise)
Their ways are neither safe, nor wise. Selah
4
Like sheep, they food for death are made,
Who shall a covering on them lay:
Their glories in the grave shall fade,
And, Iust-men rise more blessed, then they. Selah
Despair not then, though some thou see,
Surpassing thee in place, or pelf:
Since, God, thy soul from hell will free,
And, home receive thee to him self.
5
For, though their life more blessed they thought,
(And, others did their path commend)
They to their grave shall carry naught,
Nor shall their pomp to them descend.
No; to their Fathers, they must pass,
And lie in darkness quite forgott;
For, foolish men in honored place,
Are like the beast, which dies, to rott.
It is a Riddle (oh Father of Wisdom) that happiness, should be attained
without wealth honors and such transitory things; Therefore, worldings magnify
them selves, and applaud others, according to their temporal Acheivments; But,
when Sin follows at the heels to Judgment; when the grave shall devour our
beauties; and when the price of Souls is required; then, their vanity will be
apparent. Grant therefore, oh Lord, that neither the worlds esteem of such
things, make us to overvalue them; nor our want of them, to be discouraged;
but, ^^t us be fully contented in our salvation by thee: So, when they perish
like beasts, (and are consumed and forgotten in the grave) who were honorable
and rich, without understanding; we, whom they judged unhappy, shall at the
Resurrection arise blessed and glorified, through Jesus Christ, our Lord, Amen.

Psa. 50.
A Psalm for Asaph. It prophecies of the last Judgment, and summons Jews and
Gentiles there unto; It declares by what law they shall be judged; Reprehends
Hypocrites; and exhorts to repentance, etc. It is useful, to warn that we be
not hypocritical; in regard, all shall one day be disclosed, etc.

THe Lord our God, th'Almightie-one
Has spoke, and summoned all,
That are bewixt the rising Sunn,
And places of his fall.
God's glory, Syon, first will show,
With noise, approach will he;
Before him, burning fire shall go,
A storm, shall round him be.
2
Through heaven and earth, he shall, aloud,
His folk to judgment call;
His Saints, that Sacrisizes vowed,
Appear before him shall.
His Justice, heaven shall show abroad;
For, God the Judge will be.
Hark Israel; for, even I, thy God,
Will thee accuse, says he.
3
I, for thine Offerings blame thee not,
Which were my due of old;
Nor Bullock ask I, neither Goat,
Out of thy Stall or Fold.
For, I, more herds of Cattle own,
Then all the Mountains yeald;
To me all Beasts, and Birds are known,
That live in wood or field.
4
If I were hungry, do thou thinck,
(Since all the world is mine)
Thy Goats blood, I would ask to drinck?
Or, feed on Bulls of thine?
No; rather pay, in thanckfulnes,
Thy Vows; and call on me:
So, I shall pity thy destresse
And, have due praise from thee.
5
But, to the wicked, says the Lord,
How dare thou to prate
Of my commands, and of my word,
Whilst thou do Counsel hate?
For, when thou do a Thief perceive,
A share with him thou take;
Thou, in Adultery do live,
And, wicked words thou speak.
6
Thy Brother, (thine own Mothers son)
Thou causles, do revile.
I, silent was, and thou have done
These wicked things, the while.
Yea, thou have thereupon supposed,
That, I, was like to thee;
But, all thy folly shall disclosed,
And, now apparent be.
7
Ye, that of God forgetful are,
Of this, Remembrance have;
Else, I shall you in pieces tear,
When there is none to save,
For, I am glorifide of those,
That give due praise to me,
And, such as well their lives dispose
My saving-health shall see.
Allmighty God, who with maiestic and terror, shall come to judge the world and
require an Account of every one according to the Talent received (especially
of us, who are Saints, by an ordinary and visible Calling) give us grace to
offer the acceptable Sacrifize of Righteousness and true obedience. Let not our
Religion be merely formal, without the fruits of good life. Let us not be of
those hypocritical talkers and professers of thy word, who hate reformation,
and uncharitably censure their own Brethren; neither let thy long forbearance
of our Sins cause us any way to abuse thy mercies: But, grant rather, that we
may so unfeignedly embrace thee in our hearts, and so truly serve thee in our
lives, that thou may be glorified by us, and we saved by thee in the last
Judgment, Amen.

Psa. 51.
To the cheef Musician a Psalm of David when Nathan the prophet came unto him,
after he had gone into Bethsheba. It personates a man truly penitent; and, a
true confession, contrition, and purpose of amendment, is the subject of this
Psalm, Every true penitentiarie may sing it in his humiliation, etc.

OH Lord, of thy abounding Love
To my offense, remissive be:
My Follies Purge, my Sin remove,
And, of thy grace, daigne grace to me.
For, still, my fault before me lies;
Yea, by my self, I am accused:
Thee, thee alone, my conscience cries,
Even to thy face, I have abused.
2
Which, here I do confess, oh Lord,
That, when to censure thou art brought,
Men, true my find thy Truthfull word,
And, judge thy Judgments as they ought.
For, (sinnfull though my parents made,
My Being, and my Birth to be)
From thee, a secret grace I had,
To form the Truth thou seek'st in me.
3
And, if I purged with hysope were,
Me, thou should make more white then snow:
Yea, thy Glad-message when I hear,
The bones thou brak'st, will healthful grow.
Then, from my faults, thy face divart;
Blot all my follies out of sight;
Creat in me a spotles heart,
And, make my Spirit, Lord, upright.
4
Oh! let me not rejected be;
Take not thy Holie-ghost away;
To joiefull health, restore thou me;
Let thy free Spirit be my stay.
So, I will other Sinners guide,
To seek thy grace, and walk thy ways;
And, (if my bloody sin thou hide)
Thy Justice, oh my God, I Will praise.
5
Which praises, that my tongue may sing,
My lips, oh Lord my God, unclose:
For, Burnt-oblations I would bring;
But, thou have quite rejected those,
A greeved Soul, a contrite heart,
Is God's best-liked Sacrifize:
With such, oh God! thou pleased art;
And, such thou never shall despise.
6
As thou art pleased, Mount -Syon bless,
And wall about Jerusalem.
The Sacrifize of Righteousness,
Shall then obtain thy good esteem.
Yea, thou shall then their Gifts receive,
And, they shall all their Offerings pay;
Even whole Burnt-offrings they shall give,
And, Oxen on thine Altar slay.
Oh Lord! our own Consciences accuse us, and will pronounce thee just if thou
condemn us: for though it might somewhat moove thy compassion, to consider our
disabilities, by Original Polution; yet, knowing what grace thou have secretly
infused, both, to resist that natural corruption, and to form also within us
that Righteousness which thou requirest; we have no excuse (no hope) but to
appeal to thy mercy. To thy Mercy therefore, we appeal, believing to be
perfectly purified by the sprinckling of thy dear Sonns blood. Oh! forgive us
for his sake; Restore us to thy favor; repair what is decayed in soul or
body; and so comfort, renew, guide, and strengthen us, by the continual
presence of the Holy Ghost; that our conversation may be more upright; and all
our future endeavors become acceptable; to thy glory, to the saving of our
Souls, and to the consolation of other penitent Sinners, through Jesus Christ
our Lord: Amen.

Psalm. 52.
To the cheef Musician Maschil a Psalm of David when Doeg the Edomite came and
told Saul, and said unto him, David is come unto the house of Abhimelech. It
mistically, personates the Elect, vpraiding their persecutors, foretelling
their shamfull ruin, and reicicing in their own deliverances, etc. It is
useful in persecutions.

WHy vaunt'st thou Tiraunt of thy wrong?
God's love will still the same appear,
Although thy mischeef-working tongue,
Faines lies, as keen as Razors are.
Thou, evil more then Good respect'st;
Thou love falsehood more then right: (Selah.)
All harmfull speeches thou affect'st,
And, tongues which publish forth deceit.
2
But, thee from hence, the Lord shall tear,
And, from the Land thy dwelling take. (Selah.)
The Just shall see the same with fear,
And, sport at thy destruction make.
Yea, they shall say; Lo, this was he
Who sought not God to make him strong;
But, labored how he great might be,
By getting wealth, and doeng wrong.
3
Then, as for me, I prosper shall
As Olive trees that have their place
Within Gods holy temple wall,
And, still depend upon his grace.
There, Lord, I Will spread abroad thy fame;
Yea, then, I Will praise thee for thy love,
And, trust for ever in thy Name;
Which, all thy Saints will well approve.
Deliver us oh gracious Lord, from the cruel insolences and falsehood of
those, who seek their Advancement by injurious and wicked means. Preserve us
also from the guilt of their abominations; but especially from being so
shameless, as to make vaunts of oppression, or of any other sin. Disenable, and
root out of the land, all such insolent offenders; that the righteous
flourishing as green Olive trees, and beholding thy Judgments, may with reverent
awe, rejoice in their subversion who are friends to Unrighteousness; and (with a
fearles confidence in thy love) magnify thy Holy Name, for ever and ever. Amen.

Psa. 53.
To the cheef Musician Maschil, A Psalm of David. It is almost the same with
the 14. Psalm. And may be used to mind us that our Nature was wholly depraved,
and that we should desire the coming of Christ, by whom we are to be
renewed, etc.

THe fool, does God in heart denay,
And, all corrupt are grown;
Perverse and wicked is their way,
There is no Righteous-one.
For, God from heaven his eye declin'de,
Man's offspring to behold;
And, searched who did seek to find,
Or, know him as they should.
2
But, all their ways prepostrous were;
All, fillthie and unsound:
None saw he live vprightlie, there;
Not one good man, he found.
Even brutishlie, fond Sinners eat
God's people, as their bread.
They, seek not God; and horrors great
They feel, where is no dread.
3
The Lord will break the bones of them
That have beseiged thee;
And, thou shall shame them, since, of him
They disrespected be.
Would we God's healp from Syon had!
For, Jacob, triumph shall,
And, Israel, will there of be glad,
When them he brings from thrall.
Free us, oh Lord, from that universal corruption which overspreadeth our
Nature; that we neither become so foolish to deny thee in our hearts, nor so
perverse as to dishonor thee in our ways. So behold our polutions, that thou
may cleanse us from them; So consider our weakness, that thou may break
the bands of all our foes; So make us to fear thee, that all our other fears
may be turned into joy; And cause us to be so desirous of that salvation,
which was promised out of Syon, that (being delivered from the thraldom of
sin and death) we and every true Israelite, may triumph in our Salvation and
Redemption through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen,

Psa. 54.
To the cheef Musician on Neginoth Maschil. A Psalm of David when the Ziphims
came and said to Saul, does not David hide himself with us? It mystically
prophesied the Jews trecheries and tirannies against Christ etc. It is
useful, when we are (or have been) betrayed or persecuted by false brethren,
etc.

DEfend me Lord, for thy Name sake,
In thy great power, adjudg thou me,
Of all thy suites quick notise take;
And, let my words well heeded be.
For, Strangers do against me rise,
And, Tirants for my life have sought,
(Not setting thee before their eyes)
Although my healp, thou still have wrought,
2
The Lord, my Souls vpholders, gards;
His Truth has chased my foes away;
And, them with Vengance he rewards:
For which, my Vows I Will freely pay.
To laud thy Name is well approved
And, I oh Lord, thy praise will sing;
Because, my greefs thou have remoov'd
And, on my foes, my wish do bring.
Incline thtne ear (oh merciful father) unto all our just petitions, and
suffer us not to be oppressed by our professed foes, nor to be betrayed into
their hands, by those Aliens unto thy Truth and Goodness, from whom we have
better deserved; But, as thou have been always heretofore our Healper (and the
vpholder of them who have befreinded us.) So, continue, we pray thee, to reward
our friends, according to their kindness; to requite our foes according to their
deservings; and to deliver us from all our sorrows, through Jesus Christ; To
whom, with thy blessed Spirit, we will offer up the free Sacrifize of praise
and thancksgivinge, now and for ever. Amen,

Psa. 55.
To the cheef Musician Neginoth Maschil, a Psalm of David. It personatet the
faithful, complaining and petitioning against the inhumanitie of their foes.
It deciphers, also, false brethren; declares their destruction, and the
security of the Elect. It may be used as the former.

OH God! my prayers hear;
Hide not away thine ear;
But, hear, and cast on me thine eye.
For, loud my foes do roar;
The wicked greeve me sore;
And, therefore Lord, thus loud I cry.
2
With wrongs, they me pursue,
A wrathful spite they show,
And, I, at heart am greatly vexed:
Deaths torments me oppress,
I shake through fearfullnes,
With horrors great, I am perplexed.
3
I said; Doves wings, had I,
To rest, I then would fly.
Lo, then far hence I would abide,
I, then would haste away,
And, in some Desert stay
Which from the Tempest me should hide. (Selah.)
4
Destroy and slitt their tongues;
For, strife, oh Lord, and wrongs,
Possess their City night and day:
In midst thereof I spi'de
Sin, fraud, and guile abide;
These, in her streats, still made their stay.
5
A foes contempt, or scorn,
I could have shund or borne;
But, me no public foe abus'de:
It was my trusted Peer;
As friends, we freindlie were,
And, we God's house together used.
6
Arrest them, Death and Hell,
With whom such Mischeevs dwell:
For, I, upon the Lord will call.
To God, at night I Will pray,
At morninge, at nooneday;
And, me both hear, and save, he shall.
7
In war, he gave me peace,
And, me will still release:
Even me, the Lord will hear, and save.
But, God will punish them: (Selah.)
For, they his fear contemn;
Because, that they no Changes have.
8
Their hands, the Peace did break,
(Where they a league did make)
And, though their speech most freindlie were,
Yet are, sometime, their words,
Like darts or naked swords.
Let God, therefore, thy Burden bear.
8
For, God is thy defense,
He gardeth innocence;
And, Sinners down to Hell will thrust.
Not half their days they live,
Who murder or deceive:
But, in the Lord I put my trust.
Many and greevous (oh Lord) are those troubles which exercise thy Children;
especially in those places, where prophanes, or false worship is openly
approoved: but, the greatest Afflictions are occasioned by Hypocrites, False
breathren, and those who abuse us under color of Religeon, or by pretenses of
dearest Amity. Defend us therefore, oh God, from those harmfull Serpents; Give
us the wings of Dovelike innocence, to carry us above their snares: Grant us
those enterchanges of Prosperity and Adversity, which may keep us both in thy
Fear, and Love: Suffer not the tribulations of the world, nor the temptations
of the Devil, nor the miseries of the Flesh, to oppress us: But, let us lay
all our burdens upon thee, confidently; Trust in thee firmly; Seek thee duly;
love thee sincerely; and enjoy thy gracious protection for ever more Amen.

Psa. 56.
To the cheef Musician upon the mute Dove in the Desert, a golden Psalm of
David, when the Philistims took him in Gath. It typically personates the Church
in persecution, and is a prayer, and a complaint against her Foes,
acknowledging Gods regard of her sufferings, professing assurance in him, and
promising to be thanckfull etc. It is useful to those ends. etc.

HAve Mercy Lord, for, man has sought
To swallowe up, and mischeeve me.
My Foes with me have daily fought;
And (Lord most high) they many be.
Thou art my hope, when doubts arise,
Thy word has brought me comforts, to,
On thee alone, my heart relies,
And, fearles is, what Flesh cann do.
2
They wrest my words, Lord, every day;
To work me harm, they still devise:
They meet unseen, they mark my way,
And, how they might my Soul surprise.
Therefore, in thy just wrath, oh God!
Correct them for this Crime of theirs:
And, as thou do my Faults record,
Record, and botle up my tears.
3
For, thou will save me, Lord, I know;
When thee I seek, my Foes fly back:
Thy promise makes me joyful grow,
And, of thy word, my songs I make.
My, trust, oh God! is all in thee,
And, of man's power, I fearles am.
Thy vows are all performed on me
And, I will praise thee for the same.
4
For thou have freed my Soul from death;
From falls, thou do my footing stay,
To walk, by thee, within that Path,
Which leads to Life, a lightsome way.
Oh thou faithful preserver of all who put their trust in thee! Our visible
and invisible Adversaries do continually seek the destruction of our souls and
bodies, by many secret and mischeevous devises: But, our trust being placed
upon thee, we need not fear the malice of any Adversary. Grant us grace
therefore, so to depend on thy promises, and so to lament our errors (with
tears of true Repentance) that as our enemies mark our ways to entrap us, we
our selves may mark them to prevent ensnarings; and that thou observing their
hatred, and our penitence, may cause us to walk joyfully, in the way of
eternal life, through Jesus Christ. Amen.

Psalm. 57.
To the cheef Musician Altaschith, A Psalm of David, when he fledd from Saul in
the Cave. It mystically expressed the Jews persecutinge Christ, even unto his
Grave. we that are his members, and partake in his sufferings, may sing it, to
declare our injuries, and to pray, and praise God, for deliverances. etc.

LOrd, grant (oh grant) me thy compassion;
For, I, in thee my trust have placed,
Display thy wings for my Salvation,
Until my greefs are over-passed.
To thee I sue (oh God most high)
To thee, that can all want supply.
2
From their despights who seek to rend me,
Let help, oh Lord, from heaven be daigned,
And let thy Truth and Love defend me;
For, I with Lions am detained:
With men inflamed, whose biting words,
Are shafts, and spears, and naked swords.
3
Let over heaven God's praise be reared,
And through the world, his glory showed.
For, they who netts for me prepared,
(They who my soul to ground had bowed)
Even they, with in those trapps are caught,
Which for my fall, their hands had wrought. Selah
4
Oh God! my heart now ready makes,
My heart is for thy praise preparing;
My Tongue, my Harp, my Lute awaketh
And, I my self, betimes vprearing,
Will speak and sing, in praise of thee,
Where greatest throngs of people be.
5
For, Lord, thy Mercies forth are stretched,
As far as are the Spears extended;
Thy Truth unto the Clouds has reached
And, thou thy self art high ascended
Let, still, thy, Fame and praise, oh God!
Through heaven and earth be spread abroad.
Oh Lord to whom Mercy belongs, have mercy upon us; and let the Wings of thy
protection be graciously spread over us, until the Storms of this life be
overpast: For, so great and so manyfold are those dangers, and those Miseries
wherewith we are always enclosed, by spiritual and temporal foes; that they
have brought our bodies to the Grave, and our seules near unto Hell. Oh! let
thy Truth and Love defend us from our Lion-like persecuters; that our Hearts
(being timely cheared) our Thoughts, Words and Actions, may harmoniously agree
in manifesting thy praises. And, seeing thy holy Spirit has plainly declared
the Universality of thy proffered Grace; let not us presume to set Limmits
there unto; but publish thy glory as vniversaly as thou have extended thy
Mercies, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Psa. 58.
To the cheef Musician Altaschith Michtam of David. It reprehends and
characters, that Serpentine generation, who are obstinate enemies to the
Gospel of Christ, and prophecies and illustrates their destruction, etc. It is
useful to encourage us against their malice. etc.

Ye congregation, said ye right?
Ye Mortals, are your Doomes upright?
No; for you muse on works of Sin:
Your hands with mischeevs filled are,
You from your Births untoward were;
And, from the womb have liers binn.
1
Your poison, like the serpents, flows;
Deaf-Adder-like, your ears you close,
Though powrfull Charms are wisely sung.
Oh God! their mouths of teeth disarme;
And, that their Fangs may do no harm,
Make tootheles (Lord) the Lion's young.
3
Like sudden Floods, their fury slale;
When they would shoot; their arrows, break:
Yea make them quite consume away.
Like snailes, consume them from the earth;
Or else, like some untimely birth,
Destroy, them, er'e they see the day.
4
Before we feel them, prick or burn,
Them, whirle-winde-like, Lord, overturne;
And sweep them hence, in wrath alive.
Which Vengance. when the Righteous vewe,
(And vewing Sin receive her due)
They, joyful thancks, to thee shall give.
5
Yea, they shall trample on their blood,
Who have been Foes to doeng good;
And every man shall say, and see,
That Righteous men shall have their meed;
And, that there is a God, indeed,
By whom the world shall judged be.
Keep us, oh Lord, from having fellowship in the Congregations of those, who
are perverted in their Judgment, mischeevous in their Conversation; Draf to
good Instructions, Obstinate in their heresies; and wilful continuers in all
their natural Corruptions. Deliver us from their malice; Break their
Instruments of mischeef; and let their deserved confusion fall suddenly upon
them: That, the Faithful Congregation, may vewe it; and that all men may see
and confess thee, to be the Righteous Judge of the world, and the rewarder of
all those who put their trust in thee. Amen.

Psa. 59.
To the cheef Musician Altaschith Michtam a Psalm of David, when Saul sent and
they watched the house to kill him. It chiefly prophesied the Jews dogged
cruelty to Christ, and that they should be preserved to wander in a vagabond
Condition (as we see at this day) for an example to others etc. It serves to
warn us, that we resist not God's grace once offered. etc.

MY God, protect me from my Foes;
From them, who strive with me:
From Sinners guard me, and from those,
That bloodie-minded be.
For, lo, the mighty do combine;
They wait my soul to tear:
And, without cause or fault of mine,
With speed there to prepare.
2
Lord God of Hoasts, and Israel, wake,
To heed and succor me:
The Gentiles Curb, and vengance take,
Where sins malicious be. (Selah)
At night, like Dogs, they Bawling come,
They round the City go
And slanders rank, and threatenings, from
Their Mouths, and lips, do flow.
3
For why, say they, none hears the same;
But, God shall them detect:
The Gentiles also to defame,
His aid I will expect.
For, God's my strength, God healpeth me,
Preventing grace bestows;
And, what my heart requires to see,
Inflicts upon my Foes.
4
Oh Lord our help, disperse with shame,
Disperse them by thy power;
But, lest my Folk forget the same,
Them, do not quite devour.
Until their tongue, all words of spite
And falsehood, vttred has;
And, when their pride is at the height,
Consume them in thy wrath.
5
Yea Lord, consume them utterly,
Till, notise they obtain,
That, God, throughout eternity;
Does over Jacob reign. Selah
At night, unto the City wall
Like dogs they shall retreat;
Without it, they shall bark and bawle,
And whine, for want of meat.
6
But, in the Morn, aloud I Will sing,
Both of thy power and grace;
And speak what succors thou did bring
When sore destrest I was.
Even unto thee, oh God my power.
My praise-full song shall be:
For, thou art my defensive Tower,
And, gracious unto me.
Just Avenger of all malicious injuries; According to thy promises thou have
subjected the Gentiles to thy Sonns Dominion, and scattred the Jews (with a
Cain -like mark preventing their utter extirpation) that so, their vagabond
life may be a perpetual memorial, both of their cruelty, and of our Savious
Passion. Let all those who shall make themselves partakers of their malicious
heresy (without repentance) be partners in their punishment; and let them hunt
through the earth in error, bawling like dogs without the walls of thy new
Jerusalem (for an example to all Ages): But, let so many of them as have been
misseled, by ignorance only (without wilful malice) oh let them, return from
their obstinacy, in the Evening of their life (or of this world) and let them
hunger and thirst after the true Messiah; that in the Morning of their and our
Resurrection, we may, altogether, praise and glorify thy holy Name. Amen.

Psa. 60.
To the cheef Musician upon Shushan Eduth Michtam of David, to teach when he
strove with Aram Naharaym and with Aram Zobath, when Ioab returned and slew of
Edom in the salt vallie 12000. It bemoanes the present calamity; mitigates it
by remembering God's promises; Desires his conduct; and professes Assurance in
him. It is useful to encourage those who fight under God's banner. etc.

OH God! we are despised of thee,
And, in thy wrath dispersed be:
But, now return to us again.
Thou smot'st our land, and Lo it quakes,
Oh! stopp the breach, for, still it shakes;
And, many cares thy folk sustain.
2
A giddie wine thou made us drink;
Yet, they that fear thee, do not shrinck
They Truths displaied Flagg to bear. Selah
Oh! that thy Darling, safe may be,
Let thy Right Hand over shadow me;
And, bow thou down to me thine ear.
3
Then (as God's holy-voice declared)
All Shechem, shall by me be shared;
I Will Succhoth Dale by Line receive:
I Will Gilead and Manasseth take;
Mount Eph'rim, I my guard will make;
In Judah, I, my law will give.
4
My servile work shall Moab do;
Over Edom I will fling my shoe;
And Palestine, of me shall boast
For, who to Edom is my Guide?
Or to the City fortifide,
But, God, that had forsook our Host?
5
That Lord, who did our Host forsake,
Shall of our greefs an ending make:
For, man's vain help we do contemn.
Through God, we valiant Acts have done,
Our Foes, by him, shall down be thrown
And, He shall set his feet on them.
Notwithstanding our many outward Afflictions make us appear as reprobates in
the worlds opinion; and though (by reason of our sins) we our selves are
sometime half afraids, that thou, oh God, have for saken and despized us: yet,
havinge among us the Ensign of Truth as a testimony of thy favor; we
believe that thy spiritual kingdom shall be continued with us, and be
established in those places also, which are not yet of thy visible Church.
Fulfill oh Lord, our hopes herein; that we may break through the
fortifications of the mistical Babylon, and that thy Spiritual Armies may be
victorious, through the conduct of our Lord and Captain Jesus Christ. Amen.

Psa. 61.
To the cheef Musician a psalm of David. It desires God's assistance;
confesses former protections, and promises future trust in him. It contains
also, a prediction of Christ's kingdom, a petition for Grace, and a vow of
thanckefulnes. To these ends it may be used.

LOrd, let my plaint attention move,
When greev'd at heart I lie;
And, lead me to the Rock above,
When from Earth's ends I cry.
For, as a City fortifide,
From foes thou gardest me,
Within thy Tent, still, safe I bide;
Thy Wings my Covering be. Selah.
2
Thou hear'dst my vows, and gav'st me shares,
With such as fear thy Name;
And, spar'dst the king, till he in years
An aged man became.
Oh! let thy Truth and Mercy, Lord,
Preserve him still by thee;
That, still thy praise I may record,
And pay my vows to thee.
Hear our Prayers, oh Lord, and let our cries come unto thee. So firmlie
establish us on that Rock whereon thy Church is founded, that it may be our
Bullwork of defense in all dangers. Cover us with the wings of thy Mercy;
Succor us in thy Tent; and be gracious unto us, from what place, or in
whatsoever affliction, we call upon thee: That so (having an outward portion
among those who profess thee, and performing those vows, which we made unto
thee in our Baptism) we may be continued in thy favor, until we shall be
admitted into thy triumphant Church, and enjoy life eternal with Christ Jesus.
Amen.

Psa. 62.
To the Cheef Musician to Iduthun a Psalm of David. It professes trust in God;
threatens and Characters out, Antichrist and his Members; Exhorts to faith in
Christ; and declares the vanity of man and of all te^porall assistances and e.
It may be sung to increase Piety. Faith, Hope, and the contempt of temporal
Vanities. etc.

STill wait thou, oh my Soul, on God;
For, he my help does prove,
My Rock, my Guard, my Safe-abode;
Whence, none cann me remove.
Those, therefore, who conspire my fall,
His Blade shall root from hence,
And, shake them like a rotten wall,
Or, like a broken fence.
2
They seek my shame; They lies commend:
And hate when fair they speak. Selah.
My Soul, therefore, on God attend;
Thy hope, him only make.
For, God (my strength, my healp, my sort)
From harm will succor me:
My praise, my guard, my firm support,
And my sole trust, is he.
3
In God, ye people, always hope;
To him, your hearts declare:
For, he will prove a certain propp,
When men deceitful are. Selah.
Men high and low, are less in weight,
Then things that are most vile:
Trust not therefore, nor take delight,
In wealth, in wrongs, or guile.
4
For, once God said, and often I heard,
That, God (both strong and kind)
On all men, will bestow reward,
As he, desert shall find.
Grant oh Lord, that we may always, so patiently attend on thee, that
persecutors, falseteachers, and all they who seek our fall or dishonor, may be
quite subverted or converted. Make us ever mindful how strong a supporter thou
art unto all those who put their trust in thee; and how just a rewarder of
every one according to his deserving. Seeing also, we cann have no safe
assurance in the best men, nor in the best outward means (without thy special
Assistance) let us never depend upon them; much less, seek to be secured, or
to profit our selves, by fraudulent or wicked practices: But endeavoring
rather, to fulfill all righteousness for thy sake; and making our petitions to
thee only; at us depend wholly on thy protection, for ever and ever, Amen.

Psa. 63.
A Psalm of David when he was in the wilderness of Judah. It may be sung by
those who are afflicted in the wilderness of this life, hungring and thirsting
after righteousness. It expresses their longing to be pertakers of the public
worship, who are debarred from the same; and may be used also by them, etc.

OH God! my God thou allwaies art;
For thee, betimes, I seeking pant,
With longing soul, and thirsting heart,
Even as the land, which rain does want.
Yea, Lord, my soul does long, full sore,
Thy power and glory to behold,
As I have seen them heretofore,
Even in thy holie-place of old.
2
For why! thy love does life surpass;
And, I therefore will sing thy praise:
Thy Name, I Will all my lifetime bless,
And, unto thee my hands I Will raise.
For, when I mind thee on my bed,
And muze upon thee in the Night;
It fills me, as with marrowe fedd;
And I with joy thy praise recite.
3
Since, me thou healp'st in my destresse;
Beneath thy wings I gladd remain,
My Soul, to thee does closely press;
And, thy Righthand shall me sustain.
But, they shall to their grave descend,
Whose purpose is my soul to slay:
The Sword shall bring them to their end,
And, they shall be the foxes prey.
4
The king, and they who swear, in truth,
By God's great Name; in God shall joy:
But, he shall stop the liers mouth,
And, every perjured soul destroy.
Cause us to seek thee timely (oh Lord our God) and when we are wandering in
the deserts of this life, let us hunger and thyrst after thee and thy
righteousness; that we may be satisfied according, to thy promise. Let our
muzings be upon thee, both in the night of our Afflictions, and upon the bed
of our prosperities. Let the contemplation of thy power and glory fill us, as
with marrowe and fatnes: Let thy Love be precious unto us; yea, more precious
unto us then our lives: Let the wings of thy Mercy, and the power of thine
Arm, so shaddowe and protect us, that (both our Lionlike and foxlike
Adversaries being destroyed, and the mouth of all unrighteousness being
stopped.) We and thy whole Church may rejoice in thy Salvatoon, for ever and
ever. Amen.

Psa. 64.
To the Cheef Musician a Psalm of David. It prophecies the Jewish malice
against the Messiah at his passon; and that according to their own
imprecation, the avengment of his blood should be upon them and their children,
etc. It serves to mind us, what manner of foes we have, and for what
assistance we may hope, etc.

LOrd, hear my voice, and me acquit
From terrors of the foe;
And from their plotts, and feirce despite
That mischief seek to do.
For, they like swords, their tongues prepare;
With words, like arrows keen,
They shoot the righteous without fear,
With quicknes, and unseen.
2
Themselves in Mischief, strong they make,
Their plotts they thinck vnspide;
And, search how that effect may take,
Which in their hearts they hide.
But, God shall wound them with a shaft,
Before they be aware;
So, they shall fall by their own craft,
And their own sentence bear.
3
Thereat, beholders, all, shall fly,
And, every man, with fear,
The works of God shall magnify,
And, ponder what they are,
The righteous also, with delight,
On God, their hope shall build:
And, they that are in heart upright,
Shall with true joie be filld.
Oh Lord, we have so many visible, and invissble Adversaries, secretly and
continually plotting our destruction; that our Souls are afflicted with great
terror. Some, by whispering of slanders, or by privy conspiracies, seek to
endanger our bodies; Others, by hidinge false Doctrines under appearances of
Truth, or masks of piety; or else, by insinuating carnal or spiritual
wickednesses (before we be aware) deeply wound our Consciences, and very
dangerously pierce our Souls with venomous arrows. Oh God! break, and quench
these fiery darts of Satan; Deliver us from their cunninge Proiects; shoot
back their arrows into their own bosoms; and let their predictions be
fulfilled on themselves: But, grant that we may still depend on thee; and that
being delivered from all our terrors, we may serve thee in holiness and
righteousness, all the days of our life Amen.

Psa. 65.
To the Cheef Musician a Psalm and song of David. It acknowledges God's
manifold benifits; First, those which are peculier to the Elect; and then, his
Universal providence over all his Creatures etc. We should sing it to those
ends. etc.

IN Syon, Lord, thine honor lies;
There, vows to thee are brought:
Even there, thou answer'st all men's cries,
And, of all Flesh art sought.
Though many sins do me oppress,
From them thou purgest me;
For, thou thy Chosen-one do bless,
And bringst him near to thee.
2
Within thy courts and holie-place,
His dwelling he does gain;
Even there, where we shall (of thy grace)
Our wished fill obtain.
Thou in thy Justice dreadful art,
Yet, in thy grace we stand;
And thou the hope of all men art,
That live on sea, or land.
3
Girt round with power, thy Vigor lays,
A groundwork for the hills:
The noise of seas and Floods it stays,
The peoples rage it stills.
Thy signs, remotest Clymates fear;
Thee, day and night they praise;
Their Lands to visit, thou have care;
And, rich increase it paies.
4
To water all their furrows there,
Thy River overflowes:
To feed them, corn thou do prepare;
And, blessest that which grows.
Thou Crown'st the year with plentiousnes,
And, fat thy paths are made:
It dropps upon the wilderness
And makes the mountains glad.
5
Fair flocks, their fruitful meads adorn;
Their valleys freshlie spring,
And, are so filld with cropps of Corn;
That they do laugh and sing.
In thy visible Church, oh Father of Mercy, thine honor and thy Grace are
most evident: Nevertheles, thy Mercy is not so confined, but that thy Church
invisibly extends it self into every corner of the earth; yea, thy overflowing
River makes up thy harvest even in those deserts where we behold no
fertility; and there (thou havinge regard as well to the soul as the bodic)
visitest them, not only with temporal, but with spiritual Blessings. For which
thy great providence and mercy, we bless thy holy name; beseeching thee, so
to moisten the clodds of our hearts with dewes from above, that we whom thou
have planted in thy visible Garden, may not, be less fruitful then those, to
whom thou have not yet vouchsafed the same priveledges; But grant that both
we and they (according to what we have received) may bring forth fruits
acceptable unto thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Psa. 66.
A song a Psalm. It praises God both for temporal and spiritual blessings,
especially for the great benifit of our universal Redemption, which is
typically expressed, by allusion to the Jews deliverance from the Egiptian
bondage etc. It may be sung to praise God for our deliverances from sin and
the Devil. etc.

Ye kingdoms all, God's praise express;
In songs, exalt and land his Name:
To him, his dreadful Acts confess;
And, how his Arm his foes does tame.
Let all the world before him bow.
With singing to his Name and him; Selah.
And, let all men more heedfull grow,
What dreadful things he did for them.
2
The sea he dri'de, and through the Maine
We walked on foot, him praising there.
He has obtained a boundles reign,
And, of all Nations, he has care.
He will not let the Rebels thrive. Selah.
Oh! bless our God, and sing his praise;
For, he preserves our soul alive,
And, he from slipps our footing stays.
3
By thee, oh God! we prooved were,
Like silver tried and refin'de:
Thou did entrap us in a snare,
And round our loins affllictions bind.
Above our heads, thou made men ride;
And, through both Floods and fires, we came:
But, thou did rest, at last, provide;
And, I will praise thee for the same.
4
Even in thy house those vows I Will pay,
Which in destresse were sworn by me;
Fatt Rams and Bullocks I will slay,
And burn sweet incense unto thee. Selah.
Come hither, ye that fear the Lord,
And, hear what for my soul he wrought,
When his assistance I emplor'd,
And, him with praise-full voice besought.
5
If any sin, my heart affects,
The Lord, will then withdraw his ear:
But, surely, God my suite affects;
For, he my vocal moan did hear.
Oh! let him ever praised be,
For not rejecting my request:
And, for his Mercy showed to me,
Oh! let him be for ever blessed.
Blessed be thy Name (oh gracious God) for all thy benifitts; especially for
our many spiritual deliverances, which are, every day as wonderful now, as
when the Reddsea was dried up. For, through Seas of terrors, and Deserts of
tribulations, we pass many Dangers, many trialls, and many enterchanges of
Adversity and prosperity in this life, to refine and prepare us for a blessed
habitation, and, that without impeachment to thy Justice, we may be made
capable of thy free-Mercie. Oh! root out of our hearts that affection to sin
which interrupts thy hearing of our prayers; and grant that (by sacrifizinge
our brutish affections, and offering up the sweet Incense of a Faith fruitful
in Good works) we may declare our selves thanckfull unto thee; and that we
and our Oblation may be made acceptable through the Merrits of Jesus Christ.
Amen.

Psa. 67.
To the cheef Musician upon Neginoth, a Psalm a song. It expresses a longing
for the universal spreading of that saving grace which is offered to Jews, and
Gentiles; and shows the blessedness which will succeed the same. It is daily
sung in our Liturgy for the enlargment of the Catholic Faith.

THy blessing, Lord, bestow;
Show us thy glorious Face Selah.
That, all the world, thy ways may know,
And, see thy saving-grace.
2
Let all men give thee praise;
Let all sing praise to thee:
Let nations all sing out thy praise,
For, thou their Judge must be.
3
God, is the Nations king, Selah.
Let Nations all therefore,
Let Nations all, unto him sing,
And praise him ever more.
4
Then earth shall give increase;
And, God, whose Folk we are,
That God, shall us vouchsafe to bless,
And, him, the world shall fear.
Allmighty God, vouchsafe, that we whom thou have already enlightened with a
gracious measure of thy Savingknowledge, may so evidently enjoy also, thy
protection, and the continual brightness of thy Favor; that all the Nations of
the world, beholding the benifit of thy Service may be allured to join with us
in magnifienge of thee. Let also, a due consideration, that thou art Universal
king, makes us believe that thou have provided means of salvation for all thy
Subjects: and let the remembrance that thou art universal Judge, make us all,
so fruitful; that thou may be universally feared, and glorified; and we
blessed world without end. Amen.

Psa. 68.
To the cheef Musician a Psalm or song of David. It is a Prophecy of Christ
Heb. 4. 8. Herein, by allusion to some passages in the old Testament, many
Evangelical mysteries are shaddowed out (to wit) the Resurrection, Ascension,
sending of the holy ghost, Calling of the Gentiles, etc. It is useful to
commemorate those mysteries, etc.

LEt God arise, and all his Foes affright,
Let those that hate him, be despers'd and fly;
Let Sinners, pass like smoke out of his sight,
And melt like wax which in the fire does lie.
But, from the Just, let him expel their sadness,
And make them glad in him, with perfect gladness.
2
Oh! prais Gods name, who rides above the sphere!
His Name Eternal in your Songs commend;
For, in his holy-place, he still appears
The Orphans Father, and the widows friend.
He captives frees, he strangers entertaineth,
And for the proud, a fruitles land ordains.
3
When thou did, Lord, thy peoples passage make
(And, ways, for the^ through deserts vast prepare)
At sight of thee, both heaven and earth did shake;
Yea, Sinai shook, when Isr'els God was there.
Thou gav'st thy flock, sweet raines as need required
And, made the^ strong when they were weak and tired.
4
There dwells now, thy Congregation, Lord,
Where, for the pore thy goodness roo^ had made:
When thou thy self had first proclaimed the word
Great Armies, the^, of Preachers, there they had.
Kings troops did fly, and she the spoil divided,
Who came not forth, but, in her tent resided.
5
Ye shall be made (tho lodged with pots ye were)
As fair as doves, with gold and silver wings,
As white, as snow in Salmon did appear,
When there, the Lord dispersed mighty Kings.
Like Bashan hill, God's holy mountain shows,
And, Bashan-like, all other hills over veweth.
6
This hill is God's, and he inhabits here;
Then why insult ye so, ye meaner hills?
God's charrets, twice ten thousand Augells are,
And, he, by them, in holy Sinai dwells.
Ascending high, even thraldom, he enthralled,
And bought us gifts, when we his foes were called.
7
Thus God has done, that he might dwell in us.
Oh! let this God, our savior, blessed be; Selah.
For, with good things, he daily lodeth us,
And, God of Life, and Lord of death is he.
He breaks the heads of those, that him receive not
And wounds the crown of him, that sinning leaves
8
From Bashan, and the Deeps I will (says God)
Bring back my Folk as once from thence they came
That thou may wash thy feet, in thy foes blood,
And, that thy dogs, may come and lick the same:
For, they, oh God my king! thy goengs heeded;
They saw, how in thy house, thou have proceeded.
9
The singers first, the minstrells next had place,
With whom, the maids, on timbrels plaieng went:
And then, the Choire of Isr'els blessed race,
Did all in one, to praise the Lord, concent.
There went young Beniamin's, and Judah's Guiders,
And Zabulon's, and Nepthalies Providers.
Oh Lord! who bid'st that we should courage take
Co^firm thy work which thou for us have wrought;
At Salem then, (and, for thy Temple sake)
To thee by kings, shall gifts of price be brouht.
Their brutish troops, that arms do love to carry
Rebuke, disperse, and make them tributarie,
11
Then, Egipts kings will seek unto the Lord,
And Chush will then, to God advance her hands.
His praise therefore, ye kingdoms all record,
And, sing aloud his praises, all ye Lands.
For, when he rides, the spears his horse he makes
And lo, his voice is thunder when he speaks.
12
All power and praise, ascribe to God alone,
For, his renown is through all Isr'ell spread:
God is in heaven, the great Almighty-one,
And, in his holy-place, is full of dread.
His peoples power, by God is much increased
(By Isr'els God) let him therefore he blessed,
Eternal Son of God, who art ascended unto the righthand of thy Father, and
shall come again with majesty to be our Universal Judge; Deliver us from the
thraldom of Sin, by the power of thy Righteousness: And (though we have yet
our conversations among Dragons, and in defiled habitions) make us innocent as
Doves, and as vnpoluted as the mountain snow. Increase the means of
publishing thy Gospel; and preserve Unity, order, and good discipline, in thy
Church: that the comelines thereof may allure all beholders, to desire
fellowship in thy Congregation; that, heretics, hirelings and contentious
persons, may be reprooved and reformed, or cut of; that, they who are, yet,
without, may be received into the Covenant; that we who are admitted, may be
confirmed, without waveringe; and that the God head may be feared, and praised,
and blessed, now and for ever more Amen.

Psa. 69.
To the cheef Musician Shosannim a Psalm of David. It personates Christ taking
upon him our sins and infirmities; humbling himself before his Father;
declaring the Condition of his Adversaries; showing the bitterness of his
passion; signifieng the judgments prepared for Sinners; and prayeng for his
Elect etc. Christ's members may use it to those purposes.

HEalp Lord, for, Floods enclose my Soul,
In groundles depths I am bemir'd,
Above my head, great waters roll,
My parched throat, with cries is tir'de.
Mine eyes are dimmed in seeking thee,
More then my hairs, my Foes are grown,
My spoilers are too strong for me;
And, take as theirs, what is mine own.
2
Thou know how I am too blame;
But, for my sake, let none of those
(Lord God of Israel) suffer blame,
Who do in thee their trust repose.
For, I sustain reproachful scorn.
And, am disgraced for thy sake.
My brethren, of my mother borne,
Of me, likewise, a stranger make.
3
Zeal to thy house, has worn me out,
Thy scorners, my reprochers be;
My Fastings, and my tears they flout,
And, when I mourn, they laugh at me.
Of me, the Rulers, evil, spoke;
The Drunckerds, made of me their songs:
But, Lord, my moan, I timely make,
In Mercy, mark therefore my wrongs.
4
Me, by thy Truth's protection keep,
That miry-depths, nor spightfull-foes,
Devouring-Flouds, nor whirl-pooles deep,
Nor Dungeons Mouth my soul enclose.
But, Lord, of thy abounding grace,
(For thy Love-sake) return, and hear;
To me, thy servant show thy face,
And, in my need, incline thine ear.
5
Draw nigh, and save, and set thou free
My soul, from those who bear me spite;
For, all my wrongs, are known to thee,
And, all my Foes, are in thy sight.
Rebukes and scorns, my heart nigh broke,
With greefs oppressed, I made my moan;
But, where I did for pity look
They would (alas) afford me none.
6
They, for my meat, did gall prepare,
Sharp Vinegar to quench my thirst;
Their Bourd, therefore, shall them ensnare,
And, Blessings, be to them accursed.
Their eye shall be deprived of sight:
A cure-les greef, their back shall shake:
God's heavy wrath, shall on them light,
His Vengance, them shall overtake.
7
None shall in their abiding-place,
Or in their Tent, be dwelling found:
For, whom thou smot'st, those they did chase,
And, greeved him, whom thou did wound.
More sinnfull still, they shall become,
And, in God's Justice have no share,
Nor in that book of life have room,
Wherein, the Just enrowled are.
8
But, I, that pore and scorned am
Shall by thine aid, oh Lord, be raisd;
For which, I Will magnify thy Name,
And, in my songs, thou shall be praisd.
And, that, oh Lord, more pleases thee,
Then, horned and hoofed Ox to give;
Which, when the Meek (thee seeking) see,
It shall with joy, their heart revive.
9
God's praise, ye heavens and earth declare*
Him praise thou sea, and all in thee:
For, to the pore, he lends his ear.
And, he does set the prisoner free.
He, Syon saves in time of need,
And, Judah's Towns he will erect,
To be for those, and for their seed,
Who serving him, his Name affect.
Oh Lamb of God! which take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon
us. Thou, that have taken on thee our sins, felt our infirmities, and suffered
all which we deserved, have mercy upon us. Thou, who for our salvation,
did bear the unkindness of kindred and familiers, the reproaches of
Neighbors, the scorns, and oppressions of strangers, the reproofs of
Magistrates, and the contempt of the basest people, have mercy upon us. Thou,
who for cursakes, have endured, insufferable torments of the body, the
unspeakable agonies of the soul, and tasted the gall and vinegar of every
bitter passion, have mercy upon us. Deliver us from them who seek to crucify
thee again, in thy members. Raise us by thy Resurrection, whom thou have
redeemed by thy passion; Glorify us by thy Ascentio^, in life eternal, whom
thou have secured from Damnation, by thy Death and Burial; And, for that which
thou have done, and prepared, for thine Elect; let heaven and earth praise
thee, world without end Amen.

Psa, 70.
To the cheef Musician a Psalm of David to bring to Remembrance. The Church
prays for deliverance from her persecutors; prophetically imprecates their
confusion; and desires the prosperity of the Godly, etc. It may be sung when
oppressors insult over us. etc.

DEferr not Lord, thy succors long
But, bring my Foes to shame;
Even those, who plott my soul to wrong,
Bring back, with loss and blame.
On them who skoffe, and flout at me,
Bestow the Scorners hire:
But, make them glad, and joy in thee,
Who after thee enquire.
2
Still, God be praised, let all men say,
Who, on his aid rely;
And, make, oh Lord, no more delay,
For, in great want, am I.
I will no other aid emplore,
Then, what thou shall afford;
To bring me succors, now therefore,
Thy healp, defer not, Lord.
Healp us, oh Lord; for thou only art our healper, and we have no other hopes
but in thee. Make us not the spoil or scorn of those, who desire, and
practice the destruction of our souls: But, grant rather, oh God! that all
they who fear thee, may be comforted in our speedy deliverances; Rejoice in thy
Mercies; rely on thee in their necessities; and ascribe all thancks, honor,
and glory to thy blessed Name, for ever more. Amen.

Psa. 71.
The Church acknowledges God's preservation of her in her several Ages, and
from her manyfold Oppressers, desiring to be preserved also, in her last and
worst age. etc. we, on whom the worst Age is come, should use it as a prayer,
to be delivered from the same.

KEep me from shame; for, Lord in thee I trust;
Incline thine ear, to healp and set me free:
Yea, save thou me, oh Lord, as thou art just,
My Rock, my Fort, my Refuge daigne to be;
For, Lord my strength, thou help do promise me,
2
Me from the power of sinnful men defend,
And from their hands, oh Lord, that cruel are.
My soul, on thee did in the womb depend,
And, since my birth, thou have of me had care:
For which my tongue shall still thy praise declare,
3
Thou art my hope, though wondered at I be,
And, I will fing thy praises all the day.
When I am weak and old, Lord, leave not me:
For, with despite, my haters me gainsay,
And, for my soul, they plotts and engines lay.
4
God, leaves him quite (say these) pursue and take;
He, now, has none to rescue him from thral.
But, come, oh God! and speed to healp me make;
Oh come! and smite my souls Oppressors, all,
Bring scorn and shame, on those who seek my fall.
5
The^, still, I Will hope; thy love I Will still commend;
Yea, still, relate what favors thou have done:
And, of thy grace, since I perceave no end,
Thy strength, Lord God, I will depend upon,
And, magnify thy Righteousness alone,
6
Till now, oh God! thy Marvailes I have told,
As from my youth I have bin taught by thee:
Oh leave me not, when I am gray and old,
Till Ages all, thy power have learned of me;
And, then extold, thy Justice, Lord, shall be.
7
None ever did such works as thou have wrought;
And, though my soul thou keptst awhile in pain,
At last, as one who from the grave was brought,
Me, to my joys thou did restore again;
For which, my harp, to praise thy Name, I strain,
8
My tongue, likewise; in setting out thy prais,
Oh thou cheef saint of Israel! part shall bear;
So shall my soul, whose price thy bounty paies,
And, every day, thy Justice I Will declare,
Because, my foes defamed, and ruin'de are.
Oh Lord, in the womb we had extraordinary nourishment and breathing for our
bodies, and (no doubt) our seules had there, a due nourishment by thy Spirit.
Being borne, we are brought into thy visible Church by Baptisine, and long
time after sustained by thee, both in soul and body, without having any outward
work required at our hands; and when we are capable of the outward Covenant, al
thou requirest is but to give thee that heart which thou have prepared so to
do. Yet helps us, oh God, in this duty; and never leave us in our own hands.
And as thou have in all her former ages, preserved thy Church, both from the
rage of Jews, Gentiles, and Heriticks; so, in this her old and worst age,
preserve her from those Hypocrites and lukewarm professors, who have added
seacret mischeeves, to public oppressions. Yea preserve her, and us, oh God,
from those, and all other Adversaries, that thy Truth may be continued to all
ages; the joy of her Children restored; and thy blessed Name glorified, for
ever end ever. Amen.

Psa. 72.
A Psalm for Solomon. It setts forth the majesty of Christ and his kingdom
(for, only, of that Solomon are many passages of this Psalm verified) it
declares his Universal judicature; The Churches happiness therein; His
marvailous Incarnation; The extent, Riches, and peaceablenes of his Kingdom
etc. We should sing it to glorify God for those things etc.

THe King oh God! with judgment bless,
And, give thy Justice to his Son;
That, to thy people, in destresse,
With judgment, Justice may be done.
Then, Truth and Justice flourish will,
On every great and little hill.
2
Then, poorest men shall be secure,
For, he will all Oppressors tear;
And, whilst the sunn and Moon endure
From age to age, they, him shall fear.
On Earth, like dropps descend he shall;
Like those, which on the Fleece did fall.
3
The Just, shall whilst he rules have peace,
So long as does the moon remain:
He from the River to the seas,
(And quite throughout the world) shall reign,
The salvages, adore him shall,
And all his foes, before him fall.
4
Arabia's prince, and Saba's King,
The Lords of Seas, and Islands to,
Shall gifts to him, with homage, bring;
So shall all Kings, and people do.
For, when they cry, he sets free,
The pore and meek, that helples be.
5
The pore and humble he respects,
He saves their souls that healples are:
From fraud and force, he them protects;
For, in his eye, their blood is dear.
To him, they Sheba's gold shall give;
And, he shall praised, and prayed for, live.
6
His Corn, shall from a handful, grow
To cover all the mountains topps;
Like Libanon, his fruit shall show,
And fill the Cities with his cropps.
His Fame through Ages, all shall runn,
As everlasting as thee sunn.
7
In him, the Nations all abroad,
Shall blessed be, and praise him to;
Oh praise the Lord! even Isr'els God,
For, he alone cann wonders do.
Still, blessed be his glorious Name,
And, earth still filled, with his Flame. Ame^. Ame^,
Sweet Jesus who being invisible in thy Deity, did become visible in thy
humanity, by descending miraculously into the Virgins womb, like rain into
Gideons fleece; Grant we beseech thee, thy divine spirit may so infuse it
self into our hearts that (Justice, Peace and Charity, increasing and
continueng upon the earth) all thy afllicted Children may be comforted and
secured; the barbarous Nations converted; thy Kingdom enlarged; thine enemies
be brought into subjection; thy feilds become abundantly fruitful; and heaven
and earth be filled with thy glory, world without end, Amen.

Psa. 73.
A Psalm for Asaph. It expresses, how the faithful are sometime discouraged,
by the prosperities of the wicked; and is an excellent description of such
conflicts as are between the Flesh and the spirit in every Christian. etc. We
may use it, to comfort us in such temptations, and to remember us whither to
repair in such conflicts.

NO doubt, God counts his Israel dear,
And, loves the righteous man;
Yet was my foot quite gone, wel-near
And, I to fall begann.
For, when I fools did honored vewe,
And Sinners lifted high,
And that nor sick, nor weak they grew,
Their weal I did envy.
2
From greefs like ours, they seemed free,
Their pride and Cruelties,
To them as clothes or bracelets be;
And, fatt stuffs out their eyes.
They have their wills, and are so base,
To boast of Sins and wrongs:
And neither earth nor heavenly place,
Escapes their evil tongues.
3
To such Ful-springs, as well as they,
God's Children seek to go:
For, God (the God most high) they say,
Regards not what we do.
Lo, wicked men the world possess,
And, wealth and honors gain;
But, we have cleans'd in righteousness.
Our hearts and hands in vain.
4
Yea, we still pininge go (say they)
Lamenting all day long:
Yet, thus I, speak not, lest I may,
Thy weaker Children wrong.
I sought a reason for the same,
But, I no cause descern'd
Till to the house of God I came,
And, there their end I learned.
5
On slipp'rie seats, them set thou have,
From whence with shame and fear,
Even suddenly, they down are cast;
And never more appear.
For, as a dream (when thou do wake)
Thou do their Form deface:
At such therefore, offense to take,
Thou see, how fond I was.
6
But, still, with me thou do abide,
Thou hold'st my Right Hand fast;
And, by thy Counsels, me shall guide
To Glory's throne, at last.
In heaven or Earth, account I make
Of nothing but of thee:
And, though my soul and Flesh be weak,
Thou always strengthnest me.
7
For, thou oh God! my portion art;
And, thou shall them destroy,
Who runn a whooring in their heart,
Another, to enjoy.
Because, right good, the same does seem,
To God, approaching near,
(And, placing all my trust in him)
His works I will declare.
Direct thou so (oh Lord) all our works, words and thoughts, that we neither
murmur at any afliction where with we are exercised, nor be discouraged in thy
service, because the wicked are more flourishing, for a time. We confess it
is often our frailty to judge of thy love by outward prosperities; and that great
Adversities have tempted some to call into question thy providence, to the
shaking and endangering of their Faith. But, grant (we pray thee) that by
frequenting thy house and using the means of Perseverance, we may be so
informed touching the fickle estate of wicked men, in prosperity (and of that
happiness which thou preparest for constant professors of thy Truth) that we
never commit spiritual fornication against thee: But, that choosing thee for our
portion, and supporting our weakness by thy strength, we may continue in thy
Fear, Favor and protection, to our lives end. Amen.

Psa. 74.
A Psalm for Asaph. It mystically prophesied what havoke should be made in the
Church, by aluding to the destruction of the material Temple; and God is
desired to vouchsafe his wonted Mercy, in regard of the Foes outrage; but,
especially, for his own honor sake. It is a prayer for the Church in
perseeution.

OH God! for ever, why despised are we?
Why is in rage, thy pasturage laid wast?
Oh mind thy Flock, redeemed of old by thee,
(That heritage, which dearly bought thou have)
Even Syon mount, whereon thy Name is placed.
2
Come Lord (oh come) destroy for evermore,
The Foe, that on thy holy-place has preyd;
Thy foes, that in thy Congregation roar,
Who, there, for signs, their ensigns have displaid
And, on the carved works their axes laid.
3
For, as if they some grove were hewing down
With Axe and Maul, the costly works they break;
They flaming fires, into thy house have thrown;
Thy name's cheef seat, a place profane they make
And, in their hearts, of spoiling all, they speak,
4
Troughout the Land, thy houses burned be;
Yet, to declare the date of this our woe,
Nor visions now, nor Prophets word have we.
Lord, when shall end, these ragings of the Foe?
Shall he blaspheam thy Name, for ever, so?
5
No more, thy hand (thy right-ha^d) Lord, withhold:
Within thy breast, the same no longer hide:
For, thou oh God! thou art our king of old,
And, here on earth, for us thou did provide,
When, by thy power, thou did the Sea divide.
6
The Dragons Heads thou woundedst in the flood;
Leviathan's vast heads, thou did prepare,
In places wild, to be thy peoples food:
Yea, from dry rocks, thou hewdst out fountains there
And ma'dst firm land, where mighty waters were.
7
Thine, is the day, the night is also thine;
Thou ma'dst the light, and thou did form the sunn
The world, within her Zones, thou did confine;
and shewdst what course, times hot and cold should run
Lord, mind those things, and what the foe has don.
8
Observe, how fools blasphea^ thy name oh Lord?
Thy Turtles life, defend from Sinners wrongs:
Observe our greefs, and thinck upon thy word;
For, to the world, a darksome denn belongs,
Which harbors fraud, inhumane deeds, and wro^gs.
9
That so the pore (vnsham'd) may praise thy name,
To plead thy cause (thine own just cause) arise;
Observe how fools, thee daily do defame;
Yea, bear in mind, thy Foes malicious cries,
And to what height, their shouts against us rise.
Oh Lord God, dreadful in judgments and infinite in mercies! the devastation
typified in thy Material Temple, is fulfilled upon thy spiritual Sanctuary.
Thy open Adversaries batter the maine Fabric without, whilst Schysmaticks and
Hypocrites break down the Ornaments within: and betwixt both; terrors,
confusions, and dissentions are so increased, that thy Church, is endangered.
Have mercy upon the people whom thou have bought, and (as heretofore) show
thy self the King and protector, of thine Inheritance, to the confusion of thy
blaspheamers. Though not for ours, yet, for thine honor sake, let neither the
temporal enemies of thy visible Church, make spoil thereof; nor our
spiritual Destroier, deface those Temples of thy holy-spirit which are erected
in our hearts: But, keep them always undefaced, vnpoluted, and fitting
receptacles, for thee and thy Graces, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Psa. 75.
To the cheef Musician Altaschith, a Psalm or song for Asaph. God is praised
for his ready healp. Christ promises to support and judge his Church.
Oppressors are reprooved, and the different portion of them, and of the Godly,
is declared. It is useful, to comfort against the insolences of spiritual
foes.

THee Lord, we praise and magnify;
To thee we thanckfull are:
For, that thy Name approaches nigh,
Thy wondrous works declare.
When I the people have assumed,
I, Justice will maintain:
For, when Earth's dwellers are consumed
Her pillars I sustain, (Selah)
2
To Fools, I said, more prudent grow;
To Sinners, thus I spoke,
Your horn (your horn) advance not so,
Nor, such proud boasting make.
Nor East, nor west, advancements come,
Nor from the Mountains flow;
But, God him self prefers some,
And, some does overthrowe.
3
From his full Cupp, within his hand,
He mixed redd-wine does pour;
Which every Sinner in the land,
Shall dreggs and all devour.
But, I of Jacob's God will speak,
And always sing his praise:
The horns of Sinners I will break;
And, high, the Righteous raise.
Oh Christ, the Son of God! so establish thy Kingdom in our hearts, that
Righteousness may be continued in the Land. Support those whom thou have raised
to be as it were pillars in thy Church or Commonwealth; keep them from being so
impudent, or vain glorious in their preferment, as if it came either
causuallie, or by their own Industry, or deservings: But, so cause the^ and
us to perceive thy purpose and thy providence, both in our several
advancements, and humiliations, that we may the better discharge our particular
duties. And, when thou shall fill out the redwine of thy wrath to all obstinate
malefactors, let us be refreshed by taking the Cupp of Salvation, which thou
have prepared for all them, who shall be justified, through the merrits of
Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

Psa. 76.
To the cheef Musician a Psalm or song for Asaph. It is a Triumph-song to
praise God, for that knowledge of him, which he has vouchsafed unto his Church
typified by Judah, Jerusalem, and Syon. It glorifieth Christ also, for his
conquests over sin, Death and the Devil. The use is manifest.

IN Jury, God is known full well;
His Name's in Israel great:
He, in Jerusalem does dwell,
And, Syon is his seat.
Shaft, sword, and shield, he battred there;
Yea, there he wonn the Field; Selah
And, more his powrs, and honors are,
Then spoilers Burroughts, yeald.
2
The strong are foilde; their dream is flowne
Their strength has not prevaild:
For, at the God of Jacob's frown,
Both horse and Charret faild.
Thou dreadful art, and none, oh Lord,
Thine angry looks cann bear;
For, when thy voice from heaven is heard.
The Earth is dumb with fear.
3
The meek on earth, when thou to save,
And judge them (Lord) shall please, Selah.
Thou by man's wrath, shall honor have,
And, his hot rage appease.
To God make vows; and presents give
All ye that round him are.
For, he does kings of breath deprive
And makes great princes fear.
Glorify thy self, oh Lord God! in thy holy Catholic Church, by the final
overthrowe of all her enemies: Let thy power break all their Instruments of
mischeef: Let the preaching of thy Gospel, and the thundering of thy Judgments
(which have already destroyed the power, and made frustrate the Dreams, of the
old heathnish Idolaters, and their false Philosophy) utterly overthrowe the
strength of that carnal wisdom, which at this day stands in opposition to
thy Truth. Let our furious dissentions be appeased; and let the frowardnes,
rage, and blind zeal of all men, become a means of increasing thy glory; to
the confusion of thy stoutest opposers, and to the Salvation of the
meekeharted, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Psalm. 77.
To the cheef Musician to Iduthun a Psalm for Asaph, It expresses those
interchanges of Doubts, Hopes, Fears, Comforts and Assurances, through which
we work out salvation with fear and trembling. It serves to mind us of our
frail condition, and shows how to order our throughts in spiritual combats.

TO God, even to the Lord, I prayed,
And, he did hear my moanes;
Both day and night I sought his aid,
With never-ceasing groans.
My heart no comforts entertained,
But fixed on him her thought; Selah,
And so I greev'd, and so complained
That, low my soul was brought.
2
Mine eyes from sleep he did with hold,
With pain, I lost my tongue:
I mused on days, and years of old,
And what was once my song.
Yea, all alone, at night I lay,
Thus musing in my mind;
Lord, will thou cast me quite away,
And, never more be kind?
3
Is thy compassion lost out right?
Shall thy sirme promise fail?
Have thou for got thy Mercy quite?
Over Love, shall hate prevail?
No; this my frailty is, quoth I,
And, these, but changes are,
Wrought by the power of God most high,
Which, I, in mind will bear.
4
Thy works, and wonders past, oh Lord,
I Will therefore muse upon;
Thy former Acts, I will record,
And, show what thou have done.
Thy walkings, in thy house, declare,
That, there is no God like thee:
And, what thy power and marvailes are,
Thou make all people see.
5
For Jacob's, and for Ioseph's race,
Thine arm did purchase aid; Selah
And, seas, and Floods, to vewe thy face,
Were troubled and afraid.
The Clouds did melt, the Vapors crasht,
Thine Arrows, forth were shot,
Thy thunders roared, the lightnings flasht,
And, Earth a trembling got.
6
Thou wentst through seas with steps vn-eide,
Thy paths were in the Deep;
And, Moses did with Aron, guide
Thy people, there, like sheep.
Father of mercy, and God of all consolation (who have often times, gloriously,
and miraculously hertofore delivered thy Children, and made safe passage for
them through horrible Fears troubles perils and temptations) be merciful
unto us, we beseech thee, in all our inward and outward offlictions;
especially, when our sins cause thee to exercise us with such chaunges, as may
make us fearful we have lost thy favor. UUee deserve to be deprived of thy
compassion, and of all those comforts and protections, which we have long
enjoyed, by thy free grace: Nevertheles, grant that we never fall quite away
from thy regard, but may so return always unto thee; that our frailties may
be pitied, our peni tence accepted, our petitions entertained, and we
continued in a full fruition of all thy mercies, and gracious promises, in
Christ Jesus. Amen.

Psa. 78.
Maschil, for Asaph. It commemorates the Jews obstinate increduli^itie, with
God's plagues and Mercies interchangeably sent among them until the time of
David. We should use it, to warn us of God's long-suffring toward the whole
humane Nature, whose perversenes, is here mistically set forth, as also, the
sending of the true David, Jesus Christ.

NOw to my Law (my people) give thine ear,
and, well observe what weighty things are told:
For, lo, my lips a problem shall declare
And, plainly sing, grave sayengs, dark, and old:
That, nether what our Fathers have revealed,
Nor what we know, be from our babes concealed.
2
God's power and praisfull wonders I will blaze,
His Testaments, to Jacob, I will show;
How he, likewise, in Israel settled laws,
Which they were bound to let their children know
That so, they might to their next ages teach them,
And, Age to age, for ever after preach them.
3
That they, in God, a faithful hope might place,
And not forget his works, or his command,
As heretofore their Fathers head strong race,
Whose heart, with God, uprightly did not stand;
Like Ephr'ims brood, who bows and weapons bearing
Forsook the Field, the day of hattell fearing.
4
Gods law they brak, his covenant they did slite
And on his works or marvailes never thought:
Yet, many signs and wonders in their sight,
In Zoan feildes, and Egipt-land he wrought.
To make their way, the sea, in twain he cleaved
And, high on heaps, the rolling waters heaved.
5
A pillerd-Cloud, by day he made their guide,
A Column-fir'd, to clear the night he sent.
More over, he the Rocks did then divide,
And streams like seas, along the Desert went.
From craggy flints, sweet waters forth he bruised,
And springs from thence, like Rivers were diffused.
6
But they went on to move his anger, still,
And much provokd the wrath of God, most high,
By tempting him their lustings to fulfill,
And craving flesh, their longings to supply.
For, with distrust, they asked if God were able,
In that wild place, to furnish out a table.
7
Springs flowd indeed (sed they) when rocks he smot,
But, can he bread and flesh as well provide?
Which when God heard, with Jacob he was hot,
And, in his wrath he did with Israel chide;
Because, no faith to his firm promise giving,
They still remained in trustles unbelieving.
8
He naitheles, the gates of heaven vnclos'd,
And made the clouds, rain Manna for their meat
The bread of heaven, among them he disposed,
And Angels food, unworthy men did eat.
A wind South-East-by East, he then ordained,
And flesh as dust, and fowls as sand, it rained.
9
These filled there camp, and fluttred round their te^ts
Til they were cloid with what their lust persu'd:
Yet none of them his fleshly mind repents;
which God avengd, even when the meat they chewd
For, his feirce wrath, on Israel down he poured,
And, of their cheefs, the fattest he devoured.
10
Yet, sinned they still, and set his works at naught;
For which, their time he wasted out in vain,
(Afflicting them, til after him they sought)
And, then in show, they did repent again.
Yea, then his power to bear in mind they seemed,
And said, he was the God that them redeemed.
11
In which although he knew their flattring mouth
And lieng tongues, did naught but falsehood speak;
Tho, him, their heart affected not in truth,
And, tho, they still his holy League did break,
Of his mere grace, he naitheles forgave them,
And, from his wrath, even he himself, did save the^.
12
For, them to be but flesh, in mind he bare,
And gone like winds, which never shall retire;
That they perverse even in the Deserts were,
Yea, that even there, they much incensed his ire,
Provoking him, by false and feigned repenting,
The holy-one of Israel discontenting.
13
Nor on his power, nor on those days they thought,
Wherein he from their foes did set them free;
They minded not, the signs in Egypt wrought,
Nor those which they in Zoan feilds did see:
How, he with blood, the wholesome springs distasted
How, them with flies of diverse kinds he wasted.
14
How, he with frogs their stubborn foes anoyd
How, their increase, the Caterpillars pild.
How, then, the Locust al their fruits enjoyed
Nor how the frost, their vines destroid and killed;
Nor how, cold hail, and burning bolts of thunder,
Did slay their flocks, and break their trees asunder.
15
For, he did hurl on them his furious wrath;
To them, both fears, and harmful-sprites he sent;
Unto their deaths, his rage did make a path,
And then, to wrack, both men and cattle went;
He, of their lives, their eldest-born bereaved
Through Egipt-land, where Cham his lot received,
16
Then, like a flock, his people forth he led,
Through places wild co^ducting the^ like sheep.
He kept them safe, without all cause of dread,
Whilst he, their foes o'rewhelmed in the deep;
And also gave, when all this grace was done them,
That holy hill, which his right hand had won the^.
17
Before their face, the gentiles thence he took,
And what was theirs, to Israel gave by lot,
Yet still, almighty God they did provoke,
And his commands, they still regarded not;
But, being like their Fathers, double-harted,
Like broken bows, from him, aside they started,
18
The Lord was wroth and Jealous when he saw
Their Images, and their hill-alters reared,
And, ther-vpon, from Israel did with draw
His former love, and so incensed appeared
That, of his place among them, he repented
And left his Tent in Siloh, unfrequented.
19
By thraldom then, he took way their power,
He gave their strength and glory to their foe,
He caused the sword his people to devour,
And with his Land, exceeding wroth did grow.
Consuming heat, their yongmens vigor tired:
Their maids, by none, in wedlock were desired.
20
Then by the sword, his priests away he took,
Whom to bewail, the widows were not spared
But, lo, the Lord from sleeping then awook,
As when with wine a mighty man is cheered.
Their hinder parts, with secret-sores he wounded;
And al his foes with lasting shame confounded.
21
Then he the Tent of Joseph did refuse,
And Ephr'ims tent he did likewise reject:
But, Judah's tribe it pleased him to choose,
Even Syon hill. which he did best affect;
And, there, aloft he raised his habitation,
To be as firm, as is the Earth's foundation.
22
He from the flocks, his servant David chose,
From bigwombd ewes, and from attending sheep:
His heritage, to him, he did dispose,
And Jacob's flock, and Isr'els herds to keep.
So, with pure thoughts, discreetly the^ he guided.
And, food for them, sincerely he provided.
O Lord God! we have often bitterly censured the Jews, not considering that
their story, is a Problem, mistically decipheringe our condition: Or that we.
like David by Nathan's parable, are thereby, made Judges and condemners of our
selves. If we overlooke the course of our lives, we shall find verified in our
own persons, all those things which are mentioned of that People. We have the
like Covenant of grace; we have had miraculous deliverances both temporal and
spiritual; some of us have tempted him as long (and longer) in this wilderness
of our Pilgrimage; Our murmurings, despairings, longings, yea our frowardnes
and infidelity has been as much as theirs; We have had as many several
pardons to winn us; as many enterchanges of prosperity and Adversity, to
reform us; and have had them, also, for our examples; yet are as disobedient
and as negligent as they. Oh Good God, lay not this to our Charge; but, grant
we may so apply what thou have left written of them for our warning; that the
fear of thy Judgments, and the love of thy Mercies, may reclaim us; and that
our great Sheapherd (even the true David Jesus Christ) may guide us out of our
wanderings, and bring us out of this wilderness, into his eternal Rest, Amen.

Psa. 79.
A Psalm for Asaph. It is useful for any particular Church, when it is
tirannised over, by Turks, heretics, or such like members of Antichrist: For
the Church of Christ (whose persecutions and martirdomes were prefigured by
those which fell on Jerusalem) is here personated, prayeng, and expressing her
sufferings. etc.

Upon thine heritage, oh God!
The Gentiles, Ryots de commit:
Within thy Temple, they have trod,
And, wasted and profaned it,
The bodies of thy saints, bestrowe
The feilds about Jerusalem;
Their blood, even in the streets does flow,
And, birds and beasts do feed onthem.
2
Their bones without a grave remain,
And, all our neighbors us defame:
Oh Lord, how long shall we sustain,
Thy burning rage, thy jealous flame!
Let thy incensed wrath be poured.
On heathen lands, that know not thee;
For, they thy Jacob have devoured,
And, quite consumed his dwellings be.
3
Remember not our follies past,
(Oh God! from whom our help does flow)
But thy sweet grace, Lord, let us taste;
For, we are brought exceeding low.
Healp (for thy Mercy's cause) we pray,
For thy Namesake, forgive our sin;
Lest, else, of thee the heathen say,
Where is their God, they trusted in?
4
But, let it be (before our eyes)
Of all the Gentiles understood,
By hearing of the prisoners cries,
And, by revenging of our blood.
Them, save likewise (even through thy might)
That unto death appointed be;
And seven fold, oh God! requite
Our neighbors scornful spights to thee.
5
So, we thy pasture-sheep, oh Lord,
Will give thee praise, and thancks therefore,
Yea we thy praises will record,
From age to age, for ever more.
Look down, 'oh Christ, upon the persecutions of thy Church; behold the blood
of thy Martirs; the profanation of thy holy Ordinances; the scorneful
vpraidings, and the great calamities, which are publicly inflicted on many
true professors of thy Gospel (even among those who are their neighbors in
Belief) and in the very streets of thine own City. Though our sins have
deserved more; yet, for thy mercy sake, and for thine own honor sake,
compassionate our humiliation, forgive our offenses, and let thy displeasure be
rather manifested against those who are enemies to thy Truth. So, they, who
have (in derision) questioned thy regard of us, shall be assured thereof, by
thy avenging our cause; and we being secured from our Oppressors, shall
magnifiy thy holy Name for ever and ever. Amen.

Psa. 80.
To the cheef Musician upon Shosannim Eduth a Psalm for Asaph. By the allegory
of a Vine, is expressed God's great care of the Jewish Church, typifieng also,
the Christian Church, whose complaints and desires in her sufferings, are here
expressed. It may be used by any congregations of the faithful, when they are
delivered up to their foes etc.

HEar thou, that Flock-like, Joseph guidest,
And twixt the Cherubims residest;
Now, Isr'els Pastor shine thou clear:
To Beniamin's and Eph'rims vewe,
Thy strength before Manasseth show;
And, to defend us, draw thou near.
2
Return, and of thy grace assure us;
For, that alone will save and cure us.
Oh Lord of hoasts; we thee entreat:
For aye therefore, close not thime ears
Though, long, thou make us drinck our tears,
And giv'st us weepings for our meat.
3
Our Neighbors are at strife about us,
Thou make our foes to scorn and flout us,
Lord God of Hoasts! our sorrow slake:
To save us, cause thy face to shine:
For, thou from Egypt broughtst this Vine,
And, threw'st out Nations for her sake.
4
The place, thou had before so tilled,
That, rooting well, the land she filled,
And cov'red mountains with her shade:
Her boughs did Cedar-like extend,
She, branches to the sea did send,
And, to the River, she did spread.
5
Why of her hedge have thou bereft her?
Why to the spoil of strangers left her?
And of the feirce untamed swine?
The Forest herds, have her or'ethrowne;
Oh Lord of Hoasts! from heaven look down,
Behold, and visit this thy Vine.
6
That Vine, which thy right hand has cherisht
That branch, which for thine own was nourisht,
Is burned and spoild, while thou do frown:
Oh! send, for our defense to stand,
That Son of Man, whom thy Right Hand,
Has armed, and chosen for thine own.
7
Then, we shall never more deny thee;
But, being still revived by thee,
For ever, call upon thy Name.
Oh Lord of Hoasts, convert us now,
A gracious look, on us bestow,
And, thou shall save us, by the same.
Notwithstanding (oh gracious Father) thou do often water us with our own
tears, and expose us justly to the beasts of the Forest (even to our own
brutish appetites) and though our unthankfulness has worthily deserved that
we should be chastised with many storms of Adversity: Yet, Remember, we
beseech thee, that we are plants of thine own Vineyard, and branches of that
goodly Vine, which thou have elected for thy self. Behold, and visit us with a
favorable aspect; repair those decayed Fences, through which any strange lust,
or swinish Condition, has broken in upon us. Let our Foes (by whom we are
persecuted) our neighbors (by whom we were mocked, or preyed upon) and our
brethren (who were censorious beholders of our afflicctions) become witnesses
also, of thy renewing Favors: That we may be comforted in thee, and continue
for ever hereafter, constant in thy fear and service, through the assistance of
that man of thy Right Hand, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Psa. 81.
To the Cheef Musician on Gittith a Psalm for Asaph. It is useful to commend
unto us the observation of our Christian Sabaths and Solemnities, which are
piously to be regarded in all Ages; because we commemorate in them our
Deliverances, from our spiritual Bondage, typified by the Egiptian-thraldom.
etc. It vpraideth man's in gratitude, and neglect of God etc.

IN God our strength, let us rejoice;
To Jacob's God, let us now sing,
And in our Psalms, to help the voice,
The tymbrel, harp, and Psalt'rie bring.
The Moon renewing, trumpets blow,
And, when the solemn feastings be:
For, Jacobs God, long time ago,
In Israel, did this law decree.
2
This Testimony he prepared,
When Joseph came from Egipt-land
And lived where he a language heard,
Whose words he did not understand.
From Burdens, and the potters task,
Thy hands and shoulders I did free,
I helped, when thou for help did ask,
And, heard thee from the storm, said he.
3
Even at the waters of debate Selah.
I said (that might prove thee there)
Oh Israel mark, what I relate,
And, to my words incline thine ear.
Thou shall no other God's at all,
But me the Lord thy God, receive;
For, thee I brought from Egipts thrall,
And, will thy largest askings give.
4
But Israel did my words contemn;
Of me, my people would have none:
So, to their pleasures left I them,
Who, after their own lusts are gone.
Oh! had my people me obayd.
If Israel had my ways persu'de,
I on their foes my hand had laid;
Their haters, I had soon subdew'd.
5
My Foes had then obayd my power,
And, I had still my Folk vphild:
I, them had fedd with purest flower
And, with rock-hony, them had filled.
Make us ever mindful, oh God, to magnify thy Name for delivering us from our
spiritual Bondage; But, at those times which thy Church (according to the
laudable custom of the Patriarks) has set apart to commemorate thy
extraordinary Mercies, let us, especially, perform this, duty; neither
falsely counting it superstition to meet in the public solemnization of thy
praise; nor vnthanckfully omit the continuation of so necessary a service.
Give us grace also, to consider that it is no constraining Decree of thine,
which has made any of us vncaple of thy free grace, but that it is merely our
own wilfulnes, which compels thy Justice to leave us to our own wills, if we
be cast off: So, we shall be kept the more obedient to thy commands; and thou
(who ren^ west the will, before thou exact est obedience from it) shall accept
the willingness for the deed; and in due time work in us the Deed also, to our
eternal salvation through Jesus Christ. Amen.

Psa. 82.
A Psalm for Asaph. It may be sung at our public Iudicatures, before them who
administer in the great affairs of Church or Commonwealth; to mind them of
their duties. etc. For, it instructs and reproves Princes, Pastors and
Magistrates, abusing their Authority, declares the reward of their Injustice,
and invokes God to take the judicature to himself.

GOd stands, where he does see
The Lords to Counsel go;
And, when the Gods in Judgment be,
He judges what they do.
22
Ye Nobles, wherefore, then,
Are ye unjust so long?
Why favor ye, ungodly men
To do the righteous wrong? Selah.
4
The pore, young Orphans greev'd,
The needy and oppressed,
Should by your Justice be releev'd,
And from proud hands releast.
4
But, ye are men unwise,
And walk without the light:
Even you, on whom the land relies,
Are out of order, quite.
5
You, therefore, whom I call
The sonns of God most high,
(And termed Gods) like men, shall fall;
And, like such Princes dye.
6
Thy self, oh God! advance
And, give the world her doom;
For, thine by due Inheritance,
All nations are become.
Grant almighty God, that they to whom thou committest the government of thy
Churches or Commonweales, may not (as it often happneth) Be their greatest
oppressors: But give thy grace (oh heavenly Father) to all whom thou set
in Authority, that they (considering whose power they have, what they were, and
what they shall be hereafter, may become so wise, in them selves, and such
lights to others; that Righteousness may be advanced, Ungodliness suppressed, the
pore and fatherles releeved, all abuses reformed; and that such Dignities, may
be still conferred and continued, to the public profit, and to thy eternal
glory. Amen.

Psa. 83.
A Psalm or song for Asaph. It may be used as a prayer against the Leagues and
Confederacies of the Churches soes, such as Pagans, Turks, Heretics and
Falsebrethren; for, the whole List of them, is here typically registered, under
their Names who were enemies to the Jewish Church.

BE e silent Lord, no longer now,
To speak, oh God, no more forbear:
For lo, thy foes do furious grow,
And, proudly raised thy haters are.
They plot, thy people to betray,
And, thy intirest friends to take;
Come, and of Israel, now (say they)
A nameles nation we will make.
2
As in one League, all these combine,
And, are against thee Lord, agreed;
Even Edom land, and Ism'els line,
And Moab's race, and Hagar's breed.
Philistim's, Gebal, Ammon, Tire,
Huge Amaleck, and Ashur to,
To help the Sonns of Lot, conspire,
Assisting them in all they do. Selah.
3
But, Lord, like Madian make thou them,
Like Sisera and Iabin's trains,
Who slaughtred were by Kishon stream,
And, lay like dung on Endor plains.
Their dukes, like Zeb, and Oreb make,
Like Zeba and Zalmana's Peers,
Who said, they would God's houses take,
And his Possessions, to be theirs.
4
Lord, wheel them round, as turned we see
The dust or chaf, when whirl-winds blow.
And, let thy wrath, among them be
Like flames on hills, where woods do grow.
Yea, let a dreadful storm arise,
Persueng them with death and shame:
Let fears and troubles, them surprise,
Until they seek, and praise thy Name.
5
So, when that men behold their fall,
They shall confess, there none cann be,
Whom we ETERNAL ought to call
Or sov'raigne of the world, but thee?
Permit not, oh Lord, those enemies to praile who have made Leagues and
confederacies, against thy Church; But, as heretofore thou have overthrown al
those Nations who were great oppressors of thy ancient people the Jews (and
who were types of our confederated Adversaries) So, we beseech thee, bring to
sudden destruction, all the plotts enterprises and combinations, of Turks,
heretics, unbelievers, and false brethren. Protect us also, we pray thee, from
the snares, power and subtilties, of our spiritual foes; that thou being known
our defender and our trust being always in thy defense, we may not fear the
power of any adversaries; But, for our manyfold protections, praise and magnify
thy Eternal name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen,

Psa. 84.
To the cheef Musician a Psalm for the sonns of Chorah. It setts forth the
souls longings, to be pertaker of the blessed Communion of saints, and the
frution of God; It shows also, the happiness of such, and their demeanor in
this vale of their Misery. etc. It is useful, to stir up in our souls, on
arde^t love to God and his house etc.

OH Lord of Hoasts! how pleasant are
Thy dwellings, and thy courts to me?
In soul and flesh, for entrance there,
Eternal God, my longings be,
The Sparrow finds an abode
The Swallow builds, and breeds, to,
(Oh Lord of Hoasts! my King, my God)
Even at thine alters, thus they do.
2
Right blessed, all thy household be,
For, they are singing, still, thy praise: Selah.
And, blessed are, the strong in thee,
Who in their hearts affect thy ways.
As, through the vale of tears they go,
They find sweet springs of comforts there,
And, they from strength to strength shall grow,
Till they with God, in Syon are.
2
Lord God of Hoasts, give ear to me,
And, mark, oh Jacob's God, my moan. Selah.
Oh God our shield! behold and see,
The face of thy Anointed-one.
For, in thy house, one day is more,
Then thousands, any other where;
And, I had rather keep thy door,
Then live in pomp, where sinners are.
3
For, as the Sunn, thou shinest bright,
And, we from thee our light receive:
Thou art the shield of men upright,
And, thou do grace, and Glories give.
From such as walk the righteous way,
No needful things withheld shall be;
For ever blessed, therefore, are they
Who trust (oh Lord of Hoasts) in thee.
Kindle in our hearts oh Lord, such an affection to thee, and such a longing
after thy spiritual habitations, that we may obtain the measure of grace in
this life, that will fit us for the portion of glory, in the life to come,
which thou have prepared for all those, who do hunger and thrist after thee.
Number us among thy houshold-servants; Make us to take pleasure in thy will,
and in thy presence, above all earthly preferments; So enable us to walk from
strength to strength, that we may become strong Walkers in thy ways; and so
instruct us to make a comfortable use, of all those afflictions, which we
suffer in our Pilgrimage; that we may sincerely acknowledge, our safety, our
honor, our sustenance, and all our temporal and spiritual happiness to be only,
from thee, oh God, who live and raignest, world without end Amen.

Psa. 85.
To the cheef Musician a Psalm for the sonns of Chorah. The Church
acknowledges God's benifits; desires their continuance, and the forbearance of
his wrath etc. We may sing it to praise God for his bounty to his Church and
kingdom, and to desire the continuatio^ of our happiness, by still vouchsafing
Mercy with his Justice.

THou have, oh God, thy Kingdom grac'st
And, Jacob's thrall repeald;
Thy peoples faults, thou pard'ned have,
And all their sins conceald. Selah.
Thine anger, thou have quite appeased,
And, thy just wrath for borne;
Oh Lord of Hoasts, now thou art pleased
Let us to thee return.
2
For, why should thou still wroth remain?
And vexed rather be,
Then cheer thy people's hearts again,
That they may joy in thee?
To save us, Lord, thy favor show,
And, let us hear (in peace)
Thy word among us preached so,
That we from sin may cease.
3
Then, shall thy saving-health abide,
Near those who fear thy Name;
And, in our Land, shall still reside,
Thy glories and thy fame.
Then Truth and Love shall meet and kiss,
And, Justice, Peace embrace;
Yea, Truth on earth, and Righteousness
From heaven shall show her face.
4
The Lord, with every needful store
Shall make our Kingdom flow;
And, send his Righteousness, before,
That we his way may know.
Oh Lord, we acknowledge that from time to time, thou have been exceeding
gracious to thy whole Church, and to this part thereof in particular: For,
when thy Blessings made us wanton, thou did always humble us by thy fatherly
corrections; and when thou had worthily afflicted us according as thy
wisdom saw co^venient, thou did ever mercifully comfort, and restore us
again to thy favor. Continue, oh God, we pray thee, this thy gracious
respect unto our infirmities; and grant, we may so repent of our sins, so
unfeignedly profess thy Truth, and so diligently practice the works of
righteousness: that. Honesty and Religeon (Faith and Good-works may inseperably
be united in every one of us; and that the abundance of thy temporal and
spiritual blessings, may be powered forth on this Kingdom, and on thy whole
Church, for ever and ever. Amen.

Psa. 86.
A prayer of David. It personates Christ in his humiliation, prayeng in the
behalf of his mystical body, for several necessities thereof; intermixing some
vows of praise, and acknowledgments of Gods Attributes etc. It is an useful,
form of prayer, in many temptations, and afflictions.

LOrd, hear me; for great wants I have;
My souls defender be:
My God! thy Saint, and servant save,
Who puts his trust in thee.
That, thou thy grace to me afford,
My daily cry requires;
Thy servants heart, revive, oh Lord!
Which up to thee aspires.
2
For, thou good Lord, soon pard'nest all,
Who seek thy grace to find;
Oh! hear me (now to thee I call)
And, bear my suite in mind.
My dangers, I, to thee will show,
That thou may healp assign;
For, there is no such God, as thou,
Nor any works like thine.
3
All nations whom thou did creat,
Shall praise and worship thee;
For, thou alone (oh God) art great,
And, great thy wonders be.
Teach me thy ways, and in thy fear,
My soul to thee unite:
So, never shall my heart forbear
Thy praises to indight.
4
I escaped the grave, by thy large grace,
When proud and cruel foes,
(Who set not thee before their face)
To take my soul arose.
Oh God! thou art a gracious Lord,
Long-suffring, kind, and free;
With Truth and Love, most largly stored:
Now therefore, pity me.
5
Return, oh Lord, and me revive;
Let me thy favor have:
Thy strength to me thy servant give;
Thy Handmaids offspring save.
Yea, for my good, vouchsafe some sign,
That, all my foes may know,
I am a Favorite of thine;
And, blush, they wronged me so.
Almighty and most merciful Father, have pity upon us according to thine
infinite goodness and compassion. Let us not always wander after our own
imaginations; nor be continually exercised with such Afflictions as may make us
the scorn of all that hate us; but according to thy infinite mercy and
unparalleled goodness, Have mercy upon us: And not on us only, but on all those
people whom thou have created; that, according to thy promise, they may all
serve and praise thee. Setle them and us, in thy Truth; guide us in thy ways;
and so restore and confirm us in thy favor, by some apparent signs of thy
love, and special grace; that our adversaries may be ashamed of their hatred,
and we thanckfull for all thy Mercies, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Psa. 87.
A Psalm or song for the sonns of Chorah. It describes the situation and
glory of the Church typified by Syon; prophetically declares, that all
Kingdoms shall be incorporated into that City of God; and that all Nations
shall there obtain their New Birth etc. It serves (among other uses) to
inform, that God's Church excludes no Nation etc.

THe Lord, has his Foundations placed
Above the heighest mountains crowns;
Yea, Syons ports, he more has graced
Then all the rest of Jacob's Towns:
And, glorious things, are famed abroad
Of thee (oh City) loved of God. Selah.
2
For, God accounts, as borne in thee,
Egiptians, if they him desire;
Nay; though from Babell sprung they be
From Chush, Philistia, or from Tire.
For, he has said, that all on earth
In Syon, may renew their Birth.
3
The God most high will strengthen her,
And shall record each faithful soul,
As having had first-beeing, there: Selah.
When he his people does enrowl,
For, there are, all that play or sing;
And, thence proceeds each blessed thing.
Thou, oh Lord, art no accepter of persons, but every one that fears thee, and
works righteousness (of what place soever he be, or from whom soever he were
descended) has promise, of admission into thy Church, and to be regestred as a
freeborn Citizen of thy spiritual Syon. Make us thanckfull, Oh God, for this
large priveledge; And, seeing none are exempted, but such as wilfully exclude
themselves (seeing also it is manifest to thee only who they are) let us hope
charitably of all men, whilst there is time of grace and repentance;
endeavoureng, by our prayers, instructions, freindly reproofs, and good
examples, as much as we are able, to bring them, to become the Members of this
Corporation; and to enjoy a Christian fellowship with us, in Christ Jesus our
Lord. Amen.

Psalm. 88.
A song or Psalm for the Sonns of Chorah, to the cheef Musician upon Mahalath
Leanoth Maschil of Heman, the Ezrahite. It personates Christ and his members
complaining of his and their sorrows, contempts and sufferings etc. And it is
full of passionate petitions and expostulations. We may use it in private or
Public afflicctions.

LOrd, of whose assisting might,
I was never yet denied;
All the day, and all the night,
I, to thee have called and cried:
Now, regard my woeful plight.
2
Let thine Ear, thy Mind, thine Eyes,
To the dropping, pleading, eryeng;
Of my Tears, my Cause, my Cries,
Grant me, hearing, weighing, eyeng;
For, my soul afflicted lies.
3
I, to Death am drawing nigh,
And am prized as one interred;
Like a strengthles man I lie,
As algeady slain, and buried:
Free among the dead, am I.
4
Yea, as one forgot of thee,
(Or, as from thy hand Abiected)
Darksome pitts, my lodging be,
And in Dungeons deep afflicted,
Thy strict hand oppresses me.
5
All thy, ways I do sustain,
Thou do make my Lovers flee me; Selah.
And my friends fro me restarine:
Shutt I am, where none cann free me,
Then, how cann I tears refrain?
6
Lord, my greefs to thee I show,
With my hands to thee vp-raised.
Cann the dead thy wonders know?
Or thy Love or truth be praised,
By the Sonns of Death below? Selah,
7
Cann, thy Marvailes, they unfold,
Who in darkness, quite are blinded?
Or thy Ius;tice, there be told,
Where, is nothing said or minded,
Which was done in times of old.
8
Unto thee, oh Lord I cry,
And, my suites prevent the Morninge;
Oh! why do thou cast me by?
Still fro me thy presence turninge,
Who am greev'd, and like to die?
9
Fro my youth oh Lord, till now,
Me, thy terror has destressed,
Nigh distract, it makes me grow;
For, thy wrath has me oppressed,
And, thy fears have brought me low,
10
They, besett me every day,
Floud-like, flowing altogether;
And no friends, to help me, stay
(Lovers, nor Familiers neither)
For, thou driv'st them all away.
Help us, oh gracious Redeemer, so to bear the manifold infirmities and
afflictions of our flesh; so to endure the contempts, neglects, and injuries of
the world; and so constantly to sustain all the Assaults of our spiritual
Adversaries; that (though we be deprived of all outward Freindships and
consolations) we may be inwardly satisfied, and comforted, against every
terror, in every temptation. Let us seek so earnestly and so early, for thy
assistance, that (escaping the spiritual blindness, which makes incapable of thy
praise; that dungeon of utter Darkness, in which thy Righteousness is obscured;
and that everlasting Death, from which there is no Resurrection) we may enjoy
thy blessed presence, where we shall magnify thy Mercies, for ever and ever.
Amen.

Another of the same.
LOrd God, my healper! day and night,
To thee my moanings are:
Admit my suites unto thy sight,
And, my complainings hear.
For, in my soul, great sorrows be,
My life draws nigh the grave,
As one interred, they count of me,
And, little strength I have.
2
As he, that is dead, and buried long,
Death's freeman I became;
As one, out of thy presence flung,
I quite forgotten am.
Thou laidst me in the lowest ward,
Where darksome Dungeons are:
On me thine Anger presses hard;
And, all thy storms I bear. Selah.
3
Thou have my friends fro me restraind,
My Lovers, me despize;
I, fast in prison am detained
And, sorrow dimms mine eyes.
Oh Lord! all day to thee I sue,
My hands, I meekly raise:
Thy wonders, cann men buried show?
Or, wake to sing thy praise? Selah.
4
Lord, cann the grave thy Love express?
Thy Faith, cann ruins teach?
Thy wonders, or thy righteousness,
Cann dumb Oblivion preach?
Betimes, oh Lord, I will erect,
My suites and cries to thee;
Why should thou then, my soul reject,
And, hide thy face fro me?
5
My soul is pained even to the death;
And all my life I bear,
The heavy burdens of thy wrath,
Thy terrors, and thy fear.
They closed me round, like waters deep,
Where, whilst begirt I lay
Fro me, my Lovers thou did keep,
And hidst my friends away.
Psa. 89.
Maschil of Ethan the Ezrahite. It celebrates the mercy, Goodness, Justice, and
power of God etc. Mentions his League with David, and mystically declares,
that those covenants belong to his spiritual seed, in the cheef place, etc. It
instructs us, who are the right heirs of the promises. etc.

NOw, in a song of endless praise,
Thy Mercies, I will sing, oh Lord;
And unto all succeeding days,
Thy faithfulness I will record:
For, I have said, that thy great Love,
And Mercy, shall be raised high;
And, that thou shall in heaven above,
Thy Faith, confirm and magnify.
2
Thou have both vowed and decreed,
To David, thine Elected-one,
To multiply his faithful seed,
And build him up an endless throne. Selah.
Which heaven shall to thy praise declare,
In works to be admired at,
And, where thy Saints assembled are,
Thy Faithfulness they shall relate.
3
For, whom like thee, does heaven afford?
What earthly Kings thy equals be?
Who, art among they Saints adored,
And, feared of all that wait on thee?
Oh Lord of Hoasts, what Lord is found
So faithful or so strong as thou?
Who setts the raging seas, their bound
And, calm'st them, when thy furious grow?
4
Thou did afflict all Egipt-land,
As one made weak, by wounds and blows;
And, by the power of thy strong hand,
Thou have dispersed all thy foes.
Thine, heaven and earth and all things be,
For, thou alone did all things frame.
The North and South, were made by thee;
And East and West, extol thy Name,
5
Strong arms thou have, with powrful hands,
And, where thou do thy Throne prepare,
With Judgment, Justice always stands,
And, Truth and Love, thy Vshers are.
Oh! blessed are they who know thy voice:
Thy look shall cheer them in their ways;
They, in thy Name shall still rejoice;
And, them, thy Justice high shall raise.
6
For, thou art, Lord, our strengths renown,
Our horn shall by thy favor spring:
Thou art our strong defensive Town,
The Saint of Israel, and our King.
By vision, thou did once declare,
And, to thy Holy-one disclose,
That thou a healper would prepare,
Among thy people to be chose.
7
I have, said thou, my David found;
My holy oil on shall flow:
By mine own Arm, he shall be crowned,
My hand, shall strength on him bestow.
His Foe, shall do him no disgrace,
The Son of sin, he shall not fear;
For, I will smite, before his face,
All them, that his Opposers are.
8
My faith and love, on him shall stay,
My Name, his honor shall mainetaine;
His hand shall make the seas obey,
His right hand shall the floods restrain.
His Father, he shall knowledge me,
His God, his Rock, and his defense:
For, he my eldest borne shall be,
And, King of every earthly Prince.
9
To him, I still, will mercy grant,
He shall enjoy my promise given;
Successors, he shall never want;
His Throne shall stand as firm as heaven?
And, if my Laws his Children break,
If they shall fro my precepts fly,
My statutes. if they shall forsake,
Or, from my Judgments walk awry;
10
Their sins with stripes I will correct,
And, scourg them, when amiss they do;
But, those whom I do well-affect,
My Love, will never quite forgo.
For, once even by my self I swore,
I would no lie to David make;
My League I will not break therefore,
Nor change a word, of that I spoke.
11
Lord, thus thou saydst; and that a Throne,
Unto his issue should be given,
As lasting as the Sunn and Moon.
Or, as the witnesses of heaven. Selah.
But, now (as if he were abhorred)
Thou do on thine Anointed frown;
Thou make void thy league, oh Lord,
And on the ground, have hurld his crown.
12
His Fences, thou did rend away,
His warlike forts, thou down do race;
All passers-by on him do prey,
His Neighbors flout at his disgrace.
His foes, thou have Victorious made;
Whereat, his haters, joyful be;
Thou dull'st the sharpnes of his blade,
And, in the fight, made faint, was he.
13
Thou have obscured his glories rays,
His Throne, thou castest on the ground; Selah.
Thou have cut short his youthful days,
And, him with shame thou do confound.
Good Lord, in thy enflamed rage,
Shall still thy face obscured remain?
Oh, mind the shortness of mine age!
Why should thy make mankind in vanie?
14
Who lives, whom Death shall not remove?
Or, who, from Death is ever free? Selah.
Oh Lord; where now, is all that Love,
To David vowed, of old, by thee?
Thy servants great reproach, record,
And, in my breast what scorns I bear,
Among those mighty Nations, Lord,
Who, likewise, thy blaspheamers are.
15
Oh God! even thy Anointed-one,
They have derided in his ways;
But, Lord, what ever they have done,
To thee, for evermore, be praise.
Most gracious, God, thou have not only promised thy merciful assistance to
all true believers; but, with an Oath also, confirmed the same for the better
strengthening of our weak faith. Grant we pray thee, that we neither become
distrustful of so gracious an Assurance; neither discouraged by those
Afflictions and persecutions, where withal thou shall please to purg our
corruptions; nor be overcome by those te^ptatio^s, whereby our faith is
exercised in the day of trial: but, cause us to depend on thy promise, and to
be courageous and victorious in all our battles. Give us wisdom likewise, so
to descern who are the true seed of David (and to whom the performance of thy
Covenant does chiefly appertain) that we deceave not our selves by a false
application of thy spiritual promises; nor delude our souls with temporary
hopes or fears: But, make us ever constant both in that which we ought to
believe on thy part; and in that which is to be performed on our parts, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Psa. 90.
The prayer of Moses the man of God. In this Psalm the humane Nature, which
(as the word Moses signifies) was Drawn out, even from the waters of
perdition, praises God, for his eternal decree of her Restoration; and
confesses her vanity, and mortality etc. To the same purpose we should use it.

LOrd, thou art always our abode!
Before the world, beginning had
Thou were eternally our God;
Yea, long, e're heaven and earth were made.
Thou say, ye sonns of men, return;
And, straight returned to dust they be:
As one nights watch, or day outworne,
So, are a thousand years to thee.
2
Thou, like a Flood (as in a dream)
Shall sweep them suddenly away;
For, like the flowring grass they seem,
That springs, and fades, in a day.
One frown of thine, consumes us quite;
Thy wrath, our troubles does renew;
Thou set'st our sins before thy sight,
And, bring'st our secret faults to vewe.
3
Our time, through thy displeasure wears,
And, like a Tale that is told are we,
Our life is done at seaventie years,
Or eighty, when we strongest be.
For, all the rest we spend in woe,
And, vanish e're we be aware.
Thine Angers force, Lord, who does know!
As is thy wrath, such is thy fear.
4
Instruct us how to count our days,
That so, our hearts may wisdom learn;
And, make thou, Lord, no long delays,
But, pleased now, to me return.
To us, betimes, thy favor daigne,
That we may all our life be glad,
And, days and years, of joye obtain,
For those of greef, which we have had.
5
Thy workings, let thy servants vewe,
Thy glories, let their Children see.
Oh Lord our God! thy Beauty show:
Still shining on us, let it be.
And, all our works (oh God) we pray,
Establish thou, and so direct;
That, well our labors prosper may,
And, blessed be with good effect.
Instruct us (oh blessed God) so to consider our vanities, our errors, and the
uncertainty of our short lives, that we may redeem the time. and (by true
Faith, ioind with Christian prudence) so order our Conversations; that thy
wrath may be appeased, our sins blotted away, and all our sorrows turned into
Joys. Moreover, during our short abiding here, vouchsafe us thy favor; and,
so assist our weak endeavors; that we may, to thy glory, finish the work for
which thou have placed us in this world. And, though our works be unprofitable,
or such as like stuble will not abide the Fiery-triall; yet, let that which we
shall build up, be (at least) grounded on the right Foundation; that we our
selves may be safe, through the free mercies, of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Psa. 91.
This Psalm, shows, that such as abide and believe in Christ, shall be secured
from public and private calamities, (by an especial protection) of what
nature soever their perils be; at least, the mischeef of them shall be
prevented, and life eternal vouchsafed, etc. It is useful to strengthen Faith
in great plagues and general dangers.

WHo, in the Closet, and the shade
Of God almighty, still resides;
Is, by his Highness, fearles made,
And, always, safe with him abides.
For, I confess, the Lord has binn
A Fortress, and a Rock to me;
My God, alone, I trusted in,
And, he my trust shall all ways be.
2
He will, no doubt, secure thee from
The Fowlers traps, and noisome Pest:
His wings, thy shelter shall become;
Thou shall, beneath his feathers rest.
Thou, for thy Shield his Truth shall bear,
And, nothing then shall thee dismay;
Not that, which we at Midnight fear,
Nor any shaft that flies by day.
3
No secret plague offend thee shall,
Nor what in public wastes the Land;
Though at thy side a thousand fall,
And tenn times more, at thy right hand.
But, thou shall live to mark and see,
The due reward of men unjust;
For, God (most high) will favor thee,
Because, in him thou putst thy trust.
4
No mischeef, shall to thee betide,
Nor any plague thy house infect;
For, he does Angell-gards provide,
Which in thy ways will thee protect.
Their hands, will thee uprightly lead,
And from thy Paths, all harms expel:
Thou shall on Aspes, and Lions tread,
On Lions young, on Dragons fell.
5
For, seeing his delight I am,
I will (says God) be still his guard:
And, since he knows my holy Name,
To honors high, he shall be reared.
When he does call, an ear I Will give,
In troubles, I with him, will be;
On earth, he long shall honored live,
And, he my saving-health shall see.
Blessed God; give us such assured confidence in thee, that we may be secured
in those public calamities, for which our public sins have deserved thy
scourge; and be delivered also from the mischeef of those particular
punishments, which our personal offenses may justly bring upon us. But (how
soever thou dealest with our bodies in this life) let our souls be saved from
the plauge of everlasting Death. Let thy holy Angels, keep us in all our
ways; and give us thy grace to keep the ways in which thou, have appointed us
to walk. Whatsoever perils or terrors affront us, give courage to pass
through them, in the execution of our lawful Callings, without dismay or
distrust: And, though they bring some smart, let them not hinder (but rather
further) the accomplishment of our eternal safety through Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

Another of the same.
WHo, rests in the shade of God most high,
Within his privy-Chambers is reposed:
And, therefore, in my self, thus mused I;
Thee, as a Fort, thy God has round enclosed,
And, is that Rock on which thou shall rely.
2
For, he no doubt, will thy defender be
From fowlers netts, and pestilent infection:
He, with his wings will overshaddowe thee;
His Feathers, will become thy safe protection;
And, for thy Shield, his Truth provideth he.
3
No fear, that lurks in darkness, thee shall fright
No arrow, that abroad by daytime flies:
No secret plague, that walks about by night,
Nor that which in the street, at noonday slays,
Shall make thee fear, how nigh soever it light.
4
A thousand faint, and sinck beside thee, shall,
At thy right hand, ten thousand breathles lieng:
And yet, thou shall receive no harm at all;
But, only, see God's Justice, by espieng
The due reward of sinners, in their fall.
5
For, thou do hope in him; and, therefore he
(Even God that is most hye, and most excelling)
Will neither let thee wronged, nor harmed be,
Nor suffer any plague to touch thy dwelling;
But, place his guard of Angels, over thee.
6
They in thy ways, will thee conduct along,
And in their hands, uphold thee, as thy leaders;
That not a stone shall do thy footing wrong.
Yea, thou unhurt, shall set thy foot on adders,
On dragons, and on lions, old and young.
7
For, him, that me does love (the Almighty says)
I will secure from sorrows and oppression:
That man, likewise, to honor I will raise,
Who knows my Name, and lives in that profession;
And, I will give an answer when he prays.
8
In troublous times, to him I will be nigh,
And out of all his cares, I will repreeve him;
Him, I will bless, and greatly dignify:
His fill of days, I will, moreover, give him;
And, granr him grace, to live eternally.
Psa. 92.
A Psalm or song for the Sabbath. It seems not improper, for that great Sabbath
in which we commemorate our Saviors resurrection; for it magnifieth God, for
the exaltation of the Righteous, and for the blessedness of his later end. etc.

RIght good it is, oh Lord, most hye!
Thy praises to recite,
Thy Truth and Love to magnify,
At morning, and at night.
With tenn-string'd Instruments to sing,
The praises of thy Name;
And, that we harpes, and Psalt'ries bring,
To solemnize the same.
2
For, Lord, thy works rejoice my heart,
Thy Deeds, my soul do cheer:
How wonderful in them thou are!
How deep thy muzings are!
The Fool and Wordling, nether know,
Nor heed such things at all,
And, though like flowrs, the wicked show,
Their prospring, proves their fall.
3
But, Lord, thou allwaies art most hye;
Mark, therefore; Mark I pray,
How sinnfull men despersed fly,
And, how thy foes decay.
My horn, the Vnicorne's o're-topps;
Sweet-oyle is pourd on me;
And, on my Foes, my wished hopes,
I shall both hear, and see
4
The Just, shall flourish as the boughs
Of Palms and Cedars do;
Or, as the trees which round God's house,
Within his Courts do grow.
Yea, they when age on them does light,
Grow fruitful, fatt, and green;
To prove the Lord my Rock, upright
And blameles, to have been.
VVonderfull art thou, oh Lord, in all thy workings: and, though thy purposes
are deeper then our imaginations; Yet (by that which thou have manifested) we
behold in them great cause of much reioicing; and we desire to praise thee for
them, with all our hearts. We have heretofore, repined at the flourishings of
the wicked, and at our own sufferings; But, make us hereafter, to understand
that their prosperities are permitted to increase their shame; and our
humiliations vouchsafed, that they may the more dignify our exaltations: as it
befell our blessed Savior, whose infamous Death, occasioned that glorious
resurrection, which we commemorate in our Christian Sabbath. Oh! make us in due
time, partakers of his Rest; and grant, that our old age, and our last hours,
may be found fruitful to thy glory, and our salvation, through Jesus Christ,
Amen.

Psa. 93.
This Psalm prophesied the power and majesty of Christ; and the perpetuity of
his Kingdom, in despite of all their fury who should rage against it. etc.
We may sing it to comfort us, against the rage of the Devil and his members.

THe Lord is King, and wears
A Robe of Glory bright;
He clothed with strength appears,
And, girt with powrfull might.
The Earth, he so has grounded,
That, moov'd it cannot be;
His Throne, long since was founded,
More old then Time, is he.
2
The waters, highly flowed,
And raisd their voice, oh Lord;
The seas, their fury showed,
And, loud their Billows roared:
But, God, in strength excels
Strong seas, and powrfull deeps;
With him, still, pureness dwells,
And, firm his Truth he keeps.
Oh Lord God, Kings of Kings, incomprehensible in Majesty, and in power
infinite; give us grace so to meditate thy unspeakable Attributes, that neither
the frailties within us, nor the terrers without, make us distrustful of our
safety in thee: For, thou art our King, our Lord, and our God. Thou have
Wisdom enough to know what is best for us; Power enough to effect it; Love
enough to grant it; and Perpetuity enough to continue it: Oh! give us, but
grace and faith enough, to believe and apply it; and (though the Waters rage
never so horribly) we shall, undoubtedly be safe, for ever and ever. Amen.

Psa. 94.
The Church invokes Christ to come to Judgment, in regard of the cruelty of her
Oppressors; and shows the cause of their folly, and presumption. etc. It
serves to inform how ignorant carnal men are of the power and ways of God;
and may help to keep us vndiscouraged, during their Insultings. etc.

LOrd God, whose claim avengments are!
Thy self, the Just Avenger, show;
Thou judge of all, arise, draw near,
And, on the proud their meed bestow.
For, Lord, how long! alas, how long!
Shall sinners Joy, in doeng wrong?
2
Despightfull words, their tongues have spoke,
Great braggs, the wicked have expressed;
Yea, Lord, thy people they have struck,
And thine Inheritance oppressed:
They, widows, and the stranger slay,
They, Orphans unto death betray.
3
For, God (say those) will never know;
This, Jacob's God shall never see.
Oh learn, (ye fools) more wise to grow,
Ye people fond, more prudent be.
Cann, he or deaf, or blind be made,
From whom, both ears, and eyes you had?
4
He, to the Nations, every where,
Corrections and Instructions gives;
To scourg you (then) will he forbear,
Who, all men's fruitles thoughts perceives?
They blessed are, whom Lord, thou chid'st,
And, they whom in thy Law thou guid'st.
5
Thou giv'st them rest, when mischeevs rage,
Till pitts prepared for Sinners be:
And, Lord, thy Flock, and Heritage
Shall never quite be left of thee.
In Judgment, Justice shall be showed;
And, of all faithful hearts persued.
6
Who will with me, lewd men, resist?
Or, take my part against the badd?
Sure, God himself, does me assist;
My soul, had else been silent made.
But, when I said, that fall I should,
Me, Lord, thy grace did then uphold.
7
When many thoughts, oppressed me much,
Thy comforts did my soul delight:
For, thou partakest not with such,
Who sentence give against the right;
Or such, as have the Just withstood,
To death, condemning, guiltles blood.
8
But thou, oh Lord shall me defend.
Thou art my God, my Rock my Fort,
And, all the harms my Foes intend,
Thou shall upon themselves retort;
Yea, for the guilt of their offense,
Thou, Lord our God, shall root them hence.
Oh thou supreme Judge of the world, and severe Avenger of all wrongs; Behold
the fury, the despite, and insolent Cruelties of our Adversaries; and deliver
the pore, the widdowe, the Fatherles, and all thy Oppressed Children out of
their wicked hands. Thy forbearance, has made the perverters of Justice, seem
to conceive that thou either see not, or else regardest not their impieties:
Yea, those oppressers, are grown so powrfull, and so many, that we scarce
find any to take part with us against their Injuries; and, but that we have
assurance of thy Assistance, we should be utterly without hope. Oh! continue
our hopes in thee; Set thou in order, all that is amiss; destroy all the
Favorers of Injustice; and keep us always harmles, both in soul and body,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Psa. 95.
This Psalm exhorts to praise God, and warnes to harken to his voice whilst
we have time, lest (like our Forefathers) we be deprived of his Rest, for
our obstinacy. It should be often sung to remember us, that we embrace God's
free grace, whilst it is offered.

TO God our Savior, lett's renew
Our songs, with cheerful voice,
Our thanckfulnes before him show;
With Psalms, in him rejoice.
For, God, the Lord most powrfull is,
The King of Gods is he;
The earth's obscurest vales are his,
And, his, high mountains be.
2
The seas, he made; they are his own:
Dry land, his Creature was;
Come, serve him then, and fall we down,
Before our Makers face.
He is our God, his flock we are,
His pasture-sheep, are we:
That, you his voice, may therefore hear,
More tender-harted be.
3
Not like your Fathers, when that in
The Desert, proov'd they were;
And tempted him, though they had seen,
His works of wonder, there.
Full forty years, they moov'd his wrath,
And, therefore, thus said he;
A wandering heart, this people has,
My ways, they will see.
4
And, I to them, in my just rage,
Did by mine Oath protest;
That, none of all that froward age,
Should come within my rest.
Oh God! the Creator, preserver, and governor of all things; UUee give thee
thancks, for making us after thine own Image, and for sending thy Eternal-word
to regenerate us, when we were made worse then nothing. So far, we ought to
be, from arrogating the power either of our Being, or Well-beeing; that (we
must confess) to undo our selves, is all which we are able, of our selves
do. Like our fore Fathers, our hearts are wandering from thy ways, all our life
long; and we do more and mere harden them, by custom in sin. Yet, oh Lord,
seeing we are the sheep of thy pasture; bring us home to thy Fo de: seeing we
are thy People, soften our hearts; and givs us grace, so to harken to thy voice
in this Day of our Trial; that, in the Day of thy Judgment, we may enter into
thy Rest, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Psa. 96.
UUee are herein exhorted, to sing and preach, the Newsongs of the Gospel, to
the praise of Christ our King. And (in regard, other Gods are but vanities) all
nations are provoked to join in praising him. etc. We should sing it to
glorify Christ, for his power, and his Truth, etc.

COme now, and in some New-indighting,
Bless God (the world's Almighty King)
His Name's due praise, in songs reciting,
Of his Salvation, daily sing.
His Fame, and works of admiration,
Ye people heed, ye Nations hear:
His power deserves, high exaltation;
For, all the Gods, less dreadful are.
2
The Gentiles Gods, are foolish fictions,
But our great God, did heaven creat;
Power, glory, praise, and all perfections,
Attend him, in his holy-seat.
To him, due praise, ye kindreds render;
Extol his power, his glory sing:
To God's great Name, fit honors tender,
Approach his Courts, and offerings bring.
3
Within his house, with praise, profess him,
And, let him be adored there;
Let all the world, their God confess him,
And, serve him with a holy fear.
Yea, to the Gentiles let them publish,
The Lord their King, and that his might
The wavering earth shall fast establish;
And, do the wronged people right.
4
Let heaven and earth, with joy-excelling,
Rejoice before him ever more;
The seas, and all things in them dwelling,
The feilds, the woods, and all their store:
For, lo, the Lord, approaches nearlie,
Behold, to judge the world he comes,
The wicked, he will judge serverely;
And, give the people righteous doomes.
Honor and wisdom, and power, and praise, be ascribed unto thee (oh king of
the world) by all thy Creatures, according to the several faculties which thou
have bestowed upon them. Be thou glorified, in thy self also; according to
that which thy In comprehensiblenes deserves, beyond what thy creatures are
able to ascribe. Let all heathenish deities, and all those Idols, which
carnal men have set up in their hearts, appear such vanities as they are; and
let thy Sovereignty be acknow ledged, (and thy worship truly celebrated) by
Jews, Gentiles, and all Nations throughout the world. Let us, especially (who
are of thy visible Church) perform this duty, and let our hearts be so
established, and so filled with Holiness, and filial awe, that we may expect
thy coming to Judgment, with comefort; and welcome thy opproach, with shouts
of tryvmphs, and songs of exvltation. Amen.

Psa. 97.
The sovereignty of Christ, with his coming to Judgment; the Joy which the
faithful shall conceive thereby, and the confusion which will fall on the
wicked, is here foretold, etc. It may be mystically applied also, to our
Saviors first coramling: And may be sung, to stir up our spiritual reioicing,
in both his Advents.

THe Lord is king; be therefore glad
Ye Lands and Isles, now this is known;
With Clouds and darkness, he is cladd,
And Truth and Justice, guard his throne.
A burning flame before him goes,
Wherewith, he shall consume his foes.
2
He, to the world his Glory showed,
And, earth beheld the same with fear;
Like wax, hills melted, when they vew'd
The Lord (the world's great Lord) appear.
His Righteousness, the heavens have shown;
His glories, are to all men known.
3
All Idol servers, he destroies,
And, of all Gods will honored be.
It Syon gladds, and Jacob, joys,
His righteous doomes, to hear and see.
Above the highest hills he dwells:
And, all the Gods, he far excells.
4
Hate sin, ye Lovers of the Lord,
For, he his holie-ones, will save:
And, light and Truth, to those afford,
That, hearts upright, and faithful have.
Ye saints therefore, record, confess,
And, praise with Joy, God's holiness.
Oh Christ (the everlasting son of the Father) Thou only art the Catholic
king; and it is no less then blasphemy for any other to assume that Title.
Rule thou, therefore, in thine own Kingdom, and cast all Usurpers out of thy
Throne. Publish thy glories to the world; Let thy Truth and Justice, terrify
thy Foes, and consume all Ungodlines out of the land. Root out all Idolatries;
that, Jacob and Syon (thy Church and her Children) may rejoice. Enthrone thy
self also in our hearts, and let thy presence consume thence, the Mountains of
our presumption (with every thing, which there exalts it self, against thee)
that, the hatred of Sin, the Love of thy presence, the light of thy Truth, and
the Joy of the holy ghost, may be there established, for ever and ever, Amen.

Psa. 98.
A Psalm. The whole world, is exhorted to sing the new songs of the Gospel,
and the great power and Victories, of Christ. It shows also, how we ought to
praise him. To these ends, we should use it etc.

NEw songs, unto the Lord indite;
For, mighty marvailes he has done.
His Right Hand, has prevaild in fight,
His holy Arm, the conquest wonn.
The Gentiles have in public vew'd,
Howiust and healpfull, he has been:
To Israel, Truth and Love he showed;
His Mercies, all the world has seen,
2
Then, through the world his glory sing;
Sing praises, with triumphant voice:
To praise the Lord, the Psalt'rie bring,
And on the Harp, with Psalms rejoice.
The Lord, the King, with mirth adore;
With Trump and Flute, this Joy beginn;
Ye seas, with all your fullnes, roar;
Thou earth be glad, and all therein.
3
Before the Lord, your joys express,
Ye Floods and hills: for, lo, he comes
To judge the world, with equalnes,
And, give the people, righteous doomes.
Almighty Son of God, we bless and praise thee for the manifestation of thy
Mercy to the whole world, in the miraculous work of our Redemption. Thou did
come to us in despised weakness; Yet have thou therein shown such irresistable
power, that it prevailed against the wisdom of the worldly-wise; and magnified
thy derided Cross, above all the most renowned Deities of the Gentiles. This
thou did, by appearing in a contemptible estate: Oh! how glorious, and how
powrfull will thou be in thy second coming! It now draws nigh. Oh! let it
not come upon us, as a thief in the night; but, as the Travail upon a womam,
who keeps a just reconing; and ioyeth in the hopes of her Birth more then
she fears the pains of her Travail: So, according to the counsel of thy
holy spirit, we may expect, and receive thee, with praises, Triumphs, and
reioicings. Amen.

Psa. 99.
It magnifieth the royal dignity of Christ, and exhorts to fear, serve, and
praise him, according to the example of Moses, Aron, and Samuel. UUe may use
this, to inform us, that we and the Patriarks have but one, and the same,
Christ our savior.

THe Lord is King, and he does make
Betwixt the Cherubins, his throne:
Ye people fear, ye Kingdoms quake.
For, great in Syon, he is grown.
Over Nations all, himself he raised:
His Name is feared, and holy to.
Oh! let this powrfull king be praised,
For, he uprightly loves to do.
2
His power delights in righteous ways;
With Jacob, he will justly deal.
The Lord our God, oh therefore praise,
And, at his holy footstool, kneel.
His Priest, with Moses, A'ron was;
And Samuel did invoke his Name:
These humbly sought the Lord for grace,
And, they from him, obtaind the same.
3
He, from the Cloudie-piller spoke;
And on his words those men relide:
They, of his laws did conscience make,
And, God therefore to them replide.
Yea (though their errors, he did blame)
To them, he did his grace afford;
Oh, serve our God, and praise his Name;
For, sacred is, our God the Lord.
Oh Christ (who sit between the Cherubims, and rulest both in heaven and
earth) we thy subjects, do humbly tender our homage to thy royal Majesty;
magnifieng thy Justice, thy Mercy, and thy power. Thou art the same yesterday,
to day, and for ever. We beseech thee therefore, to make us both followers of
the Patriarks thy servants, in their faithful obedience; and partakers also,
of those mercies which thou have vouchsafed them. Though justly, thou correc
test our errors; yet, in pity regard our infirmities, accept our penitence,
and hear our prayers; even for the sake of thy bitter passion, sweet Jesus.
Amen.

Psa. 100.
A Psalm of praise. It commemorates two great Benifits: our Creation (which is
common to all) and that Free Election, which is peculier to the Chosen Flock of
Christ; and whereby, they have the Freedom of his pasturage, and of his
protection. It is therefore useful, to praise God for the same.

Rejoice in God, ye Nations,
In chearfulnes, adore him;
With joyful acclamations,
Present your Selves before him:
For, God the Lord, did make us,
No hand therein had we;
He, for his flock does take us,
His Pasture-sheep we be.
2
His Gates and Courts, possess ye,
To thanck him, go ye thither;
His Name, with gladness bless ye,
And sing his praise together:
For, God is kind, for ever,
His grace, he freely daignes;
His Truth, will fail us never,
For, endless, it remains,
Thy hands, oh Lord, did make us: therefore we praise thee for our Creation, and
for all the natural Faculties, where with it pleased thee, to endowe our
souls and bodies. Thou have also redeemed us: we therefore likewise, praise
thee; and for our Election, Vocation, Justification, Sanctification,
Illumination, Preservation, hope of Glorification, and for all the precious
Lincks of that golden Chain, wherein are joined together the means of our
Salvation. Thou have, (we confess) done already so much for us, that we have
almost nothing to pray for, but thanckfulnes, and the co^tinuatio^ of thy free
Mercies, hitherto vouchsafed: for which, we humbly beseech thee; and that we
may truly praise thee for the^, for ever and ever. Amen.

Another of the same.
OH! all ye Kingdoms, praise the Lord,
Before him, let your Joy be shown:
With singing, let him be adored;
And, for your God, let him be known.
2
He made us, and his own we be,
His Flock, and pasture-sheep we are;
His Gates, and Courts, then, enter ye,
And, give him thancks, and praises there.
3
Yea, praise him, and his Name confess:
For, in the Lord, all good resides;
His Mercies, and his Faithfulness
Throughout all Ages, firm abides.
Psa. 101.
A Psalm of David. It personates Christ proposing the divine, morrall,
political, and Oeconomical duty of good Princes; and promising the execution
there of, in his Kingdom and Famely. This is, indeed, the right singing of
Mercy and Judgment, and this Psalm is useful, at the Coronatio^ of Kings, or
when Magistrates, are admitted into their places.

OF Judgment, and of Love to thee,
Now, Lord, a song I will indite;
Oh come! unite thy self to me,
And, I will keep my ways upright.
With perfect heart, my house I Will guide,
No wicked thing, shall please mine eyes;
I Will those detest who turn aside,
And, all their deeds, I will despise.
2
No froward heart with me shall stay,
I will elect no wicked mate;
The slandrous tongue I Will cut away,
High-lookes I shun, proud minds, I hate.
But, through the land, to dwell with me,
I will equire for men upright;
And, those men shall my servants be,
Whose hearts, in perfect ways delight.
3
No Cheater, shall with me have place,
No Liers, in my sight shall stay;
And, from God's Land, I soon will chase,
And, root all wicked men away.
Oh Lord God! all Authority is from thee; and, thou placest good Magistrates
and Governors, both in church and Commo^wealth, for a blessinge: or,
permittest Tirants, Fools, and corrupt persons, for the punishment of a wicked
people. Defend us, we pray thee, from this plague; and, grant, that they whom
thou set over us, may be suppressers of all vices; protectors of al
virtues; favorers of true Piety; and be always, good examples (in life and
conversation) both to their Equals and Inferiors. Let us also, be the same in
our several places and Callings; that (walking with good consciences, and
upright hearts, in an undefiled way) we may as well sing of thy Judgments, as
of thy mercios. Amen.

Psa. 102.
A prayer of the Afflicted, when he is overwhelmed, and pours out his
complaint before the Lord. The Title shows, it may properly be sung by the
pore in spirit, who are afflicted, by the sight of their own unworthiness etc.
It contains, a confession, with a prediction of the benifits of the Gospel;
and shows the eternity of Christ's Kingdom.

LOrd, mark my suite, receive my cry,
Be present at my need:
Thine ears to my complaints apply,
And, hear my suite with speed.
For, smoke-like, fumes my time away,
My bones are parcht with heat;
My wounded heart, dries up like hay,
And, I forgo my meat.
2
My panifull groans, have made me lean,
And naught but skinn and bone;
I fare, even like a Pelicane,
In deserts, left alone.
Yea, like the desert owl, am I;
And, watching, I have sat,
As when alone, on buildings high,
A Sparrow, wants her mate.
3
Me, all day long, my foes revile,
At me, they frett, and swear:
And, Ashes are my bread the while;
My drinck, my Weepings are.
For, thou in wrath advanced'st me,
That, vile I might be made.
My days, like shades declininge be,
Like new-sprung grass, I fade.
4
But, Lord, thy times, are without end,
All Ages thee record;
Now then, arise thou, and befreind
Afflicted Sion, Lord.
For, now the time to favor her,
Fullfilled is outright,
And, greeved all thy servants are,
To vewe her woeful plight.
5
That, Earthly Kings, may stand in fear,
And, Princes dread thy Fame,
Build Syon's wall, and show thou, there,
The glory of thy Name.
Then, thou shall hear all those that mourn,
Then, thou shall healp the pore;
Which I Will record, that men vn-borne
May praise thee, Lord, therefore.
6
For, from thy holy-place, on high,
The world survayeng, then,
Thou, Lord, shall hear the prisoners cry,
And save condemned men:
Thy Name in Syon to declare;
And in Jerusalem;
(Where Nations all, Assembled are)
To show thy praise to them.
7
Short-lived, and weak, and full of grief,
Thou made me, in my way;
But, Lord, at noonetyde of my life
Remove me not I pray.
Thy years, through ages all extend,
Thy hands, long since, did frame,
Both heaven and earth; yet, when they end,
Thou shall remain the same.
8
They old shall grow, as garments do,
And, be renewed by thee:
Yea, thou, oh Lord, shall change them so,
And, they shall changed.
But, from all Changes thou art freed,
Thy years, for aye endure:
And, all thy servants, and their seed,
Shall bide in thee, secure.
Oh Lord, the sole comforter of all destressed souls! pity the sighs and
complaints of thy pore afflicted Children, whom thy displeasure for Sin, has
worthily deseased, both in mind and Body. Open unto us, the Arms of thy
compassion; and grant, that what we have lost by our Offenses, we may recover
by thy Bounty, upon our true repentance, and amendment of life: which
amendment, we beseech thee to hasten; lest we be cut short in the midst of
our hopes. Repair also, the Decays of thy Church (in thy time appointed)
that her children may praise thee for it, before me^, during their short
abiding here; and that, when thou have changed our Corruption into
incorruption, we may glorify thee among thy blessed Angels, world without end.
Amen,

Psa. 103.
A Psalm of David. The Prophet, praises and exhorts to praise God, for many
particular Benifits, magnifieng his Compassion, longsuffring, Justice etc. and
declares the frailty of man. etc. It is useful to magnify the manifold Mercyes
which we have received by Jesus Christ.

COme praise the Lord; come praise his Name,
My soul, and all that is in me.
My soul, come praise his holy Name,
And, of his favors mindful be.
For, all thine errors he forgave;
He cured thy greefs, he closed thy wound;
Thy Life, he saved from the grave,
And, thee with tender mercies crowned.
2
With Goodness, he, thy mouth does fill,
He like on Eagle, makes thee young;
And, righteous Doomes he gives still,
To every one that suffers wrong.
His ways to Moses he declared,
His deeds to Israel, he did show;
And, kind, and gracious is our Lord,
To mercy, prone; to Anger, slow.
2
He, will not always us vprayd;
Nor, evermore displeasd is he:
Nor, has he so our sins repaid,
As, justly they deserve to be.
For, they that fear him, find his grace,
Out-reach the spreadings of the sky;
And, he from us, our sins does place,
As far, as East from West does lie.
4
He pitties them who fear his Name,
As fathers pity their own seed:
For, well he knows our britle frame,
And, that from dust, we did proceed.
Our time, is like the feild-bred-flowres,
Which, now do make a goodly show;
Anon, some blast their form devours,
And leaves no token where they grew.
5
But, still there is mercy in the Lord,
For them, that awful of him be:
To them, that keep, and mind his word,
His righteousness, imputes he.
His Throne above the heavens is raised,
And, over all, he bears sway:
Of powrfull Angels, he, is praised;
They hear his voice, and him obey.
6
Let all his hoasts; his servants to,
Perform his will, and praise his name:
Yea, so let all his creatures do,
And oh! my soul; do thou the same.
Father of all pity (who art slow to anger, and ready to forgive) Look upon
our infirmities; consider our frailties; in thy abundant compassion, forgive
our trespasses; and deal not with us according to our deserts. Cause us to be
renewed like Eagles by casting of, the old Man: Fill our Mouths, with songs of
thy praise; and our hearts, with thine own self, that unmatchable sweetness!
that unspeakable goodnos! Cure all our infirmities; and healp in all our
weaknesses, by thy fatherly care. Preserve us in thy fear; in the remenbrance
of thy Covenant; and in the ways of thy Commandments, to our lives end. That,
we honoring thee, by thy Creatures here; may glorify thee among thy Angels
and Saints hereafter, world without end. Amen.

Psalm. 104.
The Majesty, wisdom, and power of God, in the Creation and preservation of
all his Creatures, is here described, by excellent Metaphors. We may sing it to
praise him, for making and preserving all things, to his own glory, and for
our confortable use. etc. The Title is; Halelujah.

NOw, shall my soul to praise the Lord assay;
For, Lord my God! unbounded is thy might:
With glories beams, thy self thou do array,
And as with Robes, art clothed about, with Light.
Thou curtaine-like, the heavens abroad displayest;
And, in great floods, thy cha^bers roofs thou layest.
2
The rolling Clouds, thy speedy Charrets are,
And winged winds, thy swift-pasd Coursers be;
Thy Messages, the glorious Angels bear,
And burning fires, like servants, wait on thee.
The Globe of Earth, so firmly thou have grounded,
That none can shake the structur thou have founded.
3
As with a robe, with floods thou clothdst the same
And, then, the waves above the hills aspired:
But, at thy Check, soon down again they came,
And, when thy voice did thunder, back retired:
From lofty heights, by winding Valleys, tracinge;
They thither fell, where first they had their placing.
4
And, strongly there, thou boundest them about,
That they, no more, the world should overflowe;
Among the Dales, clear springs, thou sendest out,
Which run between the mountains to and fro.
Thou drink from thence, to forest herds convaiest
And, there, the thirst of Asses wild, alayest.
5
Then by the Bancks of all those running Rills,
Among the boughs the, birds make melodies:
Thou from above, with shewres bedew'st the hills,
And giv'st enough, all Creatures to suffice.
For Cattle, grass, for man, thou herbs ordainest;
And, him with food, out of the earth sustainest,
6
From thence proceeds, the hart-reioicing-wine;
Refreshing oil, from thence does also flow;
That precious oil, which makes the face to shine;
and bread, whereby man's heart more strong may grow.
Thy Cedars tall, due moisture have not wanted;
Not they, which high, on Libanon, are planted.
7
The feathered fowls, their nests on the^ do build,
The lofty Firrs, are dwellings for the storke;
For clyming goats, the mountains, refuge yeald,
In craggy Rocks, the fearful connies lurk.
The changing Moon, the times appointed shows
The constant Sunn, his howr of setting knows.
8
Thou Darkness cal'st; so, night shutts up the day;
And, then, abroad the Forresters do roame:
With roarings loud, the Lions hunt their prey,
And, unto thee (oh God) for meat, they come.
The rising sunn, anon returns hither
And, in their denns, they couch again together.
9
Then, man till night, afresh, his labor plies.
How many, be thy wondrous works oh Lord!
In every thing, thou art exceeding wise.
The spacious Earth, by thee is fully stored;
And, in the sea are many creatures dwelling,
Both great and small, whose number passes telling.
10
There, sail the ships, and, there thou did creat
Leviathan, to sport upon the Flood.
Thy Creatures all, from thee expect their meat;
And, that thou should in season, give them food,
Which thou bestow'st, and they (the same receiving)
Are filld with Goodness, of thy bounteous giving.
11
Thou hid'st thy face, and lo, they troubled are;
Thou stopt'st their breath, and lifeles dust they be:
Again, thou breathe; and they revived appear,
And, all the earth is new arayd by thee.
Oh! let the Lord, with honor still be named,
And, let him joy in that which he has framed.
12
If with his eye, the earth he but survay,
The fearful earth, does tremble at his look;
If on the hills, he but a singer lay,
His very touch, does make the hills to smoke.
And, whilst my Life, or being, is enjoyed,
To praise my God my, tongue shall be employed.
13
Sweet thoughts of him, conceaved are in me;
And, in the Lord my heart shall ever joy:
For, from his Land, the wicked rooted be;
And, he, will them, perpetually destroy.
Oh let his praise, for ever, be confessed;
Praise God my soul, and say: The Lord be blessed.
Most glorious Lord God! thy admirable power and wisdom created the world
(which having once overflowed for Sin, thou did again replenish the same)
continueng the maine Fabric ever since; and, therein mainetaining a succession
of innumerable different Creatures, by a wonderful providenee (and with a
special regard unto mankind above them all) Give us therefore, grace, we
beseech thee, so to meditate thy workmanship, thy wisdom, and thy great
mercies herein; that our hearts being regenerated and revived (by the
breathings of thy holy spirit) we may be thanckfull for thy great Favors: and
that when our wickedness is rooted out, we (perceaving all to be good which
thou have created or ordained) may praise thy wisdom, thy goodness, and thy
bounty, for ever and ever Amen.

Psa. 105.
Halelujah. It typically expresses (by God's deliverances of the Jews, and
his Covenant with them) the spiritual League and graces, vouchsafed to us etc.
We should therefore sing it, not only historically, but with a respect also, to
the Covenant of grace, and his mercies, by Christ Jesus.

COme praise the Lord, invoke his Name;
To all men make his actions known:
In Psalms of praise, sing forth his fame,
And, speak what wonders he has done.
Let them, who seek the Lord, be glad,
Let of his Name, their boast be made.
2
Oh search God's power, and seek his face;
Still, mind what wonders he has done:
Let all, that are of Abraham's race,
And Jacob's, his elected-one,
God's wondrous works, record with heed,
And, mind what he has fore-decreed.
3
He, is our God, our mighty Lord;
His Judgments through the world are spread:
He bears in mind, his promised word,
Unto a thousand Ages made;
Even that, which he to Abr'ham swore,
And vowed to Isa'ck heretofore.
4
To Jacob, came the same decree,
In Israel to continue still;
To thee, and all thy seed, said he,
The Land of Can'an give I will.
Yea, thus he spoke, when few they were,
And, they themselves, mere strangers there,
5
When forraigners, they lived among,
(And, often from place to place remoov'd)
He suffered none to do them wrong;
But, for their sakes, even kings reproov'd,
My prophets, harm ye not, said he;
Untouched, let my Anointed be,
6
Then, he by dearth, their Land made pore,
And, did the staff of bread withhold;
But, Joseph, he, first sent before,
Even him, whom for a Slave they sold.
With fetters, there, his feet they pained;
And, him in irons, they detained.
7
But, when his Trial was decreed,
God's word, his innocence disclosed;
The king did send, to have him freed,
And by the prince, he was vnlos'd.
His cheef commander he was made,
To rule his house, and all he had.
8
Of all his Lords, he had command;
That he his Counselors might guide,
Then, Israel came to Egypt land,
And, Jacob did with Cham reside:
And, so his Children thrived there,
That, stronger then his foes they were.
9
Whose hate, and fraudulent intent
When to his Folk, he well made known,
His servant Moses, then he sent,
And A'ron his Elected-one,
Who wrought great marvailes in his Name,
And wonders in the Land of Ham.
10
He darkness called; and dark it grew;
(For his commands were not withstood)
Throughout their Coast, their fish he slew.
And changed their waters into blood.
Upon their land he froggs did bring
Which climbed the chambers of the king.
11
He spoke, and flies of diverse forms,
And, lice through every quarter craw'ld;
Instead of rain, he gave them storms,
And, hayle, and lightnings forth he called.
Which, down, their vines, and figtrees brake,
And in their groves, great spoil did make,
12
The Locust came at his command;
And Caterpillars did abound:
The grass they wasted from the land,
And every fruit, upon the ground.
Then, he their Eldest-borne did smite,
The very prime of all their might.
13
His people, rich from thence he brought:
Among his Tribes, no weaklings were:
All Egypt joyed when they went out;
For why? of them, they stood in fear.
A Canopy of Clouds they had;
To give them light, a fire he made.
14
The people asked, and quails he gave,
With heavenly bread, he filled them:
The Rocks likewise, for them he clave,
And through dry Lands he sent a Stream:
Because, to mind that promise came,
Which he had made to Abraham.
16
His people, and his chosen bands,
He brought away with loyfulnes,
To them, he gave the Gentiles lands,
And, they their labors did possess:
That, they might mark what he decreed,
And keep his laws, with careful heed.
Preserve us oh Lord, from that hardness of heart for which thou sendest thy
dreadful judgments into the world; and withhold also thy plaugues from our
Kingdom: But, especially, that spiritual Darkness, and those Judgments, which
are mistically signifiied, by Lice, froggs, Locusts, and the rest of the
Egiptia^ plagues: And, as a means of this favor, make us mindful of that
Covenant, which then have made unto us, and we unto thee, in Christ Jesus.
We confess thou did graciously lead our Forefathers in the wilderness;
feeding, guiding and preserving them, by thy miraculous power; Be thou also, we
pray thee, our Assistance and protector in this our Pilgrimage; feeding us with
that heavenly Manna, and refreshing us out of that spiritual Rock, whereof,
they had the type; that we may follow them who are gone before into the Land
of the living, and there praise thee, world without end. Amen.

Psa. 106.
Halelujah. It commemorates the perversenes of the Jews, in whom the humane
Nature, was typified: therefore (changing the persons, to our selves.) We may
sing it to set forth, God's Grace and long-suffring toward us; Who have enjoyed
the same favors, and are guilty of the same perversenes.

COme praise the Lord; for wondrous good is he;
And, without end, his tender mercies are.
His powrfull Acts, by none cann vttred be:
His praises due, none fully cann declare.
They blessed are, that have true judgment heeded,
And in the paths of righteousness prooceeded.
2
With such respect, let me remembered be,
As that, which to thy chosen thou do bear:
Thy saving-health, vouchsafe thou unto me;
And place me there, where thine Elected are.
That, I may taste, the pleasures of thy Nation,
And partner be in all their exvltation:
3
We have amiss, like our forefathers done,
God's wondrous works, in Egypt moov'd not the^.
His mercies great, they never thought upon,
But, at the Sea (the red sea) vexed him.
Who, naitheles, them (for his namesake) spared;
That, his great power, might be by them declared,
4
The Red Sea, then, was dride, at his command,
And, there, as through the desert, they do go,
He, saved them from their oppressors hand,
And, them redeemd, from their stronghanded foe.
For, in the sloud he overwhelmd their haters,
And, non of them, escaped from the waters.
5
Then, they believed, and praisd him in a song;
But, soon his words, and works forgotten were:
For flesh, even in the Deserts, they did long,
And much provoked the Lord's displeasure there,
Their brutish lust, with flesh, indeed, he served;
But therewithal, their lustful souls were sterved.
6
Their Camp, at Moses grudgd; and with despite
God's holy-one, even Aron, did pursue:
For which, the Earth did Swallow Dathan quite,
And, quick-devour'd, Abiram, and his crewe.
A sudden flame, their Congregation fired;
And, made an end of those that had conspired.
7
An Idol then, in Horeb, they did raise;
A molten Calfe, as God, adored they:
And gave to God (their Glory, and their Praise)
An Oxes form, that eats grass, and hay.
For God their Guard, nor for his power they cared
In Egyipt, Cham, or at the sea declared.
8
God, therefore said, he quite had ruined them,
But that, his wrath by Moses was alayd.
The pleasant Land, likewise, they did contemn,
Believing not the words that he had said.
And, in their tents, their murmurs were a token,
They did nor hear, nor heed, what God had spoken.
9
Another time, his hand advanced was,
Them, in the Desert, to have overthrown;
To mix their seed, among the gentile-race,
And, scatter them, through many lands unknown.
Because, unto Baal-peor, they had bowed;
And, fedd on meats, to lifeles Idols vowed.
10
Yea, then, the Plague did fast among the^ run,
Because their fault God's anger had encreast.
But, Justice was by Phineas, timely done;
And, there upon, that mischeef quickly ceast.
His righteousness, therefore, shall be commended
Through Ages all, till Ages all are ended.
11
At Meribath, they made him angry, to,
And, wroth likewise, with Moses, for their sake;
For, they provokt his humble spirit so,
That, he, some words without advisement spoke.
They did not slay their foes, as God forewarned,
But, mixed with such, and their ill customs learned.
12
Their Idol-Gods they served; which proov'd a snare.
To Devils, they did sacrifize their seed:
They spilt the blood of those that guiltles were;
Even their own sonns, and Daughters blood, they shed
To Canans Gods, for offerings, the^ they killed;
And all the Land with bloody sins defiled.
13
Thus, by their works, poluted they became,
And, whorishlie, persude what they deviz'd:
Which did Gods wrath against them so inflame,
That he therefore, his heritage despiz'd
For, them to serve the Nations he constrained,
And, over them, their Adversaries reigned.
14
Their Foes, oppressed and brought the^ very low;
And then (though him their Courses did provoke)
He helped them, when they did helples grow;
And, when they cride, compassion on them took.
His Covenant, and his grace, to mind he called,
And succored the^, by those, who them enthralled.
15
Oh Lord our God! still, send us healp from thee,
That we therefore may laud thy holy Name,
Divided from the Gentiles, let us be,
To sing thy praise and trivmph in the same.
Let Isre'ls God, with praise be still confessed;
And, let al people say; The Lord be blessed.
UUee confess, oh Lord God, that we have sinned according to all the
transgressions of our forefathers; and added many Offenses unto theirs. UUee
confess also, that (as to them) thou have multiplied thy mercies toward us;
Insomuch that our enemies, yea our Afflictions, have been made comfortable:
And in steed of Plagues (whose increase and continuance we rather deserved)
thou have alured us unto thy love, by many extraordinario blessings. Oh God!
let us no longer abuse thy patience; but make us now, so to mind our part of
the covenant which is betwixt us; that we may be separated from our heathenish
conversations; be remembrend among thy people; behold the good of thy Chosen;
rejoice in the gladness of thy Nation; and be pertakers in the glory of thine
Inheritance, for ever and ever. Amen.

Psa. 107.
Halelujah. It exhorts, to praise God, for his universal Grace; Acknowledges
him, the deliverer of all men, in all places, and in all troubles; Confesses
him the Corrector, Orderer, and disposer of kingdoms, persons, and famelies,
etc. It is useful both for temporal and spiritual belssings: for, by bodiey
sufferings; spiritual miseries, are mystically signified.

COme praise the Lord, and thanckfully confess,
That he is good, and gracious, without end,
Let those whom God redeemed, his praise expers,
Even those whom he did from their foes defend;
Collecting them, from East, and western Nations,
From Northern Clymes, and southern habitations.
2
In deserts wild, and where no dwellings were,
They wandered on, with drought, and hunger, faint:
And, them he freed, from all destresses there,
When they to him, had vttred their complaint.
He ledd them on, in paths directly guiding
To Cities fair, whear they had safe abiding.
3
Oh! let men praise the goodness of the Lord,
And publish out, his wonders to their seed:
For, he to hungry men does meat afford;
And, with good things, the longing soul does feed.
He, those vnbinds, that are in fetters chained;
And in the bands, and shades of death detained.
4
The word, of God most high, they did reject,
And small account, of his advise they made;
With heat, and toil, he therefore did afflict
And cast them down, when they no helper had.
But, in their need (when they again complained)
He took away the greef, which they sustained.
5
From deaths black shades, he showed the^ light some
And, all their bands, did quite asunder break; (wais
Let all mankind, therefore, his wonders praise,
And of his works, among their Children speak,
The brazen Gates, he crakt, and open set them:
Their iron bars he broke, and forth he fett them.
6
He plaugeth fools, because they have transgrest;
And, for their sins, they much afflicted are:
Their fainting souls, do pleasant meats detest,
They to the gates of death approached near:
But, seeking God (when they were so oppressed)
From all their pains, and fears, he them released.
7
He sent his word, which did their greeva^ce heal,
Preventing so, their fall, which hastened on.
Oh let all men! God's goodness, therefore tell,
And show their seed, what wonders he has done,
Let them declare his works, with joyful singing,
The sacrifize, of thanckfull praises, bringing.
8
They that in ships, at sea employed are,
(And for their gain to cross the waves are bold)
May vewe the works of God-almighty there,
And in the deepes his wondrous deeds behold.
For, he but breaths, and straight a storm appears
Which up aloft, the rolling billows bears.
9
Now mounts to heaven; anon, desce^ds the keel,
And they grow faint, with labor and with fear:
As drunken men, they stagger, and they reel;
And of their skill, they quite deprived are,
Then, to the Lord they cry, who them releases,
From all their fears, their dangers, and destresses.
10
For, he, the storms, to gentle calmes co^varts,
And, quiet then the raging sea, becomes;
Then they are joy'd; Then eased are their hearts,
And, them he brings, to their desired homes.
Of these his works, let all men make relations,
And show his deeds, to future generations.
11
Oh sing his praise, where great Assemblies are,
And him, among your elders, glorify;
He deserts makes, where once great waters were;
He draines the springs of mighty Rivers dry.
And, from rich Lands, their fatnes, often he takes;
When by their sin, her dwellers, him forsakes.
12
The Deserts vast, he turns to standing Lakes;
And springs convaies, to lands which barren were:
For hungry souls, a dwelling there he makes,
Who, for themselves do build a City there.
They sow and plant, and reap the hoped blessing,
Both of their seed, and of their Vines increasing.
13
He prospers them; and lo, they are encreast,
Their flocks and herds, do fatt and fruitful grow.
Yet, otherwhile, he letts them be oppressed, (low,
And with great plagues, he, sometime, brings the^
He takes from kings, their princely estimation;
And, makes them stray, in pathles desolation.
14
But from all greefs, the meek he still does raise,
And, makes like flocks, his households to appear;
At sight thereof, the Just will sing his praise,
And they shall dumb be struck, that wicked are.
All this, they mark; that have true wisdom learned:
And, God's great love, by them is well descerned.
Most merciful God! what Affliction is there, from which we are not howrely
delivered, or preserved, by thee? Nay, what necessary benifitts are there,
which we have not in the best season, received from thee, in what place
soever, or of what Nation, or condition soever we are? In our wanderings, in
our poverty, in our sicknesses, in our imprisonments; in our Iournyes at sea
and land, in our labors, in our goods, in our children, in our sorrows, in
our prosperities, in our persons, in our famelies, in life, in death, yea in
every thing, we have continual experience of thy Mercies; insomuch, that we
may confess thou delightest in nothing, but in showing Mercy; unless our sins
compel thy Justice to afflict us, that thy Mercies may not be despised: and,
there is great Mercy, even in that, also. Oh good God! make us ever mindful
hereof; and give us wisdom so to mark and consider these things, that both we
and our posterity, may magnify thy unspeakable bounty, and declare thy
wonderful workings, for ever and ever. Amen.

Psa. 108.
A song or Psalm of David. This is composed of the later parts of the 57. and
60 Psalms; yet differs from both: for, those beginn with lamentations, and end
with reioieings; but, this is wholly triumphant, and personates the Church
praising God for her enlargment: etc. We may sing it, when the Church is
released from some persecution, or her limitts extended farther etc.

MY heart is sixth; and I, oh Lord,
Will in my songs, thy fame record,
And, with my tongue, sing praise to thee:
My Harp and Psaltry, are awake;
And, I, my self, will ready make
To praise thee, where Assemblies be.
2
For, through the heavens thy Truth does stretch;
Above the Spears thy mercies reach.
Oh God! be still exalted high.
Thy praise, through heaven and earth extend;
Let thy righthand, thy Dear defend,
And, still vouchsafe me thy reply.
3
For, as thy holy Voice declard,
With trivmphs, Shechem I have sharde;
And, I have measured Succoth Vale.
Mine, Gilead and Manasseth are,
My head, mount Ephraim high does bear,
In Judah, stands my judgment Stall.
4
Proud Moab is my drugding slave,
My foot in Edom, fixed I have;
And, Palestine does joy in me.
For, who to Edom was my guide?
Or, to the City fortifide?
But, God of whom despisd were we.
5
Oh God! who did our hoasts forsake,
From us, our greefs, thus, always take;
For, man's vain succors we contemn.
Through God, we valiant Acts have done;
Our foes, by him, are overthrown:
And, he shall set his feet on them.
Oh Lord God of Hoasts! true in thy word, and powrful in thy performances.
According to thy ancient promises, thy Church is wonderfully enlarged; and
thou have now thy lot of Inheritance in those places, where they have been
enemies to thy Truth. UUee beseech th^^, more and more, to enlarge thy
Kingdom, and to be continually present with us, in all our spiritual
conflicts: that, by thy power we may tread under foot, the world, the flesh,
and the Devil; making servants unto us (in the execution of thy will) those
affections, which have heretofore prevailed against us. We rely on thee only:
On thee only, our hearts are fixed: And, for thy goodness; we desire, with all
our faculties, to praise and magnify thy Name, for evermore. Amen.

Psa. 109.
To the cheef Musition a Psalm of David. It is applied unto Judas Acts 1. 20.
and is it useful to terrify Gods Foes, and all Hypocrites, by showing the
Judgments pronounced by the holy ghost, against all such. But, let none abuse
this, or any such like Psalms, by repeating them in their own quarrels, lest
the Curses fall on themselves.

OH God my praise! now silence break;
For, wicked men that guileful be,
With open Jaws, against me speak,
And, with false tongues, have slandred me.
With hateful words they me enclose;
Without all Cause, with me they war,
And for my Love, they are my foes:
Yet, for their weal, my prayers are.
2
For my goodworks, ill deeds I get;
My love with hate, they do requite:
Over them therefore, some Tyrant set;
At his right hand, let Satan wait.
Let Justice, them to death pursue;
Account it sin for them to pray:
Cut short their days; and make them few:
Let others take their place away.
3
Keep fatherles, their Orphane-breed,
And, husbandies, their widdow'd wives;
Yea, Cause thou their accursed seed,
To beg and wander all their lives.
Their uncouth denns, let then forsake;
To beg, what must their life sustain:
Their labors, let oppressors take,
And, Strangers rob them of their gain.
4
Let none regard, though they lament,
Nor pity take on such a race:
But, quite away (in one descent)
Their offspring, and their Name deface.
Let God, still, mind the guilt they drew,
From both their parents, at their birth,
And, keep it allway's in his vewe,
Till they are named no more, on earth.
5
For why, they no compassion showed,
To him that greev'd and pained lay.
But, they the needy soul persu'de:
The broken heart, they sought, to slay.
They Cursings Loved: let them be made
The part, therefore, of their just lot.
In Blessings, they no pleasures had;
And, therefore, they possess them not.
6
With curses, they, themselves did clothe,
As with a gown, or with a cloak;
Therefore, as oil or water does,
Through bones and bowels, let them soke;
Let Curses, them like Belts, enclose;
And, as their clothes, such men array:
Even thus, oh Lord, require my Foes
Who of my soul, amiss do say.
7
But, (for thy Name sake) save thou me;
Deal well with me, and mercy daigne:
For, wounded is my heart in me;
And, I am pore, and full of pain.
I vanish like an Evening shade,
I, Locust like, am tossed about:
My knees, are weak through fasting made;
My flesh is lean, and wasted out.
8
They, me despise even to my face,
And, scornful nods, at me they make.
Oh Lord my God! of thy mere grace,
To bring me help, now undertake,
Make them to see, and then confess,
That by thy hand I helped am;
Lord, though they Curse, yet do thou bless.
And, let them rise, to see their shame.
9
But, make oh Lord, thy Servants glad;
Whilst they, that my illwillers are,
With shame (even their own shame) are clad,
As if with Robes arayd they were.
My tongue shall praise thee then, therefore,
Confessing, where Assemblies be,
That God is Patron of the pore;
And, from false doomes, their souls does free.
Oh God! terrible art thou in those judgments, which thou do pronounce
against all malicious and vnrepe^ta^t Sinners. UUee beseech thee therefore grant
us grace, to repent all our transgressions, and to show compassion to all thy
pore members in their Afflictions; that we may find Mercy in our sorrows.
UUee often see thy judgments; but, we neither know whom thou correctest in
love to amendment, nor whom in fury to their destruction: For, thou reservest
that secret unto thy self (To keep us, both in our dealings and Censures, always
charitable to those whom thou smitest) Oh teach us, therefore, true Charity;
and let us never do, or wish evil to any man, in our own Causes: But, let us
apply thy judgments, to sin in general; and imprecate that they may fall
only, on the enemies of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Psa. 110.
A Psalm of David, It is literally of Christ, Math. 22. and it mentions, the
Deity, Humanity, Soveraignety, Preisthood, Power, Conquests, Passion, and
Resurrection of the Messiah. We may sing it with respect to those perticulers.

Unto my Lord, the Lord, thus spoke,
Sit down at my right hand;
And, of thy foes, I Will footstooles make,
Whereon thy feet shall stand.
The Lord, shall out of Syon bring,
The scepter of thy might;
And, over them thou shall be king,
Who now resist thy right.
2
On thy great Day, in serving thee,
Men, willing minds will show;
And, from the womb, thy birth shall be,
As is the morninge dew.
The Lord, has sworn, (and will nor check,
Nor change the word he swore)
Thou art, (as was Melchizedek)
A priest, for evermore.
3
The Lord, shall smite when wroth he grows
Great kings, at thy righthand.
The Gentiles judge, and, slay his foes
Which are in every land.
The heads of kingdoms he shall slay;
And, as he passeth-by,
Shall drinck the Torrent in the way,
And, raise his head on high.
Almighty God, who have given thy eternal Son (with whom thou art the same in
Essence) to be in an unspeakable manner conceaved in the Virgins womb: To be
made an everlasting priest, for us, after the Order of Melchizedek. And in his
Passage through this life, to drinck the bitter Torrent of his Passion: Grant
we beseech thee, that by virtue of his blessed Incarnation, our nature may be
sanctified and prepared for Grace; that by his Death, we may dye to sin; that
by the power of his Resurrection we may arise to righteousness; and by his
glorious Ascension, be victorious ever all our enemies, both spiritual and
temporal, for ever and ever. Amen.

Psa. 111.
Halelujah. It praises God, for his miraculous works, his wisdom, Mercy,
Justice, and for the Covenant of has Grace etc. It may be sung to continue in
us, the fear of God, and to praise him for his benefits; especially, for our
Redemption.

WIth all my heart, God's praise I Will sing,
Where saints assembled are.
For, they, God's works to mind will bring,
Who, love to them do bear.
Most famous deeds, the Lord has done,
His Justice, has no ends:
His works are worthy to be known,
His bounty, far extends.
2
All them that fear his Name, he feeds;
His League he thinks upon;
And, for his folk, by wondrous deeds,
The Gentiles Realms he wonn.
His hands, have Truth and Justice, wrought;
His precepts, all, are sure;
With Truth and Judgment, fully fraught,
For ever to endure.
3
God sent, and has his Flock redeemd;
His Leagues eternal are:
His Name is rev'rently esteemed;
And, full of holy-feare.
The fear of God, is Wisdome's gate;
And, therefore wise is he,
Who seeks to enter in thereat:
His praises, endless be.
Most merciful Father (wonderful in thy workings, dreadful in thy judgments,
vnfallable in thy Truth, and unspeakable in thy Mercies) fill us we pray thee
with that sanctified Fear which is the beginning of true UUisdome; So manifest
unto us thy eternal Truth; so remember us of thy Covenant; and so feed us
with spiritual nourishments, that we may be strengthened to walk in thy ways;
and at the last, enter the Gates of eternal blessedness, through the mediation
of Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

Another of the same.
AL praise to God, my heart now render shall.
Before the Just; of him I Will mention make,
Confessing that his wondrous Actions, all,
Deserve that we should pleasure in them take.
Exceeding great, his glorious deeds appear,
From age to Age, his Justice does extend;
Grown famous, all his glorious workings are,
His Bounties, and his Mercies have no end.
In feeding such as fear him, he is free;
Kept firm, his promise is, from age to age.
Long since, that so, his Folk his power might see,
Made were, the Gentiles lands their heritage.
Nor Truth nor Justice pass, but from his hand.
Of all his laws, the firm fullfillings, be,
Provided so; that, they shall ever stand
Quit, from all wrongs, and from all falsehoods, free
Redeemer of his people, he became.
So firm a League likewise, he did ordain,
That, he has fixed, and fortifide the same,
Vnchangably, for ever to remain.
With holiness and fear, he clothes his Name:
Yea, Wisdome's first foundation is his fear.
Right wise are they, that well observe the same:
And such, from Age to age, commended are.
Psa. 112.
Halelujah. It mentions many priveledges and properties of the Elect; and
shows, that the wicked (for their greater vexation) shall behold their
happiness etc. It is a consolatory Hymn; and serves to keep vndiscouraged,
those who are exercised by the skoffs and prosperities of worldlings.

WHo on Gods law his love does place,
And, fears him, right blessed is he:
God, will on earth advance his race,
And, blessed his faithful seed shall be.
His house with plenty shall be dight,
His Justice, shall not be confinde;
In darkness, he shall still have light,
For, he is meek, and just, and kind.
2
The righteous lends, and helps the pore,
His dealings, he discreetly weighes;
His fame, abides for evermore,
And in a state vnchangd, he stays.
He starts not, evil News to hear.
On God, his hopes and muzings be.
His heart is fixed, and will not fear
Till on his foes, his wish he see.
3
He, on the pore, does Alms bestow,
And, always just, he does abide.
For which, his horn shall powrfull grow,
And, with renown be dignifide.
Which, when ungodly men perceave,
They shall, through envy and despite.
Grow furious, gnash their teeth, and greeve.
And, loose their hopes, and longings quite.
We humbly beseech thee oh merciful God, to infuse into our hearts, such a
filial fear of thee; Such a firm trust in thy Mercies; Such a prudent regard
to all things which are necessarily pertinent to our selves; So charitable a
respect unto the necessities of our pore brethren; and so constant a
willingness, to perform all the duties in which we are obliged to any of thy
Creatures: That, being without slavish terrors, we may be courageous, what
rumors soever we hear; and enjoy the commodities of this life, to the vexation
of our spiritual foes; and eternal Blessedness hereafter, to thy glory. Amen.

Another of the same.
ALl they that fear the Lord, attain to bliss;
Because, that, such delight God's will to do.
Conferd on them, shall honors be, for this,
Deriving to their seed, great blessings to.
Increasing wealth, their houses, full shall fill.
For aye, the Iustman's righteousness remains.
Great light, on him, in darkness beameth still.
He righteous is, and kind, and Mercy daignes,
If need require he lends, and gives besides.
Kept straight are all his ways, by prudent care.
Laid fast his groundworke are; and firm he bides.
Made endless, his memorialls (likewise) are.
No fears he feels, though evil News there be;
On God with fixed heart he does rely:
Puts trust in him; not shrincking, till that he
Quite overthrown does all his foes epsy.
Releef among the pore bestows he;
So keeping, still, his dealings, all, upright,
That, him advanced, Ungodly men shall see;
Vex, gnash their teeth, and loose their lo^gings quite.
Psa. 113.
Halelujah. It magnifieth God for his great love to mankind both in general,
and particular. But, chiefly for extending his Church so universally; for
raising us from the dunghills of corrupted Nature, to the thrones of Grace; and
for taking away our spiritual sterrillity. etc. The use appears,

Ye servants of the Lord,
With praise, Gods Name, adore;
The Name of God the Lord,
Bless, now and evermore.
Oh sing his praise!
Through every place, which in his race,
The Sunn, survaies.
2
All nations, fear his powers,
His glory mounts the sky.
There is no God like ours:
No other Lord, so high.
Yet, he does bow,
All things to see, that in heaven be*
Or Earth below.
3
The pore, from ground he fetts,
From dyrt, the meek, he brings;
And, them with kings he setts,
Even with his peoples kings.
And, her that had
A barren womb; he, made become
A mother glad.
Glorious Lord God! who (to the confusion of the proud and hauty) have made
choice of the vile and despised things of this world, thereby to magnify thy
Name. Raise us, we pray thee, from the Dunghill of our Corrupted Nature; that
by thy Grace, we may become Rulers over our own Affections: And make us also
(who have been heretofore barren in all Goodness) so fruitful, hereafter, in
Faith and goodworks, that our souls may be saved, and thy Name glorified,
through out the whole world, for ever and ever. Amen.

Another of the same.
PRaise ye the Lord, and bless his Name;
Yea, now and ever bless the same,
Ye servants, of the Lord our God.
For, from the Sunns ascending place,
Even to the utmost of his race,
His Name's due praise, is famed abroad.
Over Nations all, yea, over the Spears,
The Lord our God, his glory rears,
And, never was his equal found.
For, though his dwelling he on high,
He does behold with humbled eye,
All things in heaven, and on the ground.
2
The pore, from dust and mire he brings,
To sit with Princes, and with Kings;
Even of his people to be King.
And, he, a joyful mother made
Of her, that erst no children had.
Unto the Lord, oh therefore sing.
To God the Father, To the Son,
And Holy Ghost, (those, three in one
And, that eternal One in three)
All glory be, for ever more;
All power and praise, as heretofore,
Ascribed, now and ever be.
Psa. 114.
By alluding to the deliverance from Egypt, to the driving back of Jordan and
the Redsea, to the trembling of Sinay, and forcing waters from hard rocks; our
spiritual deliverances, and Reformations, are typified. Therefore, our Church
uses this Psalm, as proper for Easterday.

WHen Israel, brought from Egypt was
And, Jacob from a foreign tongue;
In Judah was his holy place,
To him, did Isre'ls rule belong.
The Sea saw that, and fledd away,
Even Jordan also, backward slipped.
The mountains then, like Rams did play;
Like Lambs, the lesser hillocks tript.
2
Thou sea, what made thee so to fly?
Why did thou, Jordan, backward go?
Why daunc't like Rams the mountains hye?
Ye hills, like Lambs, why tript ye so?
Shake earth, at presence of the Lord,
When Jacob's God is present, shake;
For, he, from Rocks, a standing Ford,
And, fountains, in the flints does make.
Almighty God, the deliverer of all pore destressed Captives; we are hy Nature
the slaves of Sin, Death and the Devil, who do labor to hold us in eternal
bondage: But, we praise thee, thou have made a miraculous passage for our
escape: Oh! grant therefore that thy presence, may so startle us out of our
security, and so mollify our flintie nature, that the tears of true
penitence may flow plentifully from us; and that, we (thanckfully walking in
that way which thou have prepared for our: entrance into the Land of the
living) may be quite freed from our servitude; and enjoy peace and rest in thy
Kingdom, for ever and ever. Amen.

Psalm. 115.
The Faithful desire that al honor may be ascribed to God alone; and that
their foes may not blaspheamously question his power. Then, in the name of
heathen Idols, and their worshippers, reprooves the vanity of all those
assistances whereon carnal men rely etc. It is useful when false worshippers
blaspheame God, by reason of our affliction etc.

NOt ours the glory make,
Lord, give not us the fame:
But, for thy Truth and Mercy sake,
Ascribe it, to thy Name.
2
To say, where is their God!
Why should the Gentiles dare?
Since, he in heaven has his abode,
And, works his pleasure there?
3
Men's hands, their Idols, make;
They, gold and silver be:
Possessing mouths that cannot speak
And, eyes that cannot see.
4
Their ears are senseles to;
Their nostril smells not:
Their hands and feet, nor feel, nor go;
No breath is in their throat.
5
All they, who those adore,
(Or form them) like them be:
In God, let Israel trust therefore,
For, their defense is he.
6
On God, preserving them,
Let Aron's house depend:
Let those, who fear him, trust in him;
For, he will such defend,
7
God, will remember us,
And, on us, Mercy show.
On Israel, and on Aron's house,
He, blessings will bestow.
8
He prospers great and small,
That, fear of him profess:
You and your seed, likewise, he shall
Still, more and more, increase.
9
Of God, you blessed be
Who made both earth and heaven:
The heaven of heavens, inhabits, he.
And, earth to men has given.
10
Lord, none cann thee adore,
Who dead, and silenc't are:
But, I, both now and evermore,
Thy praises will declare.
Not for our own deservings, cann we claim any thing (oh Lord God) neither
for our own sakes, or our own glory, ought we to desire any deliverances,
or benifits from thy Majesty. As much, therefore, as our self-love will permit,
we desire, merely for thine own honor sake, that public Idolaters, and
carnal minded men (who serve Gods of their own making) may not scandalize
thee, or thy Truth, by Occasion of such Miseries or Disgraces, as fall on us,
who profess the same. But, make us (oh God) to love thee and thy glory, so
far above our own lives and reputations; That, whether we be delivered or
no, we may submit our selves to thy pleasure; and be truly comforted, heartily
pleased, and rejoice unfeignedly, that we are counted worthy to suffer for thy
glory. Amen.

Psa. 116.
The Faithful profess affection to Christ; Acknowledge their condition, both
by Nature and Grace; encourage others to trust in Gods favor; and resolve the
same in them selves. We may sing it, when, after some great Affliction or
temptation, we are comforted, and sensible of our present, and passed estate
etc.

I love the Lord; for, he an ear
To my complaints does give:
And, since he pleases me to hear,
I Will seek him, whilst I live.
The fears of death, enclosd me round;
Hell torments, me enthrald.
But, still, when paind my self I found,
On God's great Name, I called.
2
Preserve my soul, oh Lord, I said;
For, thou art full of grace.
Just, kind, and every pore man's aid.
My healp, when greev'd I was.
My soul, to this thy refuge fly;
For, God is thy larg meed.
From death my soul; from tears, mine eye;
From falls, my feet he freed.
3
I shall, with God, enjoy my life
Where livinge men abide.
This I profess, with firm belief,
Though I was terrifide.
Yea, though in rashness I did say,
That all men liers were;
What for thy gifts I should repay,
Now, Lord, my questions are.
4
Thy Cupp of saving-health I Will take.
Upon thy name, I Will call;
And of my vows, I Will payment make
Before thy servants all.
Thy saints, their deaths, and sufferings, be
Right precious in thine eye.
Oh Lord, thy servant serving thee,
Thy handmayds Child, am I.
5
My fetters all, thou brak'st away,
And, I, oh Lord, therefore,
The sacrifize of thancks will pay;
And, thy great Name adore.
To thee, oh Lord, I Will pay my vows,
Where thy Assemblies be;
Even in the Courts of Gods own house Jerusalem, in thee. Haleluiah.
Hear our prayers oh Lord God, and deliver our souls from the Death of Sin.
For, we are compassed with many perils and fearful Temptations; Insomuch,
that we are sometime almost ready to despair, and distrust that there is noe
Truth in any of our hopes. Oh keep us (by thy special grace) from falling into
those whirlpooles, out of which there is no returning. When the guilt of Sin,
the fears of Death, the torments of hell, and the sugestions of the Devil
(conspiring with our frailties) have once enclosed us. UUee have then, no power
of resistance in our selves; and it is thy great Mercy, if the little spark of
our faith be not wholly quenched. Help us therefore in our extremityes. Break the
chains of our Sins, unloose the snares of Satan, and give us grace to praise
thee in thy Jerusalem, and to magnify thy Mercy in the Land of the living,
world without end. Amen.

Psa. 117.
This is the least Psalm; but it has respect unto the greatest Mystery. For
it provokes all Nations to praise God, for extending his grace to the whole
world; as appears, Romans 15. We should sing it to praise God for his Universal
Grace.

GOd's praise, ye Nations all declare;
The Lord, ye people all adore:
For, large to us, his Mercies are,
His Truth endures for evermore. Haleluiah.
We praise thee oh Father of Mercy, for that Universal Grace which thou have
vouchsafed, in offering thy salvation (without respect of persons) unto all
mankind, forsaking none until they have first forsaken thee. Make effectual
unto us, we beseech thee, this general favor; That we embracing the same,
by the Will (which thou first make capable of what thou presentest thereunto)
and that cooperating with thy Spirit (according to the power which thou shall
give us) we may be pertakers of that special grace, which makes us the Objects
of thy eternal Election; and from which there is no falling away. Grant this,
even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Psa. 118.
This Psalm Christ applied unto himself. Math 24. For, he is that Cornerstone
here mentioned. Here also are mistically touched upon, his Passion,
Resurrection, and son other Evangelicall Uerities. It is therefore used by
our Church, as proper for Easterday.

THe Lord is good, him therefore bless;
And, for his Grace that fails never.
Let Israel also, now confess,
His Mercy does abide for ever.
Yea, let the house of Aron say,
His Mercies have no ending day.
2
Let all, who fear him, publish out,
His Mercies that eternal be:
For, when at need, his healp I sought,
He, heard my plaint, and set me free:
And, since the Lord, is thus mine Aid
Of man, I cannot be afraid.
3
My helpers. God's assistance have;
And, I perceave it on my Foes.
More safe it is God's help to crave,
Then on man's healping to repose,
Yea, faith in God, more safety brings,
Then to rely on mighty kings.
4
All nations, seige to me did lay,
But, in Gods Name, I them destroyed;
They me beleaguered every way,
But, in Gods Name, I them destroyed.
As Bees, they compast me about,
Like fire in thorns, soon in, soon out,
5
I soon destroyed them in Gods Name,
For, when they sought to do, me wrong,
The Lord, my gracious aid became,
My strength, my health, my joyful song.
And, in his house, the Just may sing,
What God's right hand to pass did bring.
6
For, God's right hand is lifted high,
Greats things the Lords right hand has wrought;
And, from the Grave escaped am I
To tell, what God to pass has brought,
For, though he sore afflicted me,
Yet, he from death did set me free.
7
Of Righteousness unclose the gate,
That, I God's praises may express:
This Gate is God's; yea, this is that,
By which the Righteous have access.
And, him I Will praise; for it is he,
That hears, and healps, and saves me.
8
That Is now the cheifest Cornerstone,
Which once the builders did despise;
It was the work of God, alone,
And, seems wondrous in our eyes.
This is the day the Lord has made;
Come, let us all, therein be glad.
9
Save Lord; oh save us, Lord, we pray;
Bless him, that comes in thy Name.
That, from his house God bless us may,
We pray, and much desire the same.
For, God's the Lord, by whom our fight
Obtaines the Vision of his Light.
13
With Cords the Sacrifices bind;
Them, to the Aulters Corners, tie.
Thou art my God, whose praise I Will mind;
My God, whom I will glorify.
Oh! praise the Lord. for, great is he,
And, without end his Mercies be.
Oh Lord Christ our savior! Thou art that precious cornerstone which unites,
nor Jews and Gentiles only, but even the Godhead and the Manhood into one
spiritual Buildinge. Thou, art he by whom all our Enemies are destroyed.
Thou, art he, by whom we escape the grave of sin, and the terrors of
everlasting Death. Thou, only, art that Gate of Righteousness, by which we
enter into life eternal; And, thou only, art that Light, in whose blessed
Vision, our happiness does consist. Oh give us part in all that, which thy
Incarnation, Passion, Death, Burial, Resurrection, and Ascension, has
merrited and conquered for us; and (if it please thee) let this be the Day,
which thou have made to fill us with such a gladness, as shall make us joyful,
for ever more. Amen.

Psa. 119.
This Psalm consists of many exhortations, promises, prayers, complaints,
consolations, directions, Resolutions, and thancksgivings; varciously
intermixed, according to the Churches various Occasions: and principally
informs, that God's word is the Rule of Life. etc.

Alaph. 1.
He Is blessed, that in the perfect way
Of God's pure Law has trod
Who does his Testaments obey,
And, wholly seeks God.
For, such will take no ill in hand,
Nor, from his Pathway swarve,
But, Lord, as thou do give command,
Thy Precepts, they observe.
2
Would God! my ways were so direct
That keep thy Laws I might.
For, whilst I thy Commandes respect
On me, no shame cann light.
With upright heart, thee praise I will,
When, learned thy Judgments be;
And, then I will thy Laws fulfill;
Therefore, forsake not me.
Another of the same.
ALl those are blessed that in a blameles way,
Have by the Law of God their feet confinde,
As blessed are those, that his Decrees obey,
With all their hearts, desiring him to find.
An evil act, they never take in hand,
Nor from Gods Pathway, shall their footing swarve
We, likewise, are inioyn'd by thy Command,
That we, thy Precepts, duly should observe.
Ah! therefore, would my ways were guided so,
That, all thy Statutes, well observe I might.
For, if thy Laws, I have regard unto,
No shame at all, on me shall then alight.
And, when thy righteous Judgments I have learned
With heart sincere, I Will sing thy praise therefore,
To keep thy Laws, I will moreover learn.
Oh! then, forsake me not for ever more.
Give us, oh Lord, such perfect knowledge of thy Law; such regard of thy
Testimonies; such practice in thy Ways; such obedience to thy Precepts; such
love to thy Statutes; Such diligence in thy commands, and such awe of thy
Judgments: that our understanding may be freed from error, our Conversations
from polution, our Affections from vanity: and that thou may ever be
glorified by us; and we, never be forsaken of thee. Even for Jesus Christ his
sake. Amen.

Beth. 2.
HOw cann youth's pathway cleansed be
But by thy word, oh Lord?
With all my heart, I seek to thee,
Oh! guide me by thy word.
I Will keep thy Law, with all my heart,
That I displease not thee.
Oh Lord (that always blessed art)
Thy Statutes, teach to me.
2
To preach the Judgments of thy Mouth,
My lips I will employ.
For, in thy Testimonies, truth;
As, in great wealth, I joy.
Upon thy Laws, and Ways, alone,
My thoughts, and Love are set.
Thy Statutes, my delight is on:
Thy UUord, I Will not forget.
Another of the same.
BY what, may yongme^s ways made blameles be;
But, by their taking heed unto thy UUord?
With all my heart, I have desired thee.
From thy Commands, let me not wander, Lord.
By layeng up thy Word within my heart,
To keep me from offending thee I thought.
Oh Lord my God, thou always blessed art,
Vouchsafe, to me thy Statutes may be taught.
Between my lips, I often have sounded forth
The Judgments of thy mouth; and I have deemed
Thy Testimonies path of greater worth
Then riches are, (by others most esteemed)
Both on thy sacred Precepts I do muse,
And, ever, to thy UUaies have borne respect.
Thy Statutes, as my pleasures I will use;
And, Lord, they word, I never will neglect.
Suffer us not oh God, to deferr the amendment of our lives until we be
decrepit with age; but let thy word reform us, in our youth; at least, from
this present hour, let us beginn the cleansing of our ways with our whole
hearts. Let us seek, thee, bless thee, speak of thee, Muse on thee, and so
delight in thee; that thou may delight in us, and keep us in the way of thy
Commandments, for ever and ever, Amen.

Gimel. 3.
LOrd, grace thy servant so, that he
May live, and keep thy Word.
The wonders of thy Law to see,
Enlight mine eyes oh Lord.
A stranger here on earth, I, am;
Thy Precepts let me know.
My soul, with longings, faint became,
Thy Judgments, love I so.
2
Their Cursed pride thou have contrould,
Who from thy Laws do swarve:
But, shame and scorn, from me withhold,
For, I thy Truth observe.
Enthroned Princes me reproov'd,
Yet, on thy Laws I thought.
Thy Testimonies I have loved:
To me they Counsel taught.
Another of the same.
COnfer such Bounty on thy servant Lord,
That to fulfill thy Law, survive I may:
That, I may see the wonders of thy UUord
Unclose, likewise (Oh Lord) mine eyes I pray.
Consid'ring that on earth I am a stranger,
Hide not from me the knowledge of thy Truth.
My soul, to leave the body is in danger,
She so desires the Judgments of thy mouth.
Controld thou have, the Cursed pride of them
Who from thy just Commandments have swarved.
Remoove away their scorns who me contemn;
For, I thy Testimonies have observed.
Contested with, by Princes, I have binn:
Yet, I thy servant, on thy Statutes muse.
Thy Testimonies, my delights are in,
And, them to be my Counselors I choose.
Almighty God (seeing we are but Pilgrims here on earth (subject to many
wants, many Infirmities, and many oppressions) graciously vouchsafe us, that
which is out wardly necessary for the body; Supply that which is defective in
our seules; and let thy Law arm us against the opposition of all our
Adversaries, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Daleth, 4.
ACcording to thy word, now cheer,
My soul, which low is brought.
My life's Consession, thou shall hear,
Let me thy Law, be taught.
Me, in thy way appointed, set:
And, I Will they works record.
Greef tires my soul, oh comfort it,
According to thy word.
2
Me, from the path of Lies, remoove,
And, by thy Law, direct.
For, I the ways of Truth do love;
Thy Judgments, I affect.
Disgrace me not, for, firm I stand,
To what thou have decreed:
And, I will runn at thy Command,
When thou my heart have freed.
Another of the same.
DEclined is my soul, even to the ground;
Oh quicken me, according to thy word.
My ways I showed, and I thine answer found;
Thy Statutes, also, teach to me oh Lord.
Disclose to me thy Testimonies path,
And, of thy wondrous works my talk shall be.
My life consumes, because much greef it has;
According to thy UUord, establish me.
Divide me from that Path which liers love,
And graciously vouchsafe to me thy Law.
The way of Truth, is that which I approve;
And, of thy Judgments, I do stand in awe.
Distrustful of thy word I never grew,
Permit me not, oh Lord, to be disgraced,
The way of thy Commands I will pursue,
As soon at thou my heart enlarged have.
Indowe our hearts oh God! with such unfeigned humiliation, with such true
Confession, with such hearty contrition, with such love to thy Truth, with
hatred of error, and with a renewing of the whole man; that we may be more and
more enlarged from our sins and Corruptions, until we be perfectly restored
to the full liberty of the Sonns of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

He. 5.
Show me thy Truth, and from that way,
I never will depart.
Teach me thy Laws; and them, for aye,
I Will keep with all my heart.
Thy Statutes Paths, to me declare;
For, I delight thereon.
To love thy Word, my heart prepare,
And, Avarice to shunn.
2
From folly, turn mine eyes, oh Lord,
And, keep me in thy way.
Confirm thy Servant in thy Word,
That, so, I fear thee may.
Because thy Judgments gracious be,
My feared shame remove.
And, in thy Statutes quicken me,
For, Lord thy Laws I love.
Another of the same.
Eternal God, thy Statutes teach to me,
That til their end, I may fulfill them all,
To keep thy Law let me instructed be,
And, I with all my heart, observe it shall.
Enable me, to keep each Law of thine,
Because, that in their path, I pleasure take,
My heart unto thy Testaments, incline,
That so, all Avarice I may forsake,
Estrange mine eye, from Objects that are vain,
And, let me be revived in thy Path.
Thy word, to me thy servant, now make plain
Who, to thy fear, him self devoted has.
Expel thou far away, the shame I fear:
For, just, and good (oh Lord) thy Judgments be.
See, what my longings for thy Precepts are,
And, in they righteousness, revive thou me.
Oh Lord! Ignorance of thy Law, is the Cause that we neither love nor believe
it; and want of Love and Belief, are the occasions of all our errors. Give us
therefore, we pray thee, that Love, that knowledge, and that belief of thy word,
which may keep us in thy Paths. Root Covetuosnes, out of our hearts; let no
solly allure our eyes to wander aside, hereafter: and (because there is Mercy
in all thy Judgments) keep us from the shame which we fear, and have already
deserved: Even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Vau. 6.
THy loving aid, vouchsafe me still,
As thou have promised, Lord:
So, I my scorners answer will;
For, I believe thy word.
Since, on thy Judgments I rely,
Oh! do not, Lord, with draw
Thy Word of Truth; and then, shall I
For ever keep thy Law.
2
Now I to seek thy way, am bent,
I cann with freedom walk
And, I will of thy Testament,
To Kings, with boldness talk.
In thy Commands, I will delight:
For, I have them approov'd.
I Will mind thy word, and keep aright
Thy Laws; which I have loved.
Another of the same.
FVfill thy promisd word, and favor daigne;
Yea, great thou me thy saving-health oh Lord!
So, I shall make replies to them, again,
Who flout at me, because I trust thy word.
Firm trust, unto thy Judgments, Lord I have,
Therefore, to leave thy Truth permit me never:
But, make me to thine Ordinances cleave;
And, keep thy Laws, for ever and for ever.
Free, shall my walkings be, and uncontrolled;
Because thy precepts are beloved of me.
Thy Testaments, to kings I will unfold,
And, of the same, no whit ashamed be.
Full dearly, I have loved thy commands;
And, they my most affected pleasures prove.
I Will in thy precepte, exercise my hands,
And, muse upon thy Laws; for, them I love.
UUrite thy Laws in our hearts, oh Lord, and engrave them in our minds we
humbly beseech thee. So regenerate us, that we may become a Law unto our
selves; and have no desires in us, but those which are agreeable to thy Will.
So, we shall neither slavishly fear, the power of any Authority; nor be made
ashamed by any bitter Censurers, or scornful reproovers: but, may take
confidently, and use conscionably our liberty in Christ Jesus. Amen.

Zain. 7.
THat promise keep, which thou have made,
Thy servant's hope to be.
From thence (in greefs) I comforts had:
Thy word, revived me.
Though my disgrace, the proud have sought,
Unto thy Law I clave.
Upon thy Judgments past, I thought:
And, ear to them I gave.
2
Of sinners, who thy Law forsake,
I am in greevous fear.
Yet, where my Pilgrim-Inn, I take,
My songs, thy Precepts are.
I kept thy Law, and on thy Name,
I mused when many slept.
And, thus to pass, oh Lord, it came,
Because thy Law I kept.
Another of the same.
GIve heed unto that UUord which thou have said;
That UUord which thou did make my hope to be,
For, thence in my Afflictions I have aid:
It is thy UUord that still reviveth me.
Grown quite despised I was, in proudmens eyes,
And, yet, I from thy Law, declined not.
Thy Judgments, past, did in my thought arise;
And Lord, from them, I consolation got.
Great horrors have surprised me, because,
The wicked from thy precepts have gone wrong,
And, in my house of Pilgrimage, thy Laws,
And, thy Commandments, have been my song.
Good Lord! I mention of thy Name have made,
Even in the night; and I thy Law have kept.
And, every profitable thing I had;
Because, I from thy Precepts, have not stepped.
Oh Lord! there is no better comforter in trouble, then a faithful remembrance
of thy gracious promises; nor any means to prevent the fear, the disgraces,
or the mischeevous practices of the proud oppressor, then by the Meditation,
and practice of thy Laws. Grant therefore, we may so mind the One, and so
perform the other; That we may rejoice in this house of our Pilgrimage, all
our life long. Amen.

Chith. 8.
I Vowed oh Lord, to keep thy UUord,
For, thou my portion art.
Thy promised Mercies now afford;
I beg them with my heart.
I turned to thy Testaments,
When I had scanned my ways;
In keeping thy Commandments,
I used no delays.
2
By troops of sinners, robbed I was:
Thy Laws, yet, mind I still.
And, that thy Justice I may praise,
At midnight, rise I will.
Who e're dreads thee, and keeps thy word,
Shall my Compainon be.
Thy Mercy fills the world, oh Lord,
Oh! teach thy Laws to me.
Another of the same.
HOw that thou art my portion, Lord, I said,
And, I to keep thy Law have made a vow.
With all my heart, I for thy grace have prayed.
According to thy Word, have mercy now.
Here, I have called unto mind thy ways,
And, turned my feet unto thy Testaments.
Yea, I have ready been, without delays,
In executing thy Commandments.
Huge Troops of wicked men have robbed me:
Yet, still thy Precepts, in my heart I bear.
At midnight, I will rise, and sing to thee,
Because thy Judgments, true and righteous are.
Here, I have gained the fellowship of those,
Who stand in fear of thee, and keep thy Word.
Throughout the world, thy tender-Mercy flows.
Let me be trained in all thy Statutes, Lord.
Grant us Grace oh God! so to examine the Course of our life past, and what
ways we intend to walk hereafter; that wee'may return to thee with speedy
repentance: and so resolve to keep thy commandments during the time to come;
that we may enjoy thee for our Portion; and (both in the Night of our
afflictions, and among the troops of our persecutors) be comforted in the
remembrance of thy abundant Mercyes, through Jesus Christ. Amen.

Teth. 9.
THy servant, Favor has received
According to thy word.
And, thy Commands I have believed,
Therefore instruct me, Lord.
Though till my troubles, I mis-trod,
Thy Word, I follow now.
Thy Precepts, teach to me, oh God:
For, Good, and Kind, art thou.
2
Thy Law, with all my heart I seek;
Though, me the proud belie.
Their hearts are fatt, (even Brawner-like)
But, loved thy Laws, have I.
Now, I have learned thy Statute's Truth,
My Cares, I blessings deem:
And, I the Precepts of thy Mouth,
Above all wealth esteem.
Another of the same.
IN all things, to thy Servant thou art just,
According as thy UUord, oh Lord, has shown:
Since, therefore, to thy Covenant, I trust,
Thy Judgments, and thy Truth, to me make know,
If that, I had not been, by sorrows crossed,
I, still had erred: But, now I keep thy Word.
Most Good thou art, and all is well thou do:
Therefore, thy Statutes teach to me, oh Lord.
I, by the proud, have greatly been belide;
Yet, still, I keep thy Law within my breast:
Their heart (with fat) like brawne is stupifide;
But, with delight, thy Law has me possessed.
It is my weal, that I afflicted was;
For, by that means, thy Statutes, now, I heed.
That Law of thine, which from thy mouth did
Great sums of gold, and silver does exceed. (pass,
Sanctify unto us (oh Lord, all our Afflictions; that, being by them purified
from our Corruptions, we may become upright in all our ways. Suffer us not to
be so fatted in our prosterities as to become insensible of thy Mercies or
Judgments Let our experience in thy word, teach us, to see and acknowledge,
that our Afflictions are blessings; And what soever Scandalls do arise, let us
continue in Obedience to thy Law, and thanckfully esteem the same as we
ought, for ever and ever, Amen,

Iod. 10.
TO learn thy Law, instruct me, Lord,
For, me thy hands have made:
So, when they see me trust thy word,
Thy servants will be glad.
I know thy Judgments righteous are;
And all thy Stripes are Love.
Now, let thy grace, thy servant cheer
And, true, thy UUord approve.
2
I love thy Law, grant me therefore,
Thy grace, that live I may,
Defame the proud, who wrong me sore;
For, I thy Word obey.
Who knows thy Will, and fears thee,
All such to me convart:
And, in thy Laws, lest shamed I be,
Lord, rectify my heart.
Another of the same.
KIndle the knowledge of thy Law in me.
For, by thy hands, I fashioned was, oh Lord.
Thy servants will rejoice, my face to see,
Because, I have relied on thy word.
Known, well, thy Judgments are, to be upright.
And, Lord, on me thy stripes in love thou laydst,
Oh, make thy Tender-mercies my delight,
And comfort me, as in thy Word thou saydst.
Kind, let me find thee Lord; that I may live:
Because contentement in thy Law I find.
Defame the Proud, who me unjustly greeve;
For on thy Precepts, I employ my mind.
Keep those who thee do fear, and know thy UVill,
That they may be converted unto me.
And in thy Laws, my heart confirm thou, still,
That from disgrace, I may preserved be.
Lord, we are the workmanship of thy hands: So instruct us therefore, in the
understanding and performance of thy Law, that we may accomplish the end of
our Creation. Make our knowledge of thy Statutes, our Faith in thee, and our
conformity to thy Will, so evident; that thy Servants may rejoice, our foes
become ashamed, our corrections appear tokens of thy Love; our shame be
prevented, our hearts cheared, and life eternal obtained. Amen.

Caph. 11.
MY soul, for succor panting lies.
Yet, is thy word my stay.
I seek thy Truth with longing eyes,
Oh Comfort me, they say.
I, like a smoke-dride botle seem;
Yet, on thy Law, I thought:
Sum up my days, and judge all them,
That have my ruin sought.
2
For me, the Proud sunck pitts, which be
Forbidden by thy Laws:
Thy Words are true, oh save thou me,
Persu'de without a Cause.
Quite from the Land, they drove me nigh,
Yet, to thy Laws I cleave.
Oh cheer me, by thy grace, that I
Thy Word may never leave.
Another of the same.
LOrd, for thy healp my longing soul does pant,
And, on thy Promise al my hopes do lie.
Mines eyes do fail, because thy Word I want,
Come comfort me, with speaking looks, they cry.
Like botles in the smoke, I do appear,
Yet, still, thy Statutes minded are of me.
How long shall I thy servant suffer hece!
Thy Judgments, on my foes, oh, let me see.
Lo, for my life, the proud deep pitts have made,
Such as thy Law forbids to prepare.
They me persued, though no cause they had;
Oh help; for all thy Precepts, faithful are.
Long since, my ruin they had nigh contrived:
I, naitheles, thy Statutes did not leave.
Let me by thy compassion be revived.
And, to thy Testimonies, I will cleave.
Oh Lord, we have Adversaries, continually digging pitts for our souls. We
are sensible of great Afflictions; and our life daily wears out by vnperceaved
infirmities. Yet, we feel not that longing to obtain an incorruptible estate,
as to continue our present vanities. Oh let that experience, which we have of
miseries here; and that Faith which we ought to have of what thou have
promised hereafter, make our hearts pant with longing after the accomplishment
of thy Truth, and for our full fruition of thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

Lamed. 12.
THy Word, in heaven remains for aye;
Thy Truth shall still abide.
The earth, so firmly thou did lay,
It cannot swarve aside.
Thy Laws keep every thing upright;
For, all, thy servants be.
But that thy Word was my delight,
My Cares had ruin'de me.
2
I will not from thy Truth decline;
For, life to me it brought.
Oh save thou me; for I am thine;
And, thy Decrees, have sought.
Though sinners do my spoil intend,
Thy Word, in mind I bear.
Of all good works I see an end;
But, large thy precepts are.
Another of the same.
MAde firm in heaven, thy promise is, oh Lord,
And, shall for ever, and for ever, last.
Thy Faith fullnes, all ages will record,
For as earths globe, the same thou fixed have.
Most firm to thy Decrees thy works do stand,
And, all things as thy servants, wait on thee.
But, that I pleasure take in thy Command,
My sorrows, long e're this, had ruined me.
My heart shall never from thy Laws decline;
For, I, by them, to life again, was brought.
Vouchsafe to succor me, for I am thine:
And, after thy Commandments have sought.
Much waiting, has among the wicked been,
My fall to see; but, I thy Statutes mind.
Of all perfections, I an end have seen,
Save of thy Law; which cannot be confinde.
Almighty God, by being obedient unto the Law of their Creation, thy other
Creatures are preserved in order, and continue thy faithful servants.
Mankind only is rebellious; and yet, we have had often experience that a
little delight in thy Law, is rewarded with great Blessings. So increase
therefore, our belief of thy Truth, and our love to thy Law; that we may be
more and more conformable to thy Will, and at last be saved, through Jesus
Christ, our Lord. Amen.

Mem. 13.
IN thy Commands I pleasure take,
My daily thoughts they be;
Me, wiser then my foes they make,
And, still, remain with me.
More, learn I from thy Statutes, then,
My Teachers understand.
And, wiser am, then aged men,
By keeping thy Command.
2
My feet, from evil ways I kept,
That keep thy Law I might.
I, from thy Judgments have not stepped.
For, me thou holdst upright.
Though honey to the mouth be sweet,
Thy Word more sweetness has.
Through thy Commands I grew discreet,
And shunned the Liers Path.
Another of the same.
NO part of all the day I cann forbear
To mind thy Law; because I love the same.
It makes me wiser then my haters are.
For my companion still thy Law became.
Nay, more then all my teachers I conceave;
Because, my Musings are upon thy Will.
And, more then aged men I do perceave;
Because they Testimonies I fulfill.
No wicked pase, or Path, my feet shall use,
That so, thy UUord the better keep I might.
And, I thy Judgments never will refuse,
Because thou have instructed me aright.
Not half so sweet is honey to my mouth,
As are thy Words: for, perfect sweet are they.
Thou have encreast my knowledge, by thy Truth:
And, therefore, I abhor each evil way.
The wisdom (oh Lord) of this world, is but foolishnes, in respect of that
which is learned by thy Word: For, nothing is see profitable or pleasant, as
that; if it be meditated aright. Give us grace, therefore, we pray thee, so to
love it, and so to meditate thereon; that we may crack the shell which hides
the sweet kernel thereof, from the world; and, by help of thy spirit, thereby
attain that wisdom which (our Ordinary Teacher) the bare Letter has not
power to discover; and let it guide us out of all error, both in life and
doctrine, though Jesus Christ. Amen.

Nun. 14.
THy word is to, my feet a light:
A Lamp, my way to show,
I vowed thy Doomes to keep aright,
And I will keep my Vow.
I, sore am greev'd; Lord, me revive,
According to thy Truth.
Teach me thy Judgments; and receive
The Praises of my mouth.
2
Although my soul in danger be
Thy Statutes I obey;
And keep thy Laws, although for me,
The wicked, snares do lay.
Thy Cov'nants are mine Heritage;
They much rejoice my mind;
And, thy Decrees, from age to age,
To keep, I am inclinde.
Another of the same.
OH God, thy Word like La^ps my way does show,
And, to my feet, it is a shining flame.
To keep thy righteous Judgments, I did vow;
And, I resolve that I will keep the same.
Oppressed I am; Me, therefore Lord revive
As by thy UUord, thy promise is to do.
Accept that praise which I shall freely give;
And, in thy Judgments Lord, instruct me to.
On thy Commands, my thoughts are always set,
And, lo, my soul is always in my hands.
Ungodly men, for me have laid a nett;
Yet walk I not astray from thy Commands.
Of all my Joys thy UUord, alone, is cause:
Thy Testaments I make mine heritage.
My heart resolves, to love and keep thy Laws
While time endures, and throughout evry Age.
Many ways (oh Lord) is thy Law healpfull unto us. It is a Schoolmaster, to
teach us; A Rule, whereby to square our Actions; A glass, to show us our
deformities; A light, to guide us out of error; and a Remembrancer, to show us
what we are liable unto by Nature; That so, the terrors thereof may make the
flesh more obedient to the spirit (and their hearts the more thanck full, whom
Grace has freed from the Curse and condemning power thereof) yea, it is
always useful in some kind or other. Oh, write it therefore in our hearts and
engrave it in our minds, for ever and ever. Amen.

Samech. 15.
THy Law I love with all my heart,
And wicked thoughts detest.
The place of my defense thou art;
And, on thy Word, I rest.
Lewd men avoid; for I would feign
My God's Commands obey.
According to thy Word, mainetaine
My life, and hopes, I pray.
2
Support me, and I naught shall dread:
For, to thy word I cleave.
Upon thy Laws transgressers tread:
For, guile shall them deceive.
Purgd out like dross, the wicked be:
I therefore love thy Law.
And, of thy Judgments, and of thee,
My flesh does stand in awe.
Another of the same.
PRoud thonghts I hate, and such as cause offense
But, with much love thy Law I do embrace.
Thou art my shield, oh Lord, and my defense;
And in thy Word, my confidence I place.
Pack hence, all ye, that evil doers he;
For, all my God's Commands, I will obey.
According to thy Word, uphold thou me;
That both my life and hopes, enjoy I may.
Protect me, and no dangers I shall fear:
For, in thy Statutes, I will then delight.
Suppress all those that from thy Precepts err:
For why, they muse on nothing but deceit.
Purged out by thee, like dross, thee wicked are;
And, I thy Testimonies love therefore,
My flesh does dread thee with a trembling fear;
And, by thy Judgments, I am frighted sore.
Oh Lord, let the consideration of thy Judgments purge out all our wickedness,
and so terrify our wanton flesh, that it may tremble to offend thee. Let the
Meditation of thy Law of Love, so work upon our hearts, that our very
thinckings may be sanctified; And let us be continually supported by thy
asisting Grace, that in thought, word, and deed, we may persevere in obedience
to thy Will, and be safe under thy protection, for ever and ever. Amen.

Aijn. 16.
IN Judgment, I uprightly deal;
Let no man me oppress.
Be surety, for thy servants weal;
From Tyrants, me release.
Mine eyes, are dimmed since for thy Word,
And saving-health I sought.
Deal well with me thy servant, Lord,
Let me thy Law be taught.
2
Since, thee I serve, Lord, grant I may
Thy Testimonies know.
Now, is the time to work; for they,
Thy Law would overthrowe.
Far more then gold, (then finest gold)
Thy Statutes I affect.
Thy Law, in all things, I uphold,
And, errors way, reject.
Another of the same.
QUit me from such as do my harm assay;
For, I according to thy Law have wrought.
Be surety, for thy Servants weal, I pray,
That, to the proud, in thrall I be not brought.
Quite wasted are mine eyes, and almost blind,
Since thy just Word, and healp I did expect.
According to Mercy, be thou kind;
And, me thy servant, by thy Law direct.
Quench not that light by which thy Truth is known
But, give thy servant knowledge in thy Word:
For, they thy blessed Law have overthrown,
And, it is time that thou thy healp afford.
Quick therefore be: For, I above all gold,
Yea more then gold refinde, thy Word affect.
Thy Statutes all, to be upright I hold;
And all erroneous ways, I disrespect.
Preserve us, oh God, from their wickedness, who pretending a Christian
Liberty, seek to overthrowe, and make void thy Law (to the quenching of the
spirit, and to the fullfilling of their fleshly Will) Grant rather, that the
more we are freed, from the Bondage of the Law (and the less obliged to the
works thereof, for our Justification) the more we may labor to fulfill the
same; even for the love of Righteousness in Jesus Christ, Amen.

Pe. 17.
RAre things, thy Testaments comprise,
And are my souls delight.
Thy Statutes make the simple wise.
Their knowledge gives light.
Through longing for thy Law, I drew
My breath with panting Mouth.
Veiwe me in Love, as thou do veiwe
The Lovers of thy Truth.
2
So guide my goengs by thy Word,
No sin in me may reign.
From spoil of men, preserve me Lord.
For I thy Truth retain.
Teach me thy Laws, and let thy face.
Upon thy servant shine.
For, Streams I weep, when men transgress,
Or break a Law, of thine.
Another of the same.
RIght wonderful thy Testimonies are:
And, therefore Lord my soul to keep the^ strives.
Thy VVord's approaching, makes great light appear,
And, Understanding to the simple gives.
Respire and pant I did, with mouth vnclo'sd;
So greedy of thy Precepts, I became.
Oh look on me, as when thou art disposd,
To look upon the Lovers of thy Name.
Restrain my stepps according to thy UUord;
And let no sin, in me domion gain.
From Cruel men, defend thou me oh Lord,
So, I thy sacred Precepts will retain.
Reflect on me the brightness of thy face,
And, show thy Testimonies unto me.
For, down my cheeks the tears do flow apace,
Because, thy Laws despisd and broken be.
Sweet Jesus, though we desire to seem wise; we are very simple in the best
knowledge: Oh increase our understanding. Though we profess great Affection
to thee and thy Law; yet we soon deny (yea forsvvear) both, if we are in
danger to partake of thy sufferings. Oh look upon us therefore, with such an
aspect, as thou did cast on thy Apostle St. Peter; that weeping bitterly for
our Sins and vnkindenesses as he did; we may obtain the same forgivenes.
Amen.

Zade 18.
THou just in all thy doengs, Lord,
And in thy Judgments art.
Thy Testimonies, and thy Word,
Are true in every part.
I burn with zeal, because I see
My foes, thy Truth neglect.
Thy Word is pure, which causes me
That I the same affect.
2
Thy precepts, I will still retain,
Though I despisd am grown.
Thy Justice, always shall remain;
Thy Law, and Truth, are one.
In thy Commands, my pleasures are,
Though troubles on me fall.
Thy just eternal Will declare,
And, thereby, live I shall.
Another of the same.
SIncere thou art, oh Lord, in all thou do:
A true, and righteous Judgment thou have past,
Thy Testimonies are exceeding just:
And, so is all that thou Commanded have.
Spent, through my zeal I am, and almost pin'de,
Since of thy Truth my foes regardles grow.
Thy Word, is to the uttermost refin'de;
And, for that cause, thy servant loves it so.
Scorned and despised I am; yet cannot this,
My thoughts from thy Commandments withdraw,
Thy Justice an eternal Justice, is;
And, Truth it self, thou give for thy Law.
Sore pains and sorrows, have laid hold on me:
Yet, I from thy Commands content receive.
Thy righteous Testimonies endless be:
Oh let me know them, Lord, that I may live.
It is true oh Lord, that what ever thou willest is Just, and needs no other
reason thereof, but that thou Willest it; because thy Will is Truth and Justice
it self. Keep us therefore, from questioning the Justice of any thing which thou
have Willed or Decreed; and preserve us, also, from their madness, who fancy
Decrees which thou never made; and such as do not make thee justifiable by
humane Reason. Teach us to know, that, though thy Justice is
incomprehensible, yet so much as thy word has expressed of it, is such a
Justice, as makes thee (even in our capacities) Justifiable, when thou art
judged; and such, as may encourage us, to endeavor, to be just as thou art
just, and holy as thou art holy, by thy example. This grant, for Jesus Christ
his sake. Amen.

Coph. 19.
LOrd hear; for, in my heart I cry.
And I thy Word obey.
To hear my call, thine ear apply,
That keep thy Laws I may.
Relieng on thy Word, I called,
Before the Morning-light;
To mark thy Words mine eyes forestald,
The Watches of the night.
2
As just and loving, Lord, thou art,
So, hear and quicken me.
Lo, such as from thy Law depart
For mischief, coming be.
Oh Lord, to me, now nearer draw:
Thy Word all truth contains,
And, long ago, I knew thy Law,
Eternally remains.
Another of the same.
THey, healp oh Lord, with all my heart I crave,
Thy just Commands resolving to obey.
To thee I call aloud; me daigne to save,
That so, thy Testimonies, keep I may.
To thee, before the break of day, I call,
And, for my certain aid, thy Word I take.
The watches of the night mine eyes forestall.
That on thy Law. my muzings I may make.
Thine ear, unto my voice, in mercy, bow;
That, me, thy Judgments may revive, oh Lord.
They fast approach, who seek my overthrowe,
Even they, who strangers are unto thy Word.
To me, oh Lord, at all times, be thou nigh.
Thy Statutes, all perfection do contain.
And, many days ago, informed was I,
That thy Commands, for ever shall remain.
We rise early, (oh Lord) and cann sit up late at night, to prosecute our
common affairs, or to prevent the mischeevous purposes of any temporal
Adversary. Cause us, we tray thee, to be as vigilant, in seeking thee; in
Meditating the deep Mysteries of thy Law; and in foreseeing what spiritual
enemies are approaching to endanger our souls. Vouchsafe this, oh Lord: and in
all our endeavors, assist us; in all our prayers, hear us; and in all our
necessities be present with us, in Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Resh. 20.
REgard my greef, and save me Lord,
For, I obaie thy Laws.
Hear me, according to thy Word,
Oh save, and plead my Cause.
Because thy Word they muse not on,
From health are sinners far.
Revive me Lord, as thou have done,
For, great thy Mercies are.
2
My foes, and spoilers many be;
Yet, I thy Word profess,
And greeve when I the wicked see,
Thy Statutes to transgress.
Thy Law I love; oh quicken me,
As thou have promised Lord.
For, endless thy just Judgments be;
And, ever true, thy UUord.
Another of the same.
VEwe Lord, what sorrows have oppressed me:
For, to observe Law, My mind I give.
Let me adjudged, and delivered be;
And, me according to thy word revive.
Ungodly men from saving health are far,
Because they do not seek thy Statutes, Lord;
Exceeding great thy Tender-mercies are;
Reviue thou me according to thy word.
Vexed and persude, by many, I have been;
And, yet, I from thy Precepts have not straid.
I greeved was when sinners I had seen;
Because, thy holy -word, they disobayd.
Unto thy Law, observe what love I show;
And, of thy tender mercy, quicken me.
Thy word, through all eternity is true;
And, everlasting thy just Judgments be.
Oh Christ the Mediator; in our minds we are lovers and observers of thy
Law; but in our members we are captivated unto the Law of Sin: for which,
our greeved spirits do complain with sighs and groans, that are neither
vtterable by the voice, nor sensible to the flesh. Oh deliver us from this
bondage; Plead thou our cause to thy Father: Comfort our dejected souls; and
let our love and practice of thy Law, quicken us, in the way of Righteousness,
and make us partakers of thy Tender-Mercies, for ever more. Amen.

Schin. 21.
THough Princes, causeles, wronged me much,
Thy Law I slighted not:
But, in thy word, my ioies were such
As his that Spoils has got.
The lienge lips I do abhor;
But, I affect thy word.
Seav'n times a day, I praise thee, for
Thy righteous Doomes, oh Lord.
2
The Lovers of thy Law have peace;
And, harm they shall have none.
Lord, on thine aid my hopes I place;
And, thy Commands have done.
My soul thy Testimony kept;
In love therewith I grew.
I, from thy Precepts have not stepped;
For, thou my ways do veiwe.
Another of the same.
When cause was none, even Princes wronged me;
But, of thy word alone, my heart had fear.
And, in that word, my Ioies, moreover, be
As great as their's, that sharing booties are.
With much dislike, all falsehood I detest:
And, I thy Law, unfeignedly affect,
Sev'n times a day, thy praise I have expressed;
Because thy righteous Judgments I respect.
What perfect peace have they that love thy word?
Even such, that nothing cann their quiet mar.
For thy salvation, I have hoped, Lord;
And, thy Commands by me performed are.
Well pleased, and with exceeding much delight,
My soul thy Testimonies keeps still;
Thou know; for all my ways are in thy sight;
That I, thy Precepts, and thy Laws, fulfill.
Oh blessed Redeemer, who were persecuted by Princes, for my sake, without a
Cause; Thy many Prayers, daily offered to thy Father; thy true delight in his
Word; thy detestation of falsehood; and thy perfect fulfilling of the Law, have
obtained, that thy righteousness may be ascribed unto us. Oh grant, that by
performing what thou have enabled us to do, we may retain and increase the
Talent freely given; and enjoy thy Peace, which passes all understanding; for
ever and ever. Amen.

Tau. 22.
REceive my cry, and guide thou me
As thou have promisd, Lord.
Give ear, and saved let me be;
According to thy word.
When thou to me have shown thy ways.
My lips thy praise will show.
My tongue thy blessed word shall praise;
For, all thy Laws are true.
2
Me, let thy powrfull hand protect;
For, I thy Law approove.
Thy Saving-health I do affect,
Thy Precepts I do love.
Oh, let me live to sing thy praise;
In Judgment, me preserve.
Thy servant seek, who sheep-like straies;
For, I thy Law observe.
Another of the same.
YEald my Complaint, oh Lord, thy graitious ear,
And, knowledge of thy Law, to me afford.
My humble suite, vouchsafe, I pray, to hear;
And, save thou me, according to thy word.
Yea, save thou me; and I thy praise will preach.
When thou shall thy Commands to me declare.
Thy word likewise, to others I will teach;
For, all thy Precepts, true and righteous are,
Yeald me thy hand, my saftie to assure;
For, thy Commands my chosen part, I make.
Thy Saving-health, I labor to procure,
And, in thy Law, oh Lord, I pleasure take,
Yet, longer let me live, to sing thy praise;
And, let thy Judgments Lord, my helpers be.
Now, me thy serva^t seek, who sheep-like straies,
For, never is thy Law forgot of me.
Most merciful Father, we have all erred and strayed from thy ways like lost
sheep; give us therefore that Law of Faith, by which we may be brought home
to thy Fold. UUhen we have obtained this Grace; let us truly esteem it,
hartly praise thee for it, and diligently preach it to others. Oh spare our
lives, until the New-man shall be fully perfected in us; that we may
accomplish the work for which we were created, and glorify thy Name, world
without end. Amen.

Psa. 120.
A song of Degrees. Why these Psalms are so called, it is uncertain (for,
Jewish fancies are not vvorth heeding) but, perhaps, our Degrees tovvard the
spiritual Temple, are here mystically included: for, the first degree
thithervvard, is to have a sight of our misery, and a detestatio^ of the worlds
vanities (figured by Mesech, and Kedar, in this Psalm. It is useful, when we
are constrained to live among false worshippers, or wearied by our own
corruptions etc.

I Called on God in my destresse,
Who heard me when I prayed:
From lieng and deceitfulnes,
Lord, save my Soul; I said.
What hire, oh thou deceitful tongue!
Prepared is for thee?
But, arrows that are sharp and strong,
And coals that burning be?
2
Ah! woe is me, that I so long,
In Mesech must reside!
And, that, perforce, I must among
The Tents of Kedar bide.
My soul has been too long, alas!
With such as wranglers are:
For, when I speak to them of peace,
For war, they do prepare.
Father of Mercy; Keep us from the lieng deceits of the Devil, and his
Members; and reward them according to their malice. Vouchsafe to us, also, such
a sight, and loathing, of our natural estate; that we may have an earnest
longinge to be translated from the Tents of Ungodliness, and be incorporated
into thy heavenly Jerusalem through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Psa. 121.
A song of Degrees. Another Degree, is to fix the eye of our soul on God,
acknowledging him only, the means of our deliverance, and our defense etc. It
directs us, to whom we should seek; and encourages to depend on God in all
our ways.

MIne eyes above the hills, I rear,
And, thence, of healp, I hopeful am;
For, from the Lord my succors are,
From him, that heaven and earth did frame.
My feet vnmoov'd, he always keeps;
He, is my guard, that ever wakes:
For, he nor slumbers, neither sleeps,
Who charge of Israel undertakes.
2
The Lord, even as thy shade, will stay
On thy righthand, for thy defense.
Nor Moon by night, nor Sun by day,
Shall harm thee by their Influence:
For, God will save thee from all woe,
He, will thy soul from dangers free;
And (whether in, or out, thou go)
Thy guard, at all times, he will be.
Gracious Protector; Cause us, to expect all our deliverances from thee, with a
constant dependence upon thy savegard, in all proceedings. Keep us without
slavish fear, or wavering, in our Faith: And, be thou all way so watchful
over us, and so near unto us; that neither those dangers whereto we are
commonly subject, nor the extraordinary Influences of the heavens, nor any
other vnexpectede Eve^ts, harm our bodies, endanger our souls, or interrupt
our lawful callings, either now, or hereafter. Amen.

Psa. 122.
A song of Degrees. Another Stepp, is a delight in the piety of others, joined
with love to God's worship, and accompanied with hearty wellwishing to his
Church. The Elect are here personated reioicing on this Degree. We should use
it to provoke us unto the same.

I Ioyed, when they said to me,
God's house let us ascend unto:
For, now Jerusalem, to thee
And, through thy Ports, our feet shall go,
Jerusalem is fairly Scited;
A Town well built, and well-vnited.
2
There meet the Tribes (God's Tribes alone)
Hus name in Israel, to declare.
There, placed is, the Judgment Throne;
The Thrones of David's house are there.
Oh seek her pear, for, they are blessed;
That have to Salem, love expressed.
3
Let Peace, a Bullworke round her make,
Let Plenties in her Turrets be:
This Peace we wish, even for their sake,
Who, mates, and Brethren are to me.
Yea, God our Lord's fair habitation,
Thus, makes me pray for thy Salvation.
Inspire us, oh Lord, with a delight, and mutual desires, to further each
other in thy service. Let us take pleasure in thy Sanctuary: and, be always,
to our power, healpfull and zealous, to effect and continue the Peace of Syon;
even for the sakes of our brethren, for our own sakes, and for thy glory sake
(oh Father) that, we may reap the benifit of her Peace and Plenties, through
Jesus Christ, our Lord, Amen.

Psa. 123.
A song of Degrees. Another Stepp is obedient attendance on God's will, in all
sufferings, with assured faith in him; which is here professed by the faithful
soul. It is useful, to advance us to this Degree.

OH Lord, that in the heavens remainest,
Lo, we advance our eyes to thee:
And, Lord our God, till healp thou daignest,
They shall on the affixed be,
As men or Maids, that waiting stand,
Upon their Lord, or Lady's hand.
2
Oh, grant us Lord, thy dear compassion;
For, we extreme contempts have borne.
Vouchsafe us, Lord, thy Consolation,
For why? our hearts are greev'd with scorn,
Even by the scorns, and pride of them,
Who live at ease, and us contemn.
How ever thou shall please to afflict us, oh Lord (or how longsoever thou
deferr any desired Blessing) let us be contented to attend thy Pleasure; and
watchful, to perform what thou shall require further at our hands; so our
sufferings, shall the sooner, be redressed, and our dutiful obedience, be
rewarded through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Psa. 124.
A song of Degrees. Another Staire, is acknowledgment of former deliverances,
and of the beginnings of Gods graces already obtained, as in this Psalm. We
may use it after any Deliverances, but especially, such as are most public.

BUt, that the Lord, our part did please to take,
But that God help us, (Israel now may say)
When men did their Assaults against us make,
We to their throtes had been a living-prey;
For, wroth at us, with spighfull rage were they.
2
We by the Floods, had then been closed round;
Even quite above our soul, the streams had gone:
The swelling floods, our soul had surely drowned,
We, therefore, bless and praise the Lord, alone,
That, by their teeth we were not ceaz'd upon.
3
For, as a bird, out of a fouling snare,
Even so, our soul escaped from the ginn:
The nett is broke, and we delivered are;
And, God, (whose work, the heavens and earth have (binn)
Is he, whose Name, our healp consists in.
Many times oh Lord, we are delivered, by thy Mercy, from evident and
unavoidable perils: But, there is no moment in which we are not compassed
about with invisible foes (and unthought of Dangers) far more fearful and more
impossible to be avoided; unless thou did graciously defend us. Grant therefore,
that a filial awe of thy Judgments and a true esteem of thy Mercies, may make
us heartily thanckfull unto thee, for them, now and for ever. Amen.

Psa. 125.
A song of Degrees. Another Ascent, is firm Belief in God. The safety of
such, is here alluded to the impregnability of Mount-Syon, and Jerusalem: and
the punishment of wavering Apostates is threatened etc. It is useful to raise
us to this Degree etc.

MOunt-Syon like, for ever fixed are those
Whose hopeful trust upon the Lord is founded
For, he his faithful People will enclose
(Even as with hills Jerusalem is rounded)
As long as Time's perpetual motion goes.
2
The Rod of wicked men shall not alight,
Where God the Lot of righteousness bestows.
Lest righteous men partake in evil might.
For, to the Good, the Lord his mercy shows
And, favors all that are in heart upright.
3
But, Sliders-back, and such as wander wide,
In their own crooked paths, and ways uneven,
Shall by the Lord, be thither ledd aside,
Where, portions due to hypocrites, are given:
But, Israel shall in endless peace abide.
Oh God, many ignorances and errors, both in Judgment, and Manners, we are
naturally subject unto. Teach us therefore what we ought to Believe, or
practice; and then preserve us vnwavering in our Faith, and so sincerely
constant in a holy Life; That we may not have our portion, with Apostates, or
Hypocrites, but, be pertakers in the true Peace of Israel, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

Psa. 126.
A song of Degrees another Degree is a reioicing in our Election and spiritual
freedom; which is here typically expressed, with a prophetical prayer for that
joy promised by Christ unto the true Mourners. Ioh. 16. 20. We may sing it as
a thancksgiving for our Redemption; and to comfort in spiritual mournings.

WHen God made Syon free;
And her from thrall did bring,
It seemed as a Dream to be;
And, we did laugh and sing.
2
The Lord (the heathen sedd)
Great Marvailes wrought for us.
Great marvailes he has, wrought, indeed,
And, therefore, sing we thus.
3
Lord, back our Captives bring,
As Floods to sea-ward flow,
So, they shall then rejoice and sing,
Who did in sorrow sow.
4
Who, outward-bound, does mourn,
If he good seed employ,
Shall doubtless, back again return,
And, bring home sheaves with joy.
Let our greatest reioicings (oh Lord) be in thy redeeming us from the Bondage
of Sin; and that our Names are in the Book of life: for, marvailous was this
deliverance. Let our greatest sorrows be for our Offenses, and for the loss
of thy favor; which are, indeed, Causes of the greatest Lamentation: so, our
short sorrow shall be turned in to everlasting Joys, and glorious Trivmphs,
world without end. Amen.

Psa. 127.
A song of Degrees for Solomon. Another Staire is to ascribe our being and
well-being to the Mercy and providence of God, It may be sung to acknowledge
the same, in all our works, and endeavors, etc.

IF God the Palace build not,
The workmen loose their pain,
If God the City shield not,
The watchman wakes in vain,
In vain, is early stirring,
In vain, late watch we keep,
Or eat the bread of caringe,
But, those God loves, may sleep,
2
A fruithfull wombes possessing,
At God's disposing stands;
And, Children are a blessing,
Like shafts in Giants hands.
Right blessed is he, that bears
His Quiver full of those;
For, in the Gate, he dares,
To meet, and smite his foes.
Grant almighty God; that whether we endeavor for our souls or bodies, we
never glory or trust in our own workings; For, thou must bless the beginning,
proceeding, and conlusion of every endeavor, or all our industry is lost Nay,
we have not, so much as power over our body, or the fruit thereof. Let us
therefore, neither forget thee in the use of the means, nor neglect the means
which thou have appointed. That, (what ever the events be) our undertakings
may, bring profit to us, and glory to thy holy Name, So be it.

Psa. 128.
A song of Degrees. Another Stepp, is filial fear of God; to which, many
temporal blessings are here promised. It is used at the solemnization of
marriages; and serves to increase in us, the fear of God.

IF God thou fear, and keep his way,
He, blessings will bestow;
Thy labor shall thy food purvay,
And, happy thou shall grow.
Like fruit-full vines upon thy house,
Thy wife shall prove to thee;
Thy Children, like fair olive-boughes,
Shall round thy Table be.
2
Thus, thon that fear God shall thrive;
From Syon he shall bless:
And, thou shall see (whilst thou do live)
Jerusalem in peace.
He shall prolong thy life, till thou
Thy Childrens Children see;
And, that thy joy may greater grow.
In Isr'ell, rest shall be.
Oh Lord; of thy abundant Mercy, thou have promised, not only the blessings of
the next life; But also, all those which are most comfortable in this world,
so far forth as shall conduce to their happiness, who truly serve and sear
thee. Oh teach us that filial fear, and that obedience, for which thou have
made those promises, that we may perform what thou requirest. Yet, not for
the outward blessing sake, but merely for the love of Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

Psa. 129.
A song of Degrees. Another Step, is a patient susstaining of the Cross.
Which patience of the saints, is here mentioned; and both the tyranny and
condition of their oppressors, breefly illustrated. We may, use it to increase
and continue Christian Patience.

FUll often since my youth, may Israel say,
Full often since my youth, they me assailed;
And, still, without success they went away: (trailed,
Yea on my back, their ploughs, the ploughers
And, on the same, long furrows ploughed they.
2
The Lord, (who is a perfect Righteous-one)
The Cords of wicked men in pieces breaks.
And, Syons foes, shall quite be overthrown,
Even like that grass, which root on houses takes,
And, fades away, before it ripe is grown.
3
For, nor his Armefull, nor his handful, there,
Remains for him that binds, or him that moweth,
Nor is there any highway Passenger,
Who, there, is blessing, in God's Name bestows.
Or, does so much, as, bidd them well to fare.
Sweet Jesus, (who were persecuted, even from thy cradle, to thy grave; and on
whose back, the sharp stripes, ploughed long furrows for our Sins) worthelie
have we deserved to be whipped with reproaches to our face; to be furrowed with
slanders behind our backs, and to suffer all other indignities. Nevertheles,
since by thy sufferings, thou have as well prevailed for us, as for thy self;
make void the attempts of our Adversaries; and enable us to sustain with
Christian patience, that part of thy Cross which thou appointest us to bear:
that being cheerful partakers of thy sufferings, we may partake also, thy
victorious Trivmphs in the Kingdom of heaven. Amen.

Psa. 130.
A song of Degrees. Another Ascent, is earnest prayer: Which the Faithful
soul here powers forth for assistance, etc. It may serve as a form of prayer
in great extremities.

LOrd, from the depths, to thee I sue;
My vocal prayer hear.
And, when my Voice, my wants does show
Incline to me thine ear.
Lord, who cann bear it, if severe,
To mark our faults thou be?
But, that we faint not in thy fear,
Compassion waits on thee.
2
On God I wait, and on his word,
My soul her hopes does lay:
My soul, more waits for the Lord,
Then watchmen, for the day.
Oh Isr'ell, trust in God; for he;
Has gracious help, in store.
And, from thy sins delivers thee,
Both now, and evermore.
Graciously hear our prayers, oh Lord, in all our troubles and enter not into
judgment with us thy servants, unless thou overshaddowe us by the wings of thy
Mercy; for, our justice is unrighteousness in thy sight. Give us grace to hope
in thee, with patient expectation of thy good pleasure; and so enable us (at
least in our true desire) to fufill our promises to thee, that without
infringment of thy Justice, we may be delivered both from the guilt and
punishment of our sins, through thy Mercy in Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Psa. 131.
A song of Degrees. Another Degree is unfeigned humility: For, such as humble
them selves shall be exalted. Here, all arrogance, ambition, and selftrust is
disclaimed, a sole dependence on God professed, and others exhorted to the
same. It is useful, to beget humility.

OH Lord, I have no scornful eye,
Nor proud nor lofty mind.
I seek not things that are too high,
But, humbly am inclinde.
My soul is like an infant weaned,
(Even from his mothers breast)
And, Israel, so (to be sustaind)
On God, should always rest.
None of thy Creatures, oh God, have made them selves to be so vile as we;
yet, none are more proud or selfeconceited; none more presumptiously
inquifitive into thy forbidden Seacrets. Oh give us more humility; and less
desire to those curiosities which are above us, and pertinent to advance the
Kingdom of Satan, rather then the Kingdom of Heaven; which is to be entered
which a Childlike Obedience and humiliation. This Humiliation, we again
beseech thee to grant us, for Jesus Christ his sake Amen.

Psa. 132,
A song of Degrees. Another Degree, is a hearty purpose to prepare a Temple for
God, in our hearts; and to endeavor the settling of his outward worship, which
is here mistically implied. It is useful to stir us to this Degree.

REmember Lord, what David's troubles be,
And, what to Jacob's mighty God, he swore.
In house or bed, I will not rest, said he,
Nor shall mine eyes, or sleep, or slumber more;
Until a place be found, of my providing,
For Jacob's God, the mighty Lord's abiding.
2
Lo, Ephrata, we heard, the place should be,
And, in the forrest-feilds, we found the same.
Thy house therefore, to enter, purpose we,
And, at thy footstool, will adore thy Name.
Arise, oh Lord, ascend thy resting bower;
Thou, and the Arck, of thy Almighty power.
3
Let righteousness, thy sacred Priests array,
And. let thy saints, a joyful tryvmph make:
Oh turn not thy Messiah's face away.
For, thy beloved Servant David's sake,
To whom thou swar'st thy promise, vnrecalled,
That on his Throne, his Seed should be installed.
4
If they, said thou, my League and word respect;
Thy Children, on thy Throne shall ever sit:
For, I the Lord, did Syon hill, elect;
And, for my dwelling, I have chosen it.
My settled rest is there, and I Will possess it;
I love it, and with plenties, I will bless it.
5
The pore thereof, with bread I will sustain,
Her Priests I Will clothe will health, her saints shall
A Lamp for mine Anointed, I Will ordain, (sing.
And, I will make the horn of David spring:
I, those will shame, that for is harm endeavor;
But, on himself, his Crown shall flourish ever.
Suffer us not, oh Lord, to take rest in any thing, until we have provided
thee a dwelling in our seules; and then, let us entertain there, naught else,
but that which may be serviceable unto thee. Take thou possession of us, and
furnish us, as becomes Temples for thy presence. Remember all thy promises to
the Faithful; for they only are that seed of David, to whom thy Covenants
belong; they are those Elected-ones whom thou have promised never to forsake.
Give us, all outward means, of this invisible grace; Continue among us the
succession, of holy and faithful Pastors; The Bread of thy Word; the Clothings
of Righteousness; the Lamp of Illumination; the Horn of good Government; and
the Joy of the Holy Ghost; that the enemies of thy Church, may be ashamed, and
she crowned, with honor and blessedness, for ever. Amen.

Psa. 133.
A song of Degrees. Another Step, is that, which the preposterous Zeal of
Schismatics has much defaced, (to wit) Charity, and brotherly Unity; which
is here, excellenly Illustrated, to moove us to ascend it. We should sing it,
to increase Unity and Love.

SEe Brethren, see, how sweet a bliss
It is our lives in love to lead.
It like that precious Ointment is,
Which once anointed Aron's head;
And, on his heard, from thence did flow,
Even to his garment skirts below.
2
It like refreshing dew does prove,
Which down on Hermon's topp distills;
Even like the dew, which from above
Descends down on Syon hills.
For, there, God promisd, heretofore,
To bless with life, for ever more.
Oh God! so dear to thee, is brotherly Love, that all Faith, (yea, and
Martyrdom) wanting that Uirtue, is of no esteem: So profitable is it unto us;
That (like precious ointment on the head, or like shewres falling on high
mountains) it descends and spreads until every member be refreshed therewith.
Increase therefore, we beseech thee, this Virtue among us (without which, all
others are counterfeits) and let us so preserve Unity and brotherly kindness in
this life, that we may enjoy thy eternal Love and Vnio^, in the life to come,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Psa. 134.
A song of Degrees. This is the last Degree: For the highest Ascent, is, the
glorifieng of God. Note, that the first and last Degrees only, are placed
according to their Order; because, necessarily our first step to Godward, must
be the fight of our Misery; The highest, is, to praise him: The rest are not
ascended by all, in one and the same order; and therefore no precise order is
observed in their placing. We should sing it to provoke to this Duty.

COme now, and praise the Lord, all ye,
That his attendants are;
Even you, that in God's temple be;
And praise him, nightly, there.
Your hands, within Gods holy-place,
Advance, and praise his Name;
And, you, from Syon, he shall bless,
That heaven and earth did frame.
Lord, we were created for thy Glory; All the time of our Pilgrimage on earth
is to fit us for thy praise; and the highest Degree which we cann attain to,
either in this life, or the next, is to sing Halelujah unto thy Name. Oh grant
we may so honor thee in these Temples of our Bodies (here, upon the Way) on
whom the Nights of affliction, and the Days of consolation, do
interchangably succeed; that in thy Jerusalem we may sing praises unto thee,
in that spiritual Temple, wherein, the presence of the Lamb, makes a
continuation of Day, of Joy, and of all happiness, for ever more. Amen.

Psa. 135.
Halelujah. It exhorts to praise God, in regard. of his greatness; for our
election; for his omnipotency, Mercy, Justice, eternity; and because other
Gods are but ridiculons fictions, etc. To this end, we (who are mistically the
Sonns of Aron and Levy) should sing it etc.

OH all ye servants of the Lord,
His Name with praise confess;
Even you, that of our God the Lord,
The house and Courts possess.
Oh praise God's Name; for, sweet it is,
To sing of his renown.
For, Jacob, he has chose for his,
And Israel, for his own.
2
God is, (I know) a powrfull-one;
He does all Gods excel:
In heaven, his pleasure he has done;
In earth, in sea, in hell.
He makes vapors to arise,
Even from Earth's farthest ends:
And, he out of his Treasuries,
Wind, rain, and lighting, sends.
3
The firstborn, through the Egiptian coast,
Of man, and beast he slew.
And, on king Pharoh, and his host,
Rare wonders, he did show.
Great kings and kingdoms, down he brought,
Even Sehon, Heshbon's king,
And, Og, of Bashan; yea, to naught
All Can'an's Realms, did bring.
4
Then, for his Isr'els heritage
Their lands, he did bestow:
For which, he is famed, from age to age,
And, still shall famous grow.
When he to judge them does appear,
His people, shall be saved:
But, heathen God's, man's makings were,
Of gold and silver engraved.
5
Their carved mouths are speachles found,
Their eyes, no light cann see:
Though they have ears, they hear no sound;
Their throats, quite breathles be.
Much like to these, their Makers are;
And they, that serve them, toe.
The Lord, therefore, let Israel fear;
And, so, let Aron do.
6
The Lord, let Levie's household bless;
In Syon, let all them
Who fear the Lord, the Lord confess
That keeps Jerusalem. Haleluiah.
Oh Lord our God, we heartily thanck thee, for our creation and preservation.
We magnify thy wisdom, thy power, thy providence, thy Judgments, and thy
Mercies; and we acknowledge that the Deities of heathenish and carnal men) yea
and all other things in which we trust (are but vanities, and false Gods,
fashioned by our own wicked fancies. Grant therefore, that all of us (even
priest and people) who in Word profess thee; may in heart, fear thee; and in
deed, faithfully serve thee, now and for ever. Amen.

Psa. 136.
This Psalm, exhorts to praise God both for general and particular benifits;
and shows, that all are bestowed for his mere mercy-sake, which is eternal.
It may be sung, literally to commemorate, what God did for the Patriarks; or,
mistically, as a thancksgivinge for the spiritual deliverances, which these
typified.

THe Lord is Good; him therefore bless:
And, for his Grace, that lasts ever.
The God of Gods, let us confess;
Because, his Mercy fails never.
The Lord of Lords, with praise extol;
For, where he loves, he always loves.
His Acts, alone, are wonderful;
Because, his Favor endless proves.
2
His Wisdom, did creat the spheres,
(For, to all times, his Kindness lasts)
And, earth above the seas he rears;
Because, his Pity never wastes.
He, did the greater Lights provide;
For, through each Age, his Grace extends.
He made the Sunn, the day to guide:
Because, his Goodness never ends.
3
He framed the Moon and stars, for night;
For, without bound, is his Compassion.
And, Egipts eldest-borne did smite,
Because, his grace has no cessation.
He brought forth Israel from their land;
(For, so his endless grace procured)
With stretcht-out Arm, and powrfull hand;
Because, his Mercy still endured.
4
He did the Red sea, then divide;
(For. still, his Kindness, he retains)
And, Israel through the same did guide;
Because, his Favor, still, remains.
There, he did Pharoh's Army drown;
(For, Love, he freely, still, bestows)
And through the Deserts brought his own;
Because, eternal Grace, he shows.
5
Both huge, and powrfull kings he slew;
(For, everlasting are his Graces)
Yea, famous kings he overthrewe;
Because, his Love, times date surpasses.
Great Sehon, king of the Amorites,
For, his Affection never fails
And, Og that ruld the Bashamites.
Because, his Mercy, still, prevails.
6
Their heritage bestowed has he,
(For, so, his endless Love, required)
His Isr'el's heritage to be;
Because, his Grace is vnexpired.
He did exalt us, from below;
(For, he to Pity, still, enclineth)
And, he redeemed us from our foe;
Because, no time his Grace confineth.
7
He to all flesh their food has given;
For, his great Mercy fails never.
Oh glorify, the God of heaven:
Because his Grace abides ever.
When we look back, oh Lord, unto the beginning of thy visible workings
(pondering, the never interrupted succession of thy Mercies, unto this day) and
therewithal observe the performance of all thy promises to thy Church
heretofore; and the continuance of thy abundant Lovingkindnes, to us at this
present: UUee are assured that thy Goodness and Compassion is eternal. We
therefore, beseech thee to give us true thanckfulnes, for the same; that we may
confess it as well in deed, as word; and praise and magnify thy Name for ever
and ever. Amen.

Psa. 137.
This Elegiacal Hymn, mistically expresses the Zeal, and love of the
Faithful, to the City of God: And Prophecies, the fall of the spiritual
Babylon. We may sing it to comfort us during the continuance of our Natural
bondage, and the tirranies of Antichrist.

AS we nigh Babel River sat,
We, overcharged with weepings were,
To thinck on Syon's pore estate;
And hung our harpes, on willowes there:
For, they to whom we were inthralled,
On us, for songs of Syon, called.
2
Come sing, they said, a Syon-hymne.
Lord! cann we sing thy songs in thrall?
Unless (Oh dear Jerusalem)
Thee, in my mirth, prefer I shall;
Or, if the thought of thee forgo me,
Let hand and tongue, prove vseles to me.
3
Oh Lord, remember Edom's brood,
And, how, whilst they Jerusalem,
Vnsackt, and undefaced stood,
Her spoil was hast'ned on, by them.
For, loud thy cried, race it, race it;
And, to the groundwork, down deface it.
4
Oh daughter of proud Babylon,
Thou shall, likewise, destroyed be;
And, he will prove a blessed-one,
Who shall avenge our Cause on thee:
Even he, that pays thee our disgraces;
And, brains thy babes, in stony-places.
Oh Lord, many of thy people, suffer the scorns, and insultings, of that
Babylon which was typified, by the Chaldean City; And the Mystical Edomites,
labor the utter defacing of thy Church. But, deliver us oh Lord, and reward
them according to their intentions against us. Let us take no pleasure in any
temporal thing, till we have prevailed against the fury of our spiritual
destroyers: and give us grace so to crush all sins, and heresies, in their
first birth; that we may be made eternally safe and happy, through Jesus
Christ, cur Lord. Amen.

Another of the same.
AS nigh Babel streams we fate,
(Full of greefs, and vnbefreinded)
Minding Syon's pore estate,
From our eyes, the tears descended;
And, our Harps we hanged, by,
On the willowes, growing nigh.
2
For, (insulting on our woe)
They, that us had there inthralled,
(Their imperious power to show)
For a song of Syon, called.
Come ye Captives, come, said they;
Sing us now, an Hebrewe Lay.
3
But, oh Lord, what heart had we?
In a foreign habitation,
To repeat our songs of thee,
For our spoiler's recreation?
Ah, alas! we cannot, yet,
Thee, Jerusalem, forget.
4
Oh Jerusalem! if I
Do not mourn, (all pleasure shunninge)
Whilst thy walls defaced lie;
Let my righthand, loose his cunninge:
And, for ever, let my tongue
To my Pallet, fast be Clung.
5
Oh remember, blessed Lord,
E're Jerusalem was wasted,
How the sonns of Edom roared;
And, her total ruin hasted:
Till, they level, all had laid,
Raze it, raze it quite, they said.
6
But, thou shall be spoiled thus;
And, be used (oh Babels daughter)
Just as thou have used us.
And, that man, who in thy slaughter,
On the stones, thy Child'ren brains,
Shall be blessed, for his pains.
Psa. 138.
A Psalm of David. God is here praised, for the truth of his Word; for
glorifieng his Son Christ; for confirming his Elect; and for the Common grace
vouchsafed to all, etc. It may be sung for any Deliverance; But, especially for
our Redemption.

WIth all my heart, I Will sing abroad thy fame,
And praise thee, where the Gods assembled are;
Even in thy house, I Will magnify thy Name,
And, for thy Truth, and Love, thy praise declare:
For, thou thy Name, and word, over all, do rear,
2
When I did call, thou made reply to me,
And, strength unto my soul, thou did afford,
All Kings of earth, shall, therefore honor thee,
As soon (oh God) as they have heard thy word;
And, sing thy praise, in thine own Paths, oh Lord.
3
For, thou art great, and thou oh Lord, art high,
Yet, have regard of humble men, below.
Thou vew'st the proud, but, with a sleighting eye.
Therefore, although through many greefs I go,
I certain am, thou comforts wilt bestow.
4
Thy righthand Lord; shall my salvation be,
My foes feirce rage, thy stretcht-out hand shall stay.
Thou shall perform all things concerning me.
Thy mercies, Lord, abide the same, for aye;
Reject not then, thy handiwork, I pray.
Oh Lord our Creator, thou causlesly reject est none whom thou have made;
neither art thou such an accepter of Persons, as, too many fancy thee be: But
impartially acceptest in every Person that which is the Object of thy eternal
Election; and (where soever thou find the same) love that, unto the end.
Therefore, thou extendest thy Truth and Mercy to all; vouchsafing, also, thy
Assisting power, to perfect that work which thy free grace has begunn; yea and
thou effectually perfectest that work, in so many as do humbly submit them
selves to thy will, and resist not proudly the motions of thy spirit: And
(though they pass through many temptations and hazards) thy hand still
reaches unto the^ comforts, and means of safe perseverance unto the end. Oh
give us wisdom to perceave, and grace humbly to acknowledge this great Mercy
(which whosoever denies; Denies thy greatest glory) and make thou, our
endeavors answereable to the grace and power which we have received through
Jesus Christ, our Lord. Amen.

Psa. 139.
To the cheef Musician a Psalm of David. It confesses, the all-seeing
providence, power, wisdom, and Mercy of God; And expresses a desire of the
Faithful, to be serched, and rectified, by him, etc. It warnes us, not to live
Hypocriticallie; in regard, God beholds us, at all times, and in all places etc.

OH Lord, thy all-beholdinge eyes,
Have serch'd, and well observed me.
Thou, see me sit, thou see me rise;
Thou, know my thoughts e're thought they be.
Thou, vew'st my ways and walkings Lord;
Thou see what in my bed I do;
And, I do never speak a word,
But, lo, thine ears do hear it to.
2
Thou standst before me, and behind;
Thy hand, on me, does always lie:
Thy wisdom cannot be confinde,
And, for my reach it is too high.
Then, from thy spirit, and from thee,
Oh whither cann I fly, or go?
If heaven I clime, thou there wilt be;
If hell I dive, there art thou to.
3
If on the Mornings wings I ride,
And, thinck to fly beyond the seas;
Thy hand, even there, cann be my guide,
They right hand, there, on me cann ceaze.
Or, if I say, the Duskie night
Shall hide me; Night will me bewray;
For, darkness, is to thee as light;
The day like night, the night like day.
4
My Reins, to thee apparent are;
For, in the womb, thou closedst me:
I, strangely was composed there,
And, therefore, I will honor thee.
Thy wondrous works, my soul does know;
And, that my substance thou did mark,
Even when (as in the earth below)
I was composed in the dark.
5
Before I perfect Being, took,
Or, Form, or Matter, for this frame;
My Members all, were in thy book,
And, thou foresaw'st what now I am.
Therefore, thy thoughts of us, how dear!
And, Lord, how infinite they be!
As numerous as the Sands they are;
And, wake me, still, to muze on thee.
6
Ungodly men, and men of blood,
Destroy, and cause them to be gone;
For, they speak ill of thee, oh God,
And, vainly proud, thy foes are grown,
Thy haters, I have hated, Lord,
And, greev'd at such as thee oppose;
With perfect hate, I them abhord,
And, those accounted as my foes.
7
Oh God! a strict enquiry make;
My heart, and every thought survay:
Search if an evil Course I take;
And, show me thy eternal way.
There is nothing, oh Lord, in the structure of our bodies or in the
disposition of our minds, but it is known to thee, with every Cause and
effect thereof. Neither darkness nor distance of place cann so hide us from
thee, but, that, thou see our Actions, hear our words, and perceavest our
thoughts; Yea, and what they are enclinable unto, before we thinck them. Give
us grace therefore, to behave our selves, always, as in thy sight. Let our
secret intentions be upright; and cause us to love and hate, as thou do.
Turge away all that which is evil in us; and infuse into our hearts all those
graces, which may make us acceptable to thee in Christ Jesus. Amen.

Psa. 140.
To the cheef Musician a Psalm of David. It personates Christ's mystical
body, desiring deliverance, from Oppressors; And describing their malice, pride
and Treachery etc. It is useful, when any Congregation is greeved by the bitter
scandalls, lieng doctrines, or mischeevous insinuations, of Atheists, and false
brethren and e.

LEt me, oh God, from sinners be defended.
From those that are to violence inclined:
For, in their hearts, they mischeef, have intended,
And in malicious Leagues, are fast combined.
Their stinging to^gs the vipers teeth have matched
Between their lips, is Adders poison hatched.
2
Lord, from the hands of wicked men release me;
From Cruel-men, vouchafe secure to make me:
For, to supplant my goengs, they oppress me;
And lo, the proud prepares snares to take me.
Yea, they have netts, and ginns, and trapps prepared.
In all my ways that I might be ensnared.
3
Lord, hear I pray, and mark my supplication;
Thee, for my God, oh Lord, I have professed:
And, thou (Lord God, the strength of my Salvation)
Did guard me, when in Fight I was oppressed.
Oh, grant not, what the wicked man desires,
But, cross his plotts, lest he too high aspireth.
4
The Mischeef of their lips will fall upon them
Even on their heads, that me have circumvented.
Coals burning-hot; shall down be hurled on the^.
They shall with flames, in dung'ons be tormented;
And, in those Pitts infernal, be detained,
From whence, Redemption never cann be gained.
5
On earth, he shall not thrive, that is evil to^gued,
For, wicked men, Reveng, to death persueth.
But, God (I know) does patronize the wronged
And, in the pore man's cause, his judgmet shows.
For which, the just, within his presence living,
Shall glorify his name, with praises-giving.
Deliver us, oh Merciful God, from the cruel purposes, stinging slanders, and
mischeevous practices of our wicked and proud Adversaries, who seek the ruin
of our souls. Arm us against them, as hither to thou have been pleased:
Frustrate their devises; bring on them, their own wickedness; and inflict on
them that vengance which is prepared for impenitent Persecutors: That we being
saved by thee, thou may be glorified by us, for ever and ever. Amen.

Psa. 141.
A Psalm of David. It personates Christ, (the lifting up of whose hands on the
Cross, is accepted, instead of the legal sacrifice) prayeng in the behalse of
his Members. And it is useful for us, to desire God's acceptance of our
Prayers; to give us the Government of our tongues, and to rectify our thoughts
etc.

LOrd, hear with speed my voices lamentation;
Vouchsafe to give my mournful clamors hearing.
As incense, or an Afternoones Oblation,
Accept my Prayers, and my hands vprearing.
Lord, let my mouth, as with a watch, be warded;
And, let the Portalls of my lips be guarded.
2
Lest I to sin, with sinners, may be trained,
Preserve my heart, oh Lord, from sins infection
Who, rather then, their pleasures to have gained,
Desire in Love, the righteous man's correction.
As curing balm, the same should be received;
And, I would pray for the^, when they were greeved.
3
When from the Roks, their judges down are heved,
The rest will hear: for, I sweet words have spoken:
As on the Land, where blocks are hewed and cleaved
Our bones before the grave, lie strow'd, and broken,
Yet, still, mine eye on thee oh Lord attends,
And, still, my soul on thee alone, depends.
4
Then, suffer not my soul to be rejected.
And, (that I be not by their wiles ensnared)
Let me from those close engines be directed,
Which for my soul, the wicked have prepared.
Let their own snares, which they have laid, entrap the^
And, let me, Lord, for evermore, escape them.
Accept oh Lord, our petitions, in the mediation of Christ Jesus. Make us
watchful over our tongues, and so purify our hearts from all evil affections;
that the pleasant baits of the wicked alure us not to be partners in their
sins. To that end, teach us to bear patiently, and accept thanckfully, the
reproofs and Corrections of thy Children; yea, let us pray for them, who shall
charitably reform us. And, though by persecution we should be scattred like
bones among graves, (or chipps upon the face of the earth) yet, let us always
trust in thee; and at last be gathered up, revive, and be made blessed
everlastingly, through Jesus Christ, Amen.

Psa. 142.
Maschil of David, when he was in the Cave. It seems mistically to personate
Jesus Christ, expressing the agony of his soul in the Garden; Or his being for
saken at his Passion. It may be sung when we are left comfortles of the world.

MY voice to thee, Oh God, I rear,
To thee, oh Lord, I sue;
To thee, my troubles, I declare,
My greefs, to thee I show.
For, when over whelmed my spirit was,
My Path was known to thee:
Even when they hidd, where I should pass,
A seacret snare for me.
2
I looked on my right hand side,
But, noe man knew me there.
All succors faild; not one I spide,
That of my soul had care.
Then, Lord, thou art my hope said I,
My Lot, whilst life I have.
In my destresse, observe my cry;
From spoil, thy servant save.
3
Yea, since for me they are too strong,
To praise thee, set me free:
So, righteous men to me shall throng,
When thy great Love, they see.
Sweet Jesus, in thy bitter Agony thou had not any one (no not among thine
own desciples) so sensible thereof, as to watch with thee one hour. A secret
snare was laid for thee in that Garden, whither thou went to pray for
consolation: And, when they ledd thee to thy Passion; None would know thee;
None assist thee; Neither had any one, care of thy soul. Oh Dearest Redeemer,
this, is often the Case of us thy Members in some Degree: And, when our Spirits
are most overwhelmed with sorrows, it so happens; That no man pitties it; No
eye beholds it, but thine. For, thy Passion sake, do thou behold us with
commiseration in these extremities, that we may be comforted; and that we and
others, may magnify thy great mercy, for ever and ever. Amen.

Psa. 143.
A psalm of David. It expresses with much forvencie, many conflicts of the
spirit; emploreth God's free Mercy; in regard of our universal impurity, of
the malice of our foes, and disability of our nature etc. The use is manifest.

LOrd, my humble supplication,
Heed, and hear with acceptance,
In thy Doomes, of Truth and Right.
Judge, but judge thou not severely;
For, if thou observe us nearly,
None are blameles in thy sight.
2
By the foe, my soul is chased,
Wounded, and in darkness placed,
As one buried, long ago.
I, am inwardly, perplexed,
Yea, my spirit sore is vexed;
And, my heart is full of woe,
3
On the times, now past, I ponder,
And, on all the works of wonder.
Which were framed by thy hands.
Thee, I seek, with due submission;
And, my soul, for thy fruition
Longs, as the thirsty Lands. Selah.
4
Lord, with speed, give ear unto me,
And, thy face divart not fro me;
For, my spirits, feeble grow.
Since, on thee I have depended,
Let me timely be defended,
Lest, into the grave I go.
5
Guide my feet, by thy direction,
For, thou have my hart's affection.
Me from all my foes release.
Lord my God (my safe abidinge)
Bring me, by thy spirits guiding,
To the Land of Righteousness
6
Grace, to do thy pleasure give me:
For, thy Namesake, Lord, revive me;
Let thy Justice be my guard.
Yea, destroy (of thy compassion)
Those that seek my souls vexation:
For, I am thy servant, Lord.
Oh Lord God; if thou should judge us according to our deservings, we and all
flesh, should everlastingly perish. We appeall therefore, to thy Mercy; and,
with a thirsty longing, desire speedy assistance, according to thy accustomed
Loving-kindnes; lest we be swallowed up by Despair, or devoured by our Foes.
For thine own sake (even for thy Justice, for thy Mercy, and for thy Name
sake) direct us in thy ways; Instruct us in thy Will; protect us from all
evils; and bring us into the Land of the Living, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Another of the same.
LOrd, mark my suite; my sad complaining hear;
And, in thy Truth and Justice, answer give.
Judge not thy servant, with a doom severe,
For, in thy sight, not one does blameles live.
The foe has chased my soul, of life nigh reft me,
And in the dark, as one long dead has left me.
2
In me, therefore, my spirits down are cast;
My heart is filled with many a heavy thought:
I muse upon the days, that now are past,
And on thy works, (even al thy hands have wrought)
With stretchtout hands, and with soul-thirsty pa^ting
I thirst for thee, as Land, when rain is wanting.
3
My spirit faints (oh God) with speed give ear.
If longer, thou thy face obscure, I dye.
Oh let thy Love to me betimes appear;
For, I on thee; on thee alone, rely.
Yea, let me Lord, within thy Paths be trained;
For, unto thee, I lift a soul unfeigned.
4
Protect me, Lord; in thee is my abode:
Keep off my foes, and teach thy will to me.
Let thy good sp'rite, (because thou art my God)
My guide unto the Land of Justice be.
Yea, me, oh Lord, for thy Namesake, revive thou,
My soul, even for thy Justice sake, reprive thou;
And, of thy grace, all those that me oppressed,
Destroy thou Lord; for, I am thine professed.
Psa. 144.
A Psalm of David. It blesses God, for his regard of the humane Nature;
Desires Christ's approach to Judgment; And requesteth to be delivered from
worldlings etc. It is useful to these purposes, and to inform us, that to be
God's chose-ones, is the greatest happiness etc.

OH praise the Lord, for, he is all my Power,
My hands and Arms, in warlike feats directing;
My grace, my guard, my shield, my healp, my Tower,
My trusty friend, my foes to me subiecting.
Lord, what is man that thou art pleased to know him?
Or what his child that thou sholdst favor show him?
2
Man is as naught; his ioys like shades forsake him.
The heavens, oh Lord, decline, and down desce^d thou
But touch, the Hills, and thou to smoke, shall make the^;
To scatter them, thy dreadful lighting, send thou:
Shoot out thy shafts, until they be destroyed;
Let thy strong hand, to healp me, be employed.
3
Oh save me, from the water's over-swelling;
Let me from foreign Children be secured,
Whose mouths, are always lies and folly, telling,
And, whose righthands, to falsehood, are envred.
Then, to thy praise, new songs, I will be singing,
On harp, and Psalt'ry of a tennfold stringing.
4
Let him, who does on kings bestow salvation,
(And, from the sword, his servant David saves)
Protect me from that foreign generation,
Whose mouth speaks lies, and whose right hand deceaveth
Who beg for sonns and daughters, in their prayer,
Like plants and precious stones, welshap'd, and fair.
5
Who pray for Granards, fully stored ever.
Whose floks young breed, evn in their streets abounds:
Whose wellfed Ox, in labor, fails never;
and, in whose Towns, nor cry, nor tumult sounds.
For, tho such men a blessing have possessed;
Yet, they whose God's the Lord, are much more blessed.
Father of Mercy and God of all Consolation; thou art always, our powrefull
deliverer. and becommest every thing unto us, which our hearts cann desire. Oh,
make us thanckfull unto thee, for thy great regard of so unworthy Creatures:
And, though mere worldlings, and Carnal Professors, seek thee for temporal
Blessings; Let us, love, serve, and praise thee, merely for thine own sake.
Keep us from their falsehood, Hypocrisy, and self-love, with all their other
wicked Conditions; And, though they boast of thy transitory Blessings, which
we enjoy not: Let us be contented that thou art our God. Let that be our
portion of happiness, and let us enjoy it, (oh Lord) for ever and ever. Amen.

Psa. 145.
David's Psalm of Praise. It may be used as a Pattern whereby to glorify God,
according to his principal Attributes, such, as his Infinitenes, Omnipotency,
Majesty, Justice, Mercy, Goodness, Providence etc. UUhich are mentioned in this
Psalm.

I Will honor thee oh God my king,
And, laud thy Name for aye:
Even to thy Name, I Will always sing,
And praise thee every day.
For, thou art great, beyond all bounds,
And, great, thy praises are:
Through Ages all, thy glory sounds,
Thy wonders they declare.
2
I Will, also, show thy royal state,
And thy rare works unfold;
That men thy wonders may relate,
When I thy power have told:
That, they thy Righteousness may show,
And, much, thy glory mind;
For, thou to anger, Lord, art slow,
Right gracious, meek, and kind.
3
Thy goodness, and thy mercies, be
In all thy works expressed;
Even all thy works, Lord, honor thee,
And, thee, thy Saints have blessed.
Thy kingdoms glory they will show,
And, sing thy greatness forth;
That, all mankind thy power may know,
And, see thy Kingdoms worth.
4
For, thou for evermore shall reign,
And, rule through Ages all.
The weak, oh Lord, thou will sustain
And, lift up those, that fall.
On God, all creatures six their eyes,
And, fedd, in season be;
For, all things living to suffice,
An open hand has he.
5
The Lord is just in all his ways;
His works, are sacred all.
Nigh them who call on him, he stays;
Nigh those, who truly call,
Their hopes, who fear him, he effects;
Ands, hears, and saves all those:
Even those who love him, God protects;
But, sinners overthrowes.
6
Oh let my mouth due praise, therefore,
Unto the Lord express;
And, let all flesh, for evermore,
His holy Name confess.
Great oh Lord, is thy Kingdom, thy Power and thy Glory: great are thy Works,
thy UUonders and thy Praises: Great also, is thy VVisdome, thy Goodness, thy
Justice, and thy Mercy: Yea, so infinite art thou in these, and all other
excellencies; That no attributes are sufficient to express thee. Nevertheles,
we thy Creatures, being partakers of thy Abundance, and witnesses of thy
Bounty, toward all whom thou have made; Do (according to the measure of our
Capacities) bless thee for the same: And desire, to praise and magnify thy
Name, for ever and ever. Amen.

Another of the same.
ADvance I will, thy Name, oh God my king;
For evermore, I will extol the same.
Bless thee, I will, oh Lord, and always sing,
A davlie song of praises, to thy Name.
Consid'ring, that thy, Greatness, bound has none
(And, how thine honor should as boundles be)
Declare I will, those wonders thou have done;
That, men from age to age, may speak of thee.
Even of thy Fame, and glories, I will treat,
And, show how rare, thy wondrous workings are:
For, when thy dreadful Acts I shall repeat,
Then, other men their largnes will declare.
Great speech, of thy great goodness, they shall make,
And, (singing of thy Justice) they shall show,
How apt thou art: compassion still to take;
How prone to pity; and, to wrath, how slow.
In doeng good; to all, thou Lord, art free.
Thy Mercies are, upon thy Creatures, all.
Kept glorious, by thy deeds, thy praises be
And, therefore, all thy Saints, confess thee shall.
Lord, of thy kingdome's glory, they shall tell,
And (showing every where, what power, thou have)
Make known how much thy mighty Acts excel;
And, with what state, thy royal Throne is placed.
Not as a king that is only temporal;
For, endless and eternal is thy throne.
On thee, who e're depends, though he should fall,
Thou, Lord, wilt lift him up, when he is down.
Placed are on thee, all creatures eyes, oh God!
And, thou do give them food, in season, still.
Quite open, thou do reach thy hand abroad,
Each living Creatures longing, to fulfill.
Right just, thou art, oh Lord, in all thy ways;
And (as in all thy works thou holy art)
So, thou art near to every one that prays;
To all, that seek to thee, with honest heart.
To the^, that fear thy Name, their wish thou giv'st;
And, such as call upon thee, thou will save.
Ungodly men, of safety thou depriv'st
But, all thy Lovers, thy protection have.
Wherefore, oh Lord to publish out thy fame,
In praisefull wise, my mouth shall still endeaver
Yea, and all flesh, shall bless thy holy Name,
And praise the same, for ever, and for ever.
Oh Lord, thy spirit has said, thou art good to all, and that, thy Mercy is
over all thy Works. Stop the mouths therefore of all those perverters of thy
Truth (and blaspheamers of thy most glorious Attribute) who dare affirm, that
thou have eternally Dereed, purpossely Created, and irrevocably necessitated,
that the greatest number of souls, should be vessels of wrath and
condemnation, without any respect unto Sin; Good God, let this damnable
blasphemy, spread no further. Give all men grace to perceave, that they who
pretend to honor thee by this doctrine, do (consequently and vnavoydably)
impute unto thy sacred Majesty, all the wickedness both of men, and Devils;
contrary to all piety, contrary to thy express Word (which is perverted to
maintain this heresy) and contrary to that which natural Reason, has
written in our hearts. Lord, these are they, which have made thousands hide
their Talent, by saying, that thou expectest to reap where thou sowedst not:
and they have so corrupted their own judgments (and most of their hearers)
that there is no means to prevent this, pestilence of the soul but by prayer.
Unto thee, therefore we pray. Oh hear us; even for thine own honor sake, and
for thy Mercy sake, in Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

Psa. 146.
Haleluiah. It stirs up the soul to perpetual thanksgiving, and to
depe^dance upon God alone; giving reasons for the same etc. We may sing it to
mind us of those duties.

MY soul, praise thou the Lord;
(As long as thou have breath)
In song his praise record,
And, honor him till death.
No credit place
In earthly kings, or such vain things
As humane race.
2
Breath fails, and dust they be;
One day, their pomp destroies:
Right blessed therefore, is he
That Jacob's God enioyes;
And hopes in him,
Who framed these, heaven, earth, and seas,
And all in them.
3
For, God is faithful, still,
Men wronged, assist will he,
The hungry he does fill,
And, setts the prisoner free.
He, Sight bestows,
Loves men upright, and makes straight
What crooked grows.
4
The stranger he receives,
To Orphans, help imparts:
The widdowe he releives,
And Sinners paths subvarts.
The Lord, therefore,
Oh Syon, shall be king of all
For evermore. Haleluiah.
Almighty God, Creator of heaven and earth, and the sure healper of all who
trust in thee; pity our oppressions; satisfy our spiritual hunger; free us
from the bondage of sin; cure the blindness of our Understandings, and be
merciful to us in all the rest of our necessities and infirmities. Grant,
also, that (renouncinge all other Confidence, and depending only, on thy
favor) we may praise thee, for these, and all thy Mercies, in Christ Jesus.
Amen.

Psalm 147.
It exhorts to praise God, for increasing and building his Church, typyfied by
Jerusalem; for many particular mercies to his people, and for overthrowing the
proud etc. The use is apparent.

OH glorify the Lord;
For, of God's praise to sing,
With justice does accord:
Yea, it is a pleasant thing.
Jerusalem,
He will erect, and recollect
His Flock to him.
2
The Contrite heart, he heales,
He cures their bruises, all.
The Stars, he, also, tells;
And, them by Name cann call.
This Lord of our,
In wise foresight, is infinite,
And great in power.
3
The Lord, the Meek does raise,
The proud, he brings to ground.
Oh therefore, sing his praise,
Let Harps, his praise resound.
He, Clouds does bring,
And, shewres distills, which on the hills,
Makes grass to spring.
4
Even Beasts, and Ravens young,
He feeds when they call:
In horse, or footmen strong,
He ioyeth naught at all:
God loves all them;
Who in his grace, their hopes do place,
And honor him.
5
Syon, and Salem, bless
The Lord your God, (in song)
Who does your seed increase,
And, has your Gates made strong.
His Peace has, yet,
Your bounds vphild; and, you he filled
With flower of wheat.
6
Through earth, his Mandates go,
His word, with swiftnes flies,
Like wool, he gives snow;
His frost; like Ashes lies:
And, then (beside)
He forth does slice, cold flakes of Ice,
Which who cann bide?
7
He speaks, and straight it thawes:
He breaths, and water flows.
His, statutes, and his Laws,
He, to his people shows:
No nation else,
His Judgments know, and therefore, so
With none he deals. Haleluiah.
Most merciful God, who buildest up thy heavenly Jerusalem, by the gathering
together of all the faithful; Not only taking notise of them, who have
starr-like perfections; but even of us also, who are of those Blind and Lame,
whom thou have caused to be called to thy banquet: Nay; though we are as
brute Beasts, or unclean Birds, thou art ready to extend thy Mercy, whenever
we seek thee. Oh make us thanckfull for thy great Bounty. Send out thy word to
compel us by Storms, or to allure by Calmes, according as it shall find us
disposed: and let the graces of thy Spirit, so thawe our congealed hearts, that
the tears of true penitence may flow from us, and produce all such other
effects, as may cause us to know thy Judgments; and to be of those people,
whom thou love in Jesus Christ. Amen.

Psa. 148.
Halelujah. All Creatures are here, in a Poetical manner exhorted to glorify
their Creator. We should use it to remember us, that God requires all his
Creatures (and us especially) to praise him according to their natures.

THe Lord of heaven, confess;
On high, his glories raise:
Him, let all Angels bless;
And, all his Armies praise.
Him, glorify
Sunn, moon and stars: ye higher Spears,
And, Cloudie sky.
2
From God, your Beeings are;
Him, therefore, famous make:
You, all, Created were
When he the word, but, spoke.
And, from that place,
Where fixed you be by his Decree,
You cannot pass.
3
Praise God, from Earth below,
Ye Dragons, and ye Deeps;
Fire, hail, Clouds, wind, and snow,
Whom, in Command, he keeps.
Praise ye his Name
Hills, great and small; Trees, low and tall;
Beasts, wild and tame.
4
All things, that creep or fly,
Ye Kings, ye vulger Throng,
All Princes, mean or hye,
Both men, and Virgins young:
Even young and old,
Exalt his Name; For, much his fame.
Should be extold.
5
Oh let God's Name be praisd
Above both earth and sky:
For, he his Saints has raisd,
And, set their horn on hye:
Yea, they that are
Of Isr'els race, are in his grace
And, ever dear. Haleluiah.
Almighty God (worthy to be praised of all Creatures both in heaven and
earth) vouchsafe, that thy whole Creation, may join in ascribing to thee, that
glory for which it was ordained: And let us (whom thou have exalted above the
rest of thy workmanship) advance the highest Trophtes to thy glory. At lest,
grant this, that, we who have dishonored thee in all thy Creatures, may some
way (and in some degree) magnify thee, also, in every thing which thou have
made: That so, we may be, yet, more exalted; and continue to be of those
people whom thou have elected, and love eternally, in Christ Jesus. Amen.

Psa. 149.
Halelujah. This Psalm exhorts to praise God in the New songs of the Gospel;
and declares the power, which shall be given thereby, both to convi^ce the
Consciences of heathen Idolators; and to chain up our unperious Affections
etc. We should use it, to provoke us to praise God, for the many priveledges,
given unto his Saints. etc.

IN songs-newe made, your voice employ,
God's praise among his Saints to sing:
Let Israel in his maker joy,
And, Syon tryvmph in her king.
The praises of his Name, advance;
With Harp and Tymbrell, in the dance.
2
The Lord, his people does respect;
And, with his healp, the meek arayes.
Then, let the Saints his praise affect,
And, on their bedds, gladd Voices raise.
Let in their mouths, his praise remain:
And, two-edged blades, their hands retain.
3
Upon the heathen people, then,
They shall inflict avenging pains,
And, bind their kings, and noblemen,
In iron Fetters, and in Chains.
For, to fulfill the written doom;
The Saints, thus honored shall become. Haleiulah.
Grant Almighty God, that we may sing unto thy Glory, the New-songs of the
Gospel, to the tennstringed Instrument of thy Law; and by thy grace, attain
that meeknes; and that holiness which becomes such, as are thy Saints, by
their Visible Calling. Replenish our hearts with joys of the holy ghost; fill
our mouths with songs of thy praise; Strengthen our hands to execute Justice
without partiality; give us power to chain up those heathenish Affections,
and those noble-seeming Passions, which had the Soveraigntie over us
heretofore; and so enable us to fulfill all Righteousness which thou have
commanded in thy word: that, we may enjoy all the Priveledges, and honors,
pertaining to thy Saints, in Christ Jesus Amen.

Psa. 150.
Halelujah, It exhorts all Creatures to praise God, and shows in what manner
we should praise him; mistically expressing the same by Instruments of Music.
We should use it, to stir us up to glorify God, with every faculty which he
has bestowed on us.

COme praise the Lord, come praise him,
With in his holy-seat:
In all his glories, praise him,
And his great Acts repeat.
As he excels, praise him,
With Trumpet, and with Flute;
With Harp and Psaltry, praise him,
With Viol, and with Lute.
2
Upon the Tymbrel praise him,
In Song, his praise advance:
Upon the Organs praise him,
And, praise him in the Dance.
On tingling Cimballs praise him,
On Cymballs loud that sound;
And, let all creatures praise him,
In whom, life-breath is found. Haleluiah.
Oh blessed God; thou bestowest all things necessary, and requirest nothing
back again, but thanckfulnes. Grant therefore, we pray thee, that our soul, and
every faculty thereof; our body and every member of the same; our sighs, our
tears, our groans, our joys, our pains, our prosperities, our Adversities,
our Virtues which we have by thy grace; our very sins (which we have
committed by out own corruption) our lives; our deaths, our salvations; the
condemnations of the unrepentant (and all other things which in us, and in thy
whole Creation, have either Being, or possibility to be, or to be thought
upon; may altogether (and severally) both in their Discordes and Agreeme^ts;
make up a pleasant harmony, to the glorifieng of thy Majesty, for ever and ever
Amen.

FINIS.
A concluding HYMN.
YEt, among those many Creatures,
UUhich for living-breath are debtors,
(Though unworthy) I am one.
But, not many weeks are passed,
Since, the Blast that is now possessed,
VV as in danger to be gone.
2
They, that prayed for my Salvation,
(Far beyond their expectation)
My desired presence have:
And, I sing, among Livinge,
Songs of Thancks, and praises-givinge,
Whom they looked for, in my Grave.
3
He, (oh Friends) for whom ye mourned,
From thee Pit, is back returned:
Joy, with him, in God, therefore.
He (my Foes) whom you oppressed,
Lives; and prays you may be blessed:
VVish him evil, now, no more.
4
Come; imagine, I were lieng
In my Grave; and let envieng,
(Spite, and evil Censures) go:
We shall all (er'e long) come thither;
And, be quiet, there, together:
Let us, whilst we live, be so.
5
Or, though God has so permitted,
That we must, for him, be fitted,
By each others wounding blows:
Naitheles, his praise, endeavor;
And, Assent in whatsoever,
(Any way) his glory shows.
6
When I saw life's Taper wasting,
(And, my end by sickness hasting)
Many things, to mind it brought:
And, among my Meditations
Musings, and Expostulations,
These, were often in my thought.
7
Lord, are all those hopes bereaved,
Which I formerly conceaved,
That I should have here enjoyed?
Shall, as well my good intentions,
As my vain and fond Inventions,
Now, be frustrate, and destroi'd?
8
I haved looked, every Morrow,
For an ending of may sorrow.
And, once thought, an end I had.
But, perceaving new Afflictions
God, (said I) who gives Corrections,
May, yet, one day make me glad.
2
He has seen such Follies in me,
That his Mercies cannot winn me;
Therefore, he his Rodd extends:
But, when that has purer made me,
Peradventure he will glad me,
And, declare that we are friends.
10
Thus, from time to time, I eased
My nigh fainting heart, and pleased
My Desires, which did rebel:
And I strongly, Lord, believed
I, some Good should have received;
Till this deadly Arrow fell.
11
But, I find, my great Corruption
Has been such an Interruption
To my Earthly hopes in me;
That, there is now no expectation
Save, the hope of that Salvation
Which my Soul in heaven shall see.
12
When my Sickness me tormented
Thus I mused; and was contented,
In my Soul, it should be thus.
And, I praised God in Spirit,
For the lot she should inherit;
But, there is Flesh and blood in us.
13
It Was enough this Grace was shown me:
But, my Fleshlie-part, was on me,
UUhich was loath, her works to lose.
I, (Said she) have watched, and cared,
Holy Hymns to have prepared:
What shall now become of those?
14
All my Youth I have consumed,
(Where as else, it is presumed:
Wealth or ease, I might have wonn)
Pyous Lays to have composed,
To restrain men ill-disposed,
From those Paths in which they runn.
15
Had I Honor sought, or Treasure;
I had wit in equal Measure,
To the most that walk those ways:
But, another Path I prized,
Wherein, Death has me surprised
Just at Noonetide of my days.
16
And I see, and see it plainly,
That I spent my time as vainly
As the most whom I condemned:
They, had Fruits of their Endeavor;
Mine, to me, is lost for ever;
And, of others, is contemned.
17
Many things that I intended,
Are begunn, and almost ended;
Wherein, I my pains have lost.
UVhat, on David's Hymns I mused.
Lies imperfect, vnpervsed;
And, (of all) that, greeves me most.
18
Suchlike Thinckings, partly holy,
(Guilt with Good, and mixed with Folly)
Did possess my wasting brain.
God, had promised Isack to me,
(And, the Blessing he did show me)
Yet, of Ism'el I was feign.
19
On the Handmaid of Perfection
(By her Mistresse's direction)
I begot the Birth you see;
And, when Life was half expired,
In my heart, I much desired,
That the Fruit might spared be.
20
Which, behold, my God has granted;
And, some hopes I have not wanted
That I shall preceave the Same
Glad my heart, (that has been sorry)
And, be sung unto the glory,
And the honor of his Name.
21
Be it so, as God has willed:
Though this hope, be not fulfilled,
I have Hopes that shall remain.
Nay; those Hopings which have failed
Are not lost: but, much prevailed
My cheef Longings, to attain.
22
For which Grace, Almighty maker,
And, for that I am partaker
Of the Common-life, this day;
I do offer, as Oblations,
These my hearty Meditations:
Them, and me, accept I pray.
23
All my former sins forgivinge,
Grant, that (since among the living,
I obtain a second Breath)
I, in manners, and Affection,
May beginn that Resurrection,
UUhich prevents the Second-death.
24
Here, let these my Meditations
Yeald me, still, sweet Consolations,
UUhilst thy Grace this life prolongs.
And, at last, advance me thither,
Where all Blessed Saints, together,
Sing to thee, eternal Songs. Amen.
A Table directing to what Tunes, heretofore in use; every Psalm in this
Translation, may be sung.
To the Tune of the first Psalm in the old Translation and to 30. other Tunes
there used, sing these; 3. 4. 5. 7. 10. 11. 13. 15. 18. 22. 23. 24. 26. 29. 31.
35. 37. 42, 43. 44. 46. 47. 50. 53. 59. 61. 62. 64. 65. 70. 73. 75. 76. 77. 85.
86. 88. 92. 95. 102. 110. 111. 116. 119. 120. 128. 130. 131. 134. 135. 142. 145.

To the Tunes of the 51. Psalm and of the 100. Psalm heretofore used; and to
the Tunes of the X commandments. Of the Lamentation imprinted at the end of
the old Psalmbooke, and to the Tune of the Song, beginning thus. From Turk
and Pope etc. Being five several Tunes, may these Psalms be sung. 1. 2. 6.
14. 16. 19. 20. 21. 27, 28. 30. 32. 34. 38. 41. 45. 49. 51. 52. 54. 56. 63. 66.
69. 72. 79. 81. 83. 84. 89. 90. 91. 96. 98. 99. 100. 101. 103. 109. 112. 114.
117. 121. 136. 139.

To the Tune of the Pater noster at end of the old Psalmebooke, may be sung
these. Psalm. 5. 9. 17. 33. 39. 40, 48. 57. 87, 94. 118. 105. 122. 123. 233.
137. 149.

To the Tune of the 25. Psalm heretofore: sing these. 25. 36. 67. 82, 125. 126.

To the Tune of the 50. Psalm heretofore: sing these 16. 68. 78. 104. 106.
107. 132. 140. 141. 143. 144.

To the Tune of the 113. Psalm heretofore, sing these. 12. 58. 60. 80. 108.
113.

To the Tune of the 122. Psalm heretofore: sing these. 13. 55.

To the Tune of the 124. Psa. heretofore: sing these 71. 74. 91. 124. 129. 138.

To the Tune of the 130. Psalm heretofore: sing these, 39. 100. 127. 150.

To the Tune of the 148. heretofore: sing these. 113. 146. 147. 148. The
Psalms that are Aphabeticall are doubly translated, and some few other: One of
which translations is to be sung to French Tunes.


