CERTAIN PSALMS OF DAVID, heretofore much out of use, because of their
difficult tunes. The number whereof are contained in the page following.
Reduced into English meter better fitting the common tunes. By H. D.

Printed by Robert Walde-graue, Printer to the Kings most excellent Majesty.
1603.

Cum Privilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

The number of these Psalms, reduced into Meter fitting the common tunes.
PSALM.
CIIII. CXI. CXX. CXXI. CXXII. CXXIIII CXXV. CXXVI. CXXX.
To the Reader.
FOrasmuch (Christian Reader) as there are diverse of the singing Psalms much
out of use only because of the difficulty of their tunes: And forasmuch as
the most of them are of those 15. Psalms, which are called Psalms of
Degrees, that is, very excellent Psalms, and extraordinarily penned by the
wisdom of the holy Ghost. I have (by the help of God) reduced nine of them
(which I take to be all wherein any difficulty of tune consists) into English
meter fitting the common tunes. The which at the earnest request of diverse my
godly and learned friends, I have caused to be printed: wherein, as I have
principally sought the glory of God, and thy spiritual comfort, so I pray
thee accept there of in such Christian love, as I have labored to effect this
small piece of service unto thee, without imputing either presumption or rash
nes unto me. For the Lord knows, that in the simplicity of my heart I have
done it, and in all submission to the better learned, of whom I hope that God
will raise some, better to perform this work. Thus beseeching the Almighty to
fill thy heart with all spiritual comfort, meet for thee in his infinite
wisdom, I commend thee to his grace.

Thine in the Lord Jesus, H. D.

Psalm 104.
An excellent Psalm to praise God for the creation of the world, and
governance of the same by his marvelous providence. 35. Wherein the Prophet
prays against the wicked, who are occasion that God diminishes his blessings.

Sing this in the tune of the 25. Psalm.
My soul prais thou the Lord: O Lord my God, thou art exceeding great, thou
art clothed with glory; and honor.
1 MY soul, Iehoua praise,
O Lord my gracious God
With glory, honor, and greatness
Thou art most richly clad.
Which covers himself with light as with a garment, and sprea death out the
hea uens like a couraine.
2 Which covers with light
Himself as with array:
And spreads out the heavens bright
Like courtaines fair and gay.
Which lays the beams of his chambers in the waters, and makes the clouds
his chariot, and walks v^on the wings of the winds.
3 Which lays his chamber beams
Within the waters saire:
And walks on the wings of winds,
The clouds his Chariots are.
Which makes his spirits his messi^^^^s, and a flaming fire his ministers.
4 Which by his power does make
The Spirits his messingers,
And eke ordained flaming fire
To be his ministers.
He set the earth upon her foundations, so that it shall never move.
5 He set the earth on her
foundations firm and sure:
So that it never shall remove
but constantly endure.
Thou couerest it with the deep as with a garment: the waters would stand
above the mountains.
6 Thou coueredst it with deep
As with a garment wide:
And so above the mountains then
The waters did abide.
But at thy rebuke they fly, at the voice of thy thunder they haste away.
7 But they at thy rebuke
Do flee and haste away:
Even at the voice of thy thunder,
they pass without delay.
And the mountains ascend, and the valleys descend to the place which thou
have established for them.
8 The mountains high ascend,
and eke the valleys low
Descend into the place which thou,
appointedst for them so.
But thou have set them a bond which they shall not pass, they shall not
return to cover the earth.
9 But thou have set a bound
Which they shall never pass:
Nor once return to hyde the earth,
As once it covered was.
The second part
He sends the springs into the valleys which run between the mountains.
10 The fountains forth he sends
Into the valleys low:
So that they with their springing streams,
Between the mountains flow.
They shall give drink to all the beasts of the field, and the wild asses
shall quench their thirst.
11 They shall give drink to all
The sundry beasts in field:
And with their moisture quench the thirst
Of all the Asses wild.
By these springs shall the fowls of the hea uen dwell, and sing among the
branches.
12 By these springs shall the birds
And sowles of heaven dwell:
And sing among the branches such
Sweet songs as do excel.
He waters the mountains from his chambers and the earth is filled with the
fruit of thy works.
13 He waters from his clouds,
The mountains huge and bye:
With fruit of thy works thou have filde
The earth most plenteously.
He caused grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the vle of man that
he may bring forth bread out of the earth.
14 He causes grass and herb
For man and beast to grow:
That he may bring most wholesome bread,
Out of the earth also.
And wine that makes glade the heart of man, and oil to make his face to
shine, and bread that strengthens man's heart.
15 And makes strong and glade
The heart with bread and wine:
And with his pleasant oil does make
the face of man to shine.
The high trees ar satisfied, even the Cedars of Libanon, which he has planted.
16 The trees of Libanon,
The Cedars high and tall
Are satisfied from his hand,
Which has them planted all.
That the Birds may make their nests there the Stork dwells in the Fur
trees.
17 (That there the Birds may build,
And boldly make their nest:)
The Storke in sirre trees eke does dwell,
And there does safely rest.
The high mountains are for the Goats: the rocks are a refuge for the Conics.
18 The hills and stony rocks,
A refuge of delight,
Are for the Conics and the Goats,
To use by day or night.
He appointed the moon for certain seasons, the Sun knows his going down.
19 For certain seasons he
Appointed has the Moon:
The Sun also full well does know
His place of going down.
Thou make darkness, and it is dark, wherein all the beasts of the Forest
creep forth.
20 Thou only make dark
The time which we call night:
Wherein the beasts of Forests all,
Creep forth for their delight.
The Lions roar after their pray, and seek their meat at God.
21 The Lions for their pray
Do roar and range abroad:
And still do wait and seek for all
Their food and meat from God.
When the Sun rises, they retire, and couch in their dens.
22 But when the shyning Sun
Does rise, then they retire:
And swiftly to their dens do run,
Whereas they couched were.
Then goes man forth to his work, and to his labor until the evening.
23 Then goes the painful man
Forth to his toylesome warke:
And to his labor till the night
Prevent him* with the dark.
The third part.
O Lord, how manifold are thy works, in wisdom have thou made them all the
earth is full of thv riches.
24 O Lord how many are
Thy works in wisdom made
Thou have them all: and ceke the earth
Thy wealth does ouerspread.
So is the great and wide sea, for there in ar things creeping innumerable both
small beasts and great.
25 Also thy treasures fill
The Seas so large and wide:
Where living creatures nomberlesse
Both small and great abide.
There go the ships* yea, that Liuiathan, whom thou have made to play therein.
26 There go the Nauies great,
And he whom thou do make:
Leuiathan that hugest Whale
His pleasures there to take.
All these wait upon thee, that thou may give them food in due season.
27 All these on thee do wait,
That thou may them relieve
With such suffising food as thou
In season do them give.
Thou give to them and they gather it: thou openest thine hand, and they are
filled with good things
28 Thou give it to them,
They gather it from thee:
Thou openest thine hand and then
Filled with good things they be.
But if thou hyde thy face, they are trobled: if thou take away their breath
they die, and return to their dust
29 But if thou hyde thy face
They are sore troubled all:
And if thou take away their breath,
To dust anon they fall.
Again, if thou send forth thy spirit, they are created, and thou renewest
the face of the earth.
30 Again, if thou send forth
That powerful Spirit of thine,
They are created, and thou do
Renew the earth again.
Glory be to the Lord for even let the Lord rejoice in his works.
31 All glory to the Lord,
Both now and eke for aye:
And let the Lord our God rejoice,
In all his works always.
He looks on the earth, and it trembles* he touches the mountains and
they smoke.
32 The earth if he behold
It trembles sore for fear:
The mountains hie if he but touch,
They smoke in like manner.
I will sing into the Lord all my life, I will praise my God while I live.
33 Wherefore to praise the Lord,
I will rejoice and sing:
Whilst life does last I will advance
the praise of God my King.
Let my words be acceptable unto him, I will rejoice in the Lord.
34 O let my words and thoughts
Be pleasing unto thee:
Then in Jehovah to rejoice
My joy shall ever be.
Let the sinners be consumed out of the earth, and the wicked till there be no
more. O my soul praise thou the Lord.
35 Let sinners be consumed,
Let lewd men still decay:
But thou my soul praise thou the Lord,
Praise ye the Lord always,
Psalm Cxj.
He gives thanks to the Lord for his merciful works to his Church. 20. And
declares wherein true wisdom and right knowledge consists. Praise ye the
Lord.

I will praise the Lord with my whole heart in the assembly and congregati on
of the just.
1 TO praise the Lord with my whole heart Psalm. 111.

I will rejoice always:
In Congregations of the just,
I will advance his praise.
The works of the Lord are great, and ought to be sought out of all them that
love them.
2 The wondrous works of God the Lord
In greatness do exceed:
And all men ought to seek them out,
That love them well indeed.
His work is beautiful and glorious, and his righteousness endures for ever.
3 His work is full of beauty, and
Of glory rich in store:
His righteousness most righteously,
Endures evermore.
He made his wonderful works to be had in remembrance: the Lord is merciful
and full of compassion.
4 His wondrous works he made that we
Should ever them remember:
Full of compassion is he
And merciful for ever.
He has given a portion to them that fear him: he will ever be mindful of his
covenant.
5 A portion fair he has bestowed
On them that do him dreede:
And mindful of his covenant
He ever is indeed.
He has showed to his people the power of his works, in giving unto them the
heritage of the heathen.
6 His powerful works to Israel
He graciously has showed:
In that the Heathens heritage
He has on them bestowed.
The works of his hands are truth and judgment, all his statutes are true.
7 His handie works are equity,
And judgment: just are found
His statutes all most plenteously
In truth do still abound.
They are established for ever and ever, and ar^ done in truth and equity.
8 They are most firmly stablished,
For ever and for aye:
And eke are done in equity,
And in the truth always.
He sent redemption unto his people, he has commanded his Covenant for ever:
holy and fearful is his Name.
9 He sent redemption to his folk,
His Covenant shall endure
For ever. By divine precept
His Name is fearful sure.
The beginning of wisdom is the f^ar of the Lord: all they that observe them
have good understanding: his praise endures for ever.
10 His fear true wisdom does begin,
His Laws observe do they
That any vnderstandiug have,
His praise does last for aye.
Psalm Cxx.
The prayer of David being vexed by the false reports of Saul's slatterers. 5.
And therefore he lamenteth his long abode among those infidels, who were given
to all kind of wickedness and contention.

A song of Degrees.
I called unto the Lord in my trouble, and he heard me.
1 IN time of trouble to the Lord, Psalm. 120.

I did both call and cry:
And he did graciously accord,
To bear me by and by.
Deliver my soul, O Lord from lying lips, and from a deceitful tongue.
2 Lord, quite my soul, and set me free,
From lying lips and wrong:
And from the cursed subtelty
Of a deceatfull tongue.
What does thy deceitful tongue bring unto thee? or what does it avail thee?
3 Thy tongue still used to deceat,
What does it thee avail?
Thus of thy falshoode to entreat,
How should thou prevail?
It is as the sharp arrows of a mighty man, and as the coals of Juniper,
4 It pearceth like the arrows sharp
Shot by a man of might:
It wounds the simple harmless heart:
Like coals and fire so bright.
Wois me that I remain in Me sech, and dwell in the tents of Kedar.
5 In cruel Mesech I remain,
Oppressed with grief and woe:
And me to dwell they do constrain,
In Kedars Tents also.
My soul has too long dwelt with him that hates peace.
6 My silly soul too long has dwelt
With him that does not cease,
To show the hatred of his heart
Against the man of peace.
I seek peace, and when I speak thereof, they are bent to war.
7 I meckelie seek to them for peace,
I speak for amity:
But they the more to wars are bent
In all extremity.
Psalm Cxxj.
This Psalm teaches that the faithful ought only to look for help at God,
who only does maintain, preserve, and prosper his Church.

I lift mine eyes to the montains from whence my help shall come.
1 MY watchful eyes I will advance, PSALM. 121.

above the lofty sky:
My help, I know, shall come from thence,
And that right speedily.
My help com meth from the Lord, which has made both heaven and earth,
2 My help does only from the Lord
Our gracious God proceed:
Which has the heavens and the earth,
Made by his power indeed.
He will not suffer thy foot to slip, for he that keeps thee will not
slumber.
3 He will for ever safely keep
Thy slyding foot from fall:
Our watchful God will never sleep,
Nor slumber will at all.
He that keeps Israel, behold he will neither slumber nor sleep.
4 He that does keep his Israel
In safety, will not sleep:
Behold he still does watch full well,
From dangers them to keep.
The Lord is thy keeper, the Lord is thy shadow at thy right hand.
5 Know thou therefore assuredly,
the Lord thy keeper is:
The Lord thy shadow for to be
In troubles will not miss.
The Sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the Moon by night.
6 The Sun or Moon by day or night,
Shall not thee smite at all,
With parching heat, or slashing light
they hurt thee never shall.
The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil, he shall keep thy soul.
7 The Lord shall still thee so preserve,
From euilles all and some:
That thy poor soul shall never swerue,
Nor yet in danger come.
The Lord shall preserve thy going out. and thy coming in, from henceforth
and for ever.
8 Thy goings out and commings in,
The Lord shall still preserve:
From henceforth, and for ever he,
Will never see the swerue.
Psalm Cxxij.
David rejoices in the name of the faithful, that God has accomplished his
promise, and placed his Arc in Zion. 3. For the which he gives thanks, 8.
and praicth for the prosperitic of the Church.

I rejoiced when they said unto me, we will go into the house of the lord
1 MY joys were great when as they said, Psalm. 122.

Come, we will go the way,
Unto the house of God the Lord,
Where holy Arc does stay.
Our feet shall stand in thy gates, O Jerusalem.
2 Our wandering feet shall sirmely stand,
O fair Jerusalem,
Within thy comely gates when we
Shall enter into them.
Jerusalem is builded as a city that is compact together in it self.
3 Jerusalem is comely built
Not scattered here and there:
But stands firmly of it self,
With houses strong and fair.
Whereunto the tribes, even the tribes of the Lord go up according to the
testimony to Israel, Praise the Name of the Lord.
4 Whereto the Trybes, even all the Trybes
Of God the Lord do go:
As by commandment they are bound,
His praises forth to show.
For there are thrones set for judgment, even the thrones of the house of
David.
5 For there are comely thrones erect,
True judgment to maintain:
Which thrones to David's house are set,
For ever to remain.
Pray for the peace of Jerusalem let them pro sper that love thee.
6 O pray thou ever for the peace
Of fair Jerusalem:
Let all thy friends abound in grace,
And prosper well therein.
Peace be with in thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces.
7 The peace of God within thy walls
And all prosperity,
Within thy comely palaces
The Lord grant still may be.
For my brethten and neighbors sakes, I will wish thee now prosperity.
8 The joys that all our brethren dear
Enjoy by means of thee,
Enforce me thus in heart to wish
Thy great prosperity.
Because of the house of the Lord our God, I will procure thy wealth.
9 Because of that most worthy place
Gods house and dwelling sure,
Which he in thee has set to be
Thy wealth I will procure.
Psalm. Cxxiiij.
The people of God escaping a great peril, do acknowledge themselves to be
delivered, not by their own force, but by the power of God: they declare the
greatness of the peril, and praises the Name of the Lord.

A song of Degrees, or Psalm of David.
If the Lord had not been on our side (may Israel now say)
1 IF God had not stood on our side Psalm. 124.

Israel may confess,
If the Lord had not been on our side when men rose against us.
2 If God had not sustaind our cause
When men sought our distress,
They had then swallowed us up quick
They had then swallowed us up quick, when theirwrath was kindled against us.
3 When as their wrath and are
Against us all was kindled thick
Like dreadful flaming fire:
Then the waters had drowned us, and the stream had gone over our soul.
4 Then had the waters drowned us,
And sure the raging stream
Our souls had overwhelmed all
Yea ouerslow'd amain:
Then had the swelling waters gone over our soul.
5 The swelling waters, then had gone
Over our soul out right
And so consumed us every one
By deadly force and might.
Praised be God, which has not given us as a pray unto their teeth.
6 But praised be our God and Lord
Which has not given us
A pray unto their teeth and sword
That we should perish thus.
Our soul has escaped, even as a bird from the snare of the fowlers: the
snare is broken and we are delivered.
7 Our soul from them escaped is
As bird from fowlers snare:
The snare is broke, delivered
Behold we safely are.
Our help is in the name of the Lord, who has made both heaven and earth.
8 Our help for ever in the name,
Of God the Lord does stand,
Who founded has and furnished
Both heaven seaes and land.
Psalm Cxxv.
Wherein is described the assurance of the faithful in their afflictions, 4.
desiring their wealth, 5. and the destruction of the wicked

A Song of Degrees*
They that trust in the Lord shall be as mount Zion, which cannot be removed,
but remains for ever.
1 THey that their trust in God repose, Psalm 125.

Shall be as Zion hill:
Which never can removed be,
But ay remains still
As the mountains are about Jerusalem, so is the Lord about his people, from
henceforth and for ever.
2 As round about Jerusalem,
The mountains stand full strong:
So is the Lord about his folk,
And ever them among.
For the rod of the wicked shall not rest on the lot of the righteous, least
the righteous put forth their hand to wickedness.
3 For wickeds rod on just men's lot,
For ever shall not be:
Least righteous men put forth their hand
Unto iniquity.
Dowell, O Lord to those that be good and true in their hearts.
4 Do well, O Lord, unto all those
That upright are in heart:
But those that unto crooked ways
Shall choose to turn apart:
But those that turn aside by their crooked ways, them shall the Lord lead
with the workers of iniquity, but peace shall be upon Israel.
5 Them shall the Lord with workers lead
Of all iniquity:
But peace upon his Israel
For evermore shall be.
Psalm Cxxvj.
This Psalm was made after the return of the people from Babylon, and shows
that the mean of their deliverance was wonderful after the 70. years
captivity fore-spoken by Jeremiah the Prophet chap 23. 12. 29. 10.

When the Lord brought again the captivity of Zion, we were like them that
dream.
1 WHen mighty Jove did Zion folk Psalm. 126.

Reduce from deadly thrall,
And us poor Captives brought again,
We were like dreamers all.
Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with joy: then said
they among the heathen, the Lord has done great things for them.
2 Then was our mouth with laughter filled,
Joys did our hearts delight:
The heathen saul that God great things
Did for them by his might.
The Lord has done great things for us whereof we rereioyce,
3 Things wonderful the Lord has wrought
For us his children dear:
Wherefore in him we do rejoice
In heart with joyful cheer.
O Lord bring again our captivity, as the rivers in the south.
4 And thou O Lord fulfill our joy,
And bring the rest again
Of Captives, as thou do refreshe
South grounds with floodes and rain.
They that sow in tears shall reap in joy.
5 They that with grief in mournful tears,
Their seed do spread and sow:
Shall reap in joy assuredly,
Our God shall work it so.
They went weeping, and carried precious seed, but they shall return with
joy, and bring their sheaues.
6 They weeping went and precious seed,
They carried forth with them:
But shall return with joy and bring
Their heavy sheaues again.
Psalm Cxxx.
The people of God from their bottomless miseries do cry unto God, and are
heard. 3. They confess their sins, and flee unto Gods merries.

Out of the deep places have I called un to thee.
1 FRom depth of heart possessed with greese, Psalm. 130.

Wherein I now do lie:
To thee, O Lord, for some reliese,
I do both call and cry.
Lord bear my voice, let thine cares attend to the voice of my prayers.
2 Lord hear my voice, grant my request
Which I do make to thee:
And let thy gracious ears be pressed,
To my loud sounding cry.
If thou, o lord straightly markest iniquities, o lord who shall stand.
3 If thou, O Lord, do straightly mark,
Our foul iniquity:
O Lord who can before thee stand,
Excused for to be.
But mercy is with thee, that thou may be feared.
4 But mercy and compassion,
O Lord are still with thee:
That men may love and fear the Name
Of thy great Majesty.
I have waited on the Lord, my soul has waited, and I have trusted in his
word.
5 I have attended still upon
Thy holy will, O Lord,
My soul has waited, and I have
Still trusted in his word.
My soul waits on the Lord more then the morning watch watches for the
morning.
6 No watchman more desirouslie,
Does watch for dawning day,
Then does my soul in constancy,
Wait on the Lord always.
Let Israel wait on the Lord, for with the Lord is mercy, and with him is
great redemption.
7 Let Israel wait on the Lord,
Whose mercy does abound:
And with the Lord redemption great
Is ever to be found.
And he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities.
8 And he shall sure his Israel,
From all their sins redeem.
And purge from all iniquities,
Them that do trust in him.
FINIS.

