THE LAMENTATIONES OF JEREMY, TRANSLATED WITH GREAT CARE OF HIS HEBREW
ELEGANCIE, AND ORATORIOVS SPEECHES: VVHERIN HIS SIXFOLD ALPHABET STIRS all
to attention, OF GODS ORDERED Providence in Kingdoms confusion.

WITH EXPLICATIONES from other Scriptures, touching his story and phrases.

BY HVGH BROVGHTON. 1606

OF IEREMIES LIKENESS TO MOSES IN MANY DEGREES.
Jeremy had great resemblances to like^ him unto Moses in many poincts,
pleasant to consider: and much for his auctority. As Moses was of Levj, the
godliest tribe, and the best family: that which by faith hid him three
months: So Jeremy was of Levj, of the sacrificers of Anathoth: and his
father was Chelkiah the high sacrificer: who found the Law, hid in the
temple: in Manasses days: whose repentance was but a little before his death:
that he could not think of the Law. And Amon his son was wicked. Of this
Levite came Jeremy: Son and father honorers of Moses. Moses was unwilling
to go upon his message: Jeremy was unwilling to go upon his message. Moses
own tribe stood up against him: Core and his company. Jeremy his own, the
men of Anathoth stood up against him: Moses was cast into the river by his
own kindred: Ieremye was cast into a dungeon by his own kindred. Moses was
taken out of the river by one of Pharaohs maidens: Jeremy was taken out of
the dungeon by an Ethiopian, by Abdemelech. Moses reproved Israel: Jeremy
reproved Israel: Moses told Israel, of captivity: and closly of seaventie
years: Levit. 26. and of a new remembrance of covenant* Jeremy told Israel of
captivity and expressly to end at 70 years: and of the New Testament Moses
told that the Kings should go to a strange Land: upon desert, to be rooted out:
Jeremy tells the Kings shall go to Babel. and tells expressly twice: Ier.
36. and 22. that the Kings stock shall be rooted out. Moses desired of God to
show him his vvayes: seeing the strange success of wicked here: Jeremy
desired to know why the wicked prospered. Moses bade Israel they should no
more return to Egypt. Jeremy bade Israel they should no more return to
Egypt. Moses spoke from his own faith in God: that the rebels against him
should have a strange death: Jeremy from his faith in God told the
pseudoprophet Ananias, S. of Azor, this year thou shall die. Moses vvrote of
sadness to Rachel the mother, by her death at Beth Lechem, Jeremy wrote that
Rachel shall vveep for her childrens death at Beth Lechem. Moses prophesied, a
King, of Christ the King forty years: Jeremy prophesied unto Kings, of
Christ the true King forty years. Moses vvrote most curious poetry Ex. 15 and
Deuteronomy. 32. Ieremies Lame^tations bring more joy for learned style: then sadness
by speech of the nations fall. Moses and Jeremy saved much of their company by
their forty years: for going into the Land: from the wilderness: and out of the
Land into the wilderness of the heathen. The Pharisees despising Moses and
Jeremy, and Apostles 40 years bred Eternal Lamentations.

THE COMMENDATION OF IEREMIES LAMENTATIONS.
THe holy spirit commends in Ier. 36. the book of Lamentations: that it
abridgeth all Ieremies sermons made from the thirtenth of Josias unto the
fourth of Ioakim, which space Jeremy reckons to betvventy three years. And
as he abridgeth his own sermons made from the phrases of the Law, Job,
Psalms, and Salomons Books, and from all the former prophets: So his
Lamentations in very speech do call the reader to former works that the
reading of them brings into mind all the former holy vvriters. And the holy
Daniel so delighted in him, that ch: 9. he abridgeth his Lamentations how
under heaven it has not been done, as it has been done to Jerusalem: where
every curse spoken in the Law of Moses has shevved full event. God bade
Jeremy write the Book: and to read it in a great fast. Baruc wrote it and
read it to the nobles: they bring it to Ioakim the King: and read it: he being
at a fire in his vvinter chamber: in his fifth year: when he had returned from
Babel, and purposed rebellion in his heart. It was about November: and a
burning fire was in his chamber: and as Iehudj read three or four Leaves,
Ioakim with a penknife cut them, and cast them into the fire: till he consumed
all the Book. yet the nobles requested him not to deal so. Also he commanded
to lay hold upon Jeremy and Baruc. But God hid them: and bade Jeremy write
again the book* with addition: the threefold Alphabet: chapter 3. as well may be
thought: and to prophecy of Ioakim, the rooting out of his succession and
house: and that he shall be buried like an ass: cast out of Jerusalem. Which
fell out as he was carried the second time for Babel.

And thus in Jeremy GOD honoreth the Lamentationes of Jeremy*

HOW DANIELS VISIONS HONOR IEREMYES LAMENTATIONS.
FIve years after Ieremies Lame^tations were first written Daniel vvriteth of
the Jews enemies: how they make a great and goodly image: and figureth them
not by beasts, while the Kings of Judah be savage vvightes, and caused
Ieremies Lamentations: But after threescore years, when the Kings race was
gone, then Iudahs enemies were likened unto savage beasts: and the Jews of
Ieremies Lamentatio^s are the holy: which shall possess a kingdom for Ever and
Ever. Also Jeremy Lam. 4. closly tells of Babels fall: that does Daniel
lively describe: chapt. 5. Jeremy Lam. 5 prays unto God to turn his People:
because so only they can be returned: and to renew his gracious face as of
old. Daniel chapter 9. expressly names Ieremies 70 years for Gods anger: and
prays for the renewing of Gods favor.

THE STORY OF IVDAH, FOR THE TIME OF IEREMIES LAMENTATIONS.
Daniel only records, chapter 1. that in the third of Iehoiakim; Nabuchadnezzar
King of Babel came against Jerusalem* But by Jeremy, chapter 25. we gather that
part of Ioakim his fourth was also in Nabuchadnezar his first. And then God
gave the K. into his hands: and part of the vessels of the temple: and God
brought K. and vessels unto Babel: But the K. was suffered to return: for in
his fifth vere he was at Jerusalem: This captivity was mentioned only in
Daniel: who was also carried with three as godly, Ananias, Misael, and
Azarias: and other of the Kings race. Eight years after this would not teach
K. Ioakim that he upon rebellion should be bury^s an Ass: For he had sinned
against the holy Gh. in bur^ing Ieremies Lamentatio^s: and could not be renewed
to re(...)nce: but must have open punishment here, as Eternal (...) Gehenna.
After five years Daniel and Nab: both dreamed of the great Image: that should
rule not only Judah but all: a long time: Ioakim cared nothing for all this.
Nab. the K. presently makes a Golden Image, to augment the visions memory:
and his hope: as Diod: Siculus notes: that he should be a Monarch: and would
have it worshipped. Then Daniels godly cosyns quench the fire. And the K. of
Babel proclameth Gods glory: But Ioakim contemns God, to hasten judgment! and
rebelleth against Nab: K. of Babell. The second and third chapter of Daniel must be
here considered: how against them the wicked harden their heart. So God sent
armies of Chaldeans, Aram, Moab, and Ammon against Judah, and they took Ioakim
and bound him in chains to have brought him to Babel: 2. chapter 36. But he died
by the way, and he was buried like an ass. Ier. 36. Iehoiachin reigned three
months: like a Cruel Lion. Him Nabuchadnezar suffered not to sit any longer
upon David's throne: But carried him to Babel. And moo vessels of the temple and
palace; and all the nobles: and Mardochaj the^ a suckling, one of Ieremies
Lamented. Then also was Ezekiel captiued. That he might freely in Babel tell
the rest of Judah they should follovv. But they would never believe that Iudahs
kingdom should err to destruction. Many thousands also of the People, all
saving the poor, he carried to Babel: and kept Iechonias 37. years in prison:
that wicked Thalmudists should not say: Iechonias by repentance called back
Gods oath: that said he should die childles. Repentance should have helped Achabs
brood; first out of prison. But no repentance, not Moses repentance, can call
back Gods oath: Besides the oath passed as well for Ioakim that none of his seed
should sit upon David's throne. yet the infidels teach it to be Atheism to say
that Salomons race is ended. But the Gospel of S. Luke and Ier. 36. and 22.
and Aggej. 2. and Zach. 12. teach us that it is infidelity to deny it to be
ended. Let him that reads understand.

TO THE MOST NOBLE HENRY PRINCE OF GREAT BRITANY.
THE Law promisseth (G. P). all blessing of this world, and, when this earthly
house of tabernacle is dissolved, a building from God everlasting, if we keep
it: But without any token that men would keep it, breaking upon breaking is
foretold: and eight and twenty fold punishments, until at the last Judah
should lose their Land and be seaventy years in the Land of Nemrod: where they
might behold the wicked building: which bred confusion of tongues: and which
should end the tongue of Adam from common use. When the first year of this
captivity was beginning: Jeremy penned a form of lamentatio^s: showing man's
misery to the full. and the rooting out of Salomons house, which from Roboam
was Ammonitish: and from Ochozias was Achabish: and was often nere rooting out.
that men might better beleve it should wholly decay: and look unto the family of
Christ the son of Nathan Salomons brother. The Godly in captivity, as Daniel,
who stopped the mouth of Liones, and Ananias, Misael, with Asarias, who
quenched the force of fire, were humbled by these Lamentationes to behold the
days of Christ. And presently from their beginning Daniel begins his
captivity: as a witness to Ieremies truth; and shows how God in sorrows
advaunced him to be welthier then mighty Kings; and contrived the Kingdoms
which thence should afflict faithful Iudahs religion, unto the form of one
ma^s body: and distinct in matter, as Iudahs zeal, or relenting would be.
Ieremyes Lamentations I have set over into our tongue; with care to set forth,
so nere as our speech could, the oratorious bravery of his words. But all men,
yea all Greeks, though their learning and eloquence were powered into one head,
would come nothing nere his heavenly gayness. They must learn his own language
that would fill their ears with those soundes of Chanaan. Besides his
translation, I have showed his meaning so far as I demed need was; for his
conference with the other holy works. And him I joined to Koheleth,. Also I
finished that work which was sent over to your G. in Ebrew and Latin which
ha^dleth David's Families and Daniels su^me. That I have also turned into mo
la^guages; as containing an explication of common Christianity. These I
labored, that your G. might by ripe years, be ripe in the know ledg of God.

Your Graces most humble, HVGH BROVGHTON.

THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMY.
Aleph. 1 HOw is the city dwelt solitary which was full of people; She is
become a very widow. The great among nations, the prince among countries is
become Iehoiakim was carried to Babel, in the first of Nabu: and Daniel,
Ananias, Misael, and Azaria^ with other young nobles. Da. 1. And Iehoiakim was
suffered to return to his Kingdom: being made a servant tributarie to the King
of Babel.
tributary.

Beth. 2 She weepeth sore all the Affliction is night. as Es. 21. Three years
Iehoiakim served the K. of Babel. That time was night: Three years he was vexed
with forces of Chaldeans Syrians Moabites Ammonites. And that was a darker
night.
night: Her tears trickle upon her cheeks: She has no comforter of all her
Lovers: all her Egypt and Tyrus and other near nations, which afterward
resisted Babel 35. years. yet they left Jerusalem to be taken of Nabuchadnezar
after a small siege.
friends deal unfaithfully with her: They are become her enemies.

Gimel. 3. Judah In the eight of Nab: with K. Iechonias and Mar dochai then a
child, and Ezekiel, and many who the^ saw Salomons temple, and Lived till
Aggei asked them, of it and Zorobabels* Ag. 2. And many thousands: all saving
the poor. And again when the remnant is captived, after full bondage and
sorrow. Besides in the Book of Ester Letters went into 127 countries against
the Jews, and again for them. And the Chaldean scattered the^ not: wherefore
we must understand that many believing their conntrey should become under Babel
fled into other coutreyes. And of them might they be who made the synagoges in
Corinth and Rome.
leaves country after affliction and much bondage. She dwells among the
heathen: She finds no rest: all that pursue her overtake her in the straites.

Daleth. 4. The ways of Sion mourn, because none come to the feasts: all her
gates be desolate; her sacrificers They sighed not for killing the prophets but
for the punishment.
sigh: her virgins sorrow, and she feels bitterness.

He. 5 Her adversaries are the chief: her enemies prosper: because the Eternal
has made her sorrowful, for her great trespases: Her infants As Mardochai: who
was active in Esthers days: Ester. 10. and was carried to Babel 62. years before
Babel fell. So he must live 85. at the least; though he were (...)ived, in his
cradle.
go to captivity, before the adversary.

Chap. I.
Vau. 6 And from the All settled commonweals are called daughters in the
Scripture; as Daughter Babel, ps. 137. So Rome is pictured a woman Apo. 17
daughter Sion all her gayness is departed: her Princes are like hearts which
find no pasture, and go void of all strength before the pursuer.

Zain. 7 Jerusalem remembers in the days of her affliction and vexation, all
the precious things that she had in the old time: when the People has fallen
by the hand of the Enemy: and she has no helper: her adversaries behold her,
and Laugh at her This prophecieth how in Babel they will mourn for desire unto
their feasts: which in their Land they would not keep aright And the Chaldeans
will skoph their Sabbatismes, as did long after Horace, Ovid, and other Poets.
and Tully too: Deserving to have his head cut off and his tongue pricked, as he
had. The ps. 137. commenteth upon this verse.
Sabbatismes.

Cheth. 8 Jerusalem has sinned grevously: therefore came she into (...) Nydah.
Such uncertainty of place as Cain had Genesis 4. wandering from place to place.
(...) expresses of purpose this word, 1 Cor. 4. 11.
dispersio^: all that honored her contemn her: because they have seen her
shame: also she sigheth and turns her self backwardes.

Teth. 9 Her Ier. Chapter 2. ha^dleth this at large. The trope means Idolatry.
uncleanness is upon her skirtes. She remembers not Deu. 32. O that they were
wise, and would remember their last end. Moses spoke of this age.
her last end: How she is wonderfully brought down, she has no comforter. O
Eternal see my affliction: because the enemy is mighty.

Iod. 10 The adversary lays his hand upon all her (...) Apoc. 18.
precious things: when she sees the nations come into her temple: of whom
thou have commanded: They should not come into thy That is: They shall bear
no office in thy common weal. they are Ammonites and Moabites. Deuteronomy. 23. 3.
they come now even into the Temple where only the Levites should come.
congregation.

Caph. 11 All her People sigh, seeking for bread: they give their precious
things for This speech is a prophecy of the famine that should befall the
city, in the last siege: which began in the ninth of Sedekias. Then Nab;
compassed the city with siege, until the Eleventh year; when the famine was
exceeding great, and the People of the Land had no meat. 2. K. 25. 1. Though
two captiuities were past, and none were left but a remnant of poor, and
Ezekiel in captivity prophesied that Sedekias and his company should come
after the former, and Jeremy still in Jerusalem commented in Sermons upon his
Lamentations, all this moved not Sedekias and his nobles. For they knew not the
Kingdom of Christ: that it was for the world to come; and knew that an
Eternal throne was promised unto David. 2. Sam. 7. and 1. Chro. 17. So still
they made their belly their God. Phil. 3. And to this day the Thalmudiques say;
in R. Moses Ben Mamony Tom. 1. tractat. Poenitentia: Perek or section. 9. All
the good things which the prophets prophesied unto Israel: they are only
body things, wherein the body shall be benefited in the days of Messiah; when
the Kingdom shall be restored to Israel. Moses foretold Deuteronomy. 32. that when they
became fat, gross, and burly, they would forget God that made them, and
contemn the rock of their Salvation. And Esaias Chapter 6. records that to have
come to pass: and Rambam tract. poenit. records the sin there to be sin
against the holy Ghost: wherein God would never give repentance. As they could
not repent: to give ever at the siege: but they dreamed still that Egypt would
help; but Jeremy Lamenteth that their folly: So for the second destruction,
they believed not the Angel Dan. 9. that tells again and again that their
city should have a final destruction. But when S. Stephen, act. 6 and 7. told
the same, and had in his faco like the Angels brightness, they stopped their
ears: and would neither hear nor see. And who would have thought that Saraias
the high Sacrificer, and father of good Esra should conspire with the rest to
damn Jeremy for a false prophet, because he told of Ruin to the temple, and
implements: and of the New Testament. But man sold into sin cannot see, where
God opens not the eyes. And here the spirit teaches the Godly to groan with
sighinges unspeakable.
meat to keep in life. See o Eternal, and consider how contemptible I am
become.

Lamed. Daniell full of grace honors this verse chapter 9. thus: It has not ben
done under all the heaven as it has been done to Jerusalem.
12 This has not befallen you, o all that pass by the way. Consider ye, and
see if there be any sadness like my sadness, which is caused unto me; where the
Eternal has caused sorrow, in the day of his hot anger.

Mem. 13 From an high he has sent fire into my The cities of Judah brent by the
Chaldeans.
bones, and made it prevail: he has spread a net to my feet: he has turned
me backward, he has made me desolate, sick, all the day.

Nun. 14 The The yoke of the Law was given to teach how sin abounded. So
seeing they humbled not themselves before God, to walk better in his holy
covenant, all the curses written in the Laws of Moses came upon them: when
from the yoke of the Law, which these fathers could not bear, they yoke of
their trespasses galled the neck. When Dan. Chapter 9. confessed this much: the
angel Gabriel teaches him of the easy yoke of Christ, named so: Math. xj. And
that oration of the Angel Gabriel is no less to the old Testament then the sun
is to the sky.
yoke of my trespasses has made an impression by his hand: they plat (...). s.
Paul expounds this strange Ebrew with as strange Greek: (...): Eb. 12. Sin
that cunningly wrappeth about. And this he means that the glorious wisdom of
Moses Law, which stands for the marrow, still, but not for the outward,
Sabbat, circumcision Tabernacle, and other rites of Levy, this blinded them,
who would not look unto Christ the end of the Law; that God from the Law
plagued them, and made the Law, held as their table, to be their trappe: Seeing
they would not enter into the rest of Christ: where baptism, and the Lords
supper are no burden. S. Paul calling the Ebrewes being in the Error of
Sedekias times unto Ieremies Lamentations, closly warns by the former
destruction, a second as a deluge: when the Apostles preaching has had forty
years as Ieremies when Sedekias and his went into the wilderness of the heathen.
The Thalmudiques traditions to this day, are their sins, platting themselves
as the boughs of a tree, or the Nerves of the Elephants coddes. Job 40. 17.
Whence Jeremy borrowed his word, which S. Paul gave to Gracia.
themselves; they go over my Neck signifies as in Abak., 3. the highest towns
of state. when Iosuah conquered Chanaan. Such was Jerusalem to Ieremies days
and S. Paul's.
neck; he has beaten down my strength: The Lord has given me into their
hands before whom I cannot stand.

Samech. 15 The Lord has trodden down all my When Nah: carried away all the men
of war, and all the nobles, and Iewellers, in his eight year 2. K. 34.
valiant, within me; he has called an When the Kings of the earth assisted
Nab: to be siege Jerusalem; Craaesus King of Lydia might well be one of them.
Old Herodotus notes his familiarity with the King of Babel. God would have
Kings to know Ierusalems fall by Babel, that when they should hear of Babels
house of Nemrod fallen, by Iapheth and Sem, and proclamation to send home the
Jews by subsidy of 120 nations; they might listen when God in Christ would
pity the world for that liberality to his people.
assembly against me, to break my young men; the Lord has trodden the
winepresse, to the virgin daughter Judah.

Ain. 16 Therefore do I weep; mine eye mine ey gussheth out of water; for
co^forter is far from me, that should keep in my life; my children are desolate
because the enemy is the stronger.

Pe. 17 Sion spreads the hands, she finds no comforter; The Eternal has
given charge concerning Jacob, to his enemies round about him; Jerusalem is
become a me^struous woman among them.

Sade. 18 The Da^. Chapter 9. expreseth this whole sentence.
Eternal is just. For I have rebelled against his mouth. Hear now all ye
people and see my sadness. My virgins and my yo^g me^ are gone into captivity.

Coph. 19 I called upon my Egyptia^s, Ezekiel. 29. resisted Babel, as well as
Judah: But promising help they durst not perform it. As in many places Ezekiel
tells, 30. and 31. and moo. Also though we have no record of confederacy
betwixt Judah and other Enemies to Babel, reason tells that all of one danger
at the first, joined League: These were confederate with Egypt, Ezekiel. 30. Cush,
Put and Lud, and all Arabia, and Cub or Barbaria. These, as haters of Jerusalem
partly for fear of Nabuchadnezars greatness, partly of hatred to Gods truth,
for sake Jerusalem, while Nab: besieges Sedekias: Ezekiel Chapter 29. and 30.
prophecieth against them.
Lovers; and they have deceaved me; My sacrificers and my Elders yield up the
ghost in the city, when they seek them meat to keep in their life.

Resh. 20 See o Eternal how I am in distress. My bowels are Job. 16. 16.
disquieted, and my heart is turned within me, because I have stubburnelie
rebelled. Deu. 32. They shall be brent with hunger and eaten up with burning, and
bitter destruction. without, the sword shall rob: within shall be fear. S. Paul
2. Cor. 7. 5. calls Moses and Jeremy both into mind: saying: when we came
into Macedonia my flesh had no rest: we were alvvayes in distress, without
was fighting, within was fear: Thus divinely honors he the songs of
Moses and Jeremy: as having tbeir words still before him, joining Moses
prophecy with Ieremyes story: and showing how the Apostles were vexed in the
world, as Jerusalem of the Chaldeans.
Without the sword does rob, within is death it self.

Schin. 21 They have heard how I sigh, having no comforter; all my enemies have
heard my evel; Namely Tyrus, reproved of Ezechiel for ioyance at the fall of
^erusalem: which Tyrus is there told of ruin. Many years it was besieged of
Nab: and taken at the last. Other nations untaken yet, but told Ier. 25. that
they should serve Babel, they also hated Judah; concerning whom this prophecy
is uttered.
they rejoice at thy doing. Thou bring a day which thou have proclaimed,
that Namely Tyrus, reproved of Ezechiel for ioyance at the fall of ^erusalem:
which Tyrus is there told of ruin. Many years it was besieged of Nab: and
taken at the last. Other nations untaken yet, but told Ier. 25. that they
should serve Babel, they also hated Judah; concerning whom this prophecy is
uttered.
they shall be as I am.

Tau. 22 Let all The first Alphabet row is ended in the prophecy of ending the
wicked Kingdoms which should be brought under Babels yoke: to show that all
these troubles are in Gods providence settled in most exquisite order for his
judgments.
their evell come before thee; and do unto them as thou have done unto me for
all my trespasses. For my sighings be many and my heart is sick.

Chap. 2.
Aleph. 1 HOw has the Four Hebrew names of God are only used in this book:
Jehovah, the Eternal, in each Chapter: and is accompanied with Adonaj: Abraham's
stay, with a note of trinity: (Genesis 15.) Lam. Chapter 1. 2, 3. And in the third
also, with El: Mighty, and once in a most fit argument; and with (...) The most
HIGH, twice; wherein Jeremy complayneth against the high states of Judah, unto
one whom they felt higher and mightier. In the fourth and fifth, Jehovah:
Performer of promise from Eternal purpose, only is used Elohim the exact
mighty judge, only used Genesis 1. and elsewhere most usual in story, is not at
all in this book: where the prophet shows how God in will remember mercy* to
make the Jews in Babell a golden state: and not enter into judgment to
consume them. A translater, unmindful of fit English for each, will blind his
reader.
Lord beclouded in his anger the daughter Sion; he has cast down from heaven
to the earth the fayreness of Israel: and remembers not his footstool in the
day of his anger.

Beth. 2 The Lord has Eb. swallowed, and used as here, Job. 2.
overwhelmed, nothing sparing, all the dwellings of Jacob: he has Deuteronomy. 28.
and Amos term of David's tabernacle Chapter 9. is here.
broken down in his wrath the fortes of the daughter Judah: He has Es. 25.
brought unto the ground, He has made Ps. 89. where the whole psalm handles
this matter: that Salomons kingdom was but vanity: and that of Messiah is in
heaven.
a riddance of the kingdom, and of the Princes.

Gimel. 3 He has broken in his hot anger all the Ps. 75, 12.
horn of Israel: He has turned back his right Ps. 89.
hand from the enemy: and he has kindled Deuteronomy. 33.
in Jacob a flaming fire which eats up round about.

Daleth. 4 He has bent his bow as an enemy: he has settled his right hand as
an adversary: he has killed all the pleasant to the eye, in the tent of the
daughter Sio^: he has powered out his heath as fire.

Heh. 5 The Lord is become a very enemy: he has overwhelmed Israel, he has
overwhelmed all 2. K. 25.
her palaces: he has marred all Deuteronomy. 28.
her fortes: and he has multiplied, in the daughter Judah, Esaias 29. has the
same strange Ebrew for this matter.
heavines upon heavines.

Vau. 6 And he has pluck up his Ps. 76. 3. The Temple, and so in the Chaldy
here.
pavilion as a garden: he has put down his feasts: the Lord has caused in
Sion feast and Sabbath to be forgotten, and he has lothed in the indignation
of his anger, This was the maine point whereupon Koheleth wrote that all things
under the Sun were vain. And for this the Atheist Ioakim brent the
Lamentations: whereupon God told he should have the burial of an ass: and that
none of his seed should sit upon David's throne: and expressly that Iechonias
should die childelesse. As to this hour our Learned over Europe cannot believe
Jeremy 22. and s. Luc. 3. for that, so in Ieremyes days men could hardly
believe this: and for this the Sacrificers condemned Jeremy too. So hard a
matter it is to despise the world: and to look to the Kingdom of heaven. And
further large commenting I shall not need. The learned in I brew upon a warning
may by mine examples search how still from other holy writers Jeremy fetches
his phrases.
King and Sacrificer.

Zain. 7 The Lord has rejected his altar: he has cast off his temple: he has
delivered into the hand of the Enemy the walls of her towers: they make a
noise in the house of the Eternal as on a feast day.

Cheth. 8 The Lord purposed to destroy the wall of daughter Sio^: he stretched
the line; he withdrew not his hand from overwhelming: both frontier and wall
mourned: together they became of no strength.

Teth. 9 Her gates are sunck to the ground; he has marred and broken into
shevers all her bars; her King and her princes are among heathen that To. 2.
have no Law; also her prophets find no vision from the Eternal.

Iod 10 The Elders of the daughter Sio^ sit on the ground, they be silent; they
cast up dust upon their head; they put on sackcloth. The virgins of Jerusalem
ha^g down their heads to the ground.

Caph. 11. Mine eyes are spent by tears; my bowels are disquieted; my liver is
powered upon the ground; for the breach of the daughter of my people; while
infant and suckling faint in the streets of the of the town.

Lamed. 12 To their mothers they say where is Eb. corn.
bread wine; and when they faint as the slain in the streates of the city; when
they power out their souls in the bosom of their mothers.

Mem. 13 What testimony shall I bring for thee, what shall I liken to thee, o
daughter Jerusalem? what shall I compare with thee, that I may comfort thee, o
daughter virgin Sion? For thy breach is great as the seas. Who can heal thee;

Nun. 14 Thy prophets have looked out for thee things vain, and which have
lost the saltnes: they have not discovered thine iniquity, to turn away thy
captivity; but they have looked out for thee, prophecies of dispersion.

Samech. 15 All that pass by the way clap their hands, they hiss and wagge
their head at the daughter Jerusalem. Is this the city of which they said: ps.
48.
the perfection of fayrnes, the joy of all the earth;

Phe. 16 All thy enemies gape with their mouth against thee: they hiss and
gnash the teeth: they say, we have devoured: this now is the day which we have
expected, we have found, we have seen.

Ain. 17 The Eternal has done that which he purposed: he has performed his
word, as he ordained of old time: he has broken down, and nothing spared* and
he has made the enemy to rejoice over thee: he has exalted the horn of thy
adversaries.

Sade. 18 Their heart will cry unto the Lord: O wall of daughter Sion, power
down tears like a river day and night: take thee no rest: nor let the apple
of thine eye leave off.

Koph. 19 Eb. Kumi (...). Marc. 5. 41.
Arise, break out on the night at the first watch: pour out thy heart like
water before the face of the Lord: lift up thine hands unto him for the life
of thy children, which faint for hungre, in the corner of every streat.

Resh. Deuteronomy. 28.
20 See o Eternal and behold with whom thou have dealt thus. Should women eat
their own fruict; infants that may be spanned; should sacrificer and prophet
be killed in the temple of the Lord?

Schin 21 They lie in the streates, Deuteronomy. 32.
on the ground, young and old: my virgins and young men fall by the sword: thou
do kill in the day of thine anger; thou do make a slaughter; thou do
nothing spare.

Tau. 22 Thou call, as in a day of assembly, Ps. 31 14. Ier. 6. 25 20. 3.
and 10 and 46. 5. and 49. 29.
my fears from round about; and there was in the day of the anger of the
Eternal none escaped or remnant. Them, whom I could spanne, and brought up,
my enemy has consumed.

Chap. 3.
Aleph. Jeremy tells his own misery: after wicked Ioakim brent his
Lamentations, and sought to kill him, and ^a^uc and he prophecieth how he
shall be used by the Sacrific^rs wickedness in sedelias times: This Chapter was
added to the first book.
1. I am the man that has seen affliction by the rod of his wrath.

Aleph 2 Me has he led and caused to go into darkness and not light.

Aleph 3 He is wholly bent, he turns his hand against me all the day.

Beth. 4 He has made my flesh and my skin wax old; he has bruised all my bones.

Beth 5 Ier. 32.
He has built round about me, and he has compassed me with gall, and wearynes

Beth 6 In Ps ^43. Ier. 38.
dark places has he set me, as the dead for ever.

Gimel. 7. He has made a wall about me, that I cannot get out: he has laid an
heavy chain upon me.

Gimel 8 Though I cry, and call pitiously he shuts out my prayer.

Gimel 9 He has walled in my ways with squared stones; and turned away my
paths.

Daleth 10 A bear lying in wait, is he unto me; a Lion in a secret place.

Daleth 11 My ways has he made thorny; and he has torn me; he has made me
desolate.

Daleth. 12 He has bent his bow, and set me as a mark for an arrow.

Heh 13 He has shot into my reins the shaftes of his quiver.

Heh 14 (...). 1. Cor 4. we are made a spectacle of the world.
I am become a laughter to all my people: their song all the day.

Heh. 15 He has filled me with bitterness. he has made me dronk with wormwood.

Vau 16 And he has burst my teeth with pible stones: he has turned me on my
face in ashes.

Vau 17 And my soul is cast off from peace: I have forgotten the good.

Vau 18 And I thought in my self, my state is undone, and my hope from the
Enall.

Zain. 19 Remember my affliction, and my vexation, worm wood and gall.

Zain 20 My soul shall still remember them, and pray within me full heavily.

Zain 21 I will set this to my heart wherefore I shall hope:

Cheth. 22 It is the mercy of the Eternal that we are not Ps. 64. 7.
consumed, because his co^passions are not spent,

Cheth 23 Because they be new every morning, because thy fidelity is great,

Cheth 24 The Eternal is my portion, says my soul: Therefore I will trust in
him.

Teth. 25 The Eternal is good to them that wayt on him: to the soul that will
seek unto him.

Teth 26 It is good that a man trust and expect for the salvation of the
Eternal.

Teth 27 It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth.

Iod 26 He will sit alone, and be still, because HE has laid it upon him.

Iod 27 He will lay his face to the ground, that there may be hope.

Iod 28 He will Mat. 5.
give his cheek to the striker, he will be filled with reproaches.

Caph 29 For the Eternal will not cast off for ever.

Caph 30 For though he make sorrowful he will also have compassion: according
to the riches of his grace.

Caph 31 For he does not grieve from his own heart, nor make sorrowful the
sons of man.

Lamed 32 To stamp under his feet all the prisoners of the earth,

Lamed 33 To overthrow the right of a man before the face of the Highest,

Lamed 34 To subvert a man in his cause, the Lord likes not.

Mem. 37 Who is he that says, that any thing falls out, which the Lord
commanded not?

Mem. 38 From the mouth of the highest comes not the evell and the good?

Mem 39 What should living man grudge, any person after his sin:

Nun 40 Let us search and try our ways, and return unto the Eternal.

Nun 41 Let us lift up our heart with Mat. 6.
our hands unto El. Eb used but here: for all the Lamentations.
God which is in heaven.

Nun 42 We have trespassed and rebelled: thou have not forgiven.

Samech. 43 Thou have covered thy self in anger, and do persecute us: thou
have killed, nothing sparing.

Samech. 44 Thou have covered thy self with a cloud: that prayer should not
pass through.

Samech. S. Paul translates this. 1. Cor. 4.
45 Thou have made Himself, and Baruc, and Vriah.
us the offscouring and refuse in the midst of the people.

Pe 46 All our enemies open their mouths against us.

Pe 47 Fear and pit is come upon us: ruin and breach.

Pe 48 My eye runs with rivers of water for the breach of the daughter of my
people.

Ain. 49 Mine ey flows and cannot cease: because there is no rest:

Ain 50 Until the Eternal look down and behold from heaven.

Ain 51 Mine eye works into my soul for all the daughters of my city.

Sade 52 Mine enemies have without cause chased me as a bird.

Sade 53 They have cut off my life in the dungeo^ and they have cast a stone
upon me. Ier. ^8. 6.


Sade 54 Waters swim over my head, I said, I am cut off.

Koph 55 I have called upon thy name o Eternal out of the low dungeon.

Koph 56 Thou did hear my voice, Ier. 38.
hide not thine ear from my release; at my prayer.

Koph. 57 Thou drewest near in the day that I called upon thee: thou saydest:
fear not.

Resh 58 O Lord thou have pleaded the cause of my soul, thou have redeemed my
life.

Resh 59 Thou have seen, o Eternal, my wrong: Judge my right.

Resh 60 Thou have seen all their vengeance, al their devises against me.

Shin 61 Thou have heard their reproching, o Eternal, all their devises
against me.

Shin 62 The lips of The Sacrificers that held Jeremy guilty of death for
saying that Babell should destroy the city. Ier. 38.
them that stand up against me: and their meditation against me all the day.

Shin 63 Their Ps. 139. 2.
lying down, and rising up, do thou behold: I am become They thought it so
strange that Salomons race and kingdom should fall.
their sonnet.

Tau 64 Thou will S. Paul translateth this verse against Alexander the
Copper-smith. 2. Tim. 4.
reward them, o Eternal, according to the works of their hands.

Tau 65 Thou will give them a bursting of heart: thy heavy curse will be upon
them.

Tau 66 Thou will persecute in anger, and rid Jeremy Chapter 24. told how the men
of the third captivity should come to nothing. And Ezekiel prophesied only in
their days: but they would take no warning. This threefold Alphabet ends in
their threefold and absolute destruction. Yet Ezra was of that captivity. But
an infant. And of Anathoth cursed by Jeremy, by repentance 128 returned. Ezra,
2.
them from under the heavens of the Eternal.

Chap. 4.
Aleph. 1 HOw is the gold dimmed, how is the pure one name of gold in Eb.
cethem changed: how be the holy stones powered out at the corner of all streats.

Beth 2 The children of Sion the precious, valewed as the Fesse ore, how are
they reckoned as earthen vessels, the work of the potters hand.

Gimel. 3 Even the Dragons open their breast, they give suck to their whelps:
the daughter of my people is like the cruel: as Job. 39 14.
the ostrich in the wilderness.

Daleth 4 The tongue of the suckling cleaves unto his throat for thirst: the
infants ask for bread, none does break it to them.

He 5 They that fed delicately lie desolate in the streats; they which were
brought up in scarlet embrace the donge.

Vau 6 And the punishment of the daughter of my people passes the penalty of
Sodom, which was overthrowen as in a moment; and no hands stayed upon her.

Zain 7 Her Nazarites were purer then snow, whyter then milk; they were in
color redder then the carbuncles; they were polished like the Saphir.

Cheth 8 Their visage is darker then a coal; they cannot be known in the
streats; their skin sticks to their bones; it is as dry as a stick.

Teth 9 The slain by the sword are better then the slain by hunger. For they
wast away perced by wanting the fruictes of the field.

Iod 10 The hands of the pitiful women seth their own children; they became
their meat, in the breach of the daughter of my people.

Caph 11 The Eternal has accomplished his indignation; he has powered out his
hot anger; and he has kindled a fire in Sion, which has eaten up her
foundations.

Lamed 12 The Kings of the earth, and all that dwell in the world, would not
beleve that the adversary should enter the gates of Jerusalem.

Mem 13 For the sins of her prophets, for the iniquityes of her Sacrificers,
which shed within her the blood of the just:

Nun 14 The blind stumble in the streat: they are polluted with blood: that
men might not touch their garments.

Samech 15 Give place, o polluted, they cried unto them, give place, give
place: touch not: when they took flight, yet they stumbled upon others. Among
the heathen it was said: they shall no longer have a dwelling.

Pe 16 The face of the Eternal has scattered them: he will no more regard
the^. They respect not the person of the Sacrificers, they pity not the Elders.

Ain 17 Even yet our eyes are spent at our vain help: In our waiting we wait
for a nation that cannot save.

Sade 18 They chase our steps that we cannot go in the streates: our end is
approached: our days are fulfilled: for our end is come.

Koph. 19. Our persecuters are swifter then the egles of the sky, on the
mountains they pursue us, in the plain fields they lay wait for us.

Resh 20 The spirit Josias: the King: killed by Pharao Necho.
of our nostrels the anointed of the Eternal was caught in their trap: of
whom we said, in his shadow shall we live among the nations.

Shin 21 Rejoice and be glad o daughter From Esaw to the Herodes Edom hated
Jacob. and no less then ten prophecies are against them: As Barbinel notes
upon Obedias.
Edom, which dwell in the Land of Huz. Over thee also the cup shall pass:
thou shall be drunk and show thy nakedness.

Tau 22 Thy punishment is accomplished, o daughter Sion: He will no As in Dan.
9. 490 years they held their land in Gods favor.
more carry thee away: he will visit thine iniquity, o daughter Edo^: he will
discover thy sins.

Chap. 5.
1 REmember o Eternal, what has befallen us: consider and behold our reproach.

2 Our inheritance is turned to strangers: our houses roaliants.

3 We are become orphans, fatherles: our mothers are as widows.

4 Our water do we drink by money, and our wood comes by price.

5 Our necks are under persecution: we are weary; we have no rest.

6 We gave our hands to Egypt, to Assure, for to be satisfied with bread.

7 Our fathers have sinned; they are no more; we bear their punishment.

8 Servants rule over us; none rescueth from their hand.

9 By our lives we get our bread; for the sword of the plain fields.

10 Our skin is as black as an oven: for the burning of hunger.

11 They defile the women in Sion: the virgins in the cities of Judah.

12 The princes are hanged by their hand: the Persons Deuteronomy. 28. 21.
of the Elders are not honored.

13 The young men they take to grind: and the boys fail under the wood.

14 The Elders have ceased from the gate: the young men from their songs:

15 The joy of our heart has ceased; our dance is turned into mourning.

16 The crown of our head is fallen* woe now unto us that we have sinned.

17 For this our heart is sick; for these things our eyes be dim.

18 For mount Sion which is desolate; the foxes walk upon it.

19 Thou o Eternal continuest for ever; thy throne from age to age.

20 Wherefore do thou forget us for ever, and forsake us so long time.

21 Turn us, o Eternal unto thee, and we shall return: renew our days as of
old.

22 But thou have greatly hated us: thou have been exceedingly angry against us.

Of four repeated verses.
Turn us, o Eternal unto thee, and we shall return: renew our days as of
old.

The verse 21 is one of the four which in the Massoreth Bible are Printed as a
postscript for better memory: an other is the last save one in Ecclesiastes: an
other the last save one in Esaias: the fourth, the last save one in Malachi, as I
noted upon Ecclesiastes. These sayings conteyne the main of the writers. That
in Ecclesiastes bids us look for all happiness in the world to come: that of
Esaias tells how all Moses policy shall end. That of Malachy shows how John
Baptist shall begin the New Testament. And this of Jeremy tells that God will
begin a new state for his People. Upon that they studied in Babylon fifty
years: and they made themselves a golden age: knowing that the kingdom of
Christ was in sufferings. Afterward they are plainly told of the true kingdom:
and be renewed, as of old. This verse was geven in the beginning of the
captivity for a comfort that way.

Finis.

