The whole Psalter translated into English Meter, which contains an hundredth
and fifty Psalms. The first Quinquagene.

Quoniam omnis terre Deus: Psallite sapienter.

Psalm. 47. Imprinted at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate, beneath
S. Martyns.

CVM GRATIA ET PRIVILEGIO Regiae Maiestatis, per Decennium.



Ad Lectorem.
HEc quicunque legis, tu flexu and acumine vocis
In numeros numeros doctis accentibus effer,
Affectusque impone legens, distinctio sensum
Auget, and ignauis dant interualla vigorem.
To the Reader.
OF thee good friend: thus much I crave,
These few requests I say:
No brows to bend: but first with save,
To judge by like assay.
And if ye spy: as much ye may,
where strayd amiss I have:
To mend where I: went out of way,
with art more sad and grave.
But read it round: and hacke it not,
as iumblyng short with long:
Express them sound: and rack them not,
as learners use among.
Accent in place: your voice as needth,
note number, point, and time:
Both life and grace: good reading breedth,
flat verse it reysth sublime.
Observe the train: the ceasure mark,
To rest with note in close:
Rythmedogrell plain: as dogs do bark,
ye make it else to lose.
Read often enough: well spell the line,
less iarr to hear by use:
If verse be rough: no fault is mine,
if ye the ear abuse*
But princepall thing* your lute to tune,
that heart may sing in cord:
Your voice and string: so fine to prune,
to love and serve the Lord.
Paul. Ephe. 5. Col. 3.
Sing Psalms and hymns: and songs on hye,
To God your selves among:
But sing in heart: make melodye,
To God give thanks in song.
James. V.
IF sad ye be: and bear the cross,
In faith pray ye contrite:
If glad ye be: and feel no loss,
Sing Psalms of thanks aright.
David. Psalm. 33.47.68.
IN Lute and Harp: rejoice to sing,
Sing Psalms in decachorde:
Of all the earth: since God is King,
Sing wisely fear the Lord.
Jesus Syrach. 44.
THe fathers old: both sought and found,
Sweet musikes moodes full fine:
The Scripture songs: they did expound,
Their hearts were all divine.
Jesus Syrach. 32.
WHo knowledge loves: teach him thy lore,
No music hinder thou:
Where hearing wanth: spare words the more,
And modesty allow.
Of the virtue of Psalms.
WHat man has heart: in heaviness
With sundry cares oppressed:
And would have help: in redines,
To heal his thoughtfull breast.
And yet by man: in sueertie,
for Phisike want his cure:
Thus set in hard: perplexity,
To God yet trusting sure.
Let him behold: the melody,
of David's blissful harp:
In Psalms there find: his remedy,
He may of care so sharp.
If forreyne foe: or ennemy,
Has wasted all thy coasts:
No help thou can: have suerly,
more strong to dawnt his boastes.
If thieves thy goods: have caught in net,
And have made thee full bare:
In Psalms thy mind: if thou do set,
they will thy loss repair.
If wrung thou be: by tyranny,
And banishte out of land:
Thou may releaue: thy misery,
Content by Psalms to stand.
If train be laid: all craftily,
In spite to trap thy way:
Take David's lore: than redily,
And bid thy foes go play*
Thou mournst and sighest: in doulefull heart,
by death thy children gone:
If Psalms thou take: in ghostly part,
They will assuage thy moan.
In house and land: if poor thou lie,
down cast on both thy knees:
Here may thou have: recovery,
for all that thou can leese.
If panges and pains: both sharp and fell,
with gripes thy body wrynges:
Sweet David's harp: can ease thee well,
for it good Phisike singes.
If borne thou be: enuiouslie,
In skorne and great disdain:
No patron thou: can better spy,
then David's life and reign.
Thy hie degree: is low deiect,
by fortunes turnyng blast:
If David's state: thou see reject,
thou shall be less aghast.
Thy fields lie all: in baren sort,
by burning Sun his heat:
To David's wells: if thou resort,
His dewes thy soil shall weete.
Again if they: be overflowed,
By rage of water streams:
If David's Psalms: thou make thine own,
Thy soil must feel his beams.
(O foolish men: that mark the sky,
The Stars and Planets gate:
By them to search: their destenie,
and so repose their state.)
And thus what woe: or misery,
may move or freat thy heart:
In Psalms thou may: have remedy,
to bear all pain and smart.
Not bear them well: I only say,
but them expel full strong:
Who like in heart: can them defraie,
as David did among.
Not thus alone: have thou thine ease,
of worldly grief and pain:
But here thou may: all souls disease,
by comfort sweet restrain.
So deep in sin: no wight can be,
no conscience so thrall:
But pressed relief: here may he see,
to reyse his deadly fall.
No wight can be: so burdenous,
man's senses hard to press:
But Psalms that be: so virtuous,
can soon the weight redress.
Now go and search: the Discipline,
of mortal men so vain:
Who taught by wit: or sort divine,
of them these helps to gain.
So foul shall thou: deceived be,
to trust their rules and laws:
As dreamers be: which think to see,
all wealth within their claws.
Go now to men: and beg their art,
in sickness thee to save:
By means untrue: to heal thy smart,
where God thy heart should have.
This Prophet here: forbids thee,
thus once from God to stray:
Even he that harpth: all melody,
of godly wisdoms way.
For what thou readst: Saint Austen holdth,
in law or stories true:
In Proverbs wise: or prophets old,
the Psalm does it renew.
Both what is past: and what to come,
the psalm does it perform:
It is a law: in perfect some
to manners them to form.
Though Scripture book: says Athanase,
of virtue rule it be:
Status any marum in Psalmis.
Yet Psalter book: of soul it hase,
the state for each degree.
In other books: where man does look,
but others words sees he:
As proper has: this only book,
most words his own to be.
It is a glass: a myrrour bright,
for soul to see his state:
A garden fair: all fully dight,
with herbs most delicate.
A treasure house: ye may repute,
this book of all good lore:
All wholesome salve: to distribute,
to each man's grief and sore.
For who delyghth: them well to sing:
his mind shall feel a grace:
Of sin both dulde: the cursed sting:
and virtue come in place.
The Psalms says he: in verse be fold:
and tuned by music sweet:
The ear to please: of young and old,
so David thought it meet.
Josephus says: Lib. 7. Judah. anti. c. 12. Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 16*17.
and Philo wrighth,
That David Metres made:
Quinquemetres: some trimetres,
by musikes tract and trade.
For that that is: commended both,
with tune and time aright:
It sinkth more sweet: and deeper goth,
in heart of man's delight.
O wondrous fact: of God I say,
in his devise so plain:
Though we be seen: but sing and play,
the soul yet winth his gain.
The Psalter book: of Psalterie,
an instrument so namde:
For that the Psalms: most commonly,
to it were tuned and framde.
And who that noth: and has it waighde,
how Psalms by Meter go:
Can blame no art: by rythme so laid,
nor music squard thereto.
Thus Bernard sweet: in holy read,
Christ's death reuolued in rythme:
So Ambrose sage: and worthy Bid,
thought this no shame or crime.
And what is verse: but rythme to name,
in Lattine, French, or Greek:
Our English verse: I count the same,
though all men hit not leke.
The Psalmist stayde: with tuned song,
the rage of minds aghast:
As David did: with harp among,
to Saul in furye cast.
With golden stringes: such harmony,
his harp so sweet did wrest:
That he relieud: his phrenesie,
whom wicked sprites possessed.
Both Powle and James: in their devise,
bid Psalms with voice to use:
In hymns and songs: sweet exercise,
To God in heart to muse.
Who tunes and rythms: as ask their kinds,
to Psalms can frame I say:
The sweet in strength: for that he fyndes,
must bear the bell away.
The singyng man: and Poet must,
with grave divine concur:
As David's skill: all three discust,
when he his harp did stir.
Depart ye songs: lascivious,
from lute, from harp depart:
Give place to Psalms: most virtuous,
and solace there your heart.
Ye songs so nice: ye sonnets all,
of lothly lovers lays:
Ye work men's minds: but bitter gall,
by phansies peuishe plays.
My readers all: now must I pray,
in worth to take my pain:
I meant but well: as well they may,
mean well, and win some gain.
As some beforne: the like has playde,
of Psalms to pike their choice:
And them in ryme: so fine have laid,
to sing with musikes voice.
Then some in prose: most learnedly,
have tournd the phrase and word:
Some gloss have made: full diversely,
yet sang in good accord.
That some in verse: right latenly,
have strunged David's harp:
They have their lauds: most worthily,
their pains ought no man carpe.
Herein because: all men's delight,
been diverse found in mind:
I tournd the Psalms: all whole in sight,
in rythmes of diverse kind.
And where at first: I secret meant,
but them my self to sing:
Yet friends requests: made me relent,
thus them abroad to bring.
Express his pen: in exercise,
who list, he may, that can:
By this is wrought: no prejudice,
I trust to God or man.
Uerse clear to frame: was first pretense,
I followed Hierome next:
Third Chaldey gloss: fourth seventy sense,
rythme, time, were fifth and sext.
So Uatablus: and Pellicane,
in truth were not reiecte:
Nor Munster yet: or Pagnyne plain,
in tongues were fled for sect.
From Ludolfe that: Carthusian,
the collect most deryueth:
No praise pardy: to any man,
to hide, by whom he thriueth.
Who more will search: how here it goes,
let him the Hebrew try:
Where words were skant: with texts or gloss
that want I did supplye:
And that in some: reports be found,
and words as spare put to:
They may be lest: the sense yet sound,
though Meter varyth so.
If some be blamde: to rythme to thick,
transpose the words ye may:
The less by right: may Momus kick,
the beam so soon away.
If some will carpe: so light a warke,
grave Psalms in rythmes displayde: 2. Reg. 6.

Let Michol hear: before the arc,
how David daunced and playde.
Where senses strange: often diversely,
be seen in writers skill:
I did yet pen: my fantasy,
let others do their will.
Presuming not: yet thus in sight,
as I could this do best:
My Lute was set: in whole delight,
these tunes divine to wrest.
And yet good friend: bear thou with me,
though words be straynd among:
The verse and phrase: forced brevity,
I sude yet sense most strong.
Require not here: great difference,
In words so often the same:
Although to feel: great violence,
I might not change the name.
Conceive in heart: no grief to sore,
words old so often to vewe:
Thy gain thereby: is wrought the more,
though words be never new.
How can we feel: sacietie,
in fourmes of godly speech:
The soul which feelth: adversity,
loves playnes health to seache.
Among gay words: that heart were seen,
thereto she bends first:
She does not gase: on bushe so green,
or suckth the post for thirst.
Right path of truth: most earnestly,
God grant we hold in word:
To live co God unfeignedly,
In heart with one accord.
Us song should move: as sprite thereby,
might tunes in concord sing:
God grant these Psalms: might edify,
that is the chiefest thing.
So else if time: should reason rule,
and senses brute have will:
To fleshly lust: might voice recule,
and soul bide barren still.
No pastime vain: to sing in voice,
or thus to set in rythme:
Repyne not friend: at this my choice,
vouch save my restfull time.
Uerse hard in mouth: while often I chowde,
I spied therein no wast:
Clear sent to mind: more sweetly flowde,
erst thus not felt in taste.
Nor yet of this: I do repent,
since thus my heart I easde:
Judge Reader well: my good intent,
so think that God be pleased.
All shrewd to judge: thy neighbors cause,
may thee the like befall:
Even fear thou God: and keep his laws,
now this is end of all.
Athanasius in Psalmos.
I Do not a little meruel at, and commend thy constant purpose in Christ
(trende Marcellyne) not only for that thou do so valiantly bear this
present adversity, An. Dom. ^79.
wherein thou have suffered right many paynefull displesures: as, for that thou
have not cast of and renounced thy continual study: for when I enquired of the
bearer of thy letters how thou spe^tst thy life after thy sickness, I
understood plainly, yt thou wholly appliest all thy diligence to holy
scripture, but more specially to the book of ye psalms laboring with thy
self to this end, that thou might comprehend the secret hidden sense of
every psalm: for which thing I must love thee so much the more, for that I my
self bear so great affection toward that book, as to none almost so much in
all the whole Scripture, the rather so enflamed thereunto by the persuasion of
that ancient old Father Philoponus, who once in a learned discourse that he
vouchsaued to make unto me, made evident demonstration: that whatsoever was
contained abroad in the whole Scripture, was fullye reported in the Psalter
book: So that the matter of the v. books of Moses, the substance of the iij.
books following, the books of the kings with their supplementes, all the
mysteries of Christ, and of the vocation of the Gentiles, which were treated by
the Prophets in their books severally: The books of the Psalms (being well
resembled to a pleasant garden of all deliciousnes) did universally by Meter
express them all, by playing them as it were sweetly upon musical
instruments. In which his conference he also noted, that the book of the
Psalms had this peculiar grace and observation chieflye by it self, that
beside other matters by which it has an agreeable proportion and fellowship,
with other books of the scriptures, it has this in a marvelous consideration
proper to himself alone (says he) that it co^teyneth the motions, the
mutations, the alterations of every man's heart and conscience described and
lively painted to his own sight, so that if a man list, he might easily gather
out thereof certain considerations of himself as out of a bright glass and
plain pattern set before his face, so thereby to refourme himself as he red
therein: for in other books (says he) only we hear the precepts of the law,
what ought to be done, and what undone, we hear the matter of prophecy, to
the intent we should not be ignorant of Christ's coming unto us in the
flesh: furthermore, we read the histories, whereby the acts of kings and
holy fathers might be known and brought to remembrance, but in the books of
the Psalms, over and above that, we learn and hear all these foresaid things
sufficiently: ther^ every one may see and perceive the motions and affections
of his own heart and soul, both to see whereto he is inclined, and where he is
streyned and pinched, so that he may have a very good form of prayer
therefore, not that these motions should lightly fall from his consideration,
as soon as he have hard them but to learn how he may heal these his
affections and passions, by word and by deed. There be in other books words
and sentences, which forbid diverse vices and enormities, but this book
prescribes a form, how a man may be clear of them, and how to avoid them.
As in example, we be bidden to repent us, and to do penance, and told further
we be, that truly to repent us, is to cease from sinning: but in this book is
there a form set out unto us, how to do penance, and what is meet to be said
presently at hand in that case and state. Furthermore S. Paul teaches in his
doctrine, that tribulation works patience, patience brings in probation,
and probation breadeth hope, and hope is never ashamed, but in the psalm is
set out, how tribulation should be borne, and by what ways every one of us is
tried and proved, and what kind of prayer we may use, to come by this hope in
God. Also it is commanded in precept, that we should give thanks in all
things. Now does the Psalm express, what is meet to be said when we do
give thanks. Moreover, we hear of other places of Scripture, that all such as
will live godly in Christ, shall suffer persecution and adversity: where in the
Psalms we learn how we should be affected when we be exilde, and there to
flee from tyranny. In them we learn who they be which suffer persecution, and
what thankful prayers they ought to offer to God, which be escaped and
delivered from the pursuit of their enemies. So likewise we be charged to
bless the Lord, and to laud him in all things, but how and in what form we
should praise god, and what words we should pronounce in our lauds singing, we
have that instruction in the Psalms only. To be short, we may there find in
every case as may rise most divine songs and ballets, perteinyng as well to our
self in person, as to our doings and state whatsoever we be in. There is also
in the Psalms (said he) one other marvelous thing to be expended: For when in
other books of Scripture beside, we read such things as the holy fathers
either spoke in word or did leave in writing (we so read them as though we
seemed but to recite and rehearse them only, and they which do hear us when
we read such matters, straight way they conceive in their imagination that
they be other men's words and deeds that they hear, and in such sort are they
enflamed to those matters so rehearsed that they bend themselves to be as
followers to them to counterfayte the like. But whosoever take this book in
his hand, he reputeth and thinks all the words he reads (except the
words of prophecy) to be as his very own words spoken in his own person,
yea and whosoever do but here them read, he is so affected to them, as he were
the very man that read them, or first spoke them, and so is disposed to ward
the words of the verses, when they be uttered, as they were properlye his
own only words, first by him conceived and pronounced. So that he shall not
esteem the^ in a singular respect, referring those words to the persons of the
Patriarchs, or of Moses, or of any of the prophets: for as much as the psalm
without respect of persons do express as well the righteous man, which obeys
gods precepts, as the sinners which transgress his precepts, with all their
deeds they do. So that all manner of men must needs be comprehended in them,
as of whom the Psalms make so plain mention. And verily me think the
psalms be to him, which sings the^ as a glass where he may behold the
whole affections of his soul, which so uttered to his own sight, he may
declare forth to other: for who that hears a man readyng such kind of
poesy, undoubtedly he takes it so to himself as it were only of himself,
and so while conscience has remorse in the hearing, he is thereby compunct and
styrred to repentance, and sometime hearing what grace the psalm does express
as done by Christ to his electes, and what hope they may have in him, he must
needs in the contemplation thereof begin to rejoice in his conscience and give
God his thanks. whereupon he which shall sing the third psalm, in beholding
his own adversity, he shall so report it, as though they were his own very
words, who that shall rehearse the 10. and 17. psalms. He shall so utter
them, as he pronounced his own hope and trust, who shall read the 51. psalm,
so speaks he the words of a penitent contrite heart, as they were his in
deed. And who that prays the 54.56.57.142. he is not so disposed in them, as
though he should speak of some other which suffers persecution, but as he
himself felt the same in deed, and therefore, sings to God those words as
his very own words and petitions.

Of the use and virtue of the Psalms by Athanasius.
ALl holy Scripture is certainly the teacher of all virtue and of the true
faith: but the book of the Psalms does express after a certain manner the
very state and condition of the soul. For as he which entendeth to present
himself to a king, first will compounde with himself to set in good order
both his gesture and speech, least else he might be reputed rude and ignorant.
Even so does this godly book inform all such as be desirous to lead their
life in virtue, and to know the life of our savior, which he led in his
bodily conversation, putting them in mind in the reading thereof: First, of all
their affections and passions, whereto their soul is inclined. Moreover, the
Psalms form and teach every man with diverse instructions, whereby he may
not only espy the affections and state of his soul, and to win a good
pattern and discipline, how he may please God, but also with what form of
words he may amend himself, and how to give God due thanks least if he
should speak otherwise then were convenient, he should fall into impiety by
his vnreuerent estimation to God, for we must all make an accounte to the
judge, as well of our evil deeds, as of our idle words.

Blessed is that man which has not walked in the counsel of the ungodly. 1.
Blessed is he whose unrighteousness is forgeuen 32. Blessed is he that
considers the poor 41. Blessed is the man that fears the Lord 112.
Blessed are all they that fear the Lord. 128.

If thou would rebuke the Jews for their spite they Why do the Heathen rage.
2.

If thine own familiars pursue thee: and if many Lord how are they increased.
3. Hear my prayer O Lord. 143.

If thus in thy trouble thou have called on God, and have Hear me when I call.
4. I am well pleased. 116. I waited patiently for the Lord. 40.

If that thou see that evil men lay snares for thee, and Ponder my words O
Lord. 5.

If thou feel Gods dreadful threats, and see thy self O Lord rebuke me
not 6. O Lord rebuke me not. 38. O Lord God of my salvation. 88

If any take counsel against thee, as Achitophell did O Lord my God. 7.

If thou in beholding the grace of our savior so spread O Lord our governor. 8.

If so again thou will sing in giving thanks to God O Lord our governor. 8.

If thou would have thine adversary kept back, and I will give thanks. 9.

If thou perceyuest God to be wroth with his people, Why standst thou so far
of. 10. O God thou have cast us out. 60. O God wherefore. ^4.

If any man would put thee in fear, have thou thy hope In the Lord put I my
trust. 1^.

If thou beholdst the pride of many men, and see malice to abound, so that
there is no godliness among men repair thou to God and say. Help me Lord. 12.

How long O Lord. 13. Hear my crying O God. 61. My God my God. 22.

The fool has said. 14.53.

Lord who shall dwell in thy tabernacle. 15.

Preserve me O God. 16. Hear the right O Lord. 17. Bow down thine ear. 86.
Lord I call upon thee. 141.

I will love thee O Lord. 18. My song shall be of the loving kindenes of the
Lord. 89.

The heavens declare. 19. and 24.

The Lord hear thee. 20.

The Lord is my shepeheard. 23.

Unto thee O Lord. 25. and thou shall espy them to labor but in vain against
thee.

Be thou my Judge. 26. Plead thou my cause. 35. Give sentence with me. 43.

If they press more fiercely on thee, though they be in The Lord is my light.
27.

If they be yet so impudent that lay wait against thee Unto thee will I cry.
28.

If thou will exhort and provoke kings and princes, to submit Bring unto the
Lord. 29. God stands in the congregation. 82

If thou renuest and build thine house: both of thy I will magnify thee. 30.
Great is the Lord. 48. Except the Lord build the house. 127.

If thou see thy self had in hate for the truths sake In thee O Lord have I
put my trust. 31

If thou beholdst such as be baptized and so delivered Blessed is he whose
unrighteousness is forgeuen. 32.

If you delightest to sing among many, call together righteous Rejoice in the
Lord. 33

If by chance thou fallest among thine enemies, and I will always give
thanks. 34.

If thou see wicked men contend among themselves My heart shows me. 36. and
thou shall perceive that they be to themselves their own occasion of sinnyng.

If thou see how wicked men do much wickedness and that yet simple folk
praise such, when thou will admonish any man not to follow them, to be like
unto them because they shall be shortly rooted out and destroyed: speak to
thy self and to other. Fret not thy self. 37.

I said I will take heed. 39.

Blessed is he that considers the poor. 41.

Like as the heart desires the water brooks. 42.

We have heard with our ears. 44. Hear my law. 78. My song shall be always of
the loving kindness of the Lord. 89. Hear my prayer. 102. O give thanks unto
the Lord. 106. and 107. When Israel came out of Egypt. 114.

God is our hope and strength. 46.

O clap your hands together. 47. Great is the Lore. 48.

their God Mammon so inordinately, sing: O hear this all ye people. 49.

If thou would call upon the blind world for their The Lord the mighty God.
50.

If thou have sinned and art converted and moved to Have mercy upon me. 51.

If thou have suffered false accusation before the king, Why boast thou thy
self. 52.

If they which persecute thee with accusations would Save me O God. 54.69. and
Be merciful unto me O God. 57.

If thine adversaries which trouble thee do vpbrayde Hear my prayer O God. 55.

If persecution come fierce on thee, and vnbewares Be merciful unto me O God.
57. I cried unto the Lord with my voice. 142.

If thou wylt confound hypocrites which make glorious Are your minds set upon
right. 58.

If thy pursuers command thy house to be watched Deliver me from mine
enemies. 59.

If thine enemies cruelly assault thee, and would catch thy life, offer the
subjection to God against them, and be of good comfort: for the more they
rage, the more shall God subdue them and say. My soul truly. 62.

O God thou art my God, earlye will I seek thee. 63.

Hear my cryeng O God. 61. Let God arise. 68. Have thee O God to deliver me.
70. In thee O Lord. 71.

Thou O God art praised. 65. O be joyful. 66.

God be merciful. 67

O sing unto the Lord a new song. 96. and 98.

In thee O Lord have I put my trust. 71. Unto thee O God. 75. It is a good
thing to give thanks. 92. O give thanks unto the Lord. 105.118.136. O God my
heart. 108. I will give thanks to the Lord with my whole heart. 111. and 138.

Truly God is loving. 73.

I will cry to God. 77.

such agany and say: O God the Heathen are come. 79.

If thou will inform any man with the mystery of Hear O thou shepeheard. 80.

If thou will sing to the Lord, call together Gods servants Sing we merely.
81. O come let us sing unto the Lord. 95. Behold now praise the Lord. 134.

If the adversaries flock together on every side, and Hold not thy tongue. 83.

If thou castest an eye to gods house and to his eternal O how amiable are thy
dwellinges: 84.

If Gods wrath be ceased, and the captivity ended, Lord thou art become
grations. 85. I believed and therefore will I speak. 116. in the end. In Iurye
is God known. 76.

If thou will rebuke Paynyms and heretics, for that Bow down thine ear O
Lord. 86. Not to us O Lord, not unto us. 115.

If thou will see and know the dissent that the catholic Her foundations are
upon the holy hills. 87.

If thou would know how Moses prayde to God, Lord thou hust been our
refuge. 90

If thou would comfort thy self and others in true suffer a soul to be
confounded, but to make it bold and without fear for Gods protection, sing:
Who so dwells under the fence of the almighty shall abide. 91.

It is a good thing to give thanks to the lord. 92.

Blessed are those that are undefiled in the way. 119.

O come let us sing unto the Lord. 95.

O sing unto the Lord a new song. 96. and 98.

O Lord God to whom vengeance belongs. 94. for then when the Lord was
betrayed, he began to take vengeance on death, and to triumph of it:
therefore when thou read the gospel. Wherein thou hear the Jews to take
counsel against the Lord and that he stands boldly against the Devil, then
sing the ^oresayd Psalm. O Lord God.

The lord is king. 93. for then was the house of Gods church builded and
groundlye founded, though the enemies went about to hinder it: for which
cause sing to God the songs of triumphante victory, with the said Psalm, and
with. Many a time have they fought against me. 129. and with O sing unto the
lord a new song. 98.

O sing unto the lord. 96.

The lord is king. 97.

faith and obedience, when thou have first persuaded the^ to confess
themself, sing: O be joyful in the lord. 100. melius. 147.

If thou do acknowledge in God his judicial power My song shall be of mercy
and judgment. 101.

If for the imbecillitie of thy nature thou art weary with Hear my prayer O
lord. 102

If thou will give thanks to God as it is most congruent Praise the lord O my
soul. 103. and 104.

If thou will praise God, and also know how and for Praise the lord ye
servants. 113. O praise the lord ye heathen. 117. Behold how good. 133.
Praise the lord O my soul. 146. O praise the lord for it is a good thing to
praise. and Praise the lord O Jerusalem. 147. O praise the lord of heaven.
148. O sing unto the lord. 149. O praise God in his holiness. 150.

If thou have says to such things as God speaks, and I believed and therefore
I will speak. 116. in the end.

If thou feel thy self to rise upward in degrees of

If thou be holden in thraldom under straying By the waters of Babylon we
sat down and wept. 137.

O lord thou have searched me out and known me. 139.

Deliver me O lord. 140.

Lord I call upon thee. 141. I cried unto the lord. 142. Hear my prayer O
lord. 143.

Blessed be the lord. 144.

I will magnify thee O god my king. 145.

O give thanks. 105.106. 107. I will give thanks. 111. Blessed is the man.
112. Praise the lord. 113. When Israel came out of Aegipt. 114. I am well
pleased. 115. O praise the lord. 117. O laud the name of the lord. 135. O
give thanks. 136 Praise the lord O my soul. 146. O praise the lord. 147 O
praise the lord of heaven. 148. O sing unto the lord. 149. O praise god in
his holiness. 150.

Unto thee O lord will I lift up my soul. 25. My heart is endityng of a good
matter. 45. The lord said unto my lord. 110

In the lord put I my trust. 11. Save me O God. 69.

Why do the Heathen rage. 2. Blessed are those that are undefiled in the way.
119.

Such as express the malicious enmities of the Jews Hear my prayer O god.
55. Hold not thy tongue. 109. The king shall rejoice. 21. The lord even the
most mighty god. 50. Give the king the iudgementee. 72. Save me O god. 69.

Such as describe his agony in his passion, the cruelty My god my god. 22. O
lord god. 88. and that he suffered not for himself but for us, is declared in
the Psalm aforesaid 88. the seventh verse saying: Thine indignation lies hard
upon me. and in the 69. psalm, in the fourth verse: I paid the things that I
never took.

Such as expound his dominion and his presence in the Preserve me O god. 16.

Such as show his glorious resurrection of body be: The earth is the lords.
24. O clap your hands together. 47.

Such as set out his ascension into heaven be these. The lord is king. 93. O
sing unto the lord. 96.98. The 99.

And that he sits on the right hand of his father: The The lord said to my
lord, sit thou on my right hand.

Such as show that he have authority of his father to Thou shalt rebuke the
Heathen and destroy the ungodly. Give the king the judgments. 72. The lord
even the most mighty god. 50 God stands in the congregation. 82.

Thus thou may by readyng these, behold Christ's mysteries, and what
benefits the Lord has given us by his Nativity and passion.

Lo such is the style and form of the Psalms for man's use and commodity.

It is to be remembered that the beginning of the psalms in this table, be
according to the translation commonly used in churches, and not of the
translation hereafter following.

Psalmi quodammodo sic constituti vt alij sint: Prophetici. Eruditorij:
Consolatorij: Precatorij: Eucharistici: Mixti.
8 Prophetici Hij prophetant de Jesus Christo: ecclesia and etiam sanctorum
afflictionibus. Dicuntur in narratione. Exponunt felicitatem Dei prouidentiam,
etc. Continentes. Promis^iones de liberandis pijs and perden dis Impijs
Historia^ rerum descriptiones beatitudinis. 1 Narratorij Expositorij 1
Eruditorij Hij docent quid faciendum quid omittendum. Adhortantur ad bona
opera. Imprecantur impijs confusionem etc. Continentes. Commendationes verbi
Dei, vituperationes traditionum. Condemnationes malorum hominum. 7 Adhortatorij
2 Comminatorij Consolatorij Hij consolantur in aduersis. Gratulantur in
prosperis. Inuitant ad iustitiamgratitudum, etc. Continentes. Exempla
consolationu^ and tentationum patrum. Mutuas piorum congratulationes. 4
Gratulatorij 5 Inuitatorij 6 Deprecatori^ Hij orant inuocant Obsecrantur and
implorant opem Dei in necessitate. Expostulant de malorum prosperitate.
Continentes. Petitiones, Deplorationes propter peccata and calamitates.
Accusationes, propter vim aduersarior^^^ 7 Obsecratorij 3 Interpollatorij 4
Eucharistici Hij gratias agunt. Continentes. Confessiones beneficiorum Dei and
mirabilium operum eius Exultationes de p^rta victoria and liberatione.
Laudatorij Celebrant opera Dei. 5 Exultatorij Letantur etc. Mixti Hij plures
simul vel omnes locos habent. Videlicet, prophetiam, doctrinam, consolationem,
orationem, grotiarum, actionem

Qui prophetant 21.22.24.45.47.72.93.55.97. Qui denunciant and vaticinantur
11.110. Qui narrant 19.49.50.73.78.87.89.105.114.115.127.137 Qui narrant and
confitentur 26.121.139.131. Qui describunt beatitudinem. 1.32.41.112.128. Qui
docent virtutes 15.101.119.125.133. Qui admonent 37. Qui exhortantur
29.33.96.98.103.104. Qui exhortantur cum cantico 145.81.66. Qui minanter
imprecantur. 109.64.94.120.74.70.71. Qui veterum exempla habent
60.77.108.135.80. Qui in domino gloriantur 23.27.40.42.62.76.84.99.122. Qui
alacriter canunt 91.118. Qui prouocant ad iustitiam 58.82. Qui inuitant ad
gratitudines. 67.95.107.134. Qui precantur 5.68.90.102.132.141.17.20.28. Qui
confitentur and plorant peccatum, 9.51.6.39.38.75.106.136.143.130, Qui inuocant
4.54.142.3.69.123. Qui ad euentum votum and obsecrationem
7.12.13.16.25.27.31.35.43.44.57.59.61.83.86.88.140. Qui ad euentum solum
3.26.69.70.71.79.80.123.130.131. Qui accusant impios. 2.10.14.36.52.53.79. Qui
in action gratiarum sunt 8.18.30.34.46.63.85.116.124.126.129. Qui cum hymnis
canunt 48.65.92.144. Qui laudem anunciant 113.117.146.147.148.149.150.138 111.
Qui exultat de resurrectione 56. Qui exultant tantum. 100.
VEteres quatuor ta^tum musicos modos (quos tropos sieve tonos vocarunt)
celebres habuerunt. Scilicet Prothum: ^
Dentrum: Tritum and tetradum, quibus recentiores superinstruxeru^t alios
quatuor quasi collaterales, and hos ex gentium peculiaribus affectibus sic
vocabulis notarunt vt Dorium, Phrigium, Lydium etc. quibus modis maxim
trahebantur. Nam morum similitudine molliores in molliore gaudent tono, and
natura hilares, Iucundioribus, tristes grauioribus modis delectantur, iuxta
innatam quandam proportionem affectuum animorum, cum diuer sitate
consonantiarum quibus occulta familiaritate excitantur.

Octo tonorum distinctiones and proprietates.
Prothus Dorius Primus, modeste and religiose graditur. Hipodorius Secundus,
severe cum maiestate tonat.
Dentrus Phrigius Tertius, Indignatur and acerbe insultat. Hipophrigius
Quartus, quasi adulatur and allicit.
Tritus Lydius Quintus, Iucunde delectat and ridet. Hipolidius Sextus,
Lachrimatur and plorat.
Tetradus Mixolidius Septimus Incitate progreditur and imperios^ Hipomixolidius
Octauus, decenter and moderate incedit.

ALl manner of Scripture for that it is inspierde from God above (as necessary
for instruction) is expressed by the determination of the holy ghost to the
intent that all men in commen, Anno Domini. 380.
should gather out thereof (as out of a storehouse of Phisike for the soul)
peculiar remedies, every one of us for our own infirmities: for such Phisike
as a certain writer testifies will restrain great and many sins. Now where
as the Prophets have doctrine proper to themselves, and the books of the
divine histories matter by themself: the law have his peculiar form of
teaching, and the Prouerbiall books have their several kind of exhortations.
The book of the psalms comprehend in it self, the whole commodity of all
their doctrines aforesaid, for it prophecieth of things to come, it recites
the histories, it shows law for the governance of life, it teaches what
ought to be done, and to be short, it is a common storehouse of al good
doctrine, which does aptly distribute matter to every man peculiar to himself
for it heals not only old festured wounds of the soul, but also can give
quick remedy to such as be newly made. It stays and comfort that member
which is sick and corrupt, and preserves that which is whole and sound, it
plucketh up by the roots (as much as is possible) all such evil affections as
do reign so tirannically in the whole course of man's life, which effect it
works as it were with agreeable delectation instilling pleasantly into our
heart, all sober honestye. For where as the holy ghost perceived that mankind
was hardly trained to virtue, and that we be very negligent in things
concerning the true life in deed, by reason of our inclination to worldly
pleasures and delectations: What has he invented? he has mixte in his form
of doctrine the delectation of music, to the intent that the commodity of the
doctrine might secretlye steal into us, while our ears be touched with the
pleasauntnes of the melody. Even much like as expert Physicians use to do,
when they minister their bitter potions to sick children, least they should
abhor their health, for the bitterness of their drinks, for the most part they
annointe the brinkes of the cups with honey. And for this end be these
sweet and harmonious songs devised for us, that such as be children either by
age or children by manners, should in deed have their souls wholesomely
instructed, though for the time they seem but to sing only. Furthermore, we
see commonly that they which be of the vulgar people, or of rude and gross
nature, can not redely bear away and keep in mind the grave precepts of the
Apostles or Prophets, where yet the divine psalms they sing at home in their
houses, and abroad they can record them. And certainly though a man were never
so furiouslye raging in ire and wrath, yet as soon as he hear the sweet tunes
of the Psalms, straight way is he assuaged of his fury, and must depart more
quiet in mind by reason of the melody. The psalm is the rest of the soul,
the rod of peace, it stilleth and pacifieth the ragyng bellows of the mind,
for it does assuage and mollify that irefull power and passion of the soul,
it induces chastity, where reigned wantonness, it makes amity, where was
discord, it knitteth friends together, it returns enemies to an unity
again: For who can long repute him as an enemy, with whom he joins himself
in lifting up his voice to God in prayer. So that the song of the Psalm
works charity, which is the greatest treasure of all goodness that can be,
devising by this inducement of concord singing the knot and bond of unity, so
joining the people together after the similitude of a quiere in their unity of
singing.

The Psalm is an introduction to beginners, it is a furtherer to them which go
forward to virtue, it is to the perfect man a stable foundation to rest on, it
is the sweet voice, the only mouth of the spouse of Christ the church. The
psalm does cheer the feastfull day, the better to rejoice, it works that
same heaviness which is heaviness to godwarde: for the psalm is able to pluck
out tears of any man's heart: though it be never so stony hard.

O wise and merueilous devise of our heavenly scholemaister, who could invent,
that we should both pleasantly sing and therewith profitably learn, where by
wholesome doctrine might be the deper printed in us: for that which with
violence and force is learned of us, is not wont to abide long, but that which
enters into us with pleasure, and by loving grace it continues the longer in
our hearts, it sticks the faster in our memories.

Now as for the matter and content of the Psalm, what is there, but that a man
may learn it there? Is not there to be learned the valiauntnes of fortitude?
The righteousness of justice? The sobernes of temperance? The perfection of
prudence? The form of penance? The measure of patience? Yea and whatsoever
sounds to virtue or perfection is it not there taught?

In the Psalm is contained absolute divinity, both prophecy of christ's
coming in the flesh. The thretfull warninges of the judgment. The hope of our
rising again. The fear of Gods punishments. The promises of everlasting
joy. The revelation of all mysteries, all these be laid and couched up in the
Psalter book, as in a great treasure house common to al men. Which book the
Prophet David framed most aptly (among many instruments of music) to agree
with the instrumente called the Psaltrie. Signifieng thereby (as I can judge)
the grace of God to come from boue by the inspiration of the holy ghost: for
this only instrumente of all other have the cause of his sound from his upper
part, where the harp or the lute by their wrestes have their sound coming
forth out of the lower part of them, but the psalterye put forth the swetenes
of his harmonious melody from the upper part, teaching us thereby that we
should set our whole study and meditation in heavenly things above, and not by
the sweetenes of the tunes to be borne down to the sensual affections and
delectations of the flesh.

Chrisostomus. In Psalmos. to.2. ho. 15.
AS this life is sustained by meat, which it does straighte way ministre after
it be received, even so if we bestow our endeavor to virtuous acts, we shall
obtain Gods liuelye sprite, by the possession whereof, we shall flow in all
good works, which on the other side if we perform not, the said sprite will
flee from us, of whom if we be destitute, we must needs halte in any doing we
have: for if this holy sprite should depart from us, consequently will the
wicked sprite enter, which thing may clearly be learned in Saul who was sore
haunted therewith. Now what should it help us, though we be not vexed so
extreemely with such a spirit, as Saul was vexed, if we be tormented and
choked by malicious acts and wretched deeds: We have therefore much need to
have David's harp, to sing to our soul some divine harmony, as well gotten out
of the Prophet, as also flowing from good life, so that whether of them both we
use, that is either to sing some Psalm or song of David, or yet to begin a
virtuous life, we shall thereby destroy the devils power in us, as readily as
David was wont to assuage Saules fury with his harp: And this shall be our
principal remedy to obtain all righteousness to the health of our soul, yea
beside this the devil shall rage so much the more in fury, when he sees that
for all his sinful suggestions, we be nothing drawn to evil, for these
ungracious and unclean spirits are even in the beginning of their temptations
afraid, least we should have occasion given us by their wicked suggestions to
turn our whole intent the rather to work some laudable act. So that when
they see we stand and persevere steadfastly, they rage the more, for that they
be so frustrate in all their busy care they have to hurt us. Whereupon, after
our victory so gotten, let us sing out some song of thanks, the farther to
beat from us that devilish importune assault of our enemy for the devil in
deed cannot utterly deprive us of heaven, no, for many times he is a furderer
to us, by his warryng against us, so that we be watching warely at him, and use
sobernes to win heaven, from whence wilfully many be cast by their ungracious
and sinful living. And verily, whatsoever he be that offends of purpose, and
that of set will rages in mischief, is a plain devil, and is not worthy to
have pardon or favor of any man. Let us therefore sing to that soul that is
affected with other sayings of holy scripture, specially David's Psalms: In
such wise that the outward voice may edify the inward mind. Doubtless,
when we instruct and frame our tongue thus to sing, the conscience of man must
needs be ashamed if he do not preserve that thing at the leact which he
syngeth, though his disposition inclines to the contrary. So that by this
mean we shall not win that commodity, but many other commodities, as we
shall for example rehearse. First, the prophet David wrote not only of things
that were to come, but he disputes of these visible creatures, and of the
invisible form of the firmament. Now if peradventure thou desire to be
taught whether this firmament shall stand firmly in that same state that it is
of now or no, will not David straightway answer thee and say. The heavens
shall wax old as does a garment, and thou O Lord shall change them as a
vesture, Psalm. 102.
for they shall be transposed. Also if thou desire to hear of the facion of
the heavens, by him may thou understand it writing and grass for beasts to
the service of man. Why the Moon or into any evil affection of mind, these
psalms will much avail to thy comfort. If thou be sliden into sin, there
shalt thou find many salues to restore thee, if thou be ouerladen with
poverty, or with any adversity, in them shall thou see to appear many
restfull havens for thy refuge, if thou be in state of righteousness, there
may thou find how to keep thee in suertie thereof, if thou be in state of
sin, there shall thou be put in much hope to be pardoned, and if thou
suffer many displesures for righteousness sake, thou shalt hear David
confess O my soul, and why do thou so vex me? Trust in the lord for I
will give him thanks. Over this, if thou spiest many men to have great
commendation, without any cause of deserving, speak thou thus to thy self. Be
not envious at wicked

Reuolue therefore such things as these be often with thy self and by the
instruction of them get thee some understanding, for there is a large wild
field of wise sentences comprehended in these sayings aforesaid: yea in every
one of them though they be brieflye thus vewed and perused by us. But if ye
will more exactly search out these sentences of David, ye shall perceive that
they will sprede into plentuous store of gostly treasure. Over and beyond that,
every man that will, may by these sayings, purge himself of evil vices, how
fast so ever they have root within them. If he will neither give ear redily
to envy, neither yet to bitter malice, if he will despise riches, if he set
light by adversity, by trouble, by poverty, if he set not much by his life at
all.

This manner of contemplation will far drive from us all vice and sin, for the
subduing of which vices, we must give our thanks to God: and thus by
despising these transitory goods we may win the goods everlasting, and
through patience in adversity, and by the consolation we have in holy
scripture, we may have hope, and at the last to enjoy the bliss to come
thorough Jesus Christ, to whom with the father and the holy ghost, be all honor
world without end. Amen.

Augustinus. lib. confess. 10. cap. 33.
THe delectation of the ears had once bound me strongly, Anno Domini. 430.
yea they had subdued me, but thou (O Lord) did unbind me, and made me
free.

Now in these sweet tunes which thy holy scriptures give so lively a grace
unto, when they be sunge with the sweet voice of cunning men: I do confess
that I am somewhat delectably holden, but yet not for that I would dwell and
abide still there, but that my affection might be stirred to rise upward when
I see my time. But yet these tunes and notes thus liuelye made by the dittie of
thy word, the rather do they desire to have place in me, yea they would my
heart should have them in great affiance, which yet I have not peradventure
altogether as is most agreeable. For sometime me think I esteem this musical
harmony more hiely then is convenient, as when I feel my heart to be more
vehemently stirred to ardent devotion by those holy words, when they be so set
out with song then if they were not so sunge: For this I perceive, that all the
affections of our sprites in their diversity of natural disposition, to have
their peculier properties and facions, as well in respect of the voice, as of
the tunes. So that by a secret familiarity and similitude that is betwixt
them, the minds of men be diversely affected and ravished, but the delectation
of my flesh, though it ought not to subdue my mind with to much vain and
feeble sensuality, yet it often deceyueth me, in that my brute senses do not
wait on Lady Reason, as modestlye content to come after her, but they strive
to go before her and would be her guide, and other cause can they allege none,
but for that by her at the first they were brought in and admitted. And thus I
offend vnbewares, though afterward I perceive it. So again while that I
eschew this subtle deceit of my senses, beyond due measure I err on the other
side, by overmuch sower gravity, yea so far otherwhiles, that I would all such
sweet harmony of delectable singing, wherewith David's Psalter is used to be
sung, utterly removed not from mine own ears only, but banished out of the
church to, as judging that way to be more sure and furthest from peril of
abuse, that I remember has been often told me done of Athanasius bishop of
Alexandria, An. D. 379
who caused the readers of the quier to recite the psalms in such even
equality of the voice, that it appeared to be more like a reading then a
singing. How be it, when I call to mind what tears I wept at the hearing of
the songs which thy church and congregation did use to sing to thee (O Lord)
what time I first began to recover my faith unto thee (as me think even yet
still I feel my self ravished, not yet with the singing, but with the sweet
matter which is sung, specially, when it is sung with full expressed voices and
with decent harmony) then again I judge this ordinance of singing to be much
profitable and expedient. And thus am I tossed betwixt the danger of vain
delectation and the experience of wholesome edification. But more am I inclined
and induced to allow this custom of singing in the church (although I speak
not this as in sentence diffinitiue) that the weaker sort of men, might by
such delectation of the ear, rise up to godly affection and heavenly
devotion. Notwithstanding, when I feel this in my self that the melody moves
me more then the matter of the dittie which is sung. I confess then that I
offend mortally therein, and then wish I rather not to hear such singyng then
so to hear it.

Josephus. lib. antiq. Iud. 7. ca. 12.
WHen David was at rest from wars and other such dangers, Anno Domini. 100.
and had now peace at will, he composed songs and hymns to God of diverse
Metres, some trimetres and some quinquemetres, and caused diverse instruments to
be made, and he taught the Levites how they should in their diversities sing
and play hymns on the Saboth and other feastiuall days: Of which instruments
some as the harp were loud and shirle made of ten stringes, which were
touched with the one end of the wrest. Nabla was of xij. stringes and tunes,
and was playde on with the fingers. There were also Cymbals of brass both
large and broad.

Eusebius. li. 2. cap. 16.17. in hist. ecclesiastica.
Anno Domini 50.
PHilo an Hebrewe borne, who as report goes, came to Rome in Emperor Claudius
days, and saw Peter the Apostle, and was his auditor hearing the doctrine he
preached, among other things that he wrate of the christian sect, says thus.
The christen people have in all places of their assemblies, houses dedicated
wholye to prayer, into the which they resort aparte by themself, and there
use to have their mysteries ministered in most honest and chaste life, wherein
they bring nothing that serve for eating and drinking, or for any other
corporal necessity of the body, but only the books of Gods law and of the
Prophets, and hymns made to God and such like things as these be, by which
discipline and virtuous exercise, they be together edified, and so by daily
continual diligence they attain to very perfect life. Furthermore, they do not
only understand the ancient hymns of their Elders* but they themselves
devise new to Gods honor, which they sing with all kind of grave numbers
and rythmes in a comely honest manner, and with sweet harmony. And furthermore
Philo says, Niceph. li. 2. ca. 16.
our hymns are so song with us, that where one (as Chanter) sings before one
verse orderly and comely by observing the certentie of his numbers, all the
multitude beside, secretlye geuyng ear unto him, at the last sing together
the latter parts of the hymns.

Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 33. in hist. eccl.
PLinius the second, who bare office in a certain province under Traiane the
Emperor, Anno Domini. 94.
perceiving how from day to day were slain great numbers of the christian
people, being much moved at the slaughter of them: reported to the said
Emperor that thousands of people almost innumerable were daily put to death,
in whom was spyed no crime at any time done or committed, nor any thing else
contrary to the Roman laws, saving this only that they used to sing before
day to one Christ, as to a God their morning hymns. But as for adulteries and
such other crimes they utterly abhord, and kept themselves clear from them, and
lived otherwise customably after the common laws. Traiane the Emperor by this
man's advertisement made decree by authority of his rescript, that the
Christians should no more be serched for, and except that any of them offered
themselves, else not to be punished.

Hieronimus in prologo galeato.
Certain Psalms as the 36.110.111.114. and the 144. although they be written
and composed in diverse Metres, nevertheless they be interlaced with the
Alphabet letters of all one number.

Eusebius de prepara. euange. lib. 11. ca. 3.
WHo had the perfect skill of the Hebrews tongue should perceive that they had
among them many right eloquent orators, for they have verses and Poesies made
by most exquisite art and cunning, as that great Canticle of Moses, and the
118. Psalm of David, be composed in Heroical Meter, which is called verse
Exametre. They have also such other, as well trimetres and tetrametres, which
as concerning the composition of them be devised most eloquently,
substantially, and pleasantly, and as concerning the sense and matter of them,
no man's writing is to be compared with them, for in them are expressed gods
words, and words of mere truth, where in be contained godly doctrine,
knowledge of notable things, and wholesome conclusions.

Idem Eusebius. lib. 12. ca. 14.
PLato that divine Philosoper, judged that Metres ought to be sung, for (says
he) disciplines be fit for education and bringyng up of Children, to train
them to a right life and lawful conversation. To the intent therefore that
childrens minds might follow the law, that therewith they should both joy and
mourn, let them learn Metres and songs, and let them sing often such. Wherein
be contained the commendations and conde^nations of such things which the laws
commend and condemn, because the tender wits and years of children, can not
comprise the reason of virtue, they be well prepared thereto by play and song.
Not without good skill therefore do we (Christian men) use, that children do
learn the the canticles of the Prophets.

ca. 15.
Necessary it were (as the said Plato affirms) that Poets (who be inuenters
of such Meters) were forced by law, that in their verses, when they be
describing a blessed man in felicity, to praise none other for such, but him
that is a good man, modest and rightful in his doing, whether he be little or
great, rich or poor. And that whosoever were a wrong doer, to call him miser,
though he were richer then Cresus or Mydas. Let these Poets therefore call no
man a blessed man, except he come by these goods (which be so called of the
vulgar people) both rightfully, and also rightfully dispend the same. And such
matters being compiled in their rythmes and verses were good for the youth to
learn. As David inspierd with the grace of gods holy sprite so described a
blessed man in his Odys and songs long before these days, teaching who is
truly a blessed man, and who is contrary. In the beginning of his Psalter
saying: Blessed is that man which walks not in the counsayles of wicked men,
etc.

And furthermore writes Plato, that it is a grace specially belonging to God
himself, ca. 16.
or to some perfect man chosen by him: well to use rythmes and verses, and
therefore it were good that there were diligent law provided for them that they
should have no other respect, but to set out virtue, to which end all Music
should be applied. As it was so provided among the Hebrews, who were
restrained from receiving any other hymns and songs, then such as were
composed by the Prophets, who were inspired by the holy ghost. Furthermore, I
grant to Plato in this thing which is commonly spoken, that delectation and
pleasant satisfieng of the ear is judge to music. But I say that is best
music, which delights good men and learned men, and specially such as excel
others in virtue. And therefore virtue must be judge in this case, specially
fortitude and prudence, and not Music to be esteemed good by the allowance of
the rude people which be led and blinded with ignorance and with cowardly base
affections. For so among the Jews of old time, the judgment of divine
songs, was not permitted to the multitude, but some there were, though they
were but a few, which judged these things by divine inspiration, who had the
authority to consecrate (as I might say) and to approve the books of the
Prophets, as also to disalowe and to reject such as they thought disagreable
from Gods holy spirit.

Basilius in concione ad adolescentes.
Fol. 250.
TImotheus the Musitio^, so excelled in that art and faculty, that he could
stir up a man's mind to anger by his roughe and sower harmony, and could
assuage and release them again by a soft kind of harmony at his will and
pleasure: Of whom it is written, that when he had at a time before Alexander
sung the Phrigian harmony, he excited him as he was at supper, to run to
war, and again by his most gentle and easy harmony, brought him again to
the table among his gestes. Such strenght and virtue is set in the true use of
music. As Pithagoras once by chance was in company among a sort of wanto^ and
drunken folk, whereupon, he bad the mynstrell to change his song and to rebuke
their dissolute wantonness with playeng to them the Dorian harmony, by which
music they were cast so in a shame of themself, that they threw from the^
their garlands, and fled home all confused for their lightness, where before by
the harmony he played, they raged in fury as men out of their wits. So much
avails it to have our ears filled with virtuous or vicious songs, wherefore
I would young men should have so little a do with such songs of music, as now
a days be most set by as they would with any thing most monstrous and
vicious, ye let them ensue that other kind of musical songs much better
then the other, and stirs us to better things. I mean that was used of
David the Poet of holy songs, by which he pacified the mind of Saul when
he was in his raging fury.

That the whole multitude of the church sang their Psalms together, testifies
S. Ambrose li. exameron. 3. ca. 5.
WHat other thing is this consent and congregation of waters, but as it were
the harmony and singing together of the people, whereupon, the church is well
compared oftentimes to the Seas, which church by the first rushyng in and
entry of the people, gusheth out as it were waters about all the porches and
allies of the temple, and after that in the prayer of all the billows meting
together make a great noise by the responsaries and answers of the Psalms, as
when there rises up as it were a concord rebounde of the waters by the
singing of men, women, virgins and children.

Nicephorus tells that the catholic church from the beginning, has received
the custom of singing Psalms and hymns.
ANd the ancient church even from the apostles have received the manner of
Anthems, Li. 13. ca. 8
that is, to sing their songs by sides and by course. And it is said that
divine Ignatius, which was the third Bishop in Antioche church, from Peter the
Apostle who lived also a long time with the Apostles, being in a traunse saw a
new vision, how that the holy angels did extol in praise, the blessed Trinity
with their songs, by course one answering an other. Whereupon, he was the first
that did deliver this form of singing to the church of Antioch, from who^ as
from the spring this custom is spread throughout all churches.

Bernarde in his 312. epistle to Abbate Guido.
IF song be had at any time, let it be full of gravity that it neither sound
out wantonness nor rudenes, let it be so sweet that it be not light, let it so
delighte the ears, that it move the hearts in asswaging heaviness, and
tempering ire. Let it not deprive the letter of the sense, but rather augment
it: For it is no light loss of spiritual grace, to be carried away from the
profitablenes of the sense, with the lightness of the notes, and to be more
careful upon the chanting of the voice, then to give heed to the matter. Lo
thus you see what is comely to come into the hearing of the church and what he
is that is the author of the same.

Henry Haward Earl of Surrie in his Ecclesiast^^es.
All such as enterprise,
To put new things in ure:
Of them that scorn shall their devise,
May well themselves assure.
THis book is called of the Seventy Interpretres a Psalter, by the name of a
Musical instrument: Whereunto (as to some others) these Psalms were sunge.
Luke. 20.44. Peter act. 1. Math. 22.
The Hebrews name it a book of lauds or praises. Christ our Lord calls it
Psalms and the book of Psalms: As does also Peter the Apostle, out of the
which because our Savior Christ takes his testimonies, he shows that they
were written by the inspiration of the holy ghost.

This first Psalm is as a Preface of the book to exhort all men to the
study of Scriptures to get heavenly wisdom, and it teaches that godly men be
blessed of God, and wicked men be accursed of him whose ends shall be
thereafter.

The first Psalm.
The Argument.
Beatus vir.
This Psalm in sense of men both good and bad:
Triades.
Shewth difference of men both good and bad:
It shewth their fruits their ends both glad and sad
Ambulare. Stare. Sedere.
Their hearts pursuites their ends both glad and sad
Impij. Pectatores. Derisores.
1
MAn blessed no doubt: who walkth not out,
Consilia. Viae. Cathedrae.
in wicked men's affairs:
And stondth no day: in sinners way,
nor sitth in scorners chayres.
2
But holdth even still: Gods law in will,
with all his hearts delight:
And will him use: on it to muse,
to keep it day and night.
3
He like shall be: the planted tree,
nie set the rivers course:
Which fruth in tide: whose leaves abide,
all prosperth what he doese.
4
Not so, not so: the wicked do,
like dust or chafe they be:
Uphoyst by wind: as light by kind,
from face of earth to see.
5
Therefore these men: so wicked then,
in judgment shall not stand:
Nor sinners be: in company,
of righteous men of hand.
6
The Lord does know: and will auow,
men's ways that are of God:
Where shall decaie: the beaten way,
of wicked men so broad.
The Collecte.
O Blessed father make us to be as fruitful trees before thy presence, so
watered by the dew of thy grace, that we may glorify thee, by the
plenteousnes of sweet fruit in our daily conversation, thorough Christ our
Lord, Amen.

The Argument. Psalm. II.
Of Christ ye see Thus David spoke with us:
A Prophecy Thus David spoke with us:
As merueiling Should rage against him thus
That earthly king Should rage against him thus
1
Quare fremuerunt.
WHy fumeth in sight: The Gentiles spite,
In fury raging stout?
Why takes in hond: the people fond,
Uayne things to bring about?
2
The kings arise: the lords devise,
in counsayles met thereto:
Against the Lord: with false accord,
against his Christ they go.
3
Let us they say: break down their ray,
of all their bonds and cords:
We will renounce: that they pronounce,
their loores as stately lords.
4
But God of might: in heaven so bright,
Shall laugh them all to scorn:
The Lord on hie: shall them defy,
they shall be once forlorn.
5
Then shall his ire: speak all in fire,
to them again therefore:
He shall with threate: their malice beat,
in his displeasure sore.
6
Yet am I set: a king so great,
on Sion hill full fast:
Though me they kill: yet will that hill,
my law and word outcast.
7
Gods words decreed: I (Christ) will sprede
for God thus said to me:
My son I say: thou art, this day,
I have begotten thee.
8
Ask thou of me: I will give thee,
to rule all Gentiles lands:
Thou shall possess: in suernesse,
the world how wide it stondes.
9
With iron rod: as mighty God,
all rebels shall thou bruise:
And break them all: in pieces small,
as sherdes the potters use.
10
Be wise therefore: ye kings the more,
Receive ye wisdoms lore:
Ye judges strong: of right and wrong,
advise you now before.
11
The Lord in fear: your service bear,
with dread to him rejoice:
Let rages be: resist not ye,
him serve with joyful voice.
12
The son kiss ye: lest wroth he be,
lose not the way of rest:
For when his ire: is set on fire,
who trust in him be blessed.
The Collecte.
Break a sonder O Lord the bonds of our sins that we may be faithfully
yoked to the precepts of thy law, to serve thee in fear and reverence, to the
laud of thy holy name. Through Christ. etc.

The Argument. Psalm. III.
This Psalm endight may comfort have of God.
How troubled sprite may comfort have of God.
As woe be gone meke David fled so broad.
Domine quid.
From Absalon meke David fled so broad.
1
O Lord how ill: increase they still,
that trouble me so sore?
Full many rise: in spiteful wise,
against me more and more.
2
Right many one: when I do moan,
alas my soul they fret:
Sela
They say I have: no God to save,
oh this temptation great.
3
But yet O Lord: thou will accord,
as shield to fence my soul:
My worship clear: thou art full dear,
my head thou will extol.
4
I did but moan: with voice alone,
to God my Lord in will:
He heard me just: as I did trust,
Sela
from his so holy hill.
5
I laid me down: I slept full sound,
and up I rose again:
For God me kept: where safe I slept,
his grace did me sustain.
6
To be afraid: or yet dismayde,
for thousands ten, what need?
They go about: to drive me out,
but God will dull their speed.
7
Up Lord save me: my God most free,
on cheek thou smitest my foes:
Well have thou chrust: their teeth to dust,
of such as wicked goes.
8
Unto the Lord: by truths record,
belongth all saving health:
Thy blessing hand: so nie does stand,
to work thy peoples wealth.
The Collecte.
Pour us O Lord thy heavenly benediction, that we may be armed with the faith
of the resurrection not to fear any army of men set against us. Through
Christ. etc.

The Argument. Psalm. IIII.
The church in stress complaynth to God full sore.
For heaviness complaynth to God full sore.
Cum inuocarem.
The good have ease they sacrifice therefore.
Of their disease they sacrifice therefore.
1
O God so hie: hear when I cry,
my right is all in thee:
Thou take me fro: al troublous woe
have mercy hear thou me.
2
Ye sons of men: how long again,
will ye blaspheme my name?
Why triumph ye: in vanity?
Sela
why seek ye lies to frame?
3
Know this ye foes: that God has chose,
himself all godly men:
And when I call: this Lord of all,
he straight will hear me then.
4
Of wrathful ire: refrain the fire,
sin not but muse in heart:
Upon your beds: keep still your heds,
deaths day recount in part.
5
Look ye arise: in sacrifice,
of righteousness in skill:
And put your trust: in God so just,
but tame your fleshly will.
6
There many be: that say, O see,
who good to us can do?
Lift up thy face: of cherefull grace,
on us O Lord to go.
7
Thou chearst my heart: as God thou art,
with joy of thy good sprite:
Since corn and wine: with oil so fine,
of theirs increast in sight.
8
I will me lay: in peace I say,
my sleep to take full well:
I hope for thou: O Lord as now,
makst me most safe to dwell.
The Collecte.
Hear us O merciful Lord, and have compassion on us in our tribulations, and
where thou alone art most worthily magnified in thy people: grant that we may
have spiritual gladness in our hearts, by the hope of the heavenly reward.
Through etc.

The Argument. Psalm. V.
The church in sprite, for all oppressed in pain
Makes suit aright, for all oppressed in pain
Here Christ aduanceth the Jews he blamth again.
Verba mea
His heritaunce the Jews he blamth again.
1
EXpend O Lord: my plaint of word,
in grief that I do make:
My musing mind: recount most kind
give ear for thine own sake.
2
O hark my groan: my crying moan,
my king, my God thou art:
Let me not stray: from thee away,
to thee I pray in heart.
3
My voice and vow: thou will allow,
betymes O Lord so free:
In spring of day: I thee will pray,
and shall looks up to thee.
4
This I may vow: the God art thou,
which hate all wickedness:
No malice fell, with thee can dwell,
thou love no cruelnes.
5
Such foolish spite: can bide no sight,
of thy good lovely face:
Thou do defy: their vanity,
who wickedness embrace.
6
Thou shall destroy: and them annoy,
with lies who shame thy word:
Bloudthirsty men: which crafty run,
the Lord has them abhorde.
5
Just will I go: thy house into,
in trust of thy great grace:
In fear I will: do honor still,
against that holy place.
6
O Lord be guide: defend my side,
in thy great righteousness:
Make plain the way: less I do stray,
my foes shall brag the less.
7
Their mouths express: no faithfulness,
their holow hearts be vain:
Wide throat they have: as open grave,
their tongue but lies do feign.
8
Destroy their thought: O God for naught,
their own ways be their shame:
Expel them out: in lies so stout,
who thus blaspheme thy name.
9
Let them rejoice: that trust thy voice,
aye thanks they shall extend:
Who love thy name: shall joy the same,
thou do so them defend.
10
Thou Lord wilt than: give rightwise man,
the heavenly bliss from thence:
Thy favor kind: is not behind,
as them with shield to fence.
The Collecte.
O Merciful father which know the lamentation of a sorrowful heart and
contrited spirit, before it be uttered, infound into us thy holy spirit
always to sue unto thee in all our troubles, defend us with the shield of thy
protection, that we may be found daily attending to thy will and pleasure, to
glorify thy name, through Christ, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. VI.
An earnest cry of men all wrapped in woe
To God on hie of men all wrapped in woe
Dominene in furore.
At last they win, and glad rejoice they so
Gods help for sin and glad rejoice they so
1
O Carpe not sower: thou Lord of power,
my sin in ire to sore:
Nor chasten me: in cruelty,
I pray to thee therefore.
2
But mercy have: my life to save,
O Lord for weak am I:
My bones be vexed: with fear annexed,
thy domes make me to cry.
3
My soul also: is full of woo,
my conscience does quake:
O Lord how long: thy scourge so strong,
shall me thus fearful make.
4
O Lord return: thou see I mourn,
make free my soul to go:
Oh save me now: thy grace auowe,
thy glory standth thereto.
5
In death no man: remember can
thy name to celebrate:
What man thus bound: thy praise can sound
in pit and hell to late.
6
Of groaning so: I weary go,
my bed I nyghtly wash:
My couch with tears: for sinful fear,
I water thus alas.
7
My beuty warmeth: my trouble standth,
mine eyes for thought be dymme:
My zeal for wrath: much magre has,
amyds my foes so brymme.
8
Auaunt ye all: to you I call,
which work all vanity:
The Lord of hosts: has heard your bostes,
and eke my weping cry.
9
This Lord I say: at needful day,
has heard my meke request:
From hence he will: with mercy still,
hear me to give me rest.
10
Mine enemies: all hateful spies,
shall feel both shame and pain:
Gods helping grace: them all shall chase,
to flee swift back again.
The Collecte.
O Most merciful father: which of thine own tender favor art always inclined
to hear all men's peticions. Hear now the humble voice of our mournful
prayers, and grant to our infirmity health perpetual, and as thou vouchsauest
to accept the request of our prayers, so vouchsaue to comfort us still with
the continuance of thy mercy, through Chtist. etc.

The Argument. Psalm. VII.
As Semei at David showed his spite
Full wickedly at David showed his spite
Domine deus meus in te.
So who with lie may pray this Psalm aright.
Is charged hie may pray this Psalm aright.
1
O Lord in thee: my trust I see,
for why my God thou art:
From men untrue: which me pursue
save me and take my part.
2
Lest he devour: my soul so stoure,
as Lion does the sheep:
Lest pieces small: he make of all,
if none be me to keep.
3
O God my Lord: let truth record,
if this in me do stand:
Let it be sought: if guile I wrought,
if evil done has my hand.
4
If I good will: have taken evil,
to friend that friendly dealt:
Yea quit did I: my enemy,
when causeles hate I felt.
5
Then let my foes: work all their woes,
and take my soul in spite:
Sela
Let them confound: my life to ground,
my name in dust to wright.
6
O rise in ire: Lord I desire,
my wrathful foes repress:
Stir up to me: thy set decree,
which once thou did express.
7
So folk in street: on heaps will meet,
in church to praise thy might:
For all their sake: my party take,
raise up thy self on hight.
8
The Lord judges all: as truth befall:
O sentence give my side:
To my desert: stand Lord in heart,
as just my works be tried.
9
Let evil I pray: consume always,
of wicked men the traynes:
Oh guide the just: true God of trust,
thou triest both hearts and raynes.
10
No help of man: obtain I can,
my God is all mine aid:
He them preserves: that well deserves,
whose hearts to right be laid.
11
God judge he is: full right iwis,
both strong and patient:
Who dare provoke: his heavy stroke,
to ire when he, is bent.
12
Except ye turn: your life in form,
his sword he myndth to when:
His bow to bend: he does entend,
it is so ready set.
13
Deaths darts most hard: he has preparde,
against their pride and wrong:
His arrows bright: be pressed to smight,
these persecutors strong.
14
Behold and see: how traueleth he,
to do all wickedly:
Conceived has he: anxietie,
but bear he shall a lie.
15
To delue and dig: a pit so big,
his heart was wholly bent:
But he in pit: shall fall in it,
that he so crafty meant.
16
For just in speed: his wrathful deed,
with him shall meet at gate:
His wickedness: in spitefulnes,
shall fall upon his pate.
17
In heart all whole: I will extol,
this Lord as he deserve:
I will record: this heavenly Lord,
his name I mean to serve.
The Collecte.
ALmighty God searcher of all hearts, deliver us from all them that persecute
us, and grant to our hearts steadfast perseueraunce in patience in the
expectation of thy judgment, so that we revenge not our selves on our enemies,
to prevent thy judgment and commandment, Through Christ, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. VIII.
Here thanks ensue for his great gifts to men
To God most due for his great gifts to men
How Christ deiect and how he raignth again
Domine Dominus noster.
Of cruel sect and how he raignth again
1
O Lord our guide: thy name how wide
in all the world excels?
Thy glory great: thou hie have set,
above the heavenly cells.
2
Babes mouths so yong^: even sucklings tongue
thy laud thou made them tell:
Thy foes to blanke: their threats to danke,
to still thaduenger fell.
3
Thy heavens when I: consider hie,
thy mighty work of hand:
The Moon by night: of Stars the light,
in order how they stand.
4
What thing is man: Lord think I than,
that thou so him regardst?
What is man's child? so pore so mild?
that thou so him rewardst?
5
Thou did abate: his port and state,
more low then angels be:
Thou did him crown: in great renown,
aduanst in dignity.
6
Thou made him sit: as Lord most fit,
of all thy works of hand:
And under cast: all thing thou have,
as his footestoole to stand.
5
Both sheep and cow: the ox to plowe,
thou made for man his love:
The beast in field: both tame and wild,
that man might all improve.
6
All fowls in sky: how hye they fly,
yet stoop for man his need:
All fish in sea: how deep they be,
they rise man's son to feed.
7
O Lord of power: our governor,
how much excelth thy name?
This world so wide: therein what bydeth,
does sprede thy worthy fame?
The Collecte.
MOst puissaunt and bountiful creator, we most humbly beseech thy marvelous
name and power divine, that where thou have made all creatures subject to the
use of man. So vouchsaue to make us mete and worthy subjects to the lowly
service of thy merciful goodness: Through, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. IX.
Thanks here be spyed for tyrauntes just decaie:
To God applied for tyrauntes just decaie:
Who persecute good Christians all day.
consitebor
In hateful suit good Christians all day.
1
DUe thanks with song: I will full long
in heart give Lord to thee:
I will endight: of thy great might,
thy works so wondrous be.
2
I will rejoice: in heart and voice,
full glad in thee O Lord:
Thy name so hie: to magnify,
in song I will accord.
3
For that in have: my foes fled fast,
and back fell all their might:
No better speed: shall them succeed,
but fall from thy good sight.
4
But thou in deed: have maynteined,
my right and eke my cause:
Thy throne is true: thy sentence due,
thou iudgest with equal laws.
5
The heathen sect: well have thou checked,
thou have stroyd wicked men:
Thou have their name: put out with shame,
for aye and ever again.
6
O thou so hye: mine enemy,
thy wastes have now their end:
As city be: destroyed by thee,
their fame with them is shend.
7
But Gods devise: shall stand and rise,
the Lord shall still endure:
In just regard: he has prepared,
his seat to judge us sure.
8
For righteousness: he will express,
when he shall judge the land:
And judge shall he: in equity,
his folk by rightful hand.
9
The Lord I say: will be all day,
a fence for man oppressed:
A refuge sweet: in season meet,
when grief at hand is pressed.
10
Who knowth thy name: will trust the same,
for they thy word do leeke:
For their aduayle: thou will not fail,
all them that thee do seek.
11
O praise the Lord: in psalms accord,
who dwelth in Zion place:
Declare his strength: with words at length
to folk of his good grace.
12
For when in ire* he does enquire,
for blood he them recounth:
He will not yet: the poor forget,
their cries to him do mount.
13
O Lord me save: and mercy have,
expende my woeful state:
How suffer I: mine enemy,
ryd me from death the gate.
14
That I may tell: thy daughters well,
of Zyon all thy praise:
To sprede in street: thy health so sweet,
to joy thy health always.
15
The Heathen be: sonke down ye see,
in pit that they did delue:
Their own set net: their foot has get,
and trapt therewith themselue.
16
The Lord is seen: how he has been,
true judge to wicked bands:
The wicked is: well snarde iwis,
with works of his own hands.
17
The naught shall dwell: even thrust to hell,
if they will not repent:
Yea all the rout: that put God out,
of mind shall foul be shent.
18
For God so wise: will not despise,
always the poor that wayle:
The restfull heart: of mysers smarte,
for ever shall not quayle.
19
Up Lord to stand: lest upper hand,
man get of thy good flock:
The Heathens spite: judge thou in ^ight,
with all their brood and stock.
20
Put them in fear: thy dread to bear,
O Lord themself to see:
As wretched men: how wide they run,
Sela
in error all from thee.
The Collecte.
Lord of all comfort and consolation, fulfill our hearts with thy heavenly
joy, to confess thy name before the powers of this wicked world, and so
assist with thy protection, that we may persist against all our enemies,
finally, to rejoice in thy help and salvation. Through, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. X.
This Psalm dependth it prayth against the proud
Of thothers end it prayth against the proud
Who use their might their end not so allowed.
Vt quid Domine.
To boste in spite their end not so allowed.
1
WHy stondst so far: and art no nar?

When trouble rise: will thou devise
in need to show no grace?
2

the poor in fire is brent:
Let them in wiles: and all their guiles,
be trapt with like intent.
3

be praised at his desire:
With praise all rouse: the covetous,
whom God abhorrth in ire.
4

of God to force right naught:
He takes no care: in welthy fare,
no God in all his thought.
5

thy judgments escape his eyes:
He fears no man: say what he can,
all foes he does despise.
6

tushe, who shall cast me down?
No harm or woo: can chance me to,
my power keeps my renown.
7

he ioynth deceyt and fraud:
Ungodlynes: in folyshnes,
his tongue has under yawde.
8

so close with all the rich:
The just to kill: in peuishe will,
the poor he marketh mich.
9

and lurketh the poor to snatche:
The poor by might: to rauishe quyte,
whom he in net does catch.
10

yet guiles be all his fruits:
That this poor sort: might so resort,
in hands of his deputes.
11

that God forgotten has:
His face away: he turnth (he says)
he sees no poor man's scath.
12

arise, lift up thy hand:
The poor defend: thy might extend,
forget not him in band.
13

provoke almighty God?
Tush thou (they say:) wilt search no day,
their hearts talk thus so broad.
14

to quyte all wrong and stresse:
The poor does stand: to thy good hand,
thou aydst all comfortless.
15

of wicked man so blind:
If thou in time: would search his crime,
no where thou should him find.
16

is king for aye no doubt:
The heathen spyte: shall perish quyte,
from land of his full out.
17

the suits of all the poor:
Their hearts in care: thou did prepare,
thou hardst both day and hour.
18

to help the poor to right:
That earthly man: against them than,
no more might rise in sight.
The Collecte.
O God of all mercy open (we beseech thee) thine ears to our meek confession
of thy name, thou never forsakest them that trust thereto, grant that we may be
delivered from the gates of perpetual death: and finally to escape the craftye
traynes of the temptour. Through etc.

The Argument. Psalm. XI.
Here have thou proof strong faith in storms to stand:
How it behooves strong faith in storms to stand:
Against the train of all the diuelishe band.
In domino confido.
Of errors vain of all the diuelishe band.
1
IN Lord so great: my hope is set,
why than my soul bid ye?
That she should have: as bird aghast,
to hills that desert be?
2
The wicked lo: have bent their bow,
their shaftes in quiver thrust:
To shoot from hye: all priuelye,
at men of heart so just.
3
If earth the ground: tournd vpside down,
though heaven and earth should fall:
The just in woe: what should he do?
but stick to God in all.
4
The Lord is yet: in temple set,
in heaven the Lord has place:
The poor he spyeth: as thence he tries,
men's childerns walks and pase.
5
The Lord alowth: and just auowth,
the rightwise man full well:
His soul defieth: whose heart applies,
in wickedness to dwell.
6
Down he shall rain: to their great pain,
upon th'ungodlies heart:
Snare, brymstone, fire: with tempests ire,
these storms, their cup in part.
7
For as the Lord: is just in word,
so loves he sothfastnes:
His ryghtfull eye: will pleasauntly,
behold all righteousness.
The Collecte.
DIrect thy merciful eyes almighty God, upon the humble state of us thy poor
servants, and fence us with the armor of true faith: So that we escapyng the
darts of all wickedness may be able to keep perpetual equity and
righteousness, to the laud of thy name. Through, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. XII.
This Psalm declarth for truth so fallen to ground
The poor man's care for truth so fallen to ground
When pride bearth sail But God will it confound.
Saluum me fac.
No truth prevail But God will it confound.
1
Help Lord so hye: this case, for why
not one good man is more:
The faithful gone: scant any one,
their children mynished sore.
2
They talk so free: of vanity,
one neighbor neighbor to:
In tongue they gloss: it double gose,
their hearts dissemble so.
3
All lips so vain: God will them strain,
and pluck them up by root:
Oh that he wrung: the boasting tunge,
to tread it underfoot.
4
For thus they rail we will prevail,
our tongues must matters break:
For who dare thus: be Lord to us,
our tongues must only speak.
5
For this the stresse: of comfortless,
for sighs that poor men make:
Now rise will I: says God most hye,
and help their part to take.
6
Gods word is sure: it is as pure,
from earth as silver quit:
Though tryde be gold: in fire seven fold,
his word yet passes it.
7
O Lord so grave: thou us shall save,
and evermore preserve:
From all this route: that be so stout,
for ever thee to serve.
8
These walk most wide: in wicked pride,
all cruelty they frame:
While they so far exalted are,
poor men be put to shame.
The Collecte.
Have mercy of our frailty most loving father, and grant that we may keep
thy holy words with pure and chaste hearts, to escape the manifold deceites of
mad and vain talkers in error. Through. etc.

The Argument. Psalm. XIII.
For patience In trouble David cries
For Gods desence In trouble David cries
Lest deadly might Good hope in God he spieth
Should blind his sight Good hope in God he spieth
1
Vsquequo Domine.
HOw long will thou: forget me now,
for ever Lord, my guide?
How long wylt thou: not me allow,
how long thy face wylt hyde?
2
How long shall I: thus heauely,
in soul seek counsel so?
How long my heart: shall feel this smart,
to be thus vexed with foe.
3
O Lord my God: repress thy rod,
hear now, consider me:
Mine eyes with light: O clear thou bright,
dead sleep lest they do see.
4
Lest that to hye: mine enemy,
might boast of his prevail:
If down I were: this baratter,
would joy to see me quayle.
5
But all my trust: lies fully just,
in thy good mercy still:
My heart thy health: shall joy it self,
Gods goodness laud I will.
The Collecte.
Turn not thy face away from us O God of all might and consolation, lest our
enemies prevail against us, and so endue the hearts of us thy servants with
the rejoicing spirit of thy salvation, that we escape the dreadful sleep of
second death. Through Christ. etc.

The Argument Psalm. XIIII.
This Psalm set out of sinners obstinate
The careless route of sinners obstinate
Dixit insipiens.
How far is side which hold with God debate
They wander wide which hold with God debate
1
THe fool has said: in heart astrayd,
that God there is even none:
In works they are: corrupt so far,
not one does good not one.
2
The Lord casth eye: from heaven to spy,
the trade of Adams brood:
If that as there: some wise man were,
which God would seek so good.
3
But all astray: have take their way,
abominable made:
There is not one: to do well, none
they all from truth decayed.
4
For throtes they have: like open grave,
their tongues have used deceyt:
And vnderslips: their poison lips,
of Aspes the venom beyt.
5
Their mouths do swim: with cursings brim
all bitterness to fill:
Their feet make speed: man's blood to shede,
they force not whom they spyll.
6
Destruction: confusion,
in all their ways do rise:
Of peace no day: they know the way,
Gods fear see not their eyes.
7
Have they no mind: in heart so blind,
in myschiefe how they go?
Who like as meat: my people eat,
and God they call not to.
8
But they shall there: be once in fear,
where naught they feared in deed:
For God is spide: most strong to bide,
with just man's righteous seed.
6
Where vaynly now: ye mock and mow,
at poor man's purpose just:
When he is bent: with fast intent,
in God to put his trust.
7
Who else can speed: poor Jacobs seed,
with help from Zyon hill:
When God shall call his people thrall,
rejoice all Jury will.
The Collecte.
VOuchsaue O Lord to look from thy holy heavens upon the children of men:
and grant us to know the way of peace, that we auoydyng the bondage of
sin, may have the fruition of thy habitatio^ in heavenly Jerusalem. Through
Christ. etc.

The Argument. Psalm. XV.
Here David craves whom God alowth in sight
And answer haueth whom God alowth in sight
Domine quis habitabit.
The sprite so says to work by love aright
Who has a faith to work by love aright
1
WHo (Lord) shall bide: by thy sweet side?
In tabernacle sure?
Or who shall still: hold fast thy hill,
which holy does endure?
2
Who walkth in state: immaculate,
who blameles life ensues:
And rightwise deed: fulfilth in speed,
who speakth from heart the truth.
3
Whose tongue in spyte: does not backebyte,
ne does his neighbor evil:
Who cannot bear: with quiet ear,
his neighbor slanderd still.
4
And he whose eyes: the bad despise,
and lawdth Gods fearful men:
Who swearth also: his neighbor to,
and chaungth not it ageyn.
5
Who will not plie: to usury,
his coin for lucres love:
Who bribeth nothing: the just to wring,
oh he shall never move.
The Collecte.
Grant we beseech thee O bountiful lord and god immaculate, that we may walk
in thy church without spot, withdrawn wholly from the harmful works of this
wretched world, so that while we labor to observe the precepts in earth, we
may at last attain to thy heavenly habitation, where thou raignest eternally
one God the father, the son and the holy spirit, to whom be all honor and
glory world without end, Amen.

The Argument. Psalm. XVI.
That Christ did pray and when himself did sue
For his always, and when himself did sue
Conserua me Domine.
His burial the Prophet told full true
His rise withal the Prophet told full true
1
O God of trust: preserve me just,
In soul and body to:
For why to thee: my hope does slay,
to none else will I go.
2
O soul in sprite: thou saydst aright,
to God who thee so wrought:
My God thou art: of faithful heart,
my goods can veil thee naught.
3
All my delyght: to saints full bright,
is set, which travel here:
In virtues all: celestial,
they do excel so clear.
4
Who multiply: their Idols hie,
and after them do gad:
Their sacrifice: I whole despise
I hate their names so mad.
5
The Lord alone: is portion,
of mine inheritance:
My cup he is: my cross to bliss,
my lot he will advance.
6
My lot full broad: by line and rod,
so fair did fall to me:
That I rejoice: the goodly choice,
mine heritage to see.
7
The Lord to bliss: I will not mysse,
who gave me counsel so:
My reins by night: yet showed me light,
in thought to God to go.
8
In face I set: my God so great,
he always was my mark:
For strong he standth: on my right hand,
how can I fall in dark.
9
For help thus had: my heart was glad,
my glory ioyed his fill:
My flesh in grave: though earth it haueth,
yet rest in hope it will.
10
For why in hell: my soul to dwell,
thou will not leave it there:
The holy one: corruption
to see, thou can not bear.
11
Thou shall show me: lives path (...) see,
and joy in thy good sight:
Thy right hand hase: all joyful grace,
to stand for aye in might*
The Collecte.
Preserve O mighty Lord all them which trust in thee, and grave in our hurtes
to fulfill (...) holy will, that while we be recomforted with the joyful
remembrance of thy resurrection, we may attain to sit on thy right hand,
with thy blessed saints in joy everlasting, through Christ etc.

The Argument. Psalm. XVII.
That faith might stand the just man praythfull feign
In upper hand the just man praythfull feign
And museth in part thus should be vexed in pain.
Exaudi Deus.
That just in heart thus should be vexed in pain.
1
Hear thou the right: O Lord my might,
consider my complaynt:
My lips be straight: and hate deceight,
give ear to my constraynt.
2
Give thou assent: to mine intent,
in hand my right to take:
Let thy good eye: my cause discrye,
for thee my judge I make.
3
My heart thou tridst: by night thou sp^dst,
thou scorndst me nigh in deed:
Thou foundst not yet: my fault so great,
my thought to mouth agreed.
4
Men's works full naught: by them so wrought
against thy word and will:
Made me to mark: their ways most dark,
thy laws who do but spill.
5
O stay my feet: of life most meet,
thy word to hold the path:
Least wrong I walk: thy truth to balke,
to slip in thy great wrath.
6
O God of all: on thee I call,
for thou my suit wy^^ hear:
Enclyne to me: thy face so free,
my words in hearing bear.
7
Thy mercies great: extend thou yet,
save them which trust in thee:
From such as stand: against thy hand,
and vain resisters be.
8
As ball of eye: O tenderly,
keep me my Lord and king:
And shadow me: so close to be,
hyd under thy good wyng.
9
Defend me quyte: from all the spyte,
of them that me molest:
My foes I see: round compass me,
my soul to have oppressed.
10
So fat and fed: they iet so read
in wealth they stand full hye:
Proud speech to seek: even what they leeke,
they walk disdaynfully.
11
In ways they wait: to note our gate,
so set on every side:
They bend their eyes: as crafty spies
on ground to cast us wide.
12
Like Lion slye: they privy lie,
which greedy seekth his pray:
As close it were: fierce wolf or bear,
or Lions whelpe they lay.
13
For thy renown: rise, cast him down,
destroy his spyte O God:
My soul O save: from wicked ^laue.
who is thy sword and rod.
14
From men so fond: that be thy hond,
O Lord from worldly beast:
Who make good chere: thou filst them here,
they leave their babes the rest.
15
And I shall bold: thy face behold,
in righteousness so bright:
I shall in deed: be satisfide,
thy glory brought to light.
The Collecte.
Convert the eyes of our faith O dear father, to behold the truth of thy
judgment, that when we be tried by the spiritual fire of probation, we may
have at the last fruition of thy glorious presence, to be satisfied with the
fruit of thy righteousness. Thorough Christ our Lord, Amen.

The Argument Psalm. XVIII.
Christ here in this gives thanks to God aright,
For him and his gives thanks to God aright,
For that they be from all ungodly spite.
Diligam te Domine.
Delivered free from all ungodly spite.
1
I Will love thee: most inwardly,
O Lord my strength thou art:
Thy mercies all: both great and small,
do comfort much my heart.
2
My Lord is hence: my rock and fence,
my saving God I say:
My might and shield: my trust in field,
my horn of health, my stay.
3
The Lord always: most worthy prays,
on him I mind to call:
So safe shall I: most steadfastly,
escape mine enemies all.
4
The greuousnes: of deadly stresse,
did compass me about:
The streams of sin: so whelmd me in,
they troubled me full out.
5
The pains of hell: that were so fell,
did me enclose full fast:
The trappes and snares: of deadly cares,
prevented me in have.
6
In troublous woe: I called unto,
my Lord my God in fear:
To hear my case: his will it was,
my cry even touched his ear.
7
The earth did shake: for fear did quake,
the hills their bases shook:
Removed they were: in place most fair,
at Gods right fearful look.
8
Dark smoke rose so: his face there fro,
his mouth as fire consumde:
That coals at it: were kyndled bright,
when he in anger fumde.
9
The heavens fullow: he made to bow,
and down did he ensue:
And darkness great: was under set
his feet in clowdy hue.
10
He rode on hye: and did so fly,
upon the Cherubins:
He came in sight: and made his flight,
upon the wyng of wyndes.
11
His place he set: In darkness great,
as secret there to bide:
With clouds about: he set it out,
with waters black beside.
12
At his great light: of present sight,
the clouds past over quight:
As stones of hayle: do melt and quayle,
by coals in fire light.
13
The Lord from heaven: sent down his leaven
and thundered thence in ire:
He thunder cast: in wonders blast,
with hayle and coals of fire.
14
With arrow darts: he gald their hearts,
and scatterd them about:
And forth he bringes: his lightnyngs,
the Lord destroyed their rout.
15
When he did thret: the waters set,
their springes to be dewrayed:
The blastyng breath: of his great wrath,
the worlds deep bo^tome showed.
16
From heaven above: his grace and love,
to fetch me he did send:
From waters deep: he did me keep,
he did me strong defend.
17
He did repress: I saw no less
my foes that strongest be:
And rid me quite: of all their spite,
to strong they were for me.
18
They did prevent: with troublement,
the day of my great stresse:
Yet Gods good hand: did them wythstand
preuentyng their excess.
19
In liberty: he placed me,
and led me straight thereto:
He brought me out: of stresse no doubt,
his grace did love me so.
20
The Lord did thus: most gracious,
my dealyng he aloude:
He did me quite: as he in sight,
me innocent approved.
21
For Gods true ways: I kept always,
His law I trustd thereto:
With my Lord God: I still abode,
the wicked do not so.
22
I have an eye: his law to spy,
from man's tradition:
Nor his precept: did I reject,
to my destruction.
23
And pure I went: with true intent,
before my God also:
I just eschude: my deed so rude,
I gave good heed thereto.
24
For doing just: my Lord I trust,
will friendly me requite:
My righteous deed: as well did speed,
in his approved sight.
25
As man is just: so may thou trust,
with good so good to be:
With perfect man: so thou again,
shall perfect be and free.
26
And thus with pure: thou may be sure,
thou shall be pure and clean:
Even so with evil: of froward will,
even froward shall thou mean.
27
For thou to save: wilt soon with save,
the meek in all their woe:
And shall deryde: men's stately pride,
and make them low to go.
28
For thou dydst light: my candell bright,
and keepst my fortune right:
The Lord my God: did ease my rod,
and darkness tournd to light.
29
For strong to see: I was by thee,
whole hosts to dyng down right:
In God no dout: I was so stout,
stone wall to leap it quite.
30
Gods way I wis: unspotted is,
his word is tryde in fire:
He is a shield: to man in field,
who trust to him intiere.
31
What God is there: even any where,
but this the Lord of hosts?
What rock excelth: in strength so well,
as this our God in cost?
32
For God even he: round girdeth me,
with strength and feate of war:
He keepth my way: in ready stay,
lest vice my life should mar.
33
He makth my feet: as swyft and meet,
as feet of hearts to see:
In perfect grace: he stayed my race,
and sat me up on hye.
34
My hands aryght: he made to fight,
both devil and man to wring:
Mine arms in parts: did break their darts
yea bows of steel with stryng.
35
Thy saving shield: kept me in field,
thy right hand me sustaynd:
Thy bounteousnes: did ease my stresse,
though grievously it paynd.
36
Thou gave me room: where ever I come,
to stand, to go, to ride:
Full strong to stand: on sea and land,
my heels did never slide.
37
I did rechase: my foes in face,
and over took their spyte:
I did not stynt: with sword the dynt,
till I had stroyed them quite.
38
I did them bray: in such array,
their wounds shall never heal:
They could not rise: in any wise,
but fall at mine own heel.
39
Strait girdst thou me: with strength to be,
to war even full inured:
Thou threwest them round: upon the ground
my soul who thus pursude.
40
These noughty packes: did turn their backs
their necks thou made me smight:
My haters fell: thou did them quell,
down thou dydst beat them right.
41
They cryde dismayde: and craved aid,
but none to help was there:
When they did cry: to God so hie,
then God did turn his ear.
42
I did as small: thus beat them all,
as dust before the wind:
As clay in street: often trod with feet,
I did them stamp and grynde.
43
Thou rydst my life: from peoples strife,
thou did me sure preserve:
To Gentiles bred: thou made me head,
strange people me did serve.
44
When me they hear: at sound of ear,
they me now soon obey:
Where children strange: their friendship change
all falshoode they dewray.
45
These children strange: which strangely range
so up and down did fail:
They all afraid: in fearful brayd,
in their great forts shall wayle.
46
The Lord live he: most blessedly
who was my helper strong:
God rowsed be: my rock so free,
him praise I will full long.
47
This God of ours: he gives me powers
t'auenge my wicked foes:
And does subdue: my people true,
that they like subjects goes.
48
He daunted so: my cruel ^o,
to them he made me head:
From wicked spite: thou dydst me quite,
their wickedness to tread.
49
For this O Lord: in heart and word,
I will give thanks in song:
Of thy great name: thy power to fame,
where Gentiles dwell among.
50
His king he sought: he health him wrought,
he showed true love in deed:
To David true: anointed due,
and aye to his good seed.
The Collecte.
MOst loving Lord and puissant protector which art our refuge in all distress
and adversity, preserve us from all hostility, and from the snares of death
and hell, so that after we be drawn up from the danger of all manner
temptations, we may devoutly sing to thy holy name in all purity of life.
Through etc.

The Argument. Psalm. XIX.
This Psalm deliteth who is to sun comparde
Gods work to cite who is to sun comparde
His law it treats of his Apostles guard,
Coeli enarrant.
And so it speaks of his Apostles guard,
1
THe heavens do tell: how God excelth
in glory, power, and might:
The firmament: so excellent,
his handy work endight.
2
For day to day: succeedyng aye,
does plain his power declare:
As night to night: ensuyng right,
sets out his loving care.
3
No speech, or tongue: to them does long,
their voice distinct not hard:
To magnify: their Lord so hie,
by languages regard.
4
But yet their sound: as words rebound,
on all the earth it strayes:
To further cost: all uttermost,
their noise their maker praise.
5
In them he set: the sun so net,
like bridegroom which proceedth:
His chamber out: as Giaunt stout,
rejoices his course to speed.
6
His course goes out: even round about,
the heaven and back retreath:
From East to West: it has no rest,
all thing does feel his heat.
7
Gods law is just: a law to trust,
as spotless turnyng hearts:
His wytnes pure: record is sure,
to babe it wit impartes.
8
The Lords behest: is all the best,
to joy the heart in right:
His biddinges be: so pure to see,
blind sight they turn to light.
9
The Lord his fear: is clean and clear,
which ever shall endure:
His judgments be: the truth most free,
and be themselves full sure.
10
They be to us: more gracious,
then gold or precious stone:
To man more meet: then honey sweet,
they pass the honey comb.
11
Yea more then this: thy servant is,
to keep them always pressed:
And sure shall he: rewarded be,
with joy which is behest.
12
Sins which be wrought: in deed and thought,
without this law who knowth?
Fro faults that lie: oh secretly,
thy clensing hand bestow.
13
From sins of pride: thy seruanthyde,
that me they do not guide:
That vndefilde: and less beguilde,
the great sin might I slide.
14
My words thus said: my thoughts deep laid
God grant they please thy sight:
O Lord my power: my rock and ^^wer,
and my redemer quite.
The Collecte.
MOst merciful and loving Savior Christ, which once coming forth out of the
virginal womb did proceed up to the right hand of thy father: we beseech
thee that we may be so converted by the law illightened by thy precepts, and
taught by thy holy testimonies, to be delivered from all strange doctrine, and
craftye invasions against our faith: who lyuest and raignest, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. XX.
This prayth for kings
Good prosperinges
their realms to have defense,
Where Christ is meant
Exaudiat te Dominus.
By fore intent
of David's sprite in sense.
1
GOd grant he hear: with blessed ear,
the suits in day of woe:
Gods name so great: whom Jacob met,
promoote thee where thou go.
2
God send thee aid* where power is laid,
from sanctuary place:
He strengtht thee sure: full strong to endure,
from Syon hill of grace.
3
Let him keep hye: in memory,
thy sacrifices all:
The bullockes brent: so redolent,
Sela.
to mind all them to call.
4
Grant he thy will: of heart to fill,
in sickness eke and health:
Confirm he shall: thy counsayles all,
to work thy peoples wealth.
5
In health of thee: glad we shall be,
and triumphs make we will:
In gods good name: his praise to fame,
thy vows God shall fulfill.
6
I know that now: God will allow,
his Christ and save him dear:
To hear him nigh: from heaven so hye,
by healthful hand he bearth.
7
Some trust their horse: some charets force,
thus they presume of strength:
But we will bind: Gods name in mind,
for he is Lord at length.
8
For where we see: how low they be,
and fallen, so foul deceived:
We rise in sight: and stand upright,
by might of God received.
9
O Lord we sing: save, keep the king,
hear us and save us aye:
Both him and his: preserve and blis,
his realm defend we pray.
The Collecte.
FVlfill O Lord all our peticions, and accept us as well allowed sacrifice to
grace, that all the force and power of our adversaries may be resisted by
thee, so that we may rejoice in the present aid of thy saving health, through
Christ our Lord, who with thee, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. XXI.
Here is expressed is hard which went beforne
How that request is hard which went beforne
Now thanks the more to see his foes forlorn.
Domine in virtute.
He gives therefore to see his foes forlorn.
1
THe king with voice: does most rejoice,
thy strength O Lord most kind:
For health so had: he is full glad,
excedingly in mind.
2
Thou have him given: such help to win,
in heart as he desyrde:
For that he sought: by thee was wrought,
Sela
as full his lips requirde.
3
Thy good intent: did him prevent,
thy blessyng sweet thou gave:
Upon his head: a crown so red,
of gold well set thou have.
4
He asked life: and life full ryfe,
thou gave him that will last:
More him thou gave: then he did crave,
even life that shall not wast.
5
His honor great: in thee is set,
in thy salvation true:
Thou did him crown: with bright renown
and glory him did sue.
6
Thou have again: exalt his raygne,
with long felicity:
To glad his state: most fortunate,
with joy thy face to see.
7
The cause is this: the king I wis,
in God did put his trust:
His loving grace: so steyd his place,
no man could down him thrust.
8
Thy strong right hand: by sea and land,
shall all thy foes confound:
Thou shall seek out: thy haters stout,
with power to cast on ground.
9
In thine whote ire: as oven with fire,
thou shall them make to fume:
The Lord in wrath: shall stroy their pathe,
the fire shall them consume.
10
Thou shall supplant: their fruit to want,
their roots from earth full low:
Their seed even quyte: from all men's sight,
no man thence shall them know.
11
For they entend: on thee to send,
some evil in spiteful form:
Their cursed deed: yet wanted speed,
they could not it perform.
12
For such a thing: thou shall O king,
them all put foul to flight:
Thou shall bestow: thy stryng and bow,
against their face to smite.
13
O Lord of health: exalt thy self,
in thine own strength and might:
So will we sing: to thee O king,
to praise thy power aright.
The Collecte.
Bless us lord with the benediction of thy sweet mercy, and fulfill our desire
to be always set to thee, that where in our harmony we extol thy excellent
power we may obtayn the perpetuity of days in the world to come, through
Christ, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. XXII.
Lo David here, in anguishe all be set
Christ's type does bear in anguishe all be set
For here in sum and rising just be met
Deus deus meus.
Christ's passion and rising just be met
1
MY God my God: regard me God,
why have me left alone?
To make so far: my health to ^arre
from words of my great moan?
2
My God I cry: as day does pry,
and yet thou geuest none ear:
No rest by night I take in sight,
no silence any where.
3
Yet holdst thy will: in thee so still?
as only good thy self?
Thou Jacobs praise: thy self up raise,
they sang always thy health.
4
Our fathers old: on thee were bold,
to hope, and had their ease:
As often as they: to thee did pray,
their troubles then did cease.
5
They called on thee: and help thereby,
thou gave to them anon:
They laid their trust: on thee so just,
and escaped confusion.
6
Concerning me: a worm to see,
I am, no man of price:
A scorn all day: a cast away,
of men in their deuyce.
7
All they that me: with eye did see,
hye scorns to me they laid:
With lips they mowd: with knees they bowd
they shook their head and said.
8
In God he set: affiaunce great,
let him than rid him quyte:
Deliver ^ee: to make him free,
for him he pleasth in sight.
9
Yet he thou art that dydst depart,
my mothers womb from me:
At both her breasts in quiet rest*
thou nursed me tenderly.
10
I was whole cast: on thee full fast,
from that my mothers pappe:
No dout from thence: in sure defense,
thou God keptst me in lap.
11
Fro me to go: oh do not so,
for trouble is at hand:
No help of man: obtain I can,
in thee my refuge standth.
12
Wild bulls most stout: flock me about,
by me full fierce they ride:
Fat bulls in deed: as Basan feed,
be set on every side.
13
My death to shape: with mouths they gape,
on me they stare I say:
They swell and stamp: as Lions rampe,
when they do rore at pray.
14
Out am I cast: as water wast,
my bones in joints be lose:
My heart within: does melt and pyne,
as wax by fire dose.
15
As potsherd dry: my strength does lie,
to mouth my tongue cleau'th fast:
To death in dust: thou have me thrust,
thus made I am aghast.
16
Yea dogs full grim: have closde me in,
in councels mad they meet:
Besiegd I stand: of wicked ^and,
they pearst my hand and feet.
17
My bones to tell: I may full well,
at me they gase and stare:
They did delight: in my despite,
they did deryde my care.
18
My clothes they part: with joyful heart,
as spoil the sowgiers do:
For that my cote: they cast their lo^,
for that unsown was so.
19
But be not far: my gouerner,
O Lord my castle strong:
Thy mercy send: and me defend,
in have, no time prolong.
20
From sword and knyfe: discharge my life,
my soul lest they devour:
Keep well my soul: as derlyng fool,
from dogs their hands and power.
21
O keep in awe: the Lions iawe,
save me from them that byte:
From all the horns of Unicornes,
protect me Lord of might.
22
Thy power and name: I shall declame,
to all my brethren met:
Glad will I raise: in church thy praise,
in congregation set.
23
The Lord who fearth: with lawds draw nere,
all Jacobs seed him praise:
Fear ye him well: all Israel,
him magnify always.
24
He will advise: and not despise,
the poor for low degree:
He hydth no face: in time and place,
my prayer heard has he.
25
I purpose me: to speak of thee,
in church thy praise to sprede:
My vows so plight: in just men's fight,
I will perform in deed.
26
The meek his bread: shall eat full fed,
and praise the Lord all day:
For God who seekth: his praise he keepth,
their heart shall live for aye.
27
The world so broad: will turn to God,
while this they call to heart:
Before his face: all folk in place,
shall honor him impart.
28
All kingdoms stand: to God as bond,
their trybes and kynredes eke:
And them in reign: he shall retain,
all quarters them to seek.
29
The fat shall feed: and serve in dread,
they all shall worship ryfe:
Yea dead men all: to him shall fall,
who gave their souls no life.
30
My seed and blood: this Lord so good
shall serve in worship free:
And thus my stock: as God his flock,
shall just reputed be.
31
They shall proceed: to show in deed,
to people thence to come:
Gods justice great: from heavenly seat,
what he to them has done.
The Collecte.
O God the head and fountain of all grace and mercy which for our sake
did descend into the womb of the Virgin, was fastened to a tree, pierced
through in thy hands and feet, thy garments parted by lottes, and yet after
all this done, thou dydst gloriously rise again from death. We beseech thee so
to bear in mind this thy humayne conversation among men, that thou may be
always to them which put their trust in thee a merciful deliverer, who lyuest
and raignest one God with the father and the holy ghost, for ever in perpetual
felicity. Amen.

The Argument. Psalm. XXIII.
The Christen man how God his life does guide
Confess he can how God his life does guide
With meat so good from death his soul to hide.
Dominus regit.
of heavenly food from death his soul to hide.
1
THe Lord so good: who gives me food
my shepeheard is and guide:
How can I want: or suffer scant,
when he defendth my side?
2
To feed my need: he will me lead,
in pastures green and fat:
He forth brought me: in liberty,
to waters delicate.
3
My soul and heart: he did convert,
to me he shows the path:
Of rightwisenes: in holiness,
his name such virtue has.
4
Yea though I go: through death his woe,
his vaale and shadow wide:
I fear no dart: with me thou art,
with staff and rod to guide.
5
Thou shall provide: a table wide,
for me against their spite:
With oil my head: thou have bespred,
my cup is fully dight.
6
Thy goodness yet: and mercy great,
will keep me all my days:
In house to dwell: in rest full well,
with God I hope always.
The Collecte.
Lead us O Lord by the rules of thy comfortable precepts, that when we have
optaynd the habitation of thy everlasting mansion, we may be fully satisfied
with the cup of joyful eternity, through Christ our Lord. etc.

The Argument. Psalm. XXIIII.
Of Christ to come his reign this psalm does preach
All whole in sum his reign this psalm does preach
How God will be the letter this does teach.
Domini est terra.
In temple free the letter this does teach.
1
THe earth it is: the Lords of bliss,
with all the garnishyng:
The world so round: he has it found,
and all that dwell therein.
2
This earth he cast: on seas so fast,
as over them to stand:
And floudes he made: for corn and blade,
and eke to part the land.
3
Up who shall stye: on hill so hye,
where rests this Lord of grace?
Or who shall rise: in restfull wise,
to that his holy place?
4
Even he whose hand: and heart does stand,
in cleannes innocent:
Who sought no gain: in fancies vain.
nor oath has falsely meant.
5
He shall posses: in stablenes,
the Lords sweet blessedness:
His God of health: from even himself,
shall send him righteousness.
6
And these be they: which seek always,
in stock their God in deed:
Even truly they: who seek I say,
the God of Jacobs seed.
7
Lift up your gates: you heads and states,
ye lastyng doors arise:
In at this house: king glorious,
will enter princely wise.
8
What is this king: thus enteryng,
with glory thus beset?
The Lord is he: full strong to see,
a Lord in battle great.
9
Arise I say: thou temple gay,
Or as the vij. verse.
though I thee cannot build:
Yet ioyth my sprite: that God of might,
his arc shall be thy shield.
10
What is this king: desiering,
with glory thus to reign?
The Lord of hosts: of glory most,
Sela
the king and sovereign.
The Collecte.
EVerliuyng God the fourmer and maker of the world, to whom the whole
ornament thereof is serviceable and subject: we pray thee to restore us to the
innocence of life that we may be able to follow thy steps up into holy mount,
where thou raignest for ever almighty God in majesty, through Christ.

The Argument. Psalm. XXV.
This cry and call as supplication grave
Is General as supplication grave
It does confess and pardon craves to have
At Domine.
Done wickedness and pardon craves to have
1
O Lord to thee: my soul to flee,
is set, my God thou art:
I whole refer: my life most nare
to thee, with all my heart.
2
My God of fence: my confidence,
on thee was always borne:
O let no shame: confound my name,
my foes else will me scorn.
3
Who trustth in thee: ashamd to be,
can never man it spy:
Who break thy laws: without a cause,
confounded let them lie.
4
Show me thy ways: O Lord always,
of truth me teach the path:
Thy word and way: is certain stay,
for that all virtue has.
5
In truth me lead: teach me thy read,
my God of health thou art:
My trust does lay: in thee all day,
to thee is bent my heart.
6
Call thou to mind: O Lord full kind,
thy loving mercies old:
Thy bounties free: which ever be,
as fathers them have told.
7
Of youth my faut: so great and haut,
such sin O Lord forget:
For mercy sake: O Lord awake,
thy mind upon me set.
8
Both gracious: and righteous,
the Lord is equal so:
He teachth with rod: yet loving God,
by gifts he teachth also.
9
Who meek abide: them he will guide,
in judgment good and right:
And whom we see: most gentle be,
his ways he teachth them light.
10
The ways of God: be large and broad,
both truth and mercy just:
Even still to such: as loves much,
his hestes, and couenauntes trust.
11
For thy names sake: O mercy take,
my Lord upon my sin:
It is so great: it does me fret,
it boylth my soul within.
12
What man he be: that fears thee,
O Lord thou wylt him teach:
The rightful way: to choose I say,
in sprite thereto to retche.
13
His soul shall dwell: at ease full well,
in ghostly free delyght:
His stock and seed: shall never need,
but hold the land to right.
14
Among them lie: Gods secrecy,
to fear him who that shall:
In gentle form: he will perform,
to them his couenantes all.
15
Mine eyes intent: is ever bent
to thee my Lord so great:
For only he: pluckth suerly,
my feet from out of net.
16
Turn thou to me: O Lord so free,
have mercy, stay my fall:
I am in state: all desolate,
in misery full thrall.
17
My sorrows fell: my heart does swell,
they be enlarged so:
My troublous pain: O God restrain,
O quench this deadly woe.
18
Attend I cry: my misery,
my life and state adverse:
Forgive my fautes: which me assautes,
my joy to me reuerse.
19
Consider right: my foes their spyte,
how they increase my fear,
Their hate is thus: so tyrannous,
at me that they do bear.
20
O keep most dear: my soul intiere,
and me deliver just:
So let no shame: confound my name,
for I in thee have trust.
21
Let perfectnes: and rightfulnes,
both guide and wait on me:
My trust for aid: in thee is laid,
from me O never flee.
22
Deliver well: all Israel,
O God with all his seed:
From troubles all: that them may fall,
in thee always to speed.
The Collecte.
Deliver us from all adversity and danger O merciful God, for to thee only
have we lift up our hearts, forget we beseech thee the trespace of our youth,
and the ignorance of our former age, and where as we have negligently offended,
thou of thy mercy forgive it us, through. etc.

The Argument. Psalm. XXVI.
The just man's song for righteousness beshent:
Who suffers wrong for righteousness beshent:
And prayth in will a life lead innocent.
Iudica Domine.
That he may still a life lead innocent.
1
LOrd judge my deed: as I have lived
in thee my hope is all:
For this my trust: in thee so just,
I never doubt to fall.
2
Lord prove my way: and me assaye,
by fire try thou my reins:
And search my heart: my foe is smart,
mine giltles life he straynes.
3
Thy clemency: was nigh mine eye,
to stay, me right to do:
I did inure: my heart full sure,
to truth from lies to go.
4
With liars vain: I would not train,
my life to follow such:
With crafty men: I would not run,
whose life dissembleth much.
5
The wicked rout: that goes about,
to harm and hurt I hate:
I will not set: in council yet,
with men of wicked state.
6
For wash I will: my hands even still,
with men of perfect life:
And thus shall I: O Lord so hye,
frequent thine aulters ryfe.
7
Where I shall raise: thy worthy praise,
that men may love the same:
I will there sprede: thy grace in deed,
the works of thy good name.
8
O Lord the place: where restth thy grace,
I have the bewty loved:
Thy heavenly house: so glorious,
I loved as me behooved.
9
With sinners great: Lord do not shet,
my soul, with them to be:
Thy grace extend: my life defend,
all men of blood to flee.
10
Their hands do press: all wyckednes,
even guile prepensed ^o:
Their better hand: corrupt does stand,
with brybes, even thus they go.
11
But yet will I: most certainly,
in truth my life address:
O make me free: from them to be,
show me thy tenderness.
12
My foot as yet: in right is set,
in plain simplicity:
And still will I: in company,
exalt thee Lord on hie.
The Collecte.
Grant O Lord we beseech thee thy mercy unto us thy servants, and so ingraue
in our hearts the love of thy truth, that we may hold fast all innocence of
life, and finallye to be delivered from all wicked persecutours. Through, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. XXVII.
Here may we see in trouble though he falls:
The just is free in trouble though he falls:
In God he stays and so gives thanks in all.
On him he wayeth and so gives thanks in all.
1
Dominus illuminatio
THe Lord of might: is health and light,
to me (at need) whom should I fear?
The Lord is strength: to life at length,
of mine (I say) who can me dear?
2
When men so bad: their traynes had laid,
Even then (at eye) they fell down right:
When foes did press to eat my flesh,
they slid (away) for all their spite.
3
Though armed host: besiegd my cost,
my heart (from God) shall not relent:
Though cruel war: should rise me nar,
to God (therein) I would be bent.
4
One thing to crave: of God to have,
I did (full often) and aye I will:
To keep his place: to see his grace,
to haunt (even so) his temple still.
5
Thus shall his power: hyde me in bower,
when troubles should be (fierce and) fell:
He would me hyde: there close to bide,
as safe on rock (most sure) to dwell.
6
My head yet now: he will allow,
above my foes (in state) always:
In, will I bring: glad offering,
the Lord (so good) to laud and praise.
7
My voice O hear: my Lord so dear,
I cry (my God) in woeful part:
Grant that I crave: and mercy have,
extend to me thy (loving) heart.
8
My heart to thee: did often apply,
seek ye my face (I say) ye all:
O Lord I will: thy face seek still,
do others (how and) what they shall.
9
Hyde not from me: thy servant free,
thy (loving) face, my aid thou art:
Project not me: displeasantly,
O Lord (my health) do not depart.
10
My parents when: they bad me run,
from them (to go) my self to shift:
When Patrons all: my reyse or fall,
rought not (a myte) thou dydst me lift.
11
Teach me thy way: thy law I say,
that rightly leadth (in truth) to thee:
My foes O Lord: with one accord,
should else rejoice (in hate) to free.
12
Up turn me not: to bear their hate,
O Lord (to them) that me pursue:
False witness eyes: against me rise,
and lies (of me) they sprede untrue.
13
My heart had quayld: and utter fayld,
if fast (to thee) I had not trustd:
Let me thy grace: Lord see in place,
in land (of rest) where ioyth the just.
14
O wait the Lord: hold fast his word:
doubt not (at all) be strong, be still:
Attend on God: take meek his rod,
he will (at last) thy heart fulfill.
The Collecte.
DEfend us O God from all the assaults of our enemies, that we may continue in
constant confessing of thy name, that while we have the fruition of thy helpyng
presence, at last may have the same in glory.

The Argument. Psalm. XXVIII.
This man's intent all crafty men to escape:
Is vehement all crafty men to escape:
Ad te Domine.
And hard he is for this he thaenkes does shape.
From God of bliss for this he thanks does shape.
1
O Lord I cry: my rock on hye,
rest not (thus still) forsake me not:
Or else should I: resemble nigh,
the deed (that be) in pit bewrapt.
2
Hear my request: of humble breast,
when I (so meek) do sue to thee:
Against thy seat: of mercy sweet,
my hands (on hye) when lift they be.
3
And draw my heart: from wicked part,
with them (O Lord) that work so evil:
Their tongue cryth truse: w^^h heart refuses,
their minds all set to (stroy and) spill.
4
As is their deed: so let them speed,
retort their crafts they (use to) delue,
Their malice great: the same to get,
with like (by right) to quite themselue.
5
Their minds disdain: Gods acts to frain^
his (stately) works to mark even so:
He shall them stroy: and not employ,
their lives (no time) in wealth to go.
6
Well worthy praise: is God always,
my mouth (in song) shall him forth sound:
He heard my groan: my prayers moan,
he did not me (with shame) confound.
7
God is my shield: my strength in field,
he helped (me just) as I believed:
For this good chance: my heart may dance,
and sing in lauds (so well) releaued.
8
To my small host: God praysd be most,
that (tymely) health he soon did bring:
The Lord is strength: and fence at length,
to his (most true) anointed king.
9
Thy people save: O Lord I crave,
and bless (with joy) thine heritage:
Feed them as guide: promoote them wide,
to praise thee (God from) age to age.
The Collecte.
O Lord most strong forte and refuge to all thy people, preserve us from such
as go down into the pit of schism and dissension, and knit us together in
unity of mind, being children of one only God and of one faith, so that we
may hold fast in heart, that we outwardly profess in mouth, through. etc.

The Argument. Psalm. XXIX.
This does inuit, to note Gods mighty power:
All stately might to note Gods mighty power:
Him just to serve and else can them devour.
Who can preserve and else can them devour.
1
Afferte Domino.
YE sons of God: sprede ye abroad,
the Lords great power and strength:
Bring ye your lambs: of mighty rambes
to God his lauds at length.
2
The Lord ensue: with honor due,
extol his might and name:
And eke express: his holiness,
him laud in court of fame.
3
His voice so grand: on sea and land,
note how the floudes it stayed:
Gods majesty: you then did see,
on them when thunder brayd.
4
His voice rulth sea: how houge it be,
his voice is stern and stout:
His voice is thus: most glorious,
when it dryueth leuyn out.
5
This voice so free: breakth Cedre tree,
no force can it repel:
It dryueth even down: of Lybanon,
his Cedres, though they swell.
6
He made them skip: in roots to flip,
as calves do use to praunce:
So Lybanon: and Syrion,
as Unicorne to dance.
7
The Lord by voice: the fiery noyce,
of flames in parts can send:
The clouds among: he lightneth strong,
with shoures he fire can blend.
8
It can distres: all wyldernes,
yea Cades desert wide:
The beasts I say: which there do stray,
it make themself to hyde.
9
This voice does bind: to calue the Hynde,
thick trees it open layth:
Therefore men all: in temple shall,
his honor praise in faith.
10
Where they shall sing: that God as king,
has rule of waters all:
On whom he setth: as king is fit,
and so for ever shall.
11
The Lord all wealth: and stable health
shall give his people kind:
God them shall bless: with full increase,
all peace and rest to find.
The Collecte.
Grant we beseech thee Lord unto us, constancye in thy word, and make us the
temple of thy blessed sprite, so that we may reverence thy godly voice, to
rebound the same to all powers of this world, that they may be compunct thereby,
to present themself to thy honor with due sacrifice of thankful hearts,
through, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. XXX.
Thanks here be meant for just deliverance:
To God so sent for just deliverance:
And here ye spy in Gods good governance.
Exaltabo te Domine.
All suertie in Gods good governance.
1
LOrd thee all whole: I will extol,
for thou have lift me hye:
Thou would not make: my foes to crake,
against me joyfully.
2
O Lord of might: my God of right,
to thee I cried in grief:
Thou gave an ear: to hear me near,
thou sentst me healthes relief.
3
Thou broughtst full well: my soul from hell,
O Lord thou did wythsaue:
Thou me releuest: my strength thou kepest,
thou pluckst me quyte from grave.
4
To God sing ye: ye saints agree,
his praises eleuate:
And mind ye still: his holy will,
his graces celebrate.
5
His heavy wrath: short time it has,
life standth at his good grace:
At night we weep: yet after sleep,
at morn we mirth embrace.
6
When well I was: in joyful case,
I said as then I thought:
That I no day: should feel decay,
and never move to naught.
7
For thy good will: so strenghtd my hill,
O Lord most steadfastly:
But when thy face: had tournd his grace,
I than fell troublously.
8
In this my pain: I was full feign,
to cry to thee for might:
My God with cry: I did apply,
and prayed both day and night.
9
What gain said I: has life thereby,
if death cut short my days:
Can dust declare: thy power in care?
in grave to tell thy praise?
10
My God therefore: spare me the more,
O Lord I thee desire:
My simple sprite: despise not quyte,
but help I thee require.
11
Thou tournst from me: my woe and gree,
to mirth in cherefull voice:
The mournyng weed: thou changest in deed
so fensd I did rejoice.
12
Wherefore even still: all good men will,
thy glory sing and praise:
O Lord of love: my God above,
I thee will laud always.
The Collecte.
MOst loving and mighty protector, almighty God suffer not our enemies to
triumph over us we beseech thee, but so strength us with thy strong hand, that
after heaviness is turned into gladness, we may give condign thanks and
lauds in due remembrance of thy holiness, through Christ, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. XXXI.
Thus David prayed from Saul so scapte: in letter thankth he so:
In te Domine.
But Christ is meant: with all his church: for sprite and bodies vv^
1
IN thee O Lord I put my trust: let me never be shamde:
Rid me in thy true righteousness: which thou for me have fram^^
2
Bow down thine ear make have to me: deliuerd that I be:
Be thou my fort, my rock so ferme: so stabled just by thee.
3
Thou art my rock and castle sure: my fortres large and wide:
For thy names sake lord lead me forth: be thou my light and (...)
4
My foot O Lord draw out of net: full privy set for me:
Thou art my strength as I have said: al hope does rest in thee.
5
To thy good hands I yield my sprite: O lord to thy great ruthe*
Thou have redemd me certainly: O lord thou God of truth.
6
I hate their superstition: who hold of vanity,
where just has been my confidence: O Lord always in thee.
7
I will be glad and eke rejoice: for thine humanity:
For thou did note my souls distress: my state adverse to see.
8
In cruel hand of deadly foes: thou have not shut me up:
But set my feet at large in room: thou temperstd so my cup.
9
Have mercy Lord upon my woe: mine eyes therein consume:
My soul and eke my body sore: much pain they do resume.
10
My life is wast in heaviness: my years in mournynges wayle:
My strength is fallen for mine offense: my bones begin to quayle
11
A scorn I am among my foen: but most to neyghbourhed:
A fear I was to daily friend: seen out of doors they fled.
12
I am so clean cast out of mind: as dead man laid in grave:
I am become a vessel broke: which no man list to have.
13
I saw so great conspiracy: of men in counsel met:
My fear encreast when they did rise: my soul to trap in net.
14
But yet my hope has been in thee: O Lord I thus did say,
Thou art my God my trusty God: thou will me keep for aye.
15
My days be set in thy good hands: ryd me from all my foes:
whose hands be set to persecute: to lade my soul with woes.
16
Thy gentle light of countinance: show me thy servant poor:
Save me O Lord by mercy great: I trust thereto the more.
17
And let me not confounded be: O Lord of thee I crave:
Confounded be all wicked men: in silence put to grave.
18
Let lyeng lips be stopped to speak: to whist down low be thrust:
In cruel spite disdaynfully: they prate against the just.
19
How is thy grace so plentiful, prepared in store to be:
For righteous men which thee do fear: as Adams brood may see.
20
To hide them safe even just by thee: from all prouokyng men:
Thine eyes in house will keep them sure: from tongues yt venim (...)
21
O thanks be due to this the Lord: whose pity such I felt:
As I with forte were closed in: or I in city dwelt.
22
Though when I fled and felt excess: I said thou me despisde:
Yet when I cryde thou heardst my voice: in humble suit deuisde*
23
O Love the Lord ye all his saints: the Lord the just preseruth,
The doer proud he thoroughly: rewardth as he deseruth.
24
Be strong in heart: most manfully,
For he your hearts shall strength:
All ye that wait the Lord so good,
O trust ye him at length.
The Collecte.
MOst merciful father which excelst in abounda^ce of pity and compassion, we
beseech thy tender and infinite mercy, that while we search for the eternal
verity of thy word and commandment, we may escape the detestable
presumption and pride of vain walkers in this world, contrary to the eternal
verity in thy word, through Christ.

The Argument. Psalm. XXXII.
Here David teachth to understand,
what is clear blessedness:
Beati quorum remiss.
Even pardon free at Gods good hand,
for all our sinnefulnes.
1
O Blessed be they: whose trespaces,
all whole remitted lie:
Whose sin is hid: in secrecies,
from which God turnth his eye.
2
O blessed man to whom in sight,
God does impute no sin:
Who has no guile: in subtle sprite,
as hypocrite within.
3
For that my sin: I hyd so blind,
and would not it confess:
My bones and strength for sorrow pynde,
all day I cried in stresse.
4
For days and nyghtes: thy heavy hand,
my soul did press so stout:
That all my powers: and moisture changd
Sela
as dried by summer drout.
5
I showed to thee: my wyckednes,
not still my gilt I hid:
I said: I will my fault express,
Sela
then straight thou it did ryd.
6
For this to thee: will every saint,
make suit in time of grace:
Though waters flow: in deep constraynt,
they shall not him deface.
7
My refuge thou: art covertly,
from trouble me to bring:
Thus fenst by thee: glad sing shall I,
Sela
as men made free do sing.
8
I will give thee: intelligence,
right thee to teach the way:
That thou may walk: without offense,
on thee mine eye shall stay.
9
But he not like the horse and mule,
who naught can understand:
Whose mouths with bittes except ye rule,
they will not come to hand.
10
The wicked man: with cares is fret,
with sorrows foully vexed:
But who his trust: in God has set,
to him all grace is next.
11
In this the Lord: rejoice ye still,
ye righteous men be glad:
All ye that have: right hearts and will,
joy ye be not adrad.
The Collecte.
O Blessed Lord which by remittyng sins, geuest them who confess the same
thy true justice, hear thou the prayers of thy congregation: and so dull the
darts of sin in us, that we escapyng the sorrow full woe thereof, may be
replenished with restfull and spiritual gladness in the holy ghost, to joy
with thee in the bliss to come, through Christ.

The Argument. Psalm. XXXII.
Here hily aduanst
Gods grace do ye see:
Who sin does remit,
All wholly so free.
Beati quorum.
1
O Happy be they,
Whose sins be releast:
This psalm aforesaid in an other Meter.
Who has their offense
Whole hyd by request.
2
And happy the man
Whom God does aquite:
Whose sprite has no guile
To doubt of his might.
3
For holding my tongue,
My bones fell away:
I gronde in my heart,
Sela.
All whole by the day.
4
By night and by day,
Thy hand was to stout:
My moisture was dried
Sela.
Like summer the drout.
5
My crime I bewrayed
Even just in thy sight:
I hyd not my gylt,
But brought it to light.
I cast with my self,
My fault to reveal:
And straight thou releast,
It every deal.
6
For this shall we see,
All saints to desire:
In suit for to be
When time does require.
Though trouble arise,
as floods when they grow
Yet shall they no time,
The just ouerflow.
7
My bower thou art,
To keep me at ease:
Thou fentest me about, Sela

With songs of release.
8
To teach thee I will,
And guide thee the way:
On thee will I look,
So never to stray.
9
But be ye not like,
The horse and the mule:
For brutish they be
And hard to recule.
With bridle and bit
Their mouths do ye strain
Lest at you they wynce
And turn so again.
10
The bad shall have plages
On every side:
Who trust in the Lord,
Them grace does abide.
11
Ye men of the right,
Be glad to rejoice:
Ye true men in heart,
Be joyful in voice.
The Argument. Psalm. XXXIII.
The just always in mind bearth this,
With heart to joy in God of his,
To praise his name that mighty is,
For he gives help and heavenly blis:
But vain all other remedies,
But pain all worldly policies,
Remember this.
1
Exultate iusti in.
Rejoice in God: the Lord he is,
Ye rightwise men and do not mis,
The just be bound to thank iwis.
Repete ye this
2
Praise ye the Lord: with melodies,
With harp and lute with simphonies,
Sing Psalms to him in Psalteries.
Forget not this.
3
Sing Carols new with jubilee,
To God the Lord in majesty,
His lauds, his praise, sing heartily.
Well use ye this.
4
His word is true most certainly,
His works be wrought most faithfully:
Hold this in heart most constantly.
Abuse not this.
5
He judgment loves: and right intent,
The earth therewith is all besprent,
Such grace and love he down has sent,
Well trust ye this.
6
The heavens were made: by this the Lord,
The hosts of them: by his true word,
His breath of mouth: their power afordth.
Distrust not this.
7
The seas on heaps: he does them place,
As bottell close: he them embraces
The depes he coutcht in secret space.
Denounce ye this.
8
Let all the earth: the Lord if ear,
What man this world and mould does bear,
Serve him in dread: with gentle ear.
Renounce not this.
9
He spoke the word: and done it was,
The earth firm stood in stable case,
What he did bid: it came to pass,
Reuolue ye this.
10
All Paynyms ways God does reject,
Uayne peoples dryftes by him be chect:
Proud Princes crafts he does detect.
Dissolve not this.
11
Gods counsayles aye shall all abide,
His thoughts of heart shall never slide:
From time to time on neither side.
Respect ye this.
12
What folk has God Iehoua Lord,
Elect as heir by his accord,
O blessed they be by truths record.
Suspect not this.
13
The Lord from heaven beholdth us all,
All kind of men both free and thrall:
He sees their reyse: he sees their fall.
Advise ye this.
14
From his high seat: he cas^th his eyes,
All men to vewe their tract to spy,
Where ever they in earth do lie.
Despise not this.
15
The hearts of all he shope no dout,
He knowth their thoughts within without,
Their works what they do go about.
Repute ye this.
16
No king is saved by route of host,
No giaunt strong for all his bost,
Of strength and power though have they most
Dispute not this.
17
Strong horse is thing: but weak again,
That man by him might safe remain,
Both horse and man are all but vain.
Approve ye this.
18
Behold the Lord: holdth eye full just,
On fearful men which him do trust,
With grace them guide he safely must.
Disprove not this.
19
Their soul from death to ryd them quite,
In time of dearth to feed them right
All paynfull stresse he makth full light.
Betrouth ye this
20
Our soul has tarried quietly,
For this our God assuredly,
Our guide, our shield most trustely.
Forslouth not this.
21
Our hearts in him will still rejoice,
For his good name we trust the choice,
And sing we will in joyful noyce.
Repete ye this.
22
Extend O Lord thy gentleness,
As we in thee have trustiness,
Thou art the Lord of ryghteousnes.
Forget not this.
The Collecte.
Feed us O Lord thy miserable people in that time when reigns the famine of
thy word, deliver our souls from the death of sin, that we may be ^illed
with thy mercy: finally, to be associate to the righteous, in the joys of
eternity by thy gracious gift. Through Christ, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. XXXIIII.
When David fled, to Achis king,
At death he was full near:
And saved yet, this Psalm did sing,
Benedica^ dominum.
With all his friends in quiere.
1
I Will give thanks: to God always,
Who reigns in power most hie:
Within my mouth: shall be his praise,
declarde continually.
2
Of this good Lord: to bost the fame,
My soul shall never lynne:
The humble sort: shall hear the same,
And eke rejoice therein.
3
O laud and praise: the living Lord,
with me perform his praise:
And let us all: with free accord,
extol his name always.
4
I sought the Lord: and when I cryde,
he bowde his loving ear:
Yea, he me keeps, each time and tide,
and did me rid from fear.
5
Lo, thus to God: the poor does call,
his cry he does regard:
And he from pains and woeful thrall,
likewise does him awarde.
6
They had an eye: full bent in him,
and so they lightened were:
A shamefast face not one of them,
from that time forth did bear.
7
Gods angels stands him round about,
whose life him fearth aryght:
No harm they take, by wicked route,
he them delivers quyte.
8
O taste and see: how gracious,
the Lord remains just:
That man is blessed: all prosperous,
that lays on him his trust.
9
O fear the Lord: ye saints of his,
therein your travail plant:
For they that fear: the Lord of blis,
shall nothing ever want.
10
The Lions need: with hunger fret,
the rich and proud in heart:
But he whose fear: in God is set,
of all good things have part.
11
Ye children young: approach ye near,
give ear unto my word:
I will you learn, the Lord to fear,
in godly hearts accord.
12
What man he be: that list to live,
and feign would see good days:
Let him no fraud: in tongue atchieue,
in lewd and froward ways.
13
Reject the evil: and take the good,
all wicked ways eschew:
Seek pleasant peace: with modest mood,
and do the same ensue.
14
Upon the just: and godly men,
the Lord his eyes does splay:
And boweth his ears: as God to them,
as often as they do pray.
15
Gods face is seen, most irefully,
to wicked men of hand:
To root full out: their memory,
from all the earth to stand.
16
To God the Lord: the righteous call,
who hears their heavy case:
And he from cares: and troubles all,
delivers them by grace.
17
The Lord is nie, to him by might,
that is contrite in heart:
And saves the man: of humble sprite,
nor will from him depart.
18
Great are the cares: of perfect men,
and great their troubles be:
But yet the Lord: delivers them
from all adversity.
19
He keepth their bones: both safe and sound,
Unbroken them to ^aue:
The evil, evil happes: shall all confound,
no stay by God to have.
20
The Lord will keep: his servants all,
their souls he will defend:
And none shall be in sorrow thrall,
who just to him does bend.
The Collecte.
ALmightye God that art the strong protector of them that be in adversity,
and art most merciful deliverer from all dangers of the world: We beseech thee
of thy godly providence, to send thy holy angel to assist us on every side,
from tribulation, to be at last delivered from the miserable death of sinners.
Through Christ, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. XXXIIII.
When David fled to Achis king,
For the Lute.
At death the door he was full near,
And saved yet this Psalm did sing
With all his friends in godly quiere,
This psalm aforesaid in an other Meter.
To God his Lord, to him so dear,
In voices clear, with heart and will.
Give thanks I will.
1
Benedica^ dominum.
Give thanks I will: give thanks I will,
For aye to God most gracious,
He is my forte, my rock on hill
Note the reuolutio^s of six diverse terminations.
My Lord he is most bounteous,
My mouth shall praise him plenteous,
In heart and mind most fervent still.
Give thanks I will*
2
My soul may boast: of this my Lord,
He was my help so trustelie,
Let meek men hear with one accord:
Let woeful men joy willingly,
That God has done so lovingly,
From whom all grace does down distill.
Give thanks I will.
3
Praise ye the Lord with heart and voice,
With me ye see his gentleness,
Together come, let us rejoice,
To laud his name in faythfulnes,
Like aid to you he will express,
To keep from you, all troublous ill.
Give thanks I will.
4
I sought the Lord he sent me ease,
He hard my grief and all my pain,
He plucked me forth of all disease,
That deadly gript my heart the vain,
He rid my fear, he turned again,
For I him sought with all my skill.
Give thanks I will.
5
I fled to him, and saw his light,
Who eye did cast to his good grace,
All lightened were with visage bright,
Confounded not were they in face,
No pain no spite could them disgrace,
God them defendes, none can them spill.
Give thanks I will.
6
God hard my cry as sweet incense,
I poor man lo felt this in part,
He gives all bliss, he quith offense,
He bade all woe from me depart,
Of troublous pain to quench the dart,
Right sone he did his word fulfill.
Give thanks I will.
7
Gods host stood by to strength my fight,
For angels power most glorious,
About the just lie strong in might,
To make him go victorious,
To escape their foes so quarilous,
His power in grace endures still.
Give thanks I will.
8
O taste and see he none forsakth,
Gods goodness smells most fragrantly,
To whom who will themself betake,
O blessed they go right happily,
Who trust in him assuredly,
To them all help shall down distill.
Give thanks I will.
9
O fear the Lord in childelie fear,
Ye saints of his in holiness,
Serve him in truth your hearts him bear
For who him dredth in singlenes,
Can feel no want in baronnes,
No hurt no harm nor other ill.
Give thanks I will.
10
The Lions lack in hunger fret,
The rich I mean and gluttons vain,
To seek their pray though they be set,
No food with rest can they obtain,
Who seeks the Lord shall miss no gain,
Of all men's need he has the skill.
Give thanks I will.
11
I saylde full sure: the seas at length,
Ye children come and hear the case,
I will you teach Gods fear and strength,
By that I scapte so doubtful place,
For God me kept in all my race.
From all their hate which would me spill.
Give thanks I will.
12
Sweet life is good, it makth men glad,
Who loves it well with all his heart,
He shall not need to be adrad,
From days eterne who would not start,
Keep ye his tongue from overthwart.
And all good words let him fulfill.
Give thanks I will.
13
Fast truthfull word confoundth all blame,
Inure thy tongue in truth to lose,
Truth may be shent yet fear no shame.
Forbear all words opprobrious
All craft, all curse most odious,
For God of might will strength thee still.
Give thanks I will.
14
Flee evil, do good, and have good rest,
Old Adam kill thou formerlie,
So Adam new will follow best,
Then seek thou peace most busily,
But it ensue most earnestly,
For peace from God does full distill.
Give thanks I will.
15
God sees the just in providence,
His eyes them mark in tenderness,
He them relieueth in indigens,
His ears he bendes in redines,
When they do pray in carefulnes,
He hears their voice that work none ill.
Give thanks I will.
16
God hates the proud and them beshenth,
With irefull face to daunt their brain
His vysage grim on them is bent
Their gay renown he will distayne
Which aye to live they would so feign.
Where they reject all truth and skill.
Give thanks I will.
17
The just oppressed to God they cried,
He heard them soon in time and place
In stresse and need he them espied,
With all defense he them did brace,
To make them safe he hyed his pace
For ryghtfull men no spyte can spyll.
Give thanks I will.
18
God loves the meek: their ghostes be sweet
To them soft sprites he does impart
With faithful tears who here does greet
He will them ease of all their smarte,
To escape their foes, their spytefull art
Who would their wrecke on them fulfill.
Give thanks I will.
19
The just felt pain: they yet indurde,
In woes though wrapped all dolorous,
Great gain to them is death assured,
God them so stays most marvelous,
They joy in life most troubelous,
The rage thereof to quench and still.
Give thanks I will.
20
The just be strong: they never quayle,
Their bones in strength kept totallie,
Their constant hearts can never fail,
Their heirs be numbered severally
No bone to break can possibly,
Such help from God does most distill.
Give thanks I will.
21
The evil, dies evil to death full loath,
To late he spyeth his wyckednes
He must fear death that hated troth,
He must for sweet feel bitterness,
He harmde the just, he sinnd no less,
As evil he lived, so dies he ill.
Give thanks I will.
22
Thank thou the Lord who keeps thee still,
All help from him does ay distill,
Poor souls he rid, from bondage ill
Of woe and thrall none shall have skill
Which trust in him naught shall them spill,
O then his praise look ye fulfill.
Give thanks I will.
The Argument. Psalm. XXXV.
Christ prayth (in this) for recompense
his foes to reap (again) their part:
So man for wrong done him agens,
does yet no spite in (hateful) heart.
Indica Domine.
1
PLead thou O Lord my (ryghtfull) case
O judge (thy self) my hurtful foes:
Oppugn thou them in (open) face,
which me (all day) impugn to lose.
2
Lay hand (O Lord) upon the sword,
and eke (take so) the buckler to:
Stand up (to help) in thy good word,
to keep from me my (wrathful) fo.
3
Bring (forth the) spear and stop the way,
of them (so fierce) which me would harm:
To my poor soul (good Lord) oh say,
I am thy health and (stable) arm.
4
Let them be (driven and) put to shame,
that seek (by craft) my soul to spill:
Put them (abacke) to shameful name,
that me with grief would (deadly) fill.
5
Make them (to be) as dust we see,
before the wind so (lightly) blown:
(In have) let Gods swift aungel nie,
them (drive in) chase with power known.
6
Make way (to them) all slippery,
let it to them be (blind and) dark:
Gods aungel (so might) drive them by,
to feel thy might and (handy) warke.
7
For they close net (and snare) have laid,
even causeles me to (kill and) stroy:
Yea causles (sure even) as I said
my soul in pit (and grave) to cloy.
8
Let (sudden) woe take him unware,
his (crafty) net himself to trap:
Let mischief fall with (pain and) care
(right soon) into his only lap.
9
My soul (I say) I bid thee leap,
with joy (all glad) in this thy Lord:
It shall (no doubt) his health so reap,
that joy he shall (always) record.
10
My bones (so broosde) shall say O Lord,
who may (in strength) to thee be like?
Which sauest the poor from (tyrants) swords
from (irefull) spoylyng him to keep.
11
False witness soon (at me) did rise,
in wyckednes most (hasty) whote:
Of me they spurde (of things) full nyse,
that I knew not (at all) God wot.
12
They did (unkind) reward me evil,
for good to them I (friendly) wrought:
To grieve my soul (it was) their will,
to bring my life (and days) to naught.
13
But yet (I say) when they were sick,
in sack cloth then I (wept and) mournd,
My soul (with fast) I humbled meke,
my prayer to me (eftsoons) retournd.
14
I wept (and waylde) as dearest friend,
as (any) brother that they had:
As child for mother (does by) kind,
in black (array) I was all clad.
15
But they (again) in my great evil,
they floct (on heaps) and did rejoice:
Most abiectes (came and) mocked me still,
(and I) not ware in spiteful noyce.
16
With such lewd slaves (so vile) to see,
to them were scorners (jointly) knit:
Their teeth they gnast (and grynd) on me
as (peysant) mockers was be fit.
17
When wylt thou set (O Lord) thy sight,
on this my pain I (daily) bear?
(O Lord) ryd me from all their spite,
from Lions whelps (defend) my dear.
18
My thanks (therefore) I will extend,
when folk (in place) be met so most:
In companies (as due) to send,
all praise (to thee) in every cost.
19
Let not my foes (in ire) at me,
rejoice in quarrel (falsely) still:
For (gyltles) they hate me to free,
with (wynkyng) eyes they mock their fill.
20
For why no peace (in truth) they speak,
but all (do rage) against the meke:
Good men on earth (they wyshe) to wreke,
for this in craft (and guile) they seek.
21
Their face (and mouth) they have disfort,
at me (they cry) with fie and fie:
Our eye has seen (they say) a sport,
that we (with right) may him defy.
22
O Lord (my God) this have thou seen,
be not at this to (dumme and) still:
In thee (thou know) my trust has been,
depart not far (from me) in will.
23
Rise up and wake (in have) I say,
to judge my cause in (open) sight:
My Lord and God (thou can) them fray
aduenge (thou soon) my quarrel right.
24
Oh judge (my cause) as thou art wont,
in (equal) justice Lord of thine:
O (Lord my) God least in this bront,
my foes rejoice (to much) in fine.
25
Refrain (in tongue) them thus to say,
there there, we see (for us) enough:
Let them not say (O Lord) I pray,
we have him (surely) swalowd now.
26
Let them feel shame (and blame) at full,
which joy (and laugh) at my distress:
At me who brag (and boast) that wull,
let shame and spyte them (fully) press.
27
Let them (even so) in joy be glad,
that wyshe (to see) my right redrest:
To God (for aye) let thanks be had,
who wylth (so kind) his servants rest.
28
My tongue (then thus) shall loud rebound,
thy praise (O Lord) and justice eke:
All day I will in (perfect) sound,
thy laud tell (just even) week by week.
The Collecte.
EVerlyuing God, the health, the stay and refuge of our souls, we beseech thee
to cover and arm us with the helmet of hope, and with the buckler of
invincible faith, so that we may feel thy help in all causes of our
necessities, at length to be replenished with joy and gladness to magnify thy
goodness in the church and congregation of ryghteous christen me^, and that all
our life long, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. XXXVI.
Here wicked men's delight,
Is painted, what it is:
But blyndenes deep in (open) sight,
Dixit iniustus.
In virtue whole remiss.
1
IN mydst of evil man's heart,
His sin has blind him so:
Gods fear (all whole) is set a part,
From both his eyes ago.
2
For he himself does gloss,
In his bewitched eyes:
Till God his sin (so foul) disclose
Most worthy hate to rise.
3
His words of mouth be naught,
And kepes much guile in store:
To cease he bids his (heart and) thought,
To work by virtues lore.
4
Shrewd turns in irefull mood,
He most in bed does muse:
He hold on ways not (truly) good,
No evil deed he refuses.
5
Thy mercy Lord in heaven,
Yet over all does spread:
Thy faithful truth is (daily) seen,
The clouds to reach in bread.
6
Thy justice Lord we see,
As mountains ferme to rest:
Thy judgments (hye O) secret be,
Thou shall save man and beast.
7
How worthy Lord most just,
Excelth thy grace benign?
As Adams flock shall (firmly) trust,
In fence of thy good wynge.
8
Of thy fat household store,
As drunken shall they be:
And drink (at need) them shall thou pour,
Of pleasures wells most free.
9
For thou have well of life,
With thee all health aboundth:
And Lord in thy bright light so ryfe,
Of us shall light be found.
10
O draw thy mercy near,
To them which love thee then:
And let thy grace (O Lord appear,
To rightful hearted men.
11
And let no foot of pride,
Approach me hawtely:
Nor wicked hand (in hate) beside,
To move me wretchedly.
12
These workers vain of evil,
In their own turn be cast:
Repulse they have in (crooked) will.
From footyng be they past.
The Collecte.
PVrifie our hearts with thy heavenly light O merciful God, which art
original fountain of everlasting light, that we may be fullye replenished
with the plenteous grace of thy sweet house, so to eschew all wyckednes and
craft, to tread under our foot the vauntyng furies wherewith the men of this
world be carried by Satan the Prince of the same, grant this for thy beloved
sons sake Christ our Lord, to whom with thee and the holy ghost, be all
honor world without end.

The Argument. Psalm. XXXVI.
Here have ye painted beforne your eyes tweyne
The restles wit of the fell wicked wight,
How he cares and carkth for his lytheir gain,
This psalm aforesaid in an other Meter.
How he flotth aloft in hye power and might,
And setth God and his hallowes all in despyte;
Whose cursed steps the just makth his orison,
In life not to tread to his confusion.
Dixit iniustus.
MUsing upon the variable business,
That this troubly world haunth by sea and land
My heart gives me that sin and wyckednes,
Suggestth to the wicked that he may stand*
Without any fear safely of Gods hand,
For no fear of him is in all his sight,
Of Gods law he is bereaved the shyning light.
2
Me fell to mind that he wonted thus to go,
To flatter aye himself in his own sight,
For sin the venom did enchaunt him so,
That in it he hase his whole delight,
And thynkth in heart that all is aright,
But God will spy out his sin abominable,
Though to the world it has visour commendable.
3
Busily in mind I began to reuolue,
His words unrighteous and craftily laid,
All truth and Justice of God to dissolve
But mere deceit in hipocrisye wayghed
And would not be controld of that he said,
To learn of any man he did disdain,
How the very right way he might attain.
4
I noted eke so by night what he thought,
When Gods men vsen: to recount their trespass*
But his head in his bed all mischief sought
Imagening all goodness to deface,
To banyshe all truth and that to disgrace,
In no godly way set was his busy brain,
For all wicked ways he took for his gain.
5
The wicked thus heaping his sin on hy^
Where by desert he might be forsake:
How marvelous O Lord is than thy mercy,
That from this world thy care thou do not take,
Hye up to heaven and clouds his course does it make,
All men to feed both good and eke the bad,
Such faythfulnes ever thy promise have had.
6
Thy providence O God most marvelous,
To all men mortal is inscrutable,
More stable and hye then mountains hideous
More deep then sea botomles, unsearchable
Be thy secret judgments insuperable,
For not man only of thy power does taste,
But brute beasts of thee also has their repast.
7
Man might muse much O God this to expe^d
But what earthly man could this matter tell,
How thou by thy hand do all things defend,
In what bounty thy mercy does excel,
How profound eke thou art in thy counsel,
Well Adams childern may well in thee trust,
Under thy good wings to be shadowed just.
8
Who will thy blessed word trust in faith sure,
They shall be filled with all plenteousnes,
For thy store house is full of all pleasure
For thou geuest them to taste of thy sprits goodness,
Whose sweet wells they shall drink by thy larges,
From whose bellyes shall lively water spring,
Others to refreshe to thy gloryfyeng.
9
For with the only be these wells of life,
Of frail men spring but podels of mire,
From whom sourdeth error and crooked strife,
In the only is that we can require,
Both light truth and life to fill our desire,
For in thy light truly, light must we see,
Or else in all darkness wrapped shall we dee.
10
Thy gentle goodness O Lord impart,
To such as faithfully thy word do keep,
Who know thee both wise and merciful in heart,
That from day to day they may thy face seek,
For they to thee bear aright their hearts meke
Thy righteousness they know and thy judgments
Thy holy word and eke thy commandments.
11
Since than the meke of heart be so at ease,
And proud be out of favor all exilde:
Keep me O Lord from pride their foul disease
For they have both thee and thy word reuylde
Let not my foot be in their steps begylde,
Keep away from my soul their violence,
That they lay no hand upon my patience.
12
Thus deep musing with my self in a trance
Calling to mind the ends of good and bad:
Though they tweine here lead a life in distance
How the bad for his mirth shall once be sad,
And the good for their woe shall once be glad,
How the naught shall be cast on the worse hand
then deemd I in fine, that truth shall sure stand.
This psalm of an other kind of Metre^ Dixit iniustus.
The Argument. Psalm. XXXVI.
Here plain do ye see: how the earthly man,
All sin do commit in his heart that he can,
No love can him move: of the Lord for to see,
No fear can him stay: from his error to flee.
1
THe wicked in heart: as I guess is he bent,
All sinful abuse: in his life to frequent:
Of God has he not: any fear in his eyes,
So wilful he goes: in his awkly deuyse.
2
For blyndly he uses: for to flatter himself,
So pride has him puffed: by his waltering wealth:
Untyll that his sin: so behated of God,
Found out by his search: be dewrayed by his rod.
3
The words of his mouth: be unrightfully wayed,
In sleyghty deceyt: be they craftily laid:
Quyte ceased he has: to behave him aryght,
Good deed for to do: has he driven from his sight.
4
All mischief he dreams: to devise in his bed,
From godly deserts: has he turned his head:
No way that is good: has he ^leaued unto,
No evil can he hats: but in it does he go.
5
Thy mercy O Lord: to the heaven does ascend,
Still him to abide: so to make him amend:
Thy faythfulnes eke: to the clouds does amount,
Though graceles he be: not his life to recount.
6
Thy righteousness stands: like the mountayns on hye
Most stable it is: how so vaynly he lie:
Thy Justice in domes: to the deepes be they like,
Frail man with the beast: with thy health for to seek*
7
How wondrous O God: is thy pityfull heart,
Thus man to relieve: in his life overthwart:
More suerly trust: may the children of men,
Thy wings shall them keep: as her birds does y^ hen
8
Full fed shall they be: by thy plenteous store,
Thy grace is so large: to thy praise evermore:
Sweet drink shall they have: by thy deinty repast,
As floudes do* we see: fro the sprynges to be cast.
9
For truly with thee: is the fountain of life,
All virtue in whom: may we spy to be rife:
No doubt in thy light: shall we light ever see,
And blind shall we be: if we vary fro thee.
10
Continue to them: O thy fatherly grace,
Who know thy renome: who thy bounty embrace:
To them (do we crave): so thy justice impart,
Who serve thee aright: in a purified heart.
11
One bone for my self: do I heartily pray,
No foot of the proud: that against me he lay:
And let not the hand: of the wickedly wight,
Confound me by sleight* so to vanguyshe my might.
12
Even there are they fallen: in their crafty devise,
These workers of evil: be they never so nyse,
And cast be they down: by thy powerful hand,
Not able to rise: never able to stand.
The Argument. Psalm. XXXVII.
Here taught we be our self (in heart) to hang of God,
That we deny our self (in heart) to hang of God,
How good shall well at last (in state) have their abode
And evil shall evil at last (in state) have their abode
Noli emulari.
1
ENsue thou not: men obstinate,
Ne fret (in heart) ne strive with them:
Envy thou not: their wicked state,
A time (but short) to row the streme.
2
For soon as hay: they shall away,
as (witherd) grass cut down I say:
So swiftly fade: as herb the blade,
how green (and fresh) so ever it lay.
3
Trust thou the Lord: hold fast his word,
be doing still good (righteous) deed:
Dwell thou in land: hold still thy hand,
in truth (and rest) thy faith to feed.
4
Thus thy delight: shall God be right,
to him than set thine (ear and) heart:
What mind can crave: or wyshe to have,
God will it just (right soon) impart.
5
Commit thy way: thy state and stay,
to Gods (most strong) all loving grace:
Trust him in faith: for what he says,
he bringth it well to (ready) pass.
6
He will express: thy ryghteousnes,
at length (of time) as sun so bright:
And will endue: thy judgment true,
with light as noone (does shine) in sight.
7
Be still in God: abide his rod,
let him (always) do what he will:
Fret not I reed: though wicked speed,
who sueth (so fast) all counsayles evil.
8
Recede from ire: no time conspire,
with them (to go) thy heat refrain:
Else shall thy will: be moved still,
to counterfeit their (wicked) brain.
9
Maligners all: shall have a fall,
They shall be (all deep) rooted out:
Where who abide: the Lord their guide,
shall use (at will) the land no dout.
10
Within a while: all wicked wyle,
shall pass (away) and melt to naught:
His place whereas: late green he was,
shall not be found though (Nylo) sought.
11
But yet the meek: shall as they like,
enherite sure: the (stable) earth:
God will their stresse: In heaven refreshe,
with store (and choice) of peaceful mirth.
12
The Ungodly seek: against the meek,
his counsayles mad to (weaue and) warpe:
He gnasht his teeth: if naught he sees,
in life of them (in shame) to carpe.
13
The Lord shall let: his wrath and threat,
and laugh at him (full dry) in scorn:
For he does see: his day to be,
at hand to wayle (full sore) forlorn.
14
Their sword drawn out: bow bent so stout,
the wicked (sort all) ready has:
To bring the poor: to death his door,
to kill the just in (hateful) wrath.
15
Their sword so fierce: their hearts shall pierce
themself again (so just) to quyte:
Their bow so bent: shall be but rent,
and void shall be their (irefull) might.
16
A little store: got just before,
to ryghteous man is (always) more:
Than is the food: and all the good,
of (subtle) man that crafth therefore.
17
The arms and sleyghtes: with all the baytes
of wicked man shall (shortly) quayle:
Yet will the Lord: the just aforde,
their hold (and trust) shall never fail.
18
God knowth the days: and loves the ways
of godly men (their lives) to aid:
From tycle chance: their heritaunce,
shall last (in time) for ever stayde.
19
In perilous days: of dreadful frayes,
they shall not stand (in fear) amasde:
In time of dearth: of barren earth,
their (store and) plenty shall be blasde.
20
But wicked men: shall peryshe then,
gods foes though (they be) hye aloft,
Yet like the sun: shall they consume,
as (meltyng) fat of lambs so soft.
21
The wicked man: he borow can,
but will not pay (his det) again:
The ryghteous man: to lend he can,
and feelth therein no (bitter) pain.
22
Gods blessed men: deep rooted then,
shall raygne (at will) and have their fill:
Gods cursed men: up rooted then,
shall sterue (for lack) and want their will.
23
The Lord is guide: at good man's side,
his kind of life (he so) alowth:
His steps and gate: his life his state,
God guides (full sure) and it auowth.
24
If chance he slip: by humayne tryp,
yet (fully) flat he falth not down:
Gods hand him stayth: and under layth,
to keep him (just both) safe and sound.
25
I young have been: now old am seen,
the just (as yet) I never knew:
Once destitute: or yet his fruit,
to seek their bread (in need) undue.
26
The just man wull: be merciful,
still lendth (his good) he hourdth not than:
And yet his seed: in grace shall speed,
both blessed (and praysd) of God and man.
27
Flee thou all evil: with heart and will,
do good that God (of thee) requyrth:
Than trust thou sure: long time to endure,
to have (all thing) what heart desierth.
28
For God loves right: and will not quyte,
give up his saints (for aye) to wayle:
His dear elect: be ever kept,
where wicked seed shall (fowly) quayle.
29
The ryghteous man: most stable than,
the earth (at rest) inherit shall:
Therein to dwell: most safely well,
for ever (sure and) not to fall.
30
The ryghteous mouth: is traynd in south,
in wisdom (godly) all inured:
His tongue will talk: all wysdomes walk,
in sentence right (always) assured.
31
For why Gods law: is all his awe,
and shet in heart: (it is full fast:
His life and gate: as stable state,
shall never slide (once made) aghast.
32
The wicked prye: they toote to spy,
the walk (and trade) of ryghteous man:
They search and seek: some cause to pyke,
to kill him (quyte and) if they can.
33
But God his strength: will not at length,
leave them in their foul (subtle) hands:
To be condemnd* by foes so fremde,
at sentence (nigh so) when he stands.
34
Trust thou the Lord: keep fast his word,
for he will thee on hye promoote:
To hold the land: where wicked band,
at eye (right down) shall fall in foot.
35
For I even I: have spyed with eye,
the wicked (wight O) far a loft:
So strong to see: as Ceder tree,
so grene (and fresh) as bay full often.
36
Tho went I by: his seat to spy,
but lo (full soon) it was agone:
I sought his place: to see his grace,
fie (stable) place then had he none.
37
This is the sum: soon good become,
in cliffe (always) be innocent:
Hold truth full fast: for truth at last,
bringth (joyful) peace with gods assent.
38
But wretched men: who wicked ren.
by heaps shall fall in (shameful) fear:
Their fortune falth: their pleasure palth,
their end (of days) is woofull chere.
39
Where health and wealth: from God himself,
to righteous men so (fastly) growth:
He is their shield: their strength in field,
when trouble (chance or) ouerflowth.
40
God them shall fence: and ryd them thence,
where (proudly) rule all wicked men:
He will them save: for why they have,
their trust (and hope) in him again.
The Collecte.
O Father which art the assured stay and bliss of all righteous men, for thou
never forsakest them in hunger, ne yet permitst them to be overcome in the
battle of tribulation, we beseech thee to defend us with that right hand of
thine, which thou use redily to reach to them which be in danger, from
perishyng therein, grant this for thy sons sake, to whom, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. XXXVIII.
Meek David prayde: and ceased not,
In woe dismayde: nigh dead in that,
Yet so arayde: he faltred not,
In God he stayde: he altered not,
Domine ne in furore.
No further strayde: he varied not,
But thus he said: he tarried not.
1
O Lord to sore: correct me not,
In angers store: oh checked me not,
For sin the sore: abject me not,
O Lord abject me not.
2
Thy irefull darts: be asperous,
They prick my heart: most dolorous,
Thy hand so smart: is burdenous.
Reject me not.
3
There is no health: in all my flesh,
Thy wrath my wealth: does so repress,
My bones themself: for sin want peace.
Abuse me not.
4
My sins my heed: have ouerflown,
As heavy lead: they be so grown,
Their fearful dread: have down me thrown
Refuse me not.
5
My wounds do ren: and sore they stink,
Alas the dynne: them when I think,
My folish sin: I do forethinke.
Despise me not.
6
In far great woe: low am I brought,
My trespace so: my pain has wrought,
Al day I go in mournyng thought.
Repryse me not.
7
My loins are fyld: with sore disease,
My flesh is spyld: and have none ease:
Al parts be styld none have release.
Suppress me not
8
Full weak I lie: deiect in stresse,
I roard on hye: In carefulnes,
My heart ye spy: remedylesse.
Oppress me not.
9
O Lord thou spiest: what would I feign,
And thou aduisest: my gronyng pain,
Yet me denyest: to help again.
Repress me not
10
My heart does pant: ah woeful wight,
My strength is scant: and all my might,
Mine eyes do want: their sense and light.
Bewound me not.
11
My loving friends: from me they flee,
With careless minds: my griefs they see,
My kin them wyndes: full far fro me.
Confound me not.
12
My foes which sought: my life to spill,
Close snares they wrought: to catch me evil,
They talked of naught: to trap me still,
Beshame me not.
13
I yet kept me: as deaf I were,
As dumme to see: in tongue and ear,
Their scorns at eye: I did them bear.
Defame me not.
14
As one I say: without an ear,
My mouth all day: I did not stere:
No checkes I lay: to all this gear.
Deface me not.
15
For Lord in thee: I had my trust,
My God most free: thou art so just,
And thou for me: still answer must.
Disgrace me not.
16
As thee my guide: I prayed in voice,
That they to wide: should not rejoice,
To see me slide: to fall in choice.
Abase me not.
17
For sinful det: such plages to bear,
In dolor great: it made me fear,
My heart is fret: to feel them near.
Detrude me not.
18
I will confess: my wyckednes,
My sins excess: in heaviness,
O Lord my stresse: the more redress.
Exclude me not.
19
My foes be strong: they live at ease,
They hate me wrong: they do not cease,
By heaps in throng: on me they prease.
Detect me not.
20
Who did requyte: my good with evil,
They did me spyte: they would me spill,
For that the right I did fulfill.
Deiect me not.
21
Thou see my state: forsake me not,
To their great hate: betake me not,
Lord God to late: awake thou not.
Forsake me not.
22
My Lord of wealth: oh tarry not,
From thee thy self: oh vary not,
That I in health: miscary not,
My Lord my God: O tarry not.
Oh tarry not.
The Collecte.
SEnd out Lord thy saving health upon our infirmities, eue^ thou that art most
loving Physician to all our wounds and sores, and grant that we may bewail
to thee all our sorrow and heaviness in true repentaunt hearts, and that we may
be able to subdue all the assaults of sin. Through Christ.

The Argument. Psalm. XXXIX.
(...)
When David saw the world so bad: Gods men for ^^ruth to scorn,
To God in heart complaynt he had* his ^onge in sile^^e borne.
1
I Full decreed my ways to wait: least I in tongue might err,
To stop my mouth with mosell strayt: nigh me while sinners were.
2
By silence long, even dom I was: from truth I held my peace:
It fret me sore good things to pass: my griefs so did not cease.
3
My heart within was set on heat: thus musing fire it took:
My tongue brake out, some thing to treat: then silence I forsook.
4
Tell me mine end O Lord I said: what number have my days:
That I may know how long dismayed: I here shall live in frayes.
5
My days lo thou at fyngers have: a span in bread they be,
My life to thee as naught is cast: lives man whole vanity.
6
In shadow dark man's walk is set: in broyle he ^^yleth in vain:
He heapth and heapth and knowth not yet: who reap shall all his pain
7
Now the^ O Lord what look I for? while men thus earth do wrote
My hope no dout thou art in store: thou art my health and bote.
8
To escape thy rod deliver me: from mine offenses quite:
And make me not a scorn to be: to men of folishe spite.
9
Lord dom I laid in patience: not once my mouth to open:
For this thou dydst by providence: to prove my faith and hope.
10
Remove thy scourge from me to fly: by sin I know deserved,
Thy hand so smart has spent me nigh: be I yet (Lord) preserved.
11
For when for sin thou scourgest man: by plages down sent fro the
As cloth by mothe, his soul does wan: all men then britle be.
12
Hear Lord my suit, and hark my cry: not deafely hear my tears
For Pilgrim strange with thee I lie: as were my fathers years.
13
O spare me then, that I my strength: recover may therefore:
Before I go from hence at length: and after seen no more.
The Collecte.
Keep thou our way O heavenly father, that we offend not in our tongue, so
that we may be kindled with the ghostly flames of virtuous meditations, and
that we heap up such treasures in this mortal life to reap the glory of life
immortal in the perfect fruition of thy glorious majesty, through Christ.

The Argument. Psalm. XXXIX.
King David prayed as dumme to go,
before his cruel fo,
To escape from his woe: of sin to be quyte,
And faith that man is vanity right
This psalm aforesaid in an other Meter.
Even mere vain vanity light
Vain vanity light.
1
I Have decreed: to wait my ways,
lest tongue should fault by strayes:
My mouth will I keep: with bridle to tie,
While that I know my foe to be bye.
While he in vanity lygheth,
In vanity lygheth.
2
I held my tongue, A nothing said,
In silence domme I laid,
So loathe to reply: although to my pain,
Great grief I felt* good word to restrain,
In world such vanity raignth,
Such vanity raignth.
3
But musing thus: I was in heat,
My heart did sore me freat:
For fire the pain: provoked me much,
At last I spoke: with murmuryng grutch,
I saw the vanity such,
The vanity such.
4
Lord let me know: mine end of days,
the number how it lays:
So truly to touch, the certeintie yet,
How long shall nature respite her det,
To wayle my vanity great,
My vanity great.
5
As span thou metst: the days of mine,
And naught they be to thine:
In brevity set, all wrapped in fear,
Good hap so far: great magre so near,
Man is but vanity here,
But vanity here.
6
In shadow dark: man toylth with pain,
and vexth himself in vain:
So gather he dear: goods carefully kept,
He knowth not yet, by whom to be rept,
So deep in vanity stepped,
In vanity stepped.
7
And now O Lord what is my hope,
where men thus blyndly grope:
Thou truly my scope: art only to see,
For man we know but shadow to be,
Whole set in vanity he,
In vanity he.
8
O ryd me Lord that am so thrall,
from mine offenses all:
That never I fall: as mock and a scorn,
Of wicked men: with teeth to be torn,
Who be in vanity borne.
In vanity borne.
9
And do^^ne I went in all my pain,
In mouth I did not plain:
I minded again thy doing among,
Thou wylt the just to suffer a wrong,
Of man in vanity strong,
In vanity strong.
10
This plage for sin yet take away,
O Lord to thee I pray:
For wasted I lay: thy hand is so fell,
Thy terrors great: my conscience swell.
I feel my vanity well,
My vanity well.
11
When thy rebukes: man's sin correcth,
His strength is soon deiect:
His beauty so checked: thou bringst it a sleep,
As mothe in clothe: when slily they creep,
Each man is vanity deep,
Is vanity deep.
12
Expende my cry: bow down thine ear,
O Lord my prayer hear:
My tears be thou near: for stranger I am,
And ghest with thee: my fathers the same,
And they by vanity lame,
By vanity lame.
13
O spare a time: and cease my pain,
my strength to win again:
Before to refrain: ear death does me spy,
Consumde by thee: with irefull eye,
Lest I in vanity dye,
In vanity dye.
The Argument. Psalm. XL.
At David prayed: so Christ may ye s^e,
Himself to give: full ready to be,
To God with thanks: most heartily free,
And so they spied: their foes for to flee.
Expectans expectaui.
They mist not to see.
1
BY silent watch: I waited in sprite,
The Lord of heaven: and stayed on his might,
At last he howde: to show me his sight,
And heard my cry: that I did endight.
His ear was so right.
2
He brought me forth: of horrible pit,
In lome and clay: deep myerd in it:
On stable rock: he made me to sit,
Hewdes man was: and guyded my feet.
In journey so fit.
3
A song full new: he put in my mouth,
To sing to God: his laud for his sooth:
For he kind thank: most gently alowth,
Of just men eke: their hearts he auowth.
So friendly he bowth.
4
Mine act shall cause: full many to see,
How God is good: most bounty and free,
In fear to him: in heart to agree,
In him to trust: all error to flee.
God lauded to be.
5
Who trustth in God: is blessed in heart,
Though woe him vexth: how ever it smart:
From God his Lord: yet will not astart,
To proud men such: as fables impart.
With lies ouerwhart.
6
My God and Lord: thy wonders be hye,
None can thy thoughts: by reason espy:
Thou bearst to us: though I did apply,
I could not tell: the number at eye.
Them half to descrye.
7
No sacrifice: do work the delyght,
Meat offerings none: do please thee aryght:
But ears vnshit: thou shopst us by might,
Whole offeryngs brent: so sin for to quyte.
Thou longst not the sight.
8
Then said I strayt: most duly to this,
Lo here I come: not slowly remiss:
In volume book: there written it is,
Of me in chief: without any mis.
Thy name for to bliss.
9
Thy will to do: all whole am I bent,
My God most hye: with gentle assent:
To thy sweet law: my heart does relent,
Whereby I trust: no time to repent.
My choice to lament.
10
Thy justice great: my self shall I strain,
To thy great church: to tell it again:
No time my lips: from it will I frayne,
And that thou know: most certainly plain
Thy love to retain.
11
Thy ryghteousnes: I hid not in heart,
Thy truth and health: I glad did impart:
I kept not close: how lovely thou wart,
Thy faith to folk: I spread it in part.
So trusty thou art.
12
To me always: thy mercy reserve,
That I may thee: most faithfully serve:
Let thy sweet grace: me da^ly preserve,
Thy healthful truth: that I may deserve.
So never to swerue.
13
I am beset: with troublous woes,
My sins so fell: do threat me to lose,
As hears of head: in number they rose,
My heart is faint: it self to repose.
So faintly it goes.
14
O Lord assent: to send me thine aid,
To ryd my foes that make me afraid:
Make have to help: before I be laid,
I dye if help: to me be denayde.
As wholly decade.
15
Who seek in hate: my soul for to kill,
Let shame them take: so cursed in will:
Confound them all: which seek me to spill,
Let them fall back: that wish me so evil.
That I may be still.
16
Woe worth them all: which me do defye,
And shame for mede, that they might aspye:
Against me who: so daily replye,
And in my pain: say fie to the fie.
Where health might they cry.
17
Let these in thee: be joyfully glad,
Which seek thy name: which be not adrad,
To love thy health: no time be they sad,
That (God be praysde) by them may be said.
For mercy so had.
18
Though poor I go: and needy I be,
The Lord so good: yet cares for me:
Thou art mine aid: my suertie free,
To tract thy time: Lord never agree.
From me for to flee.
The Collecte.
O Lord almighty, which art the invincible defender of all thy true servants,
and so by prophecies were so promised as is recorded in the head and principal
book of the law. We beseech thee to grave in our hearts thy holy laws, whereby
we may be able to denounce thy only righteousness, through, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. XLI.
Ye see how Christ makth here his moan,
Against the Jews to speak:
Beatus qui intelligit.
So may the just when he do groan,
Gods cause not his bewreake.
1
THat man is blessed: that counth in heart,
the poor (afflict) and nedies pain:
For he in day: of bitter smart,
him God (his Lord) will ease again.
2
God will him keep: and save his life,
and bless (with wealth) in earth his state:
And ryd his soul: from harm and strife,
of all his foes: in (deadly) hate.
3
The Lord will ease: when he on bed,
al wrapped (in pain) lyth sick full often:
And comfort send his paynfull head,
thou tournst (O Lord) his couch full soft.
4
In pain I tournd: and said to thee,
Have mercy Lord (right sone) on me:
Heal thou my soul: and make it free,
For I (full often) have sinned to thee.
5
Mine enmyes thus: said wrathfully,
their (angry) hearts: so sweld in spite:
Why does he live: when shall he dye?
his name (and fame) to perish quyte.
6
And if they came: to visit me,
they glosde (in craft) as they were vain:
Their hearts to guile: do full agree,
and out (from thence) spoke lies again.
7
My foes in one: close rounded they,
against me whole: they (jointly) met:
Even me with lies: they did I say,
unworthily (with guile) beset.
8
They said he wrought: some evil devise,
that God him thus (so sore) does strike:
To life no more: God let him rise,
that now (in bed) he lies so sick.
9
Yea even my friends: familiar,
at me (in scorn) they lift their heels:
Even they that farde: as I did fare,
yet me (to trap) they marked at meals.
10
To mercy yet: Lord condescende,
to me so poor: (in heart) I call:
Raise me again: that I may mende,
I shall (therefore) reward them all.
11
By this I know: thy love to me,
for that (O Lord) mine enmies all:
From triumphs yet: full far to be,
to see (at eye) my house to fall.
12
For thou respects: mine innocence,
wherein thou did: me (strongly) keep:
So shall thy grace: well strength me hence,
(I trust) even nigh: thy face so meke.
13
O blessed be: of Israel,
this (mighty) God: and Lord again:
So be it aye: of men so well,
with twice (at end) Amen, Amen.
The Collecte.
MOst gentle remitter of sin almighty God, who lovingly show the way to
escape all dangers to such as be merciful to their brethren in their
neecssities, we beseech thee to ease our diseases, that where thou do
chastise our carnal offenses, yet with mercy grant us health of soul,
through Christ.

The end of the first book.
Here begins the second book of Psalm*
The Argument. Psalm. XLII.
As Christ (the Lord) for him and his,
In trust did pray: in (paynfull) stresse:
So man even like: as did his head,
Quemadmodum ceruus.
May just the same: (in word) express.
1
Even like (in chase) the hunted Hynde,
the water brooks: (does glad) desire:
Even thus my soul: that faintie is,
to thee (my God) would feign aspire.
2
My (weary) soul: did thyrst to God,
To God (the fount) of life and grace:
It said even thus: when shall I come,
To see (at eye) Gods lively face.
3
My tears instead: of (food and) meat,
Both day and night (to me) they were:
While that all day: rebukers said,
Where is thy God: (fro thee) so far.
4
When this (O Lord) came soon to heart,
I yet (therein) recomfort felt:
And trust to lead: the people forth,
to go (full glad) where thou have dwelt.
5
To joy in (heart: and) voice of mirth,
With lauds and thanks (most due) always:
Among thy folk: when that they keep,
So hye (in sight) their holy day.
5
Why castes thy self: than (flatly) down,
My (fainty) soul: I said no less:
Why layest in me: so painfully,
In (grievous) woe: and carefulnes?
Put thou thy trust: (and hope) in God,
Let (earthly) thing: not thee amase:
I will him thank: for all his help,
In sight (most sure) of his good grace.
6
My God my soul: is (daily) vexed,
With inward pains (and pangs) so thrill:
I mind thy works* in Jordan yet,
so done (by thee) next Hermon hill.
7
As deep (profound) to deep reboundth,
at (dreadful) noyce: of thy great showers
Thy streams by course: so ouerflowes,
My soul (alas) the pain deuoures.
8
But God yet will: (command) the day,
To shine (most clear) me grace to see:
My night of woe: shall praise him than,
Who kept yet life: (to bide) in me.
9
Thou art my strength: (alone) O God
I might thereby) than plain in woe:
Why have me thus: forgot so quyte,
So sad to go: for (mortal) fo.
10
It pierces my bones (as sharp) as sword
To hear my foes: in (cruel) spyte:
They daily thus: at me vpbreyde,
Where is (become) thy God of might?
11
Why art thou then: (I say) my soul?
So vexed (with grief) and prostrate so?
Why make in me: so much a do,
Where God is friend: in (all thy) woe.
12
O put thy hope (I bid) in God,
I trust (thereto) in time and place:
He is my God: whom I will thank,
My face shall see: his (helpyng) grace.
The Collecte.
O Lord which art the only chearer of man's conscience and countenance with
the aspect of thy face which the souls of thy faithful servants do long to
behold. We beseech thee, that while we seek thy favor by the manifold tears
of our compuncte minds, we may be watered with the heavenly showers of thy
grace, to place thee within the tabernacle of our hearts. Through, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. XLIII.
For Saul his wrong among Philistians
Prayed David strong among Philistians
The poor even so may thus their cry auance.
Iudica me Domine.
To God in woe. may thus their cry auance.
1
O God eterne: as judge discern
my cause, from folks unclean:
And ryd me so: from man that go,
in vice, and guyle does mean.
2
My God of might: thou art of right,
Why have us driven from thee?
While thus go I: so mournfully,
at men's hostility.
3
Send out thy light: and truth to sight,
to lead and guide my way:
To see thy place: thy hill of grace,
where thou do rest all day.
4
That I may go: Gods aulters to,
to thee my God even till:
To thee my joy: my God and roye,
with harp thee thank I will.
5
My soul so dull: why art so full,
of grief and heaviness?
Why standst aghast: as help were past?
such thoughts why do impresse?
Put all thy trust: in God most just,
I will him thanks extend:
He shewth me grace: even nigh at face,
as God all health he sendth.
The Collecte.
WE call upon thee with most hearty supplication O God which art the eternal
fountain of all light shine on us the glorious light of thy truth, while we
here travail in this world, to be illimited with the beams of everlasting
light of glory in the world to come, through, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. XLIII.
Poor David pressed by tyranny,
Of wilful Saul: who could not blin,
This psalm aforesaid in an other Meter. Iudica me Deus.
For his black guard: to search him nigh,
Prayth thus to God his help to win,
And wysheth that he his cause would try.
He thus begins.
1
AH judge me God: O judge most true,
Discern my cause: by power oppressed
Unfaintly men: do me pursue
By laws unjust: my right deprest,
Which yet thy word: allowth full due,
O give me rest.
1. Reg. 24.
Rule me to escape: that wicked man,
That sinful Saul: of shameless face,
2. These. 2.
Who boasts himself: all that he can,
And does usurp: thy godly place,
Whose power by sleite: and sin began.
O judge my case.
2
Know this I do: my God thou art
To thee my strength: I whole appeal,
Why putst me back? why standst apart?
My state to thee: I just reveal,
Why turnst from me: thy loving heart?
O mercy deal.
Eternal God: why go I thus,
Ashamd in face: and vily checked:
My cause but made: opprobrious,
Why does my fo: thus me reject?
To bear me down: so rigorous?
O me respect.
3
Return thy light: my heart to cheer,
Perform thy faith: that thou have hight:
Thy light and truth: let it appear,
To teach the blind: thy word so bright,
That it may rule: as law most dear,
O keep thy right.
Make have O Lord: and bring me nigh,
Thy holy hill: to sing thy praise:
Thy truth and light: of sanctuary,
Will be my guide: in all these frayes,
Expel this cross, this misery.
O cheer my days.
4
That I may go: gods aulters to
To offer thanks: in sacrifice:
In heart devout: as due is so,
Yea nigh in sight: to God to rise
My God of joy: ease thou my woe,
O glad mine eyes.
That thou alone: have given relief,
I thee will laud: with harp and lute:
My God intiere: my help in chief,
Thou shall my foes: for me confute,
So me to aid: to ease my grief,
O hear my suit.
5
Why then my soul: art thou so sad?
Why fretst within: why troublest me?
So foul dismayed: in thoughts bestad,
Know not that God: thy God is he?
Call this to mind: to make thee glad,
O make me free.
Even trust to God: in stablenes,
No more but trust: for sure he is,
I will him yet: with lauds confess,
For he will cheer: my face iwis,
My God my health: he is no less.
O grant all this.
The Collecte.
ALmighty God the fountain of light everlasting we sue unto thee and most
earnestly crave of thy bounteousnes, that thou would send down thy truth
and verity into our hearts, and replenish us with the clearenes of thy
eternal light, thorough Jesus,

The Argument. Psalm. XLIIII.
This Psalm with God expostulath,
That help he long delays:
It prayth for men all desolate,
Deus auribus.
In old respect of days.
1
O God so good: before these days,
we hard with open ears:
The fathers sage: told us thy ways,
thy works of old fern years.
2
How thou expulst: the heathen rout,
to plant thy people dear:
What people stout: thou dydst wede out,
to root the fathers there.
3
Not they by sword: did win the land,
their own arm saved them not.
But thy bright face: thine arm and hand,
such love at thee they got.
4
Thou art my king: O God my weal,
none other sue I to:
As once thou holpst good Israel,
help Jacobs stock even so.
5
By thee our foes: down shall we throw,
our horns shall burte them down:
In thy great name: full well we know,
to make our foes astowne.
6
For trust is none: in strength of bow,
that we can bend and draw:
My sword to weak: my strength to l^we,
to help not worth a straw.
7
But only thou: even only thou,
sauest us from all our foes:
Thou filst them all: with shame enough,
at us that hateful goes.
8
Of God above: we make our boast,
all day in thankful part:
To praise his name: in every coast,
Sela
for ever just in heart.
9
But what meanth this thou art so far,
whereby our shame thou see:
Where thou were wont to be so ^ar,
our armies now thou fleest.
10
Thou make us fast to turn our backs,
upon our enemy:
And who us hate with spiteful crackes,
they spoil our goods at eye,
11
Thou letst us all: as sparpled sheep,
to be devoured quyte:
As scattred flock: we mourn and weep,
among the Paynyms spyte.
12
To heathen dogs uncircumcised,
thou selst thy flock for naught:
No gain to thee: do rise in deed,
though we be sold and bought.
13
Thou make us all rebuke to take,
of them that neygbours be:
Of us but scorn: and scoff they make,
about us whom we see.
14
Thou makst us now: as laughyng stocks,
a scorn unto the heathen:
They shake their heads: as we were blocks
deryded up to heaven.
15
My shame and eke: confusion,
standth full to daunt mine eye:
My face all shame: as put upon,
no end thereof I spy.
16
We hear to often: the flaunderer,
how he blasphemth our faith:
We see our fo: what hate he bearth,
how he to vengeance layth.
17
Though yet these things be come on us,
we do not thee forget:
Nor froward like: ungracious,
thy covenant we reject.
18
Our heart yet standth: not turned aside,
to seek for other God:
Nor yet our steps: begone so wide,
by ways to walk so broad.
19
No though thou have: us smitten sore,
where Dragons cruel dwell:
Though paynde we be: and tossed the more,
with death the shadows fell.
20
Among thy plages: if we so evil,
should God in name forget:
To hold our hands: in straying will,
to other Gods beset?
21
Should not our God: inquyre for this,
to search where we become?
Who knowth our hearts and does not miss,
the secrets all and some?
22
When thus for thee: all day we be,
as drawn to death and slain:
Appointed thus: as sheep we see,
to slaughter driven a main.
23
Then wake O Lord: why sleep^^ so deep,
as though thou louedst not right?
Arise, be nigh: thy people keep,
aye leave us not to spyte.
24
Why turnst thy face: so irefully,
we lowly sinners be:
Why do forget: our misery,
our troubles great to see.
25
Our soul to dust: is brought^ down,
even just at deaths gate:
Our bellies cleaues in paynfull swowne,
to ground in fearful state.
26
Arise O God: and help us soon,
deliver us so thrall:
For thine own sake: we be undone,
for mercy we do call.
The Collecte.
ARise O God by thy mighty power to help us from all tyranny of persecurion,
and where thou did once for our fathers subdue al Heathen nations so deliver
us from all our enemies bodily and ghostly through. etc.

The Argument. Psalm. XLV.
A laud ye see: of king and queen,
set out-most glorious:
But Christ and eke: his spouse is seen,
more nigh described thus.
1
Eructauit cor meum.
MY heart breakth out: sweet praise to sing,
my song to king I make:
My tongue as swift: to do the thing,
as scribe his pen can shake.
2
More fair thou art: more amorous
than Adams sons I say:
Thy spech of lips: is gracious,
for God blessed thee for aye.
3
Begyrd thy thigh: Prince valiant,
with sword to vanquish stout:
To thy own laud: as mete it stant,
thy fame must show it out.
4
In worship, speed: and prosper, hye,
ride on to fence the truth:
In mekenes clad: and equitye,
great acts thy hand ensues.
5
Thine arrows kene: full sharply goes,
all folk to thee shall fall:
Among the mids: the kings his foes,
their hearts to vanquishe all.
6
Thy royal throne: O God is fast,
which ever shall endure:
Thy kingdoms mace: all right is cast,
to judge in truth full sure.
7
Thou love the right: and hatst the wrong,
O God, thy God therefore:
With oil of joy: anoynts the strong,
beyond thy match the more.
8
Thy garments smell: of Aloes,
of Myrre and cassia:
From Iuory ^hel^s: out brought they these,
to glad thy heart I say.
9
Among thy maids: so debonayre,
kings daughters there were told:
Thy right hand held: the Queen so fair,
in colored cloth of gold.
10
O daughter hear: and see full kind,
inclyne thine ear to me:
Thy people whole: cast out of mind,
thy fathers house to flee.
11
So shall the king: thy bewty like,
his love shall join to thee:
He is thy God: and Lord to seek,
with heart then serve him free.
12
So Tyrus land: shall thee enriche,
and they that richest stands:
Shall bring thee gifts: thy face to seache,
with thee to join their hands.
13
This kings sweet Queen: is glorious,
all whole within to see:
Her garments wrought: all curious,
with gold enbroydred be.
14
So brought she is: before the king,
in clothe of needle wrought:
Her Uirgin maids: her companieng,
her friends shall nigh be brought.
15
With joy and mirth: they shall full nigh,
be brought to him I say:
In palace there: most innerly,
where king himself does lay.
16
Thy fathers romes: such auncientes,
thy sons shall just succeed:
Whom thou may make: as Presidentes,
all lands in rule to sprede.
17
Thy name to all: in memory,
I ever will denounce:
The people so: shall durably,
to thee aye thanks pronounce.
The Collecte.
O Lord Christ the everlasting word of thy father by whom he once did create,
and yet dailye does create all things living, we beeseche thee to preserve
thy church brought together of diverse nations and countries, that we may all
in pure hearts so love thee in the righteousness of faith, to attain to the
heavenly habitation with our well-beloved fathers, who lyuest and raignest one God
with the father and the holy ghost, world, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. XLVI.
In this Christ's spouse elect (full well)
Her thanks to God extendth:
Deus noster refugium.
For that he did her foes debell,
And that he her defendth.
1
OUr hope is God and strength (at eye)
he guidth with his good hand:
A present help: in trouble nigh,
his grace thereby does stand.
2
For this we need: not care (and fear)
though world be cast in stowne:
Though hills to sea: were thrown (even there)
though all turn vpside down.
3
The waters though: they rage (in streme)
how ever they do swell:
Though mountayns quake: at noise of them,
Sela
yet just man hopth full well*
4
For why sweet brooks: and floudes (full nigh)
Gods City glad shall steep:
His holy place: and sanctuarye,
God strongly it does keep.
5
God dwelth in myds: of her (alone)
no man shall her remove:
Right early God: shall help her sone,
his church I mean above.
6
The heathen though: they rage (to fond)
and realms resist I say:
God raysde his voice: and so in land,
our foes did melt away.
7
The Lord of hosts: so strong (even he)
With us he standth to fight:
So Jacobs God: our refuge be,
Sela.
we fear no humayne might.
8
Lo come and see: how God (in wrath)
great meruayles aye has wrought:
What lands to naught: he scatred has,
how low their Idols brought.
9
He put down wars: and strife (in fear)
the whole world where they went:
He knapth the bow: and breakth the spear,
with fire he charets brent.
10
Be still and know: I say (all ye)
that God I am aryght:
To heathen all: known will I be,
the world shall see my might.
11
The Lord of hosts: so strong (from hence)
with us he is I say:
And Jacobs God: is whole our fence,
Sela.
our boast in him does lay.
The Collecte.
MOst trustye refuge in all perils and adversities which hang over us O
blessed Lord to sanctify the inward tabernacles of our hearts, with the
lively springs of thy blessed sprite, that we may trust steadfastly in thee our
God in all our battayles to have the better hand, through Christ.

The Argument. Psalm. XLVII.
This Psalm to joy exhorth: all christen men in sight:
Omnes gentes.
That Christ by power ascended so: whom glory sued aright.
1
TOgether clap ye hands: ye Gentiles all be glad:
Rejoice to God in melody: with thanks for mercy had
2
The Lord is hie in power: and ought be feared I say,
He is the king of all the earth: to him all things obey.
3
He shall so under us: the people soon subdue:
All Gentiles cast at feet of us: at us their Lords to sue.
4
He did chose out all us: an heritage so fair:
Even Jacobs hie magnificence: who^ he did love as heir.
5
God is ascended up: in joyful noise on hye:
with trumpets noise: as once his arc, eue^ thus up hie did s^ye.
6
O praises sing to him: O praises see ye sing:
Sing praises still unto our god: and laud him just as king
7
For that our God is king: of all the world so round:
Sing ye his praise than prudently: with understanding sound
8
For God by strength does reign: upon the heathen all
God sits upon his holy seat: all thing does hear his call.
9
The peoples heds be met: with Abraham's god and seed
Of god they be to shield the earth: but god does the^ exceed
The Collecte.
Eternal God which art the king of all worlds and realms, whose kingdom is
advanced upon all people and kynredes, we beseech thee to subdue under our
subjection all heathen vice and sin, that while we sing to thee our God in
words of wisdom and understanding, by thy aid we may have the better hand
of them, through Christ our Lord, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. XLVIII.
Gods City here a type of Christ his spouse,
Is praised clear a type of Christ his spouse,
Magnus Dominus.
It teachth again of praise to pay their vows.
All Christen men of praise to pay their vows.
1
GReat is the Lord: with hye accord,
so praised ought to be:
In city great: where God is set,
his holy hill to see.
2
For Syon hill: is fayer still,
of all the world the bliss:
This hill so wide: holdth North on side,
Gods city hye it is.
3
Our God even thus: most glorious,
is known in palace great:
As refuge sure: all men to cure,
that place is his so neat.
4
For lo the kings: their gatherynges,
in earth made her to spoil:
Though thus they met: with fury whet,
yet her they could not foil.
5
Her walls and holds, they did behold,
and merueld all aghast:
Their hearts were danke: their brags were blanke,
eftsoon they down were cast.
6
Such fears and panges, their hearts so wrang
in time of their assaute:
As women knows: their bearyng throws,
with fears like were they fraught.
7
So did they quayle: as Tharsls sail,
felt wreckt by wyndes of East:
For Paynyms all: be worthy fall,
Gods heritage to wrest.
8
As we did hear: so saw we near,
Gods city hye and strong:
This God of ours: the God of powers,
Sela.
will strength her aye from wrong.
9
As we conceyud: so we receyud,
O Lord thy mercy great:
For we did wait: thy help most great,
in myds of temple set.
10
As ( EL) thy name: is strong in fame,
So is thy praise well seen:
The world full out, and so no dout,
thy works full ryghteous been.
11
Let Syon mount: her joy recount,
let Judas towns be glad:
For this thy dome: to pull a down,
these Paynyms frantike mad.
12
Walk ye about: the walls so stout,
of Syons gostly house:
And tell her towers: her fortes and bowers,
her praise that ye may rouse.
13
And mark ye well: how strong she dwelth,
in bulwarks how she lie.
That ye may tell: it every deal,
to your posterity.
14
This God even he: our God we see,
for aye and ever strong:
He shall us guide: till death so wide,
of him shall be our song.
The Collecte.
O Most terrible God most worthy to be magnified in all thy works, which art
so glorious a prince in the heavenly Jerusalem: enlarge us in spiritual
understanding, so that after we have received thy mercy in the mydst of the
temple of our hearts, we may duly extol thy name, through Christ, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. XLIX.
The Jews be here, their honor not to see,
Reproved full nere, their honor not to see,
It does inuit of world the pride to flee.
Audite omnes.
The Christen knight, of world the pride to flee.
1
O Hear ye out: ye gentiles stout,
this thing that I will tell:
But ponder it: with ears vnshit,
this world all ye that dwell.
2
Ye Adams brood: ye noble blood,
hear ye my spell and lore:
Both hye and low: all whole in row,
the rich and eke the poor.
3
My mouth shall splay: all wisdoms way.
that will man keep and save:
My heart does muse: most godly truths,
all understanding grave.
4
I will incline: these ears of mine,
to parable full meet:
Deep words in harp: my mouth will carpe,
the sense though shall be sweet.
5
Why should I fear: evil days to bear,
to set on mucke my heart?
That even my heel: of life so evil,
at last might bring me smart?
6
For some there be: whose hearts agree,
in goods to put their trust:
And boast themselves: as carkyng elues,
of riches store unjust.
7
No brother can: redeem a man,
from death though feign he would:
Or God to go: to offer to,
agreement who so should?
8
The price to great: herein is set,
from death a soul to bye,
That must he leave: to gods own leave,
for aye in him to lie.
9
That is to say: that he should aye,
bide here in mor^all state:
That he no grave* should ever have,
but live in pleasant ra^e.
10
For he may spy: that wise men dye,
and peryshe all the fort:
As well the wise: as mad and nyse,
to others leave their port.
11
And can they think: that never sink,
their houses shall and fames:
That they here still: shall dwell their fill,
and lands to bear their names?
12
It will not be: that ever he,
shall last in glory gay:
But forth must go: as beasts they do,
in britle state and way.
13
Lo this their way: is folishe stray,
they blunder blyndly thus:
And yet their brood: praise this for good,
Sela.
as fools obliuious.
14
They shall lie deep: in hell like sheep,
and death shall gnaw their mawe:
But clear in light: of morning bright,
the just shall be their awe.
15
Their beauty gay: shall wast away,
in grave with stinche on sweet:
Their housee clean: shall not be seen,
for them so after meet.
16
But as for me: my God even be,
my soul he just will save:
From hell the power: in blessed hour,
Sela.
my sprite to him to have.
17
But fear thou not: ne dear thou that,
though one be welthy made,
Though now his house, shine glorious,
in honors portly trade.
18
For naught he shall: of riches all,
hence carry when he dyth:
Nor yet his pride: his pomp so wide,
in grave with him shall lie.
19
While here he dwelt: his soul he dealt,
all ease with pleasures wealth:
Such men will thee: praise wise to be,
if thou so helpst thy self.
20
That thou also: with them myghtst go,
their fathers steps to sue:
Where they no light: shall see in sight,
for their excess undue.
21
Man living thus: all gorgious,
who understanding wanth:
Is like to beast: with them to rest,
whose fame is short and scant,
The Collecte.
REplenish our mouths O Lord with thy heavenly wisdom, that we may remember
the mystery of thy blessed incarnation, whereby thou redemest us from the power
of hell, grant that we may be found meet to be presented to thy blessed face,
through etc.

The Argument. Psalm. L.
Here is reproved: the sacrifice,
Deus deorum Dominus.
of Jews for foolish trust:
And taught here is: with sad advise,
that thanks be yet more just.
1
THe God of Gods: the lord of might,
one God in persons three:
He bidth and calth: the earth in sight
from East to West to see.
2
This God appeard: from Zyon hill,
as God of beauty most:
From whence he would: should spring his will
and law to every coast.
3
Our God is come: in time of grace,
he will no silence keep:
With wastyng fire: before his face,
about him tempest deep.
4
The heaven above: the earth below,
he does upon them call:
His people all: to judge and know,
to help them that be thrall.
5
Collect ye now: my saints says he,
in one, before my sight:
Who stand in leage: and pact with me,
by sacrifices ryte.
6
The heavens shall sprede: his justice clear,
that all the world may spy:
That God himself: will judge appear,
Sela
the good from bad to try.
7
My people hear: for thus I say,
thy self to witness just:
O Israel: thy God always,
thy God I am to trust.
8
For sacrifice: or burnt incence,
I will not thee reprove:
To blame therein: thy negligence,
to send them me above.
9
From out thy house: I will not crave,
Bull, Bullock, Ox, or calfe:
Of thy fold else: he goats to have,
to joy of their behalf.
10
The beasts that grase: the wood so wide,
they be all mine at will:
On thousand hyls: the beasts that stryde,
I made them thee to fill.
11
On mo^ataynes fowls: that use their flight,
I know them all and some:
Wild beasts of field: be nigh my sight,
as made for my renoume.
12
If hungers stresse: though might I feel,
I would not tell it thee:
The world all whole: even every dele,
is mine and all ye see.
13
And think thou thus: so gross in wit,
that I bulls flesh would eat?
Or blood of Goats: to drink of it,
as blood to spill were sweet?
14
Na this it is: that I allow,
to God aye offer thanks:
And pay to God: of life thy vow,
and seek none other crankes.
15
In all thy woe: call thou on me,
when troubles thee do thrust:
I will (no fail) deliver thee,
thus shall thou praise me just.
16
But God thus chect: ungodly man,
what meanst to preach my laws?
My pact in mouth: why take thou than,
where life has wicked sawes.
17
To be correct: by discipline,
thou hate to hear the word:
So thou do cast: at back of thine,
my law of sweet record.
18
When the^e thou spiest: with him thou go,
to part the spoil in have:
Who wedlock break: with them thou boast,
thy lot with them is cast.
19
To cursed speech: thy tongue thou dightst,
to clout all crafty guile:
The just thou wringst: the bad thou quytest,
by laws pretense and style.
20
Thou sitst as judge: thy brothers name,
by sleit to over run:
Thou quarrel pikst: in crafty frame,
against thy mothers son.
21
While thus thou do: I saying naught,
thou iudgest me naught like thee:
But yet I shall: what thou have wrought,
detect before thine eye.
22
O ponder this: I do you pray,
all you that God forget:
Lest I in have: pluck you away,
in woe to see you set.
23
Who offer me: the sacrifice,
of thanks he honorth me:
And this the way: whereby I vyse,
Gods health to let him see.
The Collecte.
ALmighty God, God of all Gods, we humbly pray thee to take and accept our
sacrifice of thanks geuyng in good part. So that after we be discharged of
the burden of sin, we may declare without hypocrisy that we walk in the
way that leads to salvation, Through Christ.

FINIS.
The end of the first Quinquagene.
The Second Quinquagene of David's Psalter, translated into English Meter.
The Argument. Psalm. LI.
A prayer pure and form full good,
for penitentes so meek:
Thus David's heart: enbrued with blood,
Miserere mei deus
his God for grace did seek.
1
Have mercy God: on me I crave,
for thy great gentleness:
Thy mercies store on me vouchsaue,
put out my sinfulnes.
2
But wash me deep: from all my sin,
for deeply fallen I am:
O cleanse me clear: without, within,
from sin that beastly came.
3
For I confess: my wyckednes,
my state I feel most vile:
In sight I bear: my giltines,
it does mine eye reuyle.
4
To thee alone: I trespaced,
I ^ind before thine eyes:
That just in word: thou might be tried,
thou judge so pure to rise.
5
Behold in sin: I shapen was,
in natyue filth infect:
My mother me: conceyud alas,
in sin of Adams sect.
6
But lo thou have: the truth well loved,
in heart always to reign:
This wisdom hid: to few approved,
thou show to me most plain.
7
Thou shall me purge with Isope grene,
so clensd, men me shall know:
Thou shall me wash: to be full clean,
more white than is the snow.
8
Thou shall make me: much joy to hear,
and rest for all my pain:
My shaken bones shall them besteare,
and joy then once again.
9
From my misdedes: turn thou thy face,
I cannot say to often:
From out thy books: my gilt O raze,
to feel thy mercy soft.
10
A puer heart: make thou in me,
O God both good and true:
A rightful sprite: within to be,
my soul again renew.
11
From open sight of thy sweet face,
O Lord reject me not:
Withdraw not thou: thy sprite of grace,
from me so desolate.
12
Thy joyful health: restore with all,
to me thus t^st with woe:
With sprite most free: and principal,
strength me again to go.
13
Then will I teach: thy ways for right,
to all the wicked sort:
That they to the: converted quyte,
for comfort may resort.
14
Ryd me from all: bloudgiltines,
thou God my God of health:
My tongue shall sing: thy ryghteousnes,
and just condemn my self.
15
O Lord my lips: set open wide,
in thanks to make them free:
So shall my mouth: on every side,
give lauds most due to thee.
16
For thou regardst: no sacrifice,
I would else give it thee:
Nor yet requirst: by law precise,
our offerings brent that be.
17
The sacrifice: to God elect,
is just a troubled sprite:
Good God thou wylt no time reject
a broken heart contrite.
18
O show thy grace: and favor yet,
to Syon David's throne:
Jerusalem* that city great,
build thou her walls of stone.
19
Then ryghteous hosts: thou shall allow,
whole offerings burnt in sight:
With sacrifice: of calfe and cow,
they shall thine aulters dyght.
The Collecte.
Pour upon us O god most holy, thy manifold mercies and compassions, by which
thou cleansest us from the filthy corruption of sin, and therwyth make our
hearts clean in thy sight: we beseech thee still to renew in our inward parts
the gift of thy holy and principal sprite, by power whereof, we may glorify
thy name in this present world, at last to come to thy heavenly Jerusalem,
through Christ.

The Argument. Psalm. LII.
This Psalm inueith: and is full wroth,
against oppressors might:
To Christ so Judas figure goth,
Quid gloriaris.
to David Doegs spyte.
1
WHy boast thy self: thou tyrant thus?
in malice vauntyng aye?
Know not that God is gracious?
to good men day by day?
2
Thy tongue contriueth: all crokednes,
of hearts abundance great:
With guiles it cutteth in craftines,
as rasour sharply whet.
3
Thou malice love: above all good,
to hurt more then to help:
To hatch more lies: then truth to brood,
Sela
like Adams byrd and whelpe.
4
Thou have but loved: to speak all naught,
that may perdition bring:
O thou false tongue: thou have but sought,
deceit by flatteryng.
5
Therefore shall God: quite thee subvert,
thy house to take from thee:
And root thee out: all ouerwhart,
Sela.
no living land to see.
6
In seeing this: the ryghteous man,
shall fear and worship God:
And shall say thus to scorn him than,
in Gods so heavy r^d.
7
Lo this the man: that had no lust,
in God his strength to set:
But he in heaps: of gold did trust,
by sin his strength he met.
8
But I am like: in God his house,
a fruitful Olyue grene:
In Gods good grace: most piteous,
my trust shall aye be seen.
9
I will laud thee* for ever just,
thy word does never mis:
Thy name so good: shall be my trust,
with good men good it is.
The Collecte.
ALmighty God which in thy power and fearful wrath beatst down all the
vanity of the world and spite of ma^s pride, grant us so to flourish as
fruitful Olyue trees in the house and congregation of thy people, that by
trust of thy name, we may be delivered from the curse and malediction of thy
wrath, through, etc.

This psalm aforesaid in an other Meter. Quid gloriaris.
The Argument. Psalm. LII.
Thus clawbackes hear their shame
Whom God shall once consume:
They Princes hearts inflame,
With causeles ire to fume.
1
WHy bragst in malice hye?
O thou in mischief stout:
Gods goodness yet is nigh,
All day to me no doubt.
2
Thy tongue to muse all evil,
It does it self inure:
As rasour sharp to spill,
All guile it does procure.
3
Thou malice louedst to wrye,
Above all goodness walk:
And more thou love to lie,
Sela.
Then righteousness to talk.
4
Yea loved thou have no less,
To speak one word for all:
All words of noughtines,
Thou tongue in fraud most thrall.
5
But God once thee shall wast,
Shall stroy and scrape by hand:
Thy tent from thee at last,
To root thee out of land.
Sela
6
And ryghteous men shall see,
And fear thereby shall take:
But yet at him full free,
Good laughter shall they make.
7
O lo the man himself,
That made not God his aid:
That trustd in riches wealth
Whose might in mischief laid.
8
But I as Olyue green,
In Gods sweet house shall lay,
My trust has ever been,
In Gods good grace for ay.
9
I thee shall laud even still,
For this thou dydst say I:
Thy name to wait I will,
For good thy saints it spy.
The Argument. Psalm. LIII.
Our natyue sin this Psalm detecth,
that sinners all be we:
Dixit insipiens.
And that from grace who be reject,
confounded must they be.
1
THe fool have said: in heart even so,
no God at all to be:
Wherefore corrupt foul sin they do
to do good, none will see.
2
God looked down: from heaven so hye,
on Adams children all:
Some prudent man: if he could spy,
that God would seek or call.
3
But they be all astrayd and gone,
abominable made:
That would do good: not one, not one,
corrupt in all their trade.
4
Know they no thing: in heart so stoure,
these wicked workers all?
My flock as bread which do devour,
nor yet on God they call.
5
They were afraid: where fear did lack,
to shame God put them right:
Men pleasers bones: God all to brake,
for he abhorde them quite.
6
Oh that by God to Israel,
from Syon health were had:
His people thrall: no more to dwell,
to make all Jury glad.
The Collecte.
Look down from heaven most merciful Lord, and stay thou the rage of our
infidelity to be delivered from all vain terrors, and to please thee alone
in perfect integrity of heart, through, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. LIIII.
The just here prayth his God at need,
By him his aid to win:
His faith so good must nedely speed,
His eye sees proof therein.
1
Deus in nomine.
O Save me God: avouch me now,
for thy names sake I pray:
In thy great might: my right allow,
avenge me Lord I say.
2
O God so good: my prayer hear,
thy grace I do appeal:
My words of mouth: accept with ear,
which heart does now reveal.
3
For strangers lo: at me they rise,
and tyrauntes seek my soul:
They have no God: before their eyes,
Sela
they me both pill and powle.
4
Behold for God: my helper is,
and stay of all my life:
With other mo, he chief I wis,
who stayth my soul from strife.
5
Even he shall all: my foes despite,
into their laps retort:
Lord drive them down: thy truth so hight,
for thou art whole my fort.
6
I will with heart most glad and free,
give sacrifice to thee:
I shall thy name (Lord) magnify,
so good it is to me.
7
For thou have ryd: me quyte in deed,
from all my grief and woe:
As I did wish: my foes to speed,
I saw they^ overthrow.
The Collecte.
Save thy church O Lord by the protection of thy name, which is only the trusty
defense thereof, that she may set at naught all enmity against her, always to
magnify thee by voluntary confession of thy truth, through, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. LV.
As David mournd to shame reject,
by them who seemed his friends:
The same did Christ, as his elect,
Exaudi.
in like may have like minds.
1
Give ear O God: to my request,
in anguishe all be set:
Hyde not thy self: to mine unrest,
from me thine ears to shet.
2
Give head to me: thy grace impart,
to my deep cry and call:
I mourn therein: and groan in heart,
now here, now there I fall.
3
For that my foes: so cry and rore,
and me with spyte approach:
They mischief mean: and evermore,
in wroth they ^e reproach.
4
My heart does faint: sore vexed it is,
in great disquietnes:
Yea fears of death: be not remiss,
to do my heart distres.
5
Both fear and dread: thus tossing me,
my tremblyng never blin:
Dark horrors deep: full pressed they be,
all whole to wrap me in.
6
Wherefore I said: O that I had,
to fly wings like a dove:
Then would I fly: to rest full glad,
and me from hence remove.
7
No dout far of: I would me flitche,
From hence to wilderness:
More there to dwell: than here with such,
Sela.
in such vnrestfulnes.
8
I would make have: to escape away,
as fast as wind could blow:
To flee this storm: and tempest aye,
I would me safe bestow.
9
Destroy them Lord: their tongues deuyde,
their counsayles scatter wide:
Their city wryth: to wrong a side,
to strife and churlishe pride.
10
Both day and night: their city walls,
are thus enuyroned:
In mids thereof: all mischief falls,
and sorrow there exceedth.
11
All noughtines: and vice does raygne,
1. Reg. 23
in Ceyla city so:
Deceyt and guile: with all that train,
their streets full thorough go.
12
No open foe: workth me this spyte,
for him then would I bear:
No enmy known: thus raysth his might,
whom I might flee and fear.
13
But thou my mate: most dear to heart,
as was my life in state:
Whom I esteemd as guide in part,
as homely fellow grate.
14
With whom so knit: we often took,
both meat and counsel sweet:
We neither others once forsook,
in Gods house aye to meet.
15
Let death them trap: full suddenly,
even quick to fall to hell:
For vice with them: does lodge and ligh,
their hearts with falshode mell.
16
But as for me: to God I cried,
and hence him pray I will:
The Lord saved me: full often I tried,
I trust he shall do still.
17
At even and morn I made my suit,
at noone day instantly:
No time my cry: did here^ute,
thus made importunely.
18
For he redeemd: my soul to peace,
from war against me set:
For many were with me to ease,
though they in numbers met.
19
Yea God himself: which aye has been,
shall hear me them to scourge:
No time to change: they will be seen,
with fear to God assurge.
20
He rearde his hands: against his friends,
which meant him peace and rest:
He brake his league: that men so byndes,
together fast in breast.
21
His mouth more soft: then butter melt,
though war was stiff in heart:
More smooth then oil: his words were felt,
yet were sharp darts and smart.
22
O cast thy care: on God so dear,
what burden thee oppress:
He will thee feed: he cannot bear,
the just to fall in stresse.
23
And thou O God: shall stroy the fetch,
of crafty bloody men:
Their days to half: shall never retche,
to thee I yield me then.
The Collecte.
O Lord Jesus Christ though thou wart before all worlds, yet in time thou
tookest upon thee the nature of man, wherein thou suffer voluntary death for
man in himself utterly lost, and thereto were betrayed by one of thine own
family, pretending yet amity to thee, we beseech thee to here us, and grant
that we may so glorify thy name, that we be defended from all craft and
flattery of the world, who live.

The Argument. Psalm. LVI.
This prayth to God as innocent*
Against his foes so mad:
As Christ though pure: the Jews did shent.
Miserere mei deus
Yet he rejoices full glad.
1
Have mercy God: on me I pray,
for man will tread me down:
His fierce assaut: from day to day,
would make my heart to sown.
2
To swalowe me: my foes entend,
as daily bent they lygh:
Full many one: do war extend,
on me, O thou most high.
3
But ever when: such fears invade,
my heart, to make me flee:
I trust yet well, therout to wade,
my faith so cleauth to thee.
4
Praise God I will: and trust his word,
what his good hand does send:
I fear not flesh: his spyte and sword,
to God my trust shall bend.
5
For daily me: they do deprave,
both what I do and say:
In heart and tongue: at me they rave,
and me to harm they lay.
6
They flock on me: and privily,
conspyrde they have in stealth:
They wait my ways: my steps to stye,
to stroy my soul and wealth.
7
They put their hope: by guilefulnes,
and craft, to escape away:
Yet once O God: thou wylt them stres,
in ire, for all their stray.
8
Thou see my flightes* and often fears,
thou markst them all full out:
Within thy bottell put my tears,
the book them notes no dout?
9
As often as I: do call on thee,
my foes then take their slight:
Thereby my heart: does full agree,
that God for me does fight.
10
Of this my God: for promise just,
I will him laud and praise:
God will I praise: and all my trust,
in him I set always.
11
On God I have: me whole bestowde,
a time though I be thrall:
What flesh can do: though all beshrowd,
I fear no whit at all.
12
Now fit for me: my vows to pay,
to God they be so hight:
And him due lauds: to sing by day,
and thanks in open sight.
13
For thou my soul: have ryd from death,
from fall thou keepst my feet:
To walk in light: while life has breath,
before my God so sweet.
The Collecte.
O Lord of all power and might, which defendst thy servants from all
invisible hostility, and never suffer them to be overcome that trust in thy
mercy, wype from our eyes we pray thee tears shed for our sins, that after
we have subdued our carnal affections, we may rest in the land of the living,
through Jesus Christ, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. LVII.
The iuct for his delivery,
gives thanks that God him sped:
So Christ reioyste when he did stye,
Miserere mei deus
to heaven when death was ded.
1
GOd pity me. O pity me,
on thee my soul is cast:
Thy wings I trust: will shadow be,
till all this spyte be past.
2
Thy trusty help: I will implore,
of God my Lord most hye:
He will my cause: perform the more,
that now in hand does ligh.
3
He shall from heaven: send down his power
to save from me their spite:
And those that would: my soul deuower,
with shame shall full be dight.
4
Twixt Lions fierce: does stand my life,
with fiery men I dwell:
Whose teeth be spears: and darts in strife,
their tongues sharp swords and fell.
5
Advance thy self: O God appear,
from heavens more hye thou they:
Thy glory great: set up so clear,
on all the earth to stay.
6
To catch my feet: a net they splayd,
my soul they have deprest:
Sela.
Into that pyt: for me they laid,
themselves therein be threst.
7
My heart is fixed: my heart is fixed,
O God in thee full stayed:
And sing I will: my griefs betwixt,
in psalms with music played.
8
Awake my tongue: my joy awake,
awake both harp and lute:
Come forth, at morn: I me betake,
to sing with shaume and flute.
9
Thy lauds with thanks: out will I sound^
when people meet aryght:
To sing O Lord: to thee so bound,
I will in Paynyms sight.
10
Thy mercy great: to heavens does retch,
what thing can it denay?
To heavenly clouds: thy truth does stretch,
to man's most stable stay.
11
Set up thy self: O God above,
the heavens as is most meet:
Above the earth: thy glory move,
the stool of both thy feet.
The Collecte.
Remove O Lord all iniquity and enmity from thy family, which mekely set
their whole trust in the shadow of thy wings, so that by enioyeng thy mercy
sent from heaven, we may be perpetually delivered from all malicious snares
and trappes of our enemies Through Christ, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. LVIII.
Saules counsaylours: so far fro right,
This Psalm does here dewray:
Whose crafts with like: shall God requite.
Si vere vtique.
To sing once well away.
1
IF just your minds: be truly set,
ye counsaylours to right?
Judge equally: in weight and met,
ye sons of men in sight.
2
Yea ye in heart: do nothing less,
in earth to wrong ye bend:
Your hands do work: all wyckednes,
though ye the right pretend.
3
These wicked walk: in froward wise,
from even their mothers milk:
Once borne they stray? and talk but lies,
their words yet soft as silk.
4
Their poison like: the poison is,
of venom cockafryce:
Even Adder like: all deaf I wis,
who stopth her ears to rise.
5
Who hates to hear: the charmers voice,
charm he so never wise:
Of right and wrong: they make no choice,
all warnyng they despise.
6
Within their mouths: their teeth O God,
crushe thou, they be to sharp:
The Lions mouths: their jaws so broad,
break Lord, proud words they carpe.
7
To naught they pass: as water swyft,
within it self does slide:
And when to shoot: their shaftes they list,
let them go broken wide.
8
As snayle that wasth: let them so wast,
thus creepyng crookedly:
As woman's birth: to tymely cast,
let them no sun espy.
9
As tender ympes: of wicked thorn,
before their pryckes be hard:
Men root them up: so all be torn,
by wrath they shall be marde.
10
Then shall rejoice: the just and good,
to see Gods vengeance come:
To bathe his hands: in sinners blood,
and thank for his good dome.
11
Then man shall say: wythouten mis,
the just has just reward:
No doubt a God: in earth there is,
to judge in right regard.
The Collecte.
MOst righteous Lord, grant we beseech thee that the people may follow all the
righteousness of thy law, and gladly in love to embrace the same, never to turn
their hearing from the truth thereof, or to be deluded with the mortiferous
persuasions of the serpent, to be again wounded by him, from whom we be
redeemed thorough the death of thy well-beloved son, to whom with thee and the
holy ghost be. etc.

The Argument. Psalm. LIX.
Against the proud: is made request
Eripe me de inimicis.
Who dealth with guile and fraud:
Whom God shall drive: to want their rest,
with famine over yawde.
1
FRom all my foes: deliver me,
O God my God thou art:
Shield me from them: in suertie,
that up at me be start.
2
From workers bad: O save my life,
with them no time to mell:
From bloody men: whole set to strife,
make me most far to dwell.
3
For lo they wayt: my soul to catch,
these freakes be met in spyte:
Though just offense: they cannot latch,
at me O Lord of right.
4
Yet causeles they: still flock at me,
to hurt they them prepare:
Arise therefore: O Lord and see,
help me now plungd in care.
5
Stand up thou God: and Lord of hosts,
thou Lord of Jacobs line:
All Paynyms (Lord) view thou their bostes,
Sela
spare not their wilful crime.
6
They go at even: both to and fro,
they grin as dogs to bite:
The streates they trot: in city so,
as pickethankes them delight.
7
Behold they speak: within their mouth,
but swords within their lyps:
They think belyke: none hear the sothe,
from them that falshode slips.
8
But thou O Lord: shall them deryde,
to scorn their mad attempt:
These heathen dogs: that bark so wide,
from thee who can exempt?
9
My strength I will keep fast by thee,
O God I will not shrynke:
Of thee I know: all strength to be,
as rock on thee I think.
10
For God of grace: will me prevent,
with mercy plentuously:
And how my foes: shall once be shent,
God shall make me to spy.
11
Yet slay them not: all suddenly,
lest them my flock forget:
But scatter them: a stray to fly,
deiect them Lord so great.
12
Their sin of mouth: their word of tongue,
their pride shall them betray:
For perjury: they speak and wrong,
they prate but lies all day.
13
Consume them Lord: in hasty wrath,
consume them lest and most:
To know that guide: true Jacob has,
even God in every cost.
14
These men at even: will them retire,
they grenne as dogs to byte:
The city they: walk all on fire.
as pickethankes them delight.
15
For meat they range: both here and there,
still hungry let them be:
And satisfied: be they no where,
no rest or sleep to see.
16
But I shall sing: thy strength and power,
at morn to praise thy grace:
For thou have been: my fort and tower,
In all my woeful race.
17
O thou my strength: all whole alone,
to sing to thee I shall:
Thou refuge wart: in all my move
my God most liberal.
The Collecte.
LOrd almighty whose power and mercy we do laud and praise most worthily, both
even and morn, we beseech thee that thou would so preserve our powers from
all darkness of the night, that we may be beautified with the clearenes of the
pure works of thy law, through Christ; etc.

The Argument. Psalm. LX.
While Saul did reign: all Jury mournde,
by Paynyms sore oppressed:
In faith to God: here David tournd,
Deus repulisti.
and conquered them to rest.
1
O God thou have repeald us long,
and scattred us abroad:
Thy heavy wrath: fell us among,
O turn and stay thy rod.
2
Even thou that have: sore shakt our land,
well nigh to shiuer^^ rent:
Heal thou the brekes: by thy good hand,
it realeth to r^i^e ^ent.
3
Most dreadful sightes: and dolorous,
thou made thy people spy:
Such wine thou gave: for drink to us,
which grieved us inwardly.
4
Yet have thou given* thine arc as ^igne,
to such as fear thy name:
To blanke their foes: that would repyne,
Sela.
thy truth protesth the same.
5
Thy lovers all: great dangers fled,
and rid from harms full safe:
By thy right hand: let me be led,
and my requests vouch save.
6
God spoke the word: in sanctuary,
which makth me glad to bide:
I Sychem will: part mine to lie,
and Succoth vale deuyde.
7
Mine Gilead: Manasses mine,
both twain be mine intiere:
My strength of head: is Ephraim,
and Judah legister^.
8
So Moab stout: shall bow his head,
to serve as washepot aye:
On Edom land: my shoo shall tread,
joy thou Philistea.
9
Than who shall lead: me strayt to fly,
into the city strong:
Who me will bring: to Idu^ye,
to conquer them among.
10
Art thou not he: O God I say,
which thus have cast us out?
Which dydst refuse: to lead the way,
to guide our armies stout?
11
O than be thou: our help at need,
to ease our troubles yet:
For humayn help: is vain to speed,
man's arm to weak is set.
12
No doubt by God: we shall achyue,
great acts we trust even thus:
For he alone: our foes shall drive,
to tread them down for us.
The Collecte.
ALmighty and most merciful God, the only recouerer and ruler of mankind,
which do so deiect thy faithful servants that thereby thou meanest to
promote them, and so do humble the^ that thereby thou entendst to bring the^
to thy heavenly kingdom, keep we beseech thee the devout hearts of thy
servants, that while they submit themselves in true penitent hearts to thy
mercy, they may be healed from all comebrance of conscience to enjoy eternal
life, thorough the gift of thy son. etc.

The Argument. Psalm. LXI
This prayth in pain and stresse: as far exylde and fled,
Exaudi Domine.
and thanks it gives: for succor sent, it figurth chrict our head
1
MY cryeng hear O God,
That voice does sing in song:
Give ear to me: thus cast abroad,
as fled for fear of wrong.
2
From furthest coasts of earth,
To thee shall come my cry:
While heart feelth grief: to rock me lead,
That higher is than I.
3
For thou have been my trust,
In whom I hopt alone:
Of refuge strong: and tower so sure,
To fence from me my fone.
4
In thine own tente by thee,
For aye I trust to dwell:
Sela.
Within thy wings: most covertly,
To lie I trust full well.
5
For thou my God have heard,
My vows and prayers sad:
And them thou gave: an heritage,
Thy name who duly d^ad.
6
The king his days with days,
Thou shall increase in length:
His years to be: perpetual,
Even thus thou shall him strength.
7
For ever he shall dwell,
Before his God in sight:
O than prepare: him grace and truth,
Which may defend his might.
8
In Psalms to praise thy name,
I will while world does last:
And pay my vows most thankfully,
From day to day as fast.
The Collecte.
ALmighty God which art most merciful comforter of all manner trouble and
anguishe of heart, we beseech thee defend thy family from the face of the
enemy, to be in suertie by thee in the tower of strength that we may at last
dwell in thy heavenly tabernacles, through, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. LXII.
This Psalm exhorth: to God to stand,
Nonne deo subiecta.
Against all men's pursuites:
It shewth to faith: Gods mighty hand,
Man's brags it vain reputes.
1
SHall not (...) my soul: in silence look,
to God as subject still?
From whom my health: and help I took,
when woes my heart did fill?
2
No dout he is my rock and health,
my fort of strength and aid:
I trust the less* by foes in stealth,
to fall as one dismayde.
3
How long will ye: with wicked guiles,
thus me poor man invade?
Ye all shall quayle: as wall that reales,
as rotten hedge does ^ade.
4
To drive him low: they mete for this,
whom God would have excel:
They love but lies: their tongues can bliss,
Sela
their hearts yet curse to fe^^.
5
But yet my soul: to God be still,
in silence pacient:
And tarry him: in quiet will,
from whom shall health be sent.
6
No doubt I say: he is my strength,
my health, my fortress hye:
I fear no ^oyle: to shrynke at length,
where God does fortify.
7
With God is laid: my health full sure,
and he my glory just:
My rock of strength: that will endure,
in God is whole my trust.
8
Trust aye in him: ye people whole,
to him pour out your hearts:
Our hope is God: O him extol,
he health always impartes.
9
But Adams brood: is vain to see,
men's children liars be:
They wayghed in schools: ascend more hye,
more light then vanity.
10
Then hope ye not: (l^st vain ye be)
in wrong and robbery:
If riches flow: abundantly,
no heart to them apply.
11
God once did speak: and once again,
and twyse I have it hard:
That power is Gods: in stable reign,
which we should all regard.
12
And that O Lord: in thee aryght,
is mercy mixed also:
For thou shall quite: to every wight,
in deed as he shall do.
The Collecte.
MAke our sowles subjects to thy godly governance most loving father, which
art our only patience that we may renownce the transytory goods of this
present world with all the vanities thereof, so to follow thee to the eternal
life in heaven, through Christ our Lord. etc.

The Argument. Psalm. LXIII.
Deus deus meus ad te.
Poor Christen man: oppressed by might,
May pray this psalm: with Christ his head,
Who lawdes to God: did pay aright,
In desert set: where life he led.
1
O God to thee: my God so strong,
From morning watch: I cry in stresse
My soul and flesh: for thee they long,
In desert land, dry, waterlesse.
2
Thus thee I trust: to see in place,
Where resth thy grace: in holiness:
That I might see: thy mighty face,
Thy glory hye: and noblenes.
3
For better is: thy goodness yet,
Than is this life: the blessedness:
Wherefore my lips: shall still beset,
To sing thy praise: and worthiness.
4
Thus all my life: (Lord) thee shall bliss,
And render thanks: obeysantly,
To lift my hands: I will not miss,
Thy holy name: to glorifye.
5
Lo thus my soul: full frankt shall be,
As fed with fat: and marow sweet:
When that my mouth: in lands so free,
Shall joyous break: to Carols meet.
6
Even thus of thee: I myndefull was,
When that in bed: I took my rest:
As watches all: the night did pass,
Of thee I musde: in grateful breast.
7
Because thou wart: my help at need,
as help thou could: and so thou have:
Therefore I will: rejoice in deed,
Within thy wings: thus safely plast.
8
For when my soul: was set to thee,
As fast to join: in fears assaut:
Thy mighty hand: then leande to me,
And stayed me up: without defa^t.
9
Now these which seek^: my soul to spyll,
To bring me down: to see my grave:
In vain I trust: they work in will,
Their wynding sheet: they first shall have.
10
With edged sword: they shall be threst,
As they deuisde: to me full fly:
They shall be prays: to savage beast,
In Foxes lives: like Fox to dye.
11
The king in God: yet shall rejoice,
For his defense* in suertie:
Who swerth to him: shall joy the choice,
For glauering lips: all stopped shall be.
The Collecte.
O God the author and fountain of the light everlasting, grant we beseech thee
unto us, which early do watch before light unto thee, that our lips may sownd
out thy praise, and that our lives may sanctyfye thee, so that our whole
medita^ion and conversation may glorify thee both even and mo^ne through
Christ. etc.

The Argument. Psalm. LXIIII.
Here David blamth: his foes attempt,
and telth how dye they shall:
So Christ reprouth: the Jews contempt,
and prophecieth their fall.
Exaudi Domine.
1
O Hear my Lord* my voice and cry,
in tellyng thus my woes:
And keep my life: in suertie,
from fear of all my foes.
2
And hyde me Lord: from all the train,
of cursed men in close:
From all their rowte: conspired again,
in wicked life so lose.
3
Which wheth their tongues: as sword so sharp
and poison darts they shoot:
Even bitter words: in tongue they carpe,
to bring me under foot.
4
To shoot at him: in stelth they lie,
who life intiere does bear:
On him unawares: their darts they wry,
and have therein no fear.
5
They strength themselfes in wicked pride,
their crafty fetch to ply:
They do confer: their snares to hyde,
they say who them can spy?
6
They search all spite: and do it round,
that is by search comprisd:
What hearts most deep: or wit profound,
can find, is hye deuisde.
7
But God shall shoot: at them again,
his arrows suddenly:
With sundry wounds: he them shall pain,
all vn^ewares to spy.
8
He then shall make: their proper tongue,
their own confusion:
That who them see: how they be wrunge,
shall shake as woe begone.
9
All men shall see: this work right well,
and much commend this act:
As wrought by God: they shall it tell,
and wisely note the fact.
10
The ryghteous man: shall joy in God,
in him to put his trust:
Yea all true hearts: shall joy abroad,
that God kept me so just,
The Collecte.
ALmighty God, sauegarde of all them which put their trust in thee, preserve
thy Church from the conuenticles of all her malignant adversaries, which so
busely assault her with their crafty engynes, that she may still retain thy
presence in the true understanding of the word, through Christ. etc.

The Argument. Psalm. LXV.
For foyson thanks to God: the letter does aforde,
the sprite for that the church encreasth: by dews of his sweet word.
Te decet.
1
AL lauds be due to thee: O God in Zyon hill:
with hearty vows: of thanks to thee, all Sa^e^ shall we fill
2
Which hearst requests so light: in faith made fast to thee
all men for this: to thee full glad, shall come in each degree.
3
Ungodly deeds preuaild: on me so loud they cryde:
but thou our sins: wilt purify: as often we have if tried.
4
O blessed is he in all: whom thou do chose and take:
in thy courts he: shall dwell full fed: where he al joy shall make.
5
O God most drad in right, hear us thou art our health:
To them that dwell: by sea or land, thou art their only wealth.
6
Which mountains did prepare: by their own strength to rest,
So gyrt he is: with fortitude, of all the worthyest.
7
Which swagth the ragyng seas: with all their roaring dinne
So all vprores: of multitudes: to stowage he does win.
8
And they that furthest dwell: in earth thy signs shall dread:
Their goinges forth: at night and morn: thy lauds shall duly spread.
9
Thou vewst the earth for good: thou make it rich in store,
Gods fluds be full: men food thou geuest: thou framdst the earth therefore
10
Her forowes thou do moist: thou breakst the clods in two:
Thou make the^ soft: with rainy drops: her fruits thou blessed even so.
11
Thou crownst the earth full whole: with thy rich gentleness
thy clouds as waynes: do carry showers, they drop fat plenteousnes.
12
Their fatnes eke distilth: on desert pastures wide:
The little hills: deep wet by them: shall joy on every side.
13
The playnes with flocks bespred: the vales with wheat full clad,
Thus shall rejoice: and mercy sing: for fruitefulnes so glad.
The Collecte.
O God and king everlasting, grant that we may so be watered with the plenteous
dewes of grace, to escape the droutes of deadly siune, and to grow in
spiritual increase of sprite, to be able to sing hymmes and lauds always to
thy honor and glory. Through, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. LXVI.
An hymn of thanks to God: for help in tyranny:
Iubilate.
With sacrifice: the Jews it song in feasts most solempnely.
1
Rejoice to God with joy: how wide the land ye dwell:
Express your joys: to show how hie: his Godhed does (...)
2
And look with song ye praise: his name most glorious:
And think it is: your glory most: his fame most hye to rowse.
3
Say thus before the Lord: how workst thou dreadfully?
Thy power shall make: thy foes to stoop: therein though fal^^ they (...)
4
The earth all whole full low: shall worship thee as God:
Sela
And sing in psalms: they shall to thee: to sound thy name abroad
5
O come and note Gods works: how wonderful they are,
So wrougt to man of Adams line: they pass man's wit to (...)
6
He turned the sea to land: whose work alone it is:
that through the sea: dry shod they went: our fathers ioyd of (...)
7
He rulth the world by might: his eyes the Paynyms (...)
Sela.
And who rebels: as void of faith: no grace shall them ensue.
8
O bliss our God with thanks: ye people more and less:
And see ye cause: all speech and voice: that they his lauds express^
9
For he has set our soul: in life most safe and sound:
He suffers not our feet to slide: to slyp upon the ground.
10
For thou O God most hye: have proved us narowly:
Thou have us tried: as silver is: by furnace fined thereby.
11
Thou broughts us nigh to traps: of foes besiegd strayt:
Our loins and backs: bare painful lodes: of griefs in heavy way
12
Thou have set man on us: on thus our heds to ride:
We past by fire: and water to: yet room thou gave us wide.
13
Thy house I will go in: with offringes brent therefore:
My vows to pay: I will not miss: to the behight before:
14
Which vows did cause my lyps: themself to open wide:
All which my mouth: did promise just: when trouble me did stryde.
15
Brent offryngs will I give: to thee of lambs most fat:
Sela.
With smoke of rambes: with ore and goat: I will full glad do that,
16
All ye that God do fear: O come and harken now:
I will you tell: how lovingly: my soul he did auow.
17
I did but cry with mouth: my heart fel^ straight his ease:
My tongue therefore did him extol: with praise it did not cease.
18
If I yet thus in heart: ought wyckedly had meant:
The Lord my suit would not have heard: in subtle false intent.
19
Where now the Lord heard me* by proof it is discust:
My voice and vow: in prayer made: he did consider just.
20
O bless be God which did: no time my suit relect.
No time his grace forsook my need: he never me neglect.
The Collecte.
Pour into our hearts O Lord* and desire to glorify thy excellent name and
majesty, that while we endeavor our selves to decline the vain amity of
this world, we may be refreshed by thy grace, to bear quietly all thy
probations and trials which thou sendst to purge us with, still to sing in heart
thy perpetual lauds. Through Christ. etc.

The Argument. Psalm. LXVII.
This song in all: prophetical,
Does clear express: Christ's reign in flesh
Whose beams so bright: did shine in sight,
That all to come: must praise his dome.
Must praise his dome.
1
Deus mi sereatur.
GOd grant with grace: he us embrace,
In gentle part: bliss he our heart:
With loving face: shine he in place,
His mercies all: on us to fall.
On us to fall.
2
That we thy way: may know all day,
While we do sail: this world so frail:
Thy healthes reward: is nigh declarde,
As plain at eye: all Gentiles spy.
all Gentiles spy.
3
Let thee always: the people praise,
O God of bliss: as due it is:
The people whose might thee extol,
From whom all thing: they see to spryng.
they see to spryng.
4
All folk rejoice: lift up your voice,
For thou in sight: shall judge them right:
Thou shall direct: the Gentiles sect:
In earth that be: to turn to thee.
to turn to thee.
5
Let thee always: the people praise,
O God of blis: as due it is:
The people whole: might thee extol,
From whom all thing: they see to spryng.
they see to spryng.
6
The earth shall bud: his fruits so good,
Then thanks most due: from it shall sue:
And God even he: our God most free.
Shall bless us aye: from day to day.
from day to day.
7
So God our guide: shall bless us wide,
With all increase: no time to cease:
All folk thereby: on earth which ligh,
His name shall fear, and love him bear.
and love him bear.
The Collecte.
SHine thine amiable countinance upon us O Lord and grant us thy heavenly
benediction that while we acknowledge thy worthiness in reverent fear, we may
be made worthy to receive the fruit of righteousness in presence of thy
majesty, through Christ, etc

The Argument. Psalm. LXVIII.
The Hebrews sang this Psalm in war, against their foes to fight:
Exurgat Deus.
So Christen man: at Christ his foes: may pray the same in sprite.
1
LEt God arise: in majesty: and scattred be his foes:
Yea flee they all: his sight in face: to him which hateful goes
2
As smoke is driven: and comth to naught: repulse their tyranny:
At face of fire: as wax does melt: Gods face the bad might flee
3
But let the just: be glad in this: and joy in God his sight:
For Gods great power: and stable truth: in mirth let them delight
4
O sing to God: sound out his name: see him ye magnify:
He rydeth on heavens: his name is God: in him rejoice ye hi^
5
He father is: to fatherles: of widows judge he is:
Even God himself: which ever dwelth: in holy place of his.
6
This God he makth the desolate: in housholdes great to grow:
He loses the thrall: quyte out of bands: and bringth the wicked low,
7
O God when thou: wentst forth as guide: before the people out
Sela
When thou dydst walk in wyldernes: which thing thou dydst no doubt.
8
The earth then shook: at face of god: the heuens did drop and swel
Mount Synay: Gods face did fear: Gods face of Israel.
9
Thou pourdst O God: thy fruitful shoures: on thine enherita^ce
When faint they were: with ease again: their strength you did advance.
10
Thy church and flock: to dwell therein: thou shall it thus refresh:
So thou prepardst: for all thy poor: O God in gentleness.
11
Such good effect: god gave his word: to them yt showed his might
They did ^ut preach: his armies strong: how they excelled in sight
12
How kings with hosts: most fiercely set: yet fled discomfited:
And householdes whole: that kept at home: the spoil they did deuyde.
13
Though ye have line among the pots: as black as coal in sight
ye shall be white: as dove with wings: milk white and feathers bright
14
When God great kings: threw out of land: though erst his flock was black
then began they look: as white as snow: as lies on salmons back
15
Gods hill is fat: as Basan hyl a mount that stately standth:
With cliffes on hye: like Basan monnt: it rises it is so grand.
16
Why leap ye so: to spyte this mount: ye toppy hillockes gay?
This is gods mount: where God has dwelt: he there shall dwell for aye.
17
Gods charets be: ten thousands twyse: of angels millions:
With them is God: with his good grace: as God loved Syna ones.
18
Thou stiedst on hie: you thraldom caughtst: receiving gifts in men
Yea faythles eke: thou tookst to grace: that God might dwell in them.
19
O blessed be God: who day by day: does heap his gifts on us:
Sela.
This God is God: of all our health: in power most glorious.
20
He is our God: even God I say: all health and wealth to shape:
Yea death is ruld: by God the lord: whose dint by him we escape qwel:
21
This God shall wound: his enmies heds: he shall their worthies
Their heary scalpes: to pare full nie: that still in sin will dwell.
22
God said I will: restore as once: from Basan mine I did:
I will return: all mine as once: from seas most deep I ryd.
23
That dipped thy feet: in all their blood: may read appear a^eye:
That dogs might lick: their enmies blood: so read to be thereby
24
Who list did see: O puissaunt God: thy great procedings hie:
The goings just: of thee my God: my king in sanctuary.
25
When thanks were song: first fingers went. the^ minstrels mouth their feet:
In myds were set: the damsel maids: who played with timbrels sweet.
26
When they in one: were jointly met: thus god they praised well:
From heart the ground they blessed the Lord: who sprang of Israel
27
Small Benjamin: there ruler went: so Judas tribe their stone:
So went the Pieres: of Zebulon: and Neptaly came on.
28
Thus god has bid all strength and power. for thee full nigh to be:
With strength O God: confirm this work: that y^ have wrought so free.
29
From thy sweet house: Jerusalem: make this thy strength proceed
Then kings shall bring: their offerings: to thee to praise thy deed once tamde:
30
The lance men's routes: once scatred wide: the peoples calue^
When they shall stoop: and presents bring: and warring fol^^ once shamde.
31
Then shall the Pieres: of Egypt land: for this come meke in sig^^
Then Ethiops: full soon shall yield: to God their hands and might
32
O all ye realms: of all the earth: sing ye to God of blis.
Sela.
Sing psalms and hymns: to testify: how worthy praise he is.
33
To him that rydeth: on heaven of heuens: as he has done of (...)
Lo he his voice: has vttred forth: a voice most strong and bold,
34
Ascribe to God all strength and might: to Israel so showed:
On whom h^s power: no less is wrought: then is on heaven b^^stowe
35
O God thou art: full terrible: from out thy sanctuary:
This Jacobs God: his people aydth: O blessed be God thereby.
The Collecte.
O Lord and governor, which refreshest thy elect flock, with spiritual
nourishment of all dilectation, grant unto all thy congregation so to
understand thy victorious death, that we may always confess thy worthy victory
against sin, death and hell, and to honor thy majesty now syttyng on the
right hand of thy father, to whom with thee and the holy ghost be all honor
and glory for ever, Amen.

The Argument. Psalm. LXIX.
A suit of man in trouble bound,
that has his heart oppressed:
Saluumme fac deus.
To Christ and his: it nigh does sound,
as Paul somewhere expressed.
1
Save me O Lord: in heaviness,
by woes depressed down:
The ragyng waves: of all distres,
be fallen my soul to drown.
2
In mire so deep: I stick full fast,
all bottomeles to see:
In waters deep: down am I cast,
the floods have whelmed me.
3
In crying still: I weary go,
my throat is horse and dry:
Mine eyes be dim: and fainty so,
while God I wyshe to spy
4
My foes exceed: my hears of head,
at me they causeles look:
My foes prevail: that wyshe me dead,
I paid I never took.
5
Thou know O God: my folishnes,
if ought amiss I did:
My crimes of life: my simplenes,
from thee be never hyd.
6
Who wait on thee: feel they no hosts,
of shame for my desert:
O God the Lord: of Jacobs hosts,
let them feel never smart.
7
Forsooth for thee: sustained I,
both shame and vile reproof:
My face is hyd: for infamy,
so felt for thy behoof.
8
I was repute: as stranger fremd,
to all my brethren bad:
As aliant: so me condemnd,
my mothers children had.
9
For why, the zeal: of thy sweet house,
has me up eaten quite:
On me fell deeds: opprobrious,
of them that thee did spyte.
10
I wept and fast: my soul to chaste,
my body low to bring:
Thus when I did: they did it cast,
to my disabelyng.
11
When sackecloth course: I put me on,
to mourn my grief the more:
Their laughyng stock: and iestyng stone,
they made me then therefore.
12
The Judges eke: which sat in gate,
on me they babled evil:
So did on me: wine bibbers prate,
yea songs they made their fill.
13
Yet I O Lord: prayed whole to thee,
in time acceptably:
For thy great ruthe: and verity,
with help hear thou my cry.
14
O pluck me out: of mire and sand,
before I sink to steep:
Let me escape: my haters hand,
to rise from waters deep.
15
Let me no time: by floudes and sea,
all overflowed to be:
Nor let the deep: up swalow me,
ne pit shit mouth on me.
16
This grant to me: O God this day,
thy grace is liberal:
Turn thy respect: to me I pray:
regard thy mercies all.
17
Hyde not thy face: and cherefull sight,
from me thy servant poor:
For grievous woes: on me be light,
make have and hear therefore.
18
Draw nigh my soul: to challenge it,
redeem and save it well:
For these my foes: so haut they sit,
save me from them so sell.
19
Thou know what spite: what shame I bear
what vile rebukes I feel:
Mine enemies all: that me do dear,
be known to thee full well.
20
The shame has pearst: and rent my heart,
I feel all hearts disease:
I looked if man would ease my smart,
but none was me to ease.
21
Instead of meat: for my repast,
they gave me bitter gall:
In my great thyrst: they esill cast,
to quench my thirst wythall.
22
Their table be: to them a snare,
their sweet meats tournd to sour:
And that for joy: they did prepare,
let theare but sorrow lowre.
23
Their eyes be dark: to see no light,
and wit be far fro them:
And make their loins: to reele upright,
be they like drunken men.
24
Pour out thy wrath: these frekes to strike,
who walk so stubburnely,
And let thine ire: and wrath a like,
take hold of them full nigh.
25
Their dwellyngs fine: be they suppressed,
that they their country lose:
In all their tents: let no man rest,
their stock no man to chose,
26
For whom thou smitest: they scourge in sport,
as though thou would them so:
Of thine afflict: and wounded sort,
they talk with pleasure to.
27
O let them fall: from sin to sin,
as thou dydst plague the blind,
And suffer not: that they go in,
thy justice it to find.
28
Be they cast out: of book of life,
who thus impugn Gods grace:
No where in book: memoratiue,
with just men have they place.
29
As now for me: for that I mourn,
in pains and dolours lie:
Thy health to me: O God return,
to raise up me on hye.
30
Gods name I will: with praise advance,
in song full deep in heart:
I will in hymns: his lauds enhaunce,
his grace to show in part.
31
And this shall please: God far above,
(who is a sprite most pure)
Then Ox or calfe: with horn and houe,
to offer him (be sure)
32
The humble souls: shall this behold,
rejoice they shall by live:
And ye that seek: the Lord, be bold,
rejoice, your soul shall live.
33
For God no doubt: the nedy hears,
they may rejoice more hye:
His prisoners: in eye he bearth,
he cannot them defye.
34
Let heaven and earth: and all between,
his worthy laud set out:
The sea and all: that cxeepth therein,
praise him all round about.
35
For God shall save: sweet Zyon hill,
his place of godly rest:
And Judas towns: build up he will,
to dwell in them possessed.
36
His servants true posterity,
shall it enherite just:
And they that love: his majesty,
of dwelling theare may trust.
The Collecte.
O Lord of all pity and compassion, incline thine ear unto us to understand
the certentie of thy truth and salvation, and that we may be so purged from
the filthiness of all sin, to have a name in thy blessed book of election,
there to be registered among thy dear electes, through, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. LXX.
The just man here: calth God to aid,
To be protect: from hasty brayde,
Of all his foes (to hate) so ryfe:
By his good hand: to be well stayde,
Deus in adiutorium.
No time that he: be ouerlayde,
By weakness frail (of all) his life.
1
O God to me: thine help intend,
In have thy self: to mercy bend,
and me (O Lord) deliver quite:
Like grace I crave: that thou extend,
Thy help from heaven: so down to send,
to aid me strong: by (godly) might.
2
In have be they: confounded all,
With shameful name: men might them call,
Which seek (in hate) my soul to spill:
Be they put back: and driven to wall,
All vile reproof: might them befall,
who that to me: wyshe (any) evil.
3
Even strayt fled back: let all them be,
For their reward: foul shame to see:
these subtle (men but) glosers all:
Whose tongue to fawn: can whole agree,
To say there there: lo thus to me,
by guile (and craft) to make me fall.
4
But let all those: that seek thy might,
With gladness full: and joy he dyght,
in thee their Lord (and God) all day:
And let them all: that have delight,
In thy sweet health: say still aryght,
the Lord (so good) be praised aye.
5
As now for me: though poor I ligh,
Afflicted sore: in misery,
O Lord to me make (hasty) speed:
Thou art mine aid: most trustely,
My God of all: delivery,
to long (fro me) do not receede.
The Collecte.
O God eternal and invincible protector of thy subjects, we beseech thee make
have to help and succor thy poor household, who stands in suit at thy
majesty, that we may escape all shame and rebuke of sin and adversity so
defended by thine aid, through Christ, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. LXXI.
The just gives thanks: to God above,
Who kept his youth in stay:
So craves he still: for further love,
In age no time to stray.
1
In te domine speraui.
MY trust O Lord: in thy good name,
I have (in heart) always reposde:
Let never me: be put to shame,
from hope (I have) to be deposde,
2
In thine own grace: and righteousness,
all quyte (from harm) deliver me:
Inclyne thine ear: to my great stresse,
to save (my life) and make me free.
3
Both rock and wall: be thou to me,
to which (most sure) I may resort:
Thy will it is: that kept I be,
my hold thou art and (stable) sort.
4
And make me escape: the tyranny,
my God (and Lord) of wicked foe:
To escape the hand: of man to spy,
both false (in heart) and cruel to.
5
Thou art my hope: and patience,
O Lord for whom I (daily) long:
From even my youth: my confidence,
thou have (no dout) been ever strong.
6
For since my birth: by thee alone,
full sure (by thee) were kept my ways:
Thou pluckst (...) out: my mothers womb,
my mouth (therefore) shall sprede thy praise.
7
A monster great: men me report,
so many judge (that be) unjust:
But yet thou art: my stable sort,
in whom is all my (hope and) trust.
8
O let my mouth: with praises flow,
that thee I may land (always) thus:
That I may sing: to hye and low,
thine honor (great most) glorious.
9
In time of age: reject me not,
that out (from thee) I be not cast:
And leave me not: all desolate,
in (needful) time when strength does wast
10
For now my foes: together iet,
in counsel whole (they do) conspire:
To rail at me: they be all set,
to trap my soul in (hateful) ire.
11
They say him God: has whole reject,
sue on (therefore) and take him now:
And full ye may: on him he wrect,
for none (in earth) will him auow.
12
O God from me: depart not far,
O God my God (to thee) I cry:
From me thy help: do not debar,
make have (to come) my foes be nigh.
13
And let them all: confounded be,
to sink (and drown) who seek my soul,
Let shame them take: and vilanie,
who wish my life (my soul) to foil.
14
As now for me: most quietly,
I will abide thy (loving) hand:
Yea day by day: more earnestly,
my mouth (and tongue) shall praise thy sond.
15
My mouth shall tell: thy righteousness,
thy saving health (to me) all day:
But end of this: great gentleness,
I can not think or (wholly) say.
16
In this my hope: I will go on,
in God my Lord (so great) of power:
I will express: of thee alone,
thy truth (so ferme) both day and hour.
17
For thou O God* have taught me well,
from (all my) youth unto this day:
Thy meruels I: therefore will tell,
thy wonders (great and) how they lay.
18
But me in age: when hears be white,
depresse me not (O Lord) adowne:
I will first tell: thy power and might,
this age (that is) and them to come.
19
For sure O God: thy truth is s^ene,
to heaven (above) lift up so hye:
Things great by thee: so wrought has been,
who can (in power) be like to thee.
20
How great and sore: adversity,
thou made me often (in life) to spy:
Yet did thou turn: to quicken me,
from deep (of stresse) to raise me hye.
21
Beside thou did: increase my reign,
with honor (much so) more and more:
When turned thou wart: and pleased again.
of joy (so glad) thou gave me store.
22
I will thee praise: in psaltry sweet,
my God (and Lord) thy truth to tell:
To thee my harp: shall stand as meet,
O Lord (so good) of Israel.
23
My lips and mouth: both feign and glad,
shall be (always) to sing to thee:
So shall my soul: for mercy had,
Which thou (by grace) have made so free.
24
My tongue shall talk: thy righteousness,
from day to day (and that) even ^till*
Because with shame: thou dydst repress,
my foes (so fierce) that wished me evil.
The Collecte.
ALmighty god which raignes^ eternally in that hie throne of majesty, and yet
do not disdain to look upon us poor miserable worms crepyng here on
earth, and also do not suffer us to be confounded with shame for evermore,
we beseehe thee to fulfill our lyps with thy worthy praise, and exercise our
hearts in continual meditation of all thy goodness declared to us, Through
Christ, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. LXXII.
In letter prayed: king David plain,
His son to speed: in all his reign:
In sprite more true: yet m^nt it is,
Of Christ's God son: and king of blis.
1
Deus iudicium.
BEstow O God: thy judgments true
Upon the king: anointed due:
Thy justice eke: give thou thereto,
To this kings son: in it to go.
2
Then shall he judge: the people right,
The good to save: the bad to smite:
He shall the poor: afflict defend,
The meke to quyte: the proud to bend.
3
The mountains great: sweet peace shall bring
Unto thy folk: in gouernyng:
The smaller hills: shall righteousness,
So sprede a like: in faythfulnes.
4
The simple sort: in misery,
To hold their right: he shall apply:
The poor man's child: he shall protect,
And briber stroy: that him so wrect.
5
They shall fear thee: in reverence,
As long as sun has influence:
Or while the moon: her face does show,
From age to age: from hye to low.
6
He shall come down: as rayn from seas,
On grass new shorn: or woll the flease:
As showers sweet: on earth do lyte,
To cheer all thing: in fruitful sight.
7
In his good days: all rightwise men,
Shall floryshe then and rise again:
Sweet peace shall be: on every side,
As long as Moon* her sphere does ride.
8
From sea to sea: his rule shall be,
From Palestyne: to deep red sea:
From Euphrates: to holy land,
From cost to cost: how wide it standth.
9
The Ethiopes: in wilderness,
Full meek to him: shall bow their knees:
His foes shall seem: to lick the dust,
All prostrate ligh: to him they must.
10
Of Tharsys kings: and other Isles,
shall gifts present: him otherwhiles:
Of arabye: and saba kings,
shall humbly bring: their offeryngs.
11
To make short tale: what kings there be,
In earth must give: him homage free:
Yea nations all: shall them submyt,
To hold of him: and kiss his feet.
12
For he the poor: shall soon releife,
The crying wretch: to ryd from grief:
The nedy man: all comfortles,
Without all help: he will release.
13
I say again: he will be good,
To nedy man: and poor of blood:
Though here he be: both torn and brent,
Their souls to save: he will consent.
14
Their souls from fraud: in vsurye,
He will them ryd: that tyranny:
Their names to him shall shine full clear,
Their blood, his sight: shall count full dear.
15
And live he shall: to him shall be,
So given the gold: of Arabye:
He shall for poor: make suit always,
The poor for it: shall praise him ^ye.
16
One hand full sown: of wheat on hill,
For growth and length: then shake it will.
In Lybanon: eke trees so hye,
As green as grass: all towns shall lygh.
17
His name shall still: and aye endure,
Before the son: it was full sure:
His grace shall bless: all people just,
All heathen him* shall praise and trust.
18
This God our Lord: he blessed full well,
Even just the God: of Israel:
He wondrous things: does work alone,
All mysteries: by him be done.
19
His name be blessed: in unity,
For ever one: in trinity:
This name shall fill: the earth again,
Say we thereto, Amen, Amen.
The Collecte.
WE acknowledge O God almighty thy holy name to be worthily magnified, whereunto
we now resort with humble supplication, besechyng thee to suppress all
hostility of our oppressors, who envy thy prosperous and blissful raygne
of thy son our Savior Christ, give us thy people such peace whereby we may
ensue all righteousness and godliness, through the mediation of our said Lord and
savior, who with thee, etc.

The end of the second book.
Here begins the third Book of Psalms.
The Argument. Psalm. LXXIII.
This musing Psalm: by David made: to A^aph put to sing,
Does show the ends of good and bad: what vice what virtue bringth.
1
O Good is God: to Israel,
Quam bonus Israel Deus.
To them of perfect heart:
Though wicked men: have here the sweet,
And good men feel the smart.
2
But yet my feet: well nigh were gone: to dout of godly ways,
My steps of life: almost were slipped: to run in like astrayes.
3
For why I fret* all who^e in zeal: to note how sinners were:
In peace with bliss: all whole beset: the good men all in fear.
4
For they of death: feel no distress: nor much it does them fret,
Their strength is fresh: in every part: well fed and fat they iet.
Yet good is God to Israel,
To them of perfect heart:
Though wicked men: have here the sweet,
And good men feel the smart.
5
Misfortune none: befalth these men: no labor pressth them hard:
They have no scourge: as other men: all wealth is their reward.
6
Of this arises: their hawty pride: wherein they vaunt so stout:
All clad they be: with wyckednes: and wrong even round about.
7
With falnes foul: their eyes be sweld: their gullets feel no ^hurst
Their paunches full: their health so quart: their hearts excede in lust
Yet good is God to Israel,
To them of perfect heart:
Though wicked men: have here the sweet,
And good men feel the smart.
8
And others they: corrupt with talk: they speak all that is naught
They do blaspheme: even God above: such rage dewraith their thought.
9
For up to heaven* they cast their mouth: Gods providence to scorn
Their tongue in earth: must bear the rule: by them ye poor is lorne.
10
This makth all folk: to fall to them: to sue their wealth unto:
Their water cups: to drink in part: to ease their want and woe.
Yet good is God: to Israel,
To them of perfect heart:
Though wicked men: have here the sweet,
And good men feel the smart.
11
The people mad: tush say they all: do God such matters know?
Has God above: respect or care: of things so done below?
12
For lo say they: these wicked men: they prosper well in all:
The world is theirs: as ioly men: all goods to them befall.
13
And some of them: said thus again: my heart I clensd in vain:
To purge my life: from subtle art: I count it folish pain.
Yet good is God to Israel,
To them of perfect heart:
Though wicked men: have here the sweet,
And good men feel the smart.
14
Thus vexed I went: afflict in heart: all day by wicked sect:
In early morn: sore scourged I was: to have this ca^e detect.
15
I had almost: said even as they: lo then I had been wood:
For so should I: have evil reproved: thy flock of children good.
16
I sought and sought: to search it out: O Lord what this might be:
But thou O God: so secret wart: it was to hard for me.
Yet good is God: to Israel,
To them of perfect heart:
Though wicked men: have here the sweet,
And good men feel the smart.
17
I doubted still: till God I sought: in his most saintly place:
To note his wont: in all their ends: at last of all their race.
18
I spied thou setst: their slipper state: in brittle goods vnclere:
Thou cast the^ down: on head to naught: yea when most hie they were
19
O how they quayld: most suddenly: cast down and perished quyte?
For their misdeedes: and wyckednes: to naught brought down in sight.
Then good is God to Israel,
To them of perfect heart:
Though wicked men: have here the sweet,
And good men feel the smart.
20
As dreams so vain: do vanyshe quite: from man yt wakth from sleep
Their image Lord: so shall thou stroy: thy city not to keep.
21
Mine inward ghost: sore vexed it was: before this case I knew:
It pearst my raynes: and roots of heart: to note their works untrue
22
So fond I was: and ignorant: in secret works of thee:
To brute beast like: all void of wit: so dull thy trade to see.
For good thou art: to Israel,
To them of perfect heart:
Though wicked men: have here the sweet,
And good men feel the smart.
23
But yet O lord: though thus I thought: I was held up by thee:
My right hand yet: thou heldst so up: that far I did not flee.
24
As me thou taughtst: so hence thou wylt: teach me thy secret will,
And after that: with glory bright: my soul with joy to fill.
25
For whom have I: in heaven but thee: to love or trust aright:
Or who in earth: can health impart: but thou my hearts delight.
All good thou art to Israel,
To them of perfect heart:
Though wicked men: have here the sweet,
And good men feel the smart.
26
Though flesh and heart: here failed me: thou did not me forsake:
Thou art O God: my strength of heart: my part thou art to take.
27
For lo who far: from thee do stray: they perish shall no doubt:
A whoryng who: eke run fro thee: thou driuest them al to naught
28
But good for me: by God to hold: in thee O God to trust:
To tell thine acts: how good thou art: in Syon gate full just.
O good is God to Israel,
To them of perfect heart:
Though wicked men: have here the sweet,
And good men feel the smart.
The Collecte.
Give us assistence of thy grace almighty father, and so guide our feet in
meditation of thy righteous judgments, that we slide at no time or be
offended by indiscreet zele, or envy at the prosperity of thine adversaries,
either to misconceyue thy everlasting providence, or yet to be the slacker in
the godly ways of thy holy testimonies, so that we may always joyfully bear
thy cross sent unto us, having thee for our lot and comfort therein, and so
having our hearts pure in thee, we may praise thy righteousness in the eternal
gates of thy heavenly Jerusalem and everlasting habitation, Through Christ,
etc.

The Argument. Psalm. LXXIIII.
A sore complaint (here may) ye read,
Against Gods foes so vain:
Which Christ his word: and eke his flock,
Pursue with might and main,
1
WHy art so far: O God (our God)
Vt quld Deus repulisti.
For ever wylt thou flee?
Why fumeth thy wrath: against thy sheep,
Of pasture (as we be)
2
O God (our Lord) think thou upon: thy congregation dear,
Of old so strong: possessed by thee: whom thou redemst so clear.
And think upon the (chosen) lot: of thine inheritance:
Of Syon mount: wherein thou dwelt: with thy good ordinance.
3
Lift up in have: thy feet (and hands) confound thy foe in face:
How has he stroyd: thy sanctuary: the seat of thy good grace?
Why art so far O God (our God)
For ever will thou flee?
Why fumeth thy wrath: against thy sheep,
Of pasture (as we be.)
4
Thy foes did rore (full hye) in pride: in time of feastfull day:
As conquest signs: in temple there: their banners did they splay.
5
Where he that once did (cut and) hew: a beam or sparre of wood:
To beautify: thy temple work: was thought devout and good.
6
But now they boast (and brag) herein: to pull all down to naught:
To break with mall: and eke with are: the gates of caruers wrought
And yet art far: O God (our God):
For ever will thou flee?
Why fumeth thy wrath: against thy sheep,
Of pasture (as we be.)
7
Yea fire (and flame) now have they set: upon thy holy place:
They have defylde: and cast to ground: ye house where dwelt thy grace
8
They said (in wrath) to stroy them quite: let us in one consent:
Gods houses thus: in all the land: they have all wholly brent.
We (now can) see no wonted signs: there is no Prophet more:
Not one with us: of wisdom sage: to ease our bondage sore.
And yet art far: O God (our God)
For ever wylt thou flee?
Why fumeth thy wrath: against thy sheep,
Of pasture (as we be.)
10
How long O God: shall thus (in spite) the adversary brayd.
Thy house, thy feasts: thy fold deface: his brags at thee be laid?
How long I say: shall he (so mad) thy holy name blaspheme,
For ever thus: him shall we see: thy power so light to deem?
11
Why than (O Lord) hold still thy hands: and winkst at this his spite?
Thy hand draw out: of bosom soon: to stroy thy foes by might.
Why art so far: O God (our God)
For ever wylt thou flee?
Why fumeth thy wrath: against thy sheep,
Of pasture (as we be.)
12
Yet God my king (and Lord) he is: of old in years now gone:
He health bestowd: on all the earth: himself does it alone.
13
Thou did deuyde the sea (as once) by might of thy great hand:
The Dragons heds: thou brakest in two: so drowned by sea and land.
14
Thou crushedst the head of Whales (I say) Leniathan so great:
For thy dear flock: thou made him meat: which was in desert set.
Then why art far from us (O God)
For ever will thou flee?
Why fumeth thy wrath: against thy sheep,
Of pasture (as we be.)
15
Of stony rocks so (flinty) hard: thou broughtst out fluds and springs
And so thou driedst: great waters up: for all their gatheryngs.
16
The night and day: be thine (at will) thou spreadst both light and sun
The sun by day: to shine so clear: by night to shine the Moon.
17
The costs of all: the earth (so wide) thou dydst them place full due
Thou summer made: and winter both: each other right to sue.
And yet art far: from us (O God)
For ever wylt thou flee?
Why fumeth thy wrath: against thy sheep,
Of pasture (as we be.)
18
Remember this (in mind) O Lord: thine emnies how they vaunt,
How folishly: the people have: reuylde thy name a taunt.
19
Give not thy turtels (sely) soul: to beast of cruel port:
Forget not aye: the company: of thine afflicted sort.
20
Behold thy pact: ones made (to us) for darkness pestilent:
Is spread the earth: where thieves do dwell: both false and violent.
And yet art far from us (O God)
For ever will thou flee?
Why fumeth thy wrath: against thy sheep,
Of pasture (as we be.
21
O suffer not the poor (that is) contryte to feel a shame:
But let the poor: and nedy soul: for help aye praise thy name.
22
Rise God (awake) and judge thy cause: thy foe thou see extreme:
Bear still in mind: his vile attempt: for daily he blasphemth.
23
Forget not thou the (ragyng voice) the brags of all thy foes:
Their boasting pride: do mount always: at thee their hatred goes.
O than be nigh: O God (our God)
For ever do not flee?
And fume no more: against thy sheep,
Of pasture (as we be.)
The Collecte.
O Lord the almightye maker of heaven and earth, with all the furnishing
thereof, which of thine inestimable love did redeem the world again by the
price of thy precius blud, be myndful of thy poor desolate flock, overmuch
laden in misery and woe, to behold how thy glory is trodden under foot by the
wicked powers of this world, hear our lamentable tears, and comfort us with
joy again after our afflictions, to praise thy mighty hand all days of our
life: who live and raignest, one God with the father, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. LXXVI.
A prophecy: of Christ ye spy,
who threath the wicked state:
Confitebimur tibi Deus.
Not so to wry: their tyranny,
to wreke poor men in hate.
1
WE do confess: and thanks express,
to thee O God with praise:
Thy name is nigh: as testify,
thy wondrous works always.
2
When time most fit: shall serve to it,
I then will judge the right:
In day so set: when men be met,
all hearts to sprede in sight.
3
Proud earthly man: shall melt even than,
who dwells on earth shall quail:
I set the ground: of earth so round,
Sela.
I can it shake no fail.
4
I did upbraid: such fools and said,
deal not so madly sirs:
To wicked rout: I spoke full out,
blow not your horn to fierce.
5
Lift not to hie: your horn said I,
your power all wrong ensuth:
With stubburn necks: speak you no checks
but bend your hearts to truth.
6
For hye renown: comes not adowne,
from East, or West, or South:
How wide ye be: ye cannot flee,
this Gods true word of mouth.
7
For God iwis: right domes man is,
no thought can escape his eyes:
Him throws he down: him does he crown
as he can best devise.
8
In Gods right hand: a cup their standth,
of wine full red to see:
But mixed with lies: and dregs it lighes,
which he poorth diversely.
The good at brynke: the clear does drink,
God brinche them gently so:
The bad does sup: the dregs full up,
the botomes troublous woe.
9
Still will I talk: such wonted walk,
of Jacobs God and Lord:
His doomes to sing: him worshippyng,
I will with hearts accord.
10
And God says thus: down will I crushe,
all horns of wicked men:
Even so will I: exalt on hye,
all ryghteous power again.
The Collecte.
O Most loving sheparde, which for the redemption of thy flock did drink
the bitter cup of thy paynfull passion, we pray thee so attempre the cup of
adversity in such measure to us, that we may gladly in heart bear our cross,
thereto strengthened by thy holy sprite, and that we never walk in the proud
ways of this world to drink their heavy cup in the world to come, who lyuest
and reygnest with the father and the holy ghost. etc.

The Argument. Psalm. LXXVI.
Against oppressors tyrannous,
who put Gods flock to wrong:
This Psalm would they: should well discuss*
Nota in Judea deus
Gods power and hand so strong.
1
IN Jury God: is known full well,
the ryghteous does confess:
His name is great: in Israel,
the wicked says no less.
2
His tabernacle: Salem is,
a place of peace most sweet:
And Syon hill: a seat of his,
where raignth his grace full meet.
3
This God even there: for all their sake,
his love so them beheld:
Bow, arrows, sword: and shield he brake,
Sela.
all battle set in field.
4
Thou Syon mount: do more excel,
in honor fame and might:
Then robbers hills: where that they dwell,
how fierce they range in sight.
5
These Gyantes proud: of stomach fell,
even they be spoylde again:
They slept their sleep: though full they swell,
their hands shall naught retain.
6
O Jacobs God: at thy reproof,
these tyrants fell to ground:
Their charets splayd: and strayed aloof,
both horse and man I drowned.
7
Even thou alone: thou fearful art,
in wrath against the proud:
Who can resist: thine irefull dart,
O Lord who ever could?
8
From heaven thou made: thy judgment sound
that earth thy power might hear:
So earthly man: was soon on ground,
he shook and quayld for fear.
9
When God arose: to judge in right,
his saints oppressed with smart:
Then did his strength: appear in sight,
Sela
to save the meke in heart.
10
Man's fiercenes past: shall full set out,
thy praise (O Lord) no less:
Their traynes and guiles: which still they clout,
from hence thou shall repress.
11
Then vow your vows: and pay them well,
to your Lord God full glad:
I bid you all: which nigh him dwell,
bring gifts to God so drad.
12
Stout Princes sprites: so furious,
he can both quench and quell:
On them his hand: is wondrous,
how fierce in earth they swell.
The Collecte.
MOst drad and soueraygne Lord grant we beseech thee to our meditations such
effect, for the confession of thy holy name, that we be so illightned by thy
eternal hyls, to have understanding of thy glorious resurrection, that we be
not disapointed of thy glory at thy fearful judgment, Through Christ. etc.

The Argument. Psalm. LXXVII.
Strong faith in voice: with diligence,
for help he cries a loud:
He stickth to Gods: good providence,
Voce mea ad Dominum.
and sees himself alowd.
1
TO God to cry: in voice I will,
to God I say in voice:
He shall to me: give ear full still,
to make my heart rejoice.
2
In troublous days: the Lord I sought,
my wounds still ran by night:
My hands and strength full low were brought
my soul fled comfort quyte.
3
I will of God: yet mindful be,
to wayle I will not cease:
Sela
When I my soul: fore vexed shall see,
my voice shall not decrease.
4
Thou holdst mine eyes: full waking still,
that rest I none can take:
So faint and weak: I have no will,
once speech by mouth to make.
5
I did therefore: than strayt recownt,
the days of old fern years:
I did reuolue: the fathers wont,
in their distress and fears.
6
My songs from mind: shall not depart,
to others which I sing:
By night I muse: and talk in heart,
my sprite searched every thing.
7
And thus I plain: will God my Lord,
absent himself for aye?
Shall I be thus: so sore abhorde,
will he his grace denay?
8
His pytye great: will it a way:
for ever not to turn:
And will his word: now end (I say)
to make us still to mourn?
9
Has God forgot: to pytye thus?
can he himself forget?
And will he shut: so hard from us,
Sela.
his loves and mercyes great.
10
At last I said: this wavering,
declares my frayltye fond:
But I entend: in mind to bring,
the change of his good hand.
11
My Lords great acts: I will recount,
my faith to him to bind:
His wondrous works: how hye they mount,
In times of old to find.
12
In all thy works: so wrought by thee,
my study whole shall stand:
My talk shall be: most frankly free,
to spread thy deeds of hand.
13
Thy way O God: I see is set,
in holiness all bright:
What God is like: in glory great,
as this our God of might?
14
Thou God art he: which openly,
workst wonders hye as God:
To people far: and sonderly,
thy power thou spredst abroad.
15
Thou have redeemd: with might in deed,
thy people tenderly:
Old Jacobs stock: and Iosephes seed,
escapt by thee they be.
16
The waters deep: saw thee O God,
the waters deep saw thee:
They were afraid: to feel thy rod,
the depthes did quake to see.
17
Thy clouds raynd down: so waters fell,
the heavens for sound did ryng:
The stones of hayle: were arrows fell,
by them thy foes to wring.
18
Thy thunders noise: did rumble stout,
in air the sphere above:
Thy lightnyngs shoone: all round about,
the earth did quake and move.
19
Thy way in sea: is large and wide,
thy paths in waters great:
Thy footesteps yet: cannot be spied,
how there thy feet be set.
20
Thou ledst thy people pastor like,
as sheep in all their way:
By Moses hand: thou did them keep,
whom Aaron helped to stay.
The Collecte.
O God the wonderful workesman of deeds inco^prehensible, most specially in
the element of water, sometime by staying the rage of them to the defense of
thine elect, to the co^suming of thine enemies sometime in turnyng to the
nature of wine, to the comfort of thy servants, we beseech thee so to accept
the voices of our cries, that we may feel thy mercy continually poured upon
us, to preserve and to comfort us, Through etc.

The Argument. Psalm. LXXVIII.
This hye profound: oration,
A monitorie is:
To God to turn: to trust upon,
Attendite populi meus.
by works so great of his.
1
MY people kind: hear this my law,
true lore it full auowth:
Inclyne your ear: in gentle awe,
to hark my words of mouth.
2
My lipes sage sawes: shall now unfold,
which parables might seem:
And proverbs strange: of years of old,
how we should God esteem.
3
Which things we have: both hard and tried,
to be most certain true:
Which fathers old: to us a lied,
us told that should ensue.
4
Not we therefore: will hyde the same,
from their posterytye:
To them to tell: Gods lauds and fame,
his wonders strange to see.
5
He made a pact: with Jacob just,
and law set Israel:
Wherein he chargd: our fathers trust,
these things their seed to tell.
6
That so might all their lineage know,
in ages still to come:
To rise and sprede: to hye and low,
Gods acts to his renome.
6
That so might all: their lineage know,
in ages still to come:
To rise and sprede: to hye and low,
Gods acts to his renome.
7
That they thereby: might truly set,
in God affiaunce strong:
That they should not: his works forget,
but keep his hestes full long.
8
Lest they should prove: their fathers like,
a faythles stubburne kind:
A people loath: the right to seek,
which fell from God in mind.
9
All like the tribe: of Ephraym,
in arms with darts and bows:
Yet turned their backs: at fightyng time,
and had foul overthrows.
10
They kept not (lo) true tutch with God,
his pact they oueryed:
From his sweet hestes: they strayd abroad,
to walk his law they fled.
11
And soon forgate: what done had he,
to them as beasts unkind:
His wondrous works: that they had seen,
were clean cast out of mind.
12
Great meruels wrought: his mighty hand,
in their forefathers sight:
At Zoan field: in Egypt land,
to show his power and might.
13
He cut the seas* apart to stand,
as walls erect on hye:
He led them through: to go to land,
while they like heaps did lygh.
14
He led them forth: in Journeys right,
by cloud as guide by day:
By night whole out: in fiery light,
his angels kept their way.
15
He claue the rocks: in wilderness,
how hard so ever grown:
Where out he slackt: their thirstines,
as floods from depthes had flowne.
16
He made the stone: to gushe in streams,
from them did water strike:
Though flyntes by kind: keep fiery leames,
God made them drink to keep.
17
For all this yet: against his will,
they sinned more and more:
They him prouokt: in desert still,
for all his gentle store.
18
They tempted God: to prove his power,
their hearts went much astray:
They would have meat: at present hour,
their lusts they would assay.
19
Against their God* most every where,
they spoke like rebels thus:
Can God provide: a table here,
in wyldernes for us?
20
He struck the rock: the waters spread,
as streams they flowed in deed:
But can (say they): God give us bread,
or flesh his flock to feed?
21
When God this heard: he was full wroth,
his fire in Jacob brent:
His heavy plage: in anger goes,
even down on Israel sent.
22
Because no hope: in God they laid,
that he could feed their want:
Nor yet put trust: in him for aid,
God made their hearts to pant.
23
He did command: the clouds above,
which flote the air about:
He bade the heavens: their gates remove,
to pour their gifts full out.
24
Then rayned down: that Manna sweet,
thereof that they should taste:
He sent them down: about their feet,
from heaven this vyand cast.
25
O wondrous act: that man did eat,
such food of angels strong:
He pourd them down: their fill of meat,
their pitched tents among.
26
He made the East: wynd blow his blast,
amid the heaven in length:
He forced the southwynde blow as fast,
by his great power and strength.
27
So than he raynd: as thick as dust,
of flesh abundant store:
And fetherd fowls: to fill their lust,
as thick as sand on shore.
28
Amid their tents: it fell as motes,
not far to seek therefore:
Even round about: their dwelling cotes,
it did them serve the more.
29
They thus did eat: and fed they were,
full up unto the chin:
He granted them: their lust so far,
what they could wish therein.
30
Their lust was not: abased so,
for still in lust they quothed:
And while they chowd: both to and fro,
in mouth this meat they lothed.
31
Lo wrath from God: was kyndled sheu,
he slew their worthies great:
He feld to ground: their chosen men,
in Israel beset.
32
For all this yet: they sinned still,
their wonted guise they playde:
To trust to him: they had no will,
though wonders he displayde.
33
Therefore he spoyld: their living days,
in vanity to lygh:
Their years he spent: in fears and frayes,
to vere both heart and eye.
34
As long as God: them struck and slew,
they sought him then full gent:
They seemed tho: their sins to rue,
to God at morn they went.
35
Then could they well: remember this,
that God was all their strength:
That God full good: redemer is,
their comfort most at length.
36
But yet they did: but gloss in speech,
their hearts agreed not so:
They lied in tongue: thus him to seache,
dissemblers did they go.
37
Their minds to him: were nothing sound,
but hollow hearts they had:
They stood not still: with him so bound,
in league and covenant glad.
38
Yet he so good: their sins forget,
and would not them despise:
Full often: his wrath: he did retrete,
that whole it should not rise.
39
For he did count: they were but flesh,
as frail as britle glass:
And that they were: like wind to guess,
that passth without repasse.
40
Right many times: in wilderness,
they him provoked sore:
How much grieved they: his gentleness,
in desert more and more.
41
They did reuolte: often God to tempt,
that saint of Israel:
They proved his power: in mad contempt,
as he in bounds should dwell.
42
They minded not: his able hand,
what once for them it wrought:
Nor yet that day: when they were bond,
how he redemption brought.
43
How he had done: miraculously,
in Egypt fully out:
In Zoan field: his wonders hye,
they did forget no dout.
44
When he did turn their waters sweet,
to blood how they increast:
And made their springes: all full on meet,
for drink for man or beast.
45
He lyce sent eke: all kind of flies,
which them devoured quyte:
Among them frogs: did scraule and rise,
to vex them day and night.
46
He gave their fruits: of whole increase,
to caterpillars spoil:
The grasshopper: did never cease,
to wast their labors toil.
47
He did vnbarke: of vine the trees,
with stones in clods congeald:
And eke their trees: of mulberies,
with frostes so seen but selde.
48
He smote their beasts: of cart and plough,
with hayle in his great ire:
Their other flocks: he smoote full rough,
with coals of burning fire.
49
He cast on them: his fury whote,
wrath, woo, with anguyshe styng:
With such fell plages: them sore he smote
which Angels evil do bring.
50
He made plain way: for his sore wrath
to go, and stroyd them quyte:
No soul he sparde: from sudden death,
their beasts the plage did smite.
51
He stroyd their fruits: begotten first
In Egypt furious:
Their prymer fruts: of all their lust
where Chams seed dwelt in house.
52
But yet he led: his people free,
like sheep he kept them aye:
As sheep in flock: most tenderly
in desert led their way.
53
He brought them out: in suertye
all fears that they might flee:
He ouerwhelmd: their foes at eye,
In waves of fomyng sea.
54
He brought them just: within the cost
of his good Sanctuary:
To this sweet hyl: of virtue most
which his right hand did bye.
56
He Pay^yms drove: all out of place,
and Jacobs stock put in:
Their heritage: he set the space,
and met their lot by line.
57
But yet the Lord: they tempted hie,
and him provoked still:
They turned quite: his law awry,
the signs of his good will.
58
They turned their backs: yea did conspire,
as once their fathers went:
To their old wontes: they did retire,
as sturdy bow in bent.
59
To rear hill aulters was their trade,
whereby they moved him sore:
Of Idols graven: their Gods they made,
by which they grieved him more.
60
God heard this case: full wroth was he,
with indignation great:
At Israel: excedingly,
his sore displeasure fret.
61
That he did shoone: his sacrary,
which once in Sylo stood:
His tent I say: pitchd steadfastly,
among old Adams blood.
61
So he eftsoon: to thraldom sent,
his arc that was their strength:
Which was their old: fair ornament,
their foes possessed at length.
62
His folk he gave: unto the sword,
with wars entangled so:
His heritage: full sore he deard,
in much displeasant woe.
63
The fire eat up: their lusty men
both young in arms and sides:
Their virgins young: not honored then,
with wedlock songs as brides.
64
Their priests by sword: were vily slain*
religion set at naught:
No wydowes left: which should complain,
before all slain by thought.
65
The Lord as one: laid long in sleep,
at length from sleep awoke:
With wine refresht: in heart full deep,
as gyaunt strength he took.
66
His foes rearwardes: even down he field,
their hinder parts he struck:
That most in shame: they ever dweld,
so he their armies brake.
67
All Joseph's trybe: he did refuse
his arc to them to bring:
So Ephraym: he would not use,
he meant an other thing.
68
But Judas trybe: he took him till,
wherein he bode in place:
And old beloved: sweet Zyon hill,
he chase in lovely grace.
69
And there he built: his sanctuary,
as princely palace hye:
He founded it: as earth to lygh
in state perpetually.
70
And David meke: he did elect,
his servant whom he loved:
To state so hye: from state abject,
from sheep cotes him removed.
71
He took them up: in followyng,
his ewes full big with young:
To guide his folk: in pasturyng,
his heirs of Jacob sprung.
72
And he them fed: in faithful heart,
as Christ anointed king:
He gouernd them: in prudent part,
his raygne all bliss did spring.
The Collecte.
ALmightye God which art most bountiful feast maker, we beseech thee release
our souls with that heavenly Manna thy spiritual grace, that we dyrected by
the hand of thy providence, may continually dwell in the holy mount of thy
chosen congregation, once redeemed by thine almighty hand, at the last to come
to thy holy tabernacle, to joy with thee eternally, by the gift of thy son
Jesus Christ to who^ with thee and the holy ghost be all honor and glory. Amen.

The Argument. Psalm. LXXIX.
The church lamenth: the tyranny,
of all her foes so fell:
Deus vene runt gentes.
Her sins she waylth: most mourningly*
yet trust of help full well.
1
O God now come: be Paynyms wild,
thine heritance to wast:
Thy holy house: they have defylde,
Jerusalem is raced.
2
Thy servant corpse: this heathen sect,
has cast to birds for meat:
Thy saints weak flesh: they have reject,
to beasts of earth to eat.
3
Their blood they have: like water shed,
about Jerusalem:
And none there was: to mourn the dead,
or yet to bury them.
4
We are become: an open shame,
to all our neighbors next:
But mockyng stocks: in laughyng game,
on all sides we be vexed.
5
O Lord how long: shall last thine ire?
for ever shall it be?
Thy gelousie: to burn as fire,
for ever shall we see?
6
Pour out thy wrath: upon thy foes,
for Paynyms know not thee:
Upon those realms: which be to lose,
thy name and power to see.
7
Deuourd they have: true Jacobs place,
his seed and house lygheth wast:
The sanctuary: of thy good grace,
the walls they have defaced.
8
Our former sins: remember not,
make speed, show mercy soon:
Thou see our grief: our woeful state,
how all we be undone.
9
Help us O God: our savior,
for praise of thy good name:
Our sins our ill: behavior,
forgive, forget the same.
10
Least heathen rail: and say in spite,
where now is come their God?
Thy servant blood: so shed in sight,
revenge, and show thy rod.
11
O hear the sighs: and sorrows deep,
of captive men in bonds:
Men iudgd to death: see that thou keep,
show forth thy strength of hands.
12
The blasphemy: at thee so cast,
by these our neighbors parts:
Requyte it them: O Lord at last,
seven sold on all their hearts.
13
So we thy sheep: and people true,
to thanks we shall agree:
Thy praise our tongues: shall still ensue,
to our posterity.
The Collecte.
Prevent us O Lord with thy great mercy before the zeal of thy wrath be
kindled to vengeance, grant that we may be edified by the examples of such as
have shed their blood for confessing thy name, and that we commended to thee by
their petitions may at thy mercy receive remission of our sins, Through, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. LXXX.
This Psalm does ask: deliverance,
from hard captivity:
In peace and truth: good Christians,
Quiregis Israel.
should pray Christ's church to be.
1
THou shepeheard king: of Israel,
that Joseph ledst as sheep:
On Cherubin: that sit so well,
hear now, appear, and keep.
2
For Ephraym: and Benjamin,
and eke Manasses sake:
Stir up thy power: and strength of thine,
and us to mercy take.
3
Restore us God: to love again,
and shine on us thy face:
If thou Lord wylt: us visit plain,
we shall be safe by grace.
4
Thou Lord and God: of hosts I say,
how long shall fret thine ire?
Against thy folk: which daily pray,
to thee in meek desire.
5
Thou feedst them full: with bread of tears,
they mourn for woe at meat:
Thou geuest them drink: in weping fears,
in heaped measure great.
6
A cause of strife: thou make us be,
to all our neighbors next:
They rail on us: and scornd be we,
our foes us sore have vexed.
7
Turn us to thee: thou God of hosts,
and shine thy face on us:
Keep us in peace: repress their bostes,
and whole we shall be thus.
8
Thou did translate: from Egypt dark,
a vine even so thou would:
To plant it there: it was thy warke,
whence Paynyms were expulst.
9
Thou made it rome: first clensd by hand,
from Cananites the weeds:
And root it took: it spread the land,
these were thy godly deeds.
10
The hyls were closde: with shade of it,
the hill of Syon house:
The boughs thereof: did sprede so fit,
like Ceders glorious.
11
She did extend: her branches wide,
to touch the feas extremes:
In length it went: a long the side,
of Euphrates the streams.
12
Why have thou beat: his closure down,
to lay as open soil?
That they which walk: from town to town
her grapes might freely spoil.
13
The tushy bore: of wood full fierce,
does route it up to stoure:
A savage beast: whose meat is gyrse,
does wholly it devour.
14
Turn thee we pray: thou God of hosts,
look down from heaven in speed:
Behold this vine: in all our costs,
and visit it at need.
15
The vyneyard place: behold also,
which thy right hand did set:
For thy sons sake: defend thereto,
the branch thou madst so great.
16
With fire brent: it is cut down,
thy wrath was cause in sight:
But they shall quayle: (when thou do frown)
which wrought this dedly spite.
17
Extend thy hand: upon the man,
of thy right mighty hand:
Upon the son: of man that can,
thy foes by strength withstand.
18
And so shall we: no more receede,
from thee so wide to fall:
If thou reuiuest: us than in deed,
thy name extol we shall.
19
O Lord our God: turn us again,
from erryng far from thee:
Show us thy light: of face so feign,
all whole then shall we be.
The Collecte.
Visit thy vine O Lord which thy mighty hand has delivered from
Egiptiacall bondage, that it may be revived continually by the brighte visage
of thy presence, and that it may joy prosperously to bring forth good works to
the land of thy name, Through Christ, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. LXXXI.
A song of joy to God: of majesty above,
Who gives all thing abundantly: to the^ that him do love.
1
NOw sing ye joyfully: To God our strength and rock:
Exultate.
Yea sing ye sweet: in iubilies: to God of Jacobs stock
2
Streyne up your psaltery: and wrest your tymbrels hye,
With merry harp: and virginals: set out your melodye.
3
Blow out with trumpet loud: in new mooues feast I say:
In time so meet: accordingly: our solemn feastfull day.
4
By statute thus enact: it is for Israel:
From Jacobs God: it is a law: his worthy acts to tell.
5
God made in Iosephes seed: (for wytnes) this decree:
Of Egypt land: when out he went: where language strange hard he.
6
I did his shulder ease: from burdens great and thick:
His hands escapte: the daily toil: of making potts and brick,
7
Thou cryedst on me in stresse: I thee delivered ryfe:
Sela.
In thunder close: I answered thee: first tried at fluds of strife
8
O then my people hear: I will the just assure:
O Israel: if hear thou wylt: my word which shall endure.
9
Strange God thou shall not have: no other God to serve:
If this thou do: and frowardly: fro me thou do not swerue.
10
I am the Lord thy God: who thee from Egypt led:
Then set thy mouth: full open wide: I will it fill full fed.
11
But yet my people thus: would never hear my voice,
No Israel: would none of me: nor list in me rejoice.
12
I let them go therefore: their own hearts lusts to sue:
Their crooked ways: to walk at will: which they did after rue.
13
O that my people meke: had heard my document:
And Israel: had walked my ways: with gentle hearts assent.
14
How soon would I at ones: their foes have wrested down:
And turned my hand: against them all: at them who firse did frown
15
Gods haters should have kneeld: at heels of them to lay:
Though lyingly: they had it meant: their days had lastd for aye.
16
Yea then he would have fed: with flower of finest wheat:
And out of rock: them had I filled: with honey pleasant meat.
The Collecte.
OPen thou O Lord the mouths of us thy suppliants to rebounde out the praise
of thy glorious majesty, and that we renouncing all Aegiptiacall works of dark
ignorance may rejoice in the aduancyng of thy blessed name through. etc.

The Argument. Psalm. LXXXII.
This Psalm is thret: and lesson good,
to judges stately romes:
Deus stetit in Synagoga.
Amid the Jews: as Christ he stood,
and blamde their wrongful domes.
1
GOd standth in mids: of Princes hye,
when they to counsel fall:
And judge he is: their deeds to try,
he judges their judgments all.
2
He once shall say: how long will ye,
give sentence wrongfully:
How long will ye: acceptours be,
Sela.
of persons wickedly.
3
Defend the poor: and fatherles,
speak law to their behoue:
Of men afflict: in heaviness,
in right their cause approve.
4
The nedies suit: ryd ye his cause,
deliver him with speed:
And pluck the poor: from all the claws,
of wicked bribers dread.
5
They nothing know: nor understand,
they walk in darkness deep:
The bases reele: of all the land,
for right, men mourn and weep.
6
I said no less: but Gods ye be,
so hye I you esteemd:
Of God most hye: as children free,
I you in office deemde.
7
But ye shall dye: as wretched men,
to children most unlike:
To tyrauntes like: as one of them,
ye all shall fall in dyke.
8
Rise thou O God: judge thou the land,
where wrong has such excess:
To heritage: thy mighty hand,
shall claim all heathennes.
The Collecte.
Grant us O Lord thy grace, to decline from wrongful domes in judgment, as
thou commaundest it unto us, that we may relieve the needful suits of thy
poor afflict servants, whereby we may be associated to the elect number of
thy children, Thorough Christ, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. Lxxxiij.
The Hebrews here: do invoke,
Their God for help: against men's spite:
Deus quis similis.
The church this psalm: does renouate,
In her distress: to escape all quite.
1
O God our God: within thy self,
Hold not thy tongue: this muet still:
Nor silence keep: but keep our health,
Stay not O God: but punish evil.
2
For lo thou see: what murmuryng,
Thine enmies make: most arrogant:
How hye aloft: their heds they bring,
Who thee do hate: how proud they vaunt.
3
They have in guyle: their counsayles take,
in Ire against: thy people poor:
Conspirde they be: close drifts they make,
and all thy saints: they will devour.
4
They said come on: let us them root,
even quyte from out: all nations:
Of Israel: the name to wroote,
no man to be: to name them once.
5
For they have laid: their heads in one,
together knit: in heart and mind:
Confederat: they be echone,
against thy self: like beasts unkind.
6
The tents where keep: the Edomits,
the Ismalits: with might and main:
With them be joined: the Moabits,
the Agareus: they fume again.
7
So Geball folk: and Ammon to,
beset in leage: with Amaleke:
The Palestyns: with them do go,
and they that dwell: in Tyrus eke.
8
To them be knyt: thassirians,
a people fierce: and strong in arms:
Lothes childer hye: they would advance,
Sela
whose strength they be: to work their harms.
9
But do to them: as Madian,
did feel thy hand: and angry look:
As eke thou did: to Siseran,
to Iabyn eke: at Kyson broke.
10
They whole on heaps: at Endor quaylde,
no grave received: their bodies dead:
Gods hand them all: so countervaylde,
as dunge on earth: their carcass spread.
11
Make them withal: their princes gaye,
to Oreb like: and Zeb also:
As Zebee: and Salmana:
make all their peers like them to go.
12
Who said in pride: let us possess,
Gods temple hye: to us to rise:
Let us deface: that holiness,
with all the rites: and sacrifice.
13
Make them my God: to be in sight,
all like the whele: down hill that slid^h:
And let them be: as stuble light,
tossed hye with wind: that never bidth.
14
And like as fire: that brenth the wood,
the rage whereof: no tree can flee:
As flames the hyls: where forage stood,
do wast for heat: and parched be.
15
Even so O God: all them pursue,
with thy great s^ormes: and tempests stoure
In thy sore wrath: make them to rue,
all foul dismayde: in heart to loure.
16
With vile reprofe: their faces fill,
with very shame: confound them all:
That they might search: thy name and will,
O Lord to thee: that they might fall.
17
Be they abasht: and vexed still,
Yea more and more: both day and night:
And let their fames: all shame bespill,
Destroy their flesh: but save their sprite.
18
That they may know: that thou alone,
Whose name divine: Iehoua is:
Art rock most hye: against our foen,
Above the earth: that sit in bliss.
The Collecte.
O Shake and discuss from us most loving Lord, all superfluity of error,
that we may so defy all heathen vice, to fear and worship thee only, who in
hiest majesty raignest on all the earth, Through Christ.

The Argument. Psalm. LXXXXIIII.
As David longd: Gods house to walk: where civil wars him drew:
So should we love: Christ's church in sprite: his heavenly face to view.
1
O God of hosts: how lovely be: thy tabernacles all?
Quam dilecta.
where god y^ raignst in grace and truth: for help at need to call.
2
My soul does bre^s in love it melth: it longth Gods courts to see:
My heart and flesh: does pant and cry: with God of life to be.
3
Yea there her nost: the sparow buildth: the swalow there may bred^
Thine altars nigh: Lord God and king: where wandering wars I led.
4
O well is the^: their hearts be blessed: who may thy house frequ^^
Sela.
They may sing out* thy lauds always to joy in mind content
5
O happy men: whose help thou art: whose hearts thy paths do seek
Whose souls inspirde: do joy to walk: thy ways in crede^ce meke
6
They passing here: this vale of tears: yet wels of joy they find:
Their pooles at full: with heavenly showers: shall flow for rest of mind
7
From strength to strength from faith to faith* to god they shall go still,
Till they by flocks: each one appear: with God in Syon hill.
8
O Lord of hosts: and god of strength hear y^ my hearts request
Sela.
With open ear: O harken God: on whom does Jacob rest.
9
Behold O God: protector good: our state in all assayes:
Behold thy Christ's: anointed face: for grace thy people prays.
10
In thy good courts: one day pass^h more: then thousand days else where
I rather wish: gods door to keep* then proud men's halles to tear.
11
For God the Lord: is light and shield: he glory gives and grace:
No good thing he: shall hold from them: who godly life embrace.
12
O Lord of hosts O puissant God: I must conclude for right:
That man is blessed: and blessed again: who trustth in thy great might
The Collecte.
ALmighty God which art the eternal founder of all the heavenly mansions
above, grave in our hearts such eleuations of gostly meditation to behold thy
passing goodness thou bear to mankind, that we may be found worthy to
ascend up to thy celestial place in heaven, Through Christ.

The Argument. Psalm. LXXXV.
Man here makth suit: for sin who felt,
Deserved captivity:
Benedixisti domine.
And shewth what health: Christ's kingdom dealt,
To man's felicity.
1
Against thy land: become thou art,
O Lord most gracious:
thou have returned: from Jacobs heart,
his thraldom burdenous.
2
Thou have forgeuen: thy peoples sin,
that was so hugely grown:
Yea all their sins: thou couerdst in,
Sela
whereby thy grace was known.
3
Thou have restraynd: thine heat all quyte,
from indignation:
Thou have withdrawn: thy face and sight,
from wraths destruction.
4
Whole turn us than: O God our wealth,
to grace that we convert:
Remove thine ire: impart thy health,
forgive our foul desert.
5
Eternal God: against us thus,
for ever will thou threate?
Shall thou thine ire: stretch out to us,
from age to age so great?
6
Uphold thy word: to us return,
and quicken us again:
So shall thy flock: no longer mourn,
but joy in thee full feign.
7
Show us thy grace: O Lord of power,
that it we may perceive:
And give to us: thy savior,
that health we might receive.
8
Plain will I hear: what God shall speak,
for peace he shall denounce:
To all his folk: and lovers eke,
that they their vice renounce.
9
All they no doubt: who will him fear,
is his salvation nigh:
His glory than: shall just appear,
in all our land at eye.
10
Right frendlines: and verity,
they shall each others meet:
So ryghteousnes: and peace from hye,
shall kiss each other sweet.
11
Known truth from earth: shall then out spring
with all good fruits aryght:
For ryghteousnes: all florishyng,
from heaven shall cast her sight.
12
Even thus the Lord: shall manifest,
his bounteous goodness near:
That full our land: with grace possessed,
all godly fruits shall bear.
13
Right justice eke: shall be his guide,
that strait may good man walk:
His ways and gate: her steps shall stryde,
no time the right to balke.
The Collecte.
PArdon O merciful Lord the sinnefulnes of all thy people, and show to us thy
mercy and light, which may lead us into the way of peace, by followyng the
guidance and direction of thy righteousness, through Jesus Christ.

The Argument. Psalm. LXXXVI.
Here David prayth: this Psalm I say,
That Saul him fraith: with great distress,
But Christ more true: yea Christ does pray*
Who once did sue: as man in flesh,
To escape all spite: but most for us,
He this endight: and says even thus.
Inclina Domine.
and says even thus.
1
BOw down thine ear: O Lord hear me,
These ceasures have perfect sense red, severally or jointly.
For thee I fear: as God most hye,
Whose favor kind: my heart would see,
I feign would find: thy grace at eye,
For poor I lie: all wrapped in thrall,
My want I spy: to thee I call.
To thee I call.
2
My soul preserve: for thine it is,
Aye thee to serve: unfeignedly,
So wholly bought: it may not miss,
Keep then in thought: my Lord said I,
Thy servant poor: to thee I call,
To thee the more: wythstand my fall.
Wythstand my fall.
3
Extend thy grace: save me O Lord,
And show thy face: all lovingly,
In mercy so: thy grace aforde,
I stand thereto: assuredly,
Whereto I hyed: to seek for ease,
And daily cried: I will not cease.
I will not cease.
4
O Lord make glad: thy servants heart,
My state full sad: and soul is fret,
To thee I go: from thee to start,
From all my woe: I will not yet,
I mourn to thee* in souls disease,
Though hie thou be: I trust to please.
I trust to please.
5
For kind thou art: O Lord of grace,
Of gentle heart: and merciful,
To all a like: in every place,
Who will thee seek: most bountefull,
In stable faith: thou art to spy,
In thee who stayth: who mournth in thee,
Who mournth in thee.
6
Again I say: my Lord give care,
To thee I pray: in this my moan,
Thou know my pain: which now I bear,
My foes restrain: I weep alone,
Expende my cry: full bitterly,
Thou see I ligh: all heavily.
All heavily.
7
When troubles rise: in dreadful days,
In sundry wise: on thee I call,
I draw thee near: in all my frayes,
For thou will hear: when I am thrall,
Then help me send: from heaven so bright,
As trusty friend: my heart to light.
My heart to light.
8
None like to thee: O God most hie,
Of Gods that be: all day so sought,
For wit, for might: for majesty,
Thy works be right: thy deeds be wrought,
Who will contend: with thee in sight,
As them to mend: O most of might,
O most of might.
9
All people just: whom thou have fourmd,
Now come they must: to worship thee,
O Lord full low: with mind refourmd,
And them bestow: in heart most free,
Thy grace to praise: thy name to sprede,
So good always: their doings lead.
Their doings lead.
10
For God art thou: thou wonders do,
As once so now: thou show thy might,
Thou made all thing: on earth and dust,
The heavens do sing: thy power in sight,
No God but thee: shall Paynyms need,
As eye may see: by Gospels reed.
By Gospels reed.
11
Teach me thy way: O Lord again,
That sue I may: thy truth so free,
All walk to it: make me to strain,
My heart O knit: in thee to lygh,
With reverence: to love thy name,
In confidence: to fear the same.
To fear the same.
12
I thee will thank: O Lord my God,
With heart most frank: to sing thy praise,
Thy loving grace: so wide and broad,
I will embrace: fall out my days,
Thine excellence: I will proclayme,
With diligence: to show thy name,
To show thy name.
13
Thine acts to me: I must confess,
Full great they be: mine eyes does see,
Thou rydst full quyte: my deep distress,
By thy great might: thou made me free,
My soul of late: nigh gone and lost,
From hell the state: all nethermost.
All nethermost.
14
O God so great: the proud arise,
At me they fret: in numbers ryfe,
The worst of all: in cruel wise,
They wyshe my fall: they seek my life,
They fear not thee: they much do boast,
Thy face they flee: in every coast.
In every coast.
15
But thou O Lord: yet God most meek,
As truth recordth: of loving breast,
Art pitiful: thee poor to seek,
To wrath but dull: to mercy pressed,
In grace and truth: look thou on us,
To moan in ruth: all gracious.
All gracious.
16
O turn to me: and turn anon,
My rock to be: thy grace I crave,
Thy servant strength: for which I groan,
That I at length: my soul to save,
With thee may won: in thy clear house,
Thy handmai^s son: all glorious.
All glorious.
17
O show to me: for good, some sign,
Some amity: show thou in sight,
Against my foes: though foes repyne,
Thou healtst my woes: to shame their spite,
That they may see: and so agree,
I stayde by thee: in comfort free.
In comfort free.
The Collecte.
O Lord of all comfort and compassion, we beseech thee to cheer the
countenance of the congregation of thine elect family, from all terrors of
hell and other hostility, so that we may be protected by the loving visage of
thy grace, in beholding our miserable travail that we have in this world, and
that by thee we may have the dominion of our carnal affection, to tread them
under foot, Through Christ.

The Argument. Psalm. LXXXVII.
This pleasant song: describes the state,
Of Christ's dear spouse: where Christ was borne
Jerusalem: most fortunate,
Fundamenta eius in.
To nurse both Jew: and gentile lorne.
1
GOd hily loves: Jerusalem,
Whose bases strong: be depely set,
In holy moun^es: sure laid in them,
Moria, Syon, Olyuet.
2
The Lord I say: loves Syon gates,
Her ports and fortes: her walls and towers:
Above the rest: for all their states,
Of Jacobs tents: and princely bowers.
3
Thou city hye: of God no doubt,
Where he does reign: in majesty:
Hye things be said: to set thee out,
Sela.
To blase thy power: and dignity.
4
I Raabs realm: and Babylons,
Will bear in mind: such shall know me
Lo Tyrus lo: Philistians,
Lo Moors most far: there borne is he.
5
Of Syon thus: it shall be said,
That he and he: was borne in her:
But he that is: far highest laid,
Is he that her: confirmth most clear.
6
The Lord for truth: shall it record,
The people when: he registreth:
That he so hye: that lovely Lord,
Sela.
Was borne even there: and there he lyegth.
7
All singers there: and trumpetters,
Their songs and hymns: shall sweet rebound:
Fresh lively springes: with all their cheres,
Shall praise this Lord: for grace most bound.
The Collecte.
ALmighty God the only foundation of our faith which do build the gates and
strength of thine eternal majesty to be seen in the hearts of thine elect,
as it were upon thy holy hiles fenced and beset round about by thy
righteousness, grant us we beseech thee to glory in thy true faith, and to
declare the benefit of thy sons redemption wrought for our souls by his
incarnation to whom with thee and the holy ghost, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. LXXXVIII.
Here is a moan: most piteous,
of man afflicte in stresse:
It payntes Christ's death: most dolorous,
Domine Deus.
his sepulture in flesh.
1
MY loving Lord: and God of grace,
on whom my health dependth:
Both day and night: before thy face,
my cry I have extend.
2
O let therefore: my prayer soon
come now before thy sight:
Inclyne thine ear: and hear my bone,
with tears which I endight.
3
My soul is full: of miseries,
in woes full gorgd I rore:
My life in sight: to all men's eyes,
is even at death his door.
4
As one of them: I am esteemd,
that tumble must in pit:
A sely man: I am but deemd,
so void of strength I sit.
5
As free (from toil) among the dead,
as wounded sleep in grave:
Who far from mind: be sonke as lead,
whom slain thy hands now have.
6
In pit most deep: thou have me thrown,
in deaths and hels despair,
In places dark: down low bestown,
where co^mith no light nor air.
7
Thy fury Lord: lies hard on me,
oh striffe on every side:
And vexed thou have: both heart and eye,
Sela.
with all thy storms full tryde.
8
Thou have driven far: my friends from me,
acquaynted most to see:
Abhord of them: thou made me be,
thus bound I cannot flee.
9
My sight does fail: for heaviness,
to thee Lord yet I cry:
No day from thee: Lord would I cease,
to lift my hands full hye.
10
Thy meruels great: wylt thou devise,
to work to buried men?
Or else shall sprites: to life arise,
Sela.
thy lauds to ^ound again?
11
Or shall my grave: thy pity tell,
when once thou have me ^layne?
Or shall thy truth: be proved so well,
when I destroyed am layne?
12
Thy wondrous works: which wrought thy hand,
Shall darkness them express?
Or shall thy justice shine in land,
of mere forgetfulness?
13
To thee O Lord: my prayer went,
to whom else should I go?
Yea still my suit: shall thee prevent,
at morn while laffth my woe.
14
Why than O Lord: abhorst my soul,
all help from me to wind?
Why hidest thy face: from me so whole,
that I no grace can find?
15
Afflict I am: at point to dye,
from youth thus have I been:
In heart astound: thy dreades feel I,
so fearful they be seen.
16
Thy sower wrathes: so multiplied,
hane overwhelmed me:
Thy terrors eke: which sore abide,
have stroyd me whole to see.
17
They daily did: pass over me,
as water surges hye:
They compasd me: in cer^enty,
even round about full nigh.
18
Both friend and kin: from me full far*
thou have put whole away:
My friends that were: familiar,
in dark fro me they stray.
The Collecte.
O Lord the redemer of all which art marvelous in the procuryng of our health
and salvation, which by thy descension into hell were made as one among the
dead, hear the timely prayers of thy family praying to be delivered from our
perverse enemy laboring to bring us into bondage, grant this O Lord: who
lyuest and raygnest with the father. etc.

The Argument. Psalm. LXXXIX.
The letter here: describes to ear,
the state of David's raygne:
Misericordias domine.
The sprite to heart: does this impart,
that Christ shall ay^ remain.
1
GOds mercies all: with song I shall,
for ever sing and play:
With mouth even still: express I will
his truth from day to day.
2
For thus I said: his mercy stayde,
for ever shall remain:
Thou shall confirm: thy truth most firm,
in heaven and it maintain.
3
With Abraham: in league I am,
who was my chief el^^^:
To David lo: I swear even so,
for him and all his sect.
4
I will thy sede: prepare in deed,
for ever world to end:
I will advance: thy governance,
Sela.
for aye thy reign extend.
5
The heavens O Lord: shall just record,
thy meruayles great in deed:
Even so thy saints: without restraintes,
thy truth in church shall sprede.
6
For who compare: so boldly dare,
with God in heaven so clear?
Whom can we seek: the Lord so like,
among Gods children dear.
7
This God of bliss: most puissant is,
amids his saints echone:
Most lovely fear: to him they bear,
which stand about his throne.
8
O Lord and God: of hosts so broad,
who (Lord) so strong as thou?
Even round about: thy truth falth out,
to them which thee allow.
9
Thou can repress: the seas excess,
by power imperial:
When they do swell: in surges fell,
thou make them down to fall.
10
Thou Egypt braidst: and it so raydst,
as wounded carcass proud.
Thou scatredst wide: thine enemies pride,
such strength thine arm auowde.
11
The heavens be thine: with all their shine,
the earth is thine full sure:
The world so round: thou dydst it found,
with all the furniture.
12
As North and South* stood through thy mouth
thy word them both did frame:
So Tabor West: and Hermon East,
both hills shall joy thy name.
13
An arm endude: with fortitude,
thou have omnipotent:
O let thine hand: then strongly stand,
thy right hand hie be bent.
14
As ryghteousnes: so judgment is,
thy throne and royal seat:
With mercy truth: most jointly sueth,
before thy face so sweet.
15
O then most blessed: such folk does rest,
that ioyeth and feelth the same:
In thy pure light: they walk shall right,
O Lord to praise thy name.
16
Thy name so bright: shall them delight,
all day to joy therein:
And they always: themself shall raise,
by thy just word to win.
17
For thou thy self: do work their wealth,
the joy of all their strength:
By thy good grace: thou shall in place,
lift up our horns at length.
18
On God is set: our help so great,
our shield he is to tell;
And be our king: all health to bring,
that saint of Israel.
19
Thou spakest thus once: in visions,
to thy sweet saints full nigh:
My help I laid: to strong men's aid,
I chase and hauntst him hye.
20
I David found: my servant sound,
I sacred him with oil:
Him king made I: right holily,
and Lord of all the soil.
21
With him my hand: shall strongly stand,
my power shall him defend:
My valiant arm: shall whole him arm,
for strength I will him send.
22
No force so ^yne: can undermine,
his strength to make him thrall:
No crafty wyle: shall him beguile,
by wicked man to fall.
23
I down will bray: his foes array,
which shall his face resist:
His haters like: I will them strike,
and stroy them shall my fist.
24
My faythfulnes: and gentleness,
with him shall long abide:
In my good name: shall spring his fame,
his horn and strength full wide.
25
Unto the sea: his reign shall be,
and he the Lord of it:
His right hand shall: rule ryuers all,
on fluds as chief to sit.
26
He me full grate: shall invoke,
most frankly thus to say:
My father thou: my God t'auow,
my health, my rock, my stay.
27
Yea more then this: I will him bliss,
my first begotten son:
More hie to stand: then kings in land,
that yet to earth be gone.
28
I will him keep: my favor meke,
for ever him to love:
My covenant fast: to him so past,
shall never void remove.
29
His seed even so: shall stable go,
so deep I will it plant:
His regal powers: shall days and hours,
as heaven stand valiant.
30
But if his sede: from me recede,
and shall my law forsake:
Or yet shall balke: in all their walk
my judgment them to slake.
31
And shall perchance: mine ordinance,
profane and cast it back:
Or my precept: as light reject,
to keep it shall be slack.
32
I will no doubt: then visit stout,
to scourge their wyckednes:
I will them smite: with plagues in sight,
to beat their sinnefulnes.
33
Yet will not I: my clemency,
wythdraw from them to go:
And loud to lie: so will not I,
my faith to ieopard so.
34
I list not vain: my pact profane,
though they defile their south:
I will me take: to that I spoke,
to keep my word of mouth.
35
Once swear I did: and testified,
my holiness to pledge:
From David's part: I would not start,
as this may he allege.
36
That is, his sede: should ever sprede,
and never should decay:
His throne begun: should shine as sun,
in my sweet light to lay.
37
As moon in sight: it should be bright,
though often it feelth the clips:
These witness sure: in heaven endure,
Sela.
to try my faith of lips.
38
But lo as now: what done have thou,
thou have abhord thy Christ:
And him forsakt: and abject makt,
at him displeasd thou lighst.
39
Of covenant made: thou breakst the trade,
with this thy servant knit:
His regal crown: thou rentst it down,
even flat on earth to sit.
40
His walls as wast: thou battred have,
and none thou leauest to stand:
Thou breakst his fortes: and stroyst his ports,
thine ire seemth now so grand.
41
All they to spy: which journey by,
tread down his raygne in spyte:
The neighbor next: his state has vexed,
as laughyng stock in sight.
42
Who foes thereto: in hatred go,
their hands thou lyftes on hye:
The enemy coye: thou makst him joy,
at it, his iestes to wry.
43
Thou have whole stynt: his weapons dynt,
his edge of sword but blunt:
It had no power: as conqueror,
to win as it was wont.
44
Thus his renown: thou pulst a down,
with darkness all obscurde:
His scepter flat: on ground is plat,
despair he sees assurde.
45
Thou have in deed: thus shortened,
his young and flouryng days:
Thou have him clad: with shame bestad,
Sela
ashamed thus he lays.
46
How long by day: wylt thou for aye,
O Lord thus hyde thy face?
And shall thine ire: thus burn as fire,
wylt thou this reign disgrace?
47
O call to mind: in heart yet kind,
what brittle date I bear:
Or have thou wrought: mankind for naught,
to stroy him thus in fear.
48
What man is he: in life so free,
that death shall never see?
Can he escape: his mortal shape,
Sela.
from grave whole ryd to be?
49
Where may we hold: thy mercies old,
O Lord, where do they lygh?
As thou dydst swear: in David's ear,
in truth most earnestly.
50
Then call to mind: spite done unkind,
O Lord to thine electes:
What tauntes in breast* I hold at rest,
of diverse peoples sects.
51
Wherwyth thy foes: have wrought us woes,
O Lord despitefully:
They threat us hye: opprobriously,
no steps of Christ to spy.
52
We may conclude: though we be rude,
the Lord will turn again:
The Lord therefore: for evermore,
be blessed, Amen, Amen.
The Collecte.
ALmighty God most true in thy promises, and terrible yet in thy judgments,
grant we beseech thee that we may walk faythfullye before thy holy face, to
feel the comfort of thy loving presence, and where we be scourged at any time
for straying from thee, that yet again we may receive thy mercy to glorify thy
name, Through Jesus Christ, etc.

The end of the third book.
Here begins the fourth Book of Psalms.
The Argument. Psalm. XC.
The woeful life: of man for sin: here Moses painted clear:
Gods grace aduaunst: man's state deiect: Christ's aduent craved here.
1
O Lord thou have: our refuge been: as sanctuary most free:
In time now past: Domine ne refugium.
from age to age: to who^ safe might we flee made:
2
Before the hills: had full their shape: ere earth and world was
From world to world: true God you art: thy power shall never fade.
3
Thou do retract: man's life to dust: thou so dissoluest his train:
And say eftsoons: ye Adams seed: return to life again.
4
A thousand years: in thy good sight: as yesterday that was:
though long they seem: yet swift thy slide: as nightly watch does pas.
5
Thou make the^ flow: as fluds in course: as dremes they vanish lyte
As early grass in sodentye: does change his hue and plight.
6
Which flourth at mo^ne: and groethful grene: and gatherth strength full gay
But rept it is: at night full dym: and witherth dry away.
7
A like we wast: and fall away: when thou art wroth for sin:
And while this sense: of wrath does last: a^rayd we be therein.
8
Thou have detect: before thy face* our sins full open laid:
Our hydden crimes: our secrecies thy face has bright dewrayd.
9
For all our days: do slide away: in thy displeasant wrath:
We spend our years* as tale is told: that brittle pleasure has.
10
Our years in dais: be seventy selde: though strength wan eighty mo:
That pride at last: were pain and grief: it pass and hence we go.
11
Thy wrathful power who can comprise? no man by reasonyng:
for more yt man: does fear thy power* thy wrath him more does wring
12
That we our days: may number right: O teach this wit to us:
Their date so frail: shall make our hearts: apply to wisdom thus.
13
Be thou retournd: O Lord we pray: how long wylt thou depart:
Thy servants rue: most pityfull: intreatable in heart.
14
Refresh us Lord: and fill us full: with thy sweet early love:
To joy a while: to sing the lauds: while we our breath can move.
15
And cheer our hearts: with days as good: as thou have us afflict:
And as our years: have smarted long: with heavy scourges strickt.
16
Thy servants teach: thy work divine* their state thy grace to see:
That thy renown: may so appear: to their posterity.
17
The cherefull grace: of God our Lord: remain on us as now:
Our works of hands: confirm in us: our hands O prosper thou
The Collecte.
ALmighty and everlasting God which art our defensible refuge in this our
brief space of life which we perceive to be miserable, we beseech thee not to
press us with the burden of thy heavy indignation, but so nurture us with thy
fatherly rod, that we may desire these eternal days of rest: where thou with
thy son and holy spryte reygnest eternal God to whom, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. XCI.
The faithful man: does here confess: that Gods defense is strong:
Against all grief: that him can press: to escape all woe and wrong.
1
WHo under fence: and covert dwelth,
Qui habitat in adiutorio.
of God that is most hye:
He shall be sure: in shadow well,
By God of heaven to ligh.
No dout of this: ought man to have: who proof thereof will make:
For God is strong: us all to save: if faith to heart we take.
2
The just by faith: may thus be bold,
to say to God so just:
Thou art my hope: my strength and hold,
my God in whom I trust.
I have no hope: in worldly thing: that may be seen or felt,
Though things I use: as need does bring: which god for use has dealt
3
To make the escape: he will not miss,
all crafty hunters snares:
From pestilence: that noisome is,
as far from other cares.
When devil or man: his soul will spyte: then God will help him free
His body frail: shall yet be quyte: from plages how fierce they be.
4
For under wynge: he thee shall hyde,
his feathers thee to brood:
His faith and truth: shall fence thy side,
as shield and buckler good.
As once in th'arke: their wings so wide: the Cherubins did splay:
As uses the hen: her birds to stryde: to keep the kyte away.
5
Thou shall not need: to be adrad,
for fears of all the night:
No dart so sharp: shall make thee sad,
that flies by day in sight.
No horrors fell: shall so prevail: to make thy heart aga^t:
Misfortune none: shall thee assail: God will eye thee so fast.
6
Thou shall escape: all pestilence,
which walkth in dark to noye:
Of sickness sore: to have defense,
that hye at none does stroye.
No venom bayte: shall thee infect: by devil or man be laid:
For God to thee: shall it detect: by whom it shall be stayed.
7
Though thousands fast: to murre in run
by thee that dwellers be:
On thy right hand: though thousands ten,
do fall: thou shall be free.
Thou nedest not fear: what fortune fall: to all the world beside:
Thou shall not stand: so casual: for God shall be thy guide.
8
Yea both thine eyes: shall make thee see,
how proud men shall decay:
How faythles impes: shall scourged be,
for their desert I say.
God shall his foes: tread under foot: who him and his did hate:
Their lies and brags: them shall not boot: with all their cruel state
9
For thou my God: mine only trust,
my hope thou art to endure:
Thou have my soul: thus made full just,
thy help to have right sure.
Because thou have: affiance had: in God who dwelth so hye:
He shall keep thee: from chances bad: and be thy sanctuary.
10
There shall no evil: so chance to thee,
but all shall work thy wealth:
No plage shall nigh: thy dwelling be,
to stroy thereof the health.
Thou safe shall dwell: protected well: by God, if him thou fearst:
From wrathful men: that be so fell: if faith to God thou bearst.
11
For he shall give: his angels charge,
on thee to cast their sight:
To see thy ways: full set at large,
to walk therein aryght.
His angels be thy servants pressed: thy wealth and health to keep:
To work thy rest: to prompt thy breast: thy God in heart to seek.
12
They shall in hands: bear thee alone,
to stay thy hold aloft:
Lest thou should hurt: thy foot at stone,
else might thou fall full often.
If God thou fearst: and keep his ways: his sprite will thee preserve
Thou nedest no dout: to walk in strayes: if god thou vowst to serve
13
The Lions fierce: and adder fly,
on both them shall thou go:
Thou shall tread down: the Lions frye,
and eke the dragon to.
All venom beasts: shall run fro thee: they shall serve thee at will
The devil so stout: thy faith shall flee: though he thy soul would spill.
14
Because his hope: on me he set,
I will him rid from shame:
I will him lift: to make him great,
because he knew my name.
I will says God: my help him send: in all his troublous days:
No better cause: make me to bend: then that on me he stays.
15
When he shall call: and sue to me,
to him I shall apply:
I will with him: in trouble be,
and ryd him gloriously.
His trust and faith: shall not decay: his love shall have reward.
Though here he weep: from day to day: yet I his tears regard.
16
With length of days: where life shall last
I will him satisfy:
I will him show: for loving taf^,
my saving health so hye.
Though here oppressed: as vile outcast: the just for right does wayle:
The greater joy; says God at last: shall chance to his aduayle.
Who under fence: and covert dwelth,
of God that is mos^ hye:
He shall be sure: in shadow well,
by God of heaven to ligh.
The Collecte.
Extend O merciful father through the invocation of thy holy name thy loving
tuition upon us thy poor servants that where we be to weak by our own
strength to overcome the crafry and combrous assawts of our enemies, that yet
by thy fatherly protection we may be defended against al their hostylitie, and
so in patience pass over this mortal conversation to joy with thee in the
length of days in thy blessed presence Through. etc.

The Argument* Psalm. XCII.
Of sabbath day (the solemn) feast* does us excyte by rest:
Gods mighty works: that we declare: love him for all the best.
1
A Joyful thing (to man) it is: the Lord to celebrate*
Bonum est confiteri.
To thy good name: O God so hye: due lauds to modulate.
2
To preach (and show) thy gentleness: in early morning light,
Thy truth of word: to testify: all whole by length of night.
3
Upon (the psalm:) the decachord: upon the pleasant lute:
On sounding good: sweet instruments: with shaumes, with harp, with flute
4
For thou have ioyed: my fearful heart: O Lord thy works to see
And I with praise: will just rejoice: these handy works of thee.
5
How glorious: O (blessed) Lord: be these the factes of thine?
Thy thoughts be deep: thy counsayles hye: inscrutable deuyne.
6
The brutish man: (that is) untaught: is naught of this beseene:
The fool as is: the carnal man? perceyueth not what it meanth.
7
When evil men flour: as (does the) grass: and wicked workers bud
Then shall they all: come down at once: for ever drowned in mud.
8
But thou art hye: (full hye) aloft: as Lord and president:
For ever standst: immovable: and wise in regiment.
9
For lo thy foes: O Lord (so strong:) thy foes shall perish all:
And such as work: all wickedly: shall have a shameful fall.
10
My horn (and power) shall yet be raysd: as Unicornes is seen:
Even now I seem: as swetely dewd: with oil of Olive green.
11
Mine eyes (full out) their lust shall have: of all my waityng spies:
Mine ears the same: of crafty men: who up at me did rise.
12
The true (elect) and ryghteous man: shall florishe like the palm:
As Ceder tree: in Lybanus: himself shall sprede with balm.
13
Deep planted they (in roots) always: in gods sweet house to bide:
Shall flourish like: in both the courts: of this our God and guide.
14
In age (most sure) they shall increase: their fruit abundantly:
Well likyng they: and fat shall be: to bear most fruitfully.
15
That is (to say) they out shall preach: this lords true faythfulnes:
Who is my strength: and mighty rock: who hates unrighteous
The Collecte.
ALmighty God which art the contynuall joy and perpetual felicytye of all thy
saints whom thou do inwardly water with the dew of thy heavenly grace,
whereby thou makst them to floryshe like the Palm tree in the celestial courts
of thy church: we beseech thee that thou would so discuss from us the burdenous
weight of sin that we may enjoy their fellowship: Through. etc.

The Argument. Psalm. XCIII.
This praith in faith: when storms arise: in trust of help full sure:
But here in reign: is Christ bewrayde: and how his church shall dure.
1
Dominus regnauit decorem.
THe Lord is king: in his array: the Lord is clad with strength,
He girt himself: the world is sure: it cannot reele at length.
2
Thy throne is strong: prepared sure: from time all out of mind
Thou art that art: all durably: which never end shall find.
3
The floods have lift: aloft O Lord: the fluds have lift their voice:
The stremes ^^^^rge: with griefly waves. thy foes to hie rejoice.
4
But far above: all rage of fluds: or dreadful storms of sea:
Does God surmount: more excellent: his enmies all to slay.
5
Thy word is sure: thy testament: is tried in all assayes:
All holiness: does deck thy house: O Lord for years and days.
The Collecte.
MOst marvelous God which art begirt round about withal godly majesty and
power, as thy handy works in the creation and situation of heaven and earth do
manifestly declare, hear us we beseech thee thy humble suitors, and inspire
into our hearts fast faith to believe thy word, perfect our souls to confess
it in tongue: and confirm us to show the holiness thereof in our life to the
glory of thy name. Through Jesus Christ. etc.

The Argument. Psalm. XCIIII.
The poor oppressed: does help implore,
against proud judges might:
Deus vltio number dominus.
As Christ and hie: long heretofore,
be paternes good in sight.
1
O God and Lord: revenger right,
of sin revenger God:
Now show thy self: declare thy might,
make have to shake thy rod.
2
Be thou set up: in majesty,
thou judge of all the land:
Requite the proud: accordingly,
and let them feel thy hand.
3
How long O Lord: these wicked men,
how long tryumphe shall they?
Thy people thus: to over renew,
without both stop and stay.
4
They blatter out: even what they list,
sore words they be and proud:
All wicked ympes: will not desist,
to vaunt and boast aloude.
5
Thy people Lord: full sore they flyte,
thine heritage they vex:
Their poor estates: with wrongs they smite
and threats thereto annexe.
6
The widow lo: the stranger eke,
they murder craftily:
The fatherless: they quell alyke,
though dear to thee they ligh.
7
Their mouths thus speak: as hearts devise,
tush God sees naught of this:
Nor Jacobs God: shall this advise,
in this he is remysse.
8
Ye doltes of all: most brute to see,
betyme yet understand:
When prudent wise: when will ye be?
ye fools I say so fond.
9
Can he be deaf: which made the ear,
how harken should not he?
Who made the eye: can ye him bleare?
that he should nothing see?
10
Or he that checkes: the heathen else,
shall he not you reprove?
And he that man: all wisdom tells,
shall he not you remove?
11
The Lord does know: the thoughts of man,
to be both fond and vain:
Your open wrongs: how can they than,
escape deserved pain?
12
Then happy is: that man and blessed,
whom thou do chastise here:
And whom by love: in law thou teach est,
O blessed Lord most dear.
13
To make him sit: with patience,
in dreadful days at rest:
While that to men: of violence,
their pit be digd and dressed.
14
For God no dout: will not reject,
his people them to fail:
Nor yet forsake: his lot elect,
to make them long to wayle.
15
Until that right: be turned again,
to dome, as just it ought:
And follow it: shall they full feign,
whose heart has justice sought.
16
O who will up: for me to stand,
against malignant spies?
Or will with me: conioyne his hand,
at wicked men to rise?
17
If soon the Lord: had sent none aid,
to me in mine unrest:
It had not faylde: my soul dismayde,
had dwelt in grave oppressed.
18
But when I said: my foot does reele,
to note the worlds disdain:
Then help O Lord: thou did me deal,
thy grace did me sustain.
19
As careful thoughts: in store did rise,
when thus my heart did boil:
Thy comfort so: did me repryse,
my soul to escape the foil.
20
Shall wicked seats: of tyranny,
cleave fast to thee as thence:
That thou should feign: to scourge thereby,
the poor by laws pretense?
21
They cloyne in one: in companies,
against the just man's life:
The giltles soul: of wicked vice,
they whole condemn in strife.
22
The Lord yet was: to me in stresse,
a refuge strong of fence:
My God was rock: as inaccesse,
my trust and confidence.
23
He shall them quite: their crafty guiles,
as they did others cloy:
God shall them slay: for all their wyles,
our Lord shall them destroy.
The Collecte.
NVrture us O Lord with the sincere doctrine of thy blessed word, be thou to
us a refuge in time of tribulation, so guide us by true knowledge and
understanding of thy word that we never fall from thee Through Jesus Christ.
etc.

The Argument Psalm. XCV.
This cherefull Psalm: does inuit us in voice:
This cherefull Psalm: inuiteth our voice:
Due lauds to God: in our hymns to rebounde:
Due lauds to God: in hymns to sound:
With lowly hearts: in his grace to rejoice:
With lowly hearts: that we rejoice:
His word to hear: as we duly be bound:
His word to hear: as we be bound.
1
Venite.
O Come in one: let us sing to the Lord:
O Come in one: to praise the Lord:
And him recounte: for the stay of our wealth,
And him recounte: our stay and wealth:
All hearty joys: let us duly record:
All hearty joys: let us record:
To this strong rock: to the Lord of our health,
To this strong rock: our Lord of health.
2
His face with praise let us rise to prevent,
His face with praise let us prevent,
His factes in sight: to the world to denounce,
His factes in sight: let us denounce:
Join we I say: in our joyful assent,
Join we I say: in glad assent,
Our psalms and hymns let us early pronounce,
Our psalms and hymns let us pronounce.
3
For why this Lord: is a God of a might,
For why this Lord: is God of might,
For help at need: Upon whom we may call:
For help at need: whom we may call.
A puissant king: in his radiant light:
A puissant king: in his brght light,
He passth all Gods: by his rule over all:
He passth all Gods: by rulyng all.
4
All coasts of earth: in his power do ligh:
All coasts of earth: by him do ligh:
His celles and grounds: be they never so deep:
His celles and grounds: though they be deep:
As fast by him: be the mountains on hye:
As fast by him: stand mountains hye,
And stoop to him: be they never so steep:
And stoop to him: though they be steep.
5
The sea is his: as the work of his hands,
The sea is his: his work of hands,
Her rise and fall: with her mutable rode,
Her rise and fall: with all her rode,
The land from her: by authority stands:
The land from her: by power stands,
Whom God so stayed: for his stable abode:
Whom God so stayed: for his abode.
6
O then come we: let us humbly adore,
O then come we: let us adore,
And prostrate ligh: be we down on our knees,
And prostrate ligh: on both our knees:
He made us all: both the rich and the poor,
He made us all: both rich and poor:
Both king and slave in their private degrees:
Both king and slave in their degrees.
7
For God he is: as our Lord and our stay:
For God he is: our Lord and stay,
His people we: in his pasture to rest:
His people we: in pasture near:
His flock of hand: for he lead us in way:
His flock of hand: who leadth our way:
His voice to day: if ye hear at the lest,
His voice to day: if well ye hear.
8
Beware say I: that ye hard not your hearts,
Beware say I: ye hard no hearts,
Against his grace: when he bid you repent,
Against his grace: to you so meant,
As desert saw: in a strife over whart:
As desert saw: once strife or ewhart,
Like tempting day: of an eluishe intent,
Like tempting day: of mad intent.
9
In which pastyme: as your fathers aforne,
In which pastyme: your fathers old,
Did tempt my strength: to assay what I could:
Did tempt my strength: to prove my might,
They proved but me: in a mock and a scorn:
They proved but me: in scorn to bold,
Where yet my works: might they see if they would,
Where yet my works: they saw in sight.
10
Full forty years, did I chyde with this age:
Full forty years, I blamde this age,
Great griefs by them: did I suffer in mind:
Great griefs by them: I felt by this:
I said even thus: when* I spied how they raged,
I said even thus: to spy their rage,
They err in heart: in my ways be they blind:
They err in heart: my ways they miss.
11
To whom I swear: in mine angry reproach,
To whom I swear: all wrathfully,
By their foul strayes: was I forced thereunto:
By their foul strayes: thus forced thereto,
If they so evil: to my rest shall approach:
If they so evil: my rest should see,
Then blame have I: if it ever be so:
Then blame have I: if it be so.
The Collecte.
LOrd of all salvation, behold we beseech thee the sheep of thy pasture
redeemed by thy precious blood, grant that in prudence we accept thy voice to
be ruled thereby, at last to joy with thee in thy rest perpetual, through, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. XCVI.
This Gentiles calls: to (christian) faith*
In Christ to joy their head:
In whom all power: and glory layth,
To judge both quick and dead.
1
Cantate.
O Sing (I bid) to God the Lord,
A song of new devise:
Let all the earth: his praise record,
for grace most new shall rise.
2
(Unto) this Lord: so new sing aye,
And praise his majesty:
Be tellyng forth: from day to day,
His great benignity.
3
To Gentiles him (look ye) declare,
His glory tell them all:
And show all folk: with all your care,
His works most martial.
4
For why (no dout) this Lord is hye,
Above all praise so famde:
To be most drad: right worthily,
Above all Gods so namde.
5
For all (even all:) the hethen gods,
Be vain, be things of naught:
This Lord in heaven: has his abode,
and heavens by him were wrought.
6
All glory (praise all) worship, fame,
Be his as ornament:
All praise and power: be his to name,
In heavenly firmament.
7
Ye stocks (of men) and familyes,
Of peoples, bring this Lord:
Bring ye this Lord: as comely is,
All laud for power of word.
8
Yea glory give (all ye) full true,
To his sweet name most hye:
Heave up your gifts: present him due,
His courts thus draw ye nigh.
9
Before this Lord (his face) bow down,
Before his holy grace:
Ye dwellers all: in field and town,
O dread his mighty face.
10
Tell ye (I say) the Gentiles all
This Lord his reign has pight:
The world is fast: not like to fall,
And he shall judge in right.
11
Let heavens (so hye) be glad so pure,
Let all the earth rejoice:
Let all the sea: in furniture,
enhaunce their cherefull voice.
12
The (fruitful) fields: and all therein,
Ought now rejoice full lite:
Than shall all trees: In wood be seen,
to gether joy in sight.
13
Before this Lord: who (shortly) comth,
For come to rule is he:
To judge the world bright brightfull dome,
His flock by verytye.
The Collecte.
O God almightye creator of heaven and earth, whose praise the whole ornament
of them both does daily magnify, we beseech thee that as we confess the
victory of the cross, so we may renounce all heathen error, to behold the
glory of thy second coming, with full joy of our consciences, through Jesus,
etc.

The Argument. Psalm. XCVII.
This Psalm in sprite: does gratulate,
Cbristes kingdom clear: immaculate:
Whereby such light: has God detect,
That truth was raisde: and lies deiect.
Dominus regnauit.
1
THe living Lord: does reign as king
The earth therefore: full glad may sing
The isles may joy: so many seen,
That he is come to make the^ clean.
2
Thick clouds and dark: be him about,
On wicked men: to thunder stout:
Both justice right: and equity,
Of his high throne: the bases be.
3
The fire him goes: before in sight,
With blasing leames: of fearful light:
By which full wide: he does inflame,
His foes to burn: which scorn his name.
4
His lighteninges shine: the world full out,
On every side: whote sparks to spout:
The earth at sight: for fear does quake,
No puissance can: resistance make.
5
The mountains hye: as ware did melte,
At God his face: thus present feit:
I say at face: of Lord so hye,
The earth did feale his majesty.
6
The heavens declare: his rightwisnes,
When he by them: strikth wickedness:
All peoples thus: his glory saw,
How drad he is: whom all should awe.
7
A shamde be all: which Idols serve,
Who chose vain gods: from God to swerne
Ye angels all: which servants be,
Come worship him: bow down your knee.
8
So Sion ioyed: in hearing this,
And Jury ioyd: in towns of his:
O Lord for these: thy domes intent,
That such should have: sharp punishment.
9
For thou O Lord, do all excel,
That here by low: in earth do dwell:
Exalted far: in name thou art,
Above all Gods: so new vpstart.
10
O ye that love: this Lord so hye,
Hate ye all vice: of mawmetrye:
He keepth their souls: who serve him pure,
From wicked hand: to ryd them sure.
11
Now light is sprung: to ryghteous man,
That day from dark* discern he can:
And joy is fallen: to rightful heart,
From whence no power: can him depart.
12
Then joy ye just: in this your Lord,
This light, his grace: always record:
His holiness: well think and thank,
His name confess: therein be frank.
The Collecte.
O Lord the preserver of all thy faithful saints on whom as on thine elect
portion thou do perpetually reign, inspire we beseech thee into our hearts
the bright beams of the scriptures of thy prophets and apostles, that what
soever as yet remain in our hearts as savoring the old carnal blyndnes of
our original darkness, may be illitened by the heavenly light of thy holy
sprite, to whom, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. XCVIII.
Here thanks be done: that God (in word) most true,
Sent Christ his son: man's loss (again) to cure:
All things that be: must laud him (ever) due,
Cantate.
Such peace to see: restord (in earth) so sure.
1
Sing ye all new: to God (a song) on hye,
For he most true: has meruels (newly) wrought
His able hand: has (won him) victory,
His arm so grand: this health (to man) has brought
2
The Lord of love: this health has (open) laid:
So man to move: to serve (in heart) aryght:
His righteousness: he has full (plainly) splayd,
For their redress: to Gentiles (eyes and) sight.
3
He called to mind: his (gentle) mercies free,
To Jacob kind: his truth (and faith) to keep*
The earth all whole: this health did (fully) see,
O him extol: this God (our Lord) so meke.
4
Thou earth sing out: all whole (I say) full glad,
In voice most stout: with (gentle) musikes sound:
To God thy Lord: (rejoice) for mercy had,
Thy songs record: thou art most (duly) bound.
5
Yea sing in harp: to God (and Lord) so hye,
Sing round and sharp: with all thy (tunes and) stringes
With harp bid I: with (note of) Psalmodie:
Your voice apply: to joy these (heavenly) things.
6
With tru^pets blow: with shaulme so (swetely) sing,
Both hye and low: extend your (hearty) strength:
Make iubilies: before this (heavenly) king,
For Lord he is: to serve (I say) at length.
7
Let eke the seas: rose out in (merry) chere,
This Lord to please: with all her (fish in) store:
The world so round: and (all the) dwellers there,
your voice rebound: to praise (this Lord) the more.
8
The floudes a like: Let (them now) clap their hands
This Lord to seek: (with man) in joyful heart:
The mountayns hie: (so houge) above the lands,
Let them be by to dance (with man) in part.
9
To God do this: let it (in sight) be plied,
For come he is: (as lord) to judge the land:
His justice sword: the world shall (judge and) guide,
His equal word: to all shall (euenly) stand.
The Collecte.
Pour into our hearts O Lord thy healthful grace, which thou have reuelde to
all Gentiles so spread by the rightwisnes of thy gospel, we humbly beseech thee
that as thou once came to be judged and condemned for us most misera le
sinners so at thy next return thou would grant us mercy to escape thy
fearful judgment, for whom thou tokst upon thee to be condemned for the
ransom of our sin: to whom with the father. etc.

The Argument. Psalm. XCIX.
Sweet Christ his reign: this Psalm compristh,
As Rabins all: can say no less:
Dominus regnauit irascantur.
God grant that they: with us would rise,
To sing these thanks: to him in flesh.
1
THe Lord to reign: is bent therein,
All folk ought than: his presence dread:
He sits betwixe: the Cherubin,
Let all the earth: then quake I read.
2
This Lord is great: in Zion seen,
Where power he shows: and rules with love
And hye he is: on all the Heathen,
If they a like: their hearts would move.
3
O let them all: thy name confess,
The bad to beat: the good to bliss:
For great it is: in fearefulnes,
The power thereof: most sacred is,
4
All Princely power: loves equitye,
And equitye: thou broughtst in sight:
In Jacobs stock: thou did apply,
To judgment true: and justice right.
5
Our Lord this God: O magnifye,
Both Jews and Greeks: your ways rele^t,
To his fotestole: his sacrarye,
Bow down your knees: most reverent.
6
As Moses meek: so Aaron grave,
Were chief his priests: so Samuel:
Among them were: his power to crave,
They cried to God: he hard them well.
7
To them in cloud: spread pillour like,
He spoke as all: the people saw:
They did his hests: and statutes keep,
Which he them gave: in pact for law.
8
O Lord our God: thou hardst them just,
And spardst them Lord: for thine own sake,
Yea when with plagues: thou did the^ thrust,
For foul attempts: which they did make.
9
Extol this God: our Lord so free,
Fall down before: his holy hill:
For God our Lord: in majesty,
Most sacred is: and just in will.
The Collecte.
THou art both Lord and king we most humbly confess it right dear savior
although the Iewishe phariseyes say the contrary, thou only gouernst the
hearts and conscience of men: and by thy only grace do iustifye the same, we
beseech thee so to raise up the pillar of thy heavenly light to shine to our
souls that we may be always defended from all error and adversity to offer
unto thee the sacrifice of prayer in thanks giving, who live and raignest
one god with the father. etc.

The Argument. Psalm. C.
All men of breath: but temporal,
Which Pilgrims walk: this earthly Ball:
To joy be bid: here several,
Iubilat^ Deo.
To God in days: most festival.
1
O Joy all men: terrestrial,
Rejoice in God: celestial,
I bid not Jews: especial,
But Jews and Greeks: in general.
2
Serve ye this Lord: heroical,
With joy of heart: effectual:
Seek ye his sight: potentiall,
With hymns of mirth: most musical.
3
Know ye this Lord: imperial:
As God us made: original:
Not we our selves: he us does call,
His folk as flock: kept pastoral.
4
His gates and courts: tread usual,
With lauds and hymns: poetical:
Give thanks to him: continual,
And bless his name: most liberal.
5
For why this Lord: so principal,
Is sweet, his grace: perpetual:
His truth of word: stand ever shall,
With hundredth thanks: thus end we all.
The Collecte.
O Lord and father of all honor and glory, show us thy mercy, and grant thy
grace that we may spiritually rejoice in the laud of thy name, and so in
spryte to serve thee, that we may feel in our hearts the delectable comfortes
of thy true promises made to us the poor flock of thy pasture, so to join to
thee our loving pastor, to come at the last to thy heavenly fold, where thou
raignest with the father and holy ghost one God, etc.

The end of the second Quinquagene.
The third and last Quinquagene of David's Psalter, translated into English
Meter.
The Argument. Psalm. CI.
When David long: was kept from reign,
This Psalm he sang: to ease his pain*
How kings should rule: here see you plain*
As he would feign,
^

1
BOth mercy meek: and judgment right,
Misericordiam and iudicium.
In Metres song: I will endight:
To thee I will: Lord sing in sight,
With hearts delight.
2
I will my life: bear strayt in way,
If thou from me: go not astray,
In all my house: clean heart shall lay,
Without denay*
3
To wicked deed: none eye shall stand,
And hate I will: all rebels band:
To join with me: I will wythstand,
with heart and hand.
4
A froward heart: and wilful (...),
From my whole sight: shall flee full out,
To me shall clout: no wicked rout,
Without all do^t.
5
His neighbor who* sty^^th privily*
Him will Astr^y (...) utterly*
I will not (...) proud (...),
With pleasure hye.
6
True men in earth: I will me get,
Most nigh to eye: with me to se^:
Who walks more strayt: shall serve me bet
Without all let.
7
From far my house: they shall be sent,
Who guiles can forge: or lies invent,
None eye on them: shall firm be bent,
With mine assent.
8
Yea soon by day: I will deface,
Proud men in earth: of wicked trace,
To drive all shrewes from Gods good place,
Without all grace.
The Collecte.
ALmightye God which art God of power incomprehensible, which show to thy
servants jointly both mercy and judgment: Grant we beseech thee, so that we
may faithfully love thee, truly to follow thee in all godliness, through Christ,
etc.

The Argument. Psalm. CII.
Here man in ear: most pituously,
Wishth Syon built: defast in shame,
He mo^eth his long^ captivity,
Christ's heavenly church: wish we the same.
\ \

1
O Lord to thee: I cry and call.
Domine exaudj.
My prayer hear: O louinglye:
Thou art my Lord: most liberal,
Receive my suit: admyt my cry.
2
While thus I mourn: hide not thy face,
From my distress: so wrathfully:
Enclyne thine ears: and hear my case,
But soon in have: O answer make.
3
My days like smoke: slide fast apace,
Consume they do: no rest they take:
As fire brandes: my bones are brent,
Their lively powers: my sprites forsake.
4
My wounded heart: lies impotent,
As witherd hay: cut down by sith,
To eat my bread: from me it went,
On me so sore: this trouble lies.
5
For gronyng loud: in this distress,
My woeful heart: oh panth and since,
That scant to skin: cleaneth any flesh.
My bones be seen: thus wast I lay.
6
Like Pellicane: in wilderness,
I am, which sing: but well away,
As Owl that flees: all birds in sight,
In desert dark: which loves to stray.
7
Full watch I keep: both day and night,
Mine eyes no sleep: can take for moan,
To Sparow like: that leaves her flight*
In houses eues: which lowerth alone.
8
All day my foes: do me reuyle,
With tauntes they sport: when I do groan,
These boasters mad: at me so vile,
Against my soul all sworn they be.
9
My bread that I: eat all this while
Was ashes like: in taste to see,
My drink with tears: with weping menkct.
So many griefs: afflicted me.
10
My soul with cares: was full besprenct,
To note thy wrath: and heavy frown,
Thou liftst me up: as I were streng^hd,
But sone most weak: thou threwst me down
11
My days draw low* as shadow falth,
When dark comth^^: in field and town,
I wyther like: as blosome pa^h,
My color wanneth my moisture dries.
12
But thou yet Lord: as thee befalth,
Art permanent: no man denies,
Thy memory: shall aye remain,
Where fast to du^t: my nature hyeth.
13
I know thou wylt: once rise again,
To pity (Lord) sweet Syon mount,
To show his grace: the time constraynth,
The time is come: by just account,
14
Thy servants lo: desire in heart,
To see her stones: to building mount,
They pity her: to spy her smart,
To mark her thus: in dust oppres^
15
The Gentiles strange: will join their part
To fear Gods name: of all the best,
Ye kings of power: in earth all whole
Shall praise thy name for worthiest.
16
When this the Lord: shall hye extol,
In buildinges fresh: this Zyon place,
And her in book of fame enroll,
When glory bright: shall her embrace.
17
And when they see: how he is bent,
To poor man's suit: in tender grace
And will not be: ought discontent,
To scorn their cries: both all and some.
18
This thing thus done* as monument,
Shall written be: for folk to come,
That countries whole: which shall arise,
May laud this Lord: with hye renome.
19
For God from hye: has cast his eyes,
Where holy is: his sacrary,
This Lord from heaven: in gentle wise,
Has looked to earth: to hear the cry.
20
To hear I say: the woeful playntes,
Of men fast bound: in misery,
To losen them: from their constrayntes,
Which were at deaths door very near.
21
That they might show* to all his saints,
In Zyon place: Gods name so dear,
To tell all out: Jerusalem,
His worthy lauds: in open quere.
22
When people whole: shall mete in realm,
Of all estates: which this shall know,
To serve this God: so good to them,
All reigns to him: shall them bestow.
23
Though God as yet: my strength has beat
From captine state: to journey slow
Though he my days: has short extreat,
I Zyon trust: yet built to spy.
24
I will him thus: with words entreat,
Ah God my God: to wastefully,
Cut not my days: by half away,
Where thy years last* eternally.
25
Thou laydst the earth: in stable stay
At first full strong: by power divine,
The heavens even so: none will denay,
Be wrought by thee: with all their shine.
26
They all shall quayle: thou yet shall hold,
As garments worn: wax thin and fine,
Thou shall them change: as vestures old
They shall be changd: thus temporal.
27
But thou art still: as we behold,
And art that art: perpetual,
Thy years in length: shall stand in deed,
For feel defect: they never shall.
28
We trust the more: thy servants seed,
Old Abraham's stock: shall not decay,
Their issue Lord: by thee shall speed,
Before thy face: to dwell for aye.
The Collecte.
O Lord most merciful protector of all them that be in trouble, who in thy
self art god everlasting, show thy mercy upon us so frail and transitory as we
be, that we may rejoice in thy saving health, through Christ, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. CIII.
The righteous man: whom God does feed,
Enioyneh his soul: due lauds to sing,
For his great love: who knowth his need,
From grief and pain: his heart to bring,
Who steyth his state: all void of dread,
His days in peace: with joy to lead.
Thus playth his string.
^

1
ARise my soul: bliss thou the Lord,
Benedic anima mea.
Address thy self: his name to spread,
My senses all: with just accord,
Within without: do it in deed,
His holy name; due praise record,
Thus bid ye be: in his true word.
So oft^^ read.
2
Reuolue the same: in grateful mind,
My soul I say: to thee again,
His benefits to tell full kind
To thee it is: most certain gain,
To God who will: him faster bind,
Of his good grace: the more shall find
I tell thee plain.
3
Of all thy sins: the giltines,
He pardon gives: full lovingly,
In all thy sores: of heuines,
Thou may in him: have remedy,
If thou to him: makst thine access
In stable heart: with faithfulness,
Thine ease to spy.
4
His saving health: comth prestly on,
To ryd thy life: from peryls all,
To make thee escape: confusion,
He gives good ear: when thou do call,
With mercy kind: even he alone,
With round defense: he crowns thy moan,
No time to fall.
5
With all good things: in plesantnes,
He feeds thy mouth: he fills thy will,
As Egle uses: her new to dress,
In age for strength: to cast her bill,
So he thy years: reuiueth afreshe:
Such youth in age: can God express.
O praise him still.
6
The Lord can try: all wicked ways,
All wrong to right: when he sees best
And though he sendth: some bitter days,
He can them sweet: with joyful rest,
True judge he is: the just to raise,
When force he bears: his truth to praise,
Than stay thy breast.
7
To Moses once: God did declare,
His ways his will: and all his trade,
His providence: and daily care,
To keep his flock: with gentle aid,
To Israel: what will he bare,
Their practice shewth: how they did fare,
So safe to wade.
8
They proved the Lord: most pitiful,
Whole bent to grace: in time of need,
They felt his help: most merciful,
To anger flow: but pressed to meede,
He pardon showed: most plentiful,
To hearts contrite: and sorrowful.
For they must speed.
9
As do stern Lords: in cruelnes,
Always he is: not chidyng sore:
He keepth not ire: the poor to press
He mercy has: in loving store,
And when he fumeth: for giltines,
Yet mercy staith: his gentleness,
Praise him the more.
10
A proof hereof: in us all spy,
He serves not us: as we deserve
As our foul sins: for vengeance cry,
But feedth our want: our need to serve,
Though him we grieve: as wretches thrall,
He guides our life: and stayth our fall.
Not far to swerue.
11
How hye the heavens: this earth surmount
So far does grace: our gylt excel,
His mercies great: most hily mount,
Upon those men: in fear who dwell,
Which low in hearts: their fautes recount,
To worship him: as fear is wont.
O love him well.
12
How far the East: is wide from Weast,
Whose coasts and terms: shall never meet,
So far our sins: be set at rest,
By his good gift: and pardon sweet
Though us he beats: as he knowth best
No wrath it is: but love of breast.
No irefull heat.
13
For like his child: the father uses,
To nurture him: by chastisement,
Him far to draw: from vain abuse,
And yet but love: and pity meant,
So God to man: does mercy use,
Who him to fear: does not refuse.
And will repent.
14
For he does know: our nature frail,
Whereof and whence: we all be made,
But dust and clay: who soon may fail,
With weight of earth: all heavy lade
His grace sees this: to our aduayle,
Else should we all: both weep and wayle.
Full evil apayde.
15
Who markth of man: his years in trade
Shall spy his life: but misery,
Even like to herb: though grene in blade,
That witherth soon: to hay so dry,
For like as flowers: in field do fade,
So wastes man: anon decayed.
In vanity.
16
This freshly flower: if wyndes so stern
Do him once shake: he falth away,
That where he grew: no man can learn
For brittle flesh: has brittle stay,
His term but short: to time eterne,
By death once past: none him discernth
From dust and clay.
17
Though naught made here: can ever last,
Gods mercy yet: holdth stable hand
On him that fear: to him has cast,
From age to age: in every land,
His righteousness: is set full fast,
To man bestowd: it will not wast
But aye shall stand.
18
These men I mean: of lovely fear,
Be such as keep: his godly will
Which fast in mind: his word do bear
In heart and tongue: to keep it still,
And always gives: full ready ear
To God their Lord: to them so dear
To learn his skill.
19
This Lord in heaven: has set his place
From whence he sees: all mortal ways
Who rightly goth: who halth in pace:
As life he rules: so death he stays,
All rule does stand: in his good grace,
The good to keep: the bad to chase.
To short his days.
20
O praise this Lord: ye sprites of his,
Ye angels pure: of strength so great,
Ye work his will: ye never miss,
His power ye know: his royal seat,
Ye know what Lord: what God he is,
Ye hear his voice: ye see his bliss.
His lauds entreat.
21
O praise the Lord: all ye his hosts,
Ye armies clear: of heavenly stars,
Ye sprites so swift: ye fiery ghostes,
In peace ye serve: ye rule his wars
To do his will: ye run as posts,
In heaven and earth: in all their coasts.
As ministers.
22
O all ye works: what names ye have,
In all the world: recount his grace:
To make you all: he did withsaue,
Advance this Lord: in time and place,
O thou my soul: of thee I crave,
Extol this Lord: he will thee save.
From woeful case.
ALmightye God creator and defender of all thy creatures, specially of them
which do put their trust in thee, defend us thy poor suppliauntes from all
adversity that is set against us, thou see how weak we be of our self,
assist us therefore O Lord with thy godly protection to glorifye thy holy name
in earth as thy holy sprites do in heaven, thorough Christ, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. CIIII.
This Psalm setth out: for providence,
Almighty Gods: magnificence:
His wisdom, power: his goodness eke,
Of night, of day: of year, of week,
His excellence: all thing does keep.
^

1
O Praise my soul: the Lord of name,
Benedic a^ima mea.
O Lord my God: of worthy fame:
Thou do excel in dignity,
With honor clothd and majesty.
O him proclaim,
Praise his degree.
2
For he is clad: most clear with light,
As he were decked: with vesture bright:
He spreadth the heavens: as veil most fine,
Where lies his grace: and power deuyne.
O seek his sight,
To him incline.
3
The upper heavens: be so arayde,
With waters like: as beams be laid:
The clouds he makth: his charet swift,
On wind the wings: his walk he listh,
O him esteem,
Expend his gift.
5
And he does make: his angels sprites
In wyndes and blastes: to work their mightes:
The flaming fire: is minister,
Whose word to do: they wait full nere.
O love his lights
Trust him intiere.
6
He sets the earth: on bases sound
The seas they be: O wondrous ground:
The world to end: it shall not reale,
It can no change: ne ruin feel.
O him rebound
His might reveal.
7
With waters deep: this earth was shet,
As it with coat: all dark beset
For once the seas: as mountains stood,
Most hye above: as raging flood.
O praise him yet:
Repute him good.
7
Though thus their waves: the waters spread
At thy rebuke: they swiftly fled:
At thy rough voice: in thunder hard,
They fast gave up: their hold and ward.
O him a dread:
His strength regard.
8
The hills then hye: in sight did mount
The fields fell low: as now they wont:
As them thou stowdst* in most due place,
They stand even so: they move no space.
O him recount:
Extol his grace.
9
To all things made: thou gave his room
Their proper place: not out to come:
Thou do the seas: in bounds repose,
Not back to turn: the earth to close.
O him renome:
His hand disclose.
10
He springes sendth out: to floudes to grow
And they in sea: discharge we know:
Between the hyls: they keep their flote,
To fresh the earth: with new green coat.
O him betrow
His larges note.
11
All beasts of field: there drink their fill:
They seek them needs: though fed on hill:
The asses wild: they slake their thirst
Most dry which be: so made at first.
O mark his will:
His care betrift.
12
The^^ fetherd fowls: seek harborow
As nigh their drink: they sit on bough:
Where birds do chirme: the trees among,
To God their Lord: in cherefull song.
O him auow:
And praise him long.
13
He wetith the hyls: and makth them soft,
From heavenly cells: by dewes aloft:
By fruitful clouds: which wrought his hand
The showers fall down: to moist the land.
O laud him often:
Him understand.
14
He makth for beast: the grass to spring,
And herbage else: for man to bring:
To serve his need his bread to get,
In earth such use: in beast he set.
O serve this king:
His acts entreat.
15
Whence wine is given: man's heart to cheer,
And oil his face: so bright to clear:
And bread fro thence: he does addres,
Man's heart to strength: in stablenes.
O count him dear:
His lauds express.
16
The Lords own trees: by man vntyld,
With Sap by showers: be fully filled:
As Ceders hye: of Libanus,
Which he has plant: right plentuous.
O praise him mild:
His care discuss.
17
In these hye trees: the birds do nest,
God gives them wit: to seek their rest:
The Storkes there build: and houses have,
In trees of fyrre: themself to save.
O love him best:
His love ingraue.
18
The mountayns hye: a refuge be,
For buckes and beasts: of Uenerie:
And so the rocks: all inaccesse,
To Conies be: their sikernesse.
O praisd be he:
His works confess.
^9
The moon he made: for ceasons due,
The night to clear: with chaunges new:
The sun so hye: a creature,
His down fall knowth: and keepth it sure.
O good ensue:
Him worship pure
^0
And after day: thou bringst in dark,
So night comth on: and blyndnes stark:
The Savage beasts: yet gain thereby,
So creep they forth: to feed full slye.
O note his warke:
His reed espy.
21
The Lions whelps: most fierce they rore,
In rangyng long: of pray the store:
They seek by dark: their sustenance,
Prepared by Gods: good ordinance.
O him adore:
His work enhance
22
When sun returnth: and shewth his rise,
Expellyng dark: his light surpristh:
These beasts by heaps: then soon remove
They keep their dens for light above.
O this advise:
His prudence love.
23
Thus man goth forth: his work to do,
More bold that they: be thus ago:
To tillage true: he makes his gate,
And spendth his day: till it be late.
O stand him to:
Recount thy state.
24
O mighty Lord: my fort and hold,
How be thy works: tried manifold:
Thou made them all: in wisdom hye,
Of thy great goods: full therth do lygh.
O him behold:
Him magnify.
25
The sea so houge: the Ocean,
So large in arms: and space for man:
Theare living things: saunce number creep
Great beasts and small therein do keep.
O search it than:
This meruel seek
26
The^^ ships by sails: the bilowes pass
Where men transport* their wardly tras^e:
There playth his vages: Leuiathan,
Whom thou dydst form: to sport theran.
O mark this case*
Reuolue it man.
27
All creatures: of thee expect,
Their food most apt: for every feet:
That thou should give: their nourishment,
In time of need: most competent.
O him respect:
To him assent.
28
When deal thou do: they gather strayt,
In hungers stresse: themselves to bayt:
If thou splayst hand: with blessyng meet,
With good, full good: they be replete.
O him awayte:
Esteem him sweet.
29
When face thou hidest: and naught do send,
O then they wayle: to death they bend:
If breath thou stopst: decay they must,
They must return: into their dust.
O then amend:
Regard him just.
30
When thou returnst: thy sprite again,
New things by thee: new breath obtain:
Then yearly thus: thou deckst a fresh,
The face of earth: with new increase.
O hold him feign:
His love possess.
31
Gods majesty: be it for aye,
In glory blessed: in all his way:
The Lord shall hye: rejoice in thought,
In all his works: so godly wrought.
O soul thus pray:
As thou art taught.
32
This God when he: man's sins to find,
But lookth on earth: it quakth and twynd:
When he the hyls: with hand but touch,
They smoke for fear: and low they couche.
O soul him mind:
Thy Lord avouch.
33
For I will sing: to this my Lord,
While I am here: and him record:
In Psaltries sweet: I will my song,
To my Lord God: in life prolong.
O soul accord:
Perform it strong.
34
My talk of him: most pleasant is,
No day I will: be found remiss,
To joy in God: I will not cease,
He is my health, my rest, mine ease.
O soul him bliss:
Him seek to please
Where sinful men: from earth shall fail,
All wicked freakes: God let them quayle:
But thou my soul: thy Lord advance,
Praise all the Lord: his heritaunce.
For thine aduayle:
Sing still all hayle.
The Collecte.
MOst excellent almighty God, which do with thy blessing hand, most richly
refreshe all living things with their food and sustinaunce, grant that our
souls may so be refresht in the contemplation of thy godly majesty, always to
behold thy glory in heaven, in the meditation of thy wonderful works here in
earth, through Christ.

The Argument. Psalm. CV.
Gods acts here lauded be: by stories order told:
His pact allege: no thank to man: but God most due extolde.
^

O Praise in voice the Lord,
Sing out with just accord:
Exalt his name: search out his fame,
Confitemi ni domino
His worthy deeds record.
1
O praise in voice the Lord: upon his name to call
Denounce and tell the people clear: his doings liberal.
2
Sing out, with just accord: and play in instruments:
Tell all his factes most marvelous: sprede out his ornaments.
3
Exalt his name with joy: most hye, and most deuyne:
And let their heart that seek the Lord: to mirth all glad inclyne.
4
Search out his fame and power: the Lords right famous arc:
Seek here his face still evermore: draw nigh to note his warke.
5
His worthy deeds record: which he has wrought as God,
His strange foreshewes: his godly domes: so past his mouth abroad
O praise in voice the Lord,
Sing out with just accord:
Exalt his name: search out his fame,
His worthy deeds record.
6
Ye seed of Abraham: his servant this respect:
I you appeal, praise ye the Lord: ye Jacobs stock elect.
7
He is the Lord our God: yea none I say but he:
His judgments be in all the world: but most with us to see.
8
For he his covenant myndth: for ever it to do:
In thousand worlds, still fast to stand, his word commanded so.
9
His pact to Abraham: fast made, with faith endude:
His oath also to Isaac: again the same renude.
10
And he this league as law: to Jacob sure decreed:
To Israel as testament: for ever well to speed.
^1
Thus saying, give I will: to the land Canaan:
For plot of your inheritance: as met with line by man.
^2
But thus when few they were: to them in like respect:
And there in land as strangers set: as Pilgrims whole reject.
^3
And strayed from land to land: of nations wandringly:
From countries wide to other realms: of people diversely.
14
He suf^red yet no man: to do them any wrong:
For all their sake: yea kings be chect: and plaged them among.
15
He say, touch not my Christ's: that sacred flock to me:
My Prophets true: afflict not ye: which preach my majesty.
O praise in voice the Lord,
Sing out with just accord:
Exalt his name: search out his fame,
His worthy deeds record.
16
When he sent dearth on earth: to stop their foodes relief:
And stroyed of bread: the sustenance: which stayed their strength most chief
17
A man before he sent: to them as herbeger,
Lo Joseph sold to servitude: to serve in Egypt theare.
18
Whose feet they wrung in stocks: by Putiphars complaynt:
In iron cast with chains I bound: his life felt hard constraynt.
19
Until the time was come: that just his cause was seen:
Whom God approved: and thoroughly tried: by Oracle divine.
20
The king then sent and him: did lose by men of his:
The Prince that there: the people ruld: did him from bonds dismiss
21
He made him Lord in chief: of all his court about:
And ruler sole: of all his goods: in his Empire full out.
22
That he might bind and lose: his Dukes and lords at will:
And wit to teach: his sages all: by his approved skill.
O praise in voice the Lord,
Sing out with just accord:
Exalt his name: search out his fame,
His worthy deeds record.
23
So Israel in went: to Egypt glad and sad:
This Jacob old: a stranger lived: in land of Cham the bad.
24
And there God multiplied: his people notably,
And made him far: more strong and big: then were his foes at eye.
25
The Moors then changd their hearts: as God did them detect:
That they did hate: his people sore: with guiles his servants checked.
26
Then God sent Moses out: his servant good and true:
Yea Aaron eke: whom he did chose: his heart on them did rue.
27
Which there to them did splay: his works and words by signs
His meruels rare: in land of Cham: such power the^ God resignes.
28
And he deep darkness sent: all things then dark was so:
The signs themself: ne Moses yet: rebeld Gods will to do.
29
He turned their waters all: to blood, not them they drank:
He slew their fish: their nourishment: for all their waters stanke.
30
The Lord even so brought frogs: in numbers wonderful:
Which crept upon: the beds of kings: their privy chambers full.
31
He spoke the word then came: on heaps all kind of flies:
So lyse of dust: as myngyns small: in all their costs did rise.
32
For all their raynes and dewes: he gave them hayle to change,
And flames of fire: so mixed with the^: in all their lands most strange.
33
Wherwyth he smote their vines: their fig trees flat to ground:
He brake even down: their fruitful trees: in all their quarters round
34
And when his word came forth: of grasshoppers on heap:
In numbers theare: nigh infinite: did Caterpillars leap.
35
Which did all whole devour: their grass about the land:
Yea fruit and all: that grew in soil: thus heavy lay his hand.
36
Their fruits first borne he slew: in all their realm in length:
Their pryme offpring: most principal* of all their natures strength.
O praise in voice the Lord,
Sing out with just accord:
Exalt his name: search out his fame,
His worthy deeds record,
37
He then did lead them out: with gold and silver stuffed:
And none there was: in all their tribes: that fell or febly puffed.
38
So Egypt ioyd full glad: when they went out of realm:
For they the Jews: drad fearfully: their fear so fell on them.
39
He spread on them a cloud: to cover them by day:
With pillar bright: to clear the night: he did dyrect their way.
40
At their request and suit: he brought them quayles for meat:
He filled them: with bread of heaven: sweet angels food to eat.
41
He claue and opte the rock: whence water flowed full pressed:
They ran like streams: in wilderness: to comfort man and beast.
42
For why he bare in mind: his holy promise thus:
His love also: to Abraham: his servant virtuous.
43
And full with joy and mirth: he led his people forth:
His dear electes: with iubilies: so taken well in worth.
O praise in voice the Lord,
Sing out with just accord:
Exalt his name: search out his fame,
His worthy deeds record.
44
And last he gave them whole: the gentiles lands by met:
They all possessed: for heritage: for which the people swet.
45
To thend that they should keep: his statutes true and right:
That they should aye: observe his laws: praise ye this lord of might
O praise in voice the Lord,
Sing out with just accord:
Exalt his name: search out his fame,
His worthy deeds record.
The Collecte.
We sue unto thee most loving Lord, besechyng thee by the power of thy name,
that where our fathers were conducted thereby, to the ministration of thy
heavenly angels food, that thou would so vouchsaue to feed and comfort us
with thy mystical nourishment of thy body and blood to whom with the father
and holy ghost be.

The Argument. Psalm. CVI.
The Jews (which dwelt) in Babylon: thus sang their thanks in heart:
They do confess: gods only grace: they blame their own desarte.
\ \

THe Lord (so good) with thanks confess:
Who can his power express:
Well true men be: then Lord teach me,
Confitemi ni domino
Thy servants state to see.
1
The Lord (so good) with thanks confess: sing praise and laud him hie
All good he is: for why his grace: for ever standth full nie.
2
Who (fully) can his power express: with tongue he Lord so great:
Or cause be hard: his praises all: who can his grace extreat.
3
Well true men be (in heart) most blessed: who judgment true perform
Which work always: that righteous is: in just and lawful form.
4
The^ lord (I crave) teach me full kind: have mind to work my wealth
As friendly thou thy people mindst: to me resort with health.
5
Thy servants state (O Lord) to see: show me their bliss at eye*
That I rejoice with thy good folk: and thank thee joyfully.
The Lord (so good) with thanks confess,
Who can his power express:
Well, true men be: then Lord teach me,
Thy servants state to see.
6
We all (to thee) have sinned sore: as often our fathers did:
We have gone wrong: and done amiss: most wickedly in deed.
7
Thy (noble) faytes in Egypt done: our fathers noted sealed:
Of thy great loves no mind they had: at red sea they rebeld.
8
Yet he (full kind) did them preserve: for love of his great name,
To make his power: so notable: the world to fear the same.
9
The sea so red: he did rebuke: then soon up dried it was:
And through great deepes he led them dry: as desert men do pass.
10
And he (by strength) defended them: from adversaries power:
He ryd them sure: from enemies hand: they could not them devour
11
The waters (deep so) whelmed such: as them did vex and grieve:
That none remaynd: not one of them: he them did quite remeue.
12
His (stable) word: they then believed: to spy their foes distress:
And then they sung: an hymn of thanks: to praise his worthiness
The Lord (so good) with thanks confess,
Who can his power express?
Well, true men be: then Lord teach me,
Thy servants state to see.
13
In (their great) heat though have they made: his works they soon forgot:
No time they would: his counsels bide: no, tarry would they not.
14
They (fondly) longd in wicked lust: for meat in wyldernes*
They tempted God: in desert hye: with shameful sturdines.
^5
And there (even there) he gave them full: their asking redily:
But yet their bane: they took therein: their lives destroyed thereby.
^6
And Moses (guide) yet they prouokt: with wrath in their own tents
Yea Aaron eke: Gods holy priest: with foolish brablementes.
17
Wherefore (in have) the earth did ryue: and swalowd Dathon quyte:
It couerd whole: the route and band: of Abyram in sight.
18
The fire (from heaven:) fell whote and fierce: amids their company
The flame did burn: those wicked men: with all their family.
19
Eftsoons (as God) a calfe they made: at Horeb mount most fond:
They worshipped: this molte^ work: which made their proper hand whole
20
And thus they turned Gods (only) glore: who was their worship
To shap of calfe: but eating hay: which they did hye extol.
21
They God forgot (and left) full soon: who them to grace did take:
Who wrought as god: in Egypt land* strange deeds for all their sake
22
Great things (to see) O wonderful: in land of Cham I say:
And things of power: most terrible: at red sea there in way.
23
To stroy them he (then full) decreed: if Moses his elect,
Had not in sight: up start to treat: his wrath to stay vnwreckt.
24
And they despisde: and (lightly) scornd: that land delicious:
No faith they gave: unto his word: but went contrarious.
25
They did (in heart) eke grutch and moyne: in all their tents unkind
They heard no time: gods holy word: it was to them but wynd.
26
By liftyng up: his (irefull) hand: God swear unto them all:
That he would them: in wilderness: destroy with shameful fall.
27
And that he would: cast (shortly) out: their seed where gentiles bide
And sparple them: as runnegates: in countries farly wide.
28
Yea yokt they were: and knit (in heart) to Baal Peor fast:
They glad did eat: the sacrifice: to dead men which was cast.
29
Thus they (all out) did him provoke: to wrath by filthy vice:
So hie, that needs: Gods heavy plage: on them did sharply rise.
30
Then Phinees: stood up (in zeal) as judge he vengeance took:
And strait the plage: did stay and cease: gods wrath so them forsook.
31
Which (godly) zeal: reputed was: to him for righteousness:
From age to age: Gods pressed to be: with all his seed no less.
32
They also (grieved and) angered God: at waters namde of strife:
That Moses meke: gate harm for them: for God abridgd his life.
33
For they prouokt: his gentle sprite: words doubtful out to lashe:
Whereby he spoke: without advise: with lips to swift and rash.
The Lord (so good) with thanks confess,
Who can his power express?
Well, true men be: then Lord teach me,
Thy servants state to see.
34
They did not eke (in war) destroy: the Heathen peoples sect:
As God them bad: most earnestly: that they should them reject.
35
But myxt (and joined) they were full nigh: among the gentiles sort:
And learnd their works: outrageous: whereof they made but sport.
^6
Whereby (full soon) they honored: and served their idols gay:
Which were a snare: so sought by them: to bread their own decay.
^7
So far (as blind) they doted than: unnatural, and mad:
That they to devils: did sacrifice: their sons and daughters glad.
38
Much giltles blood: they (spild and) shed^ of their own childers brood
To Idols slain: of Canaan: the land foul staynd with blood.
39
Thus foul (to foul) with their self works: they were defild and staind
A whoryng far: their fancies straid: no faith to God remaind.
40
The^ (justly) gods: most dreadful wrath: his own good people brent
That he abhord: his heritage: where stood his regiment.
41
So that he gave: them (wholly) up: to Gentiles cruel hands:
That they them ruld: which hated them before in other lands.
42
And then (full soon) their enemies: full sore did them oppress:
As subjects vile: subdude they were: to all their cruelnes.
43
He often (in love) deliuerd them: but they more often rebeld:
With their inuentes: and so for sin: they were but justly feld.
44
He yet (at length) his eyes did cast: when they in trouble grond:
And when he heard: how painfully: in woe they daily mond.
45
He them again: to mind did call: his pact to them betrought:
He did repent: and pitied them: his heaped grace so wrought.
46
Yea more (then this) he made even such: to show them pity all:
Which erst full hard: the^ captive held: as slaves most bond and shrall
The Lord (so good) with thanks confess,
Who can his power express?
Well, true men be: then Lord teach me,
Thy servants state to see.
47
O save us Lord: our (loving) God: from Gentiles us collect:
Thy holy name: that we may found: thy lauds with joy erect.
The (gentle) Lord of Israel: and God with praise be raysde:
From world to world: let all men say: Amen the Lord be praysde.
The Lord (so good) with thanks confess,
Who can his power express?
Well, true men be: then Lord teach me,
Thy servants state to see.
The Collecte.
BE myndefull of us O merciful Lord, for the dear love that thou bear to
thy people, and discharge us from all servitude and bondage of sin, and save
us by thy healthful hand, and gather us to gether in one unity of sprite, to
glorify thee only our Lord and savior, to whom with the father and the
holy ghost, etc.

The end of the fourth book.
Here begins the fifth Book of Psalms.
Psalm. CVII.
The Argument.
This has five parts distinct: where diverse men be bid:
The Lord to praise: to preach his power: who them from perils rid.
The Quiere. The rearefreyt of the Psalm. GOd grant that we would: praise
ever again,
The Lord for his grace: so to sing in our quiere
The wonders he does: for the children of men,
Confitemi ni domino
Whose mercy so nere: to all does appear.
To all does appear.

The Mean. / /

1
O Praise the Lord all ye,
Due thanks to him extend:
For good he is: whose gentleness,
Shall last till world does end.
2
Let them say thus in thanks: who were by God made free:
Whom he redeemd: from cruel hand: of troublous enmity.
3
And whom he gatherd nigh: from countries strange and wide:
From East and West: from North and South: in city safe to bide.
4
Who wandered out of way: in deserts wilderness:
And found no way: to dwelling town: to stay in restfulnes.
5
Who hunger felt and thirst: nigh pynde by famishment:
Whose hearts within: did melt away: for needful nourishment.

The Rectors. 6

Who thus afflict: when they did cry,
To God in meek complaints:
He them did save: most lovingly,
From all their hard constrayntes.
7
For he led them: the way full kind,
Both right and prosperous:
Whereby they did: a city find,
To dwell commodious.

The Quiere. 8

God grant that they would: praise heartily then:
The Lord for his grace: so to sing in their quiere:
The wonders he does: for the children of men,
Whose mercy so near: to them did appear,
9
For that he refresht: their bodily need,
Where thirsty they strayd: as with anguishe oppressed:
Their soul did he ease: of their hunger in speed,
To set them in rest: with food of the best.

The Mean. 10
And they that sat in dark: in deadly shadows black:
Afflict in bonds: and iron chains: and felt all comfortes lack.
11
They thus deserud for why: gods words they did detest,
The counsayles eke: they did despise: of all the worthiest.
^2
He then brought down their hearts: with griefs most tedious:
They fell full faint: none helpyng them: so far rebellious.

The Rectors. 13

Who thus afflict: when they did cry,
To God in meek complayntes:
He them did save: most lovingly,
From all their hard constrayntes.
14
For he them brought: from sorrows long,
From dark and deadly shade:
He brake their bonds: and fetters strong,
To freedom they to wade.

The Quiere. 15

God grant that they would: praise heartily then,
The Lord for his grace: so to sing in their quiere:
The wonders he does: for the children of men,
Whose mercy so near: to them did appear.
16
For that he releast: their burdenouse hold,
The gates that in brass: were invincible fast,
As also the bars: that in iron were fold,
By him were they brast: set open at the last.

The Mean. 17
And fools that lewdly did: by surfeit foul transgres,
And were for all their sins afflict: by sickness fell excess.
18
Who meat in taste abhord: though sweet and wholesome dyght,
And then came nigh: to death his gates: to stop their breath and sight

The Rectors. 19

Who thus afflict: when they do cry,
To God in meke complayntes:
He them did save: most louinglye,
From all their hard constrayntes.
20
For he then sent: his word anon,
He them restord by might:
Whereby they scapte: destruction,
From peril saved quite.

The Quiere. 21

God grant that they would: praise heartily then,
The Lord for his grace: so to sing in their quiere:
The wonders he does: for the childer of men,
Whose mercy so near: to them did appear.
22
That offer they may: the sacrifice pure,
Just thanks of their lips: out of heart so to raise:
His works to renome: so the world to allure.
His walks and his ways: most gladly to praise.

The Mean. 23
And they that enter do: the sea with ship and sail,
To work their feats: in waters deep* for lyfelodes great avail.
24
They see Gods dreadful works: in tempests them they note,
His meruels eke: of things so houge: in deep also in flote.
25
God speakth and strait rise up: the wyndes of blustering storms
Which up do hoyse: the bellows rage: in ghastly grisly forms.
26
Theare ships rise up to heaven: again to deep they fall:
Thus toss in waves. the mariners: great fears their hearts apall.
27
They to and fro be tossed: they reele as man full drunk:
Their art the^ faylth their wits be gone: they fare as men but sonke

The Rectors. 28

Who thus afflict: when they do cry,
To God in meke complayntes:
He them does save: most lovingly,
From all their hard constrayntes.
29
For he the storms: does calm in sea,
the waves he stilleth their dinne:
30
Then glad are they: that still they be,
Safe haven he drives them in.

The Quiere. 31

God grant that they would: praise heartily then,
The Lord for his grace: so to sing in their quiere:
The wonders he does: for the childern of men,
Whose mercy so near: to them did appear.
32
His fame to advance: as duly they ought,
Down set as they be: with the people in place:
To praise him aright: for indempnitie wrought,
Where elders in space: their courts do embrace.

The Mean. 33
So let men note Gods might: in dread of him to stand:
Which turnth moist soil: to wilderness: and dries up springs to land
34
A fruitful earth he makth: as salt and barren ground:
The dwellers sins: be cause thereof: where in their lives be found
35
So he the desert makth: to flow with water springes:
And soil most dry: from barennes: by runnyng brooks he bringes.
36
And there he setth to dwell: all hungry needful men:
To build themself: a city strong: as Forte thereto to run.
37
And there the fields they sow: and vineyardes large they plant
Sweet fruits to bear: of years increase: to feed their need and want
38
All them he blessth with store: they then increase most hye:
And suffers not their cattle once: to droupe or yet to dye.
39
But when they fall to sin: he them decayth again:
By cruel powers: he bringth them low: with cares oppressed and pain

The Rectors. 40

When thus afflict: they feel decay,
By Princes great abuse:
Though out of way: a time they stray,
At last he them reduce.
41
For he the poor: returned by smart,
Does raise from misery:
His householdes yet: he makth in part,
As flocks of sheep to ligh.

The Quiere.
God grant that they would: praise heartily then,
The Lord for his grace: so to sing in their quiere:
The wonders he does: for the chylder of men,
Whose mercy so near: to them did appear.
42
That tymely they may: this ponder aryght,
As righteous man: in his duty so glad:
Is pressed to rejoice: with a godly delight,
Where mouth of the bad: shall dumly be sad.

The conclusion.
Man's heart that is wise: these things will advise,
Pure thanks to procure* to his God for his cure,
And thus his devise: may he justly comprise,
Right often is his ure: by love to allure,
Kind mercy so sure: in him does endure,
Extol him I say: both by night and by day,
Ren never astray: from his merciful way.
The Collecte.
WE do acknowledge O Lord thy manifold mercies, which thou do daily bestow
upon our miserable necessities, beseching thee as thou sit in heaven on
the right hand of thy father in throne of equal glory with him, that we may
worthily conceive and understand this great mystery of thy inestimable mercies,
duly to laud the same, to the glory of thy name, who with the father and the
holy ghost, art worthy all praise, Amen.

Certain verses of the said Psalm otherwise translated.
6
When thus they cried to God: thus set in woes excess:
Right soon he did: deliver them: from all their hard distress.
7
For he led them the way: both right and prosperous:
Whereby they did: a city find: to dwell commodious.
8
O that men would then praise: the Lords benignity:
To tell what acts: full strange he does: to man's posterity.
9
For that he does refresh: the soul in thyrst so dry:
And fills the soul: that hungry is: with goodness largely.
13
When thus they cried to God thus set in woes excess:
Right soon he did: deliver them: from all their hard distress.
14
For he then brought them forth: from dark and dedly shade:
He brake their bonds: and fetters strong: to freedom sure to wade.
15
O that men would then praise: the Lords benignity:
To tell what acts: full strange he does: to man's posterity.
16
For he the gates of brass: has all to shiuers broke:
And burst the bars: a sunder quite: in iron forgd by stroke.
19
When thus they cried to God: thus set in woes excess:
Right soon he did deliver them: from all their hard distress.
20
For he then sent his word: he them restord by might:
Whereby they scapte: destruction: from peril saved quite.
21
O that men would then praise: the Lords benignity:
To tell what acts: full strange he does: to man's posterity.
22
That they would offer him: of thanks the sacrifice:
And full tell out: his works so great: in glad and thankful wife.
28
When thus they cried to God: thus set in woes excess:
Right soon he did: deliver them from all their hard distress.
29
For he dryueth down the storms: and makth them soon to cease
So that the waves: be still again: whereby they win release.
30
Then are they glad at heart: because at rest they be:
He bringth them thus: to that their haven: which they so glad would see.
31
O that men would then praise the Lords benignity:
To tell what acts full strange he does: to man's posterity.
32
That they would him exalt: when people most be met:
And praise him due: where Elders be: together jointly set.
40
Though he does bear a while: that tyrants them oppress,
And suffer them: to go astray: in wandryng wilderness.
41
Yet he does help the poor: from his great misery:
His householdes yet: he makth in part: as flocks of sheep to lie.
42
The righteous man will this: expend and eke rejoice:
Where that the mouth: of wickedness: shall whole be stopped in voice
43
Who that is wise I say: will ponder all these things:
They shall so know: what mercies free: the Lord in sorrow bringes.
The Argument. Psalm. CVIII.
When David kept: Odollan cave,
Where Saul he scapte: for all his rave:
Thus thanks in song: he did extend,
Paratum cor.
To God who did: his life defend.
/ /

1
MY heart to God: is ready found,
Thy worthy lauds: devout to sound:
For sing I will: and Psalms record,
With glory due: in tongue and word.
2
Lift up thy self: thou Psaltrye sweet,
Thou harp even so: with tunes most meet,
For I my self: will early rise,
New songs to sing: I will devise.
3
I thee will praise: O Lord in song.
In peoples sight: even them among:
Yea Psalms to thee: I will arrect.
Among all folk: of every sect.
4
For far above: the heaven we see,
Standth firmly thy: benignytie:
Thy faith and truth: as proof does teach,
Most nigh the clouds: does wholly reach.
5
Be thou exalt: O God on hye,
Above the heavens: in majesty:
Above all earth: thy glory set,
That men may know: thy power so great.
6
That thy beloved: from wretchedness,
Whole rydde may be: in stablenesse:
Let thy right hand: than us preserve,
O answer me: my turn to serve.
7
God spoke his word: in holiness,
Wherein I joy: and shall no less:
All Sychem just: in parts I set,
And Sucoth vale: I also met.
8
All mine no doubt: is Gilead,
And so is mine: Manasses had:
And Ephraim: my reign the strength,
And Judah is: my guide at length.
9
Land Moab is: my water pot,
And Idumye: my conquered lot:
Whereon my sho: extend I will,
On Philistyne: joy shall I still.
10
Who has me brought: to be so nigh*
That city great* so walled hye:
Who led me forth: so just to come,
To Id^mye: to win renome?
11
Was it not thou: I say O God?
Which us forsokst: cast wide abroad:
Which did not walk: as God with us,
With our main hosts: victorious?
12
O give us help: and that at hand,
Of all our grief: of troubles band:
For weak the help that man can do,
Most vain to trust: it is even so.
13
In God we shall: all strong endure,
By him to do: ^duentures sure:
And he our foes: shall sone debell,
To tread them down: though hie they swell.
The Collecte.
PRepare our hearts O Lord ready unto thee, to confess the power of thy name,
and whereas we know how thou early as conqueror did rise, to raygne in
kingdom everlasting, so we may in life always rise from our earthly
conversation: to be pertaker of thy heavenly resurrection to whom with the
father and the holy ghost art one God: world without end. Amen.

The Argument. Psalm. CIX.
Here David vexed: by tyranny,
has Doegs spite bewrayed:
Whose successor: we Judas spy,
who falsely Christ betrayed.
/ /

1
Deus lau^em
O God my joy: and all my praise: in whom I glory most:
Hold not thy peace: thy virtue raise: destroy my haters bost.
2
For wicked mouths: and mouths of gile: at me be open set,
With lying lips: they me revile: with tongues most false they ief.
3
With hateful words: they compass me: such gall in heart they have
They fight at my: sincerity: they causeles me deprave.
4
For love I had: to them in heart: they seek my hurt and blood,
Yet did I pray: to ease my smart: wherein I wysht them good.
5
For good they evil: again requite: to malice so they bend,
And so for love: I showed in sight: whote hate they do repend.
6
Some wicked man: O constitute* on him to break his band,
Let Satan stand: and execute: his power against his hand.
7
When judged he be: for any deed: let him as gilty come,
His prayers whole: ill might they speed: to sin turned all in some
8
And let his days: abriged be: in years but few to go,
His office eke: withal his fee: Some other take him fro.
9
Let all his seed: and issue sprung: full sone be fatherles,
And let his wife: be widow young: and cursed with barennesse.
10
As wandrels make: his childrens stray: to beg and seek their bread,
Depryued so: their houses gay: abroad to desert led.
11
Yea let his goods: the usurer: all wholly catch in net,
And let also: the forriner: by spoil his labors set.
12
Let no man be: in any place: to pitye his distress,
And no man help: with any grace: his children fatherles.
13
To wast be led: his progenye: to joy in no degree,
Their name be blot: from memory: no second age to see.
14
His fathers crimes: be they revived: in mind before the Lord,
His mothers sin: to her deryued: and still of God abhord.
15
Yea let them hang: in open sight: before the Lord for aye,
Drive he their fame: all whole and quyte: from all the earth away.
16
Because no love: he had in breast: to any nedy wight,
But did pursue: poor man oppressed: to kill the heart contryfe.
17
He curse ensued: he ioyed therein: it came him home the more,
He bless eschued: none would he win: it shall him flee therefore*
18
To cursednes: he whole was set: as clad for all the nonce,
As water yet: his bowels wet: as oil it pearst his bones.
19
Let it therefore* as cloak to be: himself to wrape therein,
With gyrdell gyrt: so like be he: always even next the skyn.
20
This mede from God: to them befall: which me resist in hate,
To them even all: in general: against my soul that prate.
21
But do thou Lord: my Lord with me: as it becomes thy name
For sweet is thy: benignitye: O ryd me far fro shame.
22
For sore afflict: and poor I weep: I am all destitute,
My heart within: is wounded deep: in death nigh constitute,
23
As shadow fast: I pass away: as day does low declyne,
As grasshopper: removing aye: from place I am so driven.
24
My knees do reale: all fatigate: in fasting long from meat,
My flesh is dried: for lack of fat: or oil to make it sweat.
25
A foul rebuke: to them I seemde: on me they strangly gase.
As laughing stock: they me esteemd: and shoke their heads apace,
26
O help me Lord: my God withsaue: to thee alone I clyue,
Preserve me sure: thy grace I crave: and shortly me reuyue.
27
And let them know: in this thy aid: that this is whole thy hand,
That thou thy self: my state have laid: so strong by thee to stand.
28
And let them curse: so thou do bless: O Lord of all most drad,
Yea let them rise: but foul to miss: to make thy servant glad.
^9
Let all my foes: with shame be broke: as clad therewith echone,
Let them be wrapped: as with (...) cloak: in their confusion.
^0
And I with mouth: will celebrate: the Lord with thanks on hye,
Whom people most: be congregate: I will his lands apply.
^1
For that he stood: in poor man's need: at his right hand so strong,
To save his soul: from judges dread: who might him stroy by wrong.
The Collecte.
O Most pitiful Lord and intreatable God, which did vouchsaue to be cast
under the malediction of the law, so bearyng the wrath of thy father, to the
end that thou would discharge us from all curse and malediction, we beseech
thee so to deal with us mercifully that we may escape from the tyranny of
sin that does haunte us, and also to be defended by the power of thy name
from all cursed detractions of evil men, so that we may fully joy to be in thy
favor, in the enmity of the world, to whom with thy father and holy sprite,
be all honor and glory for ever. Amen.

The Argument. Psalm. CX.
Though David's reign: be somewhat meant,
Yet Christ is chief: here prophesied,
Who was both king: in regiment,
And priest in death: then after stied,
To heanen to sit: as priest and king,
His friends to save: his foes to wring.
With death the sting.
^

1
THe Lord most hye: the father thus,
Dixit dominus domino.
Did say to Christ: my Lord his son
Set thou in power: most glorious,
On my right hand: above the sun,
Until I make: thy foes even all,
Thy low footestoole: to thee to fall.
As subjects thrall.
2
The Lord shall send: from Zion place,
Of thy great power: imperial,
The royal rod: and princely mace,
Whence grace shall spring: original,
Yea God shall say: thou God up rise,
To reign amids: thine enemies.
In princely wise.
3
The people glad* in hearts delight,
Shall offer gifts: in worship free,
As conquest day: of thy great might,
In shinyng show of sanctity,
For why the dew: of thy sweet birth,
As morn new sprung: dropth joyful mirth,
So seen on earth.
4
The Lord did swear: and fast decreed,
He will his word: no time repent:
Which said thou art: a priest in deed,
A kingly priest: aye permanent,
Of order namde: Melchisedeck,
Whom peace and right* does jointly deck,
As Gods elect.
5
The Lord as shield: kepth right thy hand,
To make thy reign: invincible,
He shall subdue: by sea and land
All power adverse: most forcible,
He shall great kings: and Cesars wound,
In day of wrath: all them confound.
By fearful sound.
12
He judgment true: shall exercise,
As judge among: the Gentile sect,
All places he: shall full surprise,
With bodies dead: on earth project
Abroad he shall: in sunder smite,
The heds of realms: that him will spyte,
Or scorn his might.
13
Though here exilde: he strayth as bond,
And shall in way: but water drink,
Of homely brook: as comth to hand,
Pursued to death: and wysht to sink.
Yet he for this: humility,
Shall lift his head: in dignity.
Eternally.
The Collecte.
O Lord the eternal son of the father, which wart begotten before the world
was made, and art the first of all creatures we lowly beseech thee that where
by the session of the right hand of thy father thou subduest thy enemies, so
make us to subdue all the dominion of sin rising against us to be made meet
to serve thee in all godliness, who live and raignest one God, with the father
and the holy ghost, Amen.

The Argument. Psalm. CXI.
This laudatory is: and thankth Gods gentleness,
Who made all thing: and us redeemd: from sin and wretchedness.
/ /

1
Con^itebor tibi.
WIth all my heart I will: the Lord commend on hye,
Met secretly: with faithful men: in church eke openly.
2
Full great be all the factes: of this hye Lord in name,
Most exquisite: and may be found: of them that love the same.
3
His deed is worthy praise: most worshipful I say,
It Glory is: and comlynes: his justice lasts for aye.
5
Of all his wondrous works: remembrance has he made,
The Lord is good: and merciful: to Israel in trade.
5
For meat and spoil he gave: to them that feared him due,
So myndfull he: will ever be: his pact and league to sue.
6
His acts great power showed: to all his peoples sight,
In giving them: the heritage: of Gentiles lands for right.
7
His works of hands be seen: all truth and equytye,
And his precepts: all faithful be: in just conf^rmytye.
8
Upholde they stand most firm: and ever will remain,
For made they are: by verytye: and equytye again.
9
He sent his people guydes: which them to freedom lad,
His pact he bad: should ever stand: whose holy name be drad.
10
The fear of God is said: of wisdom first the way,
Who keep his hests: have wisdom clear: whose praise shall ner decay.
The Collecte.
GOd whose glory all thy saints most gladly delight to confess, grant us to
have the fear of thy holy name, wherein consist the beginning of all wisdom
that we being enstructed in thy will and pleasure, may be fed with the
heavenly nourishment of thy word, through Christ, etc.

This does recite, of him that fears the Lord:
The praises right, of him that fears the Lord:
Whose constancy, in God by faythes accord.
Lies perfectly, in God by faythes accord.
^

1
THat man is blessed: and lives at rest: that fearth the Lord most pure,
Beatus vir.
Who has delight: most exquisite: to work his byddinges sure.
2
No doubt his seed: shall firmly speed: in all felycitye,
These regents hye: their progenye: most blessed shall they be,
3
He riches store: in house the more: with plenty shall possess,
His righteousness: in stablenes: shall last and still increase.
4
And light shall spread: from darkness dread: to godly men's relief,
The Lord benign: aye pitiyng: and just to ease their grief.
5
This blisfull man: he pitye can: and lend with diligence,
His word and deed: by wisdoms reed: he rightly shall dispense.
6
For moved he: can never be: Gods arm shall him defend,
The just shall sure: in fame endure: till all the world does end.
7
At tydyngs evil: no time he will: stand dreadfully himself,
His heart for why: stands steadfastly: he trustth the Lord of health,
8
His heart so great: is stable set: to fear nothing adverse,
Untyll his eyes: their lust espies: on all his foes perverse.
9
He spredth his store: he gives the poor: his justice yet abidth,
His power shall be: exalted free: with glory large and wide.
10
The evil shall see: and fret shall he: shall gnash his teth and lowe^*
The wicked lust: of men unjust: shall wast and turn full sower.
The Collecte.
Grant we beseech thee O God which art the light everlasting and guide of our
hearts, that we may love and fear thee above all things, to delight only in
thy praise, and so to deal to the necessity of ou^ neighbor in this prcsent
life, that in the next we hear not that sharp word of reprobatio^ for
unmercifulness. through Christ. etc.

The Argument. Psalm. CXIII.
This praisth Gods grace on hie: thereto it does inuit,
His dignity and providence: it does in part endight.
\ \

1
YE servants (all: ye) children meek,
Laudate ^ueri.
praise ye the Lord of all:
Praise ye his name: extol ye due,
his power potentiall.
2
Gods (worthy) name: be blessed from hence: till all ye world have end
To dread and love: his power above: God grant we all contend.
3
From time ye Sun (does shine) in rise: til downward fallth ye same
From East to West: O blessed be: the Lords sweet holy name.
4
For why (no fail) the Lord does rule: on Gentiles all that be,
Yea heavens he passth: in glory bright: this Lord of majesty.
5
For who is like (this God) the Lord: in glory fame or power?
Who has set up: himself above: as chief and governor.
6
And yet he bowth: himself (full low) of his great gentleness,
All things that be: in heaven and earth: to see in carefulnes.
7
And he it is (at will) alone: that liftth the poor from dust,
The nedy man: he does promote: in dong that low was thrust.
8
To make him (hye: and) equal sit: with Princes rule to bear:
Yea that with Peers: of age most grave: of his own people dear
9
And he (alone) the baren makth: in fruitful house to dwell,
As mother glad: to joy in babes: O praise the Lord then well.
The Collecte.
WE give all praise most due to thy blessed name almighty god, beseching thee,
so to preserve us in the lap of thy well-beloved spouse thy church that we may
increase and be stablished in the perpetual knot of charity and unity:
Thorough Christ. etc.

The Argument. Psalm. CXIIII.
Here joy is made: that Jacobs seed,
Did Aegipt escape: in luckie speed:
That led they were: by Gods great might,
To Canaan land: to them behight.
^

1
WHen Israel: from Egypt went,
In exitu.
Where God them held: in chastisment:
When ryd from thrall: was Jacobs house,
Of people fierce: and barbarouse.
2
Then Jury land: was consecrate,
True God to serve: full dedicate:
Than Israel: was his Empire,
His subject made: to rule intyre.
3
Which thing when that: the sea did spy,
She fled to see: Gods power so nigh:
And Jordan flood: reuersed was,
As geuyng place: his arc to pass.
4
The mountaynesleapt: as Rams full light,
Above the waves: th'appeard in sight:
The Hillockes eke: did skip full glad,
As Lambs in grass: all fat bestad.
5
What meanst thou sea: to flee so fast?
Thou Jordan why: aback wart cast?
Was this the cause: Gods truthfull grace?
Or fathers faith: that ye gave place?
6
You Mountains hye: why leap ye thus?
As Rams with fruit: most plenteous:
Ye little hills: why skypt ye so?
(This sight to see) as young sheep do?
7
At Gods bright face: the earth thus shook,
At Jacobs Gods: most present look,
Be whole adrad: than earth to see,
This puissant Lord: so nigh to be.
8
Whose power did turn: the stone to gushe,
Great water brokes: most merueylous:
The flint so hard: whence fire springth,
Even water floods: he made it bring.
The Collecte.
Grant us O Lord ever to escape the servitude of all error and Egipticall
sin and wickedness, that we may always bear our lives sanctified to thee to
rejoice in thy protection, Through Christ, etc.

The Argument.
Thus Gentiles Gods: be scornd vnpure*
Where God of heaven: is God most sure:
On him to trust: to lawd him aye,
Who blessth our life: and keepth our way.
^

1
NO praise give us: O Lord to us,
Non nobis Domine.
Give it thy name: most glorious:
For thy sweet love: for thy good truth,
Defend us Lord: and show thy ruth.
2
Why else no doubt: the Hea^hen sect,
Would say where is: their God so tect?
If God they have: as we in sight,
Let him come forth: and show his might.
3
But sure our God: is God in heaven,
Not made or seen: to carnal eyne:
He does at will: what like him best,
He made all things: by him they rest.
4
Their Idols all: the best, they be,
But silver cast: and gold to see:
The handy work: of mortal men,
They be thus made: full brittle then.
5
Wide mouths they have: but speak no whit
Of speech but domme: to them most fit:
And eyes they have: yet have no sight,
All void of life: all void of light.
6
So ears they have: but hear nothing,
How loud men cry: in halowing:
And nose they have: but have no taste,
Their brent incense: on them is wast.
8
Yea hands they have: but handle not,
Two feet they have: but have no gate:
They make no voice: from out their throtes,
Where yet small flies: have open notes.
7
As those be all: so such be they,
Which make them first: of gold or clay:
And so be they: which worship them,
Or them do trust: in any realm.
9
But thou that see: O Israel,
Trust thou the Lord: bid them farewell:
The Lord is whole: thine aid and shield,
Protector sure: in town and field.
10
Ye Aarons house: trust ye this Lord,
None other serve: to him accord:
The Lord is whole: your aid and shield,
Protector sure: in town and field.
11
All ye that fear: the Lord so hye,
Trust ye this Lord: to him apply:
The Lord is whole: your aid and shylde,
Protector sure: in town and filde.
12
The Lord has mind: and cares for us,
He will us bless: most prosperous:
And Jacobs house: so will he bless,
Bless Aarons house: he will not mysse.
13
Who fear the Lord: he bless them all,
Both rich and poor: both great and small:
To do them good: is his intent,
Who worship him: most reverent.
14
The Lord will add: to your increase,
To heap his gifts: he will not cease:
Upon your self: in joyful cheer,
And after on: your children dear.
15
Ye are the Lords: most blessed lot,
If fear in you: be not forgot,
The Lords ye be: his heritage,
Who made of heaven: and earth the stage.
16
The heavens so houge: the heavens I say,
Be all the Lords: in whom they stay:
The earth he gave: to men a place,
To dwell therein: to serve his grace.
17
The dead that be: praise not the Lord,
No sense in them: no voice or word:
Ne they whose corpse: be laid to rest,
By them no lauds: can be expressed.
18
But we alive: with voice and heart,
Will praise this Lord: till we depart:
From this time forth: and so for aye,
Than sing we still: Alleluya.
The Collecte.
BE thou our protector and help O merciful Lord for we put our whole affiance
in thee only, be mindful that thou formedst us out of the moulde of the earth
grant us therefore thy strength to acknowledge thee our maker duly to laud thee
and celebrate thy name through Christ. etc.

The Argument. Psalm. CXVI.
When David escaped: adversity,
to God with thanks he goes,
So man full past: all misery,
may so his heart disclose.
/ /

1
I Loved have: the Lord and shall,
Dilexi quo niam.
with all my heart for why:
He soon has heard: my prayers all,
with voice when I did cry.
2
Full nigh I say: his ear he bent,
to me most redily:
Wherefore my days: that me be lent,
him will I call most hye.
3
The snares of death: did close me in,
yea panges of hell me found:
Fell anguish smart: and woes between,
I felt about me round.
4
Eftsoons I cried: in Gods good name:
for help and said even thus:
O Lord I pray: thy grace I clame,
my soul from pain discuss.
5
Of clemency: the Lord is full,
and just he is in word:
And this our God: is merciful,
which does all grace aforde.
6
The Lord preseruth: the simple ones,
as abiectes counted here:
For lo my self: was woe begone,
and health he brought me nere.
7
Wherefore I said: O turn again,
my soul into thy rest:
Since that the Lord* has easd thy pain,
for thine advantage best.
8
For thou O Lord: have ryd my fears,
my soul from death beside:
And eke mine eyes: from weeping tears,
my feet from falling wide.
9
To walk in life: I purpose then,
before the Lord upright:
While here I live: with living men,
on earth to please his sight.
Credidi propter quod.
10
I held my faith therout I spoke,
to God in hope full strong:
Although with woes: my heart did quake,
and sorrows seamed long.
11
In all my flightes: so forced to flee,
I said thus half amasd:
All men on earth: but liers be,
mine eyes were so adasd.
12
To quyte my Lord: what shall I give,
his benefits at length:
His grace so great: by whom I live,
surmounth my simple strength.
13
I will take up: and heave on hye,
the cup of thankfulness:
And Gods good name: beseech will I,
who compast all my wealth,
14
To God my Lord: I now will pay,
my vows that I behight:
With thankful heart: from day to day,
In all his peoples sight.
15
The Lord no doubt: full dear reputes,
the death of all his saints:
He takes to heart: their wrong pursuts:
and hears their woeful playnts.
16
For truth, lo I* thy servant lord,
thy servant this may speak:
Thy hand maids son: can this record,
for thou my bands did break.
17
To thee therefore: I offer shall,
of thanckes the sacrifice:
The lords good name: thereon to call,
I will in grateful wise.
18
To God my Lord: I will repaye,
my vows that I behight:
With thankful heart: from day to day,
in all his peoples sight.
In all the courts: even just in them,
of Gods hye house so bright:
In mydst of thee: Jerusalem,
O praise this Lord aright.
The Collecte.
GOd the clenser of manes soul from the filthynes of sin which in redines
do comfort his sprite that call upon thee faithfully, we beseech thee to
pluck us from the danger of death and hell and to place us in the region of
the living, where death and sin be abolished. Through Christ.

Psalm. CXVII.
The Argument.
\ Laudate Dominum.
This Hymn does endight,
Gods glorious might, --
His truth and grace most free,
That Gentiles a far,
Were made to be narre,
With Jews one flock to be.
\

1
Praise duly ye lord: in myndful accord: ye hethen ones all vain,
Ye Gentiles I bid: recount how ye s^id: and praise this Lord again.
And honor ye right: this Lord in his light: ye nations all in town
All people I say: where ever ye lay: extol this Lords renown
2
For merely his grace: and merciful face: confirmd lies on us all*
His love does excel: all sin to debell: his grace is general.
This lord in his truth: most stable ensuth: his word and promise just
The faith of his way: will never decay: O praise this lord of trust
The Collecte.
ALmighty and most merciful Lord, which would be praised by the mouths of
all nations, through out all the world, whose grace we the Gentiles called us to
the perticipation of thy son Jesus Christ, we beseech thee so to confirm
this grace in us, that we never declyne there fro, but continually laud thy
mercy, through the same Jesus Christ, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. CXVIII.
This Psalm is sung* of praise and lauds: that David's rule begone:
In sprite it shewth: and ioyeth the reign: of Christ Gods only son.
^

1
Confitemi ni domino
O Thank and laud: the heavenly lord: for he is gracious,
Because his love: and mercy free: for ever standth to us.
2
Let Israel: now glad confess: with song melodious,
Because his love: and mercy free: for ever stands to us.
3
Let Aarons house: and stock confess: in thanks most plenteous,
Because his love: and mercy free: for ever stands to us.
4
Yea let them all: that fear the Lord: this grace in heart discuss,
Because his love: and mercy free: for ever stands to us.
5
In trouble laid: to straytes be thrust: I called the Lord from thence
He hard at large: and set me wide: this Lord of excellence.
6
The Lord as thus: with me to stand: on my nigh side to be,
I can not fear: for what can man: prevail in spite at me.
7
The Lord takth part: with them to join: that me do help and ayds
Mine eyes shall see: their full desire: my foes reuengd and frayd.
8
O good it is: the Lord to trust: on him all hope to cast,
More sure it is: then man to trust: on him to lean to fast.
9
Yea good it is: the Lord to trust: to him all whole to stand,
More safe it is: then Prince to trust: with all his guard and band.
10
Though nations all: do compass me: and hedge me round about,
By name (I trust (of this the Lord: I shall cut down their route.
11
Let them besege: and compass me* on every side at will,
The Lords good name: I hope thereby: their pride to quel and kill.
12
Though they like bees: swarm me about: to sting, to hurt, to noye
They soon shall fade: as fire in thorns: in God I shall them stroy.
13
By pushing often: they thrust at me: to make me full aghast,
But yet the Lord: my pillar strong: was whole my stayful fast.
14
The Lord of power* my strength he is: of lauds my tenors style,
For he was made: my health and fence: to escape all mortal guyle,
15
The voice of joy* and healthful mirth: rebound in just men's tents
For why full great: the Lords right hand: has wrought experime^ts.
16
The Lords right hand: exalted is: his power is clearly known,
The lords right hand: great feats has done: man's strength is not his own
17
Not dead I am: but live as yet: and trust to spend my days,
To tell Gods works: his mighty acts: by whom my living stays.
18
The Lord although: he me correct: in chastisment most fyt,
Yet down to death: he drove me not: he would not so permyt.
19
Open me the gates: of righteousness: that just men use to haunt,
To enter now* Gods temple so: the Lord with praise to vaunt.
20
This gate is wide: the Lord his gate: where due his grace is spread
All ^ightwise men: do pass therein: who faithful life have led.
21
I will with thanks: set out thy praise: for thou have answered m^
Though thou did strike: yet ease thou se^tst: for health I had by thee*
22
The stone it self: which was reject: by all the buylders choice,
Was made the head: and corner stone: to all good men's rejoice.
23
From god the Lord: this act issued: his work it was alone,
A thing it is: most marvelous: in all our eyes so done.
24
This is the day: the joyful day: which that the Lord has made,
Let us therein: rejoice and sing: a day that shall not fade,
25
Ah Lord help now: and save I pray: assist us presently,
O Lord on hye: give help I pray: good luck send speedely,
26
O blessed be he: that comth as thus: in God the Lords good name,
To you as we: gods house that keep: have wished good luck and fame.
27
God is the Lord: and lightened us: all health who luckly sendes,
Sprede bows therefore: and bind your hosts: with cords at alters ends
28
Thou art my God: whom thank I will: whom I shall celebrate,
Thou art my God: to whom my lauds: I will whole dedicate.
29
O thank and laud: the heavenly Lord: for he is gracious,
Because his love: and mercy free: for ever stands to us.
The Collecte.
MOst merciful God which art the undoubted co^forter in all our adversities,
and makst the houses of the just to be filled with joy and gladness, extol thy
church and congregations by the power of thy right hand, to be the eternal
gate, thorough which all righteousness may proceed so established upon the head
corner stone Jesus Christ in this life, that at the resurrection she may be
presented glorious in thy fight, thorough the same Jesus Christ, etc.

A Preface to the Psalm. 119.
MAde is this Psalm: by Alphabete: in Octonaries fold,
All letters two: and twenty set: as Hebrews them have told.
The verses all: an hundred be: threescore and just sixtene,
Thus framde and knit: for memory: and elegance some wene.
Here letters all: so sortely bound: do show in mystery:
Eternal health: may sure be found: in scripture totallie.
Uerse yokt by eight: Christ's rising day: does figure them in some,
Sweet Saboth rest: not here I say: I mean of world to come.
Peruse this psalm: so wide and broad: each verse save one is freight
As still in terms: of law of God: most often by voices eight.
Right statutes, old precepts, decrees: co^maundeme^ts, word, and law.
Known judgments, domes, and witnesses: al rightous wais they draw
Envy no man: Gods word to painte: in art by such devise,
Read Hebrew tongue: the tongue so saint: and causeles be not nise.
Upfolde be here: Gods truths discust: right sure us all to teach,
So lies of man: all low be thrust: full false in glosing speech.
The Argument. Psalm. CXIX.
This Psalm dewrayth: good men's desire,
Gods law to know so mild:
Which David prayth: whom men in ire,
Did curse, from home exilde.
Aleph. 1.
^

1
Deati imculati.
A Rightvp man: of perfect ways* is blessed and blessed again,
As blessed be they which walk their days: in gods true law so plain.
2
And yet I speak: so blessed they be: who keep his witnesses,
All whole in heart: which will agree: to search Gods promises.
3
Admit they do: no sinfulnes: who walk his paths always,
At will who work: but wickedness: they tread not these his ways.
4
Advisedly: thou gave in charge: thy hests that we should keep,
Approved so: by thee at large* for us most due to leke.
5
Ah then O lord* where ye wilt so: would God my ways were steyd
Affected right: in heart to go: thy statutes justly leyd.
6
Ashamed then: I shall not shrink: in heart or visage cold,
Abacke to stand: what time I think: thy laws and them behold.
7
Ascribe will I: to thee my thank: in heart most right and clean:
As Soon as I: shall learn so frank: thy judgments just besene.
8
Again I vow: withal my heart: to keep thy true decrees:
A far then Lord: do not depart: from me thy grace to leefe.
Beth. 2.
In quo corigit.
1
By what or how: can young man cleanse* or yet reform his way,
Best, word of thine: if he the sense: will warely keep I say.
2
Betymes where I thy word have sought: with all my hearts intent
Be guide, lest I: might err in thought: from thy commandment*
3
By low I hyd: thy word in heart: thy wills inspird to keep,
Blasphemingly: lest might I start: from thee in sin to deep.
4
Both blessed and praised: thou do remain: O lord of secrecye,
Bestryde my heart: and teach my brain: thy statutes inwardly.
5
Bold have I been: and ever shall: by thee with tongue to tell,
Before all men: thy judgments all: which once thou spakst so well*
6
Blithe whole my heart: did joy to trace* thy testimonies ways,
Beholding them: more glad in face: than riches gaynfull praise,
7
Bestow I will: my time and talk: in thy precepts to muse,
Beside to note: thy wondrous walk: no time I will refuse.
8
Besport me still. I purpose me: in thy decrees whole set,
Believe I have: thy words decree: no time I shall forget.
Ghimel. 3.
Retribue.
1
Confirm O lord: thy servants will: with thy good grace so meke
Consist that I: in life may still: so just thy words to keep.
2
Clear thou mine eyes: both dark and thral: reform my sprite afresh
Consider then: thy law I shall: what meruels they express.
3
Cast here on earth: as Pilgrims be: I am poor traueler,
Conceal not Lord: thy law from me: depart not thou to fer.
4
Consume do I: afflict in sprite: for love to know thy word,
Comprise I would: always aright: thy judgments hye O Lord.
5
Correct thou do: the proud therefore: which thy precepts despise,
Cursed be they all: from thy good lore: who wander will to nyse.
6
Contempt and shame: from me remove: which proud men cast on me
Content for that: in life I love: thy laws to testify.
7
Chief Princes lo: in counsel sat: and me they hie controld:
Change yet my choice: so would I not: I used thy statutes bold.
8
Cause why, to me: thy witnesses: are whole my hearts delites,
Close counselors: they be no less: against these cursed wyghtes,
Daleth. 4.
Adhesit.
1
Dear Lord to dust: my soul is knit: nigh dead I ligh for grief:
Draw nigh my life: and quicken it: with thy sweet words relief*
2
Detect I have: my ways to thee: thou aunswerdst me again:
Declare thy will: that I may see: in heart thy statutes plain.
3
Due sense give me: to understand: the ways of thy precepts,
Demure I will: then take in hand: to talk thy wondrous steps.
4
Distemperd cares: did melt my heart: to note the worlds despite,
Deal then some ease: in gentle part: as thy true word has hight
5
Deliver me. from lying ways: from subtle glosing sect:
Delight my heart: in all thy lays: vouchsaue this good effect.
6
Do this for why: right path of life: I have now chosen due,
Deteyne I will: mine eyes so rife: to view thy judgments true.
7
Directly Lord: where hold I have: thy testimonies fast,
Defame me not: of thee I crave: to fall by shame aghast.
8
Deliuerly: run shall I light: thy laws the perfect gate:
Dilated large* when thou in sprite: shall make it joy in state.
He. 5.
Legem pone.
1
Eternal God: teach me the way: of thy most just decrees:
Even then I shall: keep them all day: in all their full degrees.
2
Employ my wits: to perfectnes: so hold thy law I may,
Effect thereof: I shall express: with all my hearts assay.
3
Eke lead me strayt: to see the path: of thy precepts most right,
Elect for why: my heart themhath: wherein I most delight.
4
Egg thou my heart: to magnify: thy testimonies all,
Escape that I: may utterly: foul avarice thee gall.
5
Erect mine eyes: not down to cliue: by lusts to things most vain
Encleare my sight: and me revive: thy ways to love the train.
6
Establish Lord: thy word all sure: thy servant lo I am,
Else could not I: thy fear procure: to reverence thy name.
7
Eftsoons remove: the brute vnswete: of shame that I do fear,
Espy I do: thy doomes discrete: all mixed with mercy dear.
8
Enforst I have: lo all my mind: thy statutes just to sue:
Encourage me: soon them to find: I crave thy justice true.
Vau. 6.
Et veniat.
1
First Lord I crave: thy grace deuyne: thy mercyes sweet to feel.
Fence thou my soul: with health of thine: as thy true word does deal.
2
Find thus I may: to answer right: and dull blasphemers slent^
Fast that my hope: is wholly plight: to thine aduertisments.
3
Far drive not lord: thy word most sure from out my mouth to stray
Full still for why: I will endure: to wait thy judgments way.
4
Ferme will I keep: thy lay and lore: since thou will teach the way,
Faith still to bear: I will the more: from age to age for aye.
5
Fair walk and large: thus shall I hold: in conscience upright,
Forth on where I: do seek so bold: thy clear precepts in light.
6
Free shall my tongue: thy witness tell: before both Lord and king,
Foul shame shall not: my heart debell: to shrink for manacyng
7
Fro thence I shall: my comfort find: thy laws shall me delight,
Fresh love I bear: to them in mind: no time to slide to light.
8
Fold up my hands: I will full hye: to thy commandments,
For them I love: and muse shall I: thy stable testaments.
Zain. 7.
Memor esto.
1
God call to mind: thy promise grave: to me thy servant frail,
Good hope therein: thou made me have: to my poor souls avail.
2
Great comfort this: gave me in thought. in pain when I did lie,
Glad heart for why: thy word me wrought: as whole revived thereby
3
Grym stately men: though one by one: most hye do me deryde,
Gone yet a back: I have not done: from thy true law aside.
4
Grave thoughts had I: and cast in mind: thy judgments lord from first,
Gat so I did: my comfort kind: to stake my woeful thirst.
5
Grieved sore I am most horribly: at wicked men's ententes:
Glyde fast they do: so shamefully: from all thy laws contents.
6
Grate songs in verse: I do devise: of thy sweet statutes lore:
Gest when I am: in wandryng wise: abroad afflicted sore.
7
Graven deep in mind: thy name by night: O Lord full often I had:
Glue fast to heart: that so I might: thy law that I had rad.
8
Grace thus did grow: to me so green: for that thy law I keep:
Grant then O Lord: I may be seen: thy will always to seek.
Heth. 8.
Portio me.
1
Hole portion Lord: thou art of mine: to thee alone I clyue:
Hold will I just: thy law divine: though men for lies do strive.
2
How deep in heart: thou see all day: I have thy face be sought:
Have mercy then, on me I pray: such trust thy word has taught.
3
Here how I live: what ways I lead: I have discust full nere:
Home so to turn: thy laws to plead: my feet I did retire.
4
Have made I fast: my fault espied: no time then troyted I:
Heart, hand, and tongue. I strait applied: to keep thy laws more nigh.
5
Ha^t wicked men: on heaps they met: to rob from me my trust:
Hard yet in heart: thy law I kept: though sore at me they thrust.
6
Hye midnight just: my tide is set: to rise thy name to bless:
Hark so I shall: and spy the bet: thy judgments righteousness.
7
Host me I will: with them to dwell: which thee do duly fear:
Hyd who do keep: thy hestes full well: in heart to mind them clear.
8
Hill, dale, and vale: the earth is full: thy mercies Lord to tell:
Help thou therefore: my wits so dull: teach me thy statutes spell.
Teth. 9.
Bonitatem fecisti.
1
I Lord confess: thou dealst full kind: with me thy servant frail:
In thy good word: such grace I find: thy promise never fail.
2
Inspire right taste: of discipline: and me sound knowledge teach:
Just have I hold: the laws of thine: most firmly them to seach.
3
Inuegeled foul: awry I went: before I was correct:
Imprint I now: thy testament: in heart thus gently checked.
4
Entirely good: and liberal: thou art who can deny:
Illumine then: my senses all* thy statutes well to spy.
5
Ill men and proud: their traps have set: to spot my truth with lies,
Inure my heart: I purpose yet: all whole thy laws to vise.
6
Inlarded is: their heart with pride: they swell in fat and grease:
Inuy I not: their joys so wide: thy laws can me refresh.
7
It wrought me wealth: so good it was: that troubles me did strain.
Endued was so: my soul with grace: to learn thy statutes plain.
8
Joy more I do: the law of thine: which thy sweet lips pronounce:
Infinitely: then silver fine: or gold a thousand ounce.
Iod. 10
Manus tuae.
1
King, Lord, and God: thou art to me: thou madst and formdst my shape,
Kerne deep my heart: with knowledge free. thy word in mind to wrap.
2
Kind loving men: that worship thee: will joy at me right soon,
Keyd fast thy word: was so to me: in hope that I have done.
3
Know well I do: in this thy rod: thy judgments all be just,
Know worthy is: thy truth O God* which humbled me to dust.
4
Kiss thou my soul: by loving grace: some comfort sweet to feel,
Knyt just thy word: though I be base: thy man yet every deal.
5
Kneel low I will: to ask full sad: thy mercyes all in sight,
Keep than my life: I shall full glad: for I thy law delight.
6
Kill down ye proud: confound their lies: they me would vayn pervert
Koole thou their heat: and I will rise: to preach thy laws apart.
7
Kenne they thy laws: as turnde to me: who duly thee do fear,
Known right who have: thy dignity: thy word with me do bear.
8
Knock, ask, and seek: I will, and weep: in heart thy word to spy,
Knead else in mire: of error deep: I should most shamefully.
Caph. 11.
Defecit.
1
Longd has my soul: and languished: while I thy health expect:
Lord yet thy word: me comforted: for hope did me erect.
2
Lo both mine eyes: did faint and wast: thy promise still to wait,
Loud thus I spoke: when will thou cast. thy help to ease my strayt.
3
Like though I was: to bottle dried: in smoke so was my skyn,
Leave would I not: thy statutes tried: I kept yet mind therein.
4
Leaf Lord my days: how long to go: thy servant fayn would know
Long will thou slake: err thou my foe: wilt judge who thrust me low.
5
Lyme pittes full slye: these lurdens proud: did dig in crafty sort,
Lies loud they made: not well auowed: by thy true laws report.
6
Life, truth and way: thy laws contain: though words they prate untrue
Lend me thy help: where men so vain: do falsely me pursue.
7
Large sautes they made: to make me sink: well nigh they had me spent:
Loath yet I was: in heart to shrink: from thy commandment.
8
Let then thy grace: and gentleness: refresh and me revive:
Love so I shall: and will express: thy words of mouth belyue.
Lamed. 12.
In eternum domine.
1
Meke Lord thy word: most stable lies as heaven: is permanent:
Most strong it is: as testefieth: the starry fyrmament.
2
Man trust may thee: thy faith so standth: in truth from age to age:
Mark well we do: the earth and land: how fyrme thou madst the stage.
3
Made fast they bide by thy decree: until this present day:
Meet service all. do yield to thee: In all their course and sway.
4
My chief delight: and ornament: unless thy law had been:
More deep in woe: I had been shent: whole quenched quite and clean.
5
Mind still I will: thy laws precept: and never it forget:
Me still in life: it daily kept: by thee this grace I get.
6
Maineteyn my life: for thine so wrought: I am most congruent,
Midst whole in heart: for why I sought: thy true commandment.
7
Mad men in heart: ungodly men: awayted me to kill:
Muse yet I did: full often again: thy testimonies will.
8
Much noted I: things finest tried: drue fast to brittle end:
Mere infinite: thy law I spied: whose breadth no time could spend.
Mem. 13.
Quam dilexi.
1
Nigh love in heart: thy law I bear: such hope thereby I win:
No day does pass: but that I steare: my mind to muse therein.
2
Now have thou made: my wit excel: my foes by thy precepts:
No time there is: but that I mel: with them in my concepts.
3
Note this I do: I am more wise: then all my teachers be:
No dout for this: that I advise: thy testimonies free.
4
Not aged men: have knowledge like: I them exceed to far:
No question: for that I keep: thy laws familier.
5
Needs must I stey: and so I do: my feet from path of vice:
No witherward: aside to go: but keep thy words devise.
6
Naught do I shrink: one ynch awry: from thy decrees amiss:
No praise to me: does rise thereby: for thou have taught me this.
7
New fragant taste: by thy sweet word: O how my pallat felt:
No honey comb: set on my bourd: such swetenes ever dealt.
8
Notorious: my wisdom grew: by thy commandments:
No wicked ways: then will I sue: I hate all crafty flents.
Nun. 14.
Lucerna.
1
O Lord thy word: a lantern is: full clear to guide my feet:
Ondoubted light: that will not miss: to rule my paths most meet.
2
Oath once I spoke: and promise made: in heart I full decreed:
Observe that I: should whole in trade: thy just and righteous reed.
3
Oppressed I am: O Lord to hye: in soul, in sprite, in flesh:
Of this sore cross: revive thou me: thy word pretendth no less.
4
Oh let my mouths: free sacrifice: please thee O Lord at will:
Open thou my wits in ghostly wise: teach me thy judgments skill.
5
Onsure my life: all day I see: my soul lies in aye hand:
Obliuious yet: thy law to flee: I will not so be bond.
6
Onrightfull men: and obstinate: for me a snare have laid,
Offend thy law: yet will I not: to run from it astraid.
7
Obtaynd I have: thy witnesses: in just fee simple state:
Oblected so: my fansy is: with them most delicate.
8
One thing in heart: inclynde I to: to work thy statutes lore:
Once this to miss: I will not so: to end for evermore.
Samech. 15.
Iniquos.
1
Presumpteous men which guiles devise: I hate as hypocrites:
Pure law of thine: most hie I prise: for that all truth behightes.
2
Protector thou: thou art my bower: thou art my trusty shield:
Persist I will in thy good power: I trust thy word so mylde.
3
Part ye from me: malignaunt men: your by paths wrong I hafe:
Perform I shall: more just and plain: my Gods precepts in gate.
4
Pluck up my heart: O me sustain: by thy sweet word to live:
Pinche not my hope: with shames disdayn: to make my heart to rine
5
Preserve me still: in sure defense: so safe I shall remain:
Promoote thy words: intelligence: I shall always full feign.
6
Press down thou will: all the^ to naught: which err from thy decrees
Plain lies they forge: in crafty thought: they frame but fallacies.
7
Proud men like dross: thou will remove: which iet in earth so stout
Precellently: therefore I love: thy witnesses full out.
8
Perplexed with fears: my flesh does shake: when I thy power do mark
Profound afrayes: my soul have take: thy judgments be so dark
Ain. 16.
Feci iudicium.
1
Quite out my life. I dealt with that: which lawful was and right:
To Quarelers: up give me not: my soul with wrong to spite.
2
Queynt thou my heart: delightfully: in things of perfect name:

In Quire else will: the proud thereby: Some cause my life to shame.
3
Quick sight I lost: Mine eyes were wast: for waiting long thy health
I Quothd and sight: and longed fast: thy rightwise word of wealth.
4
Quit me O Lord: thy servant poor: from sin and mercy reatch:
So Quicken me: in all thy lore: and me thy statutes teach.
5
Quire, out the truth: that right I may: O understanding grant:
In Quiet mind: to thee I pray: as servant suppliant.
6
Qualms ouerwhelmd: my woeful heart: for men have stroyd thy law:
O Quel them Lord: as judge thou art: the time does ask thine aw.
7
Quench not my sprit: with these thy foen: for I thy laws do love:
No Querry geuyth: such gold or stone: which I would prise above.
8
Quake might my heart: if all thy laws: I held not all the best
No Question: I love thy sawes: all false ways I detest
Pe. 17.
Mirabilia.
1
Right wonderful: set hy aloft: thy testimonies are:
Reuolue therefore: then will I often: my soul shall keep them nar.
2
Resort who does thy law the door: winth light as shewth the proof,
Ripe wisdom rises: thereby in store: to simple men's behoue
3
Raise up my mouth: I did apert: for wind my breath I drew:
Refresht for that: I wished my heart: with thy sweet statutes view.
4
Respect me Lord: not me refuse: my strength were else but lame
Rue than on me: as thou do use: on them that love thy name.
5
Rule thou my steps: thy word to tread: form them to live thereby:
Reign can no pride. in all my head: to vanity to fly.
6
Redeem me Lord: from injury: of men in quarrels vain:
Retain I may: more constantly: thy constitutions plain.
7
Reveal to me: thy servant true: thy lovely face so bright:
Renew my sprite: my soul endue: teach me thy statutes right.
8
Ran down my cheeks: did water streams: for yt thy law they balke
Rough cheer I made: to note all realms: against thy law to walk.
Zadic. 18.
Iustus es Domine.
1
Seen right thou art: full good and just: O Lord in verity:
So righteous be: thy domes discust: all judged in equity.
2
Strayt have thou chargd: that me^ should haunt: thy testimonies reed
Still faith to speak: still truth to grant: most vehement at need.
3
Sower zeal fret me: in gelousie: for ire nigh spent I was:
Set whole for that: my foes I spy: from all thy words to pass.
4
Skord clean full out: thy word is seen: fine tried from dross vnpure:
Stick fast to it: thy servant meanth: in heart to love it sure.
5
Small though I seem: and vile at eye: to vaunting insolentes,
Slide yet shall not: my memory: from thy commandments.
6
Sound righteousness: thy justice is: and that which still will last,
Sure truth thy law: is so iwiffe: I trust thereto full fast.
7
Smart woes and sharp: when they did press: and I by spite abused:
Sweet comfort yet: did me refresh: thy hestes when I perused.
8
Stand ever shall: thy witnesses: in ryghteousnes to stay,
Send wisdom then: well teach me this: that ever live I may.
Coph. 19.
Clamaui.
1
Thy grace to win: cried loud I have from heart effectual:
Then answer me: O Lord with save: thy statutes keep I shall.
2
To thee I suyd: O save me thou: I sued to none beside:
That just I may: in life avow: thy testimonies tried.
3
The dawning day* preuentingly: I cried most earnest than:
Trust fast I did: thy words for why: my hope thereby I wan.
4
Time watch of night: mine eyes prevent: so rath I then awoke:
Thus that I might: some thing comme^t: of thy true word on book
5
Tourn Lord thine ear: my voice to hear: thy mercies ask eue^ so:
Touch thou my heart: revive me clear: as thou do use to do.
6
They tread full nigh: that would on me: their malice execute:
Twind far they be: thy law to fle: O Lord be my refute.
7
Tread thou as nigh: O Lord with aid: for God thou art at hand:
True be thy laws: all justly laid: their ways be mad and fond.
8
Taught am I sure: erst long ago: of all thy witnesses:
Through thee were set: most groundly so: that they will never miss
Res. 20.
Vide humilitatem.
1
Uyse thou my woe: and rid my smart: thou see exild I am:
When yet thy law: from inward heart: forgotten never came.
2
Uphold my cause: and me release: so free redeamd to rise:
Wast not my life: but me refresh: in thy words warantise.
3
Ungodly men: from health ren far: and health ren far fro them:
Wide fle they foul: for why they err: thy words they search not the^
4
Use still thy grace: O Lord of might: thy mercies great be seen:
With life, and joy, refresh my sprite: as erst thy wont has been.
5
Uaine men there be: right many one* which me pursue and press:
Ware yet I am: to swerue to sone: from thy sweet witnesses.
6
Uyle men I spied: transgress thy law: for grief thereof I quoke:
Which was because: at eye I saw: thy laws how they forsook.
7
Uew thou my heart: O Lord and see: how thy precepts I loved:
Wherefore by grace: revive thou me: not whole from thee removed.
8
Uouch this I may: thy word in chief: in some is truth most pure:
Wast can no time: thy laws relief: thy domes aye Just will dure.
Sin. 21.
Principes.
1
Xtremly Lord: I am pursued: of princes undeserved.
Xactly yet: thy word I vewd: I them with fear preserved.
2
Xteme I do* thy word so glad: and joy thereof as mich:
Xceding Joy: as he has had: that spoils has found most rich.
3
Xcesse of lies: I have abhorde: I have them aye defied:
Xtend I have: my loves accord: to all thy laws so tried.
4
Xprest I have: thy lawdes most dear: seven times a day no less:
Xpending just: thy domes so clear: full wrought in southfastnes.
5
Xcellent peace: in conscience: have they which love thy law
Xchew they can: all light offense: no harm to them can draw.
6
Xpect I do: thy help and health: O Lord to thee I plead:
Xcited so: I have my self: thy just precepts to tread.
7
Xquisitly: In soul I kept: thy testimonies hye:
Xpert by use: I them accept: in love exceedingly,
8
Xalt I have: thy statutes right: and eke thy witnesses:
Xempt from thee: to escape thy sight: I can no secrecies.
Tau. 22.
Appropinquet.
1
Yield Lord assent: with ears vnshit: to hear these lawds I sing:
Yt might please the: to grant me wit: as thy word use to bring.
2
Yet once I pray: mine suit even so: admit before thy face:
Ill men's despites: O take me fro: thy word so works in grace.
3
Ymnes, Psalms, and songs: my lips shall sound: such co^me^datio^s brave
If thou will teach: my heart the ground: thy laws in heart to grave.
4
Yea sure my tongue: shall still express: thy word deseruingly:
Yokt so with truth: and rightwisenesse: thy whole precepts I spy.
5
Year after year: me then vpshore: with thy good helping hand:
Young did I chose: (thou know) thy lore: to thy decrees to stand.
6
Yearnd has my heart: and wished long: thy health to feel so meet:
Yies, head, and hand: have loved as strong: thy law to me so sweet.
7
Yield still I will: O life prolonge: my soul shall praise thee then:
Yane shall I wide: for aid among: for thou do aid all men.
8
Youth made me err: as sheep but lost: seek up thy servant Lord:
Yes seek him Lord: bestow the cost: thy law me not abhord.
The Collecte.
ALmighty God the only pattern and meede of all felicity, which by thy wholesome
direction informst thy faithful servants to walk upright in thy law, to
search thy pactes and promises, to observe thy precepts and commandments,
grant unto us, so to understand thy iustifications and with whole heart to
search thy wylles and pleasures, and to preach out thy great acts done to
our behoof, that when we were as lost sheep wandryng in our ways of
ignorance, we might be brought home to thy shepefold to be placed on thy right
hand with thy sheep in thy kingdom, through Christ our Lord, etc.

Observations.
These fiftene Psalms: next followyng,
Be songs de^amd: of steps or stayers,
For that the quiere: on them did sing,
The peoples vows: to bliss by prayers,
For lucky speed: in their affairs,
As need and time* as case did bring.
In wedlock, war: or house begone,
For peace, for aid: for freedom won,
The Argument. Psalm. CXX.
When David felt: all spite of man,
All help of God: he then optaynd:
By whom alone: relief he wan,
From hard disease: that him constraynd.
Well trust we than,
When we be paynd.
1. Canticum graduum.
^

1
TO God when I: was vexed with smart,
^^d do^inum (...).
By wrongful means: of man oppressed:
I cried in voice: I cried in heart,
He aunswerd me: at my request.
In gentle part,
He gave me rest.
2
For thus I said: and still will say,
O Lord my soul: deliver free:
From lying lips: save me I pray,
From crafty tongues: that double be.
But set all day,
To vanity.
3
What shall thou win: what gain or gift?
Thou crafty tongue: with all thy spyte:
Or what may that: increase thy thirst,
False tongue to use: in such delight?
What is thy drift?
What winst in sight
4
Even this thou wynst: sharp darts and fell,
Of Gods strong hand: in dreadful fear:
Whose strength shall send: thy spite to hell,
As whote as coals: of Juniper.
And mark it well,
In mind it bear.
5
O woe is me: that mine abode,
Is still prolongd in hard exile:
Thus forced to dwell: as cast abroad,
In Ceder tents: both black and vile.
O help me God,
Me reconcile.
6
Ah long to long: my soul abydth,
With such as hate: good love and peace:
With people rough: of hawty pride,
Which fierce in heart: on me do preace.
O cast them wide,
Their magre cease.
When peace I seek: they cry to war,
When fair I speak they threat the more:
When them I sue: they drive me far:
Thus gall for love: I gain in store.
O God be narre,
Help me therefore.
The Collecte.
O God the only pacifier of all manner of angwishe and trouble, deliver we
pray thee the souls of thy true servants from slanderous and lyeng lips, to
be never overcome by the malicious assauts of the evil, but to stand by the
assistence of thy grace wholye in thy protection to the lawd of thy name,
through Christ, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. CXXI.
As David here: so other king,
Nie toward war: ought thus begin:
The people than: him following,
Should wish him speed: Gods aid to winn
Thus comth he in.
2 Canticum graduum.
^

1
TO heavenly hills: I lift mine eyes,
Leuauioculos.
In faithful heart: even there direct.
From whence can else: my help arise?
Gods foes to quel: this cursed sect.
O cursed sect.
Let all my help: come whole from God
Who made this heaven: and earth to see:
Though other stray: most far abroad,
His will his arm: my trust shall be.
My folk speak ye.
3
We trust and pray: that God of hosts
Will not permit: thy foot to slide:
But make thee beat: the Paynyms bostes,
He sleeps not he: that keeps thy side.
His aid is tried.
4
For lo he will: not slomber once
Much more, deep sleep: he will repel
But keep he will: his little ones,
He warden is: of Israel.
We trust him well.
5
The Lord himself: will be thy shield.
The Lord shall be: thy shadows bower:
At thy right hand: most nigh in field
He will thee keep: both day and hour.
By godly power.
6
The sun by day: shall thee not burn,
But shine thereof shall clear thy way,
The moon by night: shall serve thy turn:
Her frory horns: shall thee not fray.
But be thy stay.
7
The Lord our God: will thee preserve,
From all evil haps* from all mischaunce:
The Lord will saufe: thy soul conserve
He will thy faith: and fame auaunce.
In Governance
8
The Lord will keep: and keep might he,
Thy coming in: thy going out:
By puissant power* (thus pray all we)
From this time forth: the world about.
We have no dout.
The Collecte.
DEfend thy people O God, which art so vigilant a watchman over thy flock,
grant that we be conducted safely by thee both by day and night, from all
assaults of our enemies, through. etc.

The Argument. Psalm. CXXII.
Here Salem is: well ioyed and wished,
That earthly mount: is figure past:
For us to wish: Christ's church so blist,
That we in heaven: may mete at last.
From earth dismissed.
3. Canticu^ Graduum.
/ /

1
MOst glad I was (says good man so)
Letatus s^m in.
When men devout: said thus to me,
Come we in one: in will we go,
the lords hie house:
of majesty
and pray him to.
2
Our feet shall stand: in certentie,
Within thy gates: Jerusalem,
Within thy courts: where we shall see,
Gods true electes:
to join with them,
In perfectnes.
3
Jerusalem: thou shinyng beam,
Thou builded art: in peacefulnes,
As city else: in any realm,
Where men may meet
for holiness.
In times select.
4
For thither have: the tribes access,
Even Gods own tribes: by him elect,
I mean Gods flock: of Israel,
To laud his name:
by laws respect.
His praise to tell.
4
For there the seats: be duly dect,
To judge the truth: by priesthoodes spell,
Set there we see: of David's house,
His judgment seat:
there just to dwell.
Most glorious.
5
O wish and pray: all joyful peace,
Jerusalem: to have even thus:
Who love thee well: or wish thine ease,
All joy have they:
most prosperous,
Well God to please.
6
O peace befall: thy walls so wide,
No foreign power: to work disease:
God grant thy towers: may strong abide,
In all success:
most happily,
By God the guide.
7
My brethernes sake: my neighbors nigh,
Make me thus speak: up on thy side:
To wish thee peace: so earnestly,
Thy wealth to stand:
from day to day,
O Mount most hye.
8
Yea thus I seek: thy wealth I say,
For Gods house sake: our Lord of love,
Whose regal power: therein does lay
O thus do we:
our hearts to move,
In sprite to pray.
The Collecte.
VOuchesaue O Lord to grant to all such as delight to walk in the courts of
thy house the congregations of thine elect people, continual abundant peace
that while in the same we confess thy grace exhibited thereto, we may enjoy thy
felicity in the heavenly habitation, through Christ, etc.

The Argument. Psalm, CXXIII.
On Whom the world: does look awrye,
This psalm is fit: for there behoue:
Proud worldly men, true man defye,
All like themself they only love.
As proof does try.
4. Canticum graduum.
\ \

1
TO thee I lift: mine eyes on hye,
Ad te Domine.
To thee that dwelst: in heaven above
Though here with shame me^ me deny,
Yet me I trust: thou will approve.
O Lord be nigh.
2
As man and maid: for help does eye,
Their Lords and Ladies hands to prove:
So we our eyes: bend certainly,
To God our Lord: his grace to move.
O trustelye.
3
Have mercy Lord: to us apply,
Have mercy yet: show us thy love:
For skornde we be: full bitterly,
They us with spite: from them remove.
O cruelly.
4
With mockes and taunts: reuilde we lie,
Our soul is full: of their reprove:
The wealthy (Lord) the proud we spy,
Be they that us: with spite disprove.
O Lord be by.
The Collect.
O God whose habitation is in heaven we list up our eyes unto the beseeching
thy mercy to repres the opprobrious despites of the proud and favorably grant
to us to feel thy wonted mercies, through Christ our Lord.

The Argument. Psalm. CXXIIII.
The Iues so left: in Jury still,
When they exild: were others set:
With thanks their songs: they did fulfill,
As they by times: together met.
So we the same,
May counterfete.
5. Canticum graduum.
/ /

1
BUt God himself: by ready grace,
Nisi quia
Had stand with us: in carefulnes:
Against men's spite: and Irefull face,
May Israel: in tongue express.
As we the same,
Must needs co^fes.
2
I say again: to note the case,
Except the Lord: himself in preace:
Had been with us: in open place,
When me^ rose up: our hearts to press.
Like Israel,
We must confess.
3
They had deuourd: by time and space
Our souls eue^ quick: In cruelnesse
Wha^ they so feign: would us disgrace
And fumed at us: In wrathfulnesse.
Like Israel,
We must confess.
4
The storms, and slouds: of woes so base
Had drowned us quite: by their exces
The roaring streams: so swift in pace
Had drencht our souls remediless.
Like Israel:
We must confess.
5
Proud swelling floods: so ran in race
To whelme our souls: in heaviness:
Our rest of life: they would deface.
And thought therein: great godliness.
Like Israel,
We must confess
6
With heart most kind: let us embrace,
This loving Lord* with thanks to bless
who duld their teeth: our flesh to race
Their pray so sought: in gredinesse.
Like Israel
We must confess.
7
Our souls as birds which foulers trace
Be escaped their snares: of wickedness
Which they with craft: did interlace,
The snare is broke: we have release.
Like Israel
We must confess.
8
Gods mighty name: we ought to blase,
Our help at need: who made no less
But heaven and earth: and all it hase
As Israel: may still express.
So just the same we will confess.
The collect.
SHut up the cruel mouths of the evil, O Lord, who labor to devour us by the
rauenouse teeth of detraction that where we doubt our own strength: we may be
saufe by thee through Christ.

The Argument. Psalm. CXXV.
This Psalm commendth: against our foen,
Almighty Gods protection:
If we in faith: to him can clyue,
No power adverse: can us contryue.
In vain they strive.
6. Canticum graduum.
^

1
WHo stickth to God: in stable trust,
Qui confidunt.
As Sion monnt: they stand full just,
which moves no whit: nor yet ca^ reel,
But standth for aye: as stiff as stele.
Than trust him well.
2
Jerusalem: with hills is set,
Enuyroned: with bulwarks great:
Right so the Lord: standth round about,
His people nigh for ever stout.
Without all dout.
3
For wicked power: with all his tail,
On just men's lot: shall not prevail:
Lest rightwise men: should put their hands
To wickedness: for fear of bonds.
So my God stands.
4
Do well O Lord: in loves respect,
To godly men: though here reject:
And right up men: of parfyte heart,
O them embrace: in gentle part.
As God thou art.
5
But who to wrong: will back declyne,
Of crooked drifts: who draw the line:
Where wicked wail: god them shall lead,
But Israel shall joy in meede.
Without al dread.
The Collect.
REpulse O Lord the malignant assaults of the evil from the lot and elect
flock of thy true servants, that where they put their whole trust in thy
protection, they may be strong against the troublous storms of all
temptations: thorough. etc.

The Argument. Psalm. CXXVI.
This Psalm in sight: does prophecy,
What mirth is made: most worthily:
When God does work: delivery,
From souls or bodies: misery.
To liberty.
Canticu^ Graduum.
\ \

1
WHat time the Lord: shall back repry
In conuertendo.
Hard Sions thrall: to death so nigh,
Appear shall we: then dreamingly,
Such joy unlooked: for then to spy,
So suddenly.
2
Our mouth shall laugh: then plentuously,
Our tongues shall flow: with songs full hye,
Then Gentiles shall. say openly,
For them the Lord: wrought royally,
We see at eye.
3
The Lord no dout: shall magnify,
For us his power: most notably,
Thus may we joy: then restfully,
Our thraldom past: all totally.
So blessedly.
4
O Lord return: then spedely,
Our captive state: our drudgery:
As rivers cheer: the south so dry,
So shall thine act: us gratefy.
Most lovingly.
6
Who sows in tears: all mourningly,
His corn bought dear: in penury:
Shall reap again: yet joyfully.
To see increase: his need supply.
So fruitefully.
7
Who goes from home: all heavily,
With his seed leap: his land to try:
He home returns: with hocky cry,
With sheaues full lade abundantly,
Reioycingly.
The Collecte.
COmfort thy people most pitiful Lord, and deliver us from all manner
captivity, sin, error, and infidelity, that where as we sow here in
tears with heuines, by thy goodness we may reap in joy and gladness through
Christ.

The Argument. Psalm. CXXVII.
This Psalm describes: Gods providence,
Whence man must spy: his suerety:
In house and town: his whole defense,
Or else shall he: his ruin see.
In vanitye.
8. Canticum graduum
^

1
EXcept the Lord: the house by build
Nisi dominus.
They toil in vain: who build most feign:
Except the Lord: becityes shield,
The watchman plain:
loose all their gain
They win but pain
2
But labor lo^t: that soon ye rise,
That late ye creep: you safe to keep:
That bread ye eat: in careful wise,
Where God gives sleep
both sound and deep
To his good sheep
3
Lo childern be: an heritage,
From God so sent: beneuolent:
The fruit of womb: to comfort age,
From God is lent:
by his assent.
Munificent.
4
As arrows strong: in Gyauntes hands,
Make strength appear: to escape all fear,
So childern young: to Gods men stands,
As staff and spear:
in age most dear,
To them full near.
^
O well is him: whose quiver is,
With such full dight: his house well pight,
At judgment gate: they shall not mis,
To plead their right
at foes despite,
They shame to quite.
The Collecte.
Eternal God the repayrer, vpholder and builder of all mansions both
spiritual and corporal, without whose continual oversight all things
should fall to utter ruin, preserve us we pray thee and accomplish our
desires, thoughts and works, that we go about to the glory of thy name.
Through Christ. etc.

The Argument. Psalm. CXXVIII.
This Psalm entreat: the wedlock state,
Yt makes Gods fear: most fortunate:
Where both be met: well God to serve,
Who can them dear: to make them swerue.
Since God will: here
Them both preserve.
9 Canticum graduum.
^

1
O Blessed is he: who fears the Lord,
Beati omnes.
and walkth his ways: in hearts accord
Who can agree: by faith full sure,
To spend his days: to him most pure
To seek no strayes:
But will endure.
2
For thou shall eat: thy labors true,
Of thine own hand: in ceason due:
For thus thy meet: and travels free,
Well shall thou stand: blessed shall thou be.
In sea and land,
most luckely.
3
Thy wife most dear: as fruitful vine,
Shall spread thy house: the fides to byne:
Thy childerne clear: shall ^lorish out,
Like Olyue bows: thy bourde about.
Thus God alowes,
Thy state no dout.
4
O give good ear: expend it than
For happy so: shall be that man:
Who just in fear* to God does bend:
His life to woe: can not descend.
God clyueth him to,
And him defends.
5
The Lord bless thee: from Sion hye,
With grace supreme: she blessed might lie:
That thou may see: while life is pressed,
Jerusalem: in goods possessed.
This come to them,
In fear who rest.
6
And God give grace: that thou may spy
Thy childrens seed: and progeny:
God show his face: to Israel,
In peace to speed: In joy to dwell.
That al good deed,
May there excel.
The Collect.
Grant to al such as fear thy name O Lord, perpetual prosperity in the state
of their lives: referring al their acts and deeds to the glorification of the
same through Christ.

The Argument. Psalm. CXXIX.
As Syon vexed: to God she can,
In prayers meek: her refuge make: --
So Christ, his church, and christen man*
In God their Lord: may comfort take. --
In heart yet glad,
For Christ's his sake.
10. Canticum graduum.
/ /

1
GReat grief they have: against me wrought
Sepe expugna.
Yea often and often: from day to day:
From up my youth: they quarrels sought,
Speak Israel: now truly may.
So Christ his spouse:
May jointly say.
2
Yea often I say: full many times,
Great trains at me in spite they lay:
From up my youth: for all their crimes:
They could not yet: my state betraye.
So christen man:
in like may pray.
3
The plowers plowde: upon my back,
Their errors mad: yet thought full gay:
My truth, so strong: they could not flacke,
Their forrowes long: had short decay.
So Christ his spouse
may jointly say.
4
The Lord so just: their cords has cut,
Their wicked yokes: to ren a stray.
In prison bound: they kept us shut,
But God them all: has driven to bay.
So Christen man:
in life may pray.
5
Let them be shamde: confounded still.
And backward tornd: in their array
All they which hate: sweet Sion Hill,
Or that would else: her quiet fraye.
So Christ his church
may jointly say.
6
Let them how grene: they seem to stand,
Be like in sight: the witherd hay:
On houses tops: plucked up by hand,
That fades to naught: without delay.
So Christen man:
in like may pray.
7
Whereof in dayne: the mowers gripe
When they to such: their hands do splay
Nor gleaners can: find sheaues so ripe,
That they to fill: their bosoms may.
So Christ his church:
may jointly say.
8
That none to them: good luck do wysh.
Which walk in gate: by fide the way:
On Gods hye name: their works to bless:
But wished them all: far well away.
God grant that often:
this all we pray.
The Collect.
DEfend thy church O Lord from al assalts of her adversaries that they al being
discomfited, the true child of the same may joy in thy ^eritye, through
Christ.

The Argument. psalm. CXXX.
In banishment: when Iues were pent,
And felt gods ire* the greuousnes:
Thus thral^ their sins: they did lament
They freedom wished: from cruelnesse.
In banishment.
11 Canticum Graduum.
\ \

1
IN deep excess: In heaviness,
O Lord to thee: my crying went
De profundis.
From depth of heart: I did express,
My great constraynts: most violent.
In deep excess.
2
O Lord affent ^ O here a^^ent,
My woeful voice: in redines,
O let thine ears: to hark be bent,
My prayers cry: in lowlines.
O Lord assent.
3
If thou would press: man's ^unefulnes,
O Lord to send: due punishment,
Who could O Lord: the waightines,
Sustain to bide: thy chastisement.
If thou would press.
4
Be Lord content: lo we repent,
For thou show grace: to humblenes
Thus feared to be: most reverent,
Then keep no sins: in irefulnes,
Be Lord content
5
I hope release: I trust no less,
The Lord I bide: still permanent:
My soul expecth: his frendlines,
I wait his words: accomplishment,
I hope release.
6
My soul so meant: more confident,
To wait my Lords: great gentleness,
Then watchemen wish: the night full spent,
And wayt the morn: their watch to cease.
My soul so meant.
7
In faithfulness: in chearefulnes,
Let Jacob wayt: the Lord so gent,
Because with God: is ^uefulnes,
He often redeemth: his mercyment,
In faithfulness.
8
He will relent: incontinent,
And full aquite: the wretchtdnes,
Of Israel: his prisonment,
And pardon all: their wickedness,
He will relent.
The Collecte.
LEt thine ears inclyne to our prayers O Lord of all pitye and compassion,
for with thee is copious redemption, whereby thou do not surely observe our
iniquities, daily bestow on us thy mercies, thorough Christ, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. CXXXI.
When David's foes: inueterate,
Him slaundred sore: as obstinate:
That he S^ules reign: would vendicat,
He prayed to God: immaculate.
To clear his state.
^

1
MY heart proud things (lord) counted not
Domine non est.
Mine eyes aloft: haunt mounted not:
In boasting acts: I walked not,
Things past my reach: I stalked not.
Lord dear me not.
2
If I my heart: refrayned not,
If I my soul: restrained not:
If I as child: beweynd me not,
If I from pride: absteynd me not.
Then hear me not.
3
O Israel: most fortunate,
Wait thou the Lord: still moderate:
Be meek, flee pride: inordinate,
From this time forth: interminate.
And fear thou not.
The Collect.
SVffer us not to be overcome with the haut pride of the world O Lord to work
every disturbaunce of godliness graffe mekenes in us and so to follow thy son
our savior in the same, through Christ our Lord.

The Argument. Psalm. CXXXII.
This Psalm does pray: for good success,
Of all thy realms: and priesthodes state:
So David's oathe: his vow his stresse,
What god him hight: it does debate.
Ye Christ express.
13 Canticum graduum.
/ /

1
REmember Lord: meke David king,
And al his hard: affliction,
Memento domine.
For his good sake: by pityenge,
Amoue from us: confusion.
Have him in mind.
2
How he in good: devotion,
To thee his Lord: himself did bind,
By oath and vow. to God most hye,
To thee I say: strong Jacobs friend.
Thus constantly.
3
Be it my shame: if I go in,
My Cabborne house: in rest to lygh:
If I my sheets: thrust me between,
And clyme my couche: in feathers soft,
Blame might I win.
4
Or else if I: mine eyes aloft,
Should give them sleep: mine eyes the lids,
To suffer them: to slumber often,
Though fast they crave: to fill their needs,
Then fall mine house.
5
Until I find: without all dreades,
The Lord a place: commodious:
A sacrary* and temple sweet,
To Jacobs God: victorious.
To him most meet.
6
Of this place lo: I Solomon,
In Ephrata hard there in street,
And found we have: this holy throne,
2. Par. 21.
In Ornans field: with woods beset.
O come ye on.
7
To his fair tents: go we to fet,
To temple built: his arc of grace:
And bow we low: with honor great,
To his footestoole: hye set in place.
And thus say we.
9
Arise O Lord: and keep by place,
Of quiet rest: no more to flee:
O thou thy self: soon thither move,
Thine arc of strength: conioynd with thee,
O Lord of love.
10
And let thy priests: be decked always,
With right and health: as them behouth:
Let all thy saints: rejoice I say,
So blessed by thee: to praise the due.
Both night and day.
11
For David's sake: thy servant true,
To whom thy grace: did lovely spring
Shame not my face so chosen new,
Thine own (O Lord) anointed king,
My heart to freat.
12
The Lord in faith: swear promising,
To David back. he will not treat:
Of thine own wombes: engendered fruit,
I will to one: bestow thy seat.
All like in suit.
13
If that in truth: thy childerne will,
My pact and statutes: execute:
Which I will teach: then shall even still
Thy children sit: thy throne for aye.
With my good will.
13
For why the Lord: without denay,
Has Zyou mount: elect in choice:
He much desird: that it should lay,
As seat whereof: he would rejoice,
And thus he said.
14
Here shall my rest: from troubly noise,
Remain full sure: for ever stayed,
Here will I dwell: for her I wished,
In my desire: full well apayd.
Of her I wist.
15
Her vitayles all with full increase,
Shall bless always: my blissful fiste,
Her poor to feed: with bread at ease,
I will them all: full satisfy,
If me they please.
16
I will their priests: adourne on hye,
With health; with truth: with life, with light:
And they his saints: shall sanctify,
That they may joy: in hearts delight,
With holiness.
17
There David's horn: and regal might,
I will it make: to flourish fresh.
And there I will: a light provide,
To mine own Christ: by fruits success,
Of David's side.
18
And all his foes: with utter shame,
I will them clothe: and them deryde
As yet for him, his crown, and name,
Shall flourish out: both large and broad,
In blessed fame.
So grant it God.
The Collect.
REmember O Lord thine eternal pact and promise made to mankind in Christ thy
son, endue our hearts worthily to answer the same on our behalf, by the
same Christ our Lord, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. CXXXIII.
A short extrete: of love the strength,
So large in length: in taste so sweet:
O charity: thou art I wisse,
Of Man the bliss: in each degree:
O charity: with unity.
14. Canticum graduum
^

1
O Come and see: how things most meet
Ecce qua^ bonum.
It is, and sweet: where men agree:
When brethren bound: together dwell
In peace so ^well: In love be found,
O unity: keep charity.
2
It is as sweet: as Balm the best,
On head well dressed, which down did fleet,
By berd and throat* the berd I say,
Of Aaron gay: his skirt of cote.
O charity: seek unity.
3
It is as sweet: as dew that wont,
Fat Hermon mount: to make so weete
As dew no dout: that heavenly stils,
On Sion hills: even round about.
O unity: bear charity.
4
For there even there: the Lord has chargd,
Where peace enlargde: most rule does here:
All blisfull life: for aye to be,
Where men agree: and void all strife.
O charity stir unity.
The Collecte.
Pour O Lord upon thy church thy gift of brotherly charity, and christian
unity that we may be sprinkled with the dew of thy ^pirituall oyntmente and so
that we may ever rejoice in the grace of thy benediction, through Christ. etc.

The Argument. Psalm. CXXXIIII.
The Levites set: in nights to sing,
To God so great: their Lord and king,
On steps in sight: some one by choice,
Did thus excyte, all men's rejoice,
So met to bring:
Both sprite, and voice.
15. Canticu^ Graduum.
/ /

1
LO ye all here:
Ecce nunc benedicite.
Ye servants dear:
And ye that stand:
Of God so grand:
Now praise the Lord:
By Gods accord,
By night in house:
And glorious.
Draw near: record
His hand, with us.
2
Your hands lift hye:
Gods sacrary:
The Lord proclaim:
Enhaunce the same:
In holiness,
Due laud express:
Bliss ye his deed,
In faith and dread.
Apply no less,
His fame to spread.
3
The Lord of grace:
Bliss he this place:
Who heaven did make:
For all our sake:
From Sion Hill,
Your heart and will,
And earth I say,
Both night and day.
Embrace, him still,
Awake, and pray.
The end of the songs of the Stayers.
The Collecte.
WE thy servants all O Lord, who of duetye do bless thee always with our
thanks we hart^lye pray thee to vouchsafe to lighten us darkened as we be with
the night of this world whereby we may obtain most large blessinge from that
while we lift up our hands in good works of our vocation, through Christ our
Lord.

The Argument. Psalm. CXXXV.
This Psalm endited seemth, for ministers in quiere,
Gods works it telth, vain Gods it scornth, it singth Gods lauds full clear.
/ /

1
O Worship thank and praise: the name of God the Lord,
Laudate nomen domini.
Ye servants all: of this your God: laud ye with one accord.
2
Ye ministers which stand in God the Lords good house:
And keep the courts: of this our God: O praise him glorious.
3
Laud ye the Lord for why: the Lord is gracious,
Sing out his name: for sweet it is: to man delicious.
4
The Lord no doubt has chose: unto himself in care.
Old Jacobs stock: all Israel: for his peculyar.
5
I know the Lord is great: and hye I him esteem
And that our God: passth other Gods: which me^ for gods do deem.
6
And what it lyketh them: the Lord does it in deed,
In heaven and earth: in sea full out: in deepes where fishes breed.
7
He vapors lifth from earth: and they to clouds do run,
He lightnings turnth: to rain in store: he winds drawth out of de^ne
8
To quite their cruelnes he smote in Egypt land:
Their fruits first got: not one to escape: from man to beast in band.
9
In midst of thee: the Lord: his signs and wonders sent:
Thou Egypt land, which Pharao, and all his servants shente.
10
He many countries smote, and diverse nations slew:
He vanguished: most mighty kings: and made them all to rue.
11
Of Ammorites their king hight Seon hie in throne:
So Og, that hog: of Basan king: and Canaans realms echeone.
12
And gave their lands and holds: for heritage of right:
For heritage: to Israel: his people whole and quite.
13
O Lord thy name endures: for ever world to end:
From age to age: thy memory: in fame shall still extend.
14
For now the Lord has judged: his peoples cause most plain:
He them auengd: and pleased he was with all his flock again.
15
The Gentyls, Images: be silver molt and gold:
But handy work: of wretched men: how ever they be fold
16
Mouths have they made in them? but speak nothing at al,
So eyes they have: and naught they see, blind Gods and casual.
17
And ears they have in shape, and yet they hear no sound:
Where beast most domme: has life and sprite, no breath in them is found.
18
As they be all to see, their makers be the leke:
Domme deaf, and dead, brute stocks and blocks: so all which the^ do seek.
19
Ye house of Israel, do well, praise ye the Lord,
Yea Aarons house, preach ye his praise: the lords great acts record
20
Ye Leuis house and seed, bless ye the Lord all whole
Ye all that fear and worship true, this Lord most hye extol.
21
O praised be the Lord, of Sion night and day,
His place is set Jerusalem: O praise the Lord I say.
The Collecte.
O God of all comfort and swetenes, whom all the world for thy incomporable
gentleness more worthily praise we beseech thee to keep us from all vain error
of the Paynyms vanities, to worship thee in sprite and verity: through Christ.

The Argument, Psalm. CXXXVI.
The Rectors. This Caroll sweet: exhorth us clear,
Gods goodness great: to praise in quiere.

The Quiere. That men with lauds: should them inure,
For thanks breed thanks: and grace procure

The Mean. So ready bendth: his love so pure,
Which will in joy: our hearts assure.

\ \

The Rectors. Confitemini.
Confess and praise: the Lord most kind:
For God he is: as man does find.

The Quiere. For ever standth: his mercy sure:
His grace to us: will still endure.

The Mean. So ready bendth: his love so pure:
Which will in joy: our hearts assure.

Rectors. 2 Confess and praise: the God of Gods,
Who made us first: of earthly clods.

The Quiere. For ever standth: his mercy sure,
His grace to us: will still endure.

The Mean. So ready bendth: his love so pure:
Which will in joy: our hearts assure.

Rectors. 3 Confess and praise: the Lord of Lords:
Who made all thing: by strength of words.

The Quiere. For ever standth: his mercy sure,
His grace to us: will still endure.

The Mean. So ready bendth: his love so pure,
Who will in joy: our hearts assure.

Rectors. 4 Who wrought alone: acts marvelous,
5 Who formd the heavens: by wisdom thus,
6 Who stretched the earth: on fluds from us.

The Quiere. Who did all this: in his good cure:
For ever standth: his mercy sure.

The Mean. His grace to us: does still endure:
Which will in joy our hearts assure.

Rectors. 7 Who made great lights: in firmament,
8 The sun for day: in regiment,
9 The moon and stars: on night to glent.

The Quiere. Who did all this: in his good cure:
For ever standth: his mercy sure.

The Mean. His grace to us: does still endure:
Which will in joy: our hearts assure.

Rectors. 10 Who Egypt smote: with their first borne,
11 And brought fro thence: the Jews forlorn.
12 By mighty strength: both night and morn.

The Quiere. Who did all this: in his good cure:
For ever standth his mercy sure.

The Mean. His grace to us: does still endure,
Which will in joys: our hearts assure.

Rectors. 13 Who sea so red: did whole divide,
14 And Jacob made: through it to slide,
15 But Pharo drowned: his host beside.

The Quiere. Who did all this: in his good cure,
For ever standth: his mercy sure.

The Mean. His grace to us: does still endure,
Who will in joys: our hearts assure.

Rectors. 16 Who led his flock: by wilderness,
17 Who slew great kings: of Heathennes,
18 The strongest kings: he put to stresse.

The Quiere. Who did all this: in his good cure,
For ever standth: his mercy sure.

The Mean. His grace to us: does still endure:
Who will in joys: our hearts assure.

Rectors. 19 As Seons brags: and Ogs despites,
20 Of Basan kings: and Amorites,
21.22. Whose lands he made: true Jacobs rightes

The Quiere. Who did all this: in his gyod cure:
For ever standth: his mercy sure.

The Mean. His grace to us: does still endure,
Who will in joys: our hearts assure.

Rectors. 23 Who minded us: in trouble set,
24 And us redeemd: from them us fret,
25 Who heapeth all flesh: with heaped met.

The Quiere. Who did all this: in his good cure,
For ever standth: his mercy sure.

The Mean. His grace to us does still endure:
Who will in joy our hearts assure.

Rectors. 26 Then praise and thank: the God of heaven,
With heart, with tongue, with life most clean

The Quiere. For ever standth, his mercy sure
His grace to us, will still endure.

The Mean. So ready bendth: his love so pure:
Which will in joy: our hearts assure.

Rectors. O think and thank: the Lord of Lords,
His thoughts, his acts, his lovely words.

The Quiere. For ever standth his mercy sure,
To thankful heart, it will endure.

The Mean. So ready bendth: his love so pure,
Which will in joy: our hearts assure.

The Collect.
BE myndfull O Lord of our misery, which art Lord of all mercy, and grant
that as thou leadest the fathers into the land of promise, so to restore us to
the heavenly land of all felicity, through Christ, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. Cxxxvij.
When Babylon: the Jews suppressed,
they tell how they did plain,
From whence well rid, they her detest,
to wish her spoylde again.
^

1
AT water sides: of Babylon,
Super flumina.
even there we sat and wept*
While Syon mount* we thought upon
remembering Gods precept.
2
We hong among. the Salow trees,
our Harpes and Organs all:
No joy we had: with weeping eyes,
to matters musical.
3
They craved of us: who thrald us wrong,
Some dyties melody:
In scorn they said: sing us some song,
Of Syon merely.
4
How can we sing: said we again,
The Lords sweet songs deuyne:
In land so strange* who us constrayne,
we must all mirth resign.
5
If I should thee: cast out of mind:
O good Jerusalem,
I would my hand: went out of kind:
to play to pleasure them.
6
Yea let my tongue: to palate stick:
if that I mind thee not.
If Syons praise: I should not seek:*
as chief to joy in that.
7
The Edomits O Lord, requite,
for Sal^ms heavy day,
Who cried wast her: spoil her in sight:
even flat on ground to lay
8
O Babylon: thou daughter light:
which waylst thy spoiling deep:
Well might he speed: that thee did quite:
as thou madst us to weep.
9
And well fare him: that took thee ones,
which us down fiercely threwest:
Who slong thy babes: against the stones,
as ours in rage thou flewest.
The Collect.
ALmighty God the strong deliverer of al them that be bound in captivity
grant us so to rebounde thy praise in agreeable consent of spiritual songs,
that where out lives and hearts has hitherto been in a discord from thy holy
wills: and as outlawes have wandered astraye, now restore us again by thy
mighty power, in one unity to glorifye thy name through Christ.

The Argument. Psalm. CXXXVIII.
When David skapt: much woe on kind
Thus thanks to God he did extend
So taught by proof he vowed in mind,
That he of God would still depend.
As he entendth.
/ /

1
Confitebor tibi.
I Will O Lord: give thanks to thee,
My heart thereto: does wholly bend:
Before the powrs: as Gods they be,
So sing I will: my voice to spend.
Else God forfend.
2
I kneel to thy: right regal cell,
To praise thy name for truth and love:
Thy word and name: thou madst excel,
Above all things: the deed does prove.
As men expende.
3
For this I saw: what day I cried,
Thou answerdst me: most lovingly:
To my poor soul: thou lentst I spyed,
More grace, so strength: to multiply.
Thus did thou lend.
4
All kings of earth: praise thee they must,
O Lord most true: as right allowth
When they shall here: performed just,
Thy word to me: which spoke thy mouth.
They will contend.
5
Lo they shall sing: with hearts most free,
Of all the Lords: most rightful ways:
That great is God: in majesty,
So they his name: shall ever praise
and thanks repend.
6
And that the Lord: though placed hye,
Who glory has: as God above:
Yet he the meke: respecth full nigh,
And knowth the proud: from far aloof.
him low to bend.
7
What though I walk: in midst of woe
Yet will thou me: revive and ease:
And stey by power: mine Irefull foe,
Thy right hand strong: shall me release.
Thy help to send.
8
The Lord shall this: perform for me,
That is begone: to bring to end.
Thy grace benign: Lord aye shall be,
Thy handy work: thou will not blende.
But still defend.
The collect.
MVltiplye thy strength in us O Lord and enlarge the powers of our souls,
'that while we worship thee daily in thy holy temple, at the last we may glory
with thy elect angels in heaven, through Christ.

The Argument. Psalm. Cxxxix.
When David mysreported was: that he would Saul subvert
He thus appeald to God himself, who knew his giltles heart.


1
O God thou have: full searched me out,
Domine probasti.
Thou know my heart and reins:
Accused I am: to compass in,
Both king and realm with traynes.
2
My sitting down: my rising up: my Acts thou know echone
Thou vnderstandst: my thoughts a far: before I think them on.
3
My walks thou know: my rests and steys: my bed thou go abcute
Yea al my ways: thou have contrived: all sercht by the no doubt.
4
No secret word: in all my tongue: so whispered closly in
But thou O Lord: it know at whole: although it make no dinne.
5
For why thou me: thy self did frame: behynd, before in form:
Thou laydst thine hand* to this my clay: thy hands did me perform
6
This knowledge is: to marvelous: for me to reach I knoow,
To hye and hard: for me to fetch* by hye or yet by low.
7
And whether can: I think to go: fro this thy sprite and thought,
From thee in face. how can I fly: or whether shall I flought.
8
If I do clime: to heaven above: even there thou artfull near:
If so by low: I make my bed: In hell, thou art lo there.
9
If now I take: the morning wings: who spredth her beams so swift
That strayt I cowd: to fordest Sea: remove my house to shift.
10
Yet there thy hand: shall led me forth: as pastor guides his sheep
thy strong right hand: would me uphold by providence most deep
11
If eke I say: or think at least: that dark shall hide my head:
Than shall the night: as shining day: be round about me spread.
12
For sure the dark so dark: cannot: endarke thy lovely sight:
The night as day: do shine to thee: so darkness is as light.
13
For just my reins: with their affects: are thine how hid they be,
In wrapst thou me my mothers womb: with vestures sonderly.
14
I give thee thanks: for that I am: in shape formd straungely,
Thy works so hye: be wrought in me, which playnd my soul does spy.
15
My substance first: both bones and Joints: were nothing hid fro the
In earth full deep when I was wrought: and wouen was curiously
16
My mass vnshapt: thine eyes did see: was writ in thine own book
By days increase: my parts were formd: when none on them could look
17
How dear to me: O God appear: thy thoughts, these counsels great
How manifold: be but the sum: In count if they were set.
18
If I would tell: the sum of them: they should exceed the sand:
Than this reuolued: I watch to thee, by thee I trust to stand.
19
If thou uow would: thy self O God: confound that wicked man:
blood thursty men: whom I defye: would leave me wholly than.
20
For these they be: that sigh at thee: and speak ungraciously:
They use thy name: in vain to light: thy foes be puffed to hye.
21
Do I not hate: all them O Lord: who thee with hate disdain?
And fret not I: and fume at them: which rise at thee by train?
22
Yes Lord from heart: I hate them all: with perfect hate and ^yne
Thy foes I take: mine enemies: as they were only mine.
23
Than search me God: and boult my heart: to thee this cause I yield
Well try and know: in thought and driftes: what hauntes in life I held
24
And see in me: if any ways: be found rebellious,
Then lead me forth: the worldly way: of death obliuiouse.
The Collecte.
O God the wonderful creature of all things earthly the eternal protector
of the same, who know all our secret parts more perfectly than we our self
can discern, grant we beseech thee that we may behave our self in perpetual
fear under this thy parfit beholding of all our doing, and cleanse the thoughts
of our hearts that they may be acceptable to thee, through Christ.

The Argument. Psalm. CXL.
This prayth for good: (and just) deliverance:
From waiting spies: and guyleful (fawning) friends
Yt shows eue^so: what ones (at length) shall chance
To good and bad: in both their (final) ends.
/ /

1
^ripe me ^omine.
O Lord most good: (in haste) deliver me,
From man that is: so evil and (wholly) naught
O keep me saufe: In (steadfast) suerty,
From wrongful man: of (cursed) wicked thought.
2
To evil their hearts: do whole (always) agree,
From whence they have: all (subtle) mischief wrought,
To hate and bate: them selfs they (fullye) bend,
But strife all day: by them is (vainly) sought.
3
Their tongs so sharp: (on me) they have extend,
As serpent slye: (as snake) most pestilente:
Like Adders sting: their (venom) poison send,
Sela
Such poison they: in (fawning) lips frequente.
4
My sely soul: O Lord: (my God) defend,
From wicked power: most (fierce and) violent:
From wrongful men: O me (good Lord) preserve,
To trip my foot: by them is (lewdly) meant.
5
These hawty men: (to death) to make me stern,
Has hid their snares: with (subtle) cords in brayde:
And spread their nets: me thus they (wait to) serve,
With wi^y trappes: my ways (and steps) they laid.
6
Yet sure from God: I would not (farly) swerue,
To whom in faith: even thus I (boldly) said:
Thou art my God: O hear my (woe full) moan,
From heart the root: by tongue (in word) displayed.
7
My Lord and God: my trust (most just) alone,
My strength and health: my (closely) couerture:
Thou shieldst my head: to escape my (deadly) fone,
In day of war: to stand (on foot) full sure.
8
Permit not Lord: while thus (for woe) I groan,
His will to have: this (wicked) man vnpure:
Sela
To his attempt: (O Lord) give no success,
Lest proud they swell: and harm (the more) procure.
9
O let their lips: in (crafty) wickedness:
Betrap themself: in all their (daily) pains:
O let their head: feel first (their due) distres,
That compass me: with subtle (wily) traynes.
10
Let burning coals: for their (so mad) excess,
Fall down on them: to dull their (hasty) brayries
Let fire and pit. be (wholly) their reward,
No time to rise: to (any) better gaynes.
11
Of bablyng tongue: who has no (bit or) ward,
O let them Lord: here never (prove to) thrive:
Him evil shall hunt: till he (to naught) be marde,
No wealth to him: (at all) shall down derive.
12
Full sure I am: God will (most kind) regard,
The poor man's case: with aid (and ease) beliue:
Of helpelesse man: to try his (truth and) right,
In judgment strong: for him (always) to strive
13
Thus righteous men: (so met) in open sight,
Shall praise thy name: (O Lord) that is so high,
Then strayt up men: in heavenly (joyous) light,
Shall see thy face: (to live) eternally.
The Collecte.
DEfend us thy poor destitute servants O Lord from the crafty trains of
the malignant enemies of all godliness: resist their pride assuage their malice
confound their devises, that we being under thy protection, may laud thy mercy
for the same. Thorough Christ, etc.

The Argument. Psalm. CXLI^,
Here David prayth: for stedfastnes,
among the wicked sect:
To escape their traps: and wyckednes,
That they may low be chect.
\ \

1
O Lord I have: loud cried to thee,
Domine clamaui.
to me therefore make speed:
Unto my voice: thine ear agree,
while that I cry in dread.
2
O let my suit: in sight so rise,
as does incense to thee:
My raise of hands: as sacrifice,
of might, Lord let it be.
3
Lord set a watch: before my mouth,
keep thou my mouth and lips:
To speak nothing: but truth and south:
to escape all snares and trips.
4
Let not my heart: declyne to evil,
with wicked works inurde:
With wicked men: to work in will,
by their delites allurde.
5
Yea let the just: as friendly led,
me smite and blame I say:
No wicked balm: to stroke my head:
against them still I pray.
6
O hedlong be: their judges thrust,
as down from rocks bethrowne:
They would have hard: my words at first,
if sweet they had be brown.
7
Our scattred bones: they break in mood,
so nigh the grave they lay:
As man which cleanth: and shiuerth wood,
or one that clods does bray.
8
For that mine eyes: O Lord to thee,
O Lord be firmly cast:
And thee I trust: then utterly,
spill not my soul in wast.
9
O keep me saufe: fro crafty snare:
which they to me do drive:
From wicked trappes: that men prepare:
which wickedness contriue.
10
But rather let: these wicked fall*
all whoel into their nets:
Betrapt themself: so be they all:
while I may escape their threats*
The Collecte.
SEt a watch O Lord, unto our mouths least^ that we apply our speech to
vanity, to consent with the wicked of the world: correct thou us with thy
merciful rod of chastisement, by virtue whereof we may be kept in aw to decline
from all vice through Christ.

The Argument. Psalm. CXLI^
What David thought: and how he prayed,
when fear drove bym to cave:
He here reporth^ on God he stayed,
who did him strongly save.
\ \

1
Unto the Lord: with voice I crye^,
Vocemea ad Dominum.
So nigh in parell set:
Unto the Lord: my prayer hyed,
both heart and voice were met.
2
I pourd my suit: my sore complaynt,
before his face in sight:
My troublouse state: I did depaynt,
before himself in light.
4
What time my sprite: was inly pent,
my life thou knew the path:
Yet laid they snares: vexed though I went,
in all my walks in wrath.
5
On hand both right: and left I vewed,
none saw I that me knew
No escape was free: none so endued,
that once my soul would rue.
6
O Lord than thee: I cried upon,
and thus I said eue^ then*
Thou art my hope; and portion,
in land of living men.
7
Respect my cry: for worn I go,
in cares full deep I wayle:
Save me fro them: which vexed me so
on me they sore prevail.
8
O bring my soul: from prison bound
Thy name to celebrate:
So just men will: me glad surround,
when thou shall quite my state.
The Collect.
With humble voice we sue unto thy divine majesty, O Lord, that we may have our
hope so strengthed by thee, to inherit the like state of thine elect in the
land of the living through Christ.

The Argument. Psalm. CXLIII.
Whose heart with hate the world resolves,
To state all base deicet:
If he in faith this psalm reuolueth,
God sone will him erect.
\ \

1
NOw hear my suit: O Lord in stresse:
Domine exaudi.
to my request agree:
For all thy truths: and rightwisenes:
sone answer thou to me.
2
(But enter not: to judge extreme:
thy servant hye by law:
For who himself. can clean esteem:
yet him I never saw.)
3
For lo the fool: my soul has chasd:
to earth my life has wrest:
My state in dark: he has abasde:
as men of old deceast:
4
My pinched sprite: in me does fail:
oppressed in heuines:
My heart sore vext-doth morn and wayle:
astoynd in pensiuenes.
5
Old years from first: I have recount:
our fathers how thou ledst:
Thine acts I mark: how hye they mount:
I muse the works thou did.
6
My hands to thee: I held full hye:
that thou would me vouchsaue:
My thristy soul: as pasture dry:
thy graces dew does crave.
7
Then hear me Lord: but sone hear thou:
my sprite does feeble ligh:
Hyde not thy face: from me as now:
least strayt my grave I spy.
8
Thy voice at morn: cause me to hear,
for thee I trust alone:
Show me thy ways: my steps to steare,
my soul to thee is gone.
9
O rid me Lord: from all their spite,
that would me causeles train:
For I to thee: refer my right,
in hid defense full feign.
10
Teach me to work: thy will to please,
thou art my God I say:
And let thy sprite: so never cease,
to lead me strait the way.
11
For thy sweet name: Lord quicken me,
from them that me pursue:
And make my soul: from peril free,
my heart with joy endue.
12
Thy grace I trust: my foes will quell,
and make their strength but lame:
Who vexth my soul: thou will debell,
for I thy servant am.
The Collecte.
ALmighty God which have brought to light the joyful morning of thy sons
resurrection, which filled the earth with joy and gladness, we require of thy
goodness, that as thou did cheer the hearts of thine apostles by that
comfortable resurrection, so comfort thy holy spouse the church which daily
holdth up her hands crauyng thy mercy, to joy in the holy ghost, through the
same Christ our savior

The Argument. Psalm. CXLIIII.
That God in war: with Dauyd stood: here thanks he did apply
And prayth to escape: all heathen spyte: his reygne to prosper hye.
/ /

1
Benedictus Dominus.
THe Lord be blessed: most worthy praise: who is my God and might,
Who teachth my hands* his wars to rule: my fyngers eke to fight.
2
My lovely grace* my hold, my fort* my raunsommer is he:
protector sure* in whom I trust: who boweth my flock to me.
3
O Lord benign: what thing is man: that thus thou him respectst?
the son of man: so weak so vain: that thus thou him erectst?
4
For man is made: like vanity: a thing of naught most frail:
his days pass fast: as shadow flees: as water bobles fail.
5
O Lord bow down: the heavens and come: be nigh and help our pain
O touch these mounts: these heathen Dukes: that they may smoke again
6
Thy lightnings spout: and scater them: like men amasde and strau^
Thine arrows sharp: shoot out at them: disturb their brags so haut
7
But send thy hand: from hye above: and me deliver free:
from waters deep: from childer strange: their power make me t^ flee
8
Whose mouth does speak: all vanity: and bost all conquests wide
whose right hand will: but them deceive: so sweld in lies and pride
9
O God I will: thus saved by grace: sing newly songs to thee:
In psaltry sweet of strings full ten: my psalms shall tuned be.
10
For thou geust health: and victory: to kings by stable word:
me (David) lo thou have discharged: to escape their cruel sword
11
O save me Lord: deliver me: from foreign childers spite,
Whose mouth full vain: does boast and prate: whose right hand: false is
dighte.
12
But grant that al: our childer grow: as playnts from youth upright
our daughters young: so polished: as palace pillars bright.
13
That full may flow: our garners wide: with kinds of vitaile sweet
that all our sheep: bring thousands forth: yea millions in street.
14
And that well fed: our Oxen go: to labor strong to see:
that battries none, no leadings thrall: in streets no waylings be.
15
Oh happy is: that people sure: who has these things at will.
Yea blessed is: that people best: whose God the Lord is still.
The Collect.
TEach us, O Lord, to use so all our spiritual armors against our ghostly
adversaries that we may resist all evil, that we be not made bond under the
vanitye of this world so to be excluded from thy gouerna^ce in grace: through
Christ.

The Argument. Psalm. CXLV.
This Dauyd framde: by Alphabete,
Where God he tha^kth (in heart) most hie
Whose power and might: whose grace so great*
In providence (most clear) we spy.
^

1
ARise I will: my God and king,
Exalta^o.
to rouse my grace (with to^g) most hie
and bless thy name: to me bening
I will (and shall) eternally.
2
Both day and night: I will declame,
thy (worthy) lauds most thankfully:
By praising due: thy holy name,
for aye (and aye) without delays.
3
Clear is this Lord: most hye of fame,
his state surmounth: all (mortal) praise:
Can no man search: how he excel,
in greatness him (by weight) to paise.
4
Describe to age: shall age full well,
thy (handy) works: with reverence,
Declare they must: where that they dwell,
thy (godly) mightes: magnificence.
5
Enhaunce I shall: thy glory bright,
thy fame (and name) thine excellence:
Enditing still: thine acts of might,
so wonderful (that be) to see.
6
For that that man: may speak and wright,
thy (princely) deeds. that dreadful be:
From hence even so: I will resound,
thy (godheds) grand ability.
7
Good men shall preach: how grace abound
in thee (O Lord) with gentleness:
Glad songs to sing: they will in sound,
of thy great (truth and) bounteousnes.
8
How good the Lord: how gracious,
he is to all in (paynefull) stresse:
How slow to wrath: not furious,
his mercy rules (and stayth) his ire.
9
In love he is: most piteous,
to all that him (thereof) require:
Imprinted be: his mercies sure,
on all his works (all whole) intiere.
10
Know this will every creature,
with thanks (most due) O Lord to thee
Kind hearted men: will them inure,
(in heart) to bless thy majesty.
11
Loud will they speak: thy regal seat,
most glorious (at eye) to see:
Lord, so shall men: be glad to treat,
thy power (divine) so tried by deed.
12
Men thus will still: thy strength repeat,
to Adams stock: and (living) seed:
Most wide they will: with kind assent,
thy kingdoms (laud: and) glory sprede.
13
No dout the reign: is permanent,
a reign (of bliss) to stand for aye:
Needs must thy power: and regiment,
endure (in length) from day to day.
14
O sure in word: the Lord is tried,
most faithful true (and just) always:
On all his works: his will is spyed,
most holy (God all) them to save.
15
Poor wavering men: the Lord bestrideth
their stay (and hold) by him to have:
Plain fallen or wronged: he reiseth again,
if they their reyse (in faith can crave.
Quick eyes all thing: does fastly strain,
on thee (O Lord) so good at need:
Quite all their food: they ask so feign
in time (most fit) thou geuest in deed.
17
Right wide thou splaist: thy blessing hand,
all living things (with store) to feed:
Refresht by thee: so full to stand,
with plenty (fed in) food delight.
18
Still just appearth: this Lord so grand,
in all his ways (to man aright:
So wholly he: does aye appear,
in all his works of (his great) might.
19
The Lord to all: approaches nere,
to him (for help) which make request,
To all I say: soon them to hear,
which call (on him) with faithful breast.
20
With ready speed: he fills their mind,
who fear him (just both) most and lest:
Unto their cry: he bendth so kind,
and saves them (whole) as him (it) likth
21
Exceeding sure: before behind,
the Lord his lovers (friendly) keepth:
Exile he does: ungodly men,
to scatter them (most wide) he seekth.
22
Yield shall my lips: by duetye then,
this Lords deserved: (laud and) praise
Yea let all flesh: give thanks again,
to his good name (most due) always.
The Collect.
Eternal governor of all ages and times, O Lord almighty, which do
minister food to all living creatures in due season, give us grace always to
thank thee for the same, and to rejoice most constantly with all thine elect
for thine almighty power expressed by thy right hand in the provision thereof.
Through Christ. etc.

The Argument. Psalm. CXLVI.
To trust to man: this Psalm forfendth,
Whose arm is flesh: and word but wind,
Where God full aid: to man extendth,
By whom twice life: he just did find,
Which David knew: the text dewrayes,
Wherefore his soul: sang still his praise.
Alleluya.
\ \

1
O Thou my soul: praise thou the Lord,
Lauda anima mea.
The Lord of love: and God of light
Extend thy powers: with one accord,
Recount his name: in inward spryte*
Express thy voice: without delays,
O thou my soul: singe still his praise.
2
My heart is set: to lawde this Lord:
This Lord so good* is God of grace:
His lauds my life: shall whole record,
Yea ^ure as long: I bide in place.
My God to thank: I will always,
O thou my soul: sing still his praise.
3
O put no trust: in princes power,
The God of might: is Lord to trust:
Yea trust no man: his fruit is sower,
No help in him* no credence just,
Gods love is sure: at all assayes,
O thou my soul: singe still* his praise.
4
Man's breath ones past, he turns to dust,
This Lord so strong: he ever lastth:
All earthly power: decay it must,
Man's counsayles all: deaths day does waste,
Gods help is ferme: without decays
O thou my soul: sing still his praise.
5
Blessed is the man: whose help is God,
The God of hosts: to Jacobs seed:
Full fast with them: he still abode,
Who God will trust: as well shall speed,
In him beset: al stable st^ayes
O thou my soul: Sing still his praise.
6
This God made heaven: and earth between,
The Lord so grand: so infinite:
He made the seas: with all therein,
His truth in word: he keeps full right*
His deed from tongue: makes never s^ayes
O thou my soul: sing still his praise.
7
The Lord reuength: oppressed man,
This God of right* as is deserved,
All wrongs and spites, requite he can,
He dealth out bread: to hungersterued:
Thrall men in bonds: he uses to raise
O thou my soul: singe still his praise.
8
The Lord gives sight to blinded eyes,
This God so bright to see again:
He lifts the lame: from ground to rise,
The just does he: in love retain:
To fill his life: with ioyefull days,
O thou my soul, singe still his praise.
9
In care the Lord: all strangers kepth,
Of them sure God: he is at need:
And Orphans loves: and widows seeks,
Nigh heart he takth: their cries of dread:
Evil minded men: to dust he brayes,
Sing still my soul: sing out his praise.
10
Praise God as king: who raygneth for aye:
As God of thine: O Sion hye:
Resort to him: Go not astray,
Knyt fast thine heart* shrink not awrye.
Expel he will: all fears and frayes.
Rouse him my soul: Sing still his praise.
The Collect.
EVerliuing God, on whom the elect have put their whole confidence, and feed
their joyful souls in hope of thy grace: grant us to be illumined in sprite,
evermore to love thee and to celebrate thy name in pure conscience, through
Christ.

The Argument. Psalm. CXLVII.
This psalm exciteth the Jews: to praise the Lord most chief
So good to them: who privately: did work them all relief.
\ \

1
Laudate Dominu^.
Praise ye the Lord always: for good it is to sing,
To this our God: for sweet he is: whom lauds we ought to brin
2
God builds Jerusalem: he does her sure protect:
The poor exiles: of Israel: he shall again collect.
3
He heald the brusde in heart: who wayle in sprite contrite,
Their plages and sores: he binds them up. he cures the^ al full light
4
No dout God them beholds: who stars by number tells:
By proper name: he calth them all: he knowth their rests and cells.
5
The Lord of ours is great: and great he is in power:
His knowledge is: all infynite: his name as strong as tower.
6
The Lord vpholdeth thafflict: So gentle is his will:
He throws to ground: all wicked men: So mighty is his skill.
7
O sing to God our Lord: praise ye his raygne abroad:
Confess his power: his will his skyll: In harp sing ye to God:
8
Who clothe the heaven with clouds: and raygne to earth prepares
He bringes forth gras: on hills to grow: to serve man's daily cares.
9
Who gives to beast their food: to all both great and small:
The rauene her birds: he feedth in care: when they forsaken call.
10
In barbed horse of strength: his pleasure standth not in:
In legs of men in force of arms: it pleases not him to win.
11
They please who fear the Lord: by such he fight with strength:
who trust all whole his gentleness: these only please at length:
Lauda Jerusalem.
O Thou Jerusalem praise hye the Lord of thine:
Thou Sion mount: auaunce thy God: in heart thereto incline
13
For he makth fast the bars: of all thy gates full pressed:
He blissth even so: thy childer al: in midst of thee to rest.
14
And he does stablish peace: In all thy borders sure:
He feedth the full: deliciously: with wheat the flower most pure.
15
Who sendth his word on earth: and swiftly does it run:
Both rain and wynd: his biddings hear: to serve the need of me^
16
And snow he gives like woll: the earth so warm to be:
The hory frosts: the mislyng dewes: as ashes scattreth he.
17
He cas^th abroad his yse: like morsels so congelde:
and his great cold: who can abide: that he so hard has sealed.
18
He sendth his word and will: he melt them all again:
He blowth the wind: then they anon: to waters flow most plain
19
Yea he reuealeth his word: to Jacobs seed and stock:
His statutes true: his just decrees: to Israel his flock.
20
He dealt no time as thus: with other lands I say:
He showed not them: his domes so plain: O praise the Lord always
The Collecte.
STrength and fortify the gate of thy church O Lord, and make her to be
enlarged in peace and unity, reveal thy word to her understanding that she may
be wholly directed by that to please the in truth: through Christ.

The Argument. Psalm. CXLVIII.
To praise here all be bid: what heaven or earth contain:
The Lord so hye: and sapyent: nothing he made in vain.
/ /

1
Laudate Domino in Coelis.
Praise ye the Lord: from heavens: ye heavenly mynds I call,
Praise him on hye: as hye he is: ye powers celestial,
2
Praise him ye Angels all: his legates ye that be:
ye hosts so called: his armies great: praise him in majesty.
Praise him ye sun and mooke: in course so marvelous,
Ye stars so bright: ye Planets all: praise him most glorious.
Ye heavens by heauens-distinct: praise him with all your shine,
ye water streams: above the air: so stayde by power deuyne.
They all might praise and laud: the Lords good name of might,
For he the word: but spoke at once: they straight were made in plight.
He constituted has: that they should ever dure,
He set a law: which shall not cease: by ordinance most sure.
Ye earthly things on earth: praise ye the Lord with them,
Ye dragons grim: ye depes and gulfes: show ye his power supreme
Fire, lightning, thunder, hayle, both snow and vapors dry,
ye hurling wyndes: tempestuous: which work his word full nigh.
Great mountains hills and clifs: low hillockes all and some,
ye fruitful trees: ye Ceders all: praise ye the Lords renome.
Ye beasts and cattle all: both savage wild and tame,
ye serpents fly: ye fetherd souls: praise ye his godly name.
So kings of earth most due: with all their people met,
So princes hie: and judges all: on earth as Gods be set.
So younger men and maids: in age sincere and pure,
As older men: with childer young: with all their busy cure.
The Lords name let them praise: for it alone is hye:
His glory passth: both heaven and earth: as things here made do cry.
He has his flock advanced: so him his saints shall praise,
Even Jacobs seed: who drawth him nie: praise ye the lord always.
The Collecte.
O Lord the woorthye praise and joy of all thy creatures, grant us thy grace
that we worthily magnify thy name, through Christ.

The Argument. Psalm. CXLIX.
This Psalm the Jews does move,
Their God to laud with love:
It shows that grace on them shall light,
So glad their foes to quyte.
/ /

1
O Sing unto the Lord,
Cantate Domino.
A song of new accord:
And let his praise: declared be,
In good men's company.
2
Let Israel be glad,
in God his maker drad:
Let Syons youth: and childer joy,
In their most princely roy.
3
Let them praise out in quiere,
His name to them so dear:
In Tabret loud: in harp so soft,
Sing they to him full often.
4
For why the Lord rejoice,
And loves his flock in choice:
The meke forlorn: he will adourne,
with health to serve their turn.
5
So godly men made free,
in joy and praise shall be:
They shall rejoice: upon their beds,
That God did raise their heds.
6
Their throtes shall praises sound,
to God by duty bound:
Two edged swords: in both their hands,
to smite all foreign lands.
7
To be avenged right,
of all the Paynyms spite:
To be a rod: to chastise smart,
strange peoples froward heart.
8
To bind their kings with chains,
to quite their wrongful means
Their nobles eke: to keep in ward,
with iron fetters hard.
9
To bring on them in speed,
their judgment just decreed:
Which shall his saints: to honor raise,
praise ye the Lord always.
Alleluya.
The Collecte.
O God which art a God of all goodness and virtue, which do use to exalte
them which humble themselves, and to deiecte those who advance themselves,
grant us on earth to joy in all purity of life as thy saints in heaven
joy in thy glorious presence to the praise of thy name, through Christ.

The Argument. Psalm. CL.
This psalm is last: and byddeth us praise,
That first and last: does us behooue:
When things be past: and spent our days,
Yet lauds shall last: with thankful love.
Alleluya In heaven above.
/ /

1
O Praise ye God: of excellence,
Laudate dominu^ in sanctis
In his respect: of holiness:
And praise ye his: magnifycence,
In fyrmament: of stablenes.
With lowlines.
2
O praise ye him: as Savior,
For his sweet acts: heroycall:
And praise ye him: as governor
For his great power: potentiall.
most principal
3
O praise ye him: for majesty,
In trompets sound: effectuouse:
Omnipo tentia.
And praise ye his: Authority,
In lute and harp: melodiouse.
most studious^
4
O praise ye him: all sapyent,
In Tymbrell sweet: with dance in quiere
Sapientia
And praise ye him: so provident
In fydle str^ung: in recordere:
with hearty chere.
5
O praise ye him: all bountiful,
In Cymbals sound: out loud in state:
Bonitas.
And praise ye him: so pytyfull:
In Cymbals sound: more mittigate.

Omnis Spiritus laudet Dominum. Full moderate
6
Let all with breath: or life endued,
Or what with sound: is fortefied:
Praise out the Lord: in state renewed,
For grace and power applied.
To none denied.
Alleluya.
I chaunter cry: to all you here:
Praise ye the Lord: with hearty cheer.
The Collecte.
MOst laudable and merciful God, being the sweet Tenor of all our harmony,
which do here exercise our hearts otherwhiles with songs of tears and
lamentations, and otherwhiles of joy and gladness. Grant we beseech thee that
after we have song up our temporal songs in praising of thy name, we may
at last be associated to that heavenly quire above, to behold thy glorious
majesty with thy saints, thorough etc.

FINIS.
Gloria Patri for diverse Metres.
To God on hye, in unity again:
In Trinity, in unity again:
Reign, power, and praise, to him be given, Amen.
As due always, to him be given, Amen.
To God on hye be praise,
The father first of myght^
To Christ his son: and their good sprite*
For ever due of right.
His name be blessed: in unity,
For ever one: in Trinity:
From this time forth: as it has been,
Say we thereto, Amen, Amen.
To God on hye: in Trinity,
In unity: yet one again:
Reign, power and praise: most due to see,
Be always given: of mortal men.
So might it be
Say we Amen.
To God the father first of might,
To Christ his son: both God and Lord:
To God of them: the holy sprite,
Though three yet one: in just accord,
Reign, power, and praise: as due by right,
Ascribe we all: in open sight.
With all our might.
Te Deum.
O God we praise: the Lord most hye,
Which liust and reignst: eternally:
With heart and voice: in one accord,
We knowledge thee: to be the Lord.
And all the earth: does worship thee,
As Lord and God: our king to be:
All things were made: by word of thine,
Thou father art of power divine.
All angels loud: to thee does cry:
They laud thy name: continually:
The heavens and all: the powers therein,
Thy praise to spread: do never lynne.
To thee do cry: the mighty sprites,
The Cherubins: all days and nights:
And Ceraphin: does never cesse:
Thy lovely lauds: full out to express.
And thus they cry: in sweet accord,
O holy, holy, holy Lord:
Thou art of hosts: the guide and boot,
Thou Lord thou God: of Sabbath.
Thy majesty: and power of host,
Do spread the heuens: in glory most:
The earth is fylde: with thy great fame,
With thy great power: and gloriouse name.
Thapostles guard: so gloriouse,
Extol thy name: most precious:
Which have by deeds of worthiness,
Set forth thy praise: and noblenes.
The Godly band: of prophets wise,
To praise thee God: they whole devise:
Which have declard: thy holy will,
From age to age: for ever still.
The Martyrs meek: of army strong,
Which spent their blood: for thee so long:
Do glorifye: thy blessed name,
And praise thee Lord: thou most of fame.
The holy church: through world so wide,
Do knowledge thee: the Lord and guide:
They do confess: thy power and might.
And knowledge thee: each day and night.
The father God: eternally:
Of power so great: and majesty:
That rulst and dwelst: in heaven above,
As father, God: which do us love.
The church even so: most faithfully,
Confess in truth: and unity:
That Tower of strength: that holy one,
Thy honorable: only son.
The holy church: confesses eke,
The holy sprite: in faith alyke:
O blessed God: our hearts enspyre,
Thou holy Ghost. thou comforter.
Thou art O Christ: of glory king,
And beam most bright: so glisteringe:
Thy heart so kind: is known to all,
Thou diedst for man: to rid his thrall.
Of Father God* in mighty throne,
Thou art O Christ aye lasting son:
Begot before* the worlds were made,
Or else of earth: foundation laid.
When thou did take: that work on thee,
Mankind to bring: to liberty:
The Uirgines womb: thou did accept,
Nor it abhordst: nor it reject.
When thou had s^ayne: of death the darte,
Of Satan's power: and hell the smarte:
The heavenly gates: thou opendst free,
To all that did believe on thee.
On Gods right hand: thou sit full nigh*
In equal power: and majesty:
With father God: in just accord,
In heaven thou sitst: O Christ our Lord.
We do believe: when the end shall be,
That thou shall come in majesty:
Where thou shall sit: as judge to deem,
Both quick and dead: as thee beseme.
Help thou therefore: thy servants true,
With thee do pray: with hearts most due:
Which thou redemdst: of heart so good,
With sheding out: thy precious blood.
With thy good saints: make them to be,
So numbered whole: in company,
That they may joy: in glory just:
From earth, from sin* most clean discust.
By thy good grace: thy people save,
O Lord their help: in thee they have:
They put themselfs: to thy good charge.
O bless thou God: thine heritage.
Direct thou them: in thy right way,
And govern them* to thee we pray:
And lift them up: for ever still,
Exalt them hye: by thy good will.
We thee O Lord: do magnify,
Still day by day* continually,
As so O God: most due it is,
We should not be: thereto remiss.
Thy worship asks: the same of us,
It is so good: so bounteouse:
Thy name to praise: we do entend,
For ever world: withouten end.
This day preserve: our hearts within,
And keep O God, our souls from sin:
Uouchsafe O Lord: to keep us pure,
In thy good laws* our lives assure.
Have mercy Lord: on us, we call,
Have mercy still upon us all,
Without the which: we cannot stand,
We claim the strength: of thy good hand.
Let mercy light: on us O Lord,
We trust in thee: with one accord:
We do thus crave most earnestly,
As we do put: our trust in thee.
In thee O Lord: I have my trust,
In thee my hope: and help so just:
Behold O God: I stand to thee,
Then let me not: confounded be.
The song of the three Children.
Quire. * Praise ye the king of kings,
Bless ye the Lord of fame:
For ever praise: and magnify,
His blessed holy name.

Rectors. O Angels hie of God,
The Lord your ornament:
Ye heavens so clear: and waters eke,
Above the firmament.

Quire. * Praise ye the king of kings,
Bless ye the Lord of fame:
For ever praise: and magnify,
His blessed holy name.

Rectors. O all ye powers of God,
Ye sun and moon also:
Ye stars of heavens: ye showers and dewes,
The Lords rough wyndes that blow.

Quiere. * Praise ye the king of kings,
Bless ye the Lord of fame:
For ever praise* and magnify,
His blessed holy name.

Rectors. O fire and partching heat,
Ye winters, Summers all:
Ye dewes and frostes: ye frostes and cold,
Ye snowes and Yse that fall.

Quiere. * Praise ye the king of kings,
Bless ye the Lord of fame:
For ever praise: and magnify,
His blessed holy name.

Rectors. O nights and days so bright,
Ye lights, and darkness dim.
Ye lightnings clouds, and earth so round,
Extol and laud ye him.

Quiere. * Praise ye the king of kings,
Bless ye the Lord of fame:
For ever praise: and magnify,
His blessed holy name.

Rectors. O hills and mountains great
Grene things on earth that grow:
Ye wels and springs, ye Seas and floods,
And Whales in deepes by low.

Quiere. * Praise ye the king of kings,
Bless ye the Lord of fame:
For ever praise: and magnify,
His blessed holy name.

Rectors. O all ye fethred fowls,
Ye beasts and herds abroad:
O ye the sons of mortal men,
O Israel praise the Lord.

Quiere. * Praise ye the king of kings,
Bless ye the Lord of fame:
For ever praise: and magnify,
his blessed holy name.

Rectors. O priests of God above,
And servants true of his:
Ye sprites and souls of righteous men
Extol the Lord of bliss.

Quiere. * Praise ye the king of kings,
Bless ye the Lord of fame:
For ever praise: and magnify,
His blessed holy name.

Rectors. O men of heart so meek,
And holy souls in mind.
O Anani, and Azari,
And Mi^aell so kind.

Quiere. * Praise ye the king of kings,
Bless ye the Lord of fame:
For ever praise: and magnify,
His blessed holy name:

Benedictus.
O Blessed be God: of Israel,
The Lord and guide: we know full well
He visited: his people all,
He them by grace: redeemd from thrall.
And raisde he has: salvation,
Most mighty now: for us each one:
Of David's stock: so virtuous,
His servants line: and noble house.
As he did speak: in times of old,
By holy Prophets: mouths so told:
Which were his will: to utter than,
And have been since: the world began.
That we should be: in freedom quite,
And saved be: from enmies spite:
To escape the hands: and cruel state,
Of all the men: that us do hate.
The mercy plight: to fathers sage,
To them perform: from age to age,
And eke recount: his noble act,
To call to mind: his sacred pacte.
His oath to keep: so sworn and plight,
To Abraham: our fathers right:
Which he in time: so bounteous,
Would just perform: and give to us.
That we so rid: from enmies hands,
From cruel yoke: of combrous bands:
Might serve him still: in joyful cheer,
Without all grief: all care and fear.
In holiness and righteousness,
So him to serve: in stablenes:
Before him thus: all void of strife,
To pass all days: of this our life.
And thou good child: shall have the name,
Of Prophet great: most chief in fame:
For thou shall go: before Gods face,
To show before: his ways of grace.
To give unto: his people sone,
To knowledge healthes* salvation:
This health to show: the grace of his,
For all their faults: and sins remiss.
Through mercy great: and tender love,
Of God the Lord: that reigns above:
Whereby the day: that spring from hie,
Us visited: so joyfully.
Them light to give: that placed be,
In darkness great: and misery:
And eke in shade: of death no less,
And guide our feet: in w^y^s of peace.
Magnificat.
MY soul the Lord: does magnify,
Who shewth his power: so mightily,
Thus has he done* by his great might,
Of only grace: that he has plight.
Also my sprite: both day and hour,
Rejoices in God: my savior:
Not me my self: but thee O Lord,
I do extol: in hearts accord.
For he has thus: regarded me,
His handmayd true: of low degree:
Whose poor estate: and simple house,
He does accept: so bounteous.
And now behold: the kyndreds all,
Shall me henceforth: right blessed call:
So thou have said: by thy good word,
As angels voice: does well record.
For he that is: most mighty tried,
Has me set up: and magnified:
By his good grace: he does the same,
For holy is: his worthy name.
And mercy great: that he does bear,
Is showed to all: that do him fear:
On kinredes all: by him alone,
He helps us now: and hearth our moan.
With his good arm: he strength has showed,
And scattred clean: the proud and lewd:
In their conceiptes* and fancies vain,
This is our God: that still does reign.
The mighty down: from seat he threw,
And humble hearts: exalted due:
Thus God has done: by power so hie,
The worldly rich: full low do lie.
The hungry soul: he filde in all,
With each good thing: so liberal:
The rich in wealth: with all their ray,
With empty hands: he sent away.
Remembering still: his grace that fell,
His servant holy: good Israel:
Which promisd was: our fathers gray
And Abraham: his seed for aye.
Nunc dimittis.
LOrd now thou let: thy servant go,
To peaceful rest thou good art so:
Thy love to me: thou do aforde
Accordth thereto: thy holy word.
For these my eyes: saw happily,
Health long desird: so ernestly:
Thy saving health: thou geuest alone,
My eyes have seen: salvation.
Which thou have thus: preparde aright,
Before thy flock: and peoples sight:
Their eyes do see thy loves intent,
And goodness great: which thou have sent.
To be a light: to Gentels all,
To lighten them: that lie in thrall:
That thy good flock: in joy may dwell,
To glory great of Israel.
Grace before meat.
MOst loving Lord: to thee we cry,
All us to bless: our board be nigh:
Thy gifts to use: in this repast,
No spoil to make: hereof in waste,
And that our want: while we do ^yll,
Our heart and tongue: express none evil.
Grace after meat.
Preserve us Lord: which all have wrought,
As thou of love: us all have bought:
Refresh our souls: with godly fear,
For these good gifts: kind heart to bear?
Our time to spend: each day by day,
At our lives end: rejoice we may.
Quicunque vult.
WHo saved will be: before all things,
He must true faith: fast hold in all:
which safe and sound: who kepth it not
Without all doubt: he perish shall.
This is the faith: calde Catholic,
Even through the world: full out so famde:
To serve one god: in Trinity:
In Trinity: but one so namde.
Confounding not: their persons three,
Their substance sundred cannot be:
The father, son: and holy ghost,
Be diverse yet: in persons three.
The godhed yet: of them all one,
Of father, son, and holy Sprite:
Their glory like: their majesty,
All one eternal, is aright.
The father such: the son is such,
The holy ghost: is such a like:
The father hie: the son even so,
The holy ghost: vncreat eke.
The father god: the son the sprite,
Incomprehensible they be all*
Eternal god: eternal son,
The holy ghost eterne we call.
Yet they not three: eternals be,
But one they stand: eternally:
Not three distinct: in power or time,
But one all whole: in unity.
The father houge: of power he is,
The son, the holy ghost even so,
Not three almighties so be said,
But one almighty known no mo.
The father God: the son is God,
The holy ghost: even so is God
Not yet three Gods: but one is God,
In all the world: so long and broad,
The Father Lord: the Son is Lord,
The holly Ghost: is truly Lord,
Not yet three Lords: but one is Lord
We say and singe: in true accord.
As we each person: God and Lord,
Be bid by Christian truth to name:
Forbidden so: we be by faith,
three gods or else: three lords to frame.
The Father made of none nor born,
Of none begotten well we know:
The son of God: alone not made:
Nor created, begotten though.
The sprite is just: of God and so
Of Christ not got: proceeding yet:
One Father so: one son, one sprite,
Not thrice in name: these persons set.
In Trinity* not one beforne,
Nor yet behind: more great or less:
These persons three: all equal be,
Eterne a like: we must confess.
So that in all: this unity:
In trinity: I say again:
The trinity: in unity,
We must adore: as one full plain.
Who saved will be: most rightly judge
The Trinity: forsooth even thus:
And health eke ask to think ye Christ,
Incarnate was: made flesh for us.
For this is faith: both right and sound
That we believe and just confess:
That Jesus Christ: the son of God
Is God and man: our Lord no less.
Of God his substance, God begot,
Before the world: was made in sight
And man he is. of Maryes flesh,
His mother him: in world so dight.
He perfect God: and perfect man:
Of soul with reason most endued:
Of humayne flesh: subsistyng is,
By whom our nature was renewed.
Christ equal is: in Deity,
To God so great: his father just:
Yet greater he: and Christ the less,
For birth in manhood so discust.
Who though he be: both God and man,
One Christ he is: in deed not two:
To ^lesh his godhed did not change,
But taking flesh: on godhed so.
Of substance whole: he is vnmixte,
By person yet: he is but one,
As soul with wit: and flesh one man
One Christ is so: both God and man
Who suffered death: for all our health,
And down he went in sprite to Hell:
He did yet rise: from death again,
The third day just as scripture telth.
To Heaven he ^^ied: and there he sitth
On gods right hand: which mighty is
from whence he shall: return to judge
The quick and dead: all right I wis
And when he comth: all men shall rise
In bodies dead: revived again:
And give they shall: account full due
of al their thoughts: and works so plain.
And they that have done good I say,
Shall enter sure to life eterne:
And they that have done evil, to fire
To darkness cast: that is externe.
This is the faith: most Catholic,
Which any man, if it mistake:
And faithfully does not believe,
No wight him saved: once can make.
Veni creator.
COme holy Ghost: eternal God,
Which do from God proceed.
The father first: and eke the son,
One God as we do read.
Oh visit thou: our minds and hearts,
Thy heavenly grace inspire:
That we in truth: and godliness,
May set our whole desire.
Thou art O sprite: the comforter,
In woe and hard distress:
The heavenly gift: of God so high,
Which tongue cannot express.
Thou fountain art: and lively spring,
Of joy celestial:
The fire so bright, the love so clear,
and unction spiritual.
For thou in gifts: art manifold,
Whereby Christ's church does stand:
And wrightst thy love: in faithful hearts,
The power of God his hand.
And like as thou: have promise made,
Thou geuest the speech of grace:
That through thy help: the praise of God,
May sound in every place.
O holy Ghost: to move our wits,
Send down thine heavenly light:
Inflame our hearts: our God to serve,
With love both day and night.
Our weakness strength: confyrme us Lord,
Both feeble faint and frail:
That nether flesh, the world, ne devil,
In us do once prevail.
Put back from us: our enemies,
And grant that we obtain:
Sweet peace of heart: with God and man,
From grudge and proud disdain.
And grant O Lord, O leader sure,
That we by thee as guide:
May safe eschew: the snares of sin,
From thee no time to slide.
And plenty Lord: of thy good grace,
Grant us we humble pray:
Be thou our joy: and comforter,
To escape that dreadful day.
Of strife and foul: dissension,
O Lord dissolve the bands:
And knit the knot: of peace and love,
Through out all Christen lands.
Grant us O Lord: through thee to know
The Father most of might:
That we of his: beloved son,
May sure obtain the sight.
And that with perfect stable faith,
We might acknowledge thee:
The sprite of them* of both I say,
One God and persons three.
Be laud to God: the father hye,
And God his son praise ye:
Be praise to God: the holy sprite,
One God in Trinity.
Pray we that Christ: the savior,
Uouchsafe his sprite to send:
To all which true: profess his name,
Till all the world does end.
THe 150. being the last Psalm, is a serious and earnest inuitation to the
praises of God: and so most agreably placed, as last to knit up the end of all
that is treated in the five several books of Psalms so divided by the
Hebrews. In which five books be insparsed abroad matter of Prophecy of
Christ and his church, of History, of Doctrine, of Instruction, of Inuitation,
of Exhortation, of Reformation, of Insultation, of Consolation, of Gloriation,
of Invocation, of Obsecration, of Meditation, of Patience, and such like. So
that all breath, voice, and sound of word, sunge, said, or thought, should
tend wholly in the end, to praise the Lord, which is the first, the mydst,
and final work, and sacrifice, whereunto all should be referred. Furthermore
because in the third, fourth, and fifth verses, only musical instruments be
recyted, lest they should be but bare instruments without distinction, or
signification of sound, in them be added for supplement, the three appropriates
ascribed to God in Trinity, as Power and Authority, whereby all things were
created and wrought Wisdom and Providence, whereby all things be justly
governed and ruled.

Goodness and Bounty, whereby all things be preserved, from whence proceed all
graces and gifts both bodily and ghostly.

Thus this Psalm which is the last being conformable to that which is the
first, which is also tracted by certain Triades describyng the felicitye of
man does resemble, the same not only by Triades of verse but also by this
Triade included in mystery, though not expressly: So determinyng the chief
and last work, that this blessed man so described in all the course of his
life should meditate, which act in the next life he shall most perfectly do
and perform.

Therefore the Chaunter is not untimely brought in for fresher remembrance to
proclayme once again his joyful Alleluya, to end therein to the glory of God
in Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghoct, to whom be all honor,
glory, and praise everlastingly, Amen.

For the Conjunction of Psalms and tunes.
FIrst ye ought to conioyne a sad tune or song, with a sad Psalm, And a
joyful tune and song with a joyful Psalm, And an indifferent tune and song,
with a Psalm which goes indifferently.

Psalms of joy be such as be constitute in the third and fifth place of
Athanasius table, which be Psalms consolatory, and of thankesgeuyng with their
Coniugates. Sad Psalms be such as be set in the fourth common place, as
Deprecatory, and Interpellatory, Indifferent be such as be in the first and
second place, as Prophetical, or such as do teach and exhort, and such also as
be mixte containyng diverse of the said five places: For a difference of tunes
and fonges in this triple nature and diversity be used, the three charectes of
the three common accentes, \
as the sharp accent to joyful songs and tunes, \
The grave accent to sad, The circumflect accent to indifferent.
Not yet by this meaning to prescribe a rule to prejudice any man's peculiar
spirit or ear, for as there be diversities of tastes in men's palaces: So be
there in men's spirits, and so also in their ears. For what Psalm or song,
one man's spirit shall judge grave and sad, some other shall think it
pleasant. And what one man's ear shall think pleasant, another shall judge
it sower and severe. And therefore in this diversity. I leave it to every man's
spirit as God shall move him: and to every man's ear, as nature shall frame
him. I set this only in example, for that it so agreed to my understanding
inwardly, and to mine ear outwardlye. But such copulations would there be in
Psalms and songs who can attain to that grace, Omne tulit punctum. etc.
which David expressed and observed, who was a Christian divine in sprite, a
perfect Poet in his Merre, and an expert musicio^ in ordering of his
instruments, and setting of his tunes agreably.

Five books of Psalms according to the Hebrews.
The.1. from the.1. psalm unto the 41. And they have in the end, either Fiat,
Fiat. or else Amen, Alleluya. The.2. from.42. unto.72. And they have in the end,
either Fiat, Fiat. or else Amen, Alleluya. The.3. from.73. unto.89. And they
have in the end, either Fiat, Fiat. or else Amen, Alleluya. The.4. from.90.
unto.106. And they have in the end, either Fiat, Fiat. or else Amen, Alleluya.
The.5. from.107. unto.150. And they have in the end, either Fiat, Fiat. or else
Amen, Alleluya.
The nature of the eight tunes.
1 The first is meek: devout to see, \ 2 The second sad: in majesty. \ 3 The
third does rage: and roughly brayth. / 4 The fourth does fawn: and flattry
playth, / 5 The fyfth delight: and laugheth the more, \ 6 The sixth bewayleth:
it weepeth full sore, \ 7 The seventh tredeth stout: in froward race, 8 The
eyghte goes mild: in modest pace.
The Tenor of these parts be for the people when they will sing alone, the
other parts, put for greater queers, or to such as will sing or play them
priuatelye.

The Mean.
^ MAn blessed no dout: who walkth not out: in wicked men's affairs:^ And standth
no day: in sinners way: nor sitth in scorners chayres^ But has his will: in
Gods law still: this law to love aright:^ And will him use: on it to muse: to
keep it day and night.

The Contra tenor.
^ MAn blessed no dout: who walkth not out: in wicked men's affairs:^ And standth
no day: in sinners way: nor sitth in scorners chayres:^ But has his will: in
Gods law still: this law to love aright:^ And will him use: on it to muse: to
keep it day and night.

Psalm. 1. The first Tune. Tenor.
^ MAn blessed no dout: who walkth not out: in wicked men's affairs,^ And standth
no day: in sinners way: nor sitth in scorners chayres.^ But has his will: in
Gods law still: this law to love aryght:^ And will him use: on it to muse: to
keep it day and night.

Base.
^ MAn blessed no dout: who walkth not out: in wicked men's affairs,^ And standth
no day: in sinners way: nor sitth in scorners chayres,^ But has his will: in
Gods law still: this law to love aryght:^ And will him use: on it to muse: to
keep it day and night.

\ Psalm. 68. The second Tune. Mean.
^ LEt God arise: in majesty: and scatred be his foes:^ Yea flee they all, his
sight in face: to him which hateful goes,^ As smoke is driven: and comth to
naught: repulse their tyranny:^ At face of fire: as wax does melt: gods face
the bad might fly.

Contra tenor.
^ LEt God arise: in majesty: and scattred be his foes:^ Yea flee they all:
his sight in face: to him which hateful goes:^ As smoke is driven: and comth
to naught: repulse their tyranny:^ At face of fire: as wax does melt: gods
face the bad might fly.

Psalm. 68. The second Tune. Tenor.
^ LEt God arise: in majesty: and scattred be his foes:^ Yea flee they all:
his sight in face: to him which hateful goes:^ As smoke is driven: and comth
to naught: repulse their tyranny:^ At face of fire: as wax does melt: gods
face the bad might fly.

Base.
^ LEt God arise: in majesty: and scattred be his foes,^ Yea flee they all:
his sight in face, to him which hateful goes,^ As smoke is driven: and comth
to naught: repulse their tyranny,^ At face of fire: as wax does melt: gods
face the bad might fly.

\ Psalm. 2. The third Tune. Mean.
^ WHy fumeth in sight: the Gentiles spyght: in fury ragyng stout.^ why takth in
hand: the people fond: vain things to bring about,^ The kings arise: the
lords devise: in counsayles met thereto:^ Against the Lord: with false accord:
against his Christ they go.

Contra tenor.
^ WHy fumeth in sight: the Gentiles spyght: in fury raging stout,^ why takth in
hand: the people fond: vain things to bring about,^ The kings arise: the
Lords deuyse: in counsayles met thereto,^ Against the Lord: with false accord:
against his Christ they go.

The third Tune. Tenor.
^ WHy fumeth in sight: the Gentiles spyght: in fury ragyng stout,^ why takth in
hand: the people fond: vain things to bring about:^ The kings arise: the
Lords deuyse: in counsayles met thereto,^ Against the Lord: with false accord:
against his Christ they go.

Base.
^ WHy fumeth in sight: the Gentiles spite: in fury raging stout,^ why takth in
hand: the people fond: vain things to bring about,^ The kings arise: the
Lords deuyse: in counsayles met thereto,^ Against the Lord: with false accord:
against his Christ they go.

\ Psalm. 95. The fourth Tune. Mean.
^ O Come in one, to praise the lord, and him recount: our stay and health,^
All hearty joys, let us record: to this strong rock: our Lord of health.^ His
face with praise, let us prevent: his factes in sight, let us denounce,^ Join
we I say: in glad assent: our psalms and hymns, let us pronounce.

Contra tenor.
^ O Come in one, to praise the lord, and him recount, our stay and health,^
All hearty joys, let us record, to this strong rock, our Lord of health:^ His
face with praise: let us prevent, his factes in sight, let us denounce,^ Join
we I say: in glad assent: our psalms and hymns, let us pronounce.

The fourth Tune. Tenor.
^ O Come in one, to praise the lord, and him recount, our stay and health,^ All
hearty joys, let us record, to this strong rock, our Lord of health,^ His face
with praise, let us prevent, his factes in sight, let us denounce,^ Join we I
say, in glad assent, our psalms and hymns, let us pronounce

Base.
^ O Come in one, to praise the lord, and him recount, our stay and health^ All
hearty joys, let us record, to this strong rock, our Lord of health,^ His face
with praise, let us prevent, his factes in sight, let us denounce,^ Join we I
say, in glad assent, our psalms and hymns, let us pronounce.

/ Psalm. 42. The fifth Tune. Mean.
^ Even like the hunted hynd: the water brokes desire:^ Even thus my soul:
that faintie is: To thee would feign aspire,^ My soul did thirst to God: to
God of life and grace:^ It said even thus: when shall I come, to see Gods
lively face.

Contra tenor.
^EUen like the hunted hynd: the water brokes desire,^ Even thus my soul: that
faintie is: to thee would feign aspire:^ My soul did thirst to God: to God of
life and grace:^ It said even thus: when shall I come: to see Gods lively face.

The fifth Tune. Tenor.
^ Even like the hunted hynde: the water brooks desire:^ Even thus my soul:
that faintie is, to thee would feign aspire,^ My soul did thirst to God: to
God of life and grace,^ It said even thus, when shall I come, to see gods
lively face.

Base.
^ Even like the hunted hynde: the water brooks desire,^ Even thus my soul:
that faintie is: to thee would feign aspire,^ My soul did thirst to God: to
God of life and grace,^ It said even thus, when shall I come, to see gods
lively face.

\ Psalm. 5. The sixth Tune. Mean.
^ EXpend O Lord: my plaint of word: in grief that I do make,^ My musing
mind: recount most kind: give ear for thine own sake,^ O hark my groan, my
cryeng moan, my king, my God thou art,^ Let me not stray, from thee away: to
thee I pray in heart.

Contra tenor.
^ EXpend O Lord: my plaint of word: in grief that I do make,^ My musing
mind: recount most kind: give ear for thine own sake,^ O hark my groan: my
crying moan: my king, my God thou art,^ Let me not stray: from thee away: to
thee I pray in heart.

The sixth Tune. Tenor.
^ EXpend O Lord: my plaint of word: in grief that I do make,^ My musing
mind: recount most kind, give ear for thine own sake,^ O hark my groan: my
crying moan, my king, my God thou art,^ Let me not stray: from thee away: to
thee I pray in heart.

Base.
^ EXpend O Lord: my plaint of word: in grief that I do make,^ My musing
mind: recount most kind: give ear for thine own sake,^ O hark my groan: my
crying moan: my king, my God thou art,^ Let me not stray: from thee away: to
thee I pray in heart.

/ Psalm. 52. The seventh Tune. Mean
^ WHy bragst in malice hie, O thou in mischief stout,^ Gods goodness yet is
nigh, all day to me no doubt,^ Thy tongue to muse all evil, it does it self in
ure:^ As rasor sharp to spill, all guile it does procure.

Contra tenor
^ WHy bragst in malice hie, O thou in mischief stout,^ Gods goodness yet is
nigh, all day to me no doubt:^ Thy tongue to muse all evil, it does it self in
ure:^ As rasor sharp to spill, all guile it does procure.

Psalm. 52. The seventh Tune. Tenor.
^ WHy bragst in malice hie. O thou in mischief stout,^ Gods goodness yet is
nigh, all day to me no doubt:^ Thy tongue to muse all evil, it does it self in
ure:^ As rasor sharp to spill, all guile it does procure.

Base.
^ WHy bragst in malice hie, O thou in mischief stout,^ Gods goodness yet is
nigh: to me all day no dout,^ Thy tongue to muse all evil: it does it self in
ure:^ As rasor sharp to spill, all guile it does appear.

Psalm. 67. The eight Tune. Mean
^ GOd grant with grace, he us embrace: in gentle part: bless he our heart,^
With loving face: shine he in place: his mercies all: on us to fall:^ That we
thy way: may know al day: while we do sail: this world so fraile^ Thy healthes
reward: is nigh declard: as plain as eye: all Gentiles spy.

Contra tenor.
^ GOd grant with grace: he us embrace: in gentle part: bless he our heart,^
With loving face: shine he in place: his mercies all: on us to fall.^ That we
thy way: may know al day: while we do sail: this world so fraile^ Thy healthes
reward: is nigh declard: as plain as eye: all Gentiles spy.

Psalm. 67. The eight Tune. Tenor.
^ GOd grant with grace: he us embrace, in gentle part, bless he our heart,^
with loving face: shine he in place: his mercies all: on us to fall,^ That we
thy way: may know al day: while we do sail, this world so fraile^ Thy healthes
reward: is nigh declard: as plain as eye, all Gentiles spy.

Base.
^ GOd grant with grace: he us embrace, in gentle part: bless he our heart,^
with loving face: shine he in place: his mercies all: on us to fall:^ That we
thy way: may know al day: while we do sail: this world so fraile^ Thy healthes
reward: is nigh declard: as plain as eye: all Gentiles spy.

Mean.
^ COme holy ghost eternal God, which do from God proceed,^ the father
first, and eke the Son, one God as we do read.

Contra tenor.
^ COme holy ghost eternal God, which do from God proceed,^ the father
first, and eke the Son, one God as we do read.

Tenor.
^ COme holy ghost eternal God, which do from God proceed,^ the father
first, and eke the Son, one God as we do read.

Base.
^ COme holy ghost eternal God, which do from God proceed,^ the father
first, and eke the Son, one God as we do read.

The Table,
/ 65 AL lauds be due to thee / 85 Against thy laud / 92 A joyful thing it
is 103 Arise my soul. 119 A right up man. 137 At waters sides. 145 Arise I
will. / 43 Ah judge me God, B.
/ 40 By silent watch. 72 Bestow O God. / 86 Bow down thine ear. 101 Both
mercy meek. / 124 But God himself. C.
\ 136 Confess and praise. \ Come holy ghost. D.
\ 9 Due thanks with song. E.
\ 5 Expend O Lord. 37 Ensue thou not. 127 Except the Lord. / 42 Even like in
chase. F.
/ 59 From all my foes. G
\ 20 God grant he hear. / 34 Give thanks I will. / 48 Great is the Lord. 55
Give ear O God. \ 57 God pity me. 67 God grant with grace. / 82 God standth
in midst. 87 God highly love. 89 Gods mercies all. / 129 Great grief I have. H.
\ 12 Help Lord so hie. \ 13 How long will thou. \ 17 Hear thou the right. 36
Here plain do ye see. * \ 51 Have mercy God. / 56 Have mercy God. \ 57 Have
mercy God. I.
11 In Lord so great, / 18 I will love thee. 31 In thee O Lord. / 34 I will
give thanckes. \ 36 In midst of evil ma^s heart. \ 39 I full decreed. / 58 If
just your mind. / 76 In Jury God is known. / 116 I loved have the Lord. \ 130
In deep excess. / 138 I will O Lord. L.
26 Lord judge my deed. \ 30 Lord thee all whole. \ 68 Let God arise in
majesty. \ 134 Lo ye all here. Lord now thou let. M.
1 Man blessed. 22 My God, my God. 45 My heart breakth out. / 61 My crying hear O
God. / 71 My trust O Lord. 78 My people kind. \ 88 My loving Lord. / 108 My
heart O God. / 122 Most glad I was. 131 My heart proud things, My soul the
Lord. N.
81 Now sing ye joyfully. 115 No praise give us. \ 143 Now hear my suit. O.
\ 3 O Lord how ill. \ 4 O God so hie. \ 6 O carpe not sour. \ 7 O Lord in
thee. / 8 O Lord our guide. \ 26 O God of trust. 25 O Lord to thee. \ 28 O Lord
I cry. 32 O blessed be they. 32 O happy they be. \ 38 O Lord to sore. / 43 O God
eterne. \ 44 O God so good. / 46 Our hope is God. 49 O hear ye out. \ 54 O
save me God. / 60 O God thou hate. / 63 O God to thee. 64 O hear me Lord, 70
O God to me. 73 O good is God to Israel. \ 79 O God fallen in. \ 83 O God our
God. / 84 O God of hosts. \ 90 O Lord thou have, / 94 O God and Lord. / 95 O
come in one. 96 O sing to God. \ 100 O joy all men. \ 102 O Lord to thee. 104
O praise my soul. 105 O praise the Lord. / 107 O praise the Lord. / 109 O God
my joy. 118 O thank and laud. 128 O blessed is he. 133 O come and see. / 135 O
worship thank and praise 139 O God thou have. / 140 O Lord most good. \ 141 O
Lord I have. \ 146 O thou my soul. / 149 O sing unto the Lord. / 150 O praise
ye God. / O God we praise. O blessed be God. P.
/ 35 Plead thou O Lord. \ 117 Praise duly the Lord. \ 147 Praise ye the
Lord. \ 148 Praise ye the Lord. R.
33 Rejoice in God. 66 Rejoice to God with joy. / 132 Remember Lord. S.
/ 62 Shall not my soul. \ 69 Save me O Lord. 98 Sing ye all new. T.
\ 14 The fool has said. 19 The heavens do tell, 21 The king with voice. / 23
The Lord so good. 24 The earth it is. \ 27 The Lord of might. 41 That man is
blessed. 47 Together clap ye hands. 50 The God of Gods. \ 53 The fool has
said. / 77 To God to cry. / 80 Thou shepeheard king. 93 The Lord is king. 97
The living Lord. \ 99 The Lord to reign. \ 106 The Lord with thanks. 110 The
Lord most hie. 112 That man is blessed. 120 To God when I. 121 To heavenly hills.
\ 123 To thee I lift. / 144 The Lord be blessed. V.
\ 142 Unto the Lord. W.
\ 2 Why fume in sight. \ 10 Why standth so far. 15 Who Lord shall bide. \ 52
Why boast thy self. \ 52 Why bragst in. 74 Why art so far. \ 75 We do
confess. / 91 Who under fence. / 111 With all my heart I will. 114 When Israel
from Egypt. 125 Who stickth to God. \ 126 What time the Lord. Who saved will
be. Y.
29 Ye sons of God. / 113 Ye servants children meke.

Index. The numbers be as the Hebrews account them. Vsus and vis Psalmorum in
Athanas^o.

120 AD dominum cum tri. 25 Ad te domine leuaui \ 28 Ad te domine clamaui. \
123 Ad te leuani. 29 Afferte domino. 78 Attendite popule. 49 Audite hec omnes.
1 Beatus vir. 32 Beati quorum. 41 Beatus qui intelligit. 112 Beatus vir qui.
119 Beati immaculati. 128 Beati omnes qui. / 34 Benedicam dominum. / 85
Benedixisti. 103 Benedic anima. 1 104 Benedic anima. 2 / 144 Benedictus
dominus. / 92 Bonum est confiteri. 96 Cantate domino. 1 98 Cantate domino. 2 /
49 Cantate domino. 3 19 Coeli enarrant. \ 9 Confitebor. 1 / 138 Confitebor. 2 /
111 Confitebor. 3 \ 75 Confitebimur. 105 Confitemini domino. 1 / 106
Confitemini domino. 2 / 107 Confitemini domino. 3 118 Confitemini domino. 4 \
136 Confitemini domino. 5 \ 16 Conserua me. 116 Credidi propter. \ 4 Cum
inuocarem. \ 130 De profundis. 22 Deus deus meus. \ 44 Deus auribus. / 46 Deus
noster. 50 Deus deorum. \ 54 Deus in nomine. / 60 Deus repulisti. / 63 Deus
deus meus. / 67 Deus misereatur. 70 Deus in adiutorium. 72 Deus iuditium. 79
Deus venerunt. \ 82 Deus stetit. / 83 Deus quis similis. \ 94 Deus vltionum. /
109 Deus laudem. / 116 Dilexi quoniam. / 18 Diligam te. / 110 Dixit dominus
domino. 14 Dixit insipiens. 1 \ 53 Dixit insipiens. 2 \ 39 Dixi custodiam. \ 36
Dixit iniustus. \ 3 Domine quid. \ 6 Domine ne in furore. 1 \ 38 Domine ne in
furore. 2 \ 7 Domine deus meus. / 8 Domine deus noster. 15 Domine quis
habitabit. 21 Domine in virtute. \ 88 Domine deus salutis. \ 90 Domine
refugium. \ 102 Domine exaudi. 131 Domine non est exalt. 139 Domine probasti. \
141 Domine clamaui. \ 143 Domine exaudi. / 23 Dominus regit me. 24 Domini est
terra. \ 27 Dominus illuminatio. 93 Dominus regnauit. 97 Dominus regnauit exul.
\ 99 Dominus regnauit iras. \ 134 Ecce nunc benedicite. 133 Ecce quam bonum. /
59 Eripe me de ini. / 190 Eripe me domine. 45 Eructauit cor. 145 Exaltabo te
Deus. \ 30 Exaltabo te domine. 55 Exaudi Deus orationes. / 61 Exaudi Deus
depreca. 64 Exaudi Deus orationes. \ 17 Exaudi deus iustitiam. \ 10 Exaudiat te
Dominus. / 40 Expectans expec. 81 Exultate deo. 33 Exultate iusti. \ 68 Exurgat
Deus. 87 Fundamenta. / 86 Inclina domine. \ 126 In conuertendo. 11 In domino
confido. 114 In exitu Israel. 31 In te domine speraui. / 71 In te domine spe.
ne. 66 Iubilate deo. \ 100 Iubilate domino. / 35 Iudica domine. / 43 Iudica me
deus. 26 Iudica me domine. \ 146 Lauda anima. \ 147 Lauda Jerusalem. \ 113
Laudate pueri. \ 117 Laudate dominum. 121 Leuaui oculos. / 122 Letatus sum. /
135 Laudate nomen. / 147 Laudate dominum. / 148 Laudate dominu^ de coel. / 150
Laudate dominus in san. / 48 Magnus dominus. \ 51 Miserere mei. / 56 Miserere
mei de. \ 57 Miserere mei deus mise. 89 Misericordias. 101 Mi^am and iudicium.
/ 132 Memento domine. 37 Noli emulari. / 62 Nonne deo. / 76 Notus in Judea. 115
Non nobis domine. / 124 Nisi quia dominus. 127 Nisi dominus. 47 Omnes gentes. /
108 Paratum cor. \ 2 Quare fremuerunt. / 42 Quemadmodum. \ 52 Quid gloriaris.
73 Quam bonus Israel. / 80 Qui regis Israel. / 84 Quam dilecta. / 91 Qui
habitat. 125 Qui confidunt. \ 12 Saluum me fac domine. \ 69 Saluum me fac deus.
/ 58 Si vere vtique. / 129 Sepe expugna. 137 Super flumina. / 65 Te decet deus.
\ 5 Verba mea. \ 10 Vt quid domine. \ 13 Vsquequo domine. 74 Vt quid deus. / 77
Voce mea ad dominum. / 95 Venite exultemus. \ 142 Voce mea ad dominum.

Faults escaped.
Letter. Line. Faults. Read. D. 4. fa. 2. 16 gratitudum. gratitudinum. 20
int^r^ollatori. interpellatori. 21 vim aduersa. aduersariorum. 25 deperta. de
parta. 29 conlationem. consolationem. E. 1. fa. 3. 3 dentrum. deutrum. G. 2.
fa. 2. 21 ecclesiastices. ecclesiastes.

Page. 9 1 v. vij. etc. 15 ^ bore. poor. 17 7 city. c^^ies. 18 20 add. Sela.
20 3 all rouse. he ro^^^. 20 9 all. aye. 32 6 scorndst. scourdst. 44 15 the
suits. thy suits. 61 22 so. so. 65 7 with. which. 99 30 with. so. 102 20 ^ilo.
nily. 102 26 weane. weaue. 106 14 clyffe. life. 107 25 and in my. and when I.
117 28 which. who. 122 7 let earth. no earthly thing let. 162 11 thy trusty.
the trusty. 172 29 not not. not. 177 ^ 63. 64. 178 25 is tried. it tried. 180
14 wrougt. wrought. Ibidem 25 besiegd. besieged. 188 2 thou know. thou know.
198 22 the justice. thy justice. 204 3 scourged. scourgd. 208 4 hold still.
holdst still. 219 the sixte verse to much. 228 29 them up. him up. 240 19 whole
turn. here turn. 86 12 fall one. full out. Ibidem 13 eyes does. eyes do.
Ibidem 15 O Lord yet God. O God yet Lord. 249 26 but if but when 254 19
witherth dry. witherd dries. 255 13 and as. and eke. 263 15 and hie. and his.
273 8 bright. by rightful do^ 282 ^3 he moves. he month. 285 15 when. where.
287 16 so often. so often to read. 294 19 them needs. their needs. ^2 their ^eth.
theare. 296 22 their ships. theare. 298 2 put the number 35. 300 4 he say. he
said. 309 22 when. who. 323 8 strongly. strangely. Ibidem. 17 as with just cloak
as just with cloke^ Ibidem 19 whom. when. 327 13 confirmitie. conformity. 331 20
than. then. 347 8 then. them. 352 8 know worthy known worthy 354 7 bid. bide.
356 11 in aye. aye in. 364 18 me not. not me. 377 21 they shame. their shame.
384 8 then. thou. Ibidem 19 all thy. all the. 388 12 to dwell. so well. 401 16
thou nou. thou now. Ibidem 18 that sigh. that sight. 404 21 (...). (...) 407
correct yt number bers of y^ verse. Ibidem ^^ ever even. 408 6 indge. judge. 409
20 will. wilt. 401 25 my grace. thy grace. 416 12 strayes. stays. Ibidem 18
stays. s^rayes. 423 ^^ stran^ge. strunge. 414 5 applied. to all applied.

Imprinted at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate beneath S. Martins.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis. per Decennium.


