THE SONG OF SONGS, WHICH WAS SALOMONS, Metaphrased in English Heroiks by way
of Dialogue.

With certain of the Brides Ornaments, viz.

Poetical Essays upon a Divine Subject.

Whereunto is added a Funeral Elegy, consecrate to the memory of that ever
honored Lord, JOHN, late Bishop of LONDON.

By R. A.

REVEL. 21. 9. Come hither, and I will show thee the Bride the Lambs wife.

LONDON Printed by William Stansby. 1621.

TO MY MOST BELOVED AND WORTHY GOOD FRIEND, Mr. HENRY KING, Archdeacon of
Colchester.
IT pleased you long since at my request, to present this holy Song to my
honorable good Lord, and your most dear and loving Father. Whose worthy
approbation has encouraged me to publish it, intending the Dedication to his
euer-honoured memory. But God having now taken him to himself, and left us to
bewail our inestimable loss (it being printed before his Death) I resolve not
to alter the Dedication, but desire you his living Heir to accept it in his
Name: praying the Lord of all Grace (who has made you Heir of his Graces and
Virtues) to make you Coheire with him of eternal Happiness, resting always

Your own, R. A.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, JOHN, LORD BISHOP OF LONDON.
ACcept (my Lord) into your Treasury
Of Wisdom, Learning, this devoted Mite;
In Widows offering out of penury;
Thy Lord did more, than richest gifts delight.
Your Lordships worthy favors did inuit
Me to this boldness, when you first did raise
My lot which in obscurity was light,
In better Fortunes for to spend my days,
For which I bless your bounty, and my Maker praise.
As little Brooks which from the Ocean wide
Receive their Source, thence watering hollow veins
Of fruitful Earth, back to the Sea do slide,
Yielding some Drops of Tribute for their gains:
Even so a thankful heart my Muse constraines,
This Tribute to your Bounty to repay,
And consecrate my labor and my pains
Unto your Service, which I humbly pray,
Like Mite, to Treasure; Drop, to Ocean, answer may.
My Muse once rashly sought to enterprise,
To rank thine Honor in the Court of Fame;
But knowing Thou such Glory did despise,
(In white stone seeking a new written Name,
Which he knows only that receives the same:)
I chose this Song of Christ and's Church to sing,
Where if mine ignorance commerit blame,
I do submit it to thy censuring,
Who art in pardoning, and giving like a King.
With Spirit of Moses, Iosuahs fortitude,
The Faith of Abram, Isaacks happy peace,
With David's heart, Jobs patience be indu'd;
With Salomons wealth, and wisdoms good increase,
From Samuels dealing Justice, never cease
Be blessed like Job in his last happy brood,
With Paul's content, be it in pain or ease,
Let Churches hidden Manna be thy food,
Thy days and strength, like Calebs, happy, long and good.
Your Lordships most bounden and devoted, R. A.

The Pastor to the Author.
I Out of Pulpit often have been thy Teacher;
Now in this Book thou art to me a Preacher,
God grant what is there and here delivered,
May daily in our lives be practiced.
Io. White.
To The Author.
THis Work divine to paint with commendation,
Were sure a work of supererogation
In me, yet in plain english I say this,
The Booke's the theorie, the practice His.
B. L.
WHen I at home thy Practice do behold,
Me thinks it goes beyond all contemplation,
But soon this Book has that conceit controlled,
And raised my soul to heavenly admiration,
Thy skill so here thy Practice does transcend,
I see there is none so good but may amend.
W. B. Affinis-domesticus.
OF making many Books there is no end,
And too much reading wearieth the flesh,
But more that I to reading these intend,
They more my Soul and Spirit do refresh.
I. A.
YOu careless Churchmen, that your time mis-spend
In idleness, or worldly cogitation,
Learn of the Learned in the Laws, to spend
Your idle time in holy Meditation.
Denout Ciuilians of our English Nation,
Besides their true discharge of public place,
Give fair example, worthy imitation,
By learned Pen, to season souls with grace.
Hayward, in Prose; our Author here in Verse,
Both Doctors of another faculty,
Do sacred heavenly Mysteries rehearse,
As if they did profess Divinity.
Go on (brave Spirits) while your deuouter Lines
Shame them that falsely call themselves Divines.
A. Magirus.
Page 10. Stan. 1. Lin. 6. for shine, r^ade shone. page 11. stan. 2. li^. 7.
for amidst, r. amiss. page 23. stan. 2. lin* 6. for confess, r. confessed. p.
31. stan. 2. lin. 2. for will, r. nill. p. 67. stan. 3. lin. 1. for fellows,
r. follows. p. 75. stan. 1. l* 2. for heaven. r. hau'n. p. 111. stan. 1. lin.
1. for assayed, r. as^ail'd. p. (...). sta. 2. l. 1. for within, r. which in.
p. 123. stan. 1. lin. 5. for abye, r. abyes. page 135. stan. 3 lin. 7. for
religious, r. Religions. p. 139. stan. 3. lin. 9. for imperfections, r.
impe^fection's. p 140. stan. 1. lin. 3. for fand, r. fend. p. 145. stan. 4.
lin. 8. read so mis-spend. p. 152. stan. 1. l. 5. for ioynes, r. joints. page
187. stan. 3. lin. 7. for will dread, r. wildred.

THE SONG OF SONGS, WHICH WAS SALOMONS.
The Argument.
MY Muse, that whilome, swaid by lust of youth,
Did spend her strength in idle wanton toys,
Now viewes her vanity, with mickle ruth,
And as awaked does seek for solid joys,
Such as pure souls to blessedness conuoyes:
This is the cause why she so much does long, Act. 2. 3.

His grace implored who in a mighty noise
Appeared in cloven tongues, to teach my tongue
To sing these sacred mysteries, this SALOMONS song.
CHAP. I.
The Churches love to Christ she does defend,
And clear her self from all indignity:
She calls her Spouse, who shows her how to wend,
They bothdelight in sweet community.
WIth kisses of thy mouth do thou me kiss: Church.

Thy love is better unto me then wine,
Thine ointments savor good and pleasant is,
A sweet perfume is that blessed Name of thine,
Therefore the Maids all in thy love combine.
Oh draw me, and we after thee will run,
If to thy treasures thou our hearts incline,
We will rejoice, and in that joy begun,
We will recount thy loves, with all that errors shun.
Scorn me not (Sions Nymphs) though I seem brown
For I am fair and comely, as a Rose,
I (till Suns scorching beams on me did frown,)
Was like those that in Salomons tents repose:
My Mothers sons my beauty did expose
To the Suns heat, and raging, me abiected,
So did they me a baser way dispose
To keep strange Vineyards not to be respected,
Whilst mine (ay me) lay vnmanur'd quite neglected.
Oh tell me where, thou whom my soul does love,
Thou feed'st thy Sheep, and rests them at noone day:
For why alas should I a strag'er prove,
And feed my flocks with them that go astray?
Fairest of mayds, Christ.
since thou know not the way
Tread not in steps that into errors move;
But lead thou forth thy Kids to leap and play
Upon the hills, the Shepherds tents above,
To Pharaoh's Host and Charrets I compare my love,
Thy comely cheeks are decked with orient stones,
Thine iu'ry neck with spangles all is graced,
Yet will we make thee far more precious ones
Of gold and silver jointly enterlaced.
When as my King is at the table placed, Church.

He sends forth smells most odoriferous:
By night he like a bunch of Myrrh embraced
My love is like a Cypress berry'd bush,
Which in the gardens of Engaddi men do crush.
Fair is my love, Christ.
behold my love is fair,
Thine eyes are like the eyes of turtle dove,
And my beloved is most debonaire, Church.

Pleasant and fruitful flourishing in love:
Our house with Cedars all is seel'd above,
And all our walks are planted like a Cypress grove,
CHAP. II.
Their mutual commendation, and their feast:
His fainting Spouse with love Christ does refresh;
He calls her forth to Gardens neately dressed:
The Church does Faith and Hope in him profess.
I Am the field Rose, Church.
and the Lilly white.
Even as a Lilly which the thorns do throng, Christ.

So is my love amongst the daughters dight:
And as an Apple tree the woods among, Church.

So's my beloved among men. Oh how I long
Under his pleasing shadow to abide!
His fruit delightful is unto my tongue,
He sets me at the banquet by his side,
And with sweet love as with a Banner does me guide.
Stay me with flagons, comfort me with smells
Of frag^ant Apples; I am sick of love,
His right arm with embracements me compells;
About my neck he does his left hand move.
O Daughters of Jerusalem above
I charge you, by the Roes, and champaine hind,
You stir not to displease, or wake my love:
I hear his voice, behold he comes behind,
And leapes and skips over hills and mountains like the wind.
Like a young Roe, and like a youthful Heart,
Is my beloved: he stands behind the wall,
And from the window beams of love does dart:
See through the lattice he to me does call
Oh come my love (the fairest above all)
The winter's past, Christ.
the summer is at hand,
The Birds do chirpe, the rain does cease to fall,
The earth embellisht all with flowers does stand,
And eke the turtles voice is sounded in our land;
The Fig Tree puts forth her blossoms green,
The tender blooming Vines do sweetly smell,
Arise my love, the fairest to be seen,
My Dove, that in the cliffes of Rocks do dwell,
Come from the secret corners of thy Cell,
Oh, thy sweet counten^nce to me unfold,
And let me hear thy voice, that sounds so well.
Thy voice is pleasanter then can be told,
And eke thy countenance most comely to behold.
The Foxes take, the little Foxes take
That spoil the Vines, that tender Grapes do bear,
My well beloved is mine, Church.
I am his Make;
Alone amongst the Lillies feeds my dear,
Until the shadow's fly and day appear.
Turn my beloved, and be thou like the Roe,
And Heart, that on the Mountains here and there,
Like the young Hearts that in Mount Bether go,
And like the Hinds and Roes that there make goodly show.
CHAP. III.
The Church her Spouse in bed does seek, not find:
She does arise, and seeks him in broad ways;
The watchmen asks: At length, with joy of mind,
She finds him out, and glories in his praise.
BY silent night as in my bed I lay, Church.

I sought to find him, whom my soul does love:
I sought indeed, but could not find that way:
I said then, I will rise now, and go prove,
If I can find him, whom my soul does love,
About the City, streets, and broad ways round:
But all in vain my labor lost I prove,
The Watchmen that do walk the streets me found,
I ask't, saw you not him whose love my soul does wound?
It was but little, that I from them past,
But I did find him, whom so long I sought:
I would not let him go, but held him fast,
Until him to my Mothers house I wrought,
And to her Chamber, that conceived me, brought.
Daughters of Salomons City, Christ.
Prince of Peace,
I charge you drive out your fair Flocks so soft,
Your Hearts and Hindes, that they do not disease,
Nor my beloved awake until her self does please.
Behold, who is she that from the Wilderness
(Like cloudy pillars of sweet smoke) ascends,
Perfumed with Incense, Myrrh, and Aloes,
And all the spices which the Merchants lends?
See Solomon his bed, Church.
which to defend,
Full sixty valiant men, by night at hand,
Most valiant men that Israel can send,
Each with his sword girt on his thigh, does stand,
All expert men, as ever were in any land.
Solomon made a Throne of Libane wood,
Whose Pillars silver, and whose seat was gold,
The covering purple; floor, whereon they stood,
All pau'd with choicest loves, and stories old,
Which Daughters of Jerusalem had told,
With cunning needles; Sions Nymphs, I say,
Come forth, and your King Solomon behold,
Crowned with the Crown, which for his marriage day
His Mother made, a day of joy, of sport, and play.
CHAP. IIII.
Christ here the graces of his Church commends;
His ravished heart with love to her does show:
Into his Garden he inuites his friends,
Where in abundance all delights do flow.
HOw fair art thou my ^oue! Christ.
behold, how fair!
Within thy locks, thy Doves eyes shine most clear:
Like to a flock of Goats is thy fine Hair,
That from the Mount of Gilead appear:
Thy Teeth be like a flock of sheep, that are
Even shorn, which from their washing up do come;
And every one amongst them twins do bear,
Amongst them barren (lo) there is not one,
Thy Lips, like scarlet Ribband, round about them shone.
Thy speech is comely, and thy Temples are
Within thy locks, like a Pomegranate side:
Thy Neck is like the Tower that David rear,
On which a thousand shields do hang beside,
(All shields of mighty men in arms well tried:)
Thy Breasts ate like two twinling Roes, close by
Feeding on Lillyes near the Ri^^er side:
Until the day appears and shadows fly
In hills of Myrrh and Mounts of Incense let me lie.
Thou art all fair (my love) in thee's no spot: Christ.

Then come with me (my dear) from Lebanon:
My Spouse, from Lebanon why came thou not?
And from the top of Amana look on
The top of Shenir, and the hill Hermon
From Lions dens, and from the Leopards hill,
Thou rauish't have mine heart, my lovely one,
One look from thee with joy my heart does fill,
Thy neck in golden chains cu'n through my heart does thrill.
My Spouse, Christ.
my Sister, how fair is my Love!
Oh, how much better are thy breasts than wine!
The savor of thine ointments is above
All Spice; and from thy Lips drops honey fine,
Honey and Milk under thy tongue do line,
And all thy garments smell like Lebanon,
A fenced Garden is my Spouse, a Vine,
A Spring shut up, a Well sealed with a stone,
Her plants are Spikenards, Saffron, Camphire, Cynamon.
All pleasant fruits, Spikenard, and Calamus,
There trees of incense, Myrrh, and Aloes dwell,
With all the spice most odoriferous.
My Love's a Spring of Gardens and a Well
Of living Waters, that from Lebanon fell.
Awake, Church.
thou North wind; come, thou South, and blow
Upon my Garden, and her plants compel
In plenty to my best beloved to flow,
When he to eat his precious fruits does thither go.
Into my Garden now, Christ.
beh^ld, I come,
My dearest Spouse, my Sister, and my Love,
I eat mine Honey, with mine hony-combe,
My Myrrh, and Spice, I up together goue:
I drink most pleasant wine, as sweet as love,
Mingled with Milk; Oh Milk and Honey dear!
My fr^ends, of all my Wine, Fruit, Spices, prove:
Oh, eat and drink, I say, and make good cheer,
Yea, drink abundantly, Oh, my beloved, my dear.
CHAP. V.
Christ does his Church out of her slumber wake:
Her sloth does turn her heart to mickle woe:
She suffers persecution for his sake:
And to her Maids describes from top to toe.
BY night I slept, Church.
but ah, mine heart did wake,
When (lo) I heard the voice of Him I love;
He knocked, Christ.
and called; Open to me, my Make,
My love, my undefiled, and my Dove:
My head is moist with dew from Heaven above;
The night, with droppings, all my locks does fill,
My coat is off; Church.
how should I on it prove?
My feet are washed; how should I them defile?
Yet seeing's hand within the door, mine heart did smile.
To open then to my beloved I rose,
And (lo) the Myrrh did down mine hands distill,
Sweet smelling Myrrh, which from his hand did wooze,
And all the handles of the lock did fill;
I opened then to my beloved at will,
But my beloved had himself withdrawn,
My love was gone, my heart grew faint and ill,
I sought him, but alas, I sought in vain;
I called him; but no answer gave he me again.
The Watchmen, that about the City went,
Found me, and smote me, and they wounded me,
The keepers of the Walls my veil off rent.
O Daughters of Jerusalem that be,
I charge you, if you my beloved see,
To tell him how that I am sick of love.
What Is thy beloved? Daugh.
fairest of Maids, what is he,
For whom such questions thou to us do move?
Tell us, what is thy beloved other belou'ds above?
Ruddy and white is my beloved one,
The chiefest of ten thousand: Church.
of fine gold
His head is; and his locks are bushy grown,
Black as a Rau'n; his eyes (if you behold)
Are like Doves eyes, which by the Brooks do fold:
Their feathers washed in milk, and fitted neat;
His cheeks, spice beds, sweet as the Marigold;
His lips, like Lillies moist, with Myrrh all wet:
His hands are like gold rings, with stones of Berill set.
His belly is bright Iuory, in-laid
With Saphires blew; and his fair legs, whereon
He stands, like marble pillars, upright staid
By golden sockets, and like Lebanon,
His face: and fair as Cedars thereupon.
His mouth (behold) most comely is and sweet;
He is the loueliest one that can be shown.
Thus my beloved is known, if you him meet,
O Daughters of Jerusalem, him fairly greet.
CHAP. VI.
The Church her hope does to her Maidens clear:
Her Spouse is ravished with her glorious sight;
Before the Queens and all does her prefer,
And likens her unto two Armies bright.
FAirest of women, Daugh.
whither is he gone?
Where did he turn? that we may seek with thee.
Into his Garden, Church.
my beloved alone
Descended is, to's beds of spicerie;
In his delightful Gardens feeds he,
And gathers Lillies beautiful and young.
I my beloueds am, and he to me
Beloved only is; for him I long;
Behold, I see him f^ede the Lillies fair among.
My Love, Christ.
thou art, as Tirza, beautiful;
And as Jerusalem, comely and gay;
And, as an Host with banners, terrible;
Thine eyes have overcome me: Turn away;
Thine hair is like a flock of Goats, that stray
Upon Mount Gilead; and thy teeth do shine
Like to a flock of Ewes, which make their way
Up from their washing place; by every one
Are twins, and, lo, amongst them barren there ar^ none.
Thy comely cheeks within thy locks appear
Ruddie and white, like a Pomegranate side:
Queens sixty, fourscore Concubines there were,
And Virgins without number, which did ride
About my Love, my vndefil'd, my Bride:
Yet her, the Mothers only happiness,
The choice of all her Mother bare beside,
When as the Daughters saw, they praise and bless;
And all the Queens and Concubines could do no less.
Who is it that looks like Morn? fair as the Moon?
Clear as the Sun? as banners terrible?
When I to view my pruned Gardens come,
The Valleys, Fruits, and budding Vines fruitful,
The Pomegranate, that bears fair and full,
My soul unawares me on the Chariot pight,
Of people unto me most dutiful:
Return, return, lets see the Shulamite;
Return, what will you see? she is like two Armies bright.
CHAP: VII.
The Churches comely graces are descride:
She does profess her Faith, Love, and desire;
And shows how to the marriage of the Bride,
All things that are in heaven and earth conspire.
HOw comely are thy feet within thy shoes! Christ.

(O Princes Daughter) junctures of thy thigh^
Like jewels are, which cunning hands did close:
Thy navel, like a goblet round, replies,
I want no liquor: and thy belly lies
Like to a heap of wheat with lillies dight:
Thy breasts (Roe twins) like tower of Iuory's
Thy neck; thine eyes, like pooles in Hesbon bright;
Thy nose, like Lebanons tower, that toward Damascus light.
Thine head's like Carmel; with thy purple hair,
Even Kings within their galleries are bound:
How pleasant art thou! for delights how fair!
Thy stature's like a Palm tree, straight from ground:
Thy breasts of grapes are like to clusters round.
I said, I would into the Palm tree climb,
And prune the boughs which there amidst I found:
Thy breasts are like the clusters of the Vine:
The odor of thy nose, Apples.
is like sweet sops in wine.
Thy palate is like wines of sweetest smell,
Which down the throat go pleasantly and sweet,
Causing the lips, that drink thereof, to tell
Tales in their sleep. Church.
I my beloved do greet,
And his free love with true affection meet.
Let Us to the fields, and lodge in country cell,
And early in the Vine-yards dew our feet,
And see if that the Vines do prosper well,
And how the Grapes do bud, and Pomegranates do swell.
There plenty of my breasts I will thee give:
Behold the Mandrake sweetly smelling ay:
Look, at our gates all ple^sant fruits do live,
Both new and old, which I for thee up lay,
For thee (^ my beloved) against our marriage day.
CHAP. VIII.
Her undefiled love the Church makes known,
And does describe the force of jealousy:
The Gentiles called, by Sisters wooing, shown:
She hastes her Christ to come in Majesty.
OH, that thou were even as my brother dear,
That sucked my mothers breasts: when I without
Thee found, I would thee kiss: and none should here
Despise me: then I would thee lead about
Even to my mothers house, that first me taught.
I would thee cause to drink of spiced wine,
And juice, that from the Pomegranate runs out:
Thy left arm underneath my head should line;
Thy right arm with embracements should my love intwine.
Oh, Sions daughters, I you charge no less,
Stir not to wake my love, until he please.
Who is it that comes up from the wilderness, Christ.

Leaning on her beloved at her ease?
From under the Apple trees I thee did raise,
Whereas thy mother did thee first conceive,
Whereas thy mother first began thy days.
Oh, Church.
let thine heart me as a Seal receive,
And as a Signet on thine arm do thou me cleave.
For Love is strong as death, and Jealousy
Cruel as grave; her coals be brands of fire,
Whose raging flames consume most violently:
No water can assuage her direful ire,
Nor any floods can drown her hot desire:
No, though a man all that he has would sell,
And let himself for wages out to hire,
Yet house and substance all she would refell,
Yea even c^ntemne: No worldly thing can Love compel.
We have a little Sister, and no more,
Whose breasts as yet lie in a narrow rome:
Tell us, What snall we for our Sister do,
When as the time of wooing her, is come?
When as the time of wedding her, Christ.
is come,
A silver Palace, with a door most sound
Of Cedar boords, we will make for her alone.
I am a wall; Church.
my breasts are towers round:
So am I in his eyes as one that favor found.
A fruitful Vineyard had King Solomon; Christ.

In a most fertile place this Vineyard lay:
To Dressers he it farmed, that every one,
For fruits thereof received, should yearly pay
A thousand silver pieces at their day:
My Vine before me I do dress alone.
If they to thee a thousand must defray,
A thousand silver pieces, Solomon,
They for their pains must have two hundred every one.
O, thou that in the Gardens sweet do dwell,
My name to thy Companions forth sound;
Oh, cause me hear thy voice, that sounds so well,
And make it from the Hills and Rocks rebound.
Make haste then (my beloved) to confound
Thine enemies: Church.
Be like unto the Roe
And youthful Heart, that on the mountains bound,
The mountains whereon Myrrh and Spices grow,
Make haste, o my beloved, thy glory here to show.
FINIS.
WHen Da^id his Ambassadors did send,
Wise Abigal unto his 1. Sam. 2^. 39. and 40.
wife to take,
The Lady lowly to the ground did bend,
Offering to wash their feet for her Lords sake:
Learn here what high account we ought to make,
Of messengers that us glad tidings bring,
Which travel great and labor undertake,
For to espouse us to our Lord and King,
To be 1. Sam. 18. 18.
allyde unto a Prince is no small thing.
They that Mark. 1. 3.
to desert hearts send forth their voice,
And make his paths straight, and his ways prepare,
Shall as the Bridegroomes John 3. 29.
friends with him rejoice,
And be Matthew. 22. 9.
invited to his heavenly cheer.
Oh, how my soul is ravished, to hear
Herself invited as a welcome ghest,
By come Can. 2. 14. and 3. 7.
my Spouse, my Love, my Dove, my Dear,
Behold, our marriage bed is richly dressed,
And all things are Ca^. 5. 1* 2.
prepared ready for the feast.
Selected Vessel, blessed Paul, who 2. Cor. 12. 1, 2, 3, 4.
rapt
Above the triple heaven, such things did eye,
As here the souls of men in darkness wrapped,
Cannot conceive, What did thou there epsy?
Matthew. 22. 2, 3, 4.
The Bridegroom clothed in love and majesty,
Hasting unto his marriage consummation,
Whose louely'st Bride the Wise man does Ca^. 7. 1, 2, etc.
descrie,
With all the marriage solemn preparation,
The Luke 2. 32.
Gentiles light, and glory of the Jewish nation.
Then let no Luke 14. 17, 18, etc.
yokes of Oxen, Farm, or Wife,
Hinder thy coming to this marriage feast.
Where Apoc. 22. 1, 2.
Water thou shall taste, and bread of Life;
The King will bid thee Can. 5. 1.
welcome as his ghest,
And thee inuit to Can. 4. 12. and 6. 2.
Gardens neatlier dressed,
Than that of Eden, planted by Gods hand;
There is true happiness and Apoc. 21. 4.
endless rest,
There Apoc. 5. 11.
glorious Angels do by millions stand,
All ready at the Bridegroomes and the Brides command.
THE BRIDES ORNAMENTS: Poetical Essays upon a divine subject.

THE FIRST BOOK.

Viz. of
Love, Humility, Repentance, Faith, and Hope.
1. COR. 2. 2. I esteemed not to know any thing, save Jesus Christ, and Him
crucified.

LONDON Printed by W. Stansby. 1621.

TO HIS MOST WORTHY, LEARNED, AND EVER-BELOVED FRIEND, Mr. JOHN ARGALL, Esquire.
THe Author does his Passe-times dedicate,
Whom he indeauouring to imitate,
These Graces all, does in the practique see,
Which here in Theorie described be.
By your own, R. A.

THE BRIDES ORNAMENTS.
The first Book.
THE CONTENTS.
The Porter of Loves Gate, Humility:
Her Treasurer, Knowledge; Fortitude, General;
Mercy, her Chancellor; Truth, Secretary:
Justice, chief Judge; Prudence directs all.
Temperance, Comptroller; Repentance, Marshall.
Bounty, the Almoner; Faith, Hope, Patrons are;
Patience, Obedience, Meekness, Maids I call,
Attending Love: Joy, privy Seal does bear;
Gods word* sword bearer is; Zeal, Prayer, chaplens there.
THE PROEME.
1
THose sublime Wits, that in high Court of Fame
Do seek to rank themselves by Poesy,
Eternizing the glory of their name
By praise of Honor, and of Cheualrie,
To some great Princes Court their youth apply,
Knights honorable actions to behold;
Chaste Ladies loves, and Nobles courtesy.
Of such have Homer, Virgil, Spencer told,
And have thereby their names in Fames fair Court enrold.
2
But had they waited on the glorious Court
Of Heavenly Love, by some called Charity,
And seen the order there, and gracious Port
Of this great Queen and her fair Company,
Her gentle Government and Majesty,
This sure their most Heroicke Muse might raise,
As far above their modern pitch to fly,
As candle-light's surmounted by Suns rays,
Or as the Creatures boasting is by Makers praise.
3
Nor had their stately Muse been raised more high,
By this employment in Loves Meditation,
Than their own souls, which up to ^^auen would fly
By this delightful heavenly Contemplation,
Where they might view the eternal Habitation,
Prepared for the faithful Friends of Love,
That by her Laws frame life and conversation,
As Members of one glorious Head above,
Which here upon the Earth by it do live, be, move.
4
Long time I sought Loves Court most carefully,
And on her noble Actions set my mind,
That, in her praise, my Muse might soar on high,
I sought in vain, but could no entrance find,
Until a courteous Lady then assigned
To keep the Court Gate, hight Humility,
Well knowing what I sought, lowly declined,
Assuring me I never could descrie,
Loves honorable Court, but by Humility.
5
She was a lovely Lady clothed in gray,
Of russet wool, which her own hands did spin,
Nor would expend her state in garments gay,
Her care was to be glorious within;
Yet had this Lady goodly commings in,
Which for Loves sake she dealt amongst the Poor,
To fill their bellies she looked lean and thin,
Would stoop to heal the meanest Lazars sore,
Yet when she had done all, grieved she could do no more.
6
She soon in me espies a dangerous sore,
Most dangerous, because it was least seen,
But inwardly did fester more and more;
It was Ambition, which even from my Spleen
Unto mine heart had sent her poisonous teene;
To cure which sore, she medicine straight applies,
Before I came in presence of her Queen.
Who gaynes, says she, grace in my Sovereigns eyes,
By meekness, not ambition, seeks, as I, to rise.
7
Many good medicines did this Maid devise,
Whereby she might recure my dangerous sore,
As good examples, words eke of the wise,
But none of these did yield me profit more,
Than mine own wretchedness; which she before
Me laid; that I might humbled be thereby,
And though my flesh first spurned against this lore,
Yet she so gently did this salve apply,
That my proud heart it made stoop to Humility.
8
Thus humbled, I was to Repentance brought,
Who was the Marshall, wondrous grave and sage,
Ah! she, at first, me^ickle sorrow wrought,
And showed how I unworthy was to wage,
Or be admitted to Loves equipage.
She then my conscience forthwith did demand,
To bring my Sins and Follies on the stage;
Who, streight-wayes, did obey her great command;
And, lo! my sins appeared in number like the Sand.
9
Sins done in secret, and long since forgot,
She there exhibited plain to be seen,
And straight me to the Bar of Justice got,
Accusing of high treason to her Queen:
Justice was chief Judge, in the Law well seen,
Yet limited by bounds of her Commission;
Law was her rule, not what she did esteem,
To extend Mercy she had no permission:
They that have sinned must be condemned without remission.
10
But Faith and Hope, two Patrons near at hand
To all distressed souls that crave their aid,
Advised me not on mine own works to stand,
But on His merits that had fully paid
The ransom of my sins; and further said,
From Justice I to Mercy might appeal.
This done, the Court most willingly conuaid
Me to the Throne of Mercy, which should heal,
And all by Justice done against me, would repeal.
11
Mercy a Princess was of high degree,
And near unto the Queen of Love allide;
Most pleasant was her countenance to see:
Knowledge the Treasurer sat by her side;
But Prudence most of all her Grace did guide.
The Secretary Truth her Acts did write,
She Mercy yet with Justice did divide,
To all those Suitors that did crave their right;
And were, by Faith and Hope, taught how to plead aright.
12
I had good audience at my first appearing,
But when Faith, Hope, began my suite to move,
Repentance craved another day of hearing,
And she would all my sins before them prove;
I answered, that this let I would remove,
For I confess all against me laid,
And straight by Faith and Hope did plainly prove,
My Saviors merits, all my debts had paid;
Then all the Court began cry, I need not be afraid.
13
Yet Mercy with her counsel would advise,
Before that she to sentence did proceed,
And first with Knowledge, Prudence, Truth devise,
The same which was long time before decreed*
And though damnation be thy sins just meed,
Yet seeing thou so rightly do apply
Christ's merits, thou, from guilt of them art freed:
Wherefore by Faith, Hope, and Humility,
In Loves Court to abide, thou have free liberty.
14
I thus absolu'd, by Mercies gracious dome
Was brought to Meekness and Obedience,
That they might me instruct, ere I should come
Into the Chamber of their Queens presence:
And by the way I met with Patience;
These three sweet Ladies many precepts give,
With charge the same to observe with diligence,
And all my wrongs past and to come forgive,
If in this Court of Love, with honor, I would live.
1^
Then Fortitude, this Queens great General,
Taught me'gainst all afflictions to stand fast,
For he that loves well endures all;
And Temperance enjoined me to fast,
And all immoderate lusts from me to cast;
This Temperance, Comptroller of the Hall,
Of slender diet is and body chaste;
Bounty the Alm'ner next to me did call,
To do good, and distribute to poor Saints above all.
16
Then Lady Laetice, that staid all this while,
Longing and wishing me this good success,
On me began most graciously to smile,
And comfort after my great heaviness:
She is of high trust and great nobleness,
And keeps the privy Signet of her Queen,
Which on the hearts of all she does impresse,
Absolu'd by Mercy from Laws direful teene:
She is called Inward Joy, more to be felt then seen.
17
There met I Zeal without vain superstition,
Who never, without Knowledge, durst come there,
So hot and fiery was her disposition,
As she in pieces could stone tables tear;
She in grave comely habit did appear,
As of the Tribe of Aaron she were borne;
Gods Name dishonored she could not bear,
Her hair was all discheuelled and torn,
Which she had rent to hear wretches her queens love scorn.
18
She was most earnest and patheticall,
And like Joy, did inflame mine inward parts:
Then Courtesy a Lady fair and tall,
Instructed me in her most pleasing Arts,
How first I should my looks suite to mine heart,
And next according to mine heart should look,
Unfeignedly the head and every part,
To love, who for love my sins on him took;
This Ladies loving heart, you might read in her look.
19
Then came Gods Word, of all the rest, the Guide,
From whose Mouth went a sharp two edged sword,
Which did from me all sin and lust divide,
And in my bleeding wounds sweet honey powered:
Last, Prayer needs this favor would afford,
My suite unto Loves Highness to present.
Then falling on my knees, she did record
My words, and even my secret hearts intent,
And them, by Mediation, to Loves presence sent.
20
Thus was I to Loves glorious presence brought,
Which was beyond imagination great,
Who gently me enquired what I sought:
Madame, said I, This now I do entreat,
Your Grace will give me license to repeat
The goodly glory I do here behold:
She granted me I should of her entreat,
And all her Courtiers, whereof I have told,
Which by Gods grace I mean in order to unfold.
21
And that I may an order due observe,
The first that comes forth is the Queen her Grace,
Then follow on such Ladies as her serve,
In their due order, rank, and proper place.
Humility first leads the Virtues trace:
Lo, next Repentance, Faith, and Hope have rome:
These three are Ladies which do guide our race,
Till we into the arms of Love do come;
But, lo, they leave us there; for then their charge is done.
MEDITAT. I.
Of Heavenly Love.
1
THose learned spirits that spend their youthful prime
In writing Volumes large of wanton Love,
Find, in the end, they lose most precious time,
And all their labor, and, though late, often prove,
That had their souls been mounted up above,
Whence they were sent to this fra^le house of clay,
They there had found the object of true Love,
God, true, eternal, which never fades away,
But when Love there begins it does endure for ay.
2
Whom as we love above all things by him wrought,
So all his glorious Works in him we love,
And even that Word, whereby to pass he brought
This all, in whom even all do live, be, move;
The same is Author, Finisher of Love,
The Sea from which all streams of Love do flow,
Which here refresh the tender plants, and prove
Most sovereign medicine to the Saints below,
Whereby in goodness, love, and virtue, they may grow.
3
And as the Brooks their tribute-streames do send
Unto the boundless Ocean, whence they move;
So though on Saints and Poor we freely spend
What we receive; yet to this Sea of Love
We must tend always, as the steel does move
With Lodestone touched, to the Arctique Pole;
All other motions violent do prove,
This is the object of true Love: this s^le
The Center is of Love, on which all Love does roll.
4
Author and Finisher, Thou Word of power,
Center and Lodestone, Object, Sea of Love,
Sweet drops of Grace upon mine heart down shower,
Attract my steely thoughts toward heaven to move;
Teach me, the complement of man, true Love,
O help me to express, what I conceive
Of thine affection, which thee from above
Made to descend, and all thy Glory leave,
And to the cursed Cross for love of man to cleave.
5
Of that dread love by which the Trinity,
Ineffably does in it self delight,
Of Persons three making one Unity;
I dare not undertake so high to write:
My Muse here only labors to indite,
Of that free Love, which does from thence descend,
That Love which from the head on members light,
And that which from them ought again ascend;
Lastly, that Christian love we each on other spend.
6
But as the eternal Godhead is but one, Quaere.

Yet is by Persons three distinguished,
The Son is of the Father all alone,
The Spirit from Son and Father does proceed;
So though a threefold kind of Love we read,
Yet is this true and heavenly Love but one,
For, with that Love from Father does proceed,
Christ loves those he chooses for his own,
And we the selfsame love to Head and Members shown.
7
Thou that did in thy Fathers bosom wun,
Eternally begotten, uncreate,
Let me begin where first thy Love begun
To be unto us manifest: when Hate
And Pride, the Dam of mischief and debate,
Had caused those celestial Lamps of light,
The Angels that kept not their first estate,
To be dejected from thy Palace bright,
Reserved in everlasting chains of darkest night.
8
Then first thy free Love did to Man appear,
Whom after thine own Image thou did frame,
And blessedst him to multiply and rear
Much fruit on Earth: and gave him power to tame
Thy handie works, to which he gave a name,
Which they received as Vassalls of their Lord;
Adam then Lord of all thy works became,
Each herb, fruit, seed, thou gave him for his board,
Thus Lord of all; He Is only subject to thy Word.
9
God saw that all he made was very good,
Yet 'twas not good that Man should be alone,
(I dare not think Man could alone have stood
In his integrity) thou gave him one
To be his help, of his own flesh and bone,
For whom he should Father and Mother leave;
Behold! now Adam with his Paragon,
Walk in the Garden, where they have good leave,
The fruit of every tree there growing to receive.
10
Had thou him set in Gardens, ready planted
With all v^^etie of rich delight,
And for his care to keep them had but granted,
He might take pleasure only in their sight,
And food from one to feed his appetite,
Nature had been content with competence:
Thou gave him leave of all the trees to bite,
Thou only one tree from his lips did fence,
To show thy Lordship, and prove his obedience.
11
But, lo, that pride which mischief did conceive,
First in the Court of Heaven, brings forth below;
And in disdain such exc'llent Spirits must leave,
Their glorious Mansions unto one they know,
Was framed of slimy earth: Behold! they grow
To tempt the weaker by a false pretense,
You shall not die, says he, for God does know
What day you eat, you shall be gods from thence,
Lo, thus was all mankind made guilty of offense.
12
Adam, where art? What art? Hid, naked, vile;
Now thou have eat of the forbidden Tree,
My Wife did me, a Serpent her beguile,
Cannot excuse thee nor thy Progeny:
Cursed is the Serpeat for his subtlety,
The Ground is cursed and all that on it goes,
Serpents and Woman's seed at enmity,
The earth, from whence thou came, thee up must close,
Thy Garden's lost, thy Subjects now become thy F^es.
13
O miserable Man, in loss, in pain,
Look but from whence, and whither thou do fall:
Who now has power to raise thee up again?
Breach of one Law, thee guilty makes of all,
Hell is thy Guerdon, miserable thrall,
Driu'n from the presence sweet of God above,
Which thee to such a height of bliss did call,
The Serpents speech, thou now too true do prove,
And to thy cost know Good and Evil, Hate and Love.
14
God is most merciful, yet True and Just,
His Mercy shined in thy first Creation,
His Law is broken, now he punish must;
Here Love, behold, beyond all expectation,
Will draw them both to reconciliation;
God becomes Man, Justice to satisfy;
His Death shall pay the price of our damnation,
No height of Verse this great Love can des^ry,
This Sun is too resplendent for my Muses eye.
15
Most glorious God, Wise, Happy, Uncreate,
Absolute, Perfect, Pure, Omnipotent,
Here humbly to converse in mean estate,
And as a Malefactor to be rent,
To save even those that sought him to torment,
Captivity thus Captive for to l^ade,
And give such gifts to Men, and Hell prevent,
Thy works of power, Lord! can (...) Creature read,
But this of Love and Mercy does them all exceed.
16
Three sorts of Love wise Sages have observed,
Love of true Friends, of Kindred, Conjugal;
Of which amongst them friendship has deserved
To be first ranked, this Love surmounts them all:
These Stars do rise, these Stars again do fall,
But when this Sun of heavenly Love does shine
Once in our hearts, it is perpetual,
And when it lowest seems and to decline,
It then is highest raised, and nearest to Divine.
17
This Love's an undivided Unity,
A concord that division will admit,
Divided yet to all abundantly,
And does this all into one body knit;
The Head that even above in heaven does sit,
It joins to the Members on the ground,
And all those Members in one Body knit,
Love like her self the same is ever found,
Though in one Member more than other she abound.
18
As Soul of Man does from the Head to Heart,
And all the Members life and motion send,
Being ^l in all, and all in every part,
Even so does Love her Power divine extend
On every part that on the Head depend,
And as the Members soon rot and decay,
To which the Soul her virtue does not lend;
Even so the Man whose love does fall away,
Does straight in error, darkness, and delusions stray.
19
Those that by reasons force, and strength of wit,
Draw true Conclusiont by firm Argument,
First strive the Causes, with the Effects to fit,
Else they will hardly grant the Consequent.
To say, I love, is not sufficient,
Except I show the reason why I love;
I know, o Lord! thou art Omniscient,
But know no cause to love me should thee move,
Only I daily feel that which I cannot prove.
20
God is Loves very Author; Life and Spring,
Yea, God himself is also styled Love;
From him all Streams of Love are issuing,
As from the Sea all other Waters move:
He first fills all with Love in Heaven above;
Which Water plenteously the Vales below.
So God loves first before we do him love,
Lo, what exceeding great love he does show:
God loves his Enemies first, before they do him know.
21
The cause of all this Love proceeds from thee;
Thou did us love yet being Enemies,
Bond-slaues to Sin and Satan: but now ^ree,
And made thy Friends by Grace; our love does rise
From thee as from the Spring, and multiplyes,
Growing from strength to strength, till by thy Grace,
We works of Love in thee do exercise;
Thy Members here for thee we do embrace,
Even as ou^ own, till we behold thy glorious Face.
22
Into one Body we by Love do grow:
Into one Building we are all combined,
Love that does from the Head to Members flow*
And all the stones has in this building joined;
Where every Members office is assigned;
And every stone an others weight does bear;
All lively Stones the choicest of mankind,
All living Members of one Head which here
By Love in one close cemented and ioynted are.
23
My lowly Muse, dares not presume to pry
Into Gods holy happy Habitation,
Where Love three Persons ioynes in Unity,
And makes one Godhead, to man's admiration;
I leave the Mystery of th'Incarnation,
Where Love does make both God and Man in one,
And eke the power of Spirits regeneration,
Where Love makes Man even of Gods flesh and bone,
Thus Love all things in Heaven and Earth unites in one.
24
Such as Loves cause is, such are Loves effects,
Holy, Transcendent, Supernatural,
Which public good, not private most respects.
The weakest member service does to all,
And the most Honorable does not call
The meaner base, as he did him despise,
They all agree in one, and one in all,
Unto one glorious Head by love to rise,
And in him works of Love and Grace to exercise.
25
This Love's long suffering, gentle, not enuies,
Not striving, boasting, shameless for her own,
Bitter, ill-minded, ioying in injuries,
But most glad to do right when Truth is known;
Endures, believes, hopes, suffers all alone,
Though tongues do cease, and prophecyings fail,
And knowledge vanish, yet Love holds her own;
We know and prophecy in part, as frail,
But when the perfect comes, th'imperfect naught auailes.
26
Had I the tongues of Men and Angels, and
Could prophecy, and knew all mysteries;
Had Faith to remove Mountains, t'vnderstand
All knowledge, and should all my goods out size
Amongst the Poor, my body should devise
Even to be burned; yet if I want this Love,
It profits not, this Love which does arise
From a pure heart; oh thou then, that do prove
And tr^e the hearts of Men, season mine heart with Love.
27
And ever let the Object of my Love
Be the true individual Trinity,
The Saints on earth, and Angels all above,
That still persist in their integrity;
I mention here the happy memory
Of thy deceased Saints and Martyrs all,
Which here their Love to thee did testify,
Whom thou by Love did first unto thee call,
And do in heaven reward with bliss perpetual.
28
But it is the heart from which this Love must flow,
There Love her Court keeps, there is her Royal seat;
It Is not enough with words this Love to show,
Or feigned looks; God does the heart entreat;
That must b^^ clens'd from sin, made sweet and neat
For him that stands knocking at the door,
Then open; he will enter in and eat,
And bring with him of heavenly food such store,
As thou shall never thirst nor hunger any more.
29
Cleanse my deceitful heart defiled with sin,
Make it a Temple for thy Spirit of Love,
Fit for the King of Glory to come in,
That all my words, thoughts, actions, pure may prove,
As Rivers which from purest Fountaynes move,
Oh, since thou were so bountiful to spend
Thy precious Blood for us thy Foes, still love
And cherish us, and against all harm defend.
Who will die for his Foes, cannot deny his Friend.
30
In all that Nature has endued with life,
We find desire with like to company:
Again we see di^^^^tions, jarres, and strife,
Amongst those that are of different quality;
We often (...)-inclinations may descrie,
By company they either keep or shun,
They have of manners such a sympathy,
I therefore show what heavenly Graces won
With royal Love, which sweetly linked together run.
31
These Virtues are Loves dear Concomitants,
Repentance, Knowledge, Faith, Humility,
Fortitude, Justice, Prudence, Temperance,
Meekness, Obedience, Truth, Hope, Courtesy,
These a most sacred (...) Society,
Do on the Court of royal Love attend,
These Hate expel, and her base progeny,
Wrath, Aua^^^, Pride, (...), and contend
Against Glutto^e, (...) which on Hate depend.
32
These Impes which of this hellish Hagge are bred,
Begot of her by Lucifer in Hell,
In ways of error and of darkness lead,
Where damned spirits in torments ever dwell;
And though on earth they bear away the bell,
Of all one day there will a reckning be,
Then shall appear who has done ill, who well;
The lovely Bride shall joy her Love to see,
But they which follow Hate, with her shall damned be.
33
Such do ill judge of Love that cannot love,
Nor in their hearts feel heat of lively flame,
Love is the gift of God from heaven above,
Sent down man's proud rebellious heart to tame,
And yield obedience to his holy Name,
Though scorned by those, whose hearts are made so blind
With this worlds god, they cannot see the same,
This World they love, and on Lusts set their mind,
And never seek this true and heavenly Love to find.
34
The reason is, they do not seek to know
Gods Wisdom, Mercy, Bounty, Goodness, Love,
And these though Preachers daily to them show,
And their slow unbelieving hearts reprove,
Their hearts of flint to love they cannot move;
Ah! How can they love God they have not seen,
When as their brethren here they cannot love?
To love the Head, and yet to bear a spleen
Unto the Members, is a thing unknown, unseen.
35
Should they with Paul behold the glorious sight
Of the Head, whose Members they do cause to rue,
They would fall down amazed with such light,
And humbly prostrate with submission due,
Cry, Lord, Who art? and with affection new,
That Head and Members would entirely love,
Which lately with such spite they did pursue:
Then would they set their hearts on things above,
And all base worldly cares out of their mind remove,
36
Or be as (...), John, and James affected,
When on the Mount their Lords Transfiguration
They saw, and thenceforth worldly cares rejected,
Desiring there to make their Habitation:
Or could they see the Bridegroomes preparation,
When clothed all in Majesty and Love,
He hastens to his marriage consummation,
How would they all their former thoughts reprove,
And strive to be joined to their Head by Faith and Love!
37
When Love like Moses holds up both her hands,
We, against our spiritual Amal^c prevail;
And, lest she faints, like Her and Aaron stands,
Both Faith and Hope to stay them, lest they fail;
These three transcendent Virtues, lo, can quail
All that our passage to the holy Land
Oppose by force, or else by flight assail;
Lo, two of them, ten thousand can withstand,
The third triumphs over Sin and all the Devils band.
38
If when good (...) saw Goliath slain,
His love to valiant David was so great,
That they did as one soul from thence remain;
How should we love our Lord that did defeat
Our spiritual Goliath? How entreat
Our Ionath^^ that does his Fathers ire
Appease, and though he drops of blood does sweat,
Will vindicate us from eternal fire,
And make Coheires with him? Angels this Love admire.
39
And father Iaco^ thought it much, to send
His dearest Benia^^^ to Egypt land,
Having ten sons upon him to attend,
To loose their brother Simeon then in band:
How does Gods love it self to us expand,
Who having but one only Son, him gave
Us to redeem from Satan's cruel hand,
And us his enemies as his Sons to save,
In whom, and by whom, he will grant us all we crave?
40
And as the Child that sucks his Mothers breast,
Is in all duty to her ever bound,
For bearing him with pain and loss of rest,
With many troubles she in nursing found:
So should our Love unto our Lord abound,
By whose Cross we are newborn from above,
And nursed with Blood that flows from his Wound,
His Flesh we eat, his Blood we drink, and prove
Flesh of his Flesh, Bone of his Bone, by Faith and Love.
41
Behold, here is a Sea of Mystery,
Where Lambs may wade, and Elephants may swim,
And both be drowned, except sweet Love stand by;
By Faith we only wade about the brim
Of this deep Sea, by Love up to the chin.
It is a mystery, which to unfold,
No speech is able, it is the heart within,
To which this mystery is plainly told:
This secret, Babes and Sucklings do through Love behold.
42
Love's like to Oil, that, in Zarepta's Cruse,
By spending on the Prophet, did increase;
Like Sun, which light does into all infuse,
Yet does thereby his light no whit decrease,
Like boundless Waters of the bounteous Seas,
Which fail not, though on all the Floods they spend;
Like Leaches skill, by use which gaynes increase,
Like fervent Prayer, which the Clouds transcend,
Yet by her daily use in strength and growth does mend.
43
Love's like pure living Streams in Pipes, which flow
From some fair Conduit built upon a Hill,
Which though they moisten all the Vales below,
And many Offices with Water fill;
Yet to as high a pitch remounten still,
As is the Fountain from whence first they fall,
Even so Loves streams, which from our head distill
Upon the lowest Member here of all,
Mount up, from whence they came, with source perpetual.
44
But why seek I by simile's to express,
The heavenly Nature of this glorious Queen,
Since Men and Angels greatest nobleness,
But even as shadows to the substance been,
If with her most celestial splendor seen:
Let dust and ashes dare then be so bold,
His Maker to compare with Loves great Queen,
So I her heavenly graces may unfold,
And you the plainlier may her glory great behold.
45
God's uncreate, eternal, infinite,
Love's boundless, sans beginning, without end:
And as Gods Throne above in Heaven is pight,
Yet's Pr^^dence does on meanest Worm attend;
So th^^gh Loves habitation does transcend;
She dwells with meanest Creature here below,
And ^n them her most gracious Beams does send;
G^d even the secrets of man's heart does know*
And Love the secret things of God to Man does show.
46
The King of Heaven, for Man, did on him take
A Servants form, even so this heavenly Peer,
Her self a Servant unto Man does make.
The whole Law God for us fulfilled here,
And Love us from the guilt thereof does clear;
If you will grant similitudes may prove,
By thousands I can make it plain appear,
Love's like in all to God in heaven above,
Yea, Love is God himself: for God is called Love.
47
As in the Frame and Microcosme of Man,
The Souls great power all other motions sway,
And the whole Frame which of the Chaos came,
To the prime Mouer always does obey;
So do all spiritual heavenly Virtues ay,
Depend upon this gracious Queen of Love,
And even as Man and the whole World decay,
When Soul departs and Spheres do cease to move,
Even so all Virtues die not quickened by Love.
48
Two things observe in Love, longing, delight;
Longing to get; Delight, when we obtain:
Lo, Love with longing does our hearts inuit
Unto the feast, where Christ shall entertayne*
Virgins that in their Lamps sweet Oil maintain;
Those that are in the wedding Garment dressed,
Where they with him shall evermore remain,
In solemnizing of this marriage feast,
Where they enjoy true happiness and endless rest.
49
As is Loves Object, so indeed is Love,
Constant, delightful, happy, permanent,
If we affection set on things above,
And tread in his steps that before us went,
Delight shall ever last with true content:
If for this pearl of Love, we all do pay,
And let no Wife, Farm, Oxen us prevent
From coming to the marriage at the Day,
Then like Loves Object, so delight shall last for ay.
50
The examples of this Love are manifold,
In holy Men, when yet the Law had place,
As Abram, Moses, Job, and David bold,
But they have shined more now under Grace
Amongst those that have seen our Saviors face,
But most since he the Comforter has sent,
Stones, Fagots, Swords, Sawes, Crosses they embrace,
As if they did their Savior represent,
Showing by loss of their dear Blood their true intent.
51
In every Age, examples do abound
Of Gods love t'vs, and ours to God again;
Yea, when most enemies seek Love to confound,
She does her own most valiantly maintain,
No horror, death, cold, hunger, loss, or pain,
Saints, from their Love to Christ, can separate,
Their Martyrdome's their Crown; their loss, their gain;
Their Captains death Soldiers does not amate,
They know this is the way in at the narrow Gate.
52
Oh! let this one example serve for all,
For Love, a Servants form, God on him takes,
To raise up Man, even God receives a fall,
Himself a Suitor poor to us he makes,
Enduring pain and hunger for our sakes,
Going from house to house: in every place
Doing of good, our sins upon him takes,
Opes wide his Arms, his Church for to embrace,
And humbly us entreating to accept of grace.
53
It has been known, that sometimes for a Friend
A man would die; some shortened have their life
With grief for loss of Children, or their kind:
Some, for their Minions loss, have did with knife:
Jacob would serve even seven years for a Wife,
Our Savior for his Foes his Blood does spend;
Us Children to adopt, lays down his Life;
To save his Spouse does on the Cross depend,
Served for her five seven years: His Love does never end.
54
Behold! by all these Names, he does inuit
Us to embrace his mutual heavenly Love,
And calls us Friend, Child, Sister, Spouse, Delight;
His Servants sends us courteously to move,
To royal Banquets and sweet beds of Love,
By grace adopting us, to be Coheires
Even with himself, of glory great above,
No cost or pains, not his own Blood, he spares,
But like a Father, Husband, Friend, for us he cares.
55
I here had ended, had not holy Steven,
The first of Martyrs, that did testify
His Masters Resurrection: of the seven
The chiefest Deacon: Had he not falsely
Been next accused of wicked blasphemy,
Whose witnesses their clothes at Saul's feet lay,
And then him stone with stones, whilst he does cry,
Jesus receive my Spirit: And Love does pray
Aloud, Lord to their charge this sin do thou not lay.
56
Why seek I out? let us within abound,
Toward the Saints in love and charity,
Which does to Gods high glorious grace redound,
When by releeuing them in poue^tie,
They for our bounty Gods Name glorify:
He that unto the Sower gives seed,
Bread to the hungry, he will multiply
Us with increase, if to poor Saints in need
We give with cheerfulness: such gifts God likes indeed.
57
Who sparingly does sow, reapes sparingly:
His Righteousness for ever shall remain
That does disperse and give abundantly:
What do we save if we the world should gain,
And lose our Crown which up in Heaven is layne?
Who having this worlds good, and does behold
His brother want, yet does his hand retain,
How can it be but Love in him is cold?
For whereas Love does dwell, her fruits are manifold.
58
Oh! come all ye then, that forget the Lord;
Behold his love to Man with admiration!
Oh, let our love such fruits to Saints afford,
They may bless God for such refocillation.
Mount up my soul by heavenly contemplation,
Behold him in his Majesty above!
Behold him in his wonderful creation!
In's Wisdom and his Providence, and prove
If all these counterpoise his Bounty, Mercy, Love.
59
And if his love's so great and wonderful,
Most precious sure's the Object of his love,
Out of this Worlds great treasury to cull
One, whom he would eternally above
Make happy with his presence: and to prove
So kind a Father, Him Coheire to take
To his own dear beloved Son: to love
Him as his own, for his own Sons dear sake.
Learn here what high account we of our souls should make.
60
Why do, my Soul, then grouell on the ground,
Since in respect of thee this World is base?
No thing created in the World is found,
Which God vouchsafed has so much to grace.
His free Love does advance thee to this place,
Requiring of thee this one complement,
Thou him and his again with love embrace,
For Love fulfilleth the Commandment,
Command Lord what thou will, Love makes obedient.
61
But ah my Soul! Where is thy Love? thy fear?
How does the World bewitch thee? How possess?
How are thy thoughts taken up with worldly care?
Breeding of heavenly Love a sensel^snesse:
Do thou misdoubt Gods gracious promises?
Far be such Atheism and impiety;
Oh, never let such dismal heaviness
Cleave on my Soul, through unbelief to die,
For which Christ offered up himself so lovingly.
62
Have thou not, oh my Soul! most plainly seen,
That all things in this World are vanity,
No true content to mortal e're has been,
But that which does endure eternally?
As Primum mobile Love does employ
All other Graces in their proper motion,
And as all Spheres are moved perpetually
By the prime Mouer, so Loves purest Notion,
Swayes all the other Virtues in their due devotion,
63
Wilt then despise his friendship, kindness, love,
Wherewith thy Lord inuites thee unto Grace?
And as a Father, Husband, Friend thee move,
His Love with like relation to embrace?
And all thy mind on things above to place,
Abandoning vain wealth and worlds delight,
The World and all things in it are but base,
To ransom one poor Soul all is too light,
In this Gods Love does more then all his Power and Might.
64
Oh! that I could despise Worlds vain promotion,
And follow heavenly things with all my might,
My whole life consecrating to devotion;
Oh, that I might live ever in thy sight!
Where fullness is of joy and pure delight,
Oh, that mine heart were on thy Law so set!
To meditate thereon both day and night,
Thy Statutes then I never should forget,
Nor at the wickeds vain and false preferments fret.
65
Oh, that my dearest Husband, Father, Friend,
His heavenly Love into mine heart would shower!
That my Love may again to him ascend,
And that I may with all my might and power,
Love and defend his Members from each stower;
His Saints which in this wandering wilderness
In danger of the Wolves are every hour,
Visit the Widows and the Fatherless,
And walk unspotted here in Truth and Holiness.
66
But though, alas, this heavenly Love I feel
Abundant grace upon mine heart to shower,
Love of this World my souls eyes up so seele,
To love the things above, I have no power:
And though I feel sweet flashes every hour
Of heavenly Love: I cannot love again
The Head nor Members, which in earthly Bower
Most dear and precious in his sight remain,
But hardly can from Envy, Hatred, Pride refrain.
67
I do confess my debt of Love so great,
I never able am my score to pay,
For if I should Gods kindnesses repeat,
And all his favors in one sum convey,
I might begin them early before day,
But could not cast the number up by night.
Accept my will and readiness for pay,
Accept my sorrowful heart and humble sprite,
Which made the Widows poor, an acceptable mite.
68
Let me thy love so lively apprehend,
That I may ready be with cheerfulness
To die for thee, who thy dear Blood did spend,
To vindicate my soul from wretchedness;
And raise me to such height of happiness,
That I may gladly wish my dissolution;
And cast from me all wretched world^inesse,
Prepared with a holy resolution,
To stand undaunted at the Worlds great deuolution.
69
Frame in me such an habit of thy Love,
As I for love may seek thee to obey,
More than for fear I should thine anger move,
Whereby thou should my sins with vengeance pay;
And grant that all the good I do, I may
Perform it well, with good and due respect
Unto thy gracious Love, which me always
In every good and perfect thing direct:
And not for pleasure, gain, vain glory, worlds respect.
70
Set my delight on hallowing thy great Name,
And longing for the coming of our King,
Thy Will on Earth to do, even as the same
Thine Angels do in Heaven: such nourishing
As we have need of, daily to us bring.
Forgive our faults as we by love forgive
Them that offend us; From the entising
Of Sin and Satan and the Flesh relieve;
From evil set us free, in Joy and Love to live.
71
O Lord! I do but ask, what thou to give
More ready art, than I am to receive;
Thy Life thou laidst down, that my soul might live,
Did cleave to flesh that I to thee might cleave;
My Soul thou will not now in darkness leave,
Which to redeem thou suffredst many a wound,
And Hell and Satan's malice to deceive,
Suffredst thy Body three days in the ground;
But raised up now to Heaven, thy Love does more abound.
72
For there thou make continual intercession
For us, thy Servants which do wander here
In this vain World, subject to base oppression
Of Satan, World, Flesh, which about we bear:
Thou send'st thy Comforter our hearts to cheer,
That says, Thy Grace is all-sufficient,
Esteeming nothing for thine Own too dear,
For them which to thee be obedient,
And love and serve thee with a faithful true intent.
73
Then, oh my Soul! be bold and confident,
Though of this Love thou have the smallest taste,
He gave it, that will daily it augment,
Cherish it carefully, let it not waste:
D^st thou desire to love? lo, love thou have;
He surely shall fulfill thy whole desire,
Look all the Ages that are gone and past,
God never yet was found like Man, a liar,
But what he promises, we boldly may require.
74
Should I with Job be thrown down in the dust;
With Jonas drowned in belly of a Whale;
With Jeremy into a Dungeon thrust;
Should I with David walk, even in the vale
Of cruel death, with Joseph set to sale,
And without cause in prison spend my days,
Should damned ghosts stand ready for to hale
My Soul to Hell: all this me not dismayes:
I know whom I have trusted, he my soul will raise.
75
Should my sins be in number as the Sand,
And my forefathers sins, my sins exceed
In weight and number: yet I firm would stand,
What though eternal fire be sins just meed?
Much is forgiu'n, where is much love indeed;
Wherefore mine Heart and Soul shall ever praise
My Maker, that in me such love does breed,
That does my Soul from hellish horror raise
Above the Heavens, to live the life of Love always.
76
As always for thy love, so at this time
I praise thee for this holy Meditation
Of heavenly Love: of all the Graces prime,
Which by thy grace do work out our salvation;
And pay the score and price of our damnation:
I always will acknowledge and confess
Thy Power and Bounty in our first Creation;
But now mine heart unable to express
Thy Love in our Redemption, here with joy does cease.
77
And pray's that whilst I Love to others preach,
My self may not become a reprobate,
Like as I often have seen a skillful Leach,
Careless of his own health and frail estate;
But grant that as this Song I do relate
Of heavenly Love, it may my Soul here move
To be as true as Turtle to her Mate:
That never worldly cares my heart remove
From this most precious Pearl: this true and heavenly Love.
78
Had I not told, you wonder might, how I
So mean a wretch, in presence came of Love;
But, as I said, Madame Humility
Me first directed to her Court to move;
And from mine heart Ambition did remove;
For, from my youth, I had a great desire,
To view the estate and bliss of glorious Love,
But, often in vain, I did thereto aspire,
Till Humbleness me taught: of whom I next enquire.
MEDITAT. II.
Of Humiliti^.
1
MY boundless thoughts, that in a restless mind,
Deprive my body often of natural rest,
And urge my soul true happiness to find,
And that once found therein to set my rest,
Do often to my purer Soul suggest,
To seek for pleasures, honor, wealth, promotion;
But more of them I gain, the more oppressed
I am with worldly cares, and minds commotion,
So that to nothing in this World I have devotion.
2
And yet I see, all Things that being have,
Unto their Been esse do intend,
Their Summum bonum it is that all do crave,
First sought for, though they last it apprehend:
Love is that good I seek to apprehend,
As all Things being to their end do move;
But none but by Humility can wend
Into Loves Court, without her none can prove
What is the end and finishing of all true Love.
3
Therefore I sing next of Humility,
The lowly Porter of high Loves Court gate,
Who brought me first Loves glorious Court to see,
And all her Courtiers, as I told of late:
Humility the poorest beggars Mate,
Yet equal to the highest Peer of Love,
And by her used in all affairs of State,
Humility which does so gracious prove
To all good Men on earth, and Angels pure above.
4
God! second Person in the Trinity,
Whose being is immortal, uncreate,
Who in the days of thy Humility,
Did here converse with Men in mean estate,
That we thy lowliness might imitate,
Direct my Muse most lively to express
Humility, that opens wide Loves gate
To those, that do confess their wretchedness,
But shuts close against all proud and vain ambitious ghests.
5
Humility that virtue is, whereby
We vile and lowly seem in our own eyes;
Despising our own worth and dignity,
Since of our selves we nothing have to prise:
The first and certain step whereby we rise,
And climb the Hill of Joy and Happiness;
Stranger to fools companion of the wise.
Of Folly, Pride; of Grace comes humbleness;
One headlong leads to Hell, the other unto Bless.
6
This modest Lady, Humbleness of Spirit,
Her self unwise and ignorant does deem,
And never thinks she able is to merit,
In Loves high Court to be in such esteem,
She far inferior to her self does seem,
And never thinks she Knowledge can attain,
Disgrace or loss she sweetly does redeem
With Humbleness, and holds it greatest gain,
Her Peace, not Place; true Love, not Glory to maintain.
7
Most fruitful Lady like the fertile Vine,
Which evermore when she most fruit does bear,
Her goodliest branches lowliest does decline,
And as the fairest clusters do appear,
Hid under leaves; even so this gracious Pee^e
Couers all Virtues under lowliness:
Of Fortunes storms she never stands in fear,
Nor troubled is with want or with distress,
For she has learned to be content in pain or ease.
8
Inward and outward's this Humility,
In words and actions, looks, thoughts, and attire,
The inward by the outward we descrie.
It is hypocrisy for to desire
Lowly to seem, and secretly aspire
Unto a Crown, by legs, with Absal^m:
Such complement let Pagan Courts admire,
Never such baseness yet had any room
In Court of heavenly Love, where heart and look is one.
9
For true Humility is undivided,
She always looks, speaks, does, seems, thinks the same,
And though she be by scorners often derided,
She Is always humble like unto her name:
Nor does she virtuous deeds to purchase fame,
But for themselves, and for her Lords dear sake,
Who with her suffered much reproach and shame,
When he a Servants form did on him take,
And Lord of all, himself of none account did make.
10
The Son of God from all eternity,
Most holy, happy, wise, whose glorious Station
Being pight in Heaven, thought it no robbery
To be with God of equal estimation;
Himself to make here of no reputation,
His glory great in highest Heavens to leave,
And live here in the meanest servants fashion,
And when the Heavens did him again receive,
Her here unto his Spouse for an ensample leave.
11
Oh! could we but this wondrous Grace conceive,
And honor Love has done Humility,
Would it not cause us unto her to cleave,
And her embrace with all integrity,
Keeping her in our hearts most carefully,
That from our humbled hearts, as from a Well,
There might flow forth vnfayn'd humility,
That when we are hence summoned by the bell,
We in Loves Court with joy eternally may dwell?
12
This is the final cause of Humbleness,
To gain true Bliss, and Gods eternal Love:
The formal is unfeigned Lowliness,
In and without, which God and Man approve;
The knowledge of our selves us well may move
As the efficient cause, her to embrace:
Thoughts, manners, looks, words, tires material prove;
For by the words, eye, act, attire and face,
A wise man may discern what in the heart has place.
13
But now if we unto the effects proceed,
What gaynes a man by all his lowliness?
We see what mickle sorrow it did breed
Unto our Captain, when in great distress
He Is humbled to the Cross: and we no less
By his ensample look to undergo
His scoffs and scorns, his gall and bitterness:
If this be all Humility can do,
Of all they are most wretched that are humbled so.
14
But lo! our Leader that did her embrace
With such affection, God does him regard
As his dear Son: behold, he does him grace
Above the Angels; and he has prepared
Such joys for him as cannot be compared:
With glory and with honor has him crowned,
And though a while on earth he meanly fared,
All now unto his honor does redound,
At naming of his Name all knees must kiss the ground.
15
And us that in our Captains steps do tread,
And follow him in true Humility,
He will to endless bliss and glory lead,
And honor here with true nobility:
And as he captive led captivity,
And did from lowest earth to heaven ascend,
So from the dust and grave shall we on high
Be raised, where we in glory shall transcend
The Angels: which on Head and Members must attend.
16
But soft, my Muse, thou now do far transcend
The subject of thy song, Humility,
Now homeward to thy self thy thoughts intend,
And view the subject where she does aby.
The heart's the seat of true Humility,
And in thy body seated is thine heart,
Both made of basest Clay: thy soul from high,
The highest by thy nostrils did impart,
Which is there all in all, and all in every part.
17
The bodi's base; the soul it does transcend,
And were it not here immured in house of clay,
Against her nature she would re-ascend
To him that gave her: Then, my Soul, I say,
Into her Makers presence would away,
And be accepted by his mediation,
Who humbled to the Cross, for her did pay
His dearest blood for reconciliation.
For after humbleness does follow exaltation.
18
Nay even our flesh, though humbled in the dust,
By virtue of our Saviors Resurrection,
Again shall be united: and the just
Which have been humbled here by his direction,
Shall be delivered from worlds base subjection,
Into the liberty and glorious light
Of Gods own Sons, under whose safe protection,
They ever shall enjoy the happy sight
Of God and's Saints, which here have humbled been aright.
19
But Humbleness is not the only way
To bring us to this glorious exaltation,
End of our hopes: but first does us convey
To wholesome true Repentance to salvation;
Which is from filthy sin the best purgation:
Mercy the meek and humble man does save,
Though Justice us condemn to dire damnation,
If Faith and Hope for us we Patrons have,
Whilst Bounty grants us all things needful we do crave.
20
The Treasurer Knowledge, who has always vowed
Her self true servant to Humility,
Has her with precious and rare gifts endowed,
Yet still more mean and lowly she will be:
For well she wots, in whom the Treasuree
Of Wisdom and of Knowledge all did dwell,
Became a servant mean of low degree,
Truth often unto her (what she knows well)
That she has naught but what she has received, does tell.
21
Thus Meekness, Patience, true Obedience, Joy,
Do always with Humility abide,
She is most kind and courteous, never coy
Unto the virtuous; and she opens wide
Loves gate unto the Humble; but does hide
From th'enuious, vain, and the ambitious wight,
Truth, Prudence, Knowledge, which should be their guide;
Thus Humbleness guides all to Truth and light,
But Pride, Ambition, lead to darkness, error, night.
22
This Monster, foul Ambition, cursed Pride,
Who, envying Man, even in his first creation,
Did like a subtle Serpent smoothly slide
In to Edens Garden, Man's sweet habitation,
Where by malicious, subtle, false persuasion,
He then persuaded simple E^e to try
Forbidden fruits, and by false application
Assured her she should knowledge get thereby,
Such knowledge gain they that eq^iuocate and lie.
23
Oh! had Humility true Knowledge brought
To Eve, before she did commit this sin!
She never had entertayn'd so base a thought,
Nor we of Pride and Satan bond-slaues bin;
See here the end of all, that do begin
In pride and in ambition: they must fall,
Pride first betrayed us to the Fowlers gin,
But Humbleness delivers them from thrall,
That do unfeignedly with her for mercy call.
24
What? Be as gods? For to be proud and poor,
Is a base sin, hated of God and Man,
Behold, even as Humility's the door,
That leads to Happiness, even so began
At Pride the misery and smart of Man:
Which still in him remaynes a dangerous sore.
For honor here a Worldling what you can,
His greedy thoughts will never count it store,
Ambition, like to Hell and Grave, still gapes for more.
25
Thus Poets tell of an ambitious Snaile,
That golden weather-cocke on steeple high
Espying, from sweet Garden, would assail,
And for vain glory life would ieopardie:
He by fast hold and winding subtlety,
Mounts slily up the steeples highest spire,
Whence he the poor Bird throws down cruelly,
And does to his place vaine-gloriously aspire,
Till Boreas brazen wings him throws down in the mire.
26
Thus vain fond youth left his sage Fathers lore,
And by his borrowed wings did soar so high,
(Lo here their end that seek so high to soar)
The Sun beams heat his waxen wings did fry.
Proud Bryar that safe and secure did lie
Under stout Oaks most safe protecting arms,
Supplanted him by treason cunningly,
Then to Suns heat exposed and Winters storms,
He Is trod down by wild beasts, and eaten up of worms.
27
Once had the feet the noble Head defide,
Grieuing to bear his burden any more,
And Brawny arms their helping hands denide,
To feed the belly with convenient store:
But hands and arms forthwith grew weak and poor
For want of stomachs strengthening nourishment,
And now the legs that able were before,
To bear both Head and Bodies wonderment,
Became wrang, stumbling, lame for want of government.
28
When Ioth^ms trees went out t'annoint a King* I^dg. 9. 8.

They first besought the Olive tree to reign,
But he, his fatness highly valewing,
Refused to leave it for a Kingdoms gain:
Next Fig Tree sweet to rule they would constrain,
Who nould his sweetness leave for Kingdoms glee:
Last to the fertile Vine they do complain,
Who fruitfulness loves more than Sou'raigntee,
But Bryar base will reign and the anointed be.
29
Like as on Mountains which do break the clouds,
Sand, gravel, and unfruitful earth do lie,
But in the fruitful Valleys lowly shrowds
Fruit good for meat, and to delight the eye:
And as the brackish Waves do mount on high,
Whilst fresher Waters silent slide away;
Even so it fares with sweet Humility,
Which like the fruitful Meadow's fruitful ay,
And like fresh Brooks, whose sweetness never does decay*
30
And as tall ships which bear too high a sail,
Are soon o'returned by a boystrous wind,
Whilst smaller Vessels against the Waves prevail,
Arriving safely at the Port assigned:
So they, that to ambition are inclined,
And Phaeton-like to guide the Sun aspire,
All things consume that under them they find,
Till from their Coach they tumble in the mire.
Till fuel fails, Ambition never slakes her fire.
31
And as man's eye, the higher he does stand,
The things which are beneath does lesser deem,
So he that does Gods greatness understand,
In his own eyes, does vile and nothing seem,
An humble man's a gemme of high esteem,
Which ignorant men do trample in the mire,
Until the skillful Ieweller redeem
It from the dust, and cleanse it in the fire,
Then those that trod on it before, do it admire.
32
Those that in Princes service purchase fame,
And thereby would raise their posterity,
Seek great alliance to confirm the same,
And of the Heralds get a Pedigree:
But they that would gain true nobility,
To do Christ's heavenly Fathers will must seek,
For such his Mother, Brother, Sister be,
No honor or alliance can be like
To this: yet sure such are the humble and the meek.
33
Humilitie's the Basis and foundation
Of Virtues all into one building brought,
Which for to raise on high by contemplation,
Must deep and low within the ground be wrought:
If one desire to mount his house aloft,
And works his vnder-pinning slight below,
He builds upon the sands: all comes to naught,
For if the floods do come or wind do blow,
Affliction, Persecution, all does overthrow.
34
The thing which God or Nature does decree
In secret: Man, often b' innate augurie
Unwittingly foretells, which shows to be
Between our souls and heaven a sympathy;
Hence is it, that this Dame * Humility
Has her denomination from the ground:
For though, as she is spiritual, she can fly
Above the highest heavens, yet she is found
The lowliest wight on earth, though highly to be crowned.
35
The ancient Latins Homo, Man did name,
By deriuation from Humility,
To teach him that he should become the same
In Truth, as in names Etymology;
And let a man look through Antiquity,
Lo! all the Men, whose virtues are commended
For paternes good unto posterity,
In humbleness they have begun and ended,
When Pride, as basest sin, is always reprehended.
36
Abel and Cain, firstlings of humane ^eede,
Ambitious Cain, but Abel meek and mild,
His offering was accepted, which did breed
Such wrath in Cain, that he the ground defiled
With his own brothers blood, which he has spoiled*
Moses is called the meekest man alive,
Abram himself but dust and ashes styled,
When he besought his Maker, for twice ^iue
Just men there found, to save the Sodomites alive.
37
Jacob fed Labans sheep, the Patriarchs all
Like trade of husbandry did exercise;
The Judges with the Prophets great and small,
And all good Kings were low in their own eyes.
John Baptist the Messias-ship denies,
And humbly does himself unworthy deem
To be him, that stoopes and his shoe vntyes,
Christ did it no disparagement esteem,
To wash their feet, whom with his blood he would redeem.
38
Ah what an humble mind did Mary bear,
When with salt tears that flowed from her eyes,
She washed Christ's feet, and wiped them with her hair,
Great Volumes I suppose would not comprise
Names of all humble Saints: let it suffice,
Their names are written in the Book of Life,
They here vain worldly glory did despise,
Free from Ambition, Malice, Envy, Strife,
And now by Faith and Hope in Loves Court lead their life.
39
Oh! could we but this Virtue truly taste,
And as we are dust and ashes apprehend,
How he that in the highest heaven is placed,
And did of nothing to us Being lend,
And one condition unto all men send,
Vouchsafes spiritual communication,
Calls us his Spou^e, his Children, Host, and Friend,
We n'ould despise the honest conversation
Of meanest brother, that is Coheire of like salvation.
40
Dares dust and ashes thus expostulate?
Shall not the Lord of all the World do right?
And yet dares dust and ashes in his state,
Deny his brother poor to come in s^ght?
Shall dogs lick Lazar's sores? whilst thou no bite
Or crummes which underneath thy table fall,
Wilt to him give? Behold, he shall be site
In Abrams bosom: thou the Devils thrall,
For thus the Humble rise, and thus the Proud must fall.
41
No better object of magnificence,
Can there be found here, than an humble heart,
Who still ascribes all to beneficence,
That he receives, not to his own desert:
Unto thy humble brother then impart
Part of thy substance: with true courtesy
Entreat the least: The lowlier that thou art,
God will thee higher raise: Humility
Mounts up to heaven, whilst Pride in hell does burning lie.
42
But ah! Ambition still cries for a name,
Like Giants proud that Babels Tower would raise,
Whence follows sure confusion, loss and shame:
Alas! how few there be now in our days,
That seek by humbleness another praise,
Humility, no entertainment finds,
But poorly 'bout Court, City, Country strayes,
And in her room faign'd complement her winds,
Who never minds as she says, nor e're says as she minds.
43
Base Complement! hatched of Pride and Ambition,
Fair Dame Humility to emulate,
Whose only piety is superstition,
And* by pretense of friendship, couers hate;
Cain by her did work his brothe^s fate,
Ioab slew Abner in the time of peace,
In Court she styled is a trick of State,
In Church and City she does so increase,
For Catholic and Universal she does prease.
44
Nay, go unto the meanest beggars cell,
And there as proud a heart you often find,
As those that under Cedar roofes do dwell,
And did his purse but answer to his mind,
He would despise the proudest of mankind.
Where shall you see more Envy, Malice, Strife,
Than is between the Servant and the Hind?
Where more dissembling than twixt Man and Wife?
The Sword is not more keen, than is the bloody Knife.
45
Ambition! How do thou possess the mind
Of restless Man, whilst, in an idle vain,
(Which thou call'st Honor) thou do nothing find
But vanity and vexation for thy pain?
Know thou not Godliness is greatest gain?
And that the Merchant was pronounced most wise,
That sold all that he had this Pearl t'obtaine,
Oh, would thou seek to buy this merchandise,
Humility is she can help thee to such prize.
46
Then, o my Soul, covet Humility:
Do thou seek Knowledge, Pleasure, Wealth, Promotion?
All these she will thee bring assuredly,
She Is like the Master-spring, that first gives notion
To every wheel, that in the Clock has motion,
Like Salt that savors every dish we eat,
She Is Sugar sweetning every bitter Potion,
Promotion, Knowledge, Pleasure, Wealth, Drink, Meat,
Humility's all these, and yet she is not great.
47
Oh, never let me seek to emulate,
Except in Goodness, and with more desire
To follow, than in hope to adequate,
And like a Tree low planted near the Mire,
Bring forth much Fruit, not Fuel for the fire:
With little let me ever be content,
Patient of miseries; for my sins require,
Than I have had, far greater punishment,
And far thy smallest favors my deserts out went.
48
For, I confess, that too ambitiously
I hunt for worlds entisements base and vain,
Which clogge my Soul so, that she cannot fly
Aloft, where sound joys evermore remain:
And though I basely think of gold and gain,
Yet Honors glittering shows so daze mine eyes,
That still I Am tainted with ambitious stain,
And wish I might to worldly honor rise,
But this in me the Flesh, not Spirit does devise.
49
For she has learned, that not from East or West
Promotion comes, The higher one is placed
The greater cares and troubles him infest,
And as thou more or greater Talents have,
The more thou art to count for at the last.
Thou art a Steward here: It Is not thine own,
But as thee above thy fellows God has graced,
So must thy Faith and care above theirs be shown,
We do expect best Crops whereas best Seed is sown.
50
These things, o God! I ask, do not deny,
Let me depend upon thy Providence
In pain and ease, loss and prosperity,
My self submit with all obedience
Unto thy Will: perform with diligence
Charge public, private: Let Humility
Be unto me a Rock of sure defense,
Against Men's malice, and Worlds injury,
And where my weakness fails, let thy good Grace supply.
51
Oh thou, that Lazarus from Dives gate,
Did into Abrams blessed bosom raise,
There to enjoy eternal happy state,
That here, on earth, was humbled all his days;
Direct mine humble heart in all thy ways,
The meek, in judgment, thou delight'st to guide,
Turn all I do unto thy glorious praise,
Preserve me from Ambition, Envy, Pride,
And though with Lazar's sores, in thy Love let me bide.
52
Thou have, o Lord! proclaimed Blessedness
To all the meek in Heart and poor in Spirit:
Blessed are the Meek, they shall the earth possess,
The Poor even now Gods Kingdom do inherit.
Lord! I acknowledge freely my demerit,
It is thy Grace whereby I am, live, move,
Thy humbling to the Cross, for me, did merit,
That I should be exalted to thy Love,
And live with thee in bliss eternally above.
53
I ask that which thy blessed Martyrs had,
Which here have witnessed their Humility,
And of that cup of gall to taste were glad,
Which first their Master swallowed willingly,
Thy Grace, o Lord! which thou will not deny,
For they have found it all-sufficient,
Humble me how thou will: Ability
Yet grant in sorrow to be patient,
And strength with Paul, in pain or ease, to be content,
54
Grant me thy Grace, but to conceive the end
And certain fruits of my humiliation,
Then shall I plainly see and apprehend,
That it prepares me fit for exaltation;
And to make sure with fear mine own salvation,
Whereby I may stand firm and confident
Against wicked Men, Hell, Devils, and damnation,
Who never shall be able to prevent
Thy love in Christ, which thou on humble men have bent.
55
Now for that thing which worldlings do deplore,
I yield to thee most hearty laud and praise,
That thou art pleased to humble me therefore,
On earth, that thou again to heaven might raise,
Oh teach me, Lord, to number so my days,
That I my life may labor to amend,
Oh, teach me lowliness in all my ways,
To think of my beginning and mine end.
Prince, Beggar, borne alike, and to their grave descend.
56
And since that sweet Humilities condition
I have so learned by this Meditation,
That now I hate Pride, Envy, and Ambition,
With complements base subtle machination:
Grant me to follow Christ's humiliation,
Who from the Cross to Glory did ascend,
Whose sufferings make a reconciliation
For those, that by true Faith him apprehend,
And after him in lowliness and meekness wend.
57
You may remember how I erst you told,
That when Humility had cleared the score,
Whereby t'ambitious Pride my heart was sold,
She led me to Repentance: who before
The chief Judge Justice brought, and my foul sore
Discovered to my more humiliation,
Till Faith and Hope at Mercies seat therefore
Did plead Christ's Blood my reconciliation.
But this I leave unto another Meditation.
MEDITAT. III.
Of Repentance.
1
THe Highest that created first of naught
A Chaos vast, and out thereof did take
The Earth, whereof he noblest Creature wrought,
Even Man, and made all Creatures for his sake,
Him first pure, just, and righteous did make,
But since, their own inventions they obey,
And in a right path set, their way mistake,
And as blind; fools and slaves have gone astray,
Nor can, without the true Light, find again the way.
2
For whilst they do yet in their sins remain,
Their Souls in error and in darkness bide,
They know not how they should be borne again,
For Sin this mystery from them does hide;
And till Humility their trusty Guide,
Shall them to wholesome true Repentance lead,
They miss their aim, and striving stray more wide;
Repentance quickneth men in sin clean dead,
And teaches newborn Babes in path of Life to tread.
3
She is the Midwife, that with keenest knife
Our Navel cuts, whereby we cleave to sin,
Who though she cruel seem, yet gives sweet life,
When first to live in Spirit we begin;
She, us polluted and defiled within,
Does cleanse in Fountain of Regeneration;
Us newborn Babes, she teaches to let in
The milk sincere to sure Justification;
Till stronger meat make strong our Faith to sure Salvation.
4
And though in chain of Gods most f^^me Decree,
First saving link is his Predestination,
Election next, then Calling, yet we see
No certain pledges here of our Salvation,
Till true Repentance works Humiliation:
Lo! then we do, by right degrees, proceed
Unto the highest link, Glorification;
So that Repentance first to us does reed,
What is eternally in Heaven by God decreed.
5
Thou, that do Hearts with true Repentance season,
Making them view their own vile wretchedness,
That cast down with Apostasy and Treason,
We may of thee seek endless Happiness;
First grant me true Repentance: next to express
What sou'raine Virtues I in her have found.
And though at first my soul with bitterness
Were ouerwhelm'd; yet Grace did cure that wound:
So where most sin there is, Mercy does most abound.
6
Repentance is a holy work of Grace,
From godly Sorrow: by which Man from sin
Is turned: Gods promises in Christ to embrace,
And Fruits fit for Repentance to begin:
Repentance is Gods holy work within,
To work our Righteousness, and Sin deface,
And no Man can be exercised therein,
But he that stands in the state of Grace;
For no Man turns to God, till God him first embrace.
7
Grace and Repentance are in time conioyn'd,
As Fire and Heat: but as Heat first appears
To us, when Fire in Embers is confined,
Even so when sparks of Grace our Heart first cheares,
Repentance manifests her self by tears.
Grace is the sap in heavenly vegetation,
Repentance is the prime bud, which it bears,
The first sure sign of true Regeneration,
Then follow leaves, flowers, fruits, as certain demonstration.
8
This godly Sorrow differs from the care
And grief a worldling in his heart receaues,
By sense of Gods just wrath or great Men's fear,
Or ought that their good names or goods bereaues.
This godly Sorrow grief of mind conceaues,
That he has sinned, and that he did displease
So good and kind a God; which so close cleaues
To's heart, that though no fear did him disease,
Of Judge, Hell, Devil, yet naught but Grace can him appease.
9
Man was most fair, in Gods own Image built,
Had with him sweet communion at's Creation,
Whereby in God, and God eke in him dwelt,
But sin has since enforced a separation,
And made us sons of wrath by alienation;
Now we like prodigal and lost sheep stray,
Till Grace and true Repentance restoration
Does make of all, sin does in us decay,
Then we return, and our Creators hests obey.
10
But true Repentance does repent of all,
And not of many or one only sin:
Herod converted thus at Baptists call,
Him gladly heard, and hearing did begin
For to do many things: but would not lin
The sin of incest with his brothers Love;
Some, like th'Adulterer, do turn from sin,
When they want strength: from bad to worse some move,
As when the prodigal a covetous man does prove.
11
She has two hands, with one, lo! she begins
To press us down to true mortification,
Whereby we may return from all our sins;
Us the other rayseth by Regeneration
To a new life, and to Sanctification.
One from all actual sins makes us abstain,
Suppresseth, weakens, natures deprauation;
Makes the Mind purpose, and the Will full feign,
And all our whole endeavors from sin to refrain.
12
The other hand Man's purged mind does raise
Unto a serious firm deliberation,
To yield sincere obedience to Gods Says,
And works in the will an inclination
Him to obey, as at our first creation.
This does Man's life and best endeavors frame,
To walk here in a holy conversation,
Though all, we do, imperfect is and lame,
Yet if the Heart be right, God will accept the same.
13
And as she has a double energie,
Men headlong to the infernal Pit to throw,
And them again by Faith to viuifie:
So though of this great work, one cause we know,
Gods Spirit, that whereas it list does blow;
Yet uses it a twofold instrument,
The Law, which Death to us for sin does show:
The Gospel, that does preach atonement;
Thus both the Law and Gospel teach us to repent.
14
The Law first pierces even the very heart,
And does by little and degrees proceed;
Till Knowledge four things needful does impart,
Gods Law; the guilt of Sin; and Sins just meede,
Which is eternal Fire by God decreed:
Then we these rightly to our selves apply,
Which does in us a fear and horror breed,
Except on Gospels comfort we rely;
For without that we die in hell eternally.
15
Then does the Gospel make us comprehend
Gods mercy, for it seriously enquire,
And by the gifts of Knowledge to contend,
That though I justly have deserved Gods ire,
If I my self deny yet, and desire
My trust in Christ's sole merits to repose,
I shall thereby escape eternal Fire:
Thus does Repentance grief and joy impose,
Grief for my sins: but Joy, God does me from them loose.
16
Thus godly Sorrow in our heart being wrought,
Which brings Repentance with true change of mind,
We are resolved never in word, deed, thought,
So to offend God in our wonted kind,
But a new life to lead; lo, then we find
Within our selves a wondrous alteration,
Not that it changes substance of our mind,
Or body, in the matter or the fashion,
But does reform their powers as in their first creation.
17
She worldly grief to godly sorrow turns,
Our Wrath and Anger into temperate Zeal,
Presumption into Faith, their heart that burns
In wanton love, to heavenly Love appeal:
Mad laughter she with Christian joy does seal,
Mildness of nature turns to spirits meekness,
Souls faculties does all repair and heal,
And brings them unto their first perfectness:
Thus she makes crocked straight, and what is wrong does redress.
18
Then bring we forth fruits worthy amendment
Of life; the truth whereof we do express,
When, by good works, we show how we repent,
Repenting souls be Trees of Righteousness,
Planted by God which Rivers do refresh,
Even floods that from the Sanctuary flow,
Whose boughs do lowly stoop with fruitfulness:
There fruits for meat; leaves good for medicine grow,
Else to the root the Axe is laid them down to throw.
19
Repentance Subject is a grieved heart,
A conscience wounded with the sight of Sin,
Which naught but hell and horror does impart,
When to lay open conscience does begin
Our sins without, and wicked thoughts within:
And 'lesse she to us hope in Christ reveal,
We may with Judas hang up by the chin,
But like a skillful Surgeon she does deal,
First corrasiue the sore, and then it gently heal.
20
She has a double Object, guilt of sin,
And sins just meede, eternal condemnation,
Which terror breeds without, horror within;
The second is our Saviors blessed Passion,
Made even our own by a right application:
This brings true inward joy and sound delight,
And does deface th'hand-writing of damnation,
This brings us out of darkness into light,
This Sun of Righteousness does chase away our night.
21
As Pharaoh with his Butler and his Baker,
So deals she with the wicked and the just,
They both alike offended have their Maker,
And both alike into one Dungeon thrust:
But, lo, she lifts to place of highest trust
The Butler, but the Baker does forsake,
And leaves him to the meede of the unjust:
Thus, with her left hand, she us drownes in Lake,
But with her right us into endless joy does take.
22
Near to her fellows, gracious Restitution,
A Lady of a conscience wondrous tender;
That of all benefits makes retribution,
And for a wrong done, double mends will render;
Sorrow, Tears, Kindness, Bounty, do attend her,
Sighs, Prayer, true Devotion on her wait,
If she wants these Associates, God amend her,
She Is but Hypocrisy, the Devils bait,
To catch poor souls with false pretenses and deceit.
23
For, lo, two Hags of hell would like her seem:
One outward is and ceremonial,
Which like proud Pharisee her self does deem
Above the Publican: And she will fall
To prayer on her knees amongst them all:
The other even my pen trembles to write,
Mine heart to think of: her, Despair we call,
Oh! she our Saviors sufferings does despite,
Counting His satisfaction, for her sins, too light.
24
Many there be that will repent of (...),
When they are scourged by The Almighty's hand,
But when to spare his rod he does begin,
They stay repenting, and themselves do band
Against the Righteous: And though God command,
They will resist him like proud Egypts King,
Which notwithstanding ten Plagues did withstand
His Makers will, his Heart still hardening,
Till on himself and people he confusion bring.
25
A cursed sinne's final impenitence,
When as a man himself so just does take,
As he needs not repent for his offense:
This like a lethargy our soul does make
Insensible of sin, till we awake:
And as it is a disease most dangerous,
Which us insensible thereof does make,
So of all States it is most perilous,
To be dead-sicke of sin, yet think we are righteous.
26
Four things observe in this great work of wonder,
Grace, horror, sorrow, comfortable peace,
Which I resemble to tempestuous thunder,
Lightning shows first, next cracks, then shower^ increase,
But all in comfortable Sunshine cease:
So in this work of our Regeneration,
The Spirit first lights; Hell does like thunder prease,
Then sorrows, clouds, tears, showers make inundation:
Lastly, like Sun shines joy, which seals up our salvation.
27
And as in course of humane generation,
Conception, travel, lastly birth we see;
So in this work of our regeneration,
The Spirit, Soules-horror, inward joy agree:
The Spirit first gives life and power to be,
The Soul then trau^ileth in grief and pain,
Then follows our glad nativity,
Which recompenceth all our loss with gain:
Thus as at first the Flesh, the Spirit begets again.
28
And as some women, though they do conceive,
And quickening joy do feel within their womb,
Yet by disorder often a hurt receive,
And so miscarry ere to birth they come,
So that their womb become the infants tomb:
So in us often a quickening Spirit does move,
As if Repentance were in us begun,
Yet in the end it does abortiue prove,
This is when we resist the holy Spirit of Love.
29
Some, as I say, conceive an embrion,
But lose their fruit even in the vegetation,
Some in due time to travel have begone,
But wanted strength eu^n in the procreation,
And in this weakness fallen to desperation,
Like Judas they have strangled their own brood,
Before it had in new life respiration,
Who did deplore's betraying innocent blood,
Well he began, but ended in a desperate mood.
30
But if our travel does to birth proceed,
And that there is a living Child forth brought,
Oh then what joy and comfort it does breed,
Then we employ our care, and every thought
How we may nurse and feed it as we ought;
We therefore pap and milk to it first give,
And after stronger meats for it are sought,
Till it unto a perfect man does thrive,
Lo then he can beget, that erst began to live.
31
Even so a newborn Babe in Christ proceeds,
There Is wondrous joy at's first regeneration,
On Gospels Milk he young and tender feeds,
Till he grow strong: Then from Predestination
He can discourse even to Glorification,
Thus does he to a height and fullness grow
Of age and strength by Spirits Illumination,
Till he all Mysteries in Christ does know,
Then is he able unto others them to show.
32
Men are like Horses wild, who sure had bin,
As at the first, to Man obedient,
Had they not been corrupted by man's sin,
And would have been servants most diligent,
Now they grow Rebels, disobedient,
Till we with bit, yoke, bridle do them tame:
So Man growes'gainst his Maker insolent,
Till by Repentance he does him reclame;
Then he becomes as at the first God did him frame.
33
Man's heart is like the ground, which for man's sin
Is cursed, Thorns and Thistles for to rear,
Which first the skillful Plowman does begin,
With a strong Teame of Oxen up to tear;
Fallowes and Harrowes it for to prepare,
It sweet and clean for to receive his seed:
Lo then, in stead of Thorns it Wheat will bear,
Repentance thus ploughs Hearts to kill Sins weed,
And Tils it, fit and sweet for Grace to sow Faiths seed.
34
If a man sowes and does not Till his ground,
Or if one Till his ground and do not sow,
On first kind, Thorns and Thistles do abound,
Which choke the seed so that it cannot grow;
And from the unsown tilled ground, we mow
Nothing but stinking weeds fit for the fire:
Even so, except with sorrow we do plow
Our hearts, and Word to sow therein desire;
Sin chokes all grace, and weeds therein grow rank and higher.
35
Repentance like an Axe is, that has praid
On all the Cedars that on Lebanon stand;
And every one down on the earth has laid,
The sound she hewes and squares with her right hand,
Making them posts and pillars fit to stand
In Gods own house: But every hollow crust
She tears and cleaues for fire with her left hand:
Thus does Repentance trim and square the just;
Despair th'vngodly rends, and into Hell does thrust.
36
Behold! we thus with trembling and with fear,
In pain and grief work out our own salvation,
But some when as Repentance draws near,
And calls their conscience to examination,
Like Ahab, fall into this bitter passion,
What, have thou found me? Oh! mine enemy?
Despising godly Prophets reformation,
And rather unregenerate choose to die,
Than pangs and bitter throws of a new birth to try.
37
Latins and Greeks give her a diverse name,
Which have in them a twofold true notation,
And yet in her they both employ the same;
Latins from P^nitentia.
Pain do make their deriuation.
Next is a (...).
new mind by interpretation;
Both these describe her nature wondrous right,
In pain and sorrow is her inchoation,
When she with Flesh and powers of Hell does fight,
Then follows change of mind which brings sweet delight.
38
For she is bred in pain, brought forth in gladness,
Sorrow is ouer-night, but in the morn
Comes soundest joy, to chase away nights sadness,
And when we think that we are left forlorn,
Then comfort's nigh to lift on high our horn,
And though a while the Worldlings us do deem
The off-scumme of the people, and the scorn
Of wicked men: yet God does us esteem,
And by this change, most precious in his eyes we se^me.
39
Thus have all holy men in former ages,
By grief and change of mind obtayn'd Gods grace.
This eke is shadowed in those grand Sages,
That took great pains and care to find the place,
Where Christ was borne, that they might see his face;
Who after, in a dream, forwarned were
Not to return again in their first trace:
Thus after travel long, great pains and care,
With joy and change of mind another way they fare.
40
Of all the (...)
Even from (...) that ^its in her T^^one,
To low Humility, that keeps her (...),
Our blessed Savior has us paternes shown,
Only because no sin was ever known
To be in him, He cannot well be said
For to repent of sins that be his own;
But sure for ours a ransom dear he paid,
And felt the wrath of God which on us should be laid.
41
His Soul was heavy even unto the death,
He feared to drink this cup of bitterness,
God did on him such wrath and vengeance breath,
That he sweat drops of blood in his distress:
Such horror, by Gods curse, did him depresse,
That he cried out as if he were forsaken,
Such horror does repenting ^oules oppress,
But not in so great measure are they shaken,
For Christ the edge of Gods displeasure off has taken.
42
This was his way to heaven; This must be ours,
Before we be to true Repentance brought.
Consider now with are the bitter stowers,
Whereby our Fathers have Repentance sought,
Let Abram tell, from native Country brought
Into an unknown Land, to be a stranger,
Where he endured hunger, cold, and drought,
Whom Cana^^^ famine made an Egypt (...),
Where of the loss of Wife and Life he was in danger.
43
Afflicted Job, model of true Repentance,
How was he plagued without? frighted within?
Who though he seemed most happy in his entrance,
Yet his last days were best: David did sin
Most desp'rately: but after did begin
Sadly to cry, when he Gods anger found,
Purge me without, and make me clean within.
When Solomon felt his sins accursed wound,
He a whole (...) of true Repentance did compound.
44
Good (...) chattered like a Swallow,
Or like a Crane, and mourned like a Dove,
And though his son Man^sses long did wallow
In much foul sin, yet bondage did him move
To true Repentance: Peter more did love
His Master after vnaduis'd denial:
Thus all Gods servants better Saints do prove,
After they have endured the fiery trial.
Experience of Gods love makes holy men more loyal.
45
I should seem partial, if I only tell
Of men, who in this work have happy been,
Since Women for this bear away the bell;
Witness her eyes which like two Fountaynes dre^ne
To wash her Saviors feet: And Ri^^as teene,
When under sackcloth she her life did lead,
Till the wished rain from heaven to fall was seen,
So long she did defend the bodies dead,
That for the Gibeonites were hanged up by the head.
46
But why seek I for witnesses without?
Look in thine heart if there thou have not found
This smart of horror, thou may justly doubt,
Thy soul's not yet up in Life's bundle bound:
Therefore unto thy self with speed propound,
To view Gods wrath and thine own wretchedness,
Then grief of heart and sorrow will abound,
Which thee unto the brinke of hell will press,
Till Faith thee raise by inward joy to happiness.
47
Thou shall not find her like fruit, which to the eye
Was wondrous fair, and pleasant to the taste,
Which poisoned Adam and his Progeny;
She bitter is at first, sweet at the last:
And when the cloud of sorrow's ouer-past,
She brings of joy and comfort so great store
That all become new: lo, old things are past,
She is the Antido^e, that does restore
What Adam lost, when he forsook his Makers lore.
48
No, th'Antid^^^ is Christ's most precious Blood,
Repentance is but the preparatiue,
To make our souls taste this most heavenly food,
Than which no other can keep us al^^e:
And till Repentance out of us does drive
Inbred corruption, and all actual sin,
This Balm of Gilead will not make us thrive,
Oh then Repentance! purge me clean within,
And make my stomach fit this Manna to let in.
49
The Spirit's willing, but the Flesh is weak,
Oh a most bitter pill is this temptation,
None but they that have felt it, right can sp^ake
What pangs it breeds in our regeneration:
Well, let men-pleasers only sing salvation,
Let not vain fruitless hopes thine heart deceive,
We must first taste the curse of our damnation,
Before salvation truly we conceive;
As head, so must the members that to it do cleave.
50
We here must taste it, or then, when w'appeare
At Christ's Tribunal: From which none can hide
Himself; but all stand forth themselves to clear;
When Books are brought forth, and are opened wide,
In sight of God, Christ, Angels, and the Bride,
When Satan and thy conscience thee accuse,
And no gold can an Advocate provide:
Oh, who thinks of this day and can refuse
To taste here of Christ's Cup, and escape the Devils Cruse?
51
Wherefore against thy self an Action bring,
And thus accuse, examine, judge, and try,
Lest thou be judged of the righteous King:
First before Christ's.
Gods Tribunal prostrate lie,
And if he then beheld thee with his eye,
Confess thy inbred sins, known, and unseen,
Against thy self pronounce unfeignedly
Damnation, hell, and horror: when we seem
Most vile in our own eyes, God does us best esteem.
52
Death, to all men, the wages is of sin,
But unto those, the Heaven of happiness,
That thus on earth condemn themselves within,
And after bring forth fruits of Righteousness;
But to those that go on in wickedness,
Death is the Port and entrance into Hell.
Lord give me here this pill of bitterness,
Which may corruption from mine heart expel:
No wound can be so deep, but thou by grace can heal.
53
And though she seems like fiery two-edged sword,
That keeps from Man the way to Tree of Life,
Because her fiery trial is abhord,
And Cowards heart does faint to see her knife;
Swouning away at Flesh's and Spirits strife:
Oh never yet let fear my courage quail,
To hinder me from that sweet Tree of Life,
Better Repentance thresh me with her flaile
On earth; than hellish Dragon break me with his tail.
54
But, I confess, I tremble at her rod,
As Moses did at his when he it cast
On ground, by the commandment of God,
And it became a Serpent, that in haste
He fled from it: but all his fear was past,
When God him bid to take it by the tail;
Then it became a Staff to stay him fast,
And wonders work: So though our hearts she quail
At first, we yet at last by Faith against her prevail.
55
We are as Satan hoped Job to have found,
When as he said, Does Job serve God for naught?
Whilst God does hedge us in on each side round,
And prospers all that by our hands are wrought,
Whilst by our flocks are multitudes forth brought,
So long we seem his bounty to embrace;
But take away our goods and leave us naught,
Behold, I say, we curse him to his face,
Except, as unto Job, he grant preventing grace.
56
This is of wicked men the punishment,
That all their life Repentance have despised,
Even at their end they think not to repent,
This trade must in thy youth be exercised,
As Abel of his Firstlings sacrificed.
They that from sin abstain not till their last,
And to Worlds pleasures have their Strength.
Youth devised;
Are like those, that being sick, profess to fast,
When as alas! they have no appetite or taste.
57
Such late Repentance seldom is or never,
We one example in the Scripture read
Not to despair, repent what time so ever,
But only one example, lest it breed
Presumption: It Is meat and drink indeed
To Satan, for to see youth do his will,
And on the other side great joy does breed
To The Angels, for to see young men fulfill
Gods Statutes in their Strength.
Youth, and eke obey his Will.
58
Oh! then embrace her whilst it is called Today:
For most uncertain is our life and frail,
The longer I the lusts of sin obey,
Against them I the hardlier shall prevail;
Late medicines of their cures do most what fail,
Which would yield remedy in season taken;
The Serpent in the head, not in the tail
Is quickly killed: young twigs are easily shaken,
But grow hard to remove when they deep root have taken.
59
If in due time thou seek to repent
By godly sorrow, which never comes too late,
And thou hells pangs do feel; Be confident,
Thou art by Faith in Christ regenerate,
Assure thy self, most happy is thy state;
If thou least drop of Mercy do obtain:
The danger's past; sins stinging will abate,
The Spirit of thy mind's renewed again,
And from least show of sin hereafter now refrain.
60
Though, like (...) servant, first thou (...)
Naught but Hostility, thee to confound,
If that thine eyes with his once opened be
To look up to the Mountain: There abound
Horses and Charets fiery about thee round,
Cry but alas! Master, What shall we do?
Lo, more for thee, than there for them are found:
Thy light with blindness so confounds thy Foe,
Thou may them captive lead, and unto others show.
61
Thy Groat is found, which thou before had lost;
Thy Sheepe's brought home, that erst has gone astray;
Thy dead son has again received his ghost;
The prodigall's come home that ran away:
Vashti's deposed from the Scepters sway,
And humble Hester now has got her place,
The works of darkness now are chac't away,
And in their room are works of Light and Grace,
Faith by Repentance shows us now Loves smiling face.
62
Joy after Sorrow, after labor rest,
And after shipwreck the desired Port,
All men love safety: they discern it best
That lately have escaped some eminent hurt.
Lo! light is pleasing unto every sort,
To them most that in darkest Dungeon be,
To pass from death to life, doubles the sport
Of (...): But (...) all the joys I see,
Is when ^^om wounded conscience, Grace does set (...).
63
And now, o Lord, vnab^^ to ^^presse
Thy wondrous bounty in (...) first creation;
And much more here unworthy to confess
Thy Love and Grace in our regeneration,
Begun here first in us by renouation,
And true Repentance: Lord, now cure my wound,
The sting of conscience by sweet application
Of Faith: the fruits whereof may still abound,
And to the riches of thy glorious Grace redound.
64
You may be pleased with me to call to mind,
How when the humble Lady first me brought
To Dame Repentance, harsh I her did find,
And she most strongly on my conscience wrought,
Yea, though with tears, I often her Grace besought,
That I might judged be at Mercies seat,
She me, by force, before Dame Justice brought,
Where all my sins and faults she did repeat,
But Faith me iustifide, of whom I next entreat.
MEDITAT. IIII.
Of Faith.
1
ONe Being that from all eternitee
Most happy is, Wise, Just, Omnipotent,
And from eternity all things did see,
As present, though long after they were meant,
Of naught created Air, Fire, Firmament,
With all the Spirits and Powers that are above,
Made and replenished Earths Continent,
The Sea, and all that in them both do move,
All these he made for Man; Man him to serve and love.
2
Man sure a Creature was most excellent,
Being of all created things the end,
To whom that Being only being lent,
That he to's Makers service might intend,
And in his joyful Presence his life spend;
Wherefore He him in goodliest Garden placed,
And one Fruit only did from him defend,
Of which Fruit only he presumed to taste,
Wherefore God him for eu'r out of the Garden cast.
3
But as the glorious riches of his grace,
Was the sole-mouing cause Man first to make;
So graceless Man he leaves not in this case,
But to repair his loss, will undertake
A new work likewise for his mercies sake:
To free him from sins guilt, and Satan's wile.
God will Man's flesh and guilt upon him take,
And purge him from the sin does him defile,
Thus Satan is beguiled, that sought Man to beguile.
4
As (...)
Can^'d Man from earthly Eden to be cast;
So true Belief and (...) Obedience,
Cause (...):
And as on pain of death he was to fast
From one fruit only; so this gracious King
Commands us now, one only fruit to taste,
Life to restore, and for to kill Death's sting:
This fruit is Faith in Christ, whereof I next do sing.
5
Thou, that when Man most blessed was created,
But by sin fallen from his high happiness,
Thine own Son sent, that he regenerated
Might be; and win again more perfect bless.
Who here even humbled'st God in humane flesh,
That thou by Faith might Man to thee unite,
And safe deliver from all wretchedness,
Direct my Muse of Faith to sing aright,
And grant me first (...) Faith, before of Faith I write.
6
Faith is a wondrous gift of God, a Grace,
Whereby The Elect apply particularly
Christ right, and all his benefits embrace:
By her our hope subsi^ts most certainly;
She shows us things unseen, most evidently:
Faith of the Gospel is a firm belief,
Whereby, Christ's benefits offered, we apply,
And rightly do receive: So Faith in brief
Is a right application, and a sound belief.
7
Faith is the Bucket which hangs on Hopes string,
Whereby the most deep living Well we sound,
Which if the Rope hold out, us up will bring
Such living Water, as does there abound,
When Christ his saving Graces does propound.
Faith is the Hand whereby we them receive;
Faith heals up the cleansed purged wound,
Begins where Repentance does us leave,
Who without her seeks Faith, (...) does himself deceive.
8
Faith as it is t^ne for credit or belief,
Is when we credit give to God or Man,
Thus he with men most Faith has that is chief,
And in his coffer hide most money can:
But when to God it reference has, we than
It ordinary or extr'ord'nary call.
By this we miracles and wonders can.
Ordinary Faith is hight historical,
Or justifying Faith, in some but temporal.
9
But this most precious Faith, whereof I write,
And which I formerly aright define,
The Faith of Gods Elect is truly hight,
Which when one has does wholly never decline*
This justifying, saving Faith does join
Us to our Head, and is the instrument
And means, whereby Gods Spirit does refine
And purge our hearts from sinful excrement:
This Faith does make Gods Children bold and confident.
10
This Faith, though not divided, has degrees,
Beginning, first, increase, and consummation;
A little Faith to greater does increase,
Till built and rooted on a sure foundation:
Yet never had this Faith so sure a station,
Which conscience and hels terrors have not shaken:
Remember Christ our Head his bitter passion,
How he cried out as God had him forsaken,
When he the guilt and curse of sin had on him taken.
11
Such as the Head, the Members must endure,
Thus in their souls they totter, faint, and reele,
Though the foundation of the Lord stand sure
And firm, and has upon it set this seal,
The Lord knows who are his: yet he does deal
With us, as does the Finer with his gold,
Which he does seven times in the furnace neale,
Thus tries he those, whose names he has enrold,
But will heap comforts in their bosoms manifold.
12
In Men and Plants, and (...), three souls we see
Of Reason Growing, and the (...),
So in this Christian soul, (...) Faith, there be
Three qualities alike cooperatiue:
And as in Man all three into one (...),
So in The Elect, both Faith historical,
Temporal, and the true Faith are alive,
And but one saving Faith together all:
This Soul, Man's form, this Faith (...) Christians life we call.
13
As vegetation shows most in Plants,
So in the worldlings Faith historical,
Faith temporal in false Professors hants,
True Faith upon The Elect does only fall:
And as no Plant or Beast, be it great or small,
The things that are in Man right apprehends,
Yet Man, what is in Beasts and Plants knows all,
So those two Faiths (which serve to other ends)
Know ^^t true (...) Faith, yet she both comprehends.
14
God Author is, and Cause efficient
Of every good and perfect gift and grace,
His good Will moves him first: But his Intent
And chief end is the glory of his Grace,
And our salvation in the second place,
But when He in our souls does Faith beget,
Whereby Christ and his Merits we embrace,
A double means he here on work does set,
Inward and outward, whereby saving Faith we get.
15
The outward is his Word and Sacrament:
One works, the other strengthens what is wrought*
The inward is Gods Spirit into us sent,
Our hearts to quicken, sanctify, make soft,
Wherein the Word may sown be as it ought,
The Gospel, whereupon stands Faith's foundation,
Though we, by Law, to see our sins are brought,
As the School Mistress to regeneration;
Yet it is the Gospel (...) us wise unto salvation.
16
The (...), most what works by the Word,
Not, but without, it is all sufficient,
But this instruction it does us afford,
That we in hearing should be diligent:
The Word, without the Spirits enlightenment,
Is as good Seed sown on untilled ground,
That never brings forth fruit that is excellent,
For without Grace, Faith temporary's found,
And never does in good and holy works abound.
17
Prayer is not the means Faith to obtain,
But it preserues and strengthens Faith to pray:
For without Faith our Prayers are in vain,
Yet after Faith is wrought in us, we may
Pray that Faith fails us not: wherefore, I say,
We must give Prayer her due commendation,
For by her we discourse with God always,
And have with him familiar conversation,
Though none can pray aright before regeneration.
18
Faith's like the Hand, and Prayer like the Key
Which does the Almighties Coffers open wide,
Wherein his richest Treasures locked up lie.
The Key unprofitably hangs beside,
Except that Faith it take in hand to guide:
Likewise the Hand does use her strength in vain,
The Bar without the Key against Wards to slide:
Both joined, the Lock to open do constrayne,
And us most glorious view of heavenly Treasures gain.
19
'Twere infinite of all Faiths fruits to tell,
All duties toward God, all charitee
Toward our Neighbors, done aright and well
From her proceed: A holy mother's she
Of Graces all, that sanctifying be:
Therefore it is plain they want her, that do strive
To make good works Faiths mother, and do flee
Unto Saints merits; For were Faith alive
In them, all Piety and Charity would thrive.
20
They (...) from Rome:
For then a quiet conscience and a clear,
(A faithful evidence) to them would come,
Then with true inward joy would soon appear
Holy Security, to cast our care
Upon the Lord: for if Faith justify,
We are at peace with God: Lo, then our fear
Is turned into sweet Security,
And inward joy does by afflictions multiply.
21
But if this peace and joy do not appear,
But rather terror, storms, and di^^idence,
Let Us labor yet our conscience may stand clear,
Which is to do Gods Will, and shun offense:
Here God beholds our will, not impotence,
And if we do endeavor to approve
Our selves to God; Faith works in us a sense
Of heavenly Love: whereby we plainly prove
That God loves first, whereby we do begin to love.
22
Behold! thus even a fruit of Faith is Love,
For many one whose Faith is weak and faint,
And cannot in themselves Spirits earnest prove,
Nor their hearts with true inward joy acquaint,
So as in true belief they seem to faint;
Yet find within their breasts this Spirit of Love,
Which is to them from sinning a restraint,
And it is an evidence does surely prove,
Faith's seed is sown within, when as we truly love.
23
And as Faith grows, even so does Love increase,
Lo! first we them that are in want relieve,
With spiritual comfort troubled souls appease,
Love makes us (if we constantly believe)
That for our brethren we our lives will leave.
By this indeed we know God's charity,
That did himself of life for us bereave,
We therefore for our brethren ought to die.
This great Love in us comes from Faiths plerophorie.
24
The Subject of true Faith is a pure heart,
Her Objects are Christ's sufferings, sanctity
Fulfilling of the Law in every part.
If these three by true Faith we can apply:
They are against all ill the remedy,
These are the Balm a wounded soul can heal,
And not the Churches store, Romes trumperie,
These only can to us our Pardon seal,
Merits Men's fancies are, these Scripture does reveal.
25
Even as three ills, inherent be in sin,
Original vice, Sin actual, condemnation;
So Faith three parallel benefits lets in,
Whereby effected is Justification,
Christ's sufferings pay the price of our damnation,
His perfectest Obedience satisfies
For actual sins; th'exquisite Sanctification
Of's humane Nature in us all destroies
Original sin: This threefold way, Faith iustifies.
26
He that is able out of stones to raise
Up children unto Abram: He, I say,
Can only make our hearts melt at the rays
Of his Sun beams: He to a heart of clay
Can turn a stony heart: And though this may
Seem very hard and strange to flesh and blood,
Yet he that feels his heart melt with the ray
Of spiritual Grace, Faith there does prove this good:
By those whose hearts world blinds, th^s is not understood.
27
Three qualities true Faith accompany,
Which she does use in every work well wrought.
First she does good, not for to please Man's eye,
But for his sake, whose blood her dearly bought*
Next by Gods Law, each action, word, and thought
She squareth: For she knows Obedience,
Then Sacrifice is better by her wrought:
All to Gods glory last has reference,
To these we guided are by Spirit, not by Sense.
28
She Is swift to hear: The holy Sacrament
Of Baptism once: The Eucharist often receaues,
Releeues the Poor, in Prayer diligent,
In which she still persists and never leaves;
Lastly, she to some lawful Calling cleaues,
To be ^fore God and Man without offense,
If these fail in her, she herself deceaues;
She Is temporary, and a false pretense,
To walk licentiously without Obedience.
29
Other Companions are of Faith likewise:
As grievous, manifold, and great tentation,
With these sound Faith herself must exercise,
These part not from her till souls separation.
For Satan prosecutes with infestation,
His hatred to our head continually,
Upon his Members to their great vexation,
Besides Tentations, true Faith purge and try,
Preparing hearts for Grace by sweet Humility.
30
These often come of diffident distrust,
When sight of sin makes us faint, stagger, reele,
Or when by our unworthiness and lust,
We of this precious Faith a coldness feel;
These for a while our spiritual eyes up seele,
So as true inward comfort, life, and love
As in times past in him we cannot feel,
Who is our Head, and hereby does us prove,
And make us when we feel his want, the more to love.
31
Behold, two other Deepes on either hand,
On right, Presumption proud; on left, Despair;
Which like two Red Sea walls of waves do stand,
And for the Faithful a fair way prepare,
That through the Deep they may even drie-shod fare*
But lo! the miscreant and presumptuous Wight,
They drown in ouer-weening and much care,
Here God against the Egyptians seems to fight,
Out of the fiery Pillar that to Faith gives light.
32
These two are like the Cities of the Plain,
Gomorrha proud, and Sodom base in lust,
On which God fire and brimstone down did rain.
The first is Pharisaicall, ouer-iust:
The other does Gods promises distrust.
But Faith, like little Zoar Lot does save,
Though unbelief do turn his Wife to dust,
These three be they that seek Faith to deprave,
These three so hinder Faith, she nothing right can crave.
33
Presumption proud on her own merits stands,
Despair looks down on her vile wretchedness,
But never Gods great goodness understands,
Nor his great power, free grace, and willingness
To ease all those whose sins do them oppress:
But Infidelity seeks to entise
To Atheism, and all ungodliness,
And make Faith folly seem to worldly wise,
Who naught believe, but Sense and Reason must devise.
34
Despair to great Goliath I resemble,
But Faith does like to little David fare,
At whom though Saul and all his Host do tremble,
Yet all his threats bold David cannot scare.
He that has given the Presumption.
Lion and the Infidelity.
Bear
Into his hands, he surely does believe,
This Despair.
railing Philistim will never spare,
But will him unto like destruction leave,
Thus off with his own sword David his head does cleave.
35
Often have I seen some grieved patient
Languishing of some desperate disease,
Not fe^ling it till Natures helps were spent,
Then thinks his grave only can's grief appease,
Yet if he hopes of skillful Leech some ease,
He him intreates to use his utmost skill,
To cure his malady and sore disease,
Himself referring wholly to his will,
Till he such Balm apply that cures him of that ill.
36
All men are (...) of the disease of sin,
Which till it is past man's cure, they not perceive.
But when of help they to despair begin,
If by true Faith they unto Christ can cleave,
Their souls Physician: and unto him leave
The cure alone: of his most precious Blood,
A plaster they to cure their sore receive;
This only is the Balm can do them good*
And not Saints m^nts, Pardons, Dirges, wooden Rood.
37
Faith to the blind man may be well compared
That feels the heat, but cannot see the flame
Of fire, which in the winter is prepared,
The tyra^nizing cold thereof to tame:
Faith, Hope, are like two Men, one blind, one lame,
Blind Hope, weak Faith on shoulders does sustain,
Faith, Hope directs her steps aright to frame,
Both labor top of Zions mount to gain,
And both by mutual aid their wished end attain.
38
Our hearts are like unto the parched Land,
That three years drought endured in Ahabs days,
Faith like the Cloud is little as man's hand,
That in the end great storms and wind does raise,
And many showers abundantly displayes;
Lo then the Land that erst was dry and waste,
Abundantly her fruit and grass repayes,
So Faith though small at first, yet at her last
Grows wondrous great, and poures down heavenly showers full fast.
39
Faith is like to a grain of Mustard seed,
Which of all grains at sowing time is least,
But grows so high that Birds therein may breed,
Yea Fowls of the air therein do make their nest;
She Is like an O^en plant that winds infest,
Which more it is shak'd roots faster in the ground,
So more tentations have true Faith oppressed,
She stands more resolute, secure, and sound;
And as her roots hold fast, her leaves and fruit abound,
40
We are on earth like Wind-mills all, whose grist
Are works of Piety and Charity,
Our Faith like Sails, which if the wind be whist,
And air calm, do stand unprofitably,
But when tentations rise, she instantly
Swayes all the inward powers by her commotion,
To all the works of Love and Piety,
Love to our Neighbors, to our God devotion;
But if Faiths sails do fail, all fail in their true motion.
41
Faith is our spiritual Sun in Firmament,
Which Clouds may darken, not put out her light:
She is swe^t Oil, that gives nutriment
Unto our Lamps, us to direct aright:
She is our strong Shield, under which we fight
Safe and secure'gainst all the powers of Hell;
Which though our breast plate often by force or slight,
They pierce of Righteousness: Faiths shield does quell
Yet all Hells fiery darts, and Satan's force expel.
42
She Mortar is, us living Stones to join,
In that great Building to the corner Stone,
The Pins and Joints which every piece combine
Into one goodly Frame: By Faith alone
Members on Earth and Head in heaven is one,
She does espouse the Bridegroom to the Bride,
She us the earnest of his Spirit has shown,
She sets us at the Banquet by his side,
Then Love us to embrace, her Arms does open wide.
43
Faith like is to the holy Martyr Steven,
Who when before the Council he did stand,
Looked up and saw Gods glory great in heaven,
And Jesus standing by on his right hand;
She Is like Tobi^^ Angel, at command
For to direct us in our journey right,
And free from danger both by Sea and Land,
She does endue us with such heavenly light,
That we to Friends and Parents may restore their sight.
44
Like Advocate, who not for private gain
Pleades for all sinners to Repentance brought,
Whom neither fear nor favor can restrain
From pleading, till our Pardon she has wrought:
She never leaves us till she has us brought
To the most glorious happy Court of Love,
Into his arms, whose Blood us dearly bought,
For Faith and Hope cease further there to move,
Our state there is immutable without remove.
45
Faith, like to Moses, out of Egypt leads
All Israelites that under bondage groan,
Baptiseth them that in her foote-steps treades,
As in red Sea: Faith cleaues a Heart.
Rock of stone,
From which gush living Waters: Faith alone
The hidden Manna makes from heaven descend,
Which who by Faith eat, Bone become of Bone,
Flesh of his Flesh: Faith does before us wend
Through this worlds wilderness: but there she makes an end.
46
Yet Faith, like Moses, does from Mount behold,
And view from far the blessed promised Land;
But leaves us there unto our Jesus.
Iosuah bold,
T'expell the Amorite with mighty hand,
And give us seisin of that blessed Land,
Lo then, Faith to sure Knowledge is returned,
Then we in state unchangeable do stand,
Not that Faith, Hope as needless off are turned,
What Faith believed, and Hope did wait for, is confirmed.
47
Like when some friend does promise thee to give,
After his death, a fair Inheritance,
Thou must believe and hope whilst he does live:
But when his change thy fortunes does advance,
And thou possessest this Inheritance,
Lo then thy first belief, and hope d^crease,
Thou hold'st it now by good assurance:
So when we Hea^^n possess, Faith, Hope, do cease,
It is our own for ever, not a Farm by lea^e.
48
Faith is as much as when we credit say,
Which is as sure as money in our hand,
If we trust one that able is to pay,
And to what he has promised will stand:
If rightly then Gods power we understand
And Truth, which fast like him has ever stood,
We have most firm assurance of heavens Land,
Yet least weak Faith make doubt of this as good,
Lo, his last Testament sealed with his own Blood.
49
If with th'incredulous these cannot prevail,
Who will believe no more than they can prove
By Sense and Reason: None of these shall fail
Thee to a true and lively Faith to move:
Behold, the Father us has showed such love,
That we the Sons of God should called be.
By reason.
If Sons, we be Coheires of heaven above;
By sense.
If we believe but what we taste and see;
To Sense in Sacraments exhibited is he.
50
With these authorities why should I sort
Saints Monuments, which in Worlds wilderness,
By Faith obtaining here a good report,
Are now arrived at the Hau'n of blessedness:
Millions which have and constantly profess,
And for this Faith, land, honors, life do leave,
Accounting it their greatest happiness
They are worthy found, not only to believe
In Christ, but for his sake their lives, goods, friends, to leave.
51
See Abraham, in whose most holy Seed
All Nations of the earth most happy are,
How Faith did arm him to perform a deed
Against the promise God unto him swear:
His son, his only son, not Isaac spare?
See Jacob, with his Maker hand to hand
Wrestling to get a blessing, nor does care
To lose his limbs, so firm his Faith may stand,
Lo, Faith brings Joseph's bones from Nile to holy Land.
52
Moses by Faith the red Sea does divide,
So stroke the Rock that Waters g^shed out,
Calls food from Heaven with God on Mount does bide
Full forty days: Lo, Iosuah bold and stout
Commands the Sun to stand still, while he fought
Gods Battles: Lo, Kings, Judges, Prophets all,
By Faith invincible did never doubt
Blessings, Rain, Hail, and Food from heaven to call,
With fire and vengeance on Gods enemies heads to fall.
53
Lo, Christ himself, when he on earth did preach,
And mighty miracles to pass forth brought,
What thing did he more here unto us teach
Than Faith? By which great miracles he wrought,
He that had Faith need not despair of ought.
Lepers by Faith are cleans'd, issues are stayed.
Blind see, Lame walk, the Devils are cast out,
Her Faith so great's grown that for crummes erst pravd,
That, Be it as thou will, to her by Christ is said.
54
Yea, after that our Savior did ascend,
And had the promised Comforter down sent,
His Church by Faith wrought wonders that transcend:
Lo, Peter's shadow healed even as he went.
Partlets and Napkins from Paul's body sent,
Expelled ill spirits; did Blind and Lame restore:
Cured all diseases of the patient:
So that the Apostles by true Faith did more,
And greater miracles, than Christ had done before.
53
I do believe the World could not contain
The Books, if one all Monuments should write
Of Saints, which Clouds of witnesses remain
Of Faith's great power, her glory, grace, and might:
Which though they laid their lives down in this fight;
Their glory ever does in Heaven remain,
Where Victors they triumph in the Lambs sight,
And for their loss of life and mortal pain,
True immortality and endless pleasure gain.
56
And though in these last times and (...) days,
Her force and virtue seem for to decline;
Yet he that feels the comfortable rays
Of her Sunne-beames upon his heart to shine,
Infallibly perceaues some power Divine
In him, that World of wonder has effected,
Which is both God and Man in one to join:
For this they know and feel that are elected,
But Satan blinds the eyes of those that are rejected.
57
Oh! What great wonders works Faith within,
When first she rayseth by regeneration,
And quickneth souls that lay long dead in sin,
Unto the life of Grace sanctification:
This second far exceedes our first Creation,
To pass from darkness to the glorious light,
And liberty of Heirs of true salvation,
When loosed from Satan's bands we walk aright,
And with this shield of Faith against all our enemies fight.
58
My joints do tremble, and mine heart does quake,
When I Faiths wondrous works begin to write;
She from the sleep of sin does me awake,
Into sweet liberty and glorious light:
My Members that in sin did erst delight,
And worldly lusts she makes to obey,
Defacing in me the old Man's image quite,
Sins fogs and mists of error drives away,
And turns my night of grief to joyful Sunshine day.
59
Like Enoch, now me thinks with God I walk,
And have with Angels happy conversation,
Like Abram I with God do friendly talk,
And wrestle by diuinest Meditation:
Lo, rapt to the third heaven by contemplation,
I there such joy and glory bright behold,
As Peter did at's Lords Transfiguration:
Such glory bright and joy cannot be told,
Faith this to true Believers only does unfold.
60
And now with (...), John, Peter, I could say,
Upon the Mount, It Is good Lord to be here:
And wish our Mansions there may last for ay,
Where such delight and happiness appear,
Where I like St^^'n behold most plain and clear
Heaven open, and Christ sit at Gods right hand;
The glorious Bridegroom longing for his Dear,
Jerusalem the glory of the Land,
The head, whose members are in number like the Sand.
61
But ah, we all, like (...) fond, desire
To Righteous later end for to attain,
But never for to live like them enquire;
But seek for Balaaks honors, gifts, and gain:
But they that will with Christ in glory reign,
Must look with him on earth to bear his Cross.
The Coward never Honor does obtain,
Who from his Captain runs for life or loss,
All in comparison of Christ is dung and dross.
62
Yet I alas! do often like F^^lix fare,
Tremble to hear of Justice and damnation,
Or think Paul mad: And if it does pr^pare
Mine heart fit for good tidings of salvation,
I am withdrawn by Worlds negotiation,
To put it off unto another day,
I often like Peter make great protestation
To die for Christ, but come I to the fray,
I deeply him forswear, or else I run away.
63
Yea often when I some inward flashings feel,
As if Faith now were to some measure grown,
I straight wax cold, faint, totter, stagger, reele,
As if Faith's seeds were scarcely in me sown;
Or I true inward comfort never had known,
Nor tasted spiritual Grace: yet I believe,
Lord help my unbelief! Thy power's shown
Most in my weakness: Lord then me relieve,
And from Sins baits and Satan's malice me reprieue.
64
Nor would I only wish for to obtain
The faithfuls glory, and her Garland wear,
But if need be, would bear my share in pain,
Not that I able think my self to bear
Those grievous ^orments as thy Martyrs were;
But let me measure like of Faith receive,
My body cut, broile, scaled, hang, saw, sterue, sear,
It Is Gods great grace, we in him may believe,
But greater, for Christ's sake, unto his Cross to cleave.
65
Why then should I wish Honor, Wealth, Promotion?
Which in this World are transitory, vain,
And in mine heart no room leave for devotion*
Or godliness, which is the greatest game?
He that to all things needful would attain,
Must seek Gods Kingdom first and Righteousness,
Lo, then all other things do come amain,
But ah! it is my fault, I must confess,
To look on present shows, and not on good success.
66
So that when of the grand Mogull I read,
Great Lord of misse-beleeuing India,
Whose wealth and Empire far outstrip indeed
All Kings of Europe and of Africa,
Great China's King; Ch^^ of Tartaria,
The least of which the grand Mogull exceed;
That potent Prince Sophie of Persia,
Great Turk, Virginia's Po^hatan, these breed
In me such doubting often, I stumble at my Creed.
67
The whole World to God compared, than point is less,
Earth to the World, to the Earth Christendom:
And but a Point of these Christ ^right profess,
Of these Professors but a Point become
Believers true: So that the little sum
Of all Christ's flock, as Point is to compare
With those that headlong to the Devil run:
What then? All these huge troops in error are,
And thus Point only in the true and right way fare.
68
Why then do Fools of Vniuers^ll (...),
As note infallible of sound belief,
Seeing the Devil has the worst and most,
And few, alas! acknowledge Christ as chief?
But soft, my Muse, thou merit'st just repriefe,
To draw in matters here of disputation:
Thy task of Faith is to discourse in brief,
And to erect thy thoughts by meditation:
Disputes are fit for Schools, not Muses recreation.
69
Lord make me one of this thy little Flock,
Of that small number that believe aright,
That fall not down before a stone or sto^ke,
But being by Faith endude with heavenly light,
Know they are always in their Makers sight:
That wheresoever we lift pure hands to pray
To thee, or whenever, by day or night,
To thee alike are both the night and day,
True Faith in Christ to God our prayers prese^teth ay.
70
Grant that by Faith I may a heart obtain,
Chams, Moguls, China's glory to despise
With all Worlds pomp, wealth, honor, luster vain.
By Faith so clearly open thou mine eyes,
To see thy Sun of Righteousness arise,
That glorious Sun whose beams do never fall
Upon the proud, ambitious, worldly-wise,
But on the meek, obedient, that with Paul
Do not consult with flesh and blood, when thou do call.
71
Lord, thou have promised, thou will not quench
The smoking flax, nor break the bruised Reed,
Thou make a weak Faith grow from strength to strength,
Unto her fullness and ripe age indeed:
Thou plant'st and watrest so this little seed,
That it does grow to infini^e increase,
Like the five Lo^ues that did five thousand feed;
Yet did into twelve baskets-full increase:
By using, grace and virtue grow, and not decrease.
72
Who then soever he be that does believe,
Perish shall not, but have eternal Life:
The calling and the gifts which God does give,
Without Repentance are: The Bridegroomes Wife
Is loved for ever: Never any strife
Can separate Christ's love: He that can free
Us from the fiery Furnace, Save our life
From Lions hungry jaws, We know that he
Is wise, and better knows, what is good for us than we.
73
And now by Faith I dare my Maker call
Father, Christ brother, Heaven my Inheritance;
The Angels mine attendants, lest I fall:
Behold, I dare my shield of Faith advance
Against Despair, the Devils keenest lance.
Death, Angels, Life, Powers, Principalities,
Things present, Things hereafter for to chance,
Height, depth, no Creature's able to devise,
To turn from me Gods love which does in Christ arise.
74
What shall we say? if God be on our side,
Who can against us be? If he not spare
His own Son for us: What can be denyde?
Who dares condemn, who by him saved are?
For whom his Death and Rising does prepare
Eternal bliss: Shall anguish, tribulation,
Nakedness, famine, peril, sword or fear,
Us separate from the Horn of our salvation?
In these Faith makes us conquer by Christ's mediation.
75
My prayer, gracious Lord, shall ever be,
Increase my Faith: And as now, in some wise,
Thou her fair Lineaments have made me see,
For which I praise thee: Open so mine eyes,
That seeing I her worth may truly prise,
And for her sake most willing be to loose
My life, and all this wicked world despise;
And rather bondage here with Faith to choose,
Than live in Egypts Court with vain deceitful shows.
76
Now as a valiant Soldier, strong and wise,
That would in open field defeat his Foe,
Suffers no sleep to come within his eyes,
But keeps continual watch: For he does know,
His En'mie, Lyon-like, about does go,
By force or slight his life for to surprise:
Even so, good Lord, grant thou me grace to do,
That though sleep often close my bodies eyes,
My Soul may still keep watch against Satan's subtilties.
77
Hope was the Patron that with Faith did join,
When to my trial me Repentance brought,
Who all their might and forces did combine,
Until my absolution they had wrought:
These not their own good, but their Clients sought,
And pleaded not for friendship, fees, or gain;
Loves favor was their utmost aim and thought,
They showed no Law their Causes to maintain:
But Pardons wrote in's Blood that for our sins was slain.
MEDITAT. V.
Of Hope.
1
REpentance, Faith, and Hope be graces three,
Which no where but in Israel are known:
Of other Virtues some resemblance we
Do find amongst the Heathen: which are shown
To them by Natures light, and first were sown
Most pure, till they corrupted were with sin,
But now they most unlike themselves are grown,
For till Faith, Hope them to restore begin,
They glorious seem without, but foul and vile within.
2
For though of Knowledge, Love, Truth, Patience,
Right, Mercy, Fortitude, Humility,
Prudence, Zeal, Temperance, Bounty, Obedience,
There do in them remain some memory;
Yet wanting Faith and Hope, like either eye,
Their blinded souls for to direct aright,
In all their actions they do move awry,
For Faith and Hope like Sun and Moons clear light,
Direct repenting Souls which wander else in night.
3
And though by reading in Dame Natures book
The Heaven and Earth's most wonderful creation,
They upwards to their Maker often did look,
And saw his Power and Wisdoms manifestation,
And their own wretchedness: Yet Humiliation
For sin, in them no true Repentance wrought:
For missing these chief Agents of salvation,
The work could not be to perfection brought;
For without Faith and Hope, Repentance profits naught.
4
Thou that the Finisher and Author art
Of every good and perfect Gift and Grace,
Who look not on the work, but on the heart,
Where every Virtue holds her seat and place,
Who lately have me guided in the trace
Of Faith the Mother: now direct aright
My Muse, to follow on the Virtues chase,
And first of Hope Faiths daughter next in sight:
And make my Hope stand steadfast whilst of Hope I write.
5
Hope is of things to come an expectation,
Which God has promised, and Faith does believe,
For when The Elect of their Justification
By Faith, stand sure: Then Hope does them relieve
With Patience, to expect till God does give
All the good things which he has promised,
So that no cross affliction can them grieve,
For by this Hope they stand assured,
The day will come their Hope shall be accomplished.
6
Some, Faith Hopes Mother, some her Sister call,
Howsoever, betwixt them is so near relation,
That if one fail, the other needs must fall;
Faith brings forth Hope, the Anchor of salvation,
But Faith is nourished by expectation,
A thankful Daughter to a blessed Dame,
Who nonrisheth her Mother in this fashion,
And often when Faith grows cold, blind, faint, and lame;
Hopes breasts, Assurance, Patience, her restore again.
7
A blessed pair, like Na^mi and Ruth,
Faith does direct, and Hope goes forth to gleane,
Faith searches first, believes, and finds the Truth,
Then Hope at Booz feet expects the mean:
And though at first a small reward she gain,
Yet being content Gods leisure for to stay,
She in the end does to her Hope attain;
Ruth unto Booz married is that day,
And now may Naomi in her lap Obed lay.
8
Hope is so like Faith, and so near of Kin,
As hardly we discern a difference;
Faith is the ground whereon Hope does begin;
Both have alike assurance, Patience:
From the same Spirit both have their influence,
Both saving Graces purge and purify
The heart, and season with obedience:
Both last alike: By both we'our selves deny;
Both make our conscience sound: By both for Christ we die.
9
But Faith is first, for lo, she is Hopes ground,
Hope only future sees, but Faith things past:
Faith seals our evidence and makes it sound,
Hope waits till she possession take at last:
Hope is the Helmet that on The Head is placed,
But Faith the Shield does all the body hide,
And though our Faith often faint, our Hope stands fast,
From off the Shield full many a blow may slide
On Helmet: but there farther entrance is deni'de.
10
Thus have I showed how they are different.
The cause now: As of Words immortal seed
The Spirit begets Faith, to give firm assent
Unto Gods Promises: Even, so indeed,
That Spirit out of those Promises does breed
A lively Hope: whose end is our salvation,
And that we shall have all things which we need;
In the mean time, we have our conversation
By Faith and Hope with Christ, in heavenly habitation.
11
Similitudes make plain and illustrate
Things, that are else mysterious, dark, obscure:
As when the immortal Workman did create
At first, Man without help, alone and pure,
He made him then a deep sleep to endure,
And took stuff from him ere he did awake,
Of which he made for him a help most sure.
So the same Spirit that Faith at first did make,
To make now Hope, Faiths help, does matter from Faith take.
12
As Body, Spirit, Faith, Lord and Baptisme's one,
So but one true and living Hope we find:
But as her Objects infinite become,
We may distinguish her in different kind.
If heavenly Objects be to her assigned,
She like the Object is, Celestial,
If she on worldly Objects set her mind,
As does the Object, she does rise or fall,
Lo then, the Object of our Hope is all in all.
13
We hope for that for us in Heau'n's up laid,
We hope to see Christ's glorious Exaltation,
We hope for all things, that Christ for us praid,
We hope in Gospel that brings us salvation,
We hope of all in Christ a restoration;
We hope Souls, Bodies, shall immortal live:
We hope to reap what is sown in expectation,
The faithful Pastor hopes his Flock shall thrive,
Faith Author is of Hope, but Hope keeps Faith alive.
14
When Faith believes, Hope hopes against Sense and Reason.
Gods Promise is her soundest Argument,
His leisure to attend, is her best season,
Though Faith believe above Hope yet she is content
To hope: Present to her are things absent:
She never faints, but holds out to the end,
She to increase and grow is diligent,
She Is pure and clean: No shame does her attend,
By Patience and Experience she does daily mend.
15
Faith's like Elias that by God was sent,
Elisha to anoint him to succeed:
Hope, like Elisha, waits most diligent,
And leaves her not, till fiery Charets lead
Faith up to Heaven: Then Hope stays in her stead;
Lo then, Faiths Spirit on Hope is doubled found,
And though by Faith our Souls on Heaven now feed,
Hope still sustaynes our Bodies on the ground,
And waits till all that Faith believes, she true have found.
16
Yea after that our bodies turn to dust,
It seems that Hope still with our souls remain:
What else does mean the Revel. 6. 10. 11.
crying of the Just,
Which for Gods Word lie under The Altar slain,
How long will thou (Lord) to avenge refrain
Our blood, on those, that on the earth it spilled?
To whom this answer is returned again,
They should rest, till the number was fulfilled
Of those which for the Word, as they were, should be killed.
17
Hope's subject is each heart, that Christ has known,
And where in glory he vouchsafes to dwell,
She best by Objects is conceau'd and shown,
For as they do transcend, Hope does excel:
All Gods good Promises which one can tell,
Her Objects are, which if one right would read,
He must begin with that when Adam fell,
Gods Promise to the Woman, that her seed,
Though Serpent bruised his heel, should break the Serpents head.
18
Like this, was that promise to Abraham,
All Nations should be blessed in his seed:
And him that King of Israel became
God promised, one should never want of his breed,
To sway great Iuda's Scepter in his stead,
Till Shilo came, who was his Lord and Son:
Son, as his flesh did from his Loins proceed,
Lord as the Godhead in the flesh did won,
Thus he was David's Christ, Son, Lord, and yet but one.
19
Lo, God performed all his good Promises
In Christ his sufferings, birth, and exaltation,
All tending to bring wretched Man to bliss;
But now, behold, new tidings of salvation,
The Gospel shows, our reconciliation
Is finished: as after shall be shown,
When all in Heaven and Earth have restoration:
What we believe and hope, shall then be known,
Hope then shall reap in joy, what she in tears has sown.
20
For as the promises that God had sw^re,
In Christ's first coming were accomplished:
Even so all those that in the Gospel are,
In's second coming shall be finished:
And since that Good to Adam promised,
Was full four thousand years ere consummation;
Why then should Hope that is thus experienced,
Faint in less then two thousands expectation?
Nearer, than when we first believed, is our salvation.
21
Oh! had I here Hopes wondrous memory,
Then should I able be soon to make known,
All Is Promises which God cannot deny,
Every of which Hope does account her own.
Behold, in brief, them all unto thee shown,
All Faith believes, (And what does he distrust?
In whom this little seed of Faith is sown)
All these, I say, Hope does together thrust,
And in them puts assured confidence and trust.
22
Therefore these Virtues always her attend,
Assurance, Confidence, and Patience,
With Perseverance always to the end,
And of Gods faithfulness Experience:
These, and the like, are her most sure defense
Against troubles, s^^ffes, her weakness, long delay
Of many Promises, which made long since
Are not accomplished unto this day;
And when she is like to faint, these her refresh always.
23
They that would make faithless uncertainty,
So necessary to attend Hopes train,
And on coniect'rall probability
Lay Hopes foundation: They demonstrate plain,
True Faith and Hope did never in them remain:
And though like Faith, Hope sometimes wa^er may,
(As who can to a perfectness attain)
Yet, Hope increasing, Doubting does decay,
Uncertainty and Hope together cannot stay.
24
No more than in the Water cold and heat,
For as the heat all coldness does expel,
So Hope all doubting out of us does beat.
I grant, that as in lukewarm Water dwell
Both heat and cold, so in the hollow Cell
Of unsound, lukewarm Libertines false mind,
Uncertainty and wau'ring Hope do dwell:
But this no true and steadfast Hope we find,
Else true and feigned Hope would differ in their kind.
25
Though Hope has many an open Enemy,
None wrong her more than her familiar Friends,
As Merits, Doubtings, false Security
In civil honest dealing: who depends
On these quicksands, more danger him attends
Than if he split on Rock of fierce Despair,
Or to distrust Gods promises intends,
Because so long a finishing they are*
Civil Defection hazards more than open War.
26
Oh! who can point out all the subtilties
Satan does use this Lady to depose;
How he all worldly Objects does devise,
That she may in them confidence repose;
And thereby may her heavenly Object lose?
Who are more miserable, Satan says,
Than those on things to come their Hopes repose?
And who live longer and more joyful days,
Than they whose Hope on wealth and Princes favors stays?
27
As Jews two Thieves did hang on either hand,
When as they crucified the Lord of Life,
So two extremes on either side Hope stands,
And both of them have each with other strife:
On left hand stands Despair with bloody knife,
On right Presumption bold does ouer-weene.
Hope, oftentimes may save Despaires life:
Presumption railes, and thinks in her spleen,
If Hope could others save, she ^ould endure such teene.
28
Hope is like Jacob that went out but poor,
But free from danger unto (...) Land;
But when he does return with Wi^es and store,
Laban pursues behind: Esau with band
Of full four hundred does before him stand:
But Angels as Companions him attend,
And even with God he wrestles hand to hand,
Who does from churlish Laban him defend,
Nor suffers cruel Esau Jacob to offend.
29
So when our Hope, alas, is faint and poor,
It forward walks most free from all tentation:
But when it gets some strength, Despair before,
Behind, Presumption seeks our supplantation,
Lo then Gods promises of our salvation,
Like Angels are to comfort us at hand,
We wrestle with the Spirit by supplication,
Whereby we are enabled to withstand
Despair, Presumption proud, and all the Devils band.
30
Men in this World, are like to ships at Sea,
Which storms have beaten and the waves have tossed,
That, when they come to harbor in the Lea,
Cast Anchre out: where if they find the coast
Consist of Men's merits.
quicksands, all their labor's lost:
Lo! then Hopes Anchre there can get no hold,
So they with storms and waves again are tossed:
But if they find firm Land, they then grow bold,
No wind, storms, waves, can beat them from their Anchre-hold.
31
Faith as the Sun, and Hope is as the Moon
In Heaven both glorious Lamps this World to light,
So in man's soul Faith, Hope, like two lights shone,
Their little world toward bliss to guide aright.
As Moon does borrow from Suns glorious light,
So Hope from Faith: And as when Sun to shine
On Moon forbeares, she is scarce discerned by sight;
So when Hope wants Faiths glorious light Divine,
She wanes like Moon, and all her beauty does dec'line.
32
Hope signifies a constant expectation
Of some good thing to come, from such a one
Of whose Love, Pow're, and Truth a firm persuasion
We have that all we wait for shall be done:
Lo, first Hope only is of things to come,
It is no Hope to hope for things we see:
Next in her self Hope confidence has none,
Last, all our hope and refuge is to flee
Unto Gods grace, pow're, wisdom, Truth, which certain be.
33
Here in examples may my Muse transcend:
For whatsoever things are writ of old,
Are for our learning and instruction pend,
That we, through Patience, comfort may behold
In Scriptures: And have Hope for to lay hold
On all Gods Promises and Dealing kind,
By him showed to our forefathers of old,
And those which to our own times are assigned,
Last of all, those which we within our selves do find.
34
These three may breed in us experience,
Experience Hope, Hope makes not ashamed;
Lo first the examples all have reference
To Hope, which I in Faiths discourse have named,
Kings, Prophets, Judges, Martyrs all enflamed
With Love, in Hope and Faith most firm do stand;
Without the one, the other may be blamed,
Both able are Hels malice to withstand,
For if one faints, the other lends her helping hand.
35
This general brief narration shall serve,
For all Hopes noble famous acts of old.
Now if you will be pleased to observe,
Whilst I the examples of our times unfold,
And those which our forefathers have us told;
God never has so de^lt with any Nation,
In giving temporal blessings manifold,
In our deliverances above expectation,
Lastly, in yielding us such means for our salvation.
36
He sets us in a blessed Land, where flow
Honey and Milk, and all good things abound,
The Plough-man reapes the Crop which he does sow:
Here Peace and Plenty every where are found;
Here dreadful trump of war does never sound,
No leading here into captivity,
Here no complaining in our streets is found,
Here Is health of body with prosperity,
And all these lasted have beyond man's memory.
37
I hope here is for us sufficient ground,
To trust in God for all things temporal;
How many plots has Hell and Rome out found,
Us to betray to bondage spiritual?
Yet God has us delivered out of all,
Besides that secret cruel trayt'rous brood,
Priests, that themselves Catholic Champions call,
She has prouok'd to make her quarrel good,
Great Kings to open war and shedding innocent blood.
38
Witness th'Armada huge of Eighty eight,
Which b^eathed naught but cruel desolation,
And was invincible in Man's conceit,
Whom naught could satisfy but th'extirpation
Of Protestants, and all the English Nation:
Home-treason, foreign war us to betray
To Popish, cursed, hellish machination:
Naught could this Phara^hs cruelty allay,
Till Death, Hell, and Destruction swept them all away.
39
This quail'd the spite of Egypt: but of Rome,
Though power grow weak, her spite grows yet more strong;
When force and open war do vain become,
She seeks by treason to maintain her wrong:
Lo, Jesuits and Seminaries throng
In Court, Church, City, and in every Place;
To sow seeds of Sedition us among,
To bring Prince, Counsel, Prelate in disgrace:
To credit Superstition, and the Truth outface.
40
How many were their plots of cursed Treason
Devised against our late dread Sovereign Queen?
Impatient to expect the time and season,
When she should hence go and no more be seen:
That time they looked to wreake their spiteful teene,
On opposites of Popes Supremacy,
Oh! this a bloody day had surely been,
Had not the Lord us succored from on high,
And whence we hoped for least, did us most help supply.
41
Lo, whilst she lived she seemed a weak defense,
A Woman to defend so great a Nation
From secret treasons, open violence,
Filled all the World with joy and admiration:
But when by her most happy commutation,
She leaves this Earth: Behold, that providence,
Which made this weak Sex strong for our salvation;
Brings in a stronger and more sure defense,
With Gladness, Plenty, Peace, without all violence.
42
Oh! that my Muse were able here to fly,
The high pitch of my Sovereigns commendation,
Who Solomon-like in all his Royalty,
Brought Peace and Plenty to this happy Nation:
At whose most blessed, glad Inauguration,
No Shimei barks, nor Sheba lifts his hand,
But all him meet with joyful salutation,
God save King JAMES, sole Monarch of our Land,
And set thy seat as fast as our late Queens did stand.
43
This was a gracious work of Providence,
A thing unparalleled, before not seen.
But can this stop the Dragons virulence?
No it increases more his spite and teene;
For the same cause he hated our late Queen,
He does Faith's great Defender now infest,
But against Love, Faith, Hope is all his spleen,
And all that will not fall down to the Beast;
With those that Antichristian supremacy detest.
44
Many a cursed plot and cruel treason
Has been attempted against our gracious King,
Before and since the happy time and season,
God him in peace to rule this Land did bring;
But never yet was hammered such a thing,
By Pope, Turk, Jesuit, or in Hell below,
As was the powder plots fierce lightening,
Which in one instant all should overthrow,
King, Counsel, Nobles, City, Commons, Priests up blow.
45
Oh barbarous wretches! cruel instruments
Of Death and Ruin to their native Nation!
What heart of steel or flint that not relents
To apprehend the dreadful desolation,
(Besides of men) of that fair habitation,
Those seats of Justice, Houses for devotion,
Great Britains glory, Strangers admiration?
Shame is reward, Gods wrath the bitter potion,
Of all that had their heads in this most hellish motion.
46
But leave them to their punishment and shame.
Behold a work no older than the year,
Wherein Gods Love to us (blessed be his Name)
No less than in the former does appear:
I mean our Sovereigns sickness, who was near
To the last act of all mortality,
But when all physic fayl'd, God did him cheer,
His health restoring with prosperity,
And adding length of days to him that looked to die.
47
Nor only does this Antichristian Bore,
Seek to root up the Vine of Gods right Hand;
But there be Foxes, little Foxes store,
Which against her bloming Grapes in ambush stand;
Those that against Church government do band,
Separatists.
Churches illit'rate Vermin, who disclose
Their envy to the Prelates of our Land,
When against their Succession they oppose,
Tithes, Prayers, Order, Titles, Ceremonies, Clothes.
48
These humorous Nouellists have often assayed,
From her youth up, our Church unto this day:
But never has their subtlety preuayl'd
Church discipline to alter, though I say,
Martin their spite and malice did bewray,
When he in scoffs and railing spent his wit,
Not sauouring of the Spirit, which should pray
For Kings and those that at the Stern do sit;
And not rank Martinisme in Rulers faces spit.
49
These first, as Theudas-like, some great Man rose;
To whom great multitudes themselves combine,
And Iudas-like Church tribute did oppose,
But they are perished: And our fruitful Vine
Yet prospers still and yields abundant Wine:
Which proves it planted is by Gods own Hand,
For were 't Man's policy, not power Divine,
She never could such furious Beasts withstand;
But long since had destroyed been out of this Land.
50
Was e're in Israel known or Iuda's coast,
So long peace and such plenty temporal?
Can any of the Nations like us boast,
Deliverances from bondage spiritual?
Our God, who did us out of bondage call,
Protects our Leaders by his power divine,
Against Hell, Pope, Jesuits, Sep'ratists and all:
And lest our Faith and Hope fail or decline,
Lo, in Prince Charles new hope, and all that Princely Line.
51
But some may say, What Is this to spiritual Hope?
These were deliverances temporal:
But who knows not, by these Hell and the Pope,
Sought the destrnction of the Spirit and all?
Lo, Faith and Hope now banished from the stall
Of Romes foul Beast, for aid flies to our Land,
Where Prince, Priests, People join together all,
In the defense of Faith and Hope to stand,
And in their quarrel spend their lives, their goods and land.
52
Here both have dwelt safe near a hundred year,
Since they from Rome were banished to this Land;
Where many Saints have lost their bloods most dear,
Whilst constantly in their defense they stand,
And though, for near six years, Romes cruel hand
Did in this Land true Faith and Hope assail;
Yet since Elizabeth did all command,
The Champions of true Faith did never fail,
But against close treason and force open did prevail.
53
And though we lately lost the likeliest Prince
That ever lived, Faith and Hope to defend,
Yet lo, our Hope is more increased since,
By Royal Charles, whom God does seem to send,
Like Charlemaine his Church secure to shend
Against Antichrist, Hell, Schism, and Saraceen:
And all from us that would Hopes Anchre rend.
But here my Muse in order should begin*
To melt away in tears for loss of Anne our Queen.
54
Most peerless Lady! Nobles surest friend,
The Peoples safety; Clergies firm defense,
Who constantly did Faith and Hope defend
Against subtle Schism and Papists virulence:
Church Patroness against the violence
Of covetous Sacrilege and griping hands,
Who spoil Church-liuings under false pretense,
It against the thrift of true Devotion stands;
That Churchmen should have large possessions, goods, and lands.
55
But as when Death from Son and Father rent
A careful Mother, and a faithful Wife,
Isaac Rebecka brought to Sara's Tent,
To comfort both the Sons and Fathers life,
So we do hope, our Prince will take a Wife
Into his Mothers Tent, who shall begin
Like her to comfort Son and Fathers life.
But soft, my Muse, this thread too long does spin,
Now will I sing of Hope that ought to be within.
56
These presidents of Gods Grace, Faith, Truth, Love,
Power, Wisdom, Providence, and dealing kind
With those that trust in him, us well may move
Unto a steadfast Hope; which if we find
Within the secret Closet of our mind,
It is the earnest that to us does prove,
Here all things needful shall be us assigned,
And we shall have Hopes end, even Heaven above,
Where Faith and Hope shall leave us in the arms of Love*
57
But Faith and Hope implicit general,
Brings not to us this blessed Habitation:
It must be inward, lively, spiritual,
With true particular right application
Of all Christ's merits, wrought for our salvation;
Else, with vntemper'd mortar stones we lay,
And build upon unsound and weak foundation;
Fie on the Clerks that so abuse the Lay,
(They understand not what they hope, believe, or pray.)
58
Which thus would seal up all in ignorance,
That they might seal their Pardons unto all;
Thus they their state do mightily advance,
By binding or by loosing them that fall:
Mortal offenses and sins venial,
Differ not in their nature but their pay:
As sins abound, their Markets rise and fall,
So wide to Heaven they open now the way,
That, lo, the richest men with most ease enter may.
59
The relish and true taste of Faith and Hope,
They turn to ignorance and superstition:
Gods written Word that wont to be their scope,
Must now give place to humane vain Tradition:
Their inward Hope is honor, wealth, ambition,
And how they may all earthly Kingdoms sway,
Emp'rours and Kings to them must yield submission,
Else they their Subjects license them to slay,
Thus Peter's keys, like swords, cut all out of their way.
60
How do these foul flagitious crying sins
Transport my Muse from holy Meditation,
Which erst in Hope above the Seraphins,
Took sweet delight in heavenly Contemplation!
(Has she too long staid in this deuaition?)
Lo, now she does to Hope return again,
To heavenly Hope, and glorious expectation,
Which firm and steadfast ever shall remain,
Till her in Loves high Court her Savior entertayne.
61
See here, how graciously our God does deal
With his, in sending them such enemies;
Else would Worlds vain entising pleasures steal
Away our hearts to all impieties:
Such trialls do the Virtues exercise,
Of all that set on God their confidence,
The greater ills that wicked men devise,
The faster we do cleave to our defense:
So Hope becomes most firm by such experience.
62
And therefore I might better here complain
Of too much Ease, Peace and Security,
Luke-warmenesse, hollow Dealing: these do train
More souls to Hell, than Popes hostility.
Lo Satan not by force, but subtlety,
Made our first Parents guilty of transgression,
Whom Priests and Jesuits follow cunningly,
In plotting by auricular Confession,
Against States, Treason, and against poor Saints oppression^
63
O let me wish here more than I can hope,
All Envy, Malice, Au'rice laid aside,
We would make Heaven the Object of our Hope,
And Faith and Truth may ever be our Guide:
Thus from Gods Statutes we shall never slide,
Thus We, Pope, Sep'ratist shall meet in one:
Whom Truth does join, no Power can divide,
Oh! why should Flesh of Flesh, and Bone of Bone
Differ? where God and Christ, Faith, Baptism, Hope is one.
64
Would our own willing be, but to confess
Their error, and return unto the right,
Aband'ning wilful, peevish, singleness,
And censuring things whereof they have no light,
Oh, would they strive with all their force and might.
To hold Spirits Unity in bond of Peace,
And not thus with indifferent things to fight;
Touch, taste not, handle not, which do increase
Schisms and Divisions, which are Enemies to Peace.
65
So long and hot has been this fervent strife
For Apples, things of order, decency,
That we, alas! neglect religious Life,
Faith, Hope, Repentance, Joy and Charity:
Of things indifferent judge indifferently,
The smaller things, the greater consequence
There is, we should with all Humility
Yield unto them vnfeign'd obedience:
Not we the Law: The Law must rule our Conscience.
66
Now could I, with Compassion, Prayers, Tears,
Beseech you all as to a common flame,
To lend your Hands, your Heads, your Hearts, your Ears,
And all your aid and help to quench the same:
It Is to our Church a foul reproach and shame,
Christ's Coat that is without Seame to divide,
When we in substance all do hold the same:
Lets humbly in one Hope, Faith, Love abide,
And not fall out for shells, to make whose peace Christ di'de.
67
But they say Ceremonies now are dead,
Why should we them again then viuifie?
I grant all were in Christ accomplished,
Which his last Sacrifice did typifie:
But those of Order and of Decency,
Do for our imitation still remain,
As Ephods, Offerings, Tithes, Prayers, Prophecy,
Kneeling: such as Devotion true maintain,
The first we do forbear: The last we do retain.
68
But now I stray from Hope, b^t not from Peace,
Which is the thing I hope for and desire,
What shall our strife for Ornaments increase?
Whilst Adversaries in our gates conspire
To burn our Towns, and blow us up with fire,
Now by our Hope that up in heaven is laid,
I instantly you pray, beseech, require,
To lend your public and your private aid,
That Rulers not for fear, but conscience be obaid.
69
Hope still pricks on my Muse in this discourse,
In hope hereby Peace to our Church to gain.
But method here does stop her farther course;
Who preaches Order, Order must maintain,
Hope must not pass her Mother Faith in train,
Lest I do hope for more than I believe,
For which if I do pray, I pray in vain;
God without Faith no prayers does receive,
Hope, Prayer, without Faith, do often poor souls deceive.
70
Thou then that art of Faith and Hope the Spring,
I ^lesse thy Name for this sweet Meditation,
This light of Hope which thou to me do bring,
Oh let true Faith direct my Supplication
Unto my Hope thy holy Habitation,
That Port of bliss, purchased by thine own Blood,
Spent on the Cross to finish our salvation:
This is my Hope, This is my heavenly Food,
On this fair Hope to rest, I hold my chiefest good.
71
And here, I hope, I may have leave to rest,
And stop my Muse a while from following
The Virtues praises, late so ready pressed,
In Loves high Court, for my true welcomming:
Yet, by Gods grace, I promise here to sing
Of all their praises, in their rank and place;
If this mine entrance and first hanselling,
Shall but obtain amongst those Readers grace,
Who, by these Virtues aid, hope to behold Loves face.
FINIS.
THE BRIDES ORNAMENTS: Poetical Essays upon a Divine subject.

THE SECOND BOOK.

Viz. of
Justice and Righteousness. Truth. Mercy. Patience. Fortitude.
LONDON Printed by W. Stansby. 1621.

TO MY MOST LOVING, AND TRVELY BELOVED WORTHY GOOD FRIEND, Mr. PHILIP KING.
IN whom for complement there is no room,
With him does so much honesty abound,
And Justice to thy Patronage will come,
Whom I of all men have the iustest found:
Thou art no curious Critic, nor of those
That nothing like in Verse, but all in Prose.
All yours, R. A.

MEDITAT. I.
Of Justice and Righteousness.
1
WHen first Gods moving Spirit forth had brought
Beasts, Foul, Fish, creeping things after their kind:
Lo, then He Man in his own Image wrought,
And him a Ruler over all assigned,
Writing within the Tablet of his Mind
His Law, which should eternally endure,
And all the Creatures in Obedience bind
To Man their King, and knit his heart as sure
To King of Kings. This Law was natural and pure.
2
Here first the right of Sovereignty began,
All subject to the Monarchy of one,
For every Creature subject is to Man,
While he is subject unto God alone.
This Monarch now is seated in his Throne,
And the whole World does with his Scepter sway:
Here Is the first president that e're was known
Of government. From hence, lo, Princes may
Learn rightly how to rule, and Subjects to obey.
3
Thus Man of this great World the little King,
To show his Sovereignty, gave all a name,
And they their Lord as Subjects reu'rencing,
True Vassals to this little King became:
Yet Man in honor could not hold the same,
But did become rude, disobedient:
Breaking that Law, he merits hell, death, shame,
When he offends that has the Regiment,
His double sin deserves a double punishment.
4
In all his works before, the Lord had shown,
His Love, Power, Wisdom, Truth and Providence:
But now Man's sin his Justice must make known,
Though most notorious was the Man's offense,
God will not judge till he makes his defense;
Man cited then, appears vile, naked, lame,
There needs no witness but his conscience,
And though on others he would lay the blame,
The more his cause is heard, the more appears his shame.
5
Besides the eternal Law within the heart
Of Adam God had wrote with his own Hand,
He did one Precept unto him impart,
Which was indifferent, till God did command
Of all the Trees that in the Garden stand,
From one, on pain of death, he must refrain.
Laws made we may not question or withstand:
Who breaks them, bears the forfeit of the pain*
When Rulers cease to punish Vice, they sin maintain.
6
Thou that the hearts of all Men do dispose,
Of Kings to rule, and Subjects to obey,
From whom all Power proceeds to bind and lose,
Who humble Men in judgment guidest ay;
Thou Judge of all the World, direct, I pray,
Thy humble Servant, to discern aright
Of Justice, that I her delineate may
In her true shape unto the Peoples sight,
That teaching I may learn and practice to do right.
7
She is a constant and perpetual Will,
That gives to every Man what is his right;
First free from passion, she continues still
Constant in her disposing things aright.
In action next she takes most delight,
And not alone in idle speculation,
There Is no respect of persons in her sight,
The same to all without vain alteration,
For Law's the Rule and Square of her administration.
8
Justice the Virtue, Law's the Rule and Square,
Whereby we truly Justice exercise:
Wherefore if in the abstract you declare
Laws Nature, she is perpetual, constant, wise,
And so with God in heaven for ay abye:
But if you view her in the concrete Would,
She varies as the Subject her employs,
Then blame not Laws when wrong we do behold,
It comes from Man that is made of corruptible mould.
9
As when pure Wine in putrid Vessel put,
Becomes unwholesome, rank, unsavory,
The fault's not in the Wine, but in the Butt,
Which does the sweetness of the Wine destroy:
Even so it fares with Law and Equity,
In their own nature they are perfect, pure,
But if in Subjects of Iniquity
They are contayn'd, they cannot so endure,
But like the Subject they become corrupt, impure.
10
Three kinds of Laws from God I do observe;
Moral, Judicial, Ceremonial:
Which three the Jews did constantly preserve,
As bound in conscience to obey them all.
The Ceremonial, and Judicial,
Cease, but remain paternes for imitation:
The Moral is the same perpetual,
That most pure Law, which from Man's first creation,
Continues still to us without least alteration.
11
And though the Rule of Right, now does not tie
To the Judicial Laws strict observation,
Yet it does bind us to the equity
Thereof (as fittest for our imitation:)
Though Blasphemy, Theft, Murder, Fornication,
Have not amongst us now the punishment
Which Jews inflicted by Gods ordination;
Yet it is a Rule in all good government,
The pain unto the sin must be equivalent.
12
As Laws right to maintain, and wrong redress,
Should be conformed to the Judicial,
So rules of order and of comeliness,
Should imitate Laws Ceremonial:
The Moral Law (by some called Natural)
Is Gods eternal Law, by which above
He things in Heaven and Earth disposes all.
These God ingrau'd in Stone, the Jews to prove,
But in our hearts they all now written are by love.
13
Mistake me not, that I maintain hereby
Gross Iudaisme, or out-worne rudiment,
Which Christ's last Sacrifice did typifie,
(Such Ceremonies long ago are spent)
But those whereby we should our selves present
In public Preaching, Sacraments, Devotions,
It well becomes us all with one consent,
To imitate without strife or commotions,
It Is sin to disobay Laws in indifferent motions.
14
I know fnll well there is a Law beside
This Moral Law, which some call Natural,
Which under God by Nature is impli'de
To rule Heavens Spheres and Motions, which they call
The Law of Nature; By which rise and fall
Sun, Moon, and Stars, in Motion necessary,
But from the Law of Reason, whereby all
That Reason have are Agents voluntary,
By some called Reasons Law, my Muse now will not vary.
15
From hence, as from a Nurserie, do come
All Laws, which by good Christian Polity
And lawful Power, to us as bonds become,
To keep us in the bands of Charity,
And us preserve from wrong and injury,
And not by others loss to raise our gain,
But lead our lives in Truth and Honesty,
As not enough from evil to restrain,
Except we good perform, and others right maintain.
16
Even as we see things wanting life and sense,
(But Agents natural) strive to maintain
The preservation of the common Ens,
And against their natural course themselves constrayne,
Even Motions against Nature do darraigne,
As heavy stones will up from Center fly,
Rather than all a Vacuum entertayne,
So reasonable men should rather die,
Then suffer any harm to University.
17
And hence come Laws of Nations, which maintain
Leagues betwixt Princes, Freedom, Servitude:
Next civil Law, whose equity did gain
Command of all Romes Empires amplitude.
The Canon Law, whose wi^edome did conclude
All other Laws, till Pride and Superstition
Amongst those sacred Sanctions did intrude,
So Antichristianizing by ambition,
That holy Writ must now give place to their Tradition.
18
Thus Statutes of each Country, City, Land,
Which they themselves do call Municipall,
All Laws which now in force with us do stand,
The Common, Civil, Ecclesiastical,
All these do come from the pure Natural,
And tend true Right and Justice to maintain,
Respecting Gods true worship above all,
Next Magistrates, peace public, common gain,
And last that each man may in peace his own retain.
19
But as from Fountain seated on a Hill,
Pure silver streams in sundry Channels flow,
First clear like Spring from which their waters rill,
But passing farther thick and miry grow,
(Defiled by their Channels soil below)
Even so, all Laws which from the Eternal come,
First like the pattern are, as pure as snow,
But do in time corrupt and base become,
By Man's corrupted heart, through which Laws streams do run.
20
Base Dust and Ashes dares not be so bold,
As to define of Righteousness Divine,
That Justice pure which Flesh cannot behold,
But as some rays here seem below to shine,
As far above the reach of humane eyne,
As infinite Love, Truth, and Majesty,
Transcends the measure of a finite Line:
Yet Man at first was framed thus righteous by
The Righteous God, from whom comes none iniquity.
21
For nothing that is unrighteous or unjust,
Has e're or shall be in his Presence seen;
Wherefore renouncing all our rags, we must
In Christ's pure Righteousness all clothed been.
It is a wicked fond conceit to ween
Man's righteousness, once able is to stand
Before the Righteous Judge, where our most clean
And perfect acts, as vile, vnpure, are scand:
Oh wretched Man whom thus Presumption holds in band.
22
My feeble Spirits and Soul amazed become,
When I contemplate of the Righteousness,
That with the most Just God does ever won,
My Muse unable far is to express
His Justice, which is Truth and Holiness:
Therefore I back now will retire again
To Justice, that brings Man to Happiness,
And here on Earth does Peace and Love maintain,
And first her Nature by her Causes will explayne.
23
Out of bad causes good effects to draw,
Peculiar is to Providence Divine,
From whence it comes that many a wholesome Law
From evil manners seems to draw her Line;
But they no causes are; For power Divine
Is the first Cause of Justice and of Right,
Even as the Sun, which gives power to shine
To all the glorious Lamps we see by night,
Though darkness seem the cause of their pure twinkling light.
24
Yet as the Sun, the Fountain of all Light,
Does of his beams to all those Planets send,
Which in the absence of the Sun by night,
Direct all Trauailers aright to wend:
So righteous God such Righteousness does lend
To Kings, and Rulers all, that judge below,
That they may Right and Justice true extend,
And in Gods stead both Light and Guidance show
To Men, which else to all obliquitie would grow.
25
At first when Kings and Princes began to sway,
And that no Laws as yet were on record,
All did their Princes will and mind obey,
And the whole Law came from the Princes word:
Law therefore Kings this Title does afford,
And styles them living Laws by grace Divine,
Sent unto Men to be their Liege and Lord,
With power to make new Laws and old define,
The Head, which Members all in politic Body join.
26
Thus God first gives Kings power Laws to ordain,
Which power Kings to the Judges delegate;
By their Laws, Right and Justice to maintain:
All Power from God does first begin her date,
And therefore all ought him to imitate,
And thereby to do right, and wrong redress;
Not only to increase their own estate,
And live in Plenty, Pride, and Wantonness,
For so we make God cause of our unrighteousness.
27
So we abuse the Power God does give,
To Pleasures, Pride, Unrighteousness, and Wrong,
As if we only to our selves did live,
When Judgment only does to God belong,
Who even the Kings and Judges sits among,
To do the Orphane and the Widow right,
To break delays that Clients suites prolong,
Nor suffering Right to be borne down by Might,
But truly first discern and then proceed aright.
28
These true effects of righteous Causes are
Like God, first cause of Justice to proceed,
Who pulls down the Mighty from his chair,
And sets the Meek and Humble in his stead.
Lo, Justice has a sword to make sin bleed,
As well as Scepter for to rule in Peace;
Besides our sowing we must also weed,
If we expect a plentiful increase,
So long as Vice grows strong, the sword must never cease.
29
(...)
Six several Serieants wa^^ on Justice Throne,
Which she in several duties does employ;
By first, she does command things to be done:
By second, punishes what is done awry:
The third forbids: the fourth gives leave to try:
The fifth exhorts: last does the right advise:
All these respect have to life's honesty,
And that no hurt against others we devise,
Lastly, things that are due to every man to size.
30
But not men only in authority,
May Subjects be of doing wrong or right,
But even weak men in want and poverty,
As when a poor man does his Neighbor smite,
Or works to man or beast the least despite*
To wish the least hurt, is unrighteousness:
And who works ought by open force or slight
Against Neighbors goods or credit, does no less
Offend against the perfect Rule of Righteousness.
31
Yea Subjects sin against the Rule of Right,
When double honor, unto Rulers due,
They do not tender in the peoples sight;
Rulers are Ministers, set in Gods lieu,
For good of those that evil do eschew;
Who seeks Authority for to outface,
Deserve sharp punishment in open view,
Though, as a Man, I can bear all disgrace,
Yet should I not endure dishonor to my place.
32
Lo, here I could by subjects five express
Five several degrees, which Meditation
Suggests to me of this pure Righteousness.
First is of God, from which by deriuation
The other four have life and sustentation;
Of Angels, Kings, and Judges all, which ^ee
Authorized by Princes delegation;
Lastly, of Subjects. But the latter three,
Corrupted often are by Man's impuritie.
33
As plants, which have sole power vegetative,
Judge not of Beasts which motion have and sense,
Nor Beasts of Men, that do in reason thrive,
Nor Men of Angels pure divine Essence,
Nor Angels infinite Omnipotence:
So Subjects judge not Judges uprightness;
Nor Judges, Kings; Nor Kings, the excellence
Of Angels Justice; And Angels no less
Unable are to judge of Gods pure Righteousness.
34
Thus every Soul by right we subject see
To higher Powers, for conscience, not for fear:
The Powers that are, by God ordained be,
And, but by God himself, no Powers are.
Who then resists the Power, does not spare
Even Gods own Ordinances to resist,
Which is for good to those that right do fare,
But for their punishment that do persist
In wickedness, nor from wrong doing do desist.
35
Wherefore we must give every Man his due,
To whom Tithe, Custom, Honor, Fear, belong:
We ought to render them most just and true,
Or else thereby Gods Ministers we wrong:
We must owe naught, but Love to old or young,
For he that loves fulfils the whole Laws will,
Abstaynes from Murder, Lust, Detraction, Wrong.
In brief, commanded good (forsaking ill.)
By loving Neighbors as our selves, we all fulfill.
36
Of all the (...) that attend this
She most of all in Truth (...) take delight,
Who is allied in Righteousness so near,
And linked in Love, that from each others sight
They never part, but even with all their might
Join their (...) service to their Queen to approve.
Obedience, Knowledge, Prudence, wait on Right,
Brave Fortitude and Zeal resolved prove,
To maintain all Right does for their great Queen of Love.
37
Thus all the Virtues that on Love attend,
Companio^^ are of Justice and of Right,
All single and in one their forces bend,
Her to assist against unlawful might.
Great Enemies with her do daily fight;
Ambition, (...) Wrong*
Seeking by (...) force and secret ^^ight,
To weaken hers, and make their own part strong:
Yet she the pro^dest of them all often lays along.
38
As many as are Enemies to Peace,
Public or (...), are her Enemies:
For whereas Discord, Wars, and Strife increase,
There follow Wrong, Revenge, and Injuries:
And though (...) ouer-vainely d^e advise
Brave Spirits to bloody wars to purchase Fame,
Yet who so undertakes such enterprise,
Unless it be for Peace in Justice name,
By shedding guiltless blood deserves eternal blame.
39
Therefore the Pirate justly did retort
Reproach of Thief to Grecian Monarchs shame,
Who the whole World sought to subdue by tort,
To purchase proud vain glory to his name,
Assuring him he was as much to blame,
To rob by Land, as he on Sea to pill,
The Monarch wronged all for idle Fame;
The Pirate for his gain did rob and kill;
Each against the (...) of Right by force maintayn'd his will.
40
Some great (...) glory like to ^ikes in Pond,
All other under Fishes to devour,
That they alone inherit may the Lord,
And all the World subdue unto their power,
As never thinking of their latest hour.
When, as they came, they must return again,
Why should the Highest on the Lowest lower?
The greatest Prince the meanest Slave disdain?
Both borne a^^ke, breath, die, and in their grave remain.
41
Besides, Vice often in Virtues shape appears:
Injustice under Mercies name does go:
Therefore must Judges not be moved with tears
Of Sinners in calamity and woe:
Rulers in Discipline may Mercy show,
And Meekness, so they leave not loosely light
The raynes unto Offenders, ill to do
Whom Fear, not Love, from doing hurt does fright.
For hope of pardon does lewd minds to sin inuit.
42
The Judges then that such Offenders free,
To Injury betray the Innocent.
Three kinds of doing Alms, some say, there be;
First to relieve the poor and impotent;
Next to remit all wrong unto us meant;
The last is, Malefactors to repress.
Who so deferres deserved punishment
Upon Offenders against Gods Righteousness,
To anger do provoke his patient gen^lenesse.
43
Therefore let Judges Grace and (...) show,
In pardoning their private injuries:
But for offenses public let them know,
They there even Gods own Judgment exercise.
The ancient Romans wisely did devise
To punish facile Judges with that pain,
Which Law against Offenders did devise,
Thus wisely foolish pity to restrain,
For that severe uprightness Peace did best maintain.
44
For surely (...)
Then feigned Mercy, Pity, Conscience, Grace,
Who all their wrong entitle Just and Right,
And the right (...) of Law deface,
Whereby each Man ought to direct his p^ce:
From which to stray is foul iniquity.
I grant that Conscience may rule in some case,
But not against the Law, whose equity
(If not against Gods Word) has good authority.
45
For as in eu^ry Town and common Mart,
There is of Weights and Measures but one s^ze,
And Standard, which true right to all does part,
And Weight and Measure justly does comprise;
Even so in this Worlds Market men devise
One Law to mete out every Man his due,
And by that Law the Judges ought assise
All their Decrees and Judgments just and true,
And not in stead of Laws to ^roach Opinions new.
46
But as in Man we soul and body find,
So Laws consist of Letter and true Sense:
And as the body place gives to the mind,
So the Laws Letter with Obedience,
To the true Sense and Soul of Law consents.
Who Letter of the Law seek to maintain,
And leave her mind and meanings excellence,
Are like them that their bodies good to gain,
Both Soul and Body hazard to eternal pain.
47
Some Painters Justice without eyes describe,
That she might know no Man in doing right;
Some without hands, that she may take no Bribe;
Some without pockets, that may gifts inuit*
For gifts of wisest men do blind the sight,
And words even of the Righteous do pervert,
Making them wrest the Law, and take delight
In base rewards, which do corrupt the Heart,
Which being once amiss does all the rest divert.
48
But vain it is to think by likelinesse
Of earthly things, to type out things Divine,
Since none her heavenly Nature can express,
But who the Godhead can aright define.
O let the Sun of Righteousness then shine
Upon my blinded heart with his bright rays,
Which may direct my Muse aright to line,
And level out this heavenly Ladies ways,
That searching, I may learn and follow Right all ways.
49
No earthly subject now my Muse contaynes,
Behold, of Righteousness Divine I sing,
That Righteous Judge that searches Heart and Reins,
Most gracious God, and yet most righteous King:
Who on his own dear righteous Son did bring
The bitter cup of wrath and indignation,
Due to Mankind for their dire trespassing;
Thus satisfying Justice by his Passion,
And showing wondrous Love in working Man's salvation.
50
This Righteousness in us may be defined
A sanctifying holy Quality,
By Gods own Spirit upon our Hearts consigned,
To show to Gods Law true conformity,
And square our words and actions all thereby.
Lo, thus we give to every one their due,
To God and Man, for by Gods Law we try
And understand what to them both is due.
So that conformity thereto is Justice true.
51
To this most perfect Justice can attain
None, but our Head, surnamed, THAT JUST ON^.
Indeed, God made Man righteous, and again
In Heaven we just and perfect shall become:
But amongst Men so righteous there are none.
Yet read we of a twofold Uprightness;
One Legal, which the Law to us has shown:
The other, which the Gospel does express,
Where Grace ac^epts our will by Faith for Righteousness.
52
The Law requires perfect Obedience,
Even in that Man that seeks to live thereby:
The Gospel, Faith, and a good Conscience;
By Faith Christ's Righteousness especially
Imputed is, which rightly we apply.
That, of the Conscience does the whole Man frame,
Willing in all things to live honestly;
This, of Gods Spirit a powerful work I name,
And none but the regenerate obtain the same.
53
For Righteousness that thus from Faith does run,
Let me refer you to that Meditation,
Which I of Faith have formerly begun,
Whereas Christ's Merits (ours by Imputation)
Stand before God for our Justification.
And thus Christ is of the whole Law the end:
For what the Law exacts for our Salvation,
Christ has fulfilled for us as a Friend,
And by the Gospel to Believers does extend.
54
The Righteousness of a good Conscience,
In two things does consist especially;
First, to abstain from ill with diligence;
Next, to do good willing and constantly:
To do good and avoid iniquity,
Are two essential parts of Righteousness:
Except they both concur, they both do die.
Lo, thus old Za^hary and Elizabesse,
Were righteous before God, and walked with men blameless.
55
We Righteousness of Faith from Christ receive:
That of the Conscience, is a work of Grace:
The Righteousness of Faith will not there cleave,
Where Righteousness of Conscience has not place:
This right of Conscience rightly we embrace,
When true Repentance working change of mind,
Does the old Man of sin in us deface,
With resolute purpose in a holy kind,
Henceforth to frame our lives as Gods Law has assigned.
56
If thus the mind be truly altered,
And change of resolution thoroughly wrought,
Then the whole Man is fitly furnished,
To put Faiths Righteousness on as he ought.
Without true change of mind we soon are brought
Like Dog unto his vomit to retire;
By sin corrupted Nature's easily caught
Again like Sow to wallow in the mire.
High God does first this inward Righteousness require.
57
Thus by true Faith and a good Conscience,
With true Repentance we our selves do press,
And arm to proof for sure and firm defense,
With breast plate spiritual of Righteousness,
Which gards us from all mortal sinfulness.
For as the breast plate hides each vital part,
So that no mortal wound can them oppress,
Even so this Righteousness defends the Heart
And Conscience, that no mortal sin can thorough dart.
58
Thus strongly armed, we most assured stand
Of our effectual calling and salvation:
For as we God most righteous understand,
So know we that the righteous Generation,
Are borne of him which brings true exultation,
Cladding our Names with happy memory,
Makes much for true religious confirmation,
Does it with Infidels much dignifie,
Who seeing our good works our Maker glorify.
59
As are the windings of sly Errors train,
So are the ^y-paths of Iniquity;
Yet in two Heads we may them all contain,
To Neighbors wrong, to God impiety;
Here I some ouer-iust Ones pass not by,
(Such as must have all Bows by their own bent)
Who by pretense of Christian liberty,
Allow naught but what their own brains invent,
Correctors curious of things indifferent.
60
Two other Gulfes here I will only sound;
One is of Pharisaicall Righteousness;
The other with false Libertines is found,
Who do abuse Gods grace to wantonness:
The last, Faith only with their tongue profess,
But let their conscience wind at liberty.
The other make great boast of Uprightness
And Merits, trusting to be saved thereby:
Both put asunder those God does together tie.
61
(Thus Hymeneus did and Alexander,
Who first did put away good Conscience:
And then in Schisms and Heresies did wander,
Till they made shipwreck of Faiths firm defense.
Thus some given over to a reprobate sense,
Do fall to senseless base Idolatry,
Putting in stocks and stones their confidence:
And in the mystery of Iniquity;
Who boasts himself to have of Heaven and Hell the Key.)
62
Not but Christ's immense Coat of Righteousness,
Sufficient is to cloth all that believe:
But we our Faith by good works must express,
If of his Fullness we hope to receive:
Yet let Presumption no Man so deceive,
The rags of his inherent Righteousness
With Christ's, in our Redemption for to weaue.
By ours we must not hope to come to bliss,
Nor ever without ours attain true Happiness.
63
Our Righteousness no cause is, but the way,
Whereby we to our Heavenly City come:
He that does miss this path, does walk astray,
And headlong with Iniquity does run.
As in some narrow passage to a Town,
He that will thither pass, one way must tread,
Which if he miss, he wanders up and down,
No path but one the right way him can lead:
Yet we the path no cause of coming thither read.
64
This path's like Jacobs Ladder, which did reach
Even up to Heaven, yet stood upon the ground;
From top whereof Christ out his Arm does stretch,
To help up all that in good works abound.
A straight long way and many steps are found,
Before we scale the top of Righteousness:
Gods gracious Spirit does first this way propound,
And guides our feet to move aright to bless,
But only Christ above does us thereof possess.
65
In this way Enoch's said to walk with God,
And Men began then holy invocation
Next Noah in his Makers grace abode,
A just and perfect Man in's generation.
Thus Job, Lot, Abram, have their commendation
For Justice, Judgment, Faith, and Righteousness,
Walking with Men in upright conversation,
And toward God in Truth and Holiness,
Thus showing by her fruits the Faith which they profess.
66
Thus Patriarchs, Prophets, Judges, Priests, and Kings,
That did believe Gods future promises,
First feared and honored him above all things,
Next walked on earth in Truth and Righteousness,
Laboring in Life and Doctrine to express
Their firm belief of Christ that was to come,
Who since is manifested in the Flesh,
And does the end of Righteousness become,
Which cannot be obtayn'd, unless on earth begun.
67
Lo, Moses had an eye to this reward,
When he left Egypts pleasures, wealth, promotion,
The three chief baits which Worldlings most regard,
Three greatest Enemies to true Devotion:
Joseph for this despised his Mistress motion,
And rather chose that stocks his limbs should lame,
Than he would taste of Lusts unrighteous potion.
Lo, Christ a wretch for Righteousness became,
And for the Iusts reward endured the Crosses shame.
68
If I should count all the Authorities,
Which of this Virtue in Gods Word abound,
One Volume to hold all would not suffice,
In every Book, Verse, Chapter, to be found:
But most of all, the holy Psalms propound
Abundant matter for this Meditation;
The which my Reader I do leave to sound,
That willing is to make right application,
And follow Righteousness in life and conversation.
69
But though I tremble whilst I hear Paul reason
Of Temperance, Judgment, Truth and Righteousness,
Yet careless take a more convenient season,
Like Foelix, in my life it to express,
And grope for Bribes the wronged to redress;
I cannot tell how soon of this my rome,
My Maker will a iuster Man possess,
And then to strict account I needs must come,
And be rewarded as to others I have done.
70
Were mortal eyes but able to behold,
The glorious splendor and the light Divine,
The Crowns, Joys, Honors, Pleasures manifold
Prepared for them that live by righteous Line,
And how the Righteous like the Sun shall shine
With Son and Father in eternal bless,
We nould at Cross, reproach, or shame repine,
Which though they seem some burden to the flesh,
More free our souls hereby converse in Holiness.
71
But ah, Sin on our Nature hangs so fast,
And pricks with honor, pleasure, wealth, and ease,
That Coward-like our Armor off we cast,
And for promotion flatter, fawn, and please.
Then Satan takes advantage us to seize
As Captives, being naked and unarmed,
Whom though before perhaps he might disease,
Yet never could us mortally have harmed,
If with breast plate of Righteousness we had been armed.
72
Oh, but it is too great burden to the flesh,
To keep this Armor on continually,
And to our nature breeds great weariness,
To so great watchfulness our souls to tie:
But since it does assure us victory,
Who would not bear this burden for a while?
Besides, the burden of Iniquity
Is heavier, and does our souls defile,
Though for a time with pleasures false it us beguile.
73
Oh, let this breast plate then of Righteousness
Be on my Soul and Body always pressed:
The more this burden does my Body press,
My Soul is sure to find more ease and rest:
No pain, shame, or reproach, that us molest,
Are worthy of the Crown most glorious,
Which God the Righteous Judge has ready dressed,
For to bestow upon the Righteous,
Made so by God his acceptance gracious.
74
For I confess it is thy acceptance
Which makes our Righteousness (though dung and loss,
Compared to the Laws strict observation)
Most perfect: Thou have nailed to Christ's Cross
All our offenses: By him all our dross
Is turned to purest Gold in fire tried.
Where God accepts, no power of Hell can cross,
If by true Faith our hearts be purified,
Our imperfections by Christ's perfectness supplied.
75
Oh then, most perfect Sun of Righteousness,
Vouchsafe that now thy Spirit of Grace may shine
Upon mine Heart, by Truth and Holiness,
Temperance, Faith, Hope, Obedience, Love Divine,
That all my words, thoughts, actions, I may line,
And level out by thy pure Rule of Right;
All error, lying, injury decline,
And having of thy Laws a most clear sight,
I may to walk therein place all my hearts delight.
76
Make me conceive the profit, use, and end
Of righteousness, and the necessity
I of this breast plate have, my Soul to fand
Against the fury of mine enemy:
And grant, my conscience good may testify
The arms whereby I may stand fast and sure,
And not those feigned ones of Hypocrisy,
Which never can hold out me to secure,
Or any of the fiery darts of Hell endure.
77
But it is not in him, that wills or runs,
For to attain the Crown of righteousness,
From whom each perfect gift and good grace comes,
His grace it is that guides to happiness:
We find amongst those gracious promises,
And grants, which in thy holy Word we read,
That who seeks first thy Kingdoms righteousness,
Shall have, all things whereof he stands in need
Do thou, Oh Lord me forth then in this right way lead.
78
Thou the whole Scripture gave by inspiration,
Apt to instruct, improve, correct, repress,
To make the man of God wise to salvation,
And perfectly instruct in righteousness:
And when the wicked turn from wickedness,
Thou promisest their Souls alive to save:
So many are thy gracious promises,
To grant all good things that the righteous crave,
That I this righteousness do beg and hope to have.
79
Then, as a Lion, shall I be most bold,
My righteous way shall shine even as the light,
The eyes then of the Lord shall me behold
And he will grant me even my hearts delight.
In all his Statutes I shall walk aright,
And all his judgments just and true observe,
My death shall be most precious in his sight,
My righteous memory he will reserve,
Yea even the righteous seed he will on earth preserve.
80
To praise God for the blessings manifold
His Word assures unto this righteous Nation,
Would in discourse my Muse for ever hold,
And be too long for this one Meditation.
Oh, hold me then to more strict observation
Of Time to come, than I have had of past,
That I may make a daily examination
Of my whole life and all my sins up cast,
As mindful of the account I am to give at last.
81
And teach me, that this Grace of Righteousness
Is as a Chain of many links close joined,
By which we would ascend from hence to bless,
Whereof if but the least link does unbind,
Lo, the whole Chain is to the earth declined:
Even so in this strong Chain of Law and Right,
Though most of all our acts be rightly lined;
If one Iniquity our Hearts delight,
This one makes all the rest unrighteous in Gods sight.
82
But I unjustly my discourse extend:
Now I beseech the Author of this Grace,
I all my force to practice it may bend,
And first do Right and Justice in my place,
Respecting not the Person but the Case,
In my Commerce with all Men dealing right.
Last, that I may true Righteousness embrace,
That with true Faith and a good Conscience dight,
I in these spiritual Arms unto the end may ^ight.
83
Thus having chalked out the Rule of Right,
I should by my first Method next proceed
To sing of Mercy: but Truth does inuit
My Muse first her great power to areede,
Who does in time even Righteousness preceede.
Besides, none can approach dread Mercies Throne,
But those whom Truth and Justice thither lead,
And sure their Nature links them so in one,
As one without the other never goes alone.
MEDITAT. II.
Of Truth.
1
SVch is the nature and sweet inclination
Of heavenly Graces all, whereof I sing,
That with most kind and mutual relation,
They all seem joined together in a ring,
So close each one another following,
That who gets one does all the rest obtain.
For, from one Fountain all of them do spring,
All linked together in so strong a chain,
As where one Virtue dwells, there all the rest remain.
2
It Is vain to think that single Graces can
Make up complete the Man spiritual,
More than divided Members of a Man
Can grow, or thrive, not joined together all.
Hence Poet^ the three Graces twins do call,
Jove's Daughters, and them in one ring do join;
And hence they make the Virgins musical
All but one consort, which are Sisters nine:
Thus by their fables shadowing things Divine.
3
For they discerned by Natures dimmed light,
One Author sole of every goodly Grace,
Whom Father they and King of all do hight,
And him Lord over all their gods do place.
Lo, thus as in a mist they Truth did trace,
But missing the true path of Righteousness,
In stead of Truth they Error did embrace,
For never was Dame Justice Errors guess,
Nor ever Truth did dwell with false Unrighteousness.
4
For seeming Truth, without the (...) of Right,
Like Summum (...) is greatest injury:
And Righteousness not guided by Truths light,
Is Curiousness or false Hypocrisy,
Faith that brings forth fruits of Iniquity,
Is base Presumption; Love, Diffimulation;
That works not in us by Charity,
All from one Head have life and sustentation,
And therefore all together make their habitation.
5
But none more like are, or of Kin more near,
Than this fair pair of Truth and Righteousness;
The blessed Mother and her Daughter dear;
For Truth the Mother is of Uprightness:
And surely, Truth and honest Simpleness
To every Virtue does so needful grow,
That all fair shows not done in Singleness,
And Truth of Heart, are but a false vain show,
A splendid sin corrupted by Man's heart below.
6
Thou, in whose Lips was never found least guile,
Whose Heart hates lying and iniquity,
Whose Hands did never God or Man beguile,
Whose Hand, Heart, Word, and Thought, is Verity,
Whose blessed Spirit of Truth does testify
Unto our Spirits true way of Righteousness,
By which we come to live eternally,
Direct my Muse Truths nature to express,
That Truth may guide my steps to endless Happiness.
7
My bounded Muse here dares not define
Of boundless Truth from all Eternity,
Which as impossible's to mete by Line,
As Persons three, which in the Trinity
Make but one Truth and perfect Unity.
But as one God consists of Persons three,
And each participates of Deity;
So we one Truth communicated see
To Persons three, which but one in the Godhead be.
8
Of Father, (...), and Spirit of Truth we read
But as one God, so but one Truth alone;
Into which Truth the Spirit of Truth does lead,
Who sent is from the Father and the Son.
The Word of Truth that gloriously did won
With Spirit and Father from eternity:
Flesh here took of our flesh, bone of our bone,
To free us from errors captivity,
And chalk't us out a way to walk in Verity.
9
This is the Truth whereof I mean to write,
Which ought to be of our whole Life the square,
To level out our words, thoughts, acts aright,
And eke our Judgments to Gods Word to square:
For of this Truth four parts there only are,
Of Judgment, Action, Speech, and of the Heart,
The want of one, the rest does all impair;
Wrong judgment, words, and actions does divert,
But a false heart does judgment, action, speech pervert.
10
And that I right and plainly may proceed,
I will all four thus singled out define;
And first the Truth of Judgment I do read, Truth of Judgment.

A power inlightning of Gods Spirit Divine,
Which does Man's understanding part refine,
And settles in the Doctrine of his Word:
Behold, when Truth does in our judgment shine,
All Heresy and Schisms by us abhord,
This Truth of Judgment sacred Knowledge does afford.
11
Truth of the Heart is a sweet singleness
And sincere meaning, Truth of Heart.
whereby Man constraynes
His Heart to approve it self in Holiness,
To him that searches both the Heart and Raynes.
This in the inward Man the Truth contaynes,
And is to God most acceptable treasure:
This Truth from all Hypocrisy refraynes:
Here does the Devil soonest take his seasure,
For, lo, the Heart of man's deceitful above measure.
12
The Truth of Speech is when our hearts agree
Unto the matter and unto our mind: Truth of Speech.

For if it from our Heart do disagree,
Or from the thing whereto it is designed,
The first to be plain lying is defined.
The second, falsehood at the best we name:
One does abuse the Conscience and the Mind;
The other brings the Author unto shame;
Both falsify the Truth and are alike to blame.
13
The Truth of Actions, Truth of Action.
honest dealing, plain,
Faithful in all without dissimulation:
With God and Man whether we lose or gain,
When we do not deceive by simulation,
And feigning things without determination;
Or else dissembling whereabouts we go:
These are from Truth a wicked declination,
And when we God or Man deceauen so,
What we would unto us, to others we not do.
14
But as a natural body does consist
Of quarters four, to make a man complete,
And if but one of all those four be mist,
The other three lose all their life and heat:
Even so it is with Truth, whereof I treat,
If of these four substantial parts want one,
The other three are vainenesse or deceat;
For Truth of Judgment, Heart, Speech, Action,
Make but one Truth without dissimulation.
15
But Truth of Judgment ground is and foundation
Of all the rest: For be our Hearts sincere,
Our words and deeds without dissimulation,
If Error in our Judgments does appear,
With Paul we may even persecute the dear
And holy Servants of the Son of Truth,
And think we do to God good service here.
Fie then on Fools that misse-spend their youth,
They never seek to know or learn the way of Truth.
16
But be our Judgments even as right and sound,
As Christ's Disciples by their Master taught;
Yet if within us Judas hearts be found,
On us the greater judgment shall be wrought.
Who knows his Masters will and does it naught,
Oh, what does he by this his knowledge gain,
But even the sting of his own conscience brought
To desperation and infernal pain,
And to put out this sting puts on an hempen chain?
17
What shall we say of those that do profess
Truth of Religion, and a Heart sincere?
Yet in their dealings nothing less express,
But for their gain deceive, lie, and forswear:
Surely, these men a double heart do bear:
For were the Heart, which is a lively Spring,
Whence flow our words and deeds, oh were that clear,
Then all the streams from thence forth issuing,
Would be pure like the fountain, from whence they do spring.
18
But things we best of all by causes know:
God is the Cause of each good gift and grace,
But here more mediate Causes I may show,
Whereby he in the Truth does guide our pace.
By's Word we Truth of Judgment do embrace,
Which is to wandering Souls a guide and light,
His Spirit upon our Hearts does Truth enchase,
Then Truth of Judgment makes us speak aright,
And Truth of Heart makes all our actions true and right.
19
Thus (as Effects) true Speech and Actions flow
From Truth of Judgment, and the Truth of Heart,
As all Mankind from Eve and Adam grow:
But if the subtle Serpent can pervert
Our Hearts or Judgments, as he did divert
Our two first Parents, then as all their seed
Defiled is with their corrupted part,
So from our Heart and Judgment will proceed
Corrupted words and actions which such fountaynes breed.
20
Therefore to set our Judgment true and right,
We to the ground and pillar ought to come
Of Truth, which is the Church of God, so hight,
Because the treasures of all Truth there won,
Of all Gods Oracles which there have rome.
From which all Truth of Judgment we derive,
The Church a careful Keeper does become:
There Is Truth that able is to save alive,
And away Error, Darkness, Superstition drive.
21
O blessed Truth, that holy Church preserues
From Satan's malice, and the Moth of time,
O glorious Church, whose soundness pure reserues
Truth of Religion, which does make thee shine
In Righteousness, Faith, Hope, and Love Divine,
More then Pomp, Wealth, Universality:
For Truth does deck Christ's Spouse more trim and fine
Then Time, Consent, Succession, Unity,
Now foild with Superstition and Idolatry.
22
With these false Ornaments the Church of Rome,
Like painted Harlot, shuns the open Light:
Nor will unto the Ground and Pillar come
Of Truth, to try if she be wrong or right.
Therefore, poor Laiks never must have sight
Of holy Writ, to frame their Judgment by:
Traditions and false Miracles them light,
And on the Churches word they must rely:
Thus Ignorance the Mother is of Popery.
23
But as sound Truth abhorres such Ignorance,
Even so presumptuous curiosity
She does decline, nor ever does advance
Her purest thoughts to things that be too high:
Her subject is no higher Mystery,
Than Spirit of Truth is pleased to reveal:
Into Gods secret Counsel for to pry,
Is like the Thief that fire from Heaven did steal,
To whom even Heathen judgments endless torments seal.
24
So universal is Truths glorious Fame,
That all things that the Heaven and Earth contaynes,
Delight to be adorned by her Name:
Yea, God himself Truths title not disdaynes:
Lo, He Lord God of Truth for ay remaynes.
The Word of Truth, the Spirit of Truth, likewise
Ways, judgments, works commandments Truth retaynes
In this, Saints, Angels, with God sympathize:
But Satan and his brood delight in contraries.
25
Thus as she is adorned by Titles high,
So with her Glory she does all adorn:
Nothing unto perfection comes nigh,
Except by them the badge of Truth be borne.
And though some Worldlings do her Liuerie scorn,
As things against their pleasure, ease, and gain,
For that plain dealing is a Jewel worn,
But he that wears it, beggerie shall gain;
Yet Truth her credit still does with the best retain.
26
Yea Truth amongst the Writers of all times,
Has been in such great honor and account,
As without Truth yet never Prose or Rimes
To any Praise or Honor up did mount.
The holy Writ, wherein Truth does surmount,
She safely doth'gainst all her Foes defend.
How often does David's muse Gods Truth recount,
Whereby her glory lasts to the Worlds end?
Ah, my poor Muse, see thou always on Truth attend.
27
There Is not one Virtue that with Love does dwell,
But honors Truth, and seeks her company:
Begin even at Humilities low Cell,
And mount to Mercy that does sit on high,
All seek the company of Verity.
Even Love must be without dissimulation,
And Righteousness without Hypocrisy,
Unfeigned Faith, true constant Expectation.
No Virtue without Truth comes near Loves habitation.
28
Fair glosing shows without Dame Verity,
Are but as falsely feigned Holiness,
Which surely doubles the iniquity,
And never leads the way to Happiness.
My Muse is far unable to express
The praises all of Peers that Truth attends,
Whom she adornes with wondrous Nobleness:
But Righteousness upon her most depends,
And Mercy now and Truth have met and grown great friends.
29
But surely Truth has not so many Friends,
But she does find as many Enemies:
For Satan all his malice against her bends,
Supplanting Her by force or subtilties.
He father is of errors and of lies,
And seeks herewith Truths glory to distaine,
And therefore they maliciously devise
Interpretations false, and glosses vain,
Traditions, men's inventions, against her to maintain.
30
As Purgatory first they did devise,
Purses for Pardon of men's sins to gleane:
So Limbo's they for Writers have likewise
Wherein to purge and make their Writings clean^,
(Index expurgatorius I mean)
In which if any Writer disagree
From their Traditions, whereupon they lean,
They in this Limbo Patrum purged must be,
Or falsely else condemned to burn for Heresy.
31
Thus modern Writs, sacred Antiquity,
The Fathers, Schoolmen, Doctors, Histories,
They all of them in Purgatory fry,
And sore against the Truth do tyrannize.
The ancient Fathers, Truths antiquities,
That like John Baptist bear to her record,
They do behead, or else them circumcise,
None scapes their Index but Gods holy Word,
And that must be translated with their Church t'accord.
32
But Error strives not more to deface
Our Truth of Judgment, than Iniquity,
And proud profaneness seeks to disgrace
True Dealing, Speech, and Hearts sincerity:
Them branding with foul Follies infamy,
As none could live but those that can dissemble,
Reproching them for Truth and Purity,
That seek hereby their pure Head to resemble,
When even in Gods pure sight the purest Angels tremble.
33
Not that I go about here to defend
Those feigned pure Ones, that most wickedly
Much Truth and Purity in words pretend,
But in their Actions deal dishonestly;
Nor those, that like the boasting Pharisie,
Call to their brother farther off to stand,
Which soon discern a Mote in Brothers eye,
But even Beams in their own not understand;
These for some false pretended Spots leave Church and Land.
34
Such rau'ning Wolves often in long clothing go,
And therefore hard by outward shows to find*
We best them by their fruits may learn and know,
It Is dangerous to censure in this kind*
For those that have a true pure Heart and Mind,
Make show thereof as they that do dissemble,
Therefore till all their Actions false I find,
To judge them Hypocrites mine heart does tremble,
Lest to the Wicked I the Righteous should resemble.
35
For dealing true's like Touchstone, which does try
The baser Metal from the purest Gold:
Discernes a true Heart from Hypocrisy,
And feigned Purity does soon unfold.
And as by Touch-stones touch is easily told
What is pure Gold, from what is gilt for show;
Although the Gilt's more glorious to behold;
So Truth of Heart by Truth of Words we know,
And by the Actions which from them do daily flow.
36
Truth's like the Treasure which the Hu^bandman,
As he was digging in the Field, did sound,
Which he keeps close, and sells all that he can,
And with the Money goes and buys the Ground.
She Is like the precious Pearl the Merchant found,
And then sold all, this Gemme for to obtain.
The wise Man heavenly Counsel does propound,
That wills us use all means her to obtain,
And buy the Truth with loss of honor, pleasure, gain.
37
Truth is like Salt that seasons every thing,
And makes it sauoury to God and Man;
Preserues our Souls from Breath putrefying
Of busy Flies, that labor what they can
To breed corruption in the inward Man.
She leauens all the whole Lumps preparation,
The Soul and Body, Flower and the Bran,
Affection, Reason, Will, Communication,
Heart, Mind, Opinion, Judgment, Life, and Conversation.
38
As precious Ointment powered on Aarons head,
Ran down upon his Beard and did not stay,
Till all the Skirts it of his clothing spread:
So sacred Truth her vigor does display
From head, whereas our Judgment makes her stay
Unto the Beard and Tongue, where speech have place,
Then to the Heart and Hands she holds her way,
From whence our Actions all have life and grace;
Thus to the Skirts of our long clothing Truth does trace.
39
Gods Truth compares her to a Belt or Zone,
Which Soldiers use for strength and ornament,
Whose golden Studs most gloriously shone,
And join the Armor in fair complement^
Lo, whilst this Girdle is about us pent,
Christians whole Armor hangs on fast and sure:
But if this Girdle from our Loins be rent,
Off falls our Arms, and Satan or Worlds lure
Then wounds us desperately, or makes us sleep secure.
40
Diuinest (...), thou did shadow well
In Legend of true Love and Chastity:
By girdle fair of fairest Florimell,
This sacred Belt of Truth and Verity,
Which none on looser Ladies loins could tie,
Yet their fair Limbs that had li^'d true and chaste,
It did adorn most rich and gloriously,
And was most fitting for their slender waste,
But they, Ungirt unblessed were that had been unchaste.
41
For as the girdle does enclose around
Man's body, where our souls high powers do dwell:
Wherein, as good or evil do abound,
Even all our actions flow thence ill or well:
So Truth about our souls keeps Centinell,
And every act we do, she does make known
To that just Judge, from whom we can conceal
Not even the secret thoughts that in us grown:
For naught so close or secret is to Truth unknown.
42
Thus Touchstone, Treasure, Pearl, Salt, Leaven, Zone,
Do all fall short with fair Truth to compare:
For Truth in all is compared to God alone,
And none but God her glory can declare:
Who for Truths sake his own Son did not spare,
But offered him, false man to reconcile,
That Truth and Mercy might meet and prepare
Strict Justice on poor wretched Man to smile,
Whom Satan with false lies and error did beguile.
43
What does the Word of Truth to us commend,
More than this inward Truth and Singleness?
Abram for this is styled by God a Friend,
And Job (...) of Truth and Perfectness.
If I should here the Readers patience press
With all examples therein to be found,
Surely, my Verses should be numberless:
Wherefore a few I for the Truth propound,
That you like men of Ber^a may the Scripture found.
44
Where you shall fi^d of Truth examples store,
Even Christ himself for Truth was crucifide,
Baptist beheaded, Paul endured more
For Truth, than the Apostles all beside.
When Peter had the Lord of Truth denide,
He went out and did weep more bitterly,
Than when his Master to him signifide
By girding him, what death he ought to die,
Whereby he should the Truth of God much glorify.
45
And this has made the Martyrs of all Ages
(Till death, their Truth of Judgment to maintain;)
Sealing with blood the Truth of sacred pages,
And whilst they here endured most cruel pain,
They joyful were in hope of glorious gain,
Yea many have embraced loss and shame,
In singleness of heart Truth to maintain.
But what though here they do endure some blame?
The true in heart shall gain an everlasting name.
46
David a man called after Gods own heart,
For inward Truth and Singleness within.
No beauty, eloquence, or outward part
Can so commend a man: For Truth does win
The love of God and Man: But that foul sin
Of lying Lips and a deceitful Heart,
Is an abomination unto him.
In every trial Truth maintaynes her part,
But all dissemblers (Adam-like) aside do start.
47
Lo, many Daughters have done virtuously,
But glorious Truth does far surmount them all.
Yet if I only sing of Verity,
And labor not to practice it at all,
But from my Loins her Girdle loosen shall,
It had been better I had never known
The way of Truth, than afterward to fall
And leave the Light, that unto me was shown,
Choking those seeds of Grace the Spirit of Truth had sown.
48
But ah, the Devil and his Instruments
Continually do seek our Truth to spoil:
And by fear, force, and Worlds allurements,
Our Souls of this rich Jewel to beguile.
Lo, Romanists adulterate and defile
Even Truths pure Fountaynes and sweet lively Spring:
And Worldlings true sincerity do soil
With odious name of false dissembling,
And even with basest terms Gods Priests dishonouring.
49
Ah, now we with the fashion all do run;
As Buildings, Wares, Apparel, are for show,
So is Religion and Devotion;
Where is most pomp and glory, thither flow
The greatest multitude; From whence does grow
To such a height the name of Popery;
Yea, many of us seek for praise to know;
But leave true practice in sincerity,
When not to know, but do Gods will is charity.
50
Fashion and Custom now so tyrannize,
As comely honest Truth they do outface:
If it the Fashion be us to disguise,
It as a comely Custom we embrace;
That which Paul thought a Woman's foul disgrace,
Like Man to have her head vncouer'd, shorn,
Amongst our Women holds a goodly grace,
Like unto men's their garments now be worn,
As they in Truth the frailty of their Sex did scorn.
51
But I could wish with all our power and might,
As in Gods presence pure we all did stand,
We would go, think, know, speak, and practice right
In Truth of Judgment, with Tongue, Heart, and Hand;
This God did unto Abraham command,
To walk before him and to be upright:
Walking before God makes us upright stand;
Uprightness shows we walk as in Gods sight:
Who thinks God him beholds, how dares he do unright?
52
Let me here tell you, how a holy Man
A Harlot did divert from filthy quest;
Who by her comely feature many wan
To leave their own, and foil her filthy nest.
Himself in habit of a Gallant dressed,
Agreed and paid, desired a secret rome,
She him unto a Chamber straight addressed,
So close that therein not the least light shone,
But ah (said he) Gods eye us here may see alone.
53
Alas (said she) no place can be so close,
That can us hide from Gods all-seeing Eye:
Do thou believe (says he) God sees thy gross,
Thy beastly foul sin of adultery,
And fear not lest his fury should destroy,
Even whilst in this presumptuous sin thou art,
And thee condemn to Hell eternally?
My Author says, hereby he did convert
Her wicked life to Truth and Singleness of Heart.
54
Though many imperfections we do feel,
And our corruptions down so sore us press,
That Vice into our Hearts does often steal,
And unawares deceive with sinfulness;
Yet if by sorrow true and humbleness
We purge our Hearts of what is entered in,
And after seek by careful watchfulness,
Them to preserve hereafter from like sin,
We may grow to some perfectness of Truth within.
55
But I confess, that though with all my might
I labor for true purity of mind,
And would do nothing but as in the sight
Of God and Angels, and of all Mankind;
Yet often my deceitful heart I find
Tempting me secretly such things to do,
Which I should not dare venture in that kind,
If some Man present were the same to know:
Yet Truth the closest of them all to God does show.
56
What, shall man^ presence make me true and just?
And shall not Gods, that ^ees my secret thought,
To whom for all one day account I must,
And be rewarded as I here have wrought?
Shall not his presence me deter from ought,
That may offend his sacred Majesty?
The Son of Truth whose blood me dearly bought,
And grieve the holy Spirit of Truth, whereby
Sealed and redeemed I am from Hels captivity.
57
Oh thou that Truth requir'st in inward parts,
Us secretly make Wisdom understand,
Renewing Spirits aright and clensing Hearts,
By whom in Truth and Righteousness we stand,
My way direct right to the holy Land,
Through Deserts wide of this Worlds wilderness;
Feed me with heavenly Manna from thine Hand,
With water from a Rock my soul refresh,
And thorough Iordanes flood conduct to endless bless.
58
The humble thou have promised to guide,
And to direct his path aright for ay.
Who seek unfeignedly in Truth to abide,
Thou never suffer to go astray;
Oh then direct my goings in thy way,
My judgment, heart, hand, tongue, in Verity;
Thou readier art to hear then I to pray:
Then grant me Love, Faith, Hope, Humility,
And season every Grace with Hearts sincerity.
59
God is my Shepherd, How then can I stray?
He is my Light, Truth, and my righteous Guide,
His rod and staff my slipperie feet does stay,
Lest they at any time do slip aside:
His Truth and Mercy evermore abide;
Though Wine and Women and the King are strong,
I nothing fear if Truth be on my side;
Thy Truth and Mercy shall my days prolong:
Of thy great Truth and Mercy ever be my song.
60
Oh, let thy Word of Truth my Judgment sway,
Thy Spirit of Truth mine inward Man inlight,
Incline mine Heart to learn, will, to obey,
And on thy Truth set thou my whole delight,
On it to meditate both day and night:
That whether I eat, sleep, walk, watch, or pray,
I may remember I am in thy sight,
So shall I conscience make of every way,
And be most careful what I ask, do, think, or say.
61
But, ah, dread Mercy, I too long forbear
To tune my Dittie to thy sacred praise,
Who were so gracious unto me whileare,
When I appealed from Justice stricter Says,
Unto thy Throne of Grace where though my ways
Were all discovered, by thy gracious dome
I was absolu'd. But next I will thee praise,
Now I with Truth and Righteousness have done:
For none without these two to Mercies grace can come.
MEDITAT. III.
Of Mercy.
1
IF any mighty Monarch chance enquire,
Why I sweet Mercies seat do place so high,
Since she the lowliest Cell does most desire,
Her self delighting sole in misery,
The only Object of her pitying eye:
He hence for greatness may this lesson gain,
That as he grows in Power and Majesty,
To Poor he ought the greater Mercy daine,
Thus imitating him by whom even Princes reign.
2
For though this Dame be of such wondrous grace,
So near in favor to the Queen of Love,
That next to her s^ee gaynes the sovereign place,
Both here below, and in the Heaven above;
Yea though to heavenly Love so like she prove,
That scarce the one from the other can be known,
(Though to be merciful, and truly Love
Do differ much, as after shall be shown)
Yet her great bounty's not to meanest wretch unknown.
3
For as the Sun, from highest firmament
Vouchsafes on good and bad alike to shine,
And clouds of Heaven do rain indifferent
On fertile Land, and on the barren Mine;
So unto all she offers Grace Divine:
But as the Cause is not in Sun nor Rain,
But in the Soil, why it does fruitless line,
So sinne's the cause some cannot Grace retain,
Which shines and waters bad and barren hearts in vain.
4
A depth all bottomless I now do sound,
A height which higher than the Heavens does reach,
So wide as nothing it can compass round,
For Mercy over all Gods works does stretch;
So far beyond man's limited frail reach,
As to conceive of Gods Eternity,
Or how he all does out of nothing fetch,
Darkness from Light, Joy out of Misery,
From War true Peace; high Honor from Humility.
5
Thou, God of Mercy! blessed Trinity!
Who first in thine own Image did create
Man pure and good: But when Hels subtlety
Had him dejected from so happy state,
Abandoning to endless Bale and Hate,
That riches of thy Mercy might appear,
Did for thy Mercies sake regenerate,
And all his score by thy Bloods price did clear,
Grant I may rightly sing and practice Mercy here.
6
Which is a certain pitiful regard,
Which we of others misery conceive,
Whereby our hearts are moved and prepared,
Them, what we can, to succor and relieve:
That Passion and Affection which does grieve
Man's heart, to see another misery,
Does not unto The Almighty's Mercy cleave,
No more than Anger, Hate, and Jealousy,
As they distempers are, be in the Trinity.
7
No words indeed can properly express
Gods Mercy, Anger, Hate, or Jealousy,
But as we see their fruits we them confess,
To be in God by Anthropopathy:
Gods punishment of foul iniquity,
We call revenge: But when he Grace does show
To those which are in woe and misery,
We call that Mercy: Not but we well know,
No passion or distemper in Gods Nature grow.
8
That Mercy may the plainelyer be descri'de,
And we her diverse Nature better know,
I her into two Currents do divide;
The Mercy God on Creatures does bestow,
And that which he requires of us below:
For as God is by Nature pitiful,
So he delights in them that Mercy show;
For he by Nature is most Merciful,
And therefore unto all in Fruits most plentiful.
9
Gods Nature is Eternal, Infinite,
So is his Mercy stretched out to all,
Even as the Sun to Man and Beast gives light,
And Rain on bad and good alike do fall:
But this we call Gods Mercy general,
Which lasts but for a time. But on the Just
He shows his Mercy more especial,
Which everlasting is: wherein we trust,
And whereby He to Bliss will raise us from the Dust.
10
But here we must have an especial Care,
Lest difference of Gods Mercy we confound,
Not special everlasting Grace to share,
Where he but common, general, does propound:
This is a firm Position, true and sound,
That God in Unbelief has shut up all,
That his great Mercy might to all abound;
Unto the Wicked, common, general,
Eternal unto them, that on him rightly call.
11
God grant to Me this Mercy special,
That of Man's Mercy I may right enquire,
That teaching, I may practice it withal,
The Mercy that God does of us require,
Of which, a twofold kind make one entire;
First toward Sinners, that do go astray,
The next to Poor, and those that Help desire;
First pitties Souls, and leads them in right way,
The last supplies their Wants, that Need have every Day.
12
For as Man's soul is his most noble part,
Whereon his sole eternal Bliss depends,
So he the greatest Mercy does impart,
Who to poor wandering Souls his Mercy sends:
He that gives to the Poor, he surely lends
To God, that will fourfold his gift repay;
But who to save poor Souls his Mercy spends,
Shall sure obtain those Crowns at that great Day,
Which God does up in store for such Soule-sauers lay.
13
In men we diverse outward causes see,
Which them to Mercy and Compassion move;
Some by remembrance of like misery,
Which in themselves they formerly did prove;
Some Kindred, Youth, Acquaintance, friendly Love,
Learning, Nobility, to Pity lead:
But none of these cause Mercy from above,
But it from Gods sole goodness does proceed,
And not from any thing that in our Natures breed.
14
Therefore as God does on us Mercy show
For the great riches only of his Grace,
So we no other cause of Mercy know,
Whereby our Fellow members we embrace,
But his sole Grace: whose Mercy did deface
Even Works handwriting once against us brought,
No works of Mercy can in heaven have place,
In Faith and Charity that are not wrought:
Then Mercies works for show, or Merit come to naught.
15
None can to Mercies perfectness attain
But only God, whose Mercy's over all;
No number can our miseries contain,
Yet God in store has Mercy for them all:
Only in words, Gods Mercy does not fall,
But most in fruits and comforts does abound,
As Mercy has no measure, so withal,
Her fruits and works all numbers do confound,
Man's life a daily exercise thereof is found.
16
It Is not a heavy Heart or grieved Mind,
Compassionate of others miseries,
Whereby afflicted Souls no profit find,
But as our Heart, so our Abilities
Must minister to Saints necessities;
They that the Heart and Hand in this disioyne,
Faith and good Works to sunder do devise.
If first our Hearts to Mercy true incline,
Good Words and Works from thence as true Effects will shine.
17
For in the heart of Man is Mercies Throne,
The Subject, where true Mercy does abide,
All streams of Mercy that from thence do flowne,
Are as the Fountaynes pure from which they slide,
Then like Gods Mercy they do spread out wide,
First, feeding Souls that pine for heavenly Food,
Next for the Poor and Hungry they provide,
For all in Need that of our help have stood,
And like to Widows Oil increase by doing good.
18
Then we them truly works of Mercy call,
When from unfeigned Mercy they proceed:
For sure it is the Heart that seasons all,
Which makes merciful in word and deed.
Thus we relieve the Poor that are in need,
And Widows, Orphans, Strangers, entertayne;
We clothe the Naked, and the Hungry feed,
Visit the Sick, the Captives that remain
In bonds, we loose: And comfort those that mourn in pain.
19
Though all the Virtues of Loves Royal Court
Delight to keep sweet Mercy company,
As Patience, Justice, Faith, Hope, good Report,
Repentance, Meekness, Truth, Joy, Chastity;
Yet she delights most in Humility,
Inseperable Adjunct of this Peer,
With whom she works all deeds of Charity,
Those which our Hearts from Sin do purge and clear,
And those whereby the Needy we do succor here.
20
By her is daily great provision made
For Blind, Old, Lame, all People that are poor,
Not those that do of begging make a Trade,
And loosely idle walk from door to door,
A work of Mercy she it deemes to gore
Such Vagabonds: their Pass with blood to seal,
Unfruitful Vermin that consume our store,
The Catterpillers of our Commonweal,
Which to maintain base ease, and lust, beg, lie, and steal.
21
But she, directed by Humility,
Into deep stinking Dungeons will descend,
To visit captived thralls in misery,
And them instruct in ways of Truth to wend,
Exhorting them their bad lives to amend;
If any for well-doing bound do lie,
She for His ransom her estate will spend,
All Malefactors wants She does supply,
For well she knows Christ did for Malefactors die.
22
She next like Lot and Abram entertaynes
Strangers all Day, at Noone, and eke at Night:
Not that she hopes from them least gold or gaynes,
Or that with double mends they will requite:
But those which harbor want she does inuit
Humbly to Meat, and Drink, and Lodging meet,
Where she to wait upon them takes delight,
And brings fair water for to wash their Feet,
And them for her sweet Saviors sake does fairly greet.
23
Then she the hungry Bodies of the Poor
With her fair Hand of plenty full does feed,
And drink unto the thirsty powers store,
She fears not once her self to stand in need.
Who to the Sower ministers his seed,
And bread unto the humble, will provide
For those which of her Body she does breed,
She with no future want is terrifide,
For others often to feed, she hunger does abide.
24
Oh, should you see the abundance every day
Of clothes, she for the naked does provide,
To keep them from the cold, and to array
Gods Images which here in Clay abide,
And if that any naked she espide,
After she all her clothes divided had,
She would her own coat cut out, and divide
To those that want; most chearefully and glad
That she had such a shift, poor naked Souls to clad.
25
With those that mourn in Sion she will mourn,
And bear a part with them in misery,
Whether they weep, by friends as left forlorn,
Or groan with weight of their iniquity,
She wondrous salues of comfort does apply,
And when they weep, she mourning not forbeares,
And often in Psalms and Hymns makes melody,
Sweet Psalms and Hymns that dry up all our tears,
And like to pleasant Wine, make us forget our cares.
26
But, most of all, sick persons she does tend,
And comfort them in point of death that lay,
For there most needed comfort sweet to lend,
When Sin, Hell, Death and Conscience do dismay
The Soul that now departing is away:
First spiritual comfort she to them does deal,
How on Christ's merits they should only stay,
Balm that applide aright, their sores should heal;
And prays the Spirit within the Truth hereof may seal.
27
'Twere infinite to tell the wondrous store
Of heavenly comforts Mercy can apply,
For Mercy has a salve for every sore:
Souls burdened with their iniquity
She handeleth most soft and tenderly;
The smoking flax, nor yet the bruised reed
She will not quench or break unwarily;
Such heavenly comforts can thus Peer areede,
That she makes Souls (...) when Bodies are half dead.
28
Best skill to cure the Body she does use,
And to his former health again restore:
No Office mean or base she does refuse,
That may the pain assuage, or heal his sore,
All miseries lie open her before,
That she may lend to all her help and aid,
She physic sends, and meat unto the poor,
With beds of down, whereon he may be laid,
And though her medicines fail, her prayer's never staid.
29
But if their Souls from Bodies once depart,
In seemly sort she cares them to engraue,
Last work of Mercy that we can impart
Unto their corpse when God their soul does save,
Which though now dust, yet most sure hope we have,
God will the same a glorious Body raise,
And deck it for her Spouse most fine and brave,
The Deads memorial she does often praise,
The Living to provoke to walk in righteous ways.
30
Thus when she has in Grave him seemly laid,
With much lamenting, and with many tears,
To tender Orphans and to Widows aid,
She does employ the utmost of her cares,
In whose defense no great Man's frowns she fears,
But stands in judgment for their firm defense,
And if both Parents die, as often it fares,
Their tender Babes she soon remoueth thence,
And feeds, and puts to Schole even at her own expense.
31
Therefore she large Almes-houses has erected,
Fair Colleges for Muses habitation,
And Churches, by prophaner sort neglected,
Adornes and decks in honorable fashion:
She holds it much against her reputation,
In goodly seeled Houses to abide,
And see Gods Temples ruinous profanation.
If in her any sparing be descride,
It Is that she works of Mercy may dispread more wide.
32
But ah! no pen is able (...)
The fruits of Mercy by Humility,
But in one work I all the^ up do count,
To succor those that are in misery:
As there is infinite variety
Of miseries in Soul and Body found,
So without number she does helps supply,
But for her end Souls health she does propound,
And in such heavenly comforts she does most abound.
33
Rebuke, admonish, suffer, and chastise,
Her very stripes are corra^^^es to heal,
And when in most distress the Body lies,
Most comfort then to Soul she does reveal.
Thus Christ did unto her a pattern seal,
With mortal food he thousand Bodies fed,
But those to whom he Bread of Life did deal,
Like huge Sea sands cannot be numbered,
Whereby their Souls now live, though yet their Bodies dead.
34
But though this Peer is merciful to all,
Yet almost all become her Enemies,
Ambition, Pride, Hate, En^^e, Malice, Gall,
All that delight in wrong and injuries,
From whence often come most horrid cruelties:
But amongst all they do her greatest wrong,
Who under show of pitying miseries,
Punish not those that do in Vice grow strong:
The Judge that spares the wicked, does the godly wrong.
35
Justice and Mercy both do well accord,
And in one Subject may contained be,
For just and merciful is God our Lord,
Just as a Judge, but as a Father, he
Is pitiful and tender: So ought we
In our own cause, as Fathers, Mercy show,
And our dear Brethren of all wrongs to free,
But when we sit in judgment, we must know,
We are Gods Ministers to punish sin below.
36
Even as a Judge in his own Family
Unto a graceless son may pardon give,
Though he his Coffers rifle privily,
And do conspire of life him to deprive;
But if as Traitor to his Prince he live,
And one before his Father him arraigne;
The Judge there cannot his own Son forgive,
But must condemn to his deserved pain,
For Magistrates ought not to bear the sword in vain.
37
I Mercy here and Justice may compare
Unto a Gardners spade and pruning knife,
The knife luxurious branches off does pare,
That for vain show grow fruitless, rank, and rife;
The Spade unto Vines root, gives heat and life,
By dunging, opening it to Sun and Rain:
Ne yet betwixt them discord is or strife,
One prunes the boughs, the other does maintain
The Root. Both have one end the Bodies good and gain.
38
In this Worlds School we all like Scholars are,
Fitted below for Fellowships above,
Mercy, our Patroness, does us prepare
Food, Raiment, Books, all things that needful prove,
We all have but one Lesson here: to Lou^:
Which none can better teach than this sweet Peer,
Yet our untowardness does often her move,
To suffer Justice to correct us here:
Which sure does us more good than all her dainty cheer.
39
So as Correction truly may be said
To be a work of Mercy: For as he
That most affects his Son, is not afraid
To scourge him often for his impiety,
Even so our gracious God, to whom we be
Than Son unto his Father far more dear,
Does often chastise to purge and purify
Us from sins guilt, whereby we may appear
Before him perfect, pure, and live more holy here.
40
For Mercy does like skillful Surgeon deal,
That has for every sore a remedy:
If gentle drawing Plaster^ cannot heal
The wound, because it festreth inwardly,
He sharper corra^iues must then apply,
And as he often cuts off some member dead,
Or rotten, lest the rest should putrify,
So Mercy wicked Members off does shred,
Lest they should noisome prove to body and the head.
41
Mercy is like the glorious Cherubins,
Which in the holiest place their wings extend,
And under their broad spreading golden ^ins,
Arc, Mercy ^eate, Rod, Manna comprehend;
So glorious Mercy does her Grace forth send.
By ruling, works of Mercy, poores defense,
The Arc, Gods Statutes does to us commend;
The Rod, his Power: Manna, his Providence:
Mercy them all contaynes in wings circumference.
42
Even as one total sum it self extends
To all the Credits in the Merchants Bill;
So Mercy does all Virtues comprehend,
And Men of Mercy with all Graces fill:
And as from foul corrupt depraved will,
All wickedness abundantly does flow,
So from a Heart of Mercy does distill,
All Graces that in Loves fair Garden grow;
Mercy's the sum of all I do, or wish to know.
43
But all in vain I seek by Simi^e
To show the nature of this Grace Divine;
Since earthly things, to Her, all shadows be.
Thy Mercy, Lord, no where so clear does shine,
As sending of that blessed Son of thine:
Unspotted Lamb, slain from Eternity,
To save all that their hearts to him incline,
From Hell, Death, Bale, and endless Misery:
This Mercy is without all like or paritie.
44
Here will I strive to clear the difference
That I of Love and Mercy do conceive.
To other each have so near reference,
That we one for another often receive:
Gods Love upon The Elect does only cleave,
Mercy on them in Misery that lie.
Till Satan our first Parents did deceive,
God them embraced in Love and Charity;
No Mercy needed them that felt no Misery.
45
Gods Love does most in our Creation shine,
In our Election, and Predestination:
But his great Mercy seems to draw her line
From our Redemption and Justification:
Not that I hence exclude Loves operation,
For Love is as the Prince and Sovereign,
Of all the Graces needful to salvation;
And Mercy is the chiefest of her train,
And seems in Man's Redemption like her Queen to reign.
46
As that great Peer that in his Princes grace,
For Virtue and for Learning high does stand,
And next to him obtaynes the second place,
And chiefest government of all the Land,
In Court of Mercy does even counter-mand
Acts that are sped in Justice highest Plee:
So Mercy here, who is Queen Loves right l^nd,
Does us from sentence of damnation free,
Which Justice does pronounce: A hard, but ^ust Decree.
47
But as this Peer deriues authority
From Prince, by whom all Regiment does move;
So special saving Mercy does rely,
And first proceed from Gods eternal Love.
O deep rich wisdom of our God above,
Unsearchable thy Judgments, and thy Ways
Past finding out! more hard the more we prove,
Most glorious Sun of Love which wide displayes,
Thy beams of Mercy bright like Phoebus golden rays.
48
But ah! such knowledge soareth ^arre above
The reach of my weak Muses waxen wing,
I now Man's Mercy and his heavenly Love
Seek to compare for their discouering^
Where heavenly Love sends her sweet lightening,
She does of thing beloved like Love require:
But when we Mercy show to any thing:
We seldom Mercy of that thing desire,
Mercy still downward goes, Love most what mounteth higher.
49
Mercy does most in Misery consist:
Love reaches Heaven with her high mounting wing,
And Head and Members all in one does twist,
But down again I my discourse must bring
To Mercy; which from Heart has life and ^pring,
Whence she receives her denomination:
For Misericordia, whereof now I sing,
Is one with Mercy, and is by translation
A miserable Heart, or piteous inclination.
50
And though indeed no Misery can fall
Upon the eternal Being, blessed for ay,
Yet he that bare the Misery of all,
And has before us lined out Mercies way,
His part in Misery for us did play,
When as he saw or heard of Miseries,
He to compassion moved was streight-way,
And to them ministered best remedies,
And often with tears bewailed our infirmities.
51
Jerusalem! Oh poor Jerusalem!
(His Heart full sad, his Eyes even flowing tears)
How often would I you gather as a Hen,
Her Chickens under her warm wings vpreares?
Not inward groans and weeping he forbeares,
When Jews and Mary Lazarus bemone,
Upon the Cross all Miseries he bears,
And cries out for our woes, not for his own,
Such cries were never heard: Such Mercy never known.
52
As our high Priest, all our in^^rmities
(Excepting sin) he in his Body bare,
Whereby he learned to know our Miseries,
And to relieve them that in anguish fare:
He now his Blood and Body does not spare,
But deals it out in blessed Sacrament,
For Meat and Drink to those that grafted are
Into his Body by sweet couplement.
Sound Meat and Drink for Souls and Bodies nourishment^
53
As Ointment sweet that powered on Aarons head,
Ran down and did perfume his garments all,
So this sweet Oil of Mercy does dispread,
From Christ our Head and on his Members fall:
If I should here to your remembrance call
The Names of all, whose Mercies did abound;
I might as well here make memorial
Of all Saints Names that Books of Life propound,
Who showed true Mercy here, in Heaven have Mercy found.
54
Noe, Abram^, Lot, Job, Isaac, Israel,
With all the righteous Men before the Flood,
Good Joseph, Moses, Iosua^, Samuel,
All Kings, Priests, Prophets, Judges, that were good:
Behold it was sweet Isreal's Singers food
To chant Gods Mercy early and at night.
Apostles, Martyrs, that for Truth have stood,
In works of Mercy set their whole delight,
In preaching Faith, Hope, Love, in Alms, and doing right.
55
No Father on his Child more pity takes,
Then does our heavenly Father show compassion
On us, and loves our Children for our sakes,
Which lasts to the thousand Generation.
Oh! had he not it shown on this our Nation,
We had long since consumed been with fire,
And brought like Sodom unto desolation,
These wicked dangerous times when sins conspire,
To draw on us Gods vengeance and eternal ire.
56
But why seek I outward A^thorities?
If we stand right, we in our hearts shall find
Of heavenly Mercy such testimonies,
That all Souls, Bodies, Powers will be inclined
To magnify Gods Mercies wondrous kind,
That like his Truth for ever do endure,
Which has all outward needful things assigned,
And given us earnest, which does us secure,
That Mercy ^^re began, shall stand for ever sure.
57
And that we may the eas'lier apprehend,
And taste Gods Mercy; He it makes known
To us familiarly: And does commend
It to us by examples of our own.
As Father has to Child his Mercy shown,
As Mother (...) of her own womb does love,
As Birds their young-ones feed till they be flowne:
So merciful the Lord to us will prove;
And though all these should fail, God will not fail above.
58
This also serves for our imitation,
That like our God we Mercy here should show,
And as he tenders us with sweet compassion,
We should his Members here in Mercy know:
It equal is we pitiful should grow,
And Mercy show, where Mercy we receive:
He is to Mercy swift, to Anger slow,
Most merciful to them that to him clea^e,
And kind, where Ignorance, not Malice does deceive.
59
But ah! so carelessly we Mercy show,
And succor those that are in misery,
That we by all means do avoid to know
Their wants, that are in woe and poverty,
When as indeed to see calamity
Of others, does Man's heart to pity move.
We swim in Plenty and Prosperity,
Regarding not what hardness others prove,
And far the sight or thought of wretchedness remove.
60
Our Captain did not thus that went before,
But in much anguish, pain, and tribulation
Converted Souls, healed Sick, releeu'd the Poor,
Himself without a house for habitation,
In works of Mercy was his conversation,
What Member suff'red, and he did not groan?
Where saw he want and showed not compassion?
What? did our Head this by himself alone?
No, His Apostles all with him in this have gone.
61
Oh, that we would in this Him imitate,
And Mercy even with open Arms embrace
With our whole heart, strength, substance and estate,
Aid and relieve the Poor in wretched case;
It Is not a pitious heart that makes men base:
For they that are most valiant, noble, wise,
Most ready are Mercy to show and Grace,
When Cruelty's the badge of Cowardice:
Good Kings rule all by love; Usurpers tyran^ze.
62
In stead of Mercies bowels, kindness, love,
We put on Worldliness, Security,
And off from us the evil day remove,
Living in pleasure, ease, and vanity:
Banishing far the Poores calamity,
As Enemies to profit, thrift, and rest,
And when we smitten are we will not cry:
As if no grief or pity ought in^e^t,
Or harbor in a hardy, valiant, noble breast.
63
Yet the most Mighty that does ^it on high,
Of Valor and Nobility the Spring,
Delights to see and help our misery,
That we might take delight in pi^ying;
Thus God by his example would us bring
To Mercy, and considering the Poor,
He Mercy before Judgment here does sing,
Wherein than Sacrifice he ioyeth more,
That as we do receive, we might again restore.
64
And since it is not in outward works alone,
But inward Bowels that God does delight,
(Though by the one the other is best known)
We often should desire to have a sight,
Of poor Men's wretchedness and pitious plight,
Which our hard Hearts might to compassion move,
And yield them remedy with all our might.
What need has God of Mercy or of Love?
But by poor Members here our Mercy he does prove.
65
For though God's able by his only Word,
To succor all that are in Misery,
And in abundance daily Bread afford,
To those that are in want and poverty;
Yet more to show his Liberality,
And that his wondrous Bounty might appear,
Us for his Stewards he does dignifie,
And good Dispensers of his bounteous cheer:
Happy is he whose Lord him finds faithful here.
66
Lord, of those faithful Stewards make me one,
Yet for no hope of Merit or Desert,
But for the Glory of thy Grace alone,
And riches of thy Love, who Author art
Of every Grace that comes from the Heart:
With temporal afflictions exercise
Me, that I may escape eternal smart,
And learn by griefs and mine infirmities
To succor all that are in woe and miseries.
67
Though Mercy God again do not desire
Toward himself, as he does Love for Love;
Yet to his Members all he does require,
We should most bountiful and gracious prove:
That our Affections inward should us move
Like heavenly Father merciful to be,
Our Brothers garment pawned we must remove
From us, before the Sun be set, lest he
Do cry to God that pities all in misery.
68
No Man so poor but he may Mercy show,
And succor those that are in misery:
For though his worldly substance ebb so low,
He seems to live in want and penury;
Yet may he lend Divine sweet remedy
To those that do in Hell and Darkness sit,
And heavenly comforts to their Soul apply,
Whom Conscience throws into the infernal Pit.
More Mercy from Hels jaws, than earthly cords to quit.
69
Do but conceive what Mercy may be found
With mercifullest Man that ere did live,
And we may know far greater does abound
With God, who is not more willing to relieve
Than able, all things needful us to give,
Besides, in Mercy he does take delight,
Most ready their Offenses to forgive
That do rely upon his Truth and Might,
And on his gracious Providence do rest aright.
70
And therefore thou this life appointest here
For Mercy; but in Life that is to come
Thou as an upright Judge wilt then appear,
And render every Man as he has done:
Oh should thou here with Judgment have begun,
We all had been the Vessels of damnation,
And but for Mercy we had long agone
Been swallowed up of Hell and Desperation,
Thy Mercy that begun, must finish our Salvation.
71
So even the Just no cause to boast shall find,
By Mercy all must be delivered,
Thy Judgments just, for thy forbearance kind,
By Reprobates shall be acknowledged,
How can his Grace sufficiently be read;
Who good by Nature, Just, Eternal, Wise,
Thus sinful, mortal, base, flesh honored,
And to such height of Glory makes to rise,
As Angels wonder to behold such Mysteries.
72
What Pen of Praise is able to commend
The wondrous gracious Force and Energie
Of Mercy, which even God made to descend
From his great Glory, Joy, Felicity?
The God of Wisdom, Power, and Majesty,
To show such Grace on Wretches vile below,
To have compassion on Man's misery,
Base corruptible Dust, which here does grow,
Swift to revenge and wrath, but to compassion slow.
73
Nothing but thine own goodness could thee move
On Man to show such Mercy and Compassion,
Thou art most glorious, he most base does prove,
Thou just, he sinful by his deprauation;
Thou Lord of bliss, he He^re of dire damnation,
Oh Lord! as thy sole goodness thee did move,
To pay our price of Reconciliation,
And us exalt from Earth to Heaven above;
So let thy goodness cause thee always us to love.
74
How should my Muse of Mercy make an end,
Which like thy Truth and Love endures for ay;
And most abundant comforts here does send
To all, but most to those that in right way
Sincerely walk, and do thy Hests obey?
Lord grant that as I of sweet Mercy sing,
Her in my heart, deed, word, I practice may,
Not for vain praise or any outward thing,
But for thy Mercy sake, my good and gracious King.
75
Next Loves great General, brave Fortitude
Should enter Lists: to show her wondrous might,
But Rashness it is, not Valor, to include
A Christian Soldier in such dangerous fight,
Till all his Armor be about him dight;
His upper parts I armed have elsewhere
With Girdle, Breast Plate, Shield and Helmet bright,
But Feet and Legs I naked left and bare;
Now Patience them shall arm, as you shall after hear.
MEDITAT. IIII.
Of Patience.
1
WEll has our valiant Guide Man's life compared
Unto a warfare, where we always stand
In complete Armor, ready and prepared
The force of cruel Foe-men to withstand,
Where Satan, World, and Flesh together band,
By open force and treason to subdue,
And lead us captive by their mighty hand,
And all unarmed, or out of order due
They fettered dragge to Hell with cursed damned crew.
2
Which to avoid, he wills us to be strong
In God, and in the Power of his Might;
And the whole Armor that does here belong
To Christian Soldiers, on our Souls to dight:
For here with Flesh and Blood we do not fight,
But Empires, Powers, Principalities,
The worldly Governors of darkest night,
Sublime spiritual subtle Enemies;
Which to resist, he ghostly Armor does devise.
3
The Belt of Truth, Breast Plate of Righteousness,
Faiths Shield, and Hope the Helmet of salvation,
Sword of the Spirit, Prayers feruentnesse,
Feet shod in Peaces Gospels preparation:
These be the Weapons of our Militation.
Of Helmet, Breast Plate, Shield, and Girdle, we
Already have conceau'd a Meditation:
These four the upper parts arm to the knee,
But Patience, Legs, wh^reon the rest supported be.
4
For so the Learned seem to give the Sense,
This preparation of the Gospels Peace,
To be the brazen Boots of Patience,
Which does defend from Thorns and Stones disease
Our Legs and Feet: And where the Belt does cease,
These Boots of Patience Armor do supply,
By which in complete Armor we do prease,
And stand undaunted against our Enemy;
This Virtue is the next my Muse seeks to descrie.
5
Which well is called the Gospels preparation;
For never any Patience true and sound
Can be, but by the Gospels mediation.
The Heathen built not on this certain ground,
And therefore this true Patience never found,
Which but by Peace of Conscience none attain:
This Peace the Gospel only does propound
By reconcilement of the Lamb (Christ) s^aine;
Without this Peace of Conscience Patience all is vain.
6
Thou glorious God of Peace and Patience,
(Who sent'st thine only Son our sins to bear,
And by his Suffering and Obedience
Upon the Cross from guilt of sin to clear
All those to whom his Cross is sweet and dear)
Direct my Muse this Grace aright to read,
That knowing, I may never once forbear
To practice Patience in thought, word, deed,
But to the end my Life in Peace and Patience lead.
7
Which is a gift of God, whereby wear
Enabled willingly and constantly
All crosses that God lays on us, to bear,
For Goodness, Godliness, and Honesty.
Impatience it is to bear unwillingly,
And but an idle feigned false pretense,
To boast of Virtue without Constancy:
Her parts be four; of which some difference
May seem at first, yet all make but one Patience.
8
The first part is, from Anger to abstain;
The second is a constant Expectation;
The third is, to the end Right to remain;
The last consists in willing Sustentation
Of all afflictions here, and castigation.
But Man to these four parts we only tie:
For the last part, which does consist in Passion^
Unto the eternal Being comes not nigh,
Who Is free from all Affliction and Calamity.
9
Yet is he rightly called the Patient God,
And does in first three named parts transcend:
First, far from Anger, when he spares his Rod,
He does expect and wait till we amend:
And last, abides the same unto the end:
He fruitful Times and Seasons of the Year
Unto the good and bad alike does send;
Most patiently does with our Follies bear,
And where he 'gins to love, he never does forbear.
10
Thus Mercy, Zeal, Repentance, may be said
Inexplicably in God to be;
Zealous, yet not offended or dismayed:
Most Merciful, yet grief did never see:
Repenting, yet without remorse is he:
Most Patient, yet without least pain or passion.
Of Virtues parts, which are of Frailtee
And Weakness, God has no participation,
Yet want they not in Man their use and commendation.
11
As is the Cause and End of Patience,
So we her true or counterfeit esteem;
The Cause and End do make the difference:
If we for Fancy, Glory, Lust, Wealth, seem
To bear with Patience, Hunger, Pain, Cold, Teene;
This suffering, missing her true Cause and End,
As falsely feigned, counterfeit we deem:
But if for doing well, or to defend
The Truth we suffer, this our Patience does commend.
12
The greedy (...)
For Lust, some do endure (...) basest shame;
The Soldier spends his blood for glory vain;
The Ambitious venture all to purchase Fame;
Lo, there we carnal Ends and Causes name.
True Patience causes, honest are and just,
When for ill-doing we do suffer blame.
Take pain for Glory, Honor, Gain, or Lust,
Rewards like to the Cause and End expect we must.
13
But true immediate ground of Patience
Is the sweet Gospel (as I said) of Peace:
For Man, deep plunged in sin and foul offense,
No Creature could Gods wr^^h but Christ appease.
In stead of Love, Gods wrath on Man did seize,
Till Christ concludes our Reconciliation,
And us of our offenses does release,
Of which the Gospel is the A^^unciation:
Therefore is Patience called the Gospels preparation.
14
And therefore as her Cause and End is Peace,
So all her works to inward Peace do tend,
Which in the inward Man does most increase,
When outward Wars seem most him to off^nd,
She does o^r Souls most valiantly defend,
By patient bearing crosses, pain, and shame,
Which she with Patience suffers to the end,
Except they cross the Glory of Gods Name,
Or Neighbors good, which to endure deserves blame*
15
One evil is of Sin, and one of Pain;
That ill of Sin this Dame cannot abide,
But that of Punishment she counts gain.
Gods holy Name blasphemed or Truth denied,
Or wicked Men Gods holy Saints deride,
Is no true Patience patiently to hear:
But on our selves when crosses do betide,
Then Patience true does patiently forbear,
For she her own, not others wrongs, delights to bear.
16
If one will take her Co^te iniurio^^ly,
She suffers such loss with Patience:
But if of Faith, Love, Truth, or Honesty
One would deprive her, that is such offense
As cannot stand right with her Conscience.
She private wrongs most willingly does hide,
But faults admits under no pretense.
She can endure Men should her self deride:
But her Profession scorned she no ways can abide.
17
Compel her to a mile, she will go twain;
Strike her on one, she turns the other Ear:
All wrongs done to her self she can sustain,
But none done to her Neighbors she can bear:
If she to l^ue her self commanded were,
She evil would resist with ill again;
But, lo, her Lord resistance did forbear,
When he was scoffed, scourged, beaten, slain,
And opened not his Mouth to curse or to complain.
18
Afflictions are her Objects, which we find
Diverse, as they in diverse Subjects rest,
Afflictions of the Body and the Mind,
Which Mind and Body dang'rously infest.
Against these, Patience is always pressed,
And them as well-come Friends does entertain:
More crosses she endures, more she is blessed,
And knows through anguish, trouble, grief, and pain,
Her aim, eternal rest, she in the end shall gain.
19
Thus Heaviness and Sorrow prove her Heart,
How willingly, how long, she will abide;
How lowly, humbly, she endures smart;
How void she is of Ha^tinesse and Pride,
Anger, Revenge, self Love, and Enuies gride.
If minds afflictions she could not withstand,
How could she bear such as her Flesh betide,
Plagues, Torments, Labors, Pains, Diseases, and
Death, Fastings, Watchings, Prisons, Cold, and Iron band?
20
Most sweet (...) and most welcome Ghest,
To every pair combined in Amity:
The chief Maintayner of each joyous feast,
Begun in Wedlock, Friendship, Charity,
Sweet Patroness of each Society;
Continuing all that Love begins in Peace:
Most sacred Twin with sweet Humility,
For as one grows the other does increase,
And to attend on Love and Mercy never cease.
21
What does the Love twixt Husband and the Wife,
Than Patience, more fast and firm maintain?
Who keeps true Friends from discord, jar, and strife,
And Children in their Parents love retain;
She Masters favor does to Servants gain,
And tells them they a Master have above,
Who God most patient does ay remain,
Though they to wrath him every day do move:
Thus Patience preserues all Peace begun by Love.
22
None can ascend to glorious Court of Love,
But he must clime by Patience, bear with pain;
Without this Patience, all the Virtues prove
False shows, which do no substance true retain.
What Love, Faith, Hope? What Grace did ere remayn^
Constant? without this gift of Patience,
Therefore she is the Glory of Loves train,
The Virtues all attend her Excellence,
And she again attends them all with Recompense.
23
Those most Heroike Virtues, Fortitude,
Prudence, Joy, Justice, Bounty, and the rest,
What are they if you Patience exclude,
But even so many torments to molest
Man's Soul, if with affliction once distressed?
Zeal without Patience does like Fury spurn:
Even heavenly Knowledge does our minds infest:
Repentance, like Hell fire does Conscience burn:
Were not for Patience, all would to Confusion turn:
24
As Christ is Author of true Patience;
So of Impatience, Satan and his brood,
First showed in Garden in Man's innocence;
Whilst he in Makers Grace and Favor stood:
For when the Serpents base impatient mood
Man's glory in Gods Image could not bear,
He them seduced to eat forbidden food,
Whereby our Blessings changed to Curses were,
Till Patience in the Garden us again did clear.
25
Since this these two do work by contrary,
By Patience we our Souls possessen here,
And we them lose by our Impatiency:
One hears sound Doctrine; the other stops her ear.
One suffers all; the other naught will bear.
For Love, Christ, Godliness, or Honesty,
By Patience more than Conquerors we are:
Impatience makes us cowardly to fly;
True Patience, brings all Grace; all Vice, Impatiencie.
26
There Is an extreme besides Impatience,
(Because by Virtue clok'd) most dangerous,
Which is a light R^gard and stupid Sense,
Not feeling crosses which God lays on us;
Such as do vant themselves so valourous,
That by Gods punishments they set most light,
Plague, Famine, Sword, Fire, Wives and Childrens loss;
Nor will be scourged when the Lord does smite,
But scorn his chastenings all, which does his wrath incite.
27
Such never look at God, who these does send;
Nor on their sins, the Cause of all our smart;
Nor on the End, that they their lives might mend:
But with rebellious will and stubborn heart,
Gods Father-like chastisements do pervert,
Whereby they do themselves the fruit deny
Of Gods corrections, which should them convert:
Like Beasts and Blocks they under burdens lie,
Referring all to Heathen Fate and D^stinie.
28
These the Almighties Patience provoke,
(Like Pharaoh) Judgments on their heads to send,
And turn his scourging stripes to fatal stroke,
Bringing a fearful and a desperate end.
Of two extremes from this Lord me defend,
Oh, rather let me fainting take a fall,
Then as incorrigible thee offend,
Which is most wicked dangerous sin of all.
Into the first thy Saints; the last, the Devils fall.
29
This Heathenish, blockish, base impatience,
(Which is a froward dull Stupiditie)
Does (like to Opium) amase the Sense,
And makes Men as dead drunk all senseless lie;
Ah, how can he his Arms or Legs emply
Like Christian Soldier, valiantly to fight
Gods Battles, whom such Drugs do stupifie?
Or how can he of Christ's Cup taste aright,
That does in such dead cursed drunkenness delight?
30
This World's the Field where all Saints Soldiers are,
Assaulted daily by Gods Enemies,
Who therefore must by Christian Pa^ience bear,
Pain, Hunger, Cold, all incommodities,
Waiting for Victual, Ease, and new supplies.
They constantly must hold out to the End,
One bearing with others infirmities:
To faint or fly before the Battle end,
Is worse, than if to fight they never did intend.
31
Love is the Mother, Patience the Nurse
Of every link and band of Amity:
And though Hate and Impatience ban and curse,
Seeking to choke all good Society;
Yet Patience nurseth all in Charity:
Her sincere Milk is patiently to bear,
And suffer wrong and harm most willingly.
Ah, but for Patience, Malice all would tear
Kings, Husbands, Fathers, ^ould their Subjects, Wives, Sons, spare.
32
Nothing her Nature better can express
Than her to Boots and greaues of brass compare,
Which do the Feet and Legs of Soldiers dress
That in the forefront of the Battle are;
Thus shod, on Spears, Pricks, Goades, Pikes, tread we dare;
Loss, Shame, Cross, Fire, Grief, Sword, and Banishment,
Which would overthrow us, if our Legs were bare:
But Patience arms them with such hardiment,
They pass them over all with courage and content.
33
As Temples, Arches built by cunning hand
Of Artist, skillful in Geometry,
More weight on them is laid, more firm do stand*
So Patience, more oppressed most sure does lie.
No Storms, Wind, Weather, can our House destrie,
Erected on such sure and fast foundation:
Afflictions do joints more strongly tie,
And knit most firm by patient sustentation:
For more she suffers here, more is her consolation.
34
And as the soundness of a firm foundation
Is best discerned when most weight on is laid;
And Faith vnfeign'd best tried by temptation,
Mercy most seen, when Poor do want our aid:
So Patience is most gloriously displaid
By Crosses, Pains, Disgrace, Indignities,
Which without her our Souls would have dismayed,
And Bodies grieved with basest injuries:
All Virtues fairest show, opposed by contraries.
35
Her very Name and Etymology
Describes this Ladies Nature wondrous right:
For Patience, Sufferance does signify,
Forbearance, far from Anger, and to fight
Gods Battles with true courage and delight.
He Is stronger that can overcome disgrace,
Cr^sses and injuries by patient sp'rit,
Than he that walled Cities does deface,
And Monarch-like does sway the whole World by his Mace.
36
Like as the heaven abo^e is garnished
With Sun, and Moon, and glistering Stars by night,
So has Gods Church been always furnished
With patient Mirrours to direct us right*
Yea though we had no Scriptures us to light,
Examples of the Elect might be our line,
To walk in Patience with all our might,
So they before to us, that follow, shine;
That number Stars, he may that can their names define.
37
Begin we with our Sun before the Flood,
Our patient Maker; How did he forbear?
Though Enochs prophesying they withstood,
Yet God with their iniquities did bear,
Until the Deluge up the Arc did rear.
Next see his Patience and forbearance kind,
To them that underneath the Covenants were:
But most his suff'rance under Grace we find;
As Father most to love his youngest is inclined.
38
Our Savior next, whose Life, Death, Suffering, shame
To us, all Patience does represent:
Whereby all Christians ought themselves to frame,
Following his foote-steps who before us went,
Who never did sin, nor ever guile invent:
Yet when he suffered, threatened not to smite,
But dumb like to a Lamb most innocent,
Commits his Cause to him that judges right,
Bearing on Cross our sins, that he redeem us might.
29
Now follow Stars, which do receive their light
From that most glorious Sun of Patience;
Meek Abel, slain by cruel Cains despite;
Noe, Preacher to the old World of Penitence,
Bearing scoffs, scorns, for his Obedience;
Abram forsakes his Kindred, House, and Land,
And patiently a stranger dwells in Tents:
At ninety nine is circumcised, and
His dear son Isaa^ offers at his Lords command.
40
See Isaac patient to embrace the Knife:
Jacob enduring churlish Lab^^^ wrong*
His Di^as Rape, his Sons most cruel strife;
With Joseph, who endured prison strong,
For doing well; who can express his long
True Patience, that did Pharaohs pleasures leave
To suffer pain his Brethren among?
The meekest Moses did stone Tables cleave,
When Zeal of Gods great Glory did his sense bereave.
41
How patiently did holy David bear
Saul's persecutions, waiting for his Crown?
When he his skirt cut off, took up his Spear;
Yet would not let Abisai smite him down.
But none for Patience like to Job is known:
Lo, Christ himself the Patience does commend
That Prophets, Priests, and Martyrs have us shown,
All which in brief the Truth for to defend,
Have without grudging held out constant to the end.
42
All wrestled in this Field of Patience:
Some scorns, stripes, fetters, prisonment sustain:
Some racking, sawing, broyling, banishments;
Some scourged with rods, with sword some have bin slain:
In Sheep skins, Goat skins, some to walk were feign,
Of which the World in no wise worthy were,
All will dread on the Mountains and the Plain,
In earthly Dens and Caves lay hid for fear;
These all by Faith in Christ of Patience followers are.
43
I should do wrong unto all Women-kind,
Should I the praise of Patience them deny:
So many for the Truth with constant mind,
In flames of fire have let their body fry:
Besides continual pain and misery,
In bearing, nursing, Children they abide,
Whereby they do maintain Posterity.
O blessed Maid, what grief did thee betide,
To see thy Son on Cross his Arms to open wide?
44
But I too far the Readers Patience press
With multitude of Paternes from without;
Since only inward Patience can us bless,
And make us like to Lions bold and stout,
Preserving us from peril, dread, and doubt,
Whilst patiently we here all crosses bear,
To the end with Christian courage holding out,
And never Man's pride or Hells malice fear,
For by this suffering, more than Conquerours we are.
45
We read that Socrates did Patience gain
By patient bearing his impatient Wife:
And we this Grace by suffering may attain,
If in Faith, Hope, and good Works we be rife.
Doubtless our pains here, crosses, grief, and strife,
Are nothing if they rightly be compared
Unto the Joys, Crowns, and eternal Life,
Which God above for all those has prepared,
That with true Patience of his coming have regard.
46
But ah, we of far other spirit are,
In our hot blood we cut off Malchus ear;
But if our lives be questioned, then we dare
The Truth deny, and even our Christ forswear.
Man's mind possessed with fury or with fear,
Falls from the mean to all extremity:
For want of courage he no cross can bear,
Or for revenge does offer injury,
Both which alike are guilty of Impatiencie.
47
When I the lives of holy Martyrs read,
And what great torments here they suffered,
As Members sympathizing with the Head;
Saint Lawrence on a gridyron tortured,
Who at's Tormenters never murmured,
But prayed them only turn the other side,
For one was broyl'd enough and martyred:
And Pota^iana
her that did most paynefull death abide,
Whom with hot scalding pitch from top to toe they tried;
48
Should I here wish their Patience or their Pain?
No sure, I wish both Pain and Patience:
The more I suffer here, the more's my gain;
The greater loss, the greater recompense.
Ah, this to flesh and blood is sore offense,
And unto carnal minded, enmity,
That take delight in pleasing of the Sense,
Their Nose with smells, their Touch with luxury;
Their Taste, Eyes, Ears, their Heart and all with vanity.
49
Though thou escape cross, scourging, sword and fire;
Yet surely, if thou live the life of Grace,
And walk'st uprightly as Gods Laws require,
Flesh, World, and Devil thee will seek to chase,
As peevish, singular, vain, foolish, base*
Yea, wicked Men thy Patience to try;
Will thee deride, dishonor, scorn, disgrace:
We Patience show in bearing injury
For Christ, as well as those that for the Truth do die.
50
But I confess I nothing here do find
More pleasing then revenge, to flesh and blood:
Like this, was John and James reuengefull mind,
When entrance was at City Gates withstood,
Because their Faces toward Sion stood;
Shall we Elias-like from Heaven fire crave,
For to consume this base rebellious brood?
To whom Christ said, Know ye what Spirits ye have
I came not hither to destroy and spoil, but save.
51
Lord grant me Paul's true constant resolution,
Not only for thy Names sake to be bound,
But willingly to suffer dissolution.
Some scortching flames like beds of down have found,
In some such inward comfort did abound,
When as they suffered for Christ's holy Name,
For sign of inward joy and comfort found,
Their hands they lift up to express the same,
Till they consumed were even by the scortching flame.
52
It was The Apostles triumph and delight,
To be accounted worthy for Christ's sake
To suffer scourging, prison, shame, despite,
Which did them way to Crowns and Glory make:
More happy it is to suffer at a stake
For Truth, than end our days in ease and rest:
Paul for a wondrous favor did it take,
That he not only to believe was blessed,
But that he suffered more for Christ than all the rest.
53
The abject and off-scowring of the World,
A gasing stock to Angels and to Men,
Peril on Land, on Seas, with Tempest whirld,
Peril of Beasts, and of false Brethren,
Mocked, scourged, bound, stocked, cold, hungry, naked, thin,
Last, Satan's buffetting spiritual:
I here should tire my Reader and my Pen,
If I his crosses all to mind should call,
Yet he with constant Patience conquered them all.
54
So they that truly love, will ought endure
For his sake only they so truly love.
Lord grant me Love, for then I may be sure,
In all afflictions patient to prove:
No power of Men or Hell their souls can move,
That build upon so good and strong foundation,
Temptation may us shake but not remove
From Love, the ground and pillar of salvation,
Love is the Cause of ours, as of our Saviors passion.
55
This seasons all afflictions, crosses, pain,
Makes Death our Gate to Heaven; the Grave, our rest.
This makes our Patience perfect, and does gayue
Us Heaven as sure, as if we were possessed.
The God of Patience be ever blessed,
The End and Author of my Meditation,
And grant I constantly may ever rest
Upon his Love in Christ, my sure foundation,
Whose Patience paid my price of Reconciliation.
56
Thus of true Patience having laid the ground,
I thereon Christian Fortitude will raise:
For never any valor true and sound
Can well abide, but where true Patience stays.
No peril, pain, or shame that soul dismayes,
Where these two Virtues do themselves combine,
Both joyful make us walk through dreadful ways,
And like two Suns in Firmament do shine;
Most glorious Fortitude: but Patience most Divine.
MEDITAT. V.
Of Fortitude.
1
AL valiant Captains of the sacred Host
Of Loves high Queen; that fight against Hate and Hell,
Christ's Soldiers muster up from every coast,
And them to stand in complete Arms compel,
That Satan's fiery darts they may repel.
But as in worldly Batta^les, Arms are vain,
If Cowards hearts do faint, or courage quell;
So in this spiritual Warfare, all are slain,
That with true Fortitude this fight cannot maintain.
2
I therefore her, Loves valiant General,
And chief Commandresse of her Forces name;
For that the most brave Spirits heroical,
Have always been most honored by the same;
Amongst the Heathen men, that sought vain Fame,
This Virtue was in such great estimation,
Of heavenly Seed they thought their Heroes came,
Expecting not from humane propagation
Such worth: except the Gods concurred in Generation.
3
And therefore those, whose valor did transcend
The ordinary reach of humane Race,
By Pedigrees are lined out to descend
From Jove's, or some great Deities embrace:
Thus in a mist they seem the Truth to trace,
For Virtues all (but chiefly Fortitude)
Are not begotten, but infused by Grace,
And in Kings hearts in larger amplitude,
As they it more do need than common multitude.
4
For as small Waters fair and goodly seem,
When little Channels do their course maintain,
Yet would a Man them scarsely Waters deem,
If they ran drissing in some River main:
Even so a Subjects heart, that does contain
True Fortitude, but in a measure small,
Great glory to himself thereby may gain,
But if in Princes heart the same should fall,
It scarsely would be counted Fortitude at all.
5
Wherefore, the Hearts of Kings are said to be
Like mighty Rivers in The Almighty's hand,
From which as from a little Ocean, he
Disposes Water over all the Land:
His Nobles, which, him round, like Brooks do stand,
Refresh and water every Dale and Plain,
As from their Sovereign they have command,
But all their Waters have from Ocean maine,
Where all their Tribute must re^urne with praise again.
6
And therefore since I find it all but vain
To seek for any good and perfect Grace,
But from the bounty of my Sovereign,
I here beseech the Almighty guide my trace,
In finding out this Virtues royal Race,
That I her wondrous Glory may express
So here, as all may strive her to embrace,
As the only strength of humane happiness,
Till with Loves gracious Train she bring us unto bless.
7
Thus, strong in God, and Power of his might,
^ F^rtitude do truly first explain
To be a strength of mind or valiant Sprite,
Whereby courageously we do sustain
Hard things, for Virtues sake, and not for gain:
Betwixt B^ol^nesse and Fear, a moderation,
True Fortitude does from base Fear retain
Meekness from murmuring at Gods castigation,
And Patience mitigates the know of our passion.
8
Patience is past, and Meekness comes behind,
I therefore Fortitude here twofold name,
One of the Body, the other of the Mind:
This Fortitude of Body is the same
We common have with Beasts both wild and tame,
Encreast by feeding, strength, good constitution;
In stout sustayning is her greatest fame,
Next in on-setting with brave resolution:
This helps in War, but minds it best in persecution.
9
I twofold likewise call that of the Mind,
One true, the other that which men do feign,
When for false ends we nobly are inclined,
Or when these Causes following constrayne;
Passion, Experience, Ignorance, Art, Gain,
Passion of Fear, of Fu^ie, Hope, and Anger:
By these we mighty things do often darraigne,
Experience, Art, make us to dread no danger,
By Ignorance, and for Gain we boldly Life endanger.
10
For fear of danger, and t'auoid disgrace,
The Coward faint will like a Dragon fight;
Who can withstand the fury of the Base?
Experience, Art prevail often against might;
And Ignorance of danger does incite
The fearful, great atchieuements to aduenter,
Custom of winning makes us often in spite
Of Fate and Fortune into Battles enter:
By Sea, for hope of gain, some to the Indies venture.
11
But Fortitude, which does prepare the Mind
For God and Goodness chearefully to die,
Is that brave Virtue formerly defined,
Which Death nor Hell it self can terrify:
By this we only on the Lord rely,
And strong in God, and Power of his might,
Put on our arms to fight most valiantly,
Faith, Hope, and Truth, with Patience, Justice Right,
And with the spiritual Sword vndantedly do fight.
12
Though, of our selves, we no more able are
These mighty Arms to wear and w^ild aright,
Than little David was King Saul's to bear,
When he Goliath met in single fight;
Yet, if Gods power we consider right,
And set by all the worldly strength we have,
Relying on his providence and might,
As David, we may say, with courage brave,
Who me from Bear and Lion, from all harm shall save.
13
For from the Lord is all sufficiency,
Our Enemies in Christ we nothing fear,
But fight Gods Battles most courageously,
In whom we able to do all things are:
And as he shame endured and cross did bear,
So Soldiers of our valiant General,
We with undaunted resolution dare
Oppose the World, Flesh, Sin, and Devils all:
Whose Faith stands firm in Christ, what dread can him apall?
14
Though spiritual Enemies do more abound
In number, Malice, Strength, and Policy;
Yet by these spiritual weapons we confound
Them all, triumphing on them valiantly:
This spiritual strength grows in us inwardly,
As does the new and inward Man revive,
Which stronger grows as our corruptions die,
And by the Fleshes weakness most does thrive,
And when the Body's dead preserues our Souls alive.
15
Our Soul, the subject of true Fortitude,
Not given by Nature, but infused by Grace,
The spirit of Man it is, that does include
This most heroike Virtue: It Is not place,
Wealth and preferment, or a noble Race,
And Breeding, that does raise so high the Mind,
To count all fading Objects vain and base,
And wholly be to heavenly things inclined,
Whereby our strength above all earthly things we find.
16
True Fortitude is home even from above,
And in Loves Court is of such high regard,
That none courageous are, but they that love,
And of their valor hope for Loves reward.
Love conquers all: oh! What can be compared
To mighty Acts of Love? whose jealous ire
Consumes all that her Grace do not regard,
Oh! what is stronger than Loves hot denre?
None e're without her did to noble acts aspire.
17
Love, Fortitude her valiant General,
In all her spiritual Battles does employ,
On whom these Graces wait, and follow all
To fight against our spiritual Enemy,
Long-Suffering, Patience, Magnanimity,
Assured Faith, Hope, Constancy and Peace,
But most of all, she loves Humility:
For as great (...) her glory more increase,
So she inclines to Meekness, and true Lowliness.
18
What is it that I have not received (says she?)
All help's from God; Man's strength is weak and vain:
If he be for us, Who can against us be?
Oh, who can to true Fortitude attain,
But he that from above does it obtain?
Boldness therefore and Intimiditie,
Which leaves Gods glory, seeking private gain,
Is to true Fortitude an enemy,
As well as Cowardice and Effeminitie.
19
For as all Cowards timorous and feign,
Discourage Friends and hearten Enemies,
So foolish, rash, inexpert, vnacquaint
With spiritual Battles, and the policies
Of cruel Satan, and his complicees,
Do desp'rately themselves and fellows train,
Unarmed where Satan in close ambush l^es,
Where some are stung, some poisoned, and some slain,
All as his capti^'d Slaves in bands he does retain.
20
Thus those that on their own strength do rely,
And have within them selves vain confidence,
Proud Boasters often Goliah-like defy
Their Enemies: but take a fall at length.
God only is our Rock of firm defense.
Beastly presumption it is for to depend
On fleshes arm, in things of consequence:
But deuillish madness it is, for to defend
Our spiritual strength, and as our own it to commend.
21
This spiritual Pride of all most dangerous,
As bodily, in them does harbor most,
Who are least valiant and courageous.
Thus Braggadochio himself does boast,
To be fit Leader of a mighty Host;
And Merit-mongers out of foolish Pride,
Will merit more than their first Father lost,
And lay up store, for many Souls beside,
Who for their money may to heaven have entrance wide.
22
(No floods of tears are able to disgrace
The resolution of brave Fortitude,
Which like pure Diamonds adorn her face.
And from her all hard-heartednesse seclude:
Oh, may mine eyes like Fountaynes be endude
With floods in War my panting Soul to cool.
It Is Satan's policy first to exclude
From quenching waters the besieged Soul,
Then burn the town with fire, when he has stopped the Pool^.
23
When valiant Gideon went out to fight
With Midian, God made a Proclamation,
Who dreaded or did fear the Enemies might,
Return should to their People and their Nation,
And shall we in this spiritual dimication,
Hope to withstand our ghostly Enemies,
Except our Hearts be strengthened against tentation,
To fight with Powers, Principalities,
And by true Fortitude to tread down injuries?
24
Wherefore the Son of Sirach, does compare
The heart of Fools to an high plast'red wall,
Which storms of wind and winter cannot bear,
But shaking, tottering, at length does fall;
Imaginations vain his heart apall:
But a wise heart, that is established
By counsel, to a strong and stately Hall,
With Beams and Ligaments so coupeled,
As it of Winds and Tempests never stands in dread.
25
As Hearts huge Horns him profit not at all,
By reason of his faint and fearful heart;
So Christian Armor yields defense as small,
If diffidence our Fortitude pervert,
And as none proudlier march than stately Heart,
In Summer fair of his prosperity,
But if he hear a Dog, or see a Dart,
Does faint for fear and flies cowardly,
So does the Man whom God does Fortitude deny.
26
The heart of man's like Pilot in a ship,
Whose cunning in calm weather is unseen,
But if Winds blow, and Waves to Heaven up skip,
And all in danger great of drowning been,
Then both his skill and courage may be seen:
Then though the Sails be rent and Ship be torn,
He faints not till the wished Port he win:
So though our Flesh here is tortured and forlorn,
Yet by true Fortitude we to our Hau'n are borne.
27
As Branches of the Palm, the more oppressed
With burdens, nearer Heaven themselves do raise;
So Fortitude in valiant Christians breast,
The more assaulted, merits greater praise:
And as those Boughs are stronger found always,
That are opposed to Boreas boystrous blast,
Than those on whom the South and West wind plays,
So that Man's mind does stand most firm and fast,
Who has through greatest torments and tentations past.
28
Three wise men wrote: 3. Esdr. 4.
King, Women, Wine, are strong,
But above all, Truth bears the Victory:
Earth great, Heaven high, Suns course is swift and long,
Yet Truth contaynes all in's imensitie.
Earth, Heaven, Sun, all obey Truth chearefully;
To Truth I perfect Fortitude compare,
Both one: most perfect in the Deity,
As Justice, Love, and other Virtues are,
God only here to us some sparks of them does share.
29
Now only of this Spark is my discourse,
This Virtue, (...)
Manliness the Grecians call;
For they that ran not valiantly their course,
The Heathen scarce accounted men at all:
By Latins; Fortitudes original
Comes from a Body strong, and valiant Mind;
They therefore count those most heroical,
Who most in war to valor are inclined,
Or whom most resolute against Fortunes storms they find.
30
With them a Man of war was seldom found,
Able in Peace to conquer Injury;
The godly in examples do abound,
Of suffering and doing valiantly.
Let captived Lot declare how valourously,
From mighty Kings him Abram succored,
Which shows his strength and magnanimity,
But his mind's valor, when he suffered
Cold, Famine, Banishment, his own Son slaughtered.
31
Most Princely Jacob with God wresteled,
And therefore better might with men prevail,
Yet how was he by Laban injured?
His brother Esan did his life assail,
Yet strong in God his heart did never fail,
Not, Genesis 32. 33.
when at Mahanim he met Gods Host;
And Esau, with four hundred, did he quail.
Of Ios^ahs valor may all Judah boast,
But of them all herein may Da^id glory most.
32
Apocryphal are Stories, not the Facts,
Of machabaeus and his Brethren;
Whose noble Fortitude and valiant Acts,
Transcend the courage of all mortal Men.
Oh! wondrous prowess which they showed then,
For to defend their Laws and Liberty,
Their Temples, Cities, Wives, and Children,
From profanation by Idolatry,
And from the bondage of an Heathen enemy.
33
I might of Moses, Caleb, Gedeon tell,
Ieptha, Job, Samson, David's Worthies three,
That through an Host drew Water from a Well;
Even millions of examples you may see
Of Saints, which in Gods Book our paternes be,
As Children three which would endure the flame,
Before they would commit Idolatry;
Of all the Apostles only Paul I name,
Whose Fortitude in God deserves eternal fame.
34
What? are the Servants greater than their Lord?
No: all the strength that did in them abound,
He of his fullness did to them afford,
In whom all perfect Fortitude was found:
Whom when he did converse with Men on ground,
No Devil, Power, terror could dismay:
And that he might, at last, Hels powers confound,
His Life, on cursed Cross, even down did lay:
Sad Night! But lo: His rising brings a joyful Day.
35
Which to sweet Nectar turns our Cup of Gall:
Lo! This is true brave Fortitude of mind,
That as Christ chearefully did suffer all,
That God for our Redemption had assigned;
So all our strength and will must be inclined,
All crosses valiantly to suffer here,
But where we them against Gods glory find:
For with such injuries Christ could not bear;
And therefore Merchants did with whips from Temple scare.
36
What? Shall I here all Womankind exclude,
As Subjects mean for this heroic Grace?
No: In the mind is seat of Fortitude,
And often in Female breasts obtaynes high place,
It Is not proud Looks, men's Tire, stout Speech, bold Face,
Can Women for true Fortitude commend:
No Virtue like to Modesty does grace
That Sex, and best their Honor does defend:
In this the brauest Women always did transcend.
37
See fair Rebecca covered with a veil;
Judge Debora under an Oken tree;
Most modest Judith durst the Head assail
Of Holofernes: H^ster next I see
Bring Haman unto shame for Mardochee:
Shall I name one that does surmount them all?
Lo, our late Queen Elizabeth was she,
Yet was most modest, shamefac't, Virginal,
All Female boldness Impudence, not Grace we call.
38
This Woman-Man.
Androgune, Masculine-Foeminine,
Sometimes of Doubtful, often of Common Gender,
Who turned her face where Womanhood should shine
To bold out-facing: And her locks did tender
Unto the Cutter.
Scisers: Our Faiths great Defender,
Because she was of Fortitude the scorn,
And Ape of Manhood, did so reprehend her,
As now all virtuous Ladies have her lorne,
Forgotten, and disgraced, as she were never borne.
39
Great Faiths Defender! who do here defend,
As Faith, so Valor and true Fortitude;
Oh, were my Muse but able to commend
Thy Princely Heart, and Minds brave magnitude,
Wherewith the Almighty has thy breast indude;
Or tell the courage of thy valiant Son
Our Prince; which stretches to such amplitude,
That had my Song with his great Praise begun,
My Life on Earth had ended ere my Muse had done.
40
But we return to Fortitude within,
By which we fight against spiritual enemies,
World, Devil, Flesh, and our original Sin,
Hell, Empires, Powers, Principalities,
To our spiritual Peace all enmities:
Against these, for our safeguard, we embrace
All spiritual Graces, as sure remedies;
Ah! how dare they look Satan in the face,
That are quite destitute of all true saving Grace?
41
Alas! What strength have they then that depend
Upon the Pope and his Supremacy,
Or hope his holy Water can defend
Them from this strong and subtle enemy:
Saints Relics, Bulls, Beads, and such trumperie,
Are now the only weapons they must wear;
Their Agnus Deies do so terrify
The Devil, and away ill spirits scare,
For other spiritual Armor, now they need not care.
42
How hope they to be able to withstand
The Serpents malice, and the Worlds despite,
Who lay by Arms, and loose and idle stand,
Not buckeling themselves unto the fight?
As Arms were, like apparel, for delight,
Or for sport only, and a glittering show,
These fainting hearts that are afraid to fight,
Vain Fools that never yet Hels strength did know,
Which at the first encounter them will overthrow.
43
Alas! even too too many now a days,
Like Gallants of our time, make goodly show
In glittering Arms, and brag great might in Frayes;
But come where danger to their life may grow,
They then away both Arms and Weapons throw.
Thus they abuse the knowledge God does lend,
Unto their ruin and their overthrow,
Wanting true valor Truth for to defend,
And Christian Fortitude, to hold out to the End.
44
My only wish is, ever to be strong
In God and in the power of his Might,
Casting off all things that do not belong
Unto the Christian Battle I must fight:
Oh! who in wars can serve his Prince aright,
That does himself with Worlds affairs entangle?
With spiritual Weapons we maintain this fight,
And not with cunning at the Bar to jangle,
We here must fight for Life, and not for profit wrangle.
45
I here confess mine inward strength is vain,
Unable to withstand such enemies,
That I to seek out of my self am feign,
For help against Hels powr's and policies;
So many are my known infirmities,
I mine own strength do utterly distrust,
Hoping thy Grace, that all our wants supplies,
Will strengthen me against Hell, Sin, and Lust,
Since in no finite Power, but infinite I trust.
46
Oh, grant me firm on thine Omnipotence,
In crosses and afflictions to rely,
And wholly to renounce all confidence,
Man's strength, or hope in Princes, can supply:
Who, under shadow of thy Wings do lie,
No foreign Power, nor inward dread need fear,
Thy strength is most seen in infirmity,
In thee we able to do all things are,
By force of thy great Might we all adventure dare.
47
God is my Refuge, Strength and Fortitude,
My Rock, Shield, Buckler, and in whom I trust,
Who has my Foes all unto me subdued,
Making our Enemies to lick the dust.
Most firm defense unto the Meek and Just;
All superstitious vanities are vain,
Who put in God their confidence and trust,
Firm, stable, sure, like Sions Mount remain,
No powers of Hell can snake where this foundation's layne.
50
Great is the Power wherein we do trust,
A mighty Power and exceeding strong,
Able to raise our Bodies from the dust,
And to Eternity our life prolong:
All power from God, to God all does belong,
Why then should thou my Soul distrust or quail?
On him rely, and none can do thee wrong:
Thine Heart and Conscience Satan may assail,
But by Gods help, thou shall against them all prevail.
51
So by this mighty Power we shall at length
Be Victors, though Sin seem us here to foil:
Lord, grant me this spiritual Power and Strength,
That though my Body suffer here a while,
And like a Coward often does take the foil;
I may with courage so my Soul defend,
No Power me of spiritual Arms despoile.
Lord, grant I practice may, what I commend,
So I, with praise my Book and Meditation end.
52
Thus as one of the Bridegromes meanest Friends,
I to adorn the Bride do offer here
These Ornaments: The gift no worth commends,
But He to whom the Widows mite was dear,
Because she all her substance offered there,
Will well accept of this poor Offering,
That when I shall at that great day appear
Before the Judge, to give my reckoning,
This time may be allowed me for Gods honoring.
FINIS.
The third Book consisting of five MEDITATIONS,

viz.
1. Knowledge. 2. Zeal. 3. Temperance. 4. Bounty, and 5. Joy.
And The fourth Book, of viz. 1. Prudence. 2. Obedience. and 3. Meekness. 4.
Gods Word, and 5. Prayer.


Were Likewise intended by the Author at this time for the Press. But the
euer-lamented loss of his most honored Lord (which has changed all his Joys
into Sorrows, and Songs to Lamentations) has been the cause of deferring
their publishing.

A FUNERAL ELEGY, Consecrated to the memory of his euerhonoured Lord, JOHN
KING, Late Lord Bishop of London.
LEt others call their Muse to help them mourn,
And books of Tragique Scenes and Stories turn:
My Heart abundant matter shall indite,
If but the half (I of my sorrow) write.
Were it a private loss of mine alone,
I could it smother with a private groan:
But ah! I ring my Fathers Fathers knell,
The Charet and Horsemen of Israel.
Happy Elisha, when the fiery Horse
And Charets thee did from thy Master force!
Whilst he in Whirlewind up to Heaven ascends,
His Spirit doubled down on thee descends:
But ah! I have no Spirit but to mourn,
And wash with tears this sacred Fathers Vrne,
His (...) is not left me to divide
Mine Eyes from Tears, as Iordanes floods were dride.
Yet had I but his Spirit here to tell,
How stoutly he opposed Iezabel,
And all her Baalling superstitious crew
Of Prophets, and their Idols overthrew,
How firmly he in his Religion stood,
Ready till Death to seal it with his blood,
Without least Bastard thought to change that Truth,
Which was in him firm, rooted from his youth;
I then might ius^ly hope my feeble Verse
Had done full right unto thy wronged Hearse,
For I should muzzell those that wrong thy fame
And die them, like their whoare, scarlet in shame,
Should force into their face that modest blood,
That left them, ere since they left Truth and Good.
Yet why should I think much that Calumny,
Labors to cloud thy Names bright memory,
Since that Just One, thy Savior, after Death
Could not avoid Slanders envenomed breath?
And if thy Lord and Masters fate were such,
Let not thy Ashes grieve to bear as much.
Oh sacred Spirit enclosed in frailest mold
Of britle Clay! when I did thee behold
Praying Elias-like; thou could constrayne
The Heavens to water all the Earth with rain.
And when thy zealous tongue touched with the flame
Which Seraphin had from the Altar ta^ne;
Thou like to Paul or Peter did divine,
Three thousand Souls converting at a time.
When thou did sit on Justice sacred Throne,
Thy Prudence shined like that of Solomon,
And Samuel-like so equal did divide,
Thou often gave content to either side.
Like Aristotle's thy Schole Disputations,
Thy Speeches Tullies eloquent Orations,
Thy Lectures all Ideas most divine,
Where Arts like Stars in Firmament do shine.
Did ^ behold thee in thy Family,
Thy House a Temple of the Deity.
Thou Dauid-like did to the Almighty swear,
No wicked riotous Person should come there.
You worthy Tribe of Leui, when you want
And find your shorn allowance all too scant,
His (...) which refresht you often, bliss
And gave you Liuengs free as they were his.
You Poor lament whom he so often fed,
Not with his Doctrine only, but his Bread.
And Strangers when you want; his loss lament
Who unto you such large allowance sent.
One and the same Rule in things Temporal,
He did observe as in Spiritual,
Who so on Earth does plentifully sow,
May well expect a like increase to mow.
Most happy Man, if Virtue, Honor, Right,
Or any worldly Bliss make happy wight,
Home, and abroad honored, beloved and feared,
Him Grace and Learning unto all endeared.
But oh! what Mortal stands so sure and fast,
That here may be called happy, till his last?
To whom the People erst Hosanna cride,
When he in triumph does through Sion ride,
Ere many days was on the Cross so shaken,
As if he feared himself of God forsaken:
So when this Saint (like Paul the ^ged) sung
To build up Sions ruins with his Tongue,
The ravished Hearers with thy message struck,
Sat as they had no powr's, but Ear and Look,
Both which did yield thy Worth such loud applause,
As if an Angels Trump had lent thee voice,
I think their strict attention did foresee,
They never more should hear so much from thee.
A Swan-like Dittie, for it was his last,
For ere the Sun had round his circuit past,
He that for Sions building up did pray,
Did in his own frail Temple feel decay!
My Soul even trembles but thy groans to hear:
Alas! how could thou them with Patience bear
Afflictions, which would break a brazen Wall,
And hardest Millstone grin'd to powder small,
But He in Heaven that heard thee groan and weep,
And all thy tears did in his Bottle keep,
When it was full, does take of thee compassion,
And freed thee from thy pains and bitter passion.
Even on that Day whereon we celebrate
His Passion, whom thou liu'dst to imitate;
Lo, God does millions of his Angels send,
Thy sorrows here with heavenly Joys to end.
Shall we bewail thy happy commutation,
Now changed from Earth to heavenly Habitation?
Where as thy Joys the Angels far surpast,
Which never of thy Miseries did taste,
For there thou do that Psalm of comfort ring,
Which none but Saints afflicted here can sing;
That Joy which never had in Heaven been known,
But by those Saints that under crosses groan:
That Joy, which feels God comfort us again,
After he has us plagued on Earth with pain;
And for a few years of adversity,
Rewards in Heaven with Joys eternity;
Which gives for Sorrow, Joy; for Labor, Rest;
A Hau'n to us whom Shipwreck erst distressed:
From Danger, Safety; Light unto the eye,
Long blind in Dungeons obscurity.
Life after Death does make our lives more sweet,
Who here Christ's plentiful afflictions meet.
Shall have in him a plenteous consolation:
Then let us all, that wait for like salvation,
In Body like this Saint the dying bear
Of's dying Lord; and let him never fear
But his Lords life shall be made manifest
In Him, when He our Labor turns to Rest.
But more: my Muse is as unfit to write
As are my sorrows stupid to endite!
Only, She thus the public loss bemones,
And what She wants in words, supplies with groans.

