THE CANTICLES or Balades of Solomon, phraselyke declared in Englysh Metres, by
William Baldwin.

Halleluiah.
Sing to the lord sum plesaunt song
Of matter fresh and new:
Unto his Church it does belong
His praises to renew.
Psalm. cxviii. M.D.XLIX.

To the reader.
THat thou may understand this book the better (Christen reader) thou
shalt understand that it is (as it were) a dialoge between Christ and his
church, or as Origin calls it, ye spousal song of Christ and his spouse:
wherein there be four singers. Christ the brydegrome accompanied with his
friends, good bishops and teachers: And the catholic church his spouse
accompanied with damoysels, young christen souls. Between these is all spoken
that is contained in these balades. The whole matter as Anselme takes it, is a
prophecy, describyng the estate of the church, and with what affeccio^ she
desired Christ in all times, both under the law of nature, of Moses* and of
the gospel. No doubt but it is an hie and mystical matter, and more darkely
hyd than other parts of the scripture, by means of the wanton words: which
also cause many to deny it to be Gods wurde. Whose error to redress is the
chief cause why I have meddled with the matter. And because the rediest way was
to make a paraphrase, I have attem^pted it: and that in meter, because they be
balades. And although I be not so plain in all things as I might have been
by means of my metres, yet I trust that such as will read them diligently,
shall have great light in understanding the text. But this I tell the good
reader, thou must read them well, (for it is not once readyng nor twice that
can make thee understand them) and in reading note the sentence more than the
time, with the arguments which go before and after the songs. And read them
orderly, so shall the process of the matter help the much. The exposicion of
every Hebrew wurd, I have put last: which will help the much both to
understand the song and the text. And to the intent thou lose not thy labor
in readyng, I entend with the leave of God shortly to set forth a book of
notes, and such an exposicion of the Metaphorical wurdes, as shall serve the
for a co^mentary. In the mean while, the Lord keep the, and augment thy
knowledge. Amen.

Love and live.

TO THE MOST GODLY KING Edward the sixte, by the grace of God King of
England, France, and Ireland, defender of the says. etc. Willm^ Baldwin
prays God to grant all things that are necessary. Love and Live.
SENECA that good Philosopher among many his piththy moral precepts, has sum
of geuinge gifts, that all things of all men might aptly be applied. Among
which when he has declared to whom, and how all gifts are to be given, and
with what affeccion received, he wills that mete things be not vnmetely
given, as armoure to women, nets to students, nor books to plowmen, but that
all gifts be helpful, or at leastwise aunswerable to his trade of life and
estate, that they be given unto. Whose counsel (most honorable and virtuous
Prince) when I had well wayed, and allowed, I thought none so mete as your
grace to whom I might aptly dedicate this present volume, considering your
earnest zeal to knowledge of truth, and diligent endeavor to auaunce the same,
with other your many towardly virtues and gifts of grace: in praise of which,
if Lamuell had not ben forbidden to give Princes wine (and suerly no wine is so
strong, or takes away man's reason or senses so soon as pride, and vayn
glory conceived of earblowing) I would here have tarried. But since your majesty
knows them already, partly by other men's true declaracion, but chiefly by
your own feling, (For every man best knows him self) I have here let slip
my just occasion: beseching the euerliuyng God, who has the hearts of rulers
in his hand so to gyde yours, that ye may always continue the same, that ye
are thought and praised for already

Sum perchance yet will think that a book of such an Argument, namely of
the holy Scripture, and that such a part of scripture as (if comparyson may
be made in the holy gostes wrytinges) passes all the rest of the same kind,
and therefore called Cantica canticorum, The Balades of Balades, that is to
say the principal balades of holy scripture according to Origens opinion (in
Erasmus judgment the best skylled of all the doctors in understanding the
holy scriptures) is much unmeet for any seculer person, and will say that I
have not followed Seneca his counsel, in geuyng that to a temporal Prince,
which were more mete for a spiritual Prelate. If any thus think arrogantlye,
disdaynyng that lay men should meddle with the scriptures, to such I answer:
Arrogant obstinacy deserves no answer. But if any so think for lack of
better knowledge, I will satisfy them with Erasmus his arguments, which they
shall find in his preface to the Emperor, before his Paraphrase of saint
Matthew: whereunto I add this, that as it is unmeet for a Prince to be
ignorant in that which he defends, so is it most unmeet for a Supreme head
to be vnskylled in ye, wherein it is his office to see his subjects instructed.
For your majesty are not only king over us your English people, but also the
Supreme head of our whole Church and congregation. And to whom could a matter
between Christ and his church be more justly given, than to him, which on the
one side is a deputy, and on the other the chyef and principal?

Sum thus satisfied in the aptly applying of my gift, may chance to doubt in a
greater matter, that is: whether one man may have at once two contrary offices,
a spiritual and a temporal: and that of so great and wayghty charge, that one
alone would cumber two diligent officers. I will not tarry in thexamining every
part of this doubt, but for a full answer to the whole, this I say: I read of
no men, so much praised of men, or better rewarded of God for executing any
one office alone, as I do of men yt have at once had both.

Of whom to let pass Mercurius Trismegystus (so called because he had both
the office of king and priest, and the spirit of prophecy to boot) whose
glory darkneth all the Egypcian rulers that we read of: the scriptures make
mention of diverse. Gene xiiii. Hebru vii.
First of Melchisedech King of Salem, of an unknown genealogy, who was
priest of the highest god before God had ordained any of those offices. But
whether he were first king, and being in that state, made priest, it is not
certain, yet by the placyng of the wurdes it should seem it was so: Once we
are sure that if kingdoms went by succession than as they do now, he was
borne a king, and so a prince before he were prelate: except the priesthode went
also by succession, joined with the kingdom, as I think it did. But because
he was before the law, we will cum nerer. And then to let go Moses the brynger
of Gods law and religion, a right pattern of a Christen king, i. of Kin. vii.
Samuel was at once chief priest and Judge in Israel. Though it were before they
had a king, yet had the Judge that than which after becam the kings office.
And how much it was against Gods pleasure to have that sundered, which was
before but one, beside his answer to Samuel, i. of Kin. viii.
the succes of wicked kings and wurse priests which ioyed their several
offices, can testify: which came both at last to utter destruction, the people
being left captive under the bluddy sweard of the tiran Antiochus, i. Macha.
i.ii and.iii.
till it pleased God to deliver them, by bryngyng that again to one, which
they by their folishnes had divided in twain. For they never enjoyed any
peace, i. Match. xiii.
till they had given to Simon and to his posterity for ever, for ouercummyng
their enemies, and restoryng their religion, and for many other benefits, the
honor both of high priest and king over them. After the death of whom (the
virtues of his life are declared in the books of Machabees) his son John (as
witnesses Josephus) otherwise called Hyrcanus, Josephus de bello Iudai. li. i.
Cap iii.
succeeded in his fathers place. A man of such wit in war, such prudence in
peace, and holiness in religion, that besides the great praises of Josephus, and
his fathers honors, he deserved the name of Trismegystus: For God gave him the
spirit of prophecy, and forknowlage of diverse matters.

These examples beside ye evident proof in our late souerain Lord King Henry
the eight, satisfy this dout sufficiently: For first they prove that God
would so have it, because he joins with them his spirit of prophecy: And
whether one man may well execute them both* the praises of these men metely
well declare.

Wherefore now seeing I have proved my gift aptly applied, I have no more to do,
but first to desyer the everliving God that as he has given your grace these
two offices, so it may plese him (as he did to other that had the like) to give
ye also the third: I mean the gift of prophecy, truly to understand the holy
scriptures, that ye may be able through the illuminyng of his holy spirit, to
judge and examine al spirits, and then to beseech your majesty to take in wurth
this simple gift. We have an english proverb which teaching to take gyfts
thankfully, and to find no fault with them, says: A proverb.
Look not a given horse in the mouth. I will not tarry upon the proverb, but I
would it should not be regarded here: for this gift is an horse of an other
nature than those that the proverb seeueth for. This is such an horse as must
be ryd, and being well red and rid, I doubt not but will bring a man to
Christ, if the reader (I should say rider) will endure to sit him: wherefore I
beseech your majesty to behold him, open his mouth hardily, yea rip his
belly to, and look what is within him, till ye be perfect in every part of his
body. It is but a short horse, and yet contrary to the proverb, he will be
long in corying: spare him not therefore, but tire him if ye can, read him day
and night, and spur him to the quick. And if your grace perceive, that he
interfere, halte, or stumble, (For it is a good horse that never stumbleth)
cast him not away therefore, but give him to sum cunnyng leache, to cure him,
and break of from him those evil properties. So doing I doubt not but your
grace shall be delyted and pleased with my gift, and I be made joyous for that
you use it according to my desire. For here shall your majesty hear Christ and
his church singyng the one in praise of the other: and that such sweet and
mistical balades, as I doubt not but will delight any christen hearted ear.
Would god that such songs might once drive out of office the baudy balades of
lecherous love that commonly are indicted and song of idle courtyers in princes
and noble men's houses. They are not fine enough sum will answer: well than
would I wish that such fine fellows would becum course enough for such
course matters. The coursest frise best pleases the finest of them in winter.
And I doubt not but their cold souls should be kept warm with these course
songs, if in the winter of their frosen faith, and clumsed charity, they
would vouchesafe tunably to sing them. I speak not this of these balades
alone, but of all other of like matter: Ephesians. v. Jacob. v. These. iii.
as psalms, and himnes: In which the apostle would have them that rejoice,
to be exercised. To which your Majesty has already given a notable ensample,
in causyng the psalms brought in to fine englysh meter, by your godly
disposed servant Thomas Sternholde, to be song openly before your grace in the
hearing of all your subjects. Which good example, I beseech GOD all your
subjects may have grace to follow: that you may be praised as the pattern of
virtue, and in the following thereof God may be glorified. Who preserve your
Majesty in health, wealth, virtue and honor, now and ever. Amen.

At London the first of June. 1549.
The Ballet of Ballettes of Solomon: called in Latin, Canticum Canticorum.
The first Chapter. A mystical song of the spiritual and godly love,
between Christ the spouse, and the church or congregation his spousesse.
O That he would kiss me with the kysses of his mouth: for thy love is more
pleasant then wine, and that because of the good and pleasant savor of thy
most precious balmes. Thy name is a sweet smelling ointment when it is shed
forth, therefore do the maidens love the: draw thou me unto the: we will run
after the. The king has brought me into his privy chambres. We will be glad
and rejoice in the, we think more of thy love then of wine. They that be
ryghteous love thee. I am black (O ye daughters of Jerusalem) like as the
tents of the Cedarenes, and as the hangings of Solomon: but yet am I fair and
well favored withal. Marvel not at me that I am so black: for why the sun
has shyned upon me. My mothers children had euel will at me, they made me the
keeper of the vyneyardes: but mine own vineyarde have I not kept. Tell me of
him whom my soul loves where thou feedest the sheep, where thou make them
rest at the noone day: for why shall I be like him, yt goes wrong about the
flocks of thy companyons?

If thou know not thy self (O thou fairest among women) then go thy way forth
after the footesteppes of the sheep, and feed thy goats beside the
shepheardes tents. Unto the host of Pharaos charets have I compared thee, O
my love. Thy chekes and thy neck is beautiful as the turtyls, and hanged with
spanges and goodly Iuels: a nekband of gold will we make thee, with silver
buttons.

When the king sits at the table, he shall smell my Nardus: a bundle of Myrre
is my love unto me: he will lie betwixt my breasts. A cluster of Camphore in
the vineyardes of Engaddi, is my love unto me. O how fayer art thou (my Love)
Oh how fayer art thou? thou have doves iyes. O how fayer art thou (my beloved)
how welfauored art thou? Our bed is decte with flowers, the sylinges of our
house are of Cedre tree, and our cross ioynters of Cypres.

THE CANTIcles or Balades of Solomon. The first Chapter.
O That he would kiss me with the kysses of his mouth: The
For thy teates are better than wine, smelling sweet with most fragraunte
oyntementes. Thy name is a poured forth oyntmente: Therefore the Damsels have
loved thee. Draw me unto thee.

The Argument of the first song.
THe Church Christ's Spouse, delivered from the corrupt kisses of fleshly
pleasures and delytes, and rid from ye vain wurkes of men in which she long
time trusted, having tasted of the pure fountayn of gods abundant love and
mercy, is so inflamed through faith to love Christ and his merits, that
humbling herself she despises her formed foreign righteousness: and ravished
with earnest affeccion (like a very fervent lover) besyreth the love of her
beloved: singing to him in the audience of her maidens, the congregation of
young beleuers, as follows.

The Church unto Christ.
O That my love whom only J desire,
Which has me brought from vain to perfect bliss
To perfect faith, from wurkes of worldly myer:
Would with his mouth witsafe his Spouse to kiss.
The Gene. xxix. ii. Kin. xiiii ii. Cor. xiii. Luke. vii. and.xxii.
Kiss o Christ, which J of thee require
Thy grace, thy peace, thy love (my Love) it is:
Which while J lack, thy fathers wrath and ire,
Condemnesh me for my first fathers wisse.
The law (alas) the duty of our hyer,
Skarce kept in ought, does still against me hiss:
Wherefore o Christ who quenched have his fire,
Through love and grace, deliver me from this.
Which still to crave the more J me incline
Because thy Esai. lxvi.
Teates, thy consolacion sweet
Much better be than any kind of wine:
Forth from the which the oyntmentes for me mete
Of truth, of hope, of patience divine,
With all good gifts of the holy ghost do flete.
My spouse the flesh has dugges, but very dry
Of fooed or fruit, save what is very ill*
From them therefore to thee my Christ J fly,
Besechyng thee with thine my lust to fill.
And thou my God suffisaunce have always
For all mankind, for every soles relyef:
Psalm. xliiii.
For all among that God anointed aye,
Thou wast, and art, and ever shalt be chyef.
Thy name my Dear, that art aye permanent,
Right son of God that rules over all.
Most wise, Esai. ix. and xlvi. and.li. Deuteronomy. xxviii Psalm. viii.cx. and.cxii.
Prou. xviii. Phile. ii. Luke. i.
most just, most good, omnipotent,
Which wast at first and dure for ever shall,
This thy name is an ointment poured forth,
Of power to save all that thereon do call.
Thou art our savior Christ, the king of wurth
That do redeem us from our fathers fall.
Hebre. ii.
Thou, thou alone, with bind thy cross besprent,
By mercy have made free us that were thral.
This name of thine my Love, has such a sent:
Where preachers sheade it as it does behoue,
That Damsels young, folk young in faith are bent
With earnest zeal thy mercy much to love.
For whose encreace o God I do thee pray
To endue me with thy grace: and so to draw
From carnal lusts, that pluck me still away
From love of thee and keeping of thy law:
That in thy truth so earnest be J may,
Of life so good, in charity not raw,
That taught of me, these Younglynges may assay
To wurke thy will, which erst in me they saw.
WE will run after thee: (In the savor of thy sweet smellyng oyntmentes. The
text.
)

The Argument.
Christ having heard the lovely peticion of his Spouse the church, fulfilleth
her request: geuyng her the sweet kiss of peace of conscience, and the
oyntmentes of gifts spiritual that run out of his fragraunt smellyng
breasts. With which when he has coupled her to him, he makes her so glorious
in faith to him ward, and charity toward all folk, that the Younglynges
seeing her godly conversation s^ynyng euerywhere, are moved the more earnestly
to stick unto her. And therefore where as before they were waueryng, for fear of
troubles and persecucion readier to go back than forward, they now pluck up a
good courage: and fully bent to follow, sing unto Christ as follows.

The Younglynges to Christ. ii.
THe fear that kept us longin dout
Through grosnes of the flesh,
Now lord alone thou driuest out,
And do our souls rifreshe.
Since then that for thy spouses sake
Our weak hearts thou have won:
Unto the truth we us betake,
And after thee we run.
The text.
THe King has brought me into his privy Chaumber.

The Argument.
CHrist seeing the readynes of the younglinges, both to follow and run after
him, is as ready to receive them: And therefore to the intent that they faint not
by the way, he sends forth his spouse to comfort and encourage them. Who
preaching to them the mercies of god, and benefits which she has received of
her beloved: syngeth very pleasauntly as follows.

The spouse to the younglinges.
King Christ (ye young) whose love (ye saw) J sought,
Has kissed me with his sweet peace and grace.
Esaias. xxvi. and.xxxii.
He has by faith my troubled conscience brought
To peace and rect, his pleasant Chamber place
For when the law that no man can fulfill,
Had made me dead and could me not revive.
Because the flesheful sore against my will
Mayntaynd with sin, did still against me strive.
With price of blood, he freely bought me free,
Giving me life by love, and made me just.
His restful places, Lo ye young, these be:
Whertil he bringes al those that in him trust.
IN the will we rejoice and be glad: The text.
we will think more of thy seats than upon wine. They that be righteous, love
thee.

The Argument.
THe younglynges delyted with the consolation of the churches pleasant song,
enter into the kings chambers, from whence they tender thanks and praises to
Christ for his benefits, synging.

The younglinges to Christ.
We will rejoice and joy in thee,
O Lord omnipotent:
Which through thy mercy make free
Them that to truth be bent.
Thy fruitful teates that are so fine,
Thy consolations sweet,
We will remember more than wine:
Which are for us most mete.
For faith al only in thy blood
Jn God the fathers light,
We are reputed just and good:
Where works are al to light.
Wherefore the young whom thou for just
By mercy do approve,
In thee alone, put al their trust,
And mearely do thee love.
The text:
I Am black and welfauored with all (O ye Daughters of Jerusalem) like the
Chedarenes tents, and like the hangynges of Solomon. Despise me not though I
be broune: for the Sun has shined upon me: My mothers children had evil will
at me, they made me the keeper of the vineyardes, but mine own vineyarde I have
not kept.

The Argument.
BEcause it is needful that al which will be partakers of the benefits and
sweet consolations of Christ, must also be partakers of his troubles and
bitter affliccions: For persecucion follows the gospel: either inwardly by
temptacion of the wicked devil, orels outwardly by the malice of his cruel
ministers: therefore the Church by example of her self warns the Younglynges
hereof, syngyng as follows.

The Church to the Younglinges. v.
O ye fayer Daughters of Jerusalem,
Ye faithful folk which pleased are so well*
In Christ's teates in which there is no wem,
And in his restful parlers where ye dwell:
Now take good heed, and learn ye al by me
Jn faith to stand in stormy troubles stout.
Lo J am black welfauored though J be:
For persecucion touches me without.
Without J am like to the Gene. xxxv.
Scithicke tents,
Which outward black keep treasures hyd within:
For though J be afflict with diverse dentes,
No farther yet pearce they than to the skin.
The peace of Christ does still within me dwell,
And J am like to ii. Paral. iii.
Salomons curtin:
For purple sylke, with faith adorned well,
And with Gods spirit, instead of Cherubin.
Despise me not therefore though I be broun,
In sight of men both abject, vain and vile:
For why the Malac. iiii. Luke. ii.
Sun, even Christ has shyned down,
And burnt my soul, which sins do sore defyle.
So that my wurkes appear now through his light,
Full foul (God wot) the best not free from sin.
Yet by his beams that shine on me so bright
J mortify old Adam hyd within.
Why I am black an other cause there is:
My mothers sons (for Eua is mother of all)
Fell out with me, the cause whereof is this:
J damn my wurkes, on Christ's mercies J call,
True faith in Christ all only makes me just.
Thus J believe, whereat they all repyne,
And would compel me on my wurkes to trust.
Eke in their vines, their laws to bad for swyne*
They have me set, a keeper for to be.
Of Sathanas the Synagog they arre,
A minister whereof they did make me:
Which made me black, and does my beauty mar.
They made me think that false hypocrisy,
With ryghtles rites devised by their brain,
Were able enough my soul to justify:
By means whereof, Kristes death I counted vain.
And these their laws repugnant to the truth,
Their vineyardes vile, I have attended long.
But mine own vine, my soul even from my youth,
I have not kept, but evermore gone wrong.
The text.
O Thou who^ my soul loves, tell me where ^hou fedest, and where thou restest at
none tide: lest I begin to wander after thy fellows flocks.

The Argument.
THe yonglinges having heard the spouses open declaracion both of her life
passed, and also of her present estate, and doubting lest they may be deceived
and seduced as she before time had been, because they would be sure, commit
themselves to her giding and custody. But ye church knowlegyng her unableness by
her own wit and power to keep herself, commits to Christ the cure of
altogether. And to the^tent she be not provoked through the subtle deceit of
false doctrine, to wandre and stray from the truth, she desires her beloved
to show her the right way where and how to find him, synging as follows.

The Spouse to her beloved.
O Christ my love beloved of my soul,
J know that thou delyting in the light.
In mid day time, when men in faith be hole,
Do feed and rest, through pleasure and delight.
But in what place thou do thee feed and rest.
I am not sure, wherefore J thee desire
To teach me that, lest I with all the rest
By wandryng wide, defyle us in the mire.
The Church malignant with her many mockes,
To be thy fellow boldly does her boast,
And in thy name has gathered mighty flocks:
Which straye abroad welnygh in every caost.
New foldes, new faythes, she daily does diuice
Her flocks to feed, wherein alas they stray:
And as for thine she counts of no price,
Praying by force, all sheep from them away.
Yet in thy name her office she does hold,
Making her vaunt that she the true Church is:
Enforcyng all that would be of thy fold,
Such weeds to eat, as she has sown amiss.
That J therefore lead not thy young awrye,
Nor fall among thy feigned fellows flock,
Enfourme me where thou do thee feed and lie,
O Christ my light, my shepherd, and my rock.
IF thou know not thy self O thou fairest among women, cum forth: The text.
and follow the footsteppes of thy flock, and feed thy kyddes hard by the
shepherdes tents.

The Argument.
BEcause the Church distrustyng her self, puts her whole confidence in her
Beloved, praying him so earnestly to teach her how she may ryghtly instruct
her You^glynges, he having heard and allowed her humble peticion, makes answer
to her request, syngyng as follows.

Christ to his Spouse. vii.
IF thou the fairest of all woman kind,
That ever J found most faithful in deed,
Do not of thy self know where me to find,
Except by my grace thou thereto proceed:
Because all wisdom of flesh is to blind
To search out the place where I lie and feed:
Because J thee love and am to thee kind,
The truth will J teach thee: if thou wylt speed,
Cum forth fro thy self.
Cum forth fro thy self, cum forth fro the darkesum
trust in thy deades, whereof all the pack
That man may devise, are not wurth a spark
Of faith in my blud, where can be no lack.
Although that the church malignant do bark,
Cum forth from her foldes: and bear on thy back
My Lode, Cross, and yoke, which shall be thy mark
For her to detest, and put thee to wrack:
Yet trace thou my steps.
Yet trace thou my steps, so shall thou be sure
To gyde right thy young, that long to be fed.
And since that thou have of such taken cure
Which young are in truth, like kiddes lately bred,
First feed them with milk, let love them allure:
Than strength them with faith, (of scripture the head)
By good shepheardes tents, my wurd that is pure.
Learn them by the life of Saynctes that are dead
Jn faith to be firm.
The text:
I Have lykened thee O my Love, to mine oaste in Pharaos charriots. Thy chekes
are fayer like the Turtle dove. Thy neck is like unto a goodly Jewel: we will
make thee a neckebande of gold, beset with silver buttons.

The argument.
Christ having taught his Spouse where and how to find him, and after what
sort she shall instruct her Younglynges: now that the Younglynges may
delight in her the more, begins to praise her, not for because she has any
thing praise wurthy of her self, but for the good gifts that he has given
her: which nevertheless he calls hers, because he gave her them freelye: she
confessyng also that whatsoever good she has, cummeth from him, which has
made her beautyfull. For which and many other good gifts he wyllyng to praise
her, syngeth before the Younglynges as follows.

Christ to his Spouse. viii.
THee (o my Spouse) which do the things that J requier,
Which longtime strayedst wide, to sin a captive thrall:
J lyken to mine Luke. ii.
Oast, mine Angels bright as fire,
But yockt in Pharaos carts, the captain principal
Of hell, of hell.
From whose power I thee quit so soon as faithfully
Thou dydst in me believe, and have thee armed so
With gifts of grace divine, that except wylfully
Thou yield, not sin, nor death have might to wurke thee woe,
Nor hell, nor hell.
For why thy Chekes be fayer, J mean thine outward hue,
Which beautified by me, that am thy bodies head,
Shine like to the holy ghost, (which is the turtle true)
With love, with grace and light, and beauty ouerspred,
Full well, full well.
Thy neck, that is thy faith by which thou do receive
All gifts which J thee give, as justice, life, and grace,
Is like a golden ouche that does no sight deceive,
Which vyler things help not, but may it foul disgrace
Right well, right well.
Because therefore thy neck, thy perfect faith is pure:
Least with the laws of men, thou do it foully fyle,
Even we the Trinity will make thee a neckebonde sure,
Beset with silver spanges, wurkes for thy faith not vile,
But good, but good.
Good wurkes that shall proceed of faith, as humblenes
Toward us the Lord thy God, obedience to our will:
With love, all such to help as shall be succourles.
This neckebande shall thou wear* these wurkes accept we will
For good, for good.
The text:
While the King was in his restyng place, my Narde yielded furthe the sauoure. My
Beloved is to me a bundle of Myrrh, he will tarry between my breasts: a cluster
of Cypres is my love unto me in the vinyardes of Engaddi.

The Argument.
SCarce has Christ finished his song, but that his Spouse according to her
duty, rendereth him thanks therefore, transcrybyng unto him that wurketh in
her both the will and deed of all goodness, the praise of all her goodly
beauty. And that the Younglynges whom she has taken charge of may know
how to wear the neckebande of good wurkes, which God has prepared and given
her, so that her Beloved may be pleased withal, she teaches the Younglynges
by example of her self, syngyng as follows.

The Spouse to the Younglynges.
VVyle that I walked in wurkes of man's device,
Thinkyng myself of power my self to save,
J did good deeds, but they were of no price:
For fault of faith J could no merit have.
But after Christ had sowed in my breast
The seed of faith, through his benevolence:
And as a King had laid him down to rest
Upon his Couche, my quiet conscience:
Than did my Narde, mine ointment of belief
Yield forth the smell, the fruteful wurkes of faith.
Among the which my charity for chief
God does accept, and most of value wayeth.
So that my Love whom I to be do know
A bundle of Myrrh, though bitter, yet in seint
Excedyng good, and making all things slow
For to corrupt, that therwithal be meint:
Between my breasts, such cumfort as J show
To all that need, delyteth for to dwell.
Ye Christ my Love from whom all faith does flow,
Jn me his Church so pleasauntly does smell,
That to my taste he is the goodly grain
Of Cypress sweet, which commonly does spryng
Among the vines, the elect that do remain
In The text.
Engaddi, Gods truth, the true kyddes spryng.
Lo thou art fayer my Love, Lo thou art fayer: Thou have doves iyes.

The Argument.
When the Church has transcribed the glory of all her goodness to her Beloved,
and praised him as the Author thereof, he pleased with this her true judgment,
prayseth her therefore, syngyng again as follows.

Christ to his Spouse. x.
Lo thou my Love, art fayer:
Myself have made thee so,
Yea thou art fayer in deed,
Wherefore thou shall not need
Jn beauty to dispayer:
For I accept thee lo
For fayer.
For fayer, because thine iyes
Are like the Culuers, white:
Whose simplenes in deed
All others do excede:
Thy judgment wholly lies
Jn true sense of spryte,
Most wise.
O How fayer art thou my Beloved, o how welfauored and beautiful art thou:
The Text.
Our bed is decked with flowers, the sylynges of our houses are of Cedre tree,
and our cross ioynters of Cypress.

The Argument.
THe Church so hyghlye commended of Christ for the simplicity of her true
and vpryght judgment, yeldeth him thanks again both because it pleased him
to give it her, and also to accept it so well in wurth: and to encorage the
Younglynges to love him the better, she prayseth his beauty and other
benefits, syngyng.

The Spouse to her Beloved. xi.
THou thou o Christ, it is that art so fayer,
Yea my Beloved, most beautiful art thou:
As for my borrowed beauty may appayer,
Which were but fylth except thou it allow.
But since thou Lord, most fair, most beautiful,
Jmputest to me part of thy beauty bright,
Behold our Bed, our peace most plentiful
Of conscience, does flourish through thy might.
Our houses eke of faith wherein we dwell,
Have sylynges fine, the scriptures truly taught,
Of Cedre tree, whose everlasting smell
Shall still endure when all things cum to naught.
With these sylynges Cross ioynters joined are
Of Cypress sweet, a wood that will not rot:
Good wurkes in which we do our faith declare,
Through lively love, with death that dies not.
Here ends the first Chapter.
The.ii. Chapter
I Am the Lilie of the field, and the Rose of the valleys: as the rose among
the thorns, so is my Love among the daughters. Like as the appul tree among
the trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the sons. My delight is to sit
under his shadow, for his fruit is sweet unto my throat. He brings me into
his wine soller, his ba^ner spread over me is love. Set about me cups of wine,
comfort me with appuls, for I am sick of love: Cant. viii. a
His left hand lies under my head, and his right hand shall enbrace me.
Cantic. iii. b.
I charge you, o ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes and Hyndes of the field
that ye wake not up my love nor touch her, till she be content herself. Me
think I hear the voice of my beloved: lo, there cummeth he hoppyng upon the
mountains, and leapyng over the little hills. My beloved is like a Roe, or a
young Heart. Behold he stands behind our wall, he looks in at the window,
and pepeth through the grate. My beloved answered and said unto me: O stand up
my love, my beautiful, and go to thine own: for lo, the winter is now past,
the rain is away and goen. The flowers are cum up in the fyelde, the time of
birds syngyng is cum, and the voice of the turtle dove is heard in our land.
The fygtree brings forth her figs, and the vines bear blossoms, and have a
good smell. O stand up then and cum my love, my bewtiful, and cum I say (O my
dove) out of the caves of the rocks, out of the holes of the wall: O let me
see thy countenance, and hear thy voice: for sweet is thy voice, and fair is
thy face. Get us the foxes yea the little foxes that hurt the vines, for our
vines bear blossoms. Cantica. vi.
My love is mine, and I am his, which fedeth among the roses, until the day
break, and till the shadows be goen. Cum again (O my beloved) and be like as
a Roe or a young heart upon the wide mountains.

The second Chapter.
I Am the flower of the field, and the Lilie of the valleys: The text.
As the lilie among the Thorns, so is my Spouse among the daughters.

The argument.
CHrist having heard his Spouse praise him for his beauty and favor through
which she was made bewtifull and obtained the bed of peace, and house in the
last song declared, calls now to mind his humanity: which after he has
evidently declared, he takes thereof a new occasion to praise his Church,
syngyng.

Christ to his Spouse. xii.
THe flower of the field am I,
That springs alone, unset:
Whom Mary brought forth fleshly,
Though man did me not beget,
Nor set.
Yet am not J like the flower
Which once being ripe, does dye:
But as the violet has power
Whose flower smells most swetely,
So I.
The Lilie am J likewise,
The glorious beauty bright
Of the humble, who as valleys,
Ly low, doubtyng of their might
To rise.
These valleys among below
Whom hills set aloft, do hyde:
J Christ for the more part grow,
By faith in them I abide,
Not slow.
And as J that am thy head
Am fayer, so art thou my Spouse:
For as Lilies white and read
In beauty far pass the bows
Of thorn,
Even so thou my Love, do pass
Jn faith other daughters borne:
The unfaithful that do not pass
To prick thee much wurse than thorn,
With howes.
LIke as the apple tree among the trees of the wood: so is my Beloved among the
sons. The text.


The Argument.
BEcause Christ compared his Spouse to a flower, she compares him again to
an Apple tree, syngyng.

The Spouse to her Beloved. xiii.
NOt J my Love, it is,
But thou that art so good:
For J am scarce a flower,
Where thou art very fruit.
For as among the trees
That wild grow in the wood,
By nature sharp and sower,
The Apple tree not brute
But pure, is of great price:
So thou Beloved of me,
Among the sons of God,
Sprites, Angels, souls, and men,
Art principal in power.
For all obey to thee,
By scripture vnforbod
To wurshyp where and when,
Thy name at every hour,
With bowyng of their knees.
I Sat down under the shadow of him whom I desired: The text:
and his fruit is sweet in my throat. The king led me in to his wine celler,
and lifted up to me his banner of love.

The Argument.
THe Church having compared Christ to an apple tree, declares to the
Younglynges the cause why she so did, swetely syngyng as follows.

The Church to the Younglinges. xiiii.
I Which did long my Love to know,
Who is the apple tree of life:
Have sit down in his Psalm. xvi. Esai. xlix.
kShade below,
Which is his help and refuge rise.
Jn this trees shade is quiet rest
For all that truly therein trust:
Jn which to sit for them is best,
Who to find rest in soul, do lust.
For whiles I rested me in the shade
Of Christ's help, there did J eat
The fruit thereof, Gods sprite, which made
Me feel the taste of Manna meat.
Whereof the relice is so sweet
Unto my Throat, while J it chew:
That down J fall at Christ's fete,
For this his fooed, high thanks to show.
For while I sat under his wyng,
And trusted whole in power divine:
Than did he lead me like a King,
Jnto his wurd, his house of wine. Oseas. ii.

In which when I holp from above,
Was well refresht, my King set up
His standard strong, which is his love,
For me, and all that taste his cup.
Deck me with flowers, The text.
and comfort me with apples: for I am love sick.

The Argument.
THe Church being in the wine seller of Gods hollye wurde, and seeing therein
the banner of his love which he displayed for her, when he gave up his body to
the cross, and suffered with horrible pain and panges of death, his blud to
be shed and powered forth, only for her sake, to pourge and cleanse her from all
spot and wrincle, and to make her of his foul enemy his fayer Spouse, is so
ravished with beholding his mercy, that desirous to have all people love him
she brasteth forth in her panges, syngyng to the Younglinges.

The Spouse to the Younglynges xv.
THe streamer have J seen
Of love, which Kriste my King
Has reard for those that been
The flock whom he would bring
To love.
With sight whereof my soul
Does flambe in like desyer,
And languisshing all whole
Js fiercely set on fire,
With love.
Paue me therefore ye young,
With flowers beset me thick:
Ye faithful make me strong,
For lo how I am sick
For love.
With apples fill me full,
Gods wurd the lively quick:
With gifts most plentiful
Of grace, for J am sick
Of Love:
Of love, because J long
That all might saved be:
That all that wander wrong
Might cleave to Christ and me,
By Love.
The Text
HIs left hand is under my head, and his right hand shall embrace me.

The Argument.
SO fervent is the Churches zeal to bring all creatures to the love of her
Beloved, that it causes the wicked, and such as hate the truth, to persecute
her: which also for a while Christ suffers, to try whether she be constant
in the truth or no. Which she knowing welynough, exhorts the Younglynges
not to be afraid though the malice of man for a time seem to prevail: and
to cumfort them the more, allegeth that it cummeth not against her Beloueds
will, but purposely by the providence of God, whatsoever tribulacion she
suffer: and that at length she shall have the victory over all her enemies.

The Spouse to the Younglynges. xvi.
Under my head my Love has laid
His left hand of adversity,
To prove if J would be afraid
His truth most true to testify
Continually.
He suffers men me to assail
To try me often and diversely
To see if malice may prevail
To make me leave him peruersly,
Continually
Wherewith although I be afflict,
In wurth I take all louyngly:
Being for Christ's sake addict
To suffer al pains wyllyngly,
Continually.
For God when it shall please his grace,
May turn my trust to victory:
For why his right hand will embrace
His Church with all prosperity,
Continually.
I Charge you o ye daughters of Jerusalem, The Text.
by the Roes and Hyndes of the field, that ye wake not up my Love, nor touch
her till she be content her self.

The Argument.
THe Spouse having drunk in the wine celler of her Beloved, the secret
mysteries of his holy spirit, sitten under his shadow, eaten the apples of
gostly graces, garnished with the sweet smellyng flowers of many faithful
people, vnderlayed with the left hand of affliccion, and embraced with the
right hand of consolacion, obteyneth perfect peace: and lays her down to
sleep and rest in Christ. Who taking upon him to save and keep her in quiet,
chaurgeth that none wake her through errors or new opinions, singyng.

Christ to the Younglynges. xvii.
O All ye daughters of Jerusalem,
I charge ye all both by the Roes and Hyndes,
The spirits of Angels, bryghter than the gem,
And in your help far swyfter than the wyndes:
Which run about as hynde or roe in field,
To help the good that in my church do dwell:
By these I charge you, as ye will they yield
Their service due, to save and keep you well,
That at no hand ye touch or cause to wake,
The Church my Spouse, that rests in my lap:
With vain beleues, which flesly brains do make
For snafflyng snares my faithful to betrap.
But let her lie till by her own accord
She wake her self, compelled by the zeal
She bearth to you, to lead you to the Lord
That only can your souls sore wounded, heal.
I Hear the voice of my Beloved: Lo he cummeth hoppyng in the mountains, The
text.
leapyng over the little hills. My Beloved is like a Goat or an Hearts hynde.
Lo where he stands behynd our wall, lokyng in at the window, and pepyng
through the lattesses.

The Argument.
THe Church hearing Christ give so strayte charge that none wake her, knows
so well his voice, that she affirms it to be his. And that it may the better
be regarded, she declares to the younglynges what he is that has given the
charge, syngyng.

The Spouse to the Younglynges. xviii.
OF my Beloved this is the voice,
For J do know his voice in deed:
Which causes me much to rejoice,
That he, to me, will take such head.
Lo how he leapeth upon the hills,
And daunseth down the dales by stealth:
Which in his flesh al manner ylles
And scorn, has borne, to give me health.
Yea Christ my Love most good and kind
His Spouse to help in time of need,
Js swyft as Angel, Roe or Hynde:
But much, more ruche, in making speed.
Lo where he stands behind our wall,
Our flesh, that does the soul diuyde
From God the good, through Adams fall:
Whose sin, within our flesh does bide.
Through which he by his gifts of grace,
Does pepe and look in at our grate,
And shine through faith our wyndoe place,
To bend, and mend our woeful state.
The Text
MY Beloved answered me and said: Arise make have my love, my dove my most
bewtifull, and cum.

The Argument.
The Church whom no man may wake up, but her Beloved, asks him continually
what she shall do: And when he has made her an answer, she publysheth it to
the Younglynges, syngyng.

The Church to the Younglinges. xix.
MY Love whom in my heart always
J ask what wurke, he will J do,
Made answer thus without delay,
And lovely spoke me to:
Arise, arise.
Up, up my Love, my dove, my friend,
Make haste, whom J have made so fayer:
And cum to me, J will thee send
My flock for to repair.
Arise, arise.
Now the winter is past, the rain shower is goen, and departed. The flowers
have appeared in our land. The singing time is cum. The Turtles voice was heard
in our land: The fygge tree has brought forth her buddes, and the flowred
vines have yielded their smell. Up therefore my Love, make haste my darlyng: and
cum O my dove in to the holes of the rock, into the hyd ladder degrees, and
show me thy face, and let me hear thy voice: For thy voice is sweet, and thy
face beautiful.

The Argument.
Christ seeing his Spouse ready to rise, encourages her to make great haste:
and exhortyng her to preach, declares how both the time and place is now
fit therefore, openly syngyng.

Christ to his Spouse. xx.
OF unbelief now is cowlde winter past,
The storms likewise of blyndnes, and of trust
Jn man's device, the which did ouercast
The truth, are goen: are known to be but rust.
And lo the flowers of faithful men and just
In the earth, our land, in beauty bud and bloome:
So that the time for which thou long did lust,
The syngyng time, the time to preach is cum.
The turtles voice, the voice of the holy ghost,
The wurd of God sincerely as it ought
Was heard abroad in our lands little coast,
And as it should, effectually has wrought.
The fygtree lo, her blossoms forth has brought,
The budded vines have yielded out their smell:
The faithful folk to whom my truth was tought,
Jn faith and wurkes, excedyngly excel.
Arise therefore my Spouse, my special Love,
Make haste, make speed, purely my wurde to preach:
And cum to me, cum, cum to me my dove,
To whom J give mine holy ghost to teach.
Cum to the Rock, to me thy stedy leache,
Cum to the hoales, the merits of my death:
Cum to the hyd degrees of faith, that reach
To perfectnes, assisted by my breath.
Then turn to me thy face, and let me hear
Thy voice aloude, like thunder in the air.
Thy preaching voice is pleasant to mine ear,
And in mine ^ye thy face is very fayer.
CAtch us the foxes, the little foxes that waste the vines, The text.
and our vine bourgeons.

The Argument.
Whiles the Church according to Christ's commandment, preaches remission of
sins, through faith in his blud, death and merits, false Apostles seeing the
people ready to receive what soever is taught* feign themselves to be the
Spouses healpers: and under that title deceyuyng the surple rude souls, preach
for their profit, their own dremes and inuencions: promisyng merit and
satisfaccion for supersticious wylwurkes. Which Christ perceyuyng, gives his
Spouse warnyng of them: and streytly chargyng her to preach against them:
syngeth.

Christ to his Spouse. xxi.
Catch us the false foxes that preach not the truth,
Those young little foxes which flatter my youth:
Catch them with scripture, declare them their folly,
Teach them to preach true my wurd that is hollie:
And stroy not my vineyardes.
They labor with learning the truth to deny,
And through their false faynyng to lead men awry,
Wastyng my vineyard, my people most holly:
Therefore catch them quickly, that they by their folly,
Destroy not my vineyardes.
For lo now my vine trees begin thycke to bud,
Jn bryngyng forth bourgeons the which will be good:
Catch then these foxes ye preachers most holly,
Least by their flattring and false feigned folly,
They stroy al my vineyardes.
Mine is my Beloved, and I his, The text.
which fedeth among the lilies: until the day break and till the shadows be
goen.

The argument.
THe Spouse consyderyng the carefulnes that her Beloved takes for her and her
maidens, admonishes them thereof: and declaring what love she bears him
again, and will do ever, syngeth.

The Spouse to the Younglynges xxii.
Christ my Beloved which still does feed
Among the flowers, having delyght
Among his faithful lilies:
Does take great care for me in deed,
And J again with all my might
Will do what so his will is.
My Love in me, and I in him,
Conioynde by love will still abide
Among the faithful lilies:
Till day do break, and truth do dym
All shadows dark, and cause them slide
According as his will is.
The text:
Return O my Beloved, and be like a Roe and young Heart upon the mountains Bather.

The argument.
The Church according to Christ's commaundment, goes about to catch the foxes:
admonishing them of their wikednes, and showing what hurt they do to the Lords
vineyardes with preaching their own dreamed diuices, and supersticious wurkes:
charitably exhortyng them to cease from peruertyng the people, and abusyng the
holy scriptures. But the foxes are so proud, stubberne and stout, that they
will not yield: but wylfully resist still the truth. Wherefore she supposing that
God has given them over by withdrawing his grace from them, instauntly prays
her Beloved to return unto them: and to mollify their hardened hearts, that
they may repent and be saved: syngyng.

The Spouse to Christ. xxiii.
Return my Love, to these that are so blind,
And give them grace, for lack whereof they err:
Cum swyft my Love, like to a Roe and hynde,
Upon these proud, these mountains of Bather.
For from thy truth these proud divided be,
Of stomach haute, with troubles vexed sore:
But meken them, and make them cum to me,
Which soon shall be, if thou thy grace restore.
Here ends the second Chapter.
The third Chapter.
BY night in my bed I sought him, whom my soul loves: ye diligently sought I
him, but I found him not. I will get up (thought I) and go about the city,
in the ways in all the streets will I seek him whom my soul loves: but
when I sought him I found him not. The watchmen also that go about the city,
found me. Saw ye not him whom my soul loves? So when I was a little past
them, I found him whom my soul loves. I have gotten hold upon him, and will
not let him go, until I bring him into my mothers house, and into her
chaumber that bare me Cantic. ii. ^.
I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes and Hyndes of the
field, that ye wake not up my love nor touch her, till she be content her
self. Who is this, that cummeth up out of the wilderness like vapors of
smoke, as it were a smell of Myrre, frankencense, and all manier spyces of the
Apoticary? Behold, about Salomons bedstede there stand.lx. valeaunte men of
the most mighty in Israel. They hold sweordes every one, and are expert
in war. Every man also has his sweorde upon his thygh, because of fear in
the night: King Solomon had made himself a palace of the wood of Libanus the
pillars are of silver, the coueryng of gold, the seat of purple, the ground
is pleasantly paued with love for the daughters of Jerusalem. Go forth (O ye
daughters of Sion) and behold King Solomon in the croune: wherewith his mother
crouned him in the day of his marriage, and in the day of the gladness of his
heart.

The third Chapter.
BY night, in my bed sought I for him whom my soul loves. I sought him but
I found him not. I will rise now and go about the city, by the lanes and
streets will I seek him whom my soul loves. I sought him, but I found him
not.

The kepers which go about the city, found me. Have ye not seen him, whom
my soul loves? When I was a little passed forth from them, I found him whom
my soul loves. I got hold upon him, and will not let him go again, until I
have brought him into my mothers house, and in to the Chamber of her that bore
me.

The Argument.
AT the desyer of his Spouse, Christ cummeth upon the mountains of Bather,
the hard hearted Foxes that destroyed his vineyardes, mekenyng through his
grace, their lofty stomakes: so humbling them that they acknowlegyng their
wyckednes, do repent and recant the false doctrine that they taught. And now
received through says and humility into the fellowship of Christ's holy
Church, they confess and openly publish the vaynenes of their former life and
of the tradicions and glorious will wurkes, which they so stiffly mayntayned,
singyng.

The new converted Spouse to the Younglynges. xxiiii.
IN wisdom of the flesh, my bed,
Fond trust in wurkes of man's devise,
By night, in darkness of the dead,
J sought for Christ, as one unwise,
Whom my soul loves.
J sought him long, but found him not,
Because I sought him not aryght:
J sought in wurkes, but now I wot
He is found by faith, not in the night,
Whom my soul loves.
J will up (thought I) and get me out
Jn lanes and streets my Love to find:
And wandre others wurkes about,
To seek him in that city blind,
Whom my soul loves.
J sought him there but could not speed.
The watch that of that city been,
False preachers there found me in deed:
Of whom I asked if they had seen
Whom my soul loves.
They saw him not, nor greatly past
My soul that sought him to confound:
But when I was a little past
Fro them and theyrs, than him I found
Whom my soul loves.
I caught him quycke, by faith and grace,
And will not suffer him depart,
Till I have brought him to the place
Where I him sought with blinded heart,
Whom my soul loves.
Till J him bring into the place
Of unbelief, my mothers house
And Chaumber: that she may embrace
His wurde, and be with me his spouse,
Whom my soul loves.
I Charge you o ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes and Hyndes of the
fyelde, The text.
that ye wake not up my Love, nor touch her, till she be content her self.

The Argument.
SO earnest is their zeal, whom God calls to the truth, that after
themselves have by faith and grace obtained Christ and the true sense of his
holy spirit, they can not be quiet until they have brought all other
unbelievers of whose sect sumtyme they were, unto the state that they now be
in. Which when this new converted church has brought to pass, she
commits her self wholly to Christ, who laying her down to rest in the bed
of quietness of conscience: commands that none wake her: singing the same
again, which in the second chapter he song to the yonglynges.

Christ to the Younglynges. xxv.
O O ye daughters of Jerusalem* etc. As before in the fowertenth song, in the
second Chapter.
THe rest of this chapter is the spech of the ministers of ye first church,
which being now perfect, are becum the friends of God, that is to say his
true and constaunt preachers* which shrink not for any kind of tribulacion:
but boldly preach his wurd in the mids of persecucion.

WHo is she that cu^meth up by the wyldrenes, The text.
like a spyre of smoke, made of the odours of Myrrh, and frankincence, with all
other kinds of Apothecary spices.

While the new converted Spouse rests in the sweet peace of conscience, she
waxes daily more perfect and perfect: ascendyng from faith to faith, from
clerenes to clerenes until she cum to perfectnes: so that in this world which
is a desert void of good people, she in all love, patience, virtue, holiness
and perseueraunce in truth so shyneth, that the first Spouse as it were amassed
thereat: syngeth.

The Friends to the Younglynges. xxvi.
What one is this that from the desert dry
Of unbelief, like to the vapors thick
Of frankincence, in true belyef up hye
Ascends sweet: as myrrh that burns trick
With poticary spice?
It is the Church that has obtained rest
Of conscience, by faith in Christ's blood:
Whom though the world do utterly detest,
Yet smokth she up with wurkes that are as good,
As poticary spice.
The text.
Behold, about Salomons bedstede are.lx. valeaunte men of the most mighty in
Israel. They hold sweordes every one, and are expert in war. Every man also
has his sweorde upon his thygh, because of fears in the night.

The Argument.
THe perfect Spouse perceyuyng that the other is in the bed of Christ, out of
which she smoketh up so swetely, prayseth the bed to the Younglynges: syngyng.

The Spouse to the Younglynges. xxvii.
Behold ye young, behold and see the bed
Of Solomon, Christ's peace wherein we dwell:
With threscore men most strong and myghtie fed
Beset about, the strong of Israel
That faithful are and wise.
Of which each one does hold a cuttyng swurd,
Expert therewith to stryke and ward in war:
Well learnde they be to preach and teach Gods wurd,
And with the same to keep all errors far
From godly men and wise.
Upon their thygh this swurd, Gods wurd they wear,
Gyrded therewith for fear of enemies,
That cum by night the feeble for to fear
With privy trappes of subtyl heresies
Which fleshly wits devise.
KIng Solomon made himself a tabernacle of the wood of Libanus: The Text
the pyllers made he of silver, the coueryng of gold, the stayres of purple:
in the mids thereof is made a paueme^t of love for the Daughters of Jerusalem.
Go forth (O ye daughters of Sion) and behold King Solomon in the croune:
wherewith his mother crouned him in the day of his Spousage, and in the day of
the gladness of his heart.

The Argument.
THe Spouse having showed to the Yonglinges the beauty and municion of Christ's
bed, which is the peace of conscience obtained by faith, through hope and
assurance of life and joy everlasting, for the merits of Christ's death and
passion: how it is inuirened with true and faithful prechers which hold the
sweard of the spirit, able to confound therewith what so ever doctrine of man
may disquiet any of the faithful restyng in the same, descrybeth in like
manner the humanity of her Beloved, syngyng.

The Spouse to the Younglynges xxviii.
KIng Solomon, king Christ the prince of peace,
Made for himself a tabernacle clear,
Of trees that sweet in Libanus increace,
A carnal corpse, whereof the py^^ers were
Of silver shene, the sylynges fine of gold:
Sweet for to smell, and goodly to behold.
The stayers whereto of purple he has wrought,
His blood and sprite, whereby we do ascend
To perfect bliss, to which we all be brought
By help of grace which he to us does lend.
Upon these stayers, by faith we do obtain
The life, for which our savior Christ was slain.
Jn the myds of Christ's tabernacle strong
With wounds beset, is made a pauement fair
Of Love, for such as for his grace do long:
His faithful flock that will to him repair.
This love has Christ provided for all them
That are the daughters of Jerusalem.
Cum forth therefore from fleshly love most vain
Ye faithful folk, ye Sion daughters trym,
To see king Christ, who for your sake was slain
Jn flesh wherewith his mother crouned him
By birth, with mirth, the day when man and God
Were ioynde with joy, who long before were od.
Cum see his flesh, believe that for your sake
He dyed therein, and rose again to life:
That by his blood he might them ryghteous make
That trust in him, and cleave unto his wife.
Cum forth to see this Solomon your king,
Who may alone your souls to glory bring.
The end of the third Chapter.
The fowerth Chapter.
O How fair art thou, my love, how fair art thou? thou have doves eyes,
beside that which lies hyd within. Thy heary locks are like the wull of a
flock of goats that be shorn upon Mount Gilead: Thy teeth are like sheep of
the same bigness, which went up from the washyng place: where every one
bears two twyns, and not one vnfruytfull among them. Thy lyppes are like a
rose colored rybonde, thy words are lovely, thy chekes are like a piece of a
Pomgranat within thine hears. Thy neck is like the tower of David builded
with costly stones lying out on the sides, where upon there hang a thousand
shieldes, yea all the weapons of the Gyauntes. Thy two breasts are like two
twyns of young Roes, which feed among Roses* O that I might go to the mountain
of Myrre, and to the hyl of frankencense: till the day break and till the
shadows be past away. Thou art all fair, O my love, and no spot is there in
thee. Come to me from Libanus (O my spouse) come to me from Libanus, look from
the top of Amana, from the top of Sanir and Hermon, from the Lions dens and
from the mountains of the Leopardes. Thou have with love bewitched my heart, O
my Sister, my spouse, thou have bewitched my heart with one of thine iyes, and
with one cheyne of thy neck. O how fayer are thy breasts, my sister my spouse?
Thy breasts are more pleasant than wine, and the smell of thine oyntmentes
passes all spices. Thy lips o my Spouse, drop as the honey comb: yea milk
and honye is under thy tongue, and the smell of thy garments is like the smell of
Libanus. A gardeyne well locked is my sister, my spouse, a garden well locked,
and a sealed well. The fruits that are planted in the are like a very
Paradise of Pomegranates, with sweet fruits: as Camphor, Nardus, and Saffron,
Calamus, and Synamom, with all swear smellyng trees: Mirrhe, Aloes, and all the
best spices: a well of gardeyns, a well of living waters, which rendoune from
Libanus. Up thou Northewynde, cum thou South wind and blow upon my gardeyn,
that the smell thereof may be carried on every side, yea and that my beloved may
cum in to his garden, and eat of the sweet fruits that grow therein.

The fowerth Chapter.
Lo thou art fayer my Love, The Text.
thou art fayer, thou have doves iyes, beside the tyer thereupon. Thy hears
are flocks of Goats, which are shorn from of mount Gileal. Thy lyppes are
like the red scarlet threde, and thy spech is sweet. Thy chekes be like to an
half pomegranade, beside thy fyllet. Thy Neck is like to David's tower which
is builded with his bulwarks, whereupon hang a thousand shyeldes, the armor
of most valiant men. Thy two teates are like a gotes two double twins, which
are fed among lilies, till the day break, and till the shadoes pass away.

The Argument.
When the perfect Preachers have declared the humanity of Christ, in which
he made satisfaccion to his father for the sins of the whole world, he
praysyng them again, for all his gifts in them, syngeth.

Christ to his perfect Spouse. xxix.
Lo, thou art fayer, lo thou art fayer my Love,
Doves iyes thou have, in judgment simplenes:
Besides thy paste that stands thine iyes above,
Thy goodly attire of faith and humblenes.
Thy hears also, thy truths most principal
Are like a flock of Goats most quick and pure,
Which rounded are from of mount Gileal,
The Bible book, an heap of witness sure.
Thy teath also, thine arguments most strong
With which thou do all heresies devour,
Are like the flock which shorn cum up along
The washyng place, Gods wurd that does them scour.
Of which each one in it two twins does bear,
Gods wurd, and truth, and not so much as one
Js void thereof: with these teeth thou do tear
Abuses byg, that think to rule alone.
Thy lyppes, thy speech is like the skarlet red,
Which for the elect, thy savior Christ do preach,
Afflicte in flesh, with blood his cross bebled,
To faithful folk a sweet and pleasant speech.
Thy Chekes thy wurkes are lovely, fair and good
Like to a broken piece of Pomegranade
Which spring of faith by merit of my blood,
Besides thy tire, my wurkes that will not fade.
Thy neck thy faith, is like to David's tower,
Which builded is with bulwarks, whereupon
A thousand shyldes of truth, which men of power
Jn faith, have borne, do hang to fraye thy foen.
Thy breasts, thy help to succor all that need
Always at wurke, are like two little twins,
The which among the faithful Lillies seed
Till shadows pass, and till the day begynnes.
The Text.
I will go to the mount of Mirrhe, to the hyl of Frankincence. Thou art al fayer
o my spouse and no spot is in thee. Cum from Libanus o my Spouse, cum from
Libanus, cum.

The argument.
When Christ has praised perfectly the perfect spouse, he calls to mind
the other, which is yet in bed on sleep: and desirous to praise her also,
syngeth.

Christ to his Spouse. xxx.
TO the mount of myrrh will J go,
To the hill of frankincence,
Go will J to my Spouse, slepie who
Wysheth feign in my presence
To cum.
Thou art fayer al whole o my love,
And no spot does rest in thee:
Fro thy self cum, cum from above
Libanus, though it bright be,
Cum, Cum.
Jn thy strength trust not o my Spouse,
But in me put all thy trust:
So thou shall be made gloriouse,
Jf thou wylt therefore be just,
Cum, cum.
THou shall be crouned from the top of Amana, from the top of Sanir and
Hermon, The Text.
from the Lions dens, and from the mountains of the Leopardes.

The argument.
BEcause the Church should cum the more spedely from all confidence in
herself, to trust wholly in Christ: her Beloved showing why he called her,
adds great promises, which (if she cum to him) he will perform, syngyng.

Christ to his Spouse. xxxi.
IF that thou cum from Libanus to me,
Thou shall be crouned from * Amana mount:
From God, the hye top, crouned shall thou be
With truth, whose heygth al hye things does surmount.
From Sanirs top, and eke from + Hermon hie,
The curses which thou shall sustain of men,
Thou shall be crounde from every dignity,
From the Leoperdes mount, and from the Lions den.
THou have ravished my mind, oh sister my spouse, The text.
thou have ravished my mind in one of thine iyes, and in one chayn of the neck.

The Argument.
Christ having promised to croune his Church with truth, (for his self will
be her croune) from Sanir and Hermon, the curses and troubles that she should
sustain for his sake, and from the Lions den, and Leoperdes mount, which
signify pleasures and delites, honors and dignities: (which though they be
for the most part abused, yet Christ promyseth his Spouse that if she trust in
him only, and stand to his truth, she shall use them to his glory, and be
crouned of him therefore) he begins to praise her. But because she is not
yet perfect by reason of the flesh, which continually troubles and hyndereth
her, he lykyng sumwhat, and myslykyng elswhat, syngeth.

Christ to his Spouse. xxxii.
MY mind thou have whole rauyshed
My spouse, my sister dear:
Thou have my heart whole rauyshed
With one of thine iyes clear.
Thy perfect judgment of my sprite
Does much my mind refresh:
Thine other iye detest J quite,
Thy judgment of the flesh.
Jn one lynke of the chain likewise
That hangth about thy neck,
My mind wholly thou do surprise,
For in it is no specke.
The fruits which thou vnfaynyngly
By faith still bryngest forth,
Do please my mind excedyngly:
The rest are nothing wurth.
O How fayer are thy breasts my sister my spouse? they are more pleasant then
wine, The text.
and the smell of thine oyntmentes passes all the spices. Thy lips o my love
are a dropping honey comb, milk and honey is under thy tongue. The smell of thy
garments is like the smell of Libanus. A garden well locked thou art my sister
my spouse, a garden well locked, and a sealed well. The fruits that grow in
thee, are like a Paradise of Pomegranades, with fruit trees, Camphor, Nardus,
and Saffron, Fistula, and Synamom, with all trees of Libanus. Mirrhe, Aloes, and
all the best spices. A well of gardeynes, a fountain of living waters, which
flow out from Libanus. Up thou North wind, and cum thou Southwynde and blow
upon my gardeyn, that the smell thereof may be carried on every side.

The Argument.
AFter Christ has praised his Spouse for the one of her iyes, and for one of
her chains, dispraysyng the other (for she has yet one carnal iye, and does
sum of her wurkes through hypocrisy) he prayseth the rest of her parts
throwly, syngyng before the Younglynges.

Christ to his Spouse. xxxiii.
How fair thy Dugges, thy charity is my Spouse,
My sister sweet, more fair they are than wine:
Thy savor eke of my gifts glorious,
Do pass all odours, be they never so fine.
Thy lyppes my Love the hunney comb are like,
From which my praise does drop al men among:
My scriptures eke that are not much unlike
Hunney and milk, do under lie thy tongue.
Thy garments gay, my merits which thou have,
Do savor sweet, like the mount Libanus.
My Spouse, thou art an orchard locked fast
Of pleasant trees, my elect most bounteous.
Fast shut thou art, my sister, J thee keep
From all assaults: thou art a sealed spryng
Of waters pure, in truths moisture so deep,
That all may drink whom grace shall thereto bring.
The planted trees and fruits which grow in thee,
Of Pomegranates are like a paradise,
Beset about with fruits that pleasant be,
Of cumly heygth that spryng in goodly wise.
Jn thee does grow spykenarde and Calamus
With Saffron, Camphor, and the sweet cypres,
And all the trees that grow in Libanus:
Sweet Cynamome, strong Myrrh and Aloes.
With all hot spices aromatical.
These are the elect and faithful that do dwell
Jn thee my church, in office several:
Who all through faith, excedyng sweet do smell.
And thou my spouse of gardeyns art a well,
Thy dewie faith does moysten every coost:
Thou art also a poole the which does well
Up lively springes, from out the holy ghost.
With these thy streams which calmly take their course
From Libanus, my wurde that mountain clear,
Thou waterest the gardens fine or course
Of all good folk, that in thy way appear.
Up North wind up, up tribulacion,
Cum blast my gardeyn, that J may it try:
Cum Southwynde eke, cum consolacion
And cherysh it, least sum part hap to dye.
That while ye two upon my church do blow,
The fragrant smell of truth may from her flow.
The text.
LEt my beloved cum into his gardeyn, and eat the sweet fruits thereof.

The Argument.
AFter the north and southwynde have so long blown upon the church that her
fruits of patience, humblenes, obedience and charity are ripe: she calls
Christ unto her his gardeyn: desyryng him to eat his fruits, that is to
accept for good the wurkes, which she through faith in him has brought surth:
syngyng as follows.

The Spouse to her Beloved. xxxiiii.
NOw that J am proved
Let my best Beloved
Whom mercy has moved,
To make me his gardeyn:
Cum eat, and for good take
My wurkes, for his blood sake
The fruits let him good make,
Which grow in my gardeyn.
Here ends the fowerth Chapter.
The fyft Chapter.
I Am cum into my garden, O my sister, my spouse: I have gathered my Myrre with
my spyce. I have eaten honey with my honey comb, I have drunk my wine with my
milk. Eat, O ye friends, drynk and be merry, O ye beloved.

As I am a sleep, and my heart is waking, I hear the voice of my beloved, when
he knocks. Open to me, O my sister, my love, my dove, my derlyng: for my
head is full of dew, and the locks of my hearre are full of the night
drops. I have put of my cote, how can I do it on again? I have washed my
fete, how shall I fyle them again?

My love put in his hand at the hole, and my heart was moved within me. I stood
up to open unto my beloved, and my hands dropped with Myrre, and the Myrre
ran down my fingers upon the lock. I opened unto my beloved, but he was
departed and gone his way. Now when he spoke, my heart was goen: I sought him,
but I could not find him: I cried upon him nevertheless he gave me no answer.
So the watchmen that went about the city, found me, smote me, and wounded me:
yea they that kept the walls, took away my kercheaf fro me. I charge you
therefore, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my Beloved, that ye tell
him how I am sick for love. What manner of man is thy love above other lovers, O
thou fairest among women? Or what can thy Love do more than other lovers, that
thou chargest us so straytly? As for my love he is white and red colored, a
goodly person among ten thousand: his head is as the most fine gold, the
locks of his hear are busshed, and blak as a crow. His iyes are as the iyes
of doves by the water brokes, as though they were washed with milk, and are
set like perles in gold. His chekes are like a garden bed, wherein the
Apotecaries plant all manner of sweet things: His lyppes are like Roses that
drop sweet smellyng Myrre. His hands are like gold ringes having enclosed the
precious stone of Tharsis. His body is as the pure yuory, decked over with
Saphires: His legs are as the pillars of Marble, set upon sokets of gold:
his face is as Libanus, and as the beauty of the Cedre trees. The wurdes of
his mouth are sweet yea he is altogether, lovely. Such one is my love. O ye
daughters of Jerusalem, such one is my Love.

The fifth Chapter.
I Am cum into my gardein, my sister, my Spouse, The text.
I have gathered my myrrh with my spice, I have eaten my hunnie comb with my
hunney: I have drunk my wine with my milk.

The Argument.
AT his Spouses request, Christ cu^meth into his gardeyn: and gathers his
mirrhe with his spices, the virtuous deeds which through him she brings
surth: and eats his hunney comb with his hu^ney and drynketh his wine with
his milk, that is, he accepts well her good doctrine wherewith she nurissheth
and comfort the Younglynges. Which al he calls his, because that for his
sake she did them: and when he has so done, he certifieth his Spouse thereof,
syngyng.

Christ to his Spouse. xxxv.
TO thee my Spouse, my gardeyn great of price,
My sister dear, J am cum at thy request:
J have cropped my myrrh, and odourykyng spice,
Good wurkes which faith has gendred in thy breast.
My hunney comb with hunney of the best
My wurde, my truth, my promise J have eat:
J stand thereto, and will perform the rest
That granted is in sweet so fine a meat.
My cheryng wine, the strongest of my truth,
Which in men's hearts through preaching, deep is sounk:
Myxt with my milk, weak doctrine for my youth,
Powrde out by thee, I have both seen and drounk.
EAt o my friends, and drink, and be drunk my best beloved. The Text.


Christ seeing his Spouses fruits of most holsum doctrine, to be excellent
good, calls his first Church, the which now are his friends, unto his
banquet: willing them not only to eat and drink his churches mylk and wine,
that is the doctrine of holy scripture, but also to be drunk, that is to have
all carnal judgment clean ouercum with the perfect knowledge of his wurde,
syngyng to them.

Christ to his Spouse. xxxvi.
EAt my friends and drink,
My Spouses milk and wine:
My wurde which to the brynke
Js full of food divine,
Both meat and drink.
My Friends whom I love most
Drink, drink till ye be drounk:
Drink till my holly ghost
Jn you be thoroughly sunk,
Drink and be drunk.
The text.
I Sleep, and my heart waketh. I hear the voice of my Beloved knockyng.

The Argument.
THe Spouse hyndred with the heavy burden of the flesh, falls often: becummeth
negligent in her ministry, and slepeth as touching the flesh: but in her heart
and spirit watches continually, always attentive and hearkenyng when God will
move and wake her up, to do any thing.

Which she confesses her self, syngyng to the Yonglynges^

The Spouse to the Younglynges. xxxvii.
I I my self whom flesh does ouermatche
Do sleep in sin, obey my worldly will:
But yet my heart, and sprite do wake and watch,
To serve the Lord, his laws for to fulfill
With heart and mind.
But while J thus, in fleshly sleep am still,
Behold the voice of Christ whom most I love,
I hear in flesh, whereon he knocks still,
From earth commaundyng me to cum above,
True rest to find.
OPen to me my sister, my Love my Dove, The Text.
my darling: for my Head is full of dew, and my locks of hear are full of
Night drops.

The Argument.
When Christ (according to the confession of his well-beloved Spouse) has
styerred and waked her up by the secret wurkyng of his grace, from the sluggysh
rest which she had in her disobedient and unruly flesh, he cummeth him self
unto her, with his head God the father hye head of all, full of the dew of his
grace, truth and mercy: having his heary locks full of the night drops of
tribulacion, persecucion, and affliccion. (For all that receive Christ with
the dew of his fathers truth and mercy, must also receive the troubleous
nyghtdroppes of his hears.) And now desirous that she should so receive him,
syngeth.

Christ to his perfect Spouse. xxxviii.
OPen to me, my sister, my Love,
Receive my truth, that J shall to thee show:
Open to me my darlyng, my Dove,
For lo my head, my head is full of dew,
Of truth, grace, and mercy.
Also my hears with night drops abound,
My truth is full of tribulacion:
Fear thou not yet, for faith shall thee ground
And make thee strong in persecucion,
Through truth, grace, and mercy.
The text.
I Have put of my coat, how shall I put it on again? I have washed my feet, how
shall I fyle them again?

The Argument.
THe Spouse (whose flesh is not full mortified, and obedient to the spirit) is
troubled sore with this request of her Beloved. She is in the bed of quietness
already, and has as she thinks, put of the vesture of old Adam, with trust
in her own righteousness, and has washed her feet from the soul affeccio^s,
lusts, and desiers of worldly things. Thus thynkyng (but she is deceived) she
reasons with her Beloved, syngyng.

The Spouse to her Beloved. xxxix.
MY fleshly coat, my trust in wurkes of man
J have put of, J count them all as vain,
And rest in peace: o Lord how shall J than,
Attire my self, and put it on again?
My feet also my affectes and pleasures vile,
Are washed away, as thou thy self most good,
Commaundedst me: why shall I then defyle
My feet again, in vile and fylthy mud?
MI Beloved put in his hand at the Hole, and my bowels swelled within me. The
Text.
I arose that I might open to my Beloved, and my hands dropped myrrh, and my
fingers were full of tried mirrhe. I opened the bolte of my door to my Beloved:
but he was goen and past. As soon as my Beloved spoke, my soul came out. I
sought him, but I found him not: I called, but he gave no answer. The watchmen
yt went about the city, found me, smote me, and wounded me: They that kept the
wall, took away my gaberdin. I charge you o ye daughters of Jerusalem, that if
ye find my Beloved, ye show him how that I am louesycke.

The Argument.
THe Church beholds Christ, and would gladly receive him, for her soul
deliteth in his dewy head, but her flesh can not away with the nyghtdroppyng
hears, which caused her as though she had been perfect, to reason with Christ,
and to think that he would have her put on her coat again, when as in deed
he would have her cum naked to put on the coat which he will give her. Thus
is the poor church deceived through frayltie of the flesh: which he
consyderyng and seeing the door shut, that is the spirit so hyndred in carnal
judgment, that she can not receive him, thrusts in his hand, that is his
power, grace, and help, through the hole of the door, that is the eleccion
which remains in old Adam the door of the flesh, which through his grace
he opens. Which the Spouse felyng, confesses: syngyng.

The Spouse to the Younglynges. xl.
MY Love did put his hand of might,
Jn to my hole of fleshly sense:
Whereby mine inward parts outryght
Did swel and rise, through influence
Of grace.
Than up I rose with diligence
To open that he might cum in
Whom I do love, by whom my sense
Of fleshly wit was made so thin.
By grace.
No sooner I up risen was
But that my hands (fast shut before)
Did drop with Mirrhe, good wurkes did pass
My fyngers from still more and more
By grace.
The doar bar eke that made me slack
To let him in that knocked fast
My carnal sense J thrust abacke:
But Christ before was goen and past,
Helas.
As soon as my Beloved spoke,
My soul to search him waxed meke:
My soul long hyd, his voice did make
From flesh to flee, his help to seek
Apace.
J sought him long but could not find;
J called him, he answered not:
Awhyle he left me to my mind,
Because at first J opened not.
Helas.
The tyrauntes that the city watch
False Prelates which the truth confound,
That sought for Christ poor me did catch,
And stroke therefore, and did me wound
Helas.
The kepers of the cursed wall,
Such rites as truthles men devise:
By force did take my cloak and all,
Because J did their wurkes despise,
Helas.
Ye daughters of Jerusalem,
Ye faithful preachers of the wurd,
Which preach Gods truths, and follow them,
That stryke with his two edged swurd
By grace:
J charge you if ye chance to find
Christ my Beloved that dwelles above,
Ye show him how sore J in mind
Am sick, and languish whole for love
Of grace.
wHat manner one is thy beloved of a beloved o thou fairest of women? what manner
one is thy beloved of his beloved, The Text.
because thou geuest us so great charge?

The Argument.
THe Younglynges being charged of the Church that if they find her Beloved,
they show him how she is louesicke, because they know him not (as in deed none
can except the faithful have taught them) enquyer what he is, singing.

The Younglynges to the Spouse. xli.
What one is he, Beloved of thee,
Beloved of God above,
Of women bright, O fairest to sight,
What manner one is thy Love?
What manner one is. etc.
What may he be, Beloved of thee,
Of God beloved also:
What one is he, So loved of thee,
Of whom thou do charge us so?
Of whom thou do, etc.
MY Beloved is white and red, chosen among a thousand. The Text.
His head is principal good gold: his hears are like the branches of the
Palm trees, as black as a Crow.

The argument.
THe Church at the Younglynges request, describes her beloved in.iii. songs,
syngyng.

The Spouse to the Younglynges. xlii.
Christ God and man (ye young) if ye know not,
Js such an one as has in him no spot.
My Love ye shall understand,
Js white in divinity, Red in humanity,
Chosen among a thousand.
His head the father, God the most of might,
Js gold, of nature perfect, pure and bright.
My Love ye shall understand,
Js white in divinity, Red in humanity,
Chosen among a thousand.
His hears, his truths, are like the Palmetree bow,
Crow black to such as will them not allow.
My Love ye shall understand,
Js white in divinity, Red in humanity,
Chosen among a thousand.
HIs iyes are as the culuers, The Text.
upon the water brooks, which are washed with mylcke, and rest unto their
fulness. His Chekes are like beds of spices, growyng for the Apotecaries. His
lyppes are lilies, that drop percing Myrre. His hands are golden ringes full
of Iacinctes His belly is of yuory, decked over with Saphirs: His legs are
Marble pillars, set upon golden bases. His shape is as Libanus, he is chosen as
the Cedre tree. His throat is most sweet.

The Argument.
When the Church has showed the eleccion of Christ (for he is the chyef and
only elect son of his father) and his two natures, divinity and humanity:
she proceeds on in the descripcion of the rest of his parts, syngyng.

The Church to the Younglinges. xliii.
MY Spousis iyes, his judgments wunderful
Are like the Doves, upon the water brook,
Which washed with milk of truth, rest where they wull,
Replete with sprite and power echewhere to look.
His Chekes, his wurdes whereby we do him know,
Are like earthbeds, of spices fine and pure:
Good books in which his truth does daily grow
For preachers such as put the same in ure.
His lyppes, such men by whom he speaks his will
Are lillies white, where purity is had:
From whom the myrrh of scripture does distill,
Preseruyng good, but bitter to the bad.
His hands, his power by which all things are wrought,
Known by the wurkes, are very rings of gold:
With Hiacincthes set as full as can be thought,
His goodly wurkes which daily we behold.
His belly or heart, which are affectes and will,
Are constant, firm, like to the Eliphantes tooth,
Beset with saphirs, clernes shynyng still,
In all his wurkes both done and that he does.
His Legs, which are his strength, his force, his guard,
His enmies down, his faithful up to hold:
Are pyllers strong, of marble stone most hard,
That builded be on bases made of gold.
His shape, in which he shows himself to us,
Jn which through faith, all faithful do him see,
Js most of price like to mount Libanus,
Whereon does grow the hye sweet Cedre tree.
His throat, the faith which we receive of him
Whereby we take his peace and righteousness,
Is sweet, sweet, sweet: my Love in every lym,
So perfect is, as no tongue can express.
Such one is my Beloved as is whollye to be desired. The text.
And he is my friend O ye daughters of Jerusalem.

The argument.
When the Church has particulerly descrybed Christ as well as she could, at
last astonished with beholding the depth of his wunderful mercies, and hyndered
through infirmity to utter such things as she gladly would, she breketh out
into wunderyng: and desirous to styr up al other to desyer him, concluded much
in few wurdes, syngyng.

The Spouse to the Younglynges. xliiii.
YE faithful would ye know,
At full what one he is?
My wit and learning is to low
To show that shape of his.
Yet thus say J of him,
Because ye me requyrde:
His excellence in every lym,
Ought wholly be desyerde.
My Love is such a gem,
My Friend also is he:
Ye daughters of Jerusalem,
Such is my Love to me.
The sixth Chapter.
WHither is thy love goen then (o thou fairest among weomen) whither is thy
love departed? we will seek him with thee. My Love is goen down into his
gardeyne, unto the sweet smellyng beds: that he may refresh himself in the
gardeyn, and gather roses. My love is mine and I am his, which fedeth among the
roses.

Thou art beautiful o my love, as is the place of Thirza, thou art fayer as
Jerusalem, fearful as an army of men with their banners. Turn away thine iyes
from me: for they have set me on fire. Thy hearry locks are like a flock of
goats shorn upon the mount of Gilead. Thy teeth are like a flock of shorn
sheep, which go out of the washyng place, where every one bears twynnes,
and not one unfruitful among them. Thy chekes are like a piece of Pomegranate,
within thy volupers. There are.lx. Queen's, and lxxx. Concubines, and Damselles
without number. One is my dove, one is my darlyng: She is the only beloved of
her mother, and dear unto her that bare her. When the daughters saw her, they
said she was blessed. Yea the Queen's and wives praised her.

What is she this that looks forth as the morning? Fair as the Moon, clear
as the Sun, and fearful as an army of men with their banners. I went down into
the nutgardeyne, to see what grew by the brooks, and to look if the
vineyarde floryshed, or if the Pomegrates were shot forth. I knew not that my
soul had made me the charriote of the people that be under tribute. Turn
again, turn again: O thou perfect one turn again, turn again and we will
look upon thee. What will ye see in the Sulamite? She is like men of war,
syngyng in a company.

The sixth Chapter.
The text*
WHither is thy Beloved goen O thou the fairest woman? Whither is thy Beloved
departed? That we may seek him with thee.

The Argument.
THe Younglynges although they have been long led in darkness, and seduced
with blyndnes of errors, yet hearing Christ truly preached, with his death,
power, and merits thoroughly declared, do hungre and thyrste for the true
righteousness: Which that they may the sooner obtain, they demand of the
Church whither her Beloved is goen, and that twyse for faylyng, showing thereby
their earnestnes that they have to help to seek him, syngyng as follows.

The Younglynges to the Spouse. xlvi.
OF women fairest thou,
Because thou do excel
In faith, all other foke
That have received the yoke
Of the gospel:
For whom thou sekest now,
Him whom thou love so well,
Why whither is he gone?
Why left he thee alone?
Tell we pray thee.
Why whither is he goen,
Whom thou do love so well,
How parted he away?
Show us that we eke may.
Seek him with thee.
MI Beloved is goen down into his gardeyne to the spice beds, The Text.
that he may there feed in his gardeyn, and gather lilies. I please my Beloved,
and my Beloved me, which fedeth among the lilies.

The Argument.
THe Church which even now sought for her beloved and could not find him,
being now required of the Younglynges to show where he is, does not only know
where for to seek him, but also where to find him: and therefore makes answer
to the Younglynges, syngyng.

The Spouse to the Younglinges. xlvi.
MY Beloved descended down
Jn to his fruitful orcharde:
With his good gifts his Church to croune,
To keep still the same in sauegard.
He is goen to the beds of spice,
The books which he is declarde in:
On them to feed which exercise
The scriptures, that are his gardin.
To feed him self among his flock,
It evermore his will is:
To pluck the flowers of Abrams stock,
His clear clothed faithful lilies.
In my Love I alone delyght,
Which makes me so joyful:
And I am lovely in his sight,
That feeds among the faithful.
THou art fayer my friend, pleasant and bewtifull as Jerusalem. Fearful as a
standerd of an host set in ray. The Text.
Turn away thine iyes from me, for they have set me on fire. Thine hears are
like a flock of goats, which appear from Gileal. Thy teeth are like a flock
of sheep, which cum up from the washing place having every one twins, and
none barayn amongst them. Thy chekes are like to a pyece of Pomegranade,
besides thy fillet.

The Argument.
When the Spouse has showed that Christ is goen down into his Church which
is his gardeyne, (not that she at any time lacked him, for she had him even
wha^ she sought him, but she felt him not: and therefore she says he went down
into her, because he than help her) and towlde also that he cummeth to the
spice beds, the books of holy scripture, always present there to give to all
those the fruits of everlasting life, that sincerely study, and earnestly
accomplysshe the things taught them therein: And that beside his presence in
her and in the scriptures, he fedeth among the lilies, those are the true and
faithful beleuers: not that he eats them, but rather they him, in perfectly
beleuyng in him: and how she only delyteth in him and he in her: Christ
allowyng her zeal prayseth her. And where as before she had a carnal iye, and
false chain of hipocritical wurkes about her fayer neck, her judgment is now
so vpryghte, and her charitable deades so good and perfect, that he delyted
therewith, syngeth.

Christ to his Spouse. xlvii.
FVll fayer art thou my friend, And frendely there withal:
For why thy good will does extend,
To all that on thee call.
Fayer, fayrer than the gem, Thou art, and do appear,
Like the heavenly Jerusalem,
Which is to God so dear.
And like an army dight, So dreadful art thou alse:
Which with my wurde do put to flight,
Al doctrines that be false.
Thou hold forth my cross, that bluddy standard strong:
And say men's wurkes thereto are moss,
And do my death great wrong.
Thy judgment in my wurd, Is paysed so vpryght,
That in my mind J am still sturde
In thee to have delyght.
Turn back from me thine iyes, For they have made me proud*
J mean thine earnest exercise
Jn judgment well allowed.
Thy hears, that is to say, thy scripture grounded notes,
Jn lyuelynes to dure always,
Are like aflocke of Goats.
Are like a flock of goats, from Gileal clypped round:
For all thy truths and scripture notes,
Are in the Bible found.
Thy teeth, thy reasons strong, that do so well agree:
Are like unto the flocks of sheep
That scarce can numbered be.
Which clean cum up along, Out from the washyng place.
Thine arguments that are so strong
Jn scripture take their grace.
Of wh^che each has within, The truth and scripture ground:
Like flocks where each beast has a twin,
And none is barayn found.
Like to the Pomegarnarde, That cut in twain, is read:
So all thy wurkes, thy chekes, outward
Do shine, and none are dead.
Besides thy fyllet fine, My wurkes that can not fail:
Which garnysh al good wurkes of thine,
Which else could not avail.
The text.
THere are three score Queen's, and fowerscore Concubines, with Damsels
innumerable. One is my dove, one is my perfect one: she is the elect of her
mother, and dear unto her that bare her. The daughters saw her, and said she
was most blessed: the queen's also and Concubines praised her.

The Argument.
Christ being highly pleased with his Spouses iyes and hears, which she
lacked at the first, prayseth her now. But above all his Churches, both
Queen's, which are the perfectest: concubines, that are not throwly perfect:
and damsels which yet are young in faith: with all the rest, he prayseth one,
which is the primative church of his Apostles, calling her his Dove, and
perfect one, to allure the Yonglinges to ensue her steps, swetely syngyng to
them.

Christ to his Spouse. xlviii.
According to the rates, of gifts of godly grace.
Within my church there are estates, whereof no one is base.
Of which three score are Queen's, that have got perfectnes,
And there be fowerscore concubines, with damsels numbreles.
But all the rest above, in one do J delyght*
One through my love is made my dove, and perfect in my sight.
One is the chyef elect, unto her mother dear,
To all that are of Abrams sect, who truly did her bear.
The daughters of Sion, those faithful did her see,
And preached frankly every one that most blessed was she.
The Queen's did praise her eke, and shall so do always,
The Concubines also did speak, of her, excedyng praise.
wHat one is she that looks forth as the morning, fayer as the Moon, elect as
ye Sun, The text.
and terrible as a banner?

The argument.
When Christ has magnified his Spouse with no little co^mendacion, yet is he
not satisfied: but that the yonglynges may like her the better, proceeds
farther, comparyng her to the morning, to the sun, to the moon, and to a
banner: and as it were wundryng at her excellency, sings.

Christ to his Spouse. xlix.
What one is she so like the morrow bright,
Which yet does lack the fulness of my light,
Which she hereafter shall receive
In glory?
Who like the Moon is pleasant to the sight,
My Moon I mean, my truth that shynes by night.
Which does of me her light receive,
Jn glory?
Yea what is she so like the Sun elect:
Like me the Sun, chief of the chosen sect,
Which shine above with my father,
Jn glory?
Yea what is she so dreadful to behold,
Which on my wurd does bear her self so bold,
Still standing styffe like a banner,
Jn glory?
I Am cum down into the Nutgardeyn, to se the plants that grow by the ryuers
side: The Text.
to see if the vineyard bud, or if the Pomegranades were floured.

The Argument.
When Christ has wundred at the excellency of his spouse and compared her to
the morning, because of the lack of perfect glory which she can not attain
so long as she is subject to the frail body: and to the Moon that is the
truth which takes light of him, as the moon does of the sun, which as it
shyneth in the dark, so does the Church in adversity and persecucion: and
to the Sun, that is himself the Sun of righteousness, calling her elect
as himself, the chief and principal elect of his father: and last of all to a
banner, for her terriblenes in fraying her adversaries: when he has thus
wunderyngly praised her, he cummeth down into her to se if his vines bud, and
pomegrates flower, whether his elect have a lively iustifiyng faith, which
wurketh by love, that if they be barayn he may curse them as he did the
fruteles fygtree. Math. xx. and when they be wydered to cast them out of his
gardayne. And being now in his Nutgardeyn, he declares why he cummeth,
singyng.

Christ to his Spouse. l.
TO my Nutgardayn free,
Whom tribulacions hyde:
J am cum the saplynges for to see,
Which grow by the ryuers side.
To see if that the vine,
The faith that I think so good,
With the wurkes and fruits of love divine,
Begin thoroughly to bud.
To see if that the plants,
Of fine Pomegranates yield:
Pleasant fruits, which every tree that wantes
Shall be cast forth from my fyelde.
I knew it not. The Text


The Argument.
When Christ has told his Spouse that he is descended into her to see the
fruits of her faithful people, she ignorant before hearing now his voice,
confesses her ignorance, acknowlagyng her imperfeccion. And not withstandyng
the great praises wherewith her Beloved magnified her, she presumes not: but
humbly acknowlegyng her estate confesses her ignorance: syngyng.

The Spouse to her Beloved. li.
I Knew not J, Thou wast so ny,
Till by thy wurd so sweet,
Thou made me know, Thou wast cum low,
And lovely dydst me great.
J was I grant, Blind ignorant.
And knew nothing at all:
Through flesh or blood, That could do good,
Before thou did me call.
Thy wurd away, My wit I say
Knew no whyt of thy will:
J knew not why, Thou came so nigh,
With fruit thy self to fill.
But when thy voice. (That does rejoice
All faithful that it hear)
Sounded so shrill, J knew thy will,
And what thou made there.
MY soul appointed me to draw in the chariots of Aminadif. The text.


The Argument.
THe Church having before the Younglynges confessed her ignorance, and
declared that without the wurde of God no man can be certified of his will, and
doubtyng now least they yet waueryng for want of knowledge, and ouercharged
with the heavy burden of the body, flesh, and sin, should dispayer of Gods
favor* because their off^nces are so great that they be neither able to hear
them, nor to recompense the^ with the best wurkes they can devise: and also
because they lack the wurkes which Christ came to see in his gardeyne: And to
show that it is Christ's will that all which are of his Church ought to bear
one an others burdeyne, she syngeth to the Younglynges.

The Spouse to the Younlinges. lii.
FEar not ye young though heavy be your yoke,
Your yoke of sin that causes you to fear:
For Christ my soul, which lately to me spoke,
Will that J healpe the burdens byg to bear,
Of Aminadif.
Aminadif, my wyllyng people be,
Such as gladly Gods wurd both do and hear:
Whose wheles to draw my soul appointed me:
Christ will J shall the burdens help to bear
Of Aminadif.
Turn again, turn again (O thou perfect one) turn again, turn again,
The Text.
that we may behold thee.

THe Younglynges having heard the Churches great consolacion, and seeing what
pains she takes for their sake in fasting and prayers, to relieve them of
their heavy burden, call her now back again to preach: that they may
behold and see, as well the precious gifts of God within her, as the
tribulacions they see upon her, syngyng as follows.

The Younglynges to the Spouse. liii.
Pain not thy self so sore, Our burdens byg to bear,
But that as we have done before, We may thy prechi^g hear:
Cum again, cum again.
Return thou perfect one, Thou plentiful in peace,
That we may se thy gyfts each one: For our faint faythes encrece
Cum again, cum again.
The Text.
What would ye see in the Sulamite, which is like to a cumpanie of pitched
te^tes?

The Argument.
When the Younglynges which judge not by the outewarde wurkes of fasting,
praying, and almose deeds, with other rites and ceremonies which the wicked
may do under hypocrisy with as goodly a face and show as the most faithful,
have called again the church, to vewe her as well within as without: Christ
to the intent that his faithful be not deceived, teaches how and by what
marks to know his church, singyng to the young.

Christ to the Younglynges. liiii.
YE young that cast again, My spouse, my chyef delight,
What is the cause that ye so feign
Would see the Sulamite?
Jn her what would ye see, What thing would ye behold?
She is not as ye think she be
Gaye clad in sylke and gold.
But simple to the sight in her are pitched tents,
With soldiers full armed to fight
Against all false intentes.
Jf this sight may ye please, which pleases me alone,
Ye may behold her at your ease,
And vewe her gifts each one.
Here ends the syxte Chapter.
The seventh Chapter.
O How pleasant are thy treadynges with thy shoes, thou princes daughter? Thy
thighs are like a fayer jewel which is wrought by a cunning wurke master.
Thy nauel is like a round goblet, which never is without drink. Thy woumb is
like an heap of wheat that is set about with roses. Thy two breasts are like
two twins of young Roes. Thy neck is as it were a tower of yuory: thy iyes are
like the water poles yt are in Hesebon, beside the port of Bathrabim: thy nose
is like the tower of Libanus, which looks toward Damascus. That head that
stands upon the, is like Carmel, and the hear of thy head is like purple, and
like a king going forth with his guard about him. O how fayer and lovely art
thou my dearlyng in pleasures? Thy stature is like a Palmetree, and thy breasts
like the grapes. I said: I will clyme up into the palmtre, and take hold of his
hye branches. Thy breasts also shall be as the vineclusters, the smell of thy
nostrels like the smell of apples, and thy jaws like the best wine. Which
goes strayt unto my Beloved, and brasteth out by the lyppes of the Ancient
elders. There will I turn me unto my Love, and he shall turn him unto me.

O come on my love, we will go forth in to the field, and take our lodgeyng
in the villages. In the morning will we go see the vineyarde: we will see if
the vine be sprung forth, if the grapes be growe^, and if the pomegranades be
shot out: There will I give thee my breasts: the Mandragoras give their sweet
smell: and beside our doors are all manner of pleasant fruits, both new and
old which I have kept for thee, O my Beloved.

The seventh Chapter.
The text.
HOw pleasant are thy treadynges in thy shoes, O thou princes daughter? The
cumpas of thy thighs are like a goodly jewel which is wrought by the hands
of a cunning wurkman. Thy nauel is like a round goblet which never is without
drink.

Thy belly is like an heap of wheat set about with lillies. Thy two breasts
are like two twins of young Roes. Thy neck is as it were a tower of yuory.
Thine iyes are like the water poles that are in Hesebon, beside the port of
Bathrabim. Thy face is like the tower of Libanus, which looks toward
Damascus. Thy head is like Carmell, and thy hears like a king going forth with
his guard about him.

The Argument.
Christ having taught the Younglynges to know the true Spouse by her pitched
tents, which as it is declared before, are the books of scripture, out of
which, she keeps war against the enemies of the truth: begins to praise
her afresh, syngyng.

Christ to his Spouse. lv.
THou that art my dawhter, who am the prince of peace,
Because thou preachest peace of conscience in my blood
How pleasant are thy steps which swiftly still increace
To show my gospel every where? Jn shoes both strong and good,
For preachers to wear.
The cumpas of thy thyghes, thy power for to beget
And to engendre such as to my truth must stycke,
Because it still bring the forth, withouten stop or let,
Js like an endless lynked chain, Of Gods own hand made trick
Always to remain.
Thy Nauyl round, that is the holy Bible book,
Through which thy young do suck the milk of food divine:
Js always full for all that can my doctrine broke,
Like to a mazar broad in brynke, Which never wants wine,
For them that would drink.
Thy Belly byg and heart, thy affeccions and thy thought
Full of Gods holy wurd that fine and deyntie meat,
Which nurisheth the soul, by which (when thou will ought)
Thou searchest first what Gods will is, Js like an heap of wheat,
Beset with Lillies.
Thy breasts, thy ready help to comfort them that need,
Aboundyng still, are like ash goats double twin.
Thy neck, thy faith is like an yuory tower in deed,
For it is perfect, strong, and clear, Without and eke within,
As it does appear.
Thine iyes, thine vpryght judgments in my wurd so brim,
Still just and full, are like the pooles in Hesebon,
Of waters clear, beside the port of Bathrabim:
For where the people gathered are, Thou truth to every one
Do justly declare.
Thy face, thy wurkes, by which all people do thee know,
For which thou through my blud, do hope to have reward,
Surmountyng in their heygth man's wurkes that lie below,
Are like the tower of Libanus That always has regard
Toward Damascus.
Thy head, J Christ my self, a circumcised lamb,
Am like to Carmell ground, both fertile, free and hard,
Thy hears also, the truths wherewith J thee emflambe,
Are purple coulored like a king That goes forth with his guard,
Him inuironyng.
The Text
O How fayer and lovely art thou my Darling in plesures? Thy stature is like a
Palm tree. I said: I will clyme the palmtre, and take hold of the hye branches.
Thy breasts also shall be like the vine clusters, the smell of thy nostrels like
the smell of apuls. Thy throat shall be like the best wine, mete for my beloved to
drink, with his lyppes, and to chewe with his teeth.

The Argument.
Christ having praised his Spouse particulerly, beginning at her feet and
going upward to her head, where as he was wunt to begin at the head, and thence
to go dounwarde: proceeds as he was wunt, with most earnest affeccion syngyng.

Christ to his Spouse. lvi.
OH how fayer, how fayer art thou my joy?
How lovely my Love, how lovely art thou alse:
Oh my spouse how wanton and how coy
Thou art in delites when I do thee enhalse.
O my Darlyng.
Like thou art in stature to the tree,
Of Palms, for no wayght can let thee for to grow:
And thy breasts are like as seems me,
To clusters of grapes, that ripe hang down below,
O my Darlyng*
Clyme will J the Palm tree then J said,
And will by the fruits and branches hye take hold:
J my self (my church) will be thine aid,
And sit thee upon, to make thy younglinges bold,
O my Darlyng.
There will I thy dugges so fruitful make,
That they shall be like the clusters of the vine:
And the smell that thou shall of me take,
Shall reike fro the nose like sent of appuls fine,
O my Darlyng.
Make will J thy throat, that is thy voice
So moist with the must of truth my chefest wine,
That my friend, my bishop shall have choice
Of doctrine to preach out of those truths of thine,
O my Darlyng.
There shall he have meat and drink at will,
To chew with his teeth and lyps: there shall he have
Mysteries, whereon to use him still.
Of the shall he learn himself and more to save,
O my Darlyng.
I Am the Spouse of my Beloved: and he does turn him unto me. The text.


The argument.
AFter that Christ has clymed up into his church, a very Palm tree, and
made her abundant in all good gifts of grace, so that her nose smells like
apples, which signify gifts of the holy ghost, which she gives unto other
by preaching and laying on hands, and by ministryng to them the holy
sacraments: and has moystned her mouth and throat with the wine of his holy
wurd, she by and by in the hearing of the Younglynges, preaches: in wurdes but
a small sermon, but in sense full of much good matter, syngyng.

The Spouse to the Younglynges lvii.
AL worldly things I utterly reject:
All means of men to health I do detest:
Jn Christ alone, my spouse, my Love elect,
I rest in rest, in him in whom is rest
For all that are weary.
Whole his I am both body, soul, and life,
He is my Love, my savior, and my health:
And he is pleased with me, as with his wife,
To whom he turns (ye faithful) for your wealth,
Us all to make merry.
CUm my Beloved, let us go forth into the field, and let us lodge together in
the villages. The text.
In the morning we will rise, and go se if the vines be flowred, and whether
the Pomegranades be shot forth. There will I pour out all my love upon thee.

When the Church has well instructed the younglynges and has still an earnest
desire to preach, she consydereth that abroad in the world, which here is
called a fyelde and country, there are many that know not Christ, which
nevertheless thorough good instruccion, would soon becum good Christians:
wherefore she has a desire to go preach to them. But because she knows that
all her endeuoures can profit nothing without Christ himself be present, and
help with the secret calling of his grace and spirit, she desires him to
go with her, and declares what she would have him to do there, syngyng.

The Spouse to her Beloved. lviii.
NOw that my young sufficiently are taught,
Cum my Beloved, assist me with thy power:
And to the fyelde where yet the men know naught
Of thee nor thine, together let us walk.
that they bedewed with grace thy pleasant shower,
May cum to thee, and hearken to my talk.
And in the towns and villages so brute,
Jn which no wurde nor mention is of thee,
Let us two lodge together, and get fruit
Which may hereafter glorify thy name:
And of thy chuche the perfect members be,
By knowing truth, and wurkyng of the same.
When this is done, than early will we rise,
And go to see if our old vineyardes bud,
To see if that our young do exercise
Their fruitful faith, and gifts of godly grace,
Whether their deeds and doctrine both be good,
Or if the wedes, or foxes them disgrace.
To see also if our Pomegranades sprede,
Such witnesses as will their lives bestow,
Thy truth to auaunce: for there lo will J shede
My Love all whole that J to thee do bear:
There will J spend the talentes that J owe,
To thee my Love, to bring them out of fear.
The Text.
THe mandrages do smell: and within our doors are all manner fruits. Both old and
new o my Beloved, I have kept for thee.

The Argument.
AFter that Christ at his Spouses request, has been with her in the field,
and lodged with her in the vyllages, and that so long that they have there
wunne a new company to the belyef of the gospel: he as she desired him, cummeth
with her now to see the vines and pomegranades, whether they be fruitful or
no. And when the Church has well beheld them, she smells the Mandrags, that
is the doctrine and preaching of the faithful, and delyted therewith, shows
Christ thereof, syngyng.

The Spouse to her Beloved. lix.
THe Mandrages yield their smell of godly life,
And doctrine pure, that brings unto rest
Unquiet minds, uncertain, still at strife,
Through want of wurkes, wherein they put their trust:
Of these they learn that of their deeds the best,
Are insufficient for to make them just.
They learn of these that only of Christ they must
Be ryghteous made, through merit of his Cross:
And that by faith they must receive must
Of ryghteousnes, through trust in Christ's blood.
This stylleth soon the mind that sins do toss.
Which sent (O Christ) cummeth from our Mandrages good.
Within our doors, our custody most sure,
Are fruits, the which the faithful have brought forth,
Of every kind of life and doctrine pure,
Both of the new and of the scriptures old
Which J have kept for thee to take in wurth,
O Christ my Love, beloved a thousand fold.
The eight Chapter.
O That I might find the with out, and kiss thee, whom I love as my brother,
which sukt my mothers breasts: and that thou shall not be despised I will lead
the and bring the into my mothers house: that thou might teach me, and that
I might give thee to drink of spiced wine, and of the sweet sap of my
pomgranates. His left hand shall be under my head and his right hand shall
embrace me. I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, that ye wake not up my
love, nor touch her, till she be content her self. What is she this, that
comes up from wyldernes, and leans upon her love? I waked thee up among the
apple trees, where thy mother conceived thee, where thy mother (I say)
brought thee into the world. O set me as a seal upon thine heart, and as a
seal upon thine arm: for love is mighty as the death and gelousie as the
hell. Her coals are of fire: and a very flambe of the Lord: so that many
waters are not able to quench love, nether may the streams droune it. Yea if
a man would give all the good of his house for love, he should count it
nothing. Our sister is but young, and has no breasts: what shall we do for our
sister when she shall be spoken for? If she be a wall, we shall buyld a silver
bulwark thereupon: if she be an open door, we shall fasten her with borders of
Cedre tree. I am a wall, and my breasts like towers, than was I as one that
has found favor in his sight. Solomon has a vineyarde at Baal Hamon, and
this vineyarde delivered he unto the kepers, that every one for the fruit
thereof should give him a thousand pieces of silver. My vineyard is in my sight:
thou (O Solomon) must have a thousand, and the kepers two hundred with the
fruit. Thou that dwell in the gardens, O let me hear thy voice, that my
companions may hearken to the same. O get thee away my love, and be as a roe
or young heart upon the sweet smellyng mountains.

The eight Chapter.
O That I once might find thee without, and kiss thee, The text.
whom I love as my brother, which sukt my mothers breasts: and that none
might despise us. I will lead the and bring the, into my mothers house. There
thou shall teach me: And I will give thee to drink of spiced wine, and of the
sweet sap of my Pomegranades.

The argument.
While the perfect Spouse takes her pleasure with her Beloved, gatheryng the
fruits of the old and new testament, to preach Christ's humanity, and the
wurkes which he wrought in the same, the younglynges which she left in the
fyeldes and villages (which may well betoken the sects of the Philosophers,
Phariseis, Saduccis, and al other like which sought for ryghteousnes in their
wisdom and deeds) seeing the purity of the vineyard, and smellyng the savor
of the Mandragoras, an heavy smell to them, partly because it condemns their
rightousnes, and partly because it makes them lament their imperfeccion,
begin to long for the true ryghteousnes, and salvation: which because they
can have by none other mean than by Christ, they seek him, and are therefore
mocked, and persecuted of those sects, of which they were before, which is
their mothers house, whose great blyndnes they (being now his Spouse) pitiyng,
wysh for to find him abroad, and to bring him to them, syngyng.

The Spouse to Christ. lx.
O That I once might have the hap to find
Thee (O my Love) abroad in every place:
That every man of every sort and kind
Might trust in thee, and eke thy wurde embrace.
Thus, thus abroad, would God I might thee mete,
To receive of thee, the kiss of peace and rest:
Whom I in heart, love as my brother sweet,
Which sumtyme sucked with me my mothers breast.
O that thou Christ my Spouse would bring to pass
That I might mete and kiss thee in this wise
And that the world now ignorant alas,
Might us behold, and neythre of us despise.
Jn the meanewhyle J will thee lead my love,
And bring thy name into my mothers house:
That there thou Lord may teach me from above,
And draw by grace my mother to thy spouse.
That J may chere thee there with spiced wine
Of doctrine pure, well poudred with thy word:
And with the juice of sweet Pomegranades fine,
The blud of martirs shead with fire and swoorde.
The Text
HIs left hand is under my head, and his right hand shall embrace me.

The Argument.
CHrist seeing his Younglynges so earnestly set to receive him, that they promys
to ieoberd their life for the profession of his name, cummeth to them, and
geuyng them his kiss of peace, takes them to his Spouse: and than as he did
to the other Churches before, he cu^meth to her with his dew and night drops,
to prove and try her: wherefore she being sore afflicted of her mothers
household, that such as are weak fall not from her, declares that Christ has
not forsaken her but has purposely brought that cross upon her, and that at
length she shall have the victory of all her adversaries, and persecutours,
syngyng.

The Spouse to the Younglynges lxi.
Under my head the chief men of my flock,
That to the truth must stycke still vnafrayed,
Of Christ my Spouse, my anchor, and my rock,
The left hand of adversity is laid.
Yet for all that, nothing can me deface,
Though for a time harm do prevail through hate:
For why at length Christ's right hand shall embrace
My body whole, with prosperous estate.
I Charge ye O ye Daughters of Jerusalem, The text.
that ye wake not up my love, nor touch her till she be content herself.

The Argument.
When Christ has tried his Spouse with persecucion, and found her constant,
he receives her into his bed of peace, quietness, and rest, geuyng chaurge to
the Daughters of Jerusalem, as many as entende to obtain favor at his hand,
that they trouble her not with vain questions false opinions, supersticious
tradicions, idle and dum ceremonies, new constitucions, wicked decrees, nor
ungodly laws: but to suffer her sleep in the faith and quietness of
conscience that she has received of him already, til she wake her self:
either through his instigacion to auaunce his glory, or by sum charitable
mocion to healpe her neighbors: syngyng as follows.

Christ to the whole world.
O O ye daughters of Jerusalem,
All such as list my voice to understand:
Mark what J say to you, and to all them
That hope to have salvation at my hand,
Concerning my faithful.
She does believe the scriptures every jot,
With all the truths that therein are contaynde:
My sacraments also she knows by rote,
With gifts of grace that are by them attaynde
Of all that are faithful.
She does believe the father omnipotent,
To have created the earth, and heavens hie:
From whom the wurde into the world was sent
And took flesh of the virgin pure Marie
A woman most faithful.
And in that flesh was hanged on the tree,
Whereon he shed his blud to reconcile
His fathers wrath, to which all subject be
That know not Christ, but do his death defyle,
Remaynyng unfaithful.
Who on the Cross by death made recompense,
For all the sins of all that in him trust:
From whom he freely pourged all offense,
And in Gods sight through faith alone made just,
All them that are faithful.
He rose again, she believes, with all the rest
Of tharticles that in the scripture be:
Through which belief she has attained rest
Of conscience, and slepeth now in me.
Through hope very joyful.
J charge you than on pain to lose the life
Which dureth ever in heaven joys above,
Ye feign no faith, nor stir up any strife,
Whereby to wake from rest my quiet love,
Through hope very joyful.
But let her lie till by her own accord
She wake herself, compelled by the zeal
She has to you, to lead you to the Lord,
Who can alone the souls sore wounded heal,
Of all that are faithful.
VUhat is she that cummeth up from the wyldrenes, and leans upon her Love?

The Argument.
While the Church is at rest in Christ, she waxes daily more and more
notable through her good life and Godly conversation: which the perfect
Spouse woundryng at, syngeth.

The perfect Spouse to Christ. lxiii.
WHat may she be that does ascend,
Out from the desert place,
Of worldly folk that would not bend
Them selves to call for grace?
What is she that ascends hye,
Leanyng upon her love:
That trusts whole in Christ's mercy
Through grace sent from above?
I Waked thee up among the apple trees where thy mother conceived thee, The Text
where thy mother brought thee into the world.

The argument.
Christ makes answer, declaryng what she is, where and how he round her:
and declaryng what he did for his Spouse, does sing as follows.

Christ to the Church. lxviii
Among the apple trees, J waked thee up my spouse,
Where as thou sleptest in sin, in sin original,
Which Eua, by the fruit she plukt fro the apple bows,
Brought on her whole posterity,
Which are condemned al,
For their parents iniquity,
And for their own unright.
Under this apple tree, through which thou wast condemnde,
Jn which condemned state thy mother brought thee forth,
J waked thee: for I, my life and all contemnde,
Upon the tree did sheade my blood,
Which all that take in wurth
Are quit from sin, and new made good
In God my fathers sight.
Under this apple tree, the sweet tree of my cross,
So soon as thou dydst sit, and therein put thy trust,
I waked thee from sin, I paid thy parents loss:
And got thy former state again,
Which Eua by her lust
Had lost: and did mankind constrayne
To sleep in sin and death.
Among these apple trees, both bitter, sweet, and sower,
The apple tree of death, by which mankind was lost,
And tree of life, which I did purchase by my power,
I waked thee up to life and wealth,
Because I saw the tossed
With waves of woe: and gave the health
Against thy sin and death.
O Set me as a seal upon thy heart, and as a signet upon thine arm: The text.
for love is myghtie as death, and gelousie as hell. Her coals are of fire and a
very flame of the Lord. Many waters are not able to quench Love, neither may
the streams droune it: yea if a man would give all the goods of his house for
love, he should count it nothing.

The Argument.
When Christ has told his Spouse how he ascended for her sake, the apple
tree of the cross, making thereon full satisfaccion to his father for the
sins of al mankind by the sheadyng of his most precious blood, wakyng her up,
from the deadly sleep, which she slept under the apple tree of original sin
and condemnacion, under which her mother brought her forth: He wyllyng to have
her myndeful of his benefits byddeth her set him as a seal upon her heart,
that is to scale up all her affeccions and thoughts, with the remembrance of
his blessed passion, and by the same to seal out al other devices to obtayn
salvation: and to set him as a signet upon her arm, not to presume to do
ought by her own wit, and strength, but to do in all things as his wurd
teaches: All this he desires her to do for the love sake which he bears to
her, which is strong as death or hell, yea and stronger: For the strength of
his love overcam the strength of both. Wherefore for this his great love, he
would have his spouse thankful, and show him love again: The properties
whereof he declares, syngyng.

Christ to his Spouse. lxv.
O Set me as a seal upon thine heart,
Remember me always in all thy thought:
Out of thy mind (my spouse) let not depart,
The wurthye wurkes which J have for thee wrought.
Remember how that I alone did clyme
The tree of death, to bring thee unto life:
And shed thereon my blud to cleanse the crime,
For which the serpent first began his strife.
Whose might my power does hold from doing harm
To thee, or them that in my merits trust:
O let therefore in me thy feeble arm
With all thy strength continually be trust.
Upon thine arm o set me as a seal,
And as a bracelet bind me all along:
For love as death, and eke the gelous zeal
J bear to thee, as hell is myghtie strong.
For which my love J naught require again
But thankfulness, that may my mercy move:
For all my zeal, my life, my death, my pain,
Naught J require save only love for love.
Whose coals are fyerye, and a very flame
Sent of the Lord: true love is such a fire,
That many waters can not quench the same,
No troubles can a faithful lover tyer.
Ne may the streams of persecucion drounde
This earnest love: yea if a man would give
For love all goods, that in his house are found,
He would them all count nothing J believe.
This love therefore that is so strong and sure,
Bear thou again to me that first began:
So shall my love and zeal for aye endure,
With thee and thine, to further what J can.
WE have a little sister, which as yet has no breasts. What shall we do to
our Sister, when we shall speak to her.

The Argument.
When Christ has finished his song, his Spouse according as he desired,
sets him as a seal at her heart, and as a bracelet about her arm: and than
remembryng he^ sister whom she left when she came to Christ, and desirous
through her preaching to bring her to Christ, does ask of Christ and his
perfect friends what she shall do, singyng.

The Spouse to Christ. lxvi.
WE have a sister young and small,
Whom J did leave behind.
Within the place where ye did call
Me from my mother blind.
She is so young in Christ's truth
That yet she has no teates:
She wants breasts to feed her youth.
With sound and perfect meats.
To our sister therefore so weak,
What shall we do, say you:
When we to her the wurdes shall speak
Of Christ's gospel true?
J in my heart desyer right sore
My sister rude to teach:
What must we do to her therefore,
When we begin to preach?
The Text.
IF she be a wall, we will build a silver bulwark thereupon: if she be an open
door, we will fasten her with borders of Cedre.

The Argument.
Christ seeing the carefulnes of his Spouse for her young sister, teaches what
must be done to her, saying: If she be a^al, that is as sum take it elect, and
yet not in the faith: and as other sum take it, instructed in the faith, but
yet not perfect, we will build upon her a silver bulwark, that is according
to eleccion a strong and valiant faith: and according to faith, the gifts of
the holy ghost, as knowledge, utterance, power to wurke miracles. etc. which
both agree well to the matter, but the last is most nere, and proper. But if
she be an open door, that is in state of grace, apt to receive any kind of
doctrine, we will garnishe or fasten her with borders of cedre tree, with good
doctrine, good books, good, constant and perfect preachers, which shall keep
her close from error. Thus says Christ she must be done by, singyng to his
spouse as follows.

The Beloved to his Spouse. lxvii.
IF that thy sister be a wall,
Upon the same than build we shall
A bulwark of silver,
If that she be an open door,
We will her fasten close before
With borders of Ceder.
I Am a wall, and my breasts like towers. The text.
Than was I as one that has found favor in his sight.

The argument.
THe Younglynges hearing what Christ said, answer that they are a wall,
strong, constant, and able to keep out errors, and wrong opinions: and being
made his Spouse, says she has breasts like towers, well furnyshed with
vytayles of good doctrine to succor and help them that need. For the which
properties they having found favor in the sight of God, declare all to their
sister, syngyng.

The Younglynges to the Spouse. lxviii.
A Wall am I, Strong, thycke, and hye,
Jn truth J bear me bold:
And with the same, Myself I frame
All errors to outholde.
Also my breasts, where succor restes,
Are like to towers strong,
Which vitayled are, For to keep war,
With all that would them wrong.
Because J was A wall, and as
The towers had breasts of might
Sweet peace J found, And do abound
With favor in Gods sight.
The text.
Solomon had a vineyard at Baalhamon, and this vineyarde let he out to kepers,
that every one for the fruicte thereof should give him a thousand pieces of
silver. My vineyarde is in my sight. And to thee O Solomon I will pay a
thousand, and two hundred to the kepers with the fruit.

The argument.
Christ having by faith coupled all his Churches together, and made them all
one vineyard, calls to mind the vineyarde which King Solomon had at
Baalhamon, a place nere Jerusalem: which vineyarde he let out to hyer,
receyuyng of every keeper, a thousand pieces of silver for the fruicte. This
story Christ counts to his Spouse, that she may know how much he loves
her better than Solomon did his, in that he will keep her him self: And give
to Solomon, that is every peaceful person, an inestimable reward: and to the
kepers, that are his bishops, two hundred and the fruit. (O happy kepers
that shall be so rewarded.) This promis makes he to his Spouse, syngyng.

Christ to his Spouse. lxix.
OF all the gydes that Jsrael ever had,
Jn wit, in wealth, in peace, prince Solomon
The chyefest King, was not a little glad
Of a vineyard he had at Baalhamon.
Which vineyard though it pleased his desyer,
Yet at the length he let it forth to hyer
To kepers such, who yearly every one
Should for such fruit as they took thence away,
Of silver good a thousand pieces pay.
Thus did this king with his beloved vine:
But J contrary have so great delyght,
That J myself this vineyard of mine
My church I mean, will keep still in my sight:
And unto thee O solomon J give,
A thousand pieces for thy good believe:
Eke to them all that keep my vine vpryght
J give two hundred, and the fruit to boot
Of life eterne, which spryngeth from the root.
If Solomon might justly well requier
A thousand for his vineyarde let to hyer,
How much than is my church now bound to me,
Who do both pay, and also ouersee?
THou that dwell in the gardeyns, O let me hear thy voice, The Text.
that my Companions may hearken: o the same.

The Argument.
When Christ has styrred up his Church to yield him thanks for his
beneficial diligence toward her, he stirs her up to preach, that his
fellows, which are false christians, may hear her true preaching, that being
confounded therewith, they may convert and becum true christians in deed,
syngyng to her as follows.

Christ to his Spouse. lxx.
THou my spouse that do excel
Jn faith all folk, and do now dwell
Jn scripture gardeyns which do smell
Most strong in sent:
Like to a trumpe exalt thy voice,
With preaching truth make such a noise,
That J may hear it, and rejoice,
That I thee sent.
Preach out my wurde so loud and hye,
That they which of my company
Do boast themselves, but yet they lie,
And loath my name:
May hear thy voice, and know how far
They are from me, and how they err
From truth: to which thou shalt prefer
Them, by the same.
That it may cum to pass at length,
That all men doubtyng in their strength
May to my mercy them submit:
And so be fit,
To be engraft in thee my stock,
That all may be one faithful flock,
With shepherdes thereof other none,
But only one.
The text.
O Get the away my Love, and be as a young Roe or an Heart, upon the sweet
smellyng mountains.

The argument.
THe Church commanded of Christ to preach, willingly obeys. But because
she knows her preaching can take none effect without his help, she desires
him to depart from this world to heaven, and there to make intercession
between God the father and her, and from thence to help her in all her
affayers: She desires him also to be as a Roe or heart upon the sweet smelling
mountains, that is, to be always quick ready and swyft, in his Scriptures,
that they may take effect when she preaches them. This she desires of him,
syngyng as follows.

The Spouse to Christ. lxxi.
TO preach thy wurde thy fellows for to win,
Such fellows false as Christen folk them feign,
Lo pressed I am: and gladly do begin,
With preaching truth, to thee them to attain.
But since J know my labor shall be vain
Except thy help be present therwithall,
Compeld therefore by force, lo J am feign
To flee to thee, for thy chief aid to call.
Wherefore O Christ, whom ever love I shall,
Avoid from earth to heaven, and remain
On Gods right hand, head father of us all:
And there of him all grace for us obtain.
And send from thence thy sprite that may constrayne
All folk through faith, to gather to thy fold:
That hypocrites their folly may refrain,
And be in deed, the same that seem they would.
And when that J such secrets shall unfold
As darkly hyd, the scriptures do contain,
That in the hearts of all they may take hold,
And to thy truth all unbelievers gain,
Like to a Roe or heart take thou the pain
Upon the mountains of thy wurde to dwell:
And through thy power the hearts of all to train
Unto thy truth, that shall thy mountains smell.
So shall my voice all kind of errors quel,
So shall all men resort to thee amayne:
So sin shall synke, so shall the power of hell,
We ryd therfrom through faith in thee, be slain.
So in the church for aye, thou Lord shall rain,
All Death shall dye through faith of styngles sin:
And we enjoy that blisfull state again
Which bought by thee, we were created in.
FINIS.
Blessyng, honor, glory, and power,
Be unto God, for ever and ever.
AMEN.
The interpretacion of the Hebrew wurdes.
AMand, signifies Truth. Ammadaf, signifies People well willing, or under
tribute.
B
Bather, Division, Pride, Trouble. Bathrabim, Gatheryng to gether. Baal hamon,
Full of people.
C
Carmel, A circumcised Lamb.
D
Damascus, A field of blud.
E
Engaddi, The iye or fountain of a Kyd.
G
Gileal, An heap of witness.
H
Hermon, Cursyng or Accursednes. Hesebon, is the name of a watrie ground.
L
Libanus, Beauty or Clerenes.
S
Solomon, Peaceful, or a quiet person. Sculamite, A peaceful or glorious
woman. Sanir, the name of Hermon, as the Amorites call it.
Finis.
In the first side of the fowertenth lefe, in the sixte and seventh line, for
fowertenth, read seuententh. Any other great fautes it has not, except lettre
for lettre, which every one shall be as able to correct as to find, and
therefore not needful to have be noted here.

MATTHEW. X. BE WISE AS SERPENTS, AND JNNOCENT AS DOVES.

Imprinted at London by William Baldwin, servant with Edward Whitchurche.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


