To my Christian friend, ^. F. comfort in Christ during this life, and glory
with Christ in the life to come.
WHen I lay at Pinchfield (where I had more leisure and fewer Books than I
could have wished, I composed this Selah or Collection of those verses in the
book of Psalms Which the Holy Ghost maks remarkable with this word of
attention Selah. Which verses I have set together not according to the order
of the psalms from whence they be taken, but according to the correspo^dency
of matter which the verses themselves contein, considered with verses
adioiyning. Out of which, I sometimes take so much as may make the sense of the
verse wherein Selah is more evident to the purpose whereunto I apply it. The
word Selah I understand in eue^y verse save only in one; In which I express
it, because the Spirit has set a double mark vp^n that. This collection
written I gave for a Newyears gift to you for whose sake especially it was
composed. But now, in consideration of the calamities of these times it is
imprinted, that I may bestow it upon mo then your self: For such is the
communion of Saints, in the fellowship of the Spirit, that the feelings o^ the
whole Church, and of every member, be alike, and therefore does the Spirit in
sundry Psalms, speak both plurally and singularly of one and the same
subject* yea* sometimes in one and the same verse. Receive eft-soones this
composed Selah, as a token of my remembering the kindness which I have received
from you and your friends, and show how you esteem it, by making some good use
thereof. Farewell.

SELAH
Complaint.
O God hear my prayer, hearke^ unto the words of my mouth, For strangers are
risen up against me, and Tyran^s seek my soul. They have not set God before
them. 54. 2. 3. 3. 2. Many say unto my soul, There is no help for him in God.
They have sharpened their tongues like a serpent. Adders poison is under their
lips. 83. 8. Ashur is also joined with them, they have been an arm to the
children of Lot. 140. 5. The Proud have laid a snare for me, and spread a net
with cords in my Pathway, and set grinnes for me. 74. 5. If I rewarded evil
unto him that had peace with me; then let mine enemy persecute my soul and
take it, yea let him tread my life down upon the earth, and lay mine honor in
the dust. 55. 6. 7. I said, O that I had wings like a dove, then would I fly
away and rest; Behold I would take my flight far off, and lodge in the
wilderness. 77. 3. I did think upon God, and was troubled, I prayed, and my
spirit was full of anguish. 32. 4. For thy hand is heavy upon me day and night,
and my moisture is turned into the drought of summer. 39 11. When thou with
rebukes does chastise man for iniquity, thou as a moth make his beauty to
consume. Surely every man is vanity. 89. 48. What man lives and shall not see
death? Shall he deliver his soul from the hand of the grave? 45. The days of
his youth have thou shortened, and covered him with shame. 39. 5. Behold, thou
have made my days as an hand-bredth, and my age is nothing in respect of thee.
Surely every man in his best estate is altogether vanity. 88. 10. Will thou
show a miracle to the dead? or, Shall the dead rise, and praise thee? 7. Thine
indignation lies upon me, and thou have vexed me with all thy waves. 77. 9.
Has God forgotten to be merciful? Has he shut up his mercy in displeasure?
32. 5. Then I acknowledged my sin unto thee, neither hid I mine iniquity: For
I thought, I will confess against my self my wickedness unto the Lord, and
thou forgauest the punishment of my sin. Comfortes.
3. 8. Salvation belongs unto the Lord, amd thy blessing is upon thy people.
66. 7. He rules the world with his power, his eyes behold the nations; The
rebellious shall not exalt themselves. 50. 6. And the heavens shall declare his
righteousness; For God is judge himself. 9. 16. The Lord is known by
executing judgment, The wicked is snared in the work of his own hands:
Higgai^n Selah. 55. 19. God will hear and afflict them, even he that reigns of
old. 75. 23. When I shall take a convenient time, I will judge righteously. The
earth and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved: But I will establish the
pillars of it. 76. 1. 2. 3. God is known in Judah, his Name is great in
Israel: For in Shalem is his tabernacle, and his dwelling in Zion. There brake
be the arrows of the bow, the shield, and the sword, and the battle. 87. 3.
Glorious things are spoken of thee, o City of God. 6. The Lord shall count,
when he righteth thy people, He was born there. 89. 3. 4. I have made a
covenant with my chosen, I have sworn to David my servant; Thy seed will I
establish for ever, and set up thy throane from generation to generation. 37.
He shall be established for evermore as the moon, and as a faithful witness
in the heaven. 68. 7. O God, when thou wentest forth before thy people, when
thou wentest through the wilderness. 76, 7. When thou o God arose to judgment
to help all the meek on the earth. 77. 15. Thou have redeemed thy people with
thine arm, even the sons of Jacob and Joseph. 85. 2. Thou have forgiven the
iniquity of thy people, and covered all their sins. 4, 2. O ye sons of men,
how long will ye turn my glory into shame, loving vanity and seeking lies? 82,
2. How long will ye judge unjustly, and accept the persons of the wicked? 62.
3. 4. How long will ye imagine mischeife against a man? ye shall be all slain,
ye shall be as a bowed wall, or as a wall shaken; yet they consult to cast him
down from his dignity. Their delight is in lies, they bless with their
mouths, but curse with their hearts. 49. 10, 11, 13. Foolish men perish and
leave their riches for others: yet they think their houses shall continue for
ever, and call their lands by their names. This their way utters their
foolishness, yet their posterity delights in their talk. 52. 3. Thou do
love evil more then good, and lies more then to speak the truth. 4. 5. Thou
love all words that may destroy, o deceitful tongue. So shall God destroy
thee for ever; He shall take and pluck thee out of thy tabernacle, and root
thee out of the land of the living. 4. 4. Tremble, and sin no^, examaine your
own heart, and be still. 67, 4. Let the na^ions be glad and rejoice. For thou
shall judge the people righteously, and govern then nations upon the earth.
Faith.
62. 8. Trust in him always ye people, pour out your hearts before him: For
he is our hope. 81. 7. Thou calledst in affliction, and I delivered thee, and
answered thee in the secret of thunder, I proved thee, at the waters of
Mer^bah. 24. 6. This is the generation of them that seek him, of them that
seek thy face, this is Jacob. 84. 4. Blessed are they that dwell in thine
house, They will ever praise thee. 3. 4. I did call upon the Lord with my voice,
and he heard me out of his holy mountain. 46. 1, 2, 3. God is our hope, and
strength, and help in troubles, ready to be found. Therefore will not we fear
though the earth be moved, and though the mountains fall into the midst of
the sea, and though the waters thereof rage and be troubled, and the mountains
shake at the surges of the same. 32. 7. Thou art my secret place, thou
preseruest me from trouble, thou compasses me about with joyful deliverance.
57. 3. He will send from heaven and save me from the reproof of him that
would swallow me up. 49. 15 But God shall deliver my soul from the power of
the grave: For he will receive me. 46. 7. The Lord of hosts is with us. The
God of Jacob is our refuge. 47. 4. He has chosen our inheritance for us, even
the glory of Jacob whom he loved. 48. 8. As we have heard, so have we seen in
the city of the Lord of hosts, in the City of our God. God will establish it
for ever. Prayer.
67. 1. God be merciful unto us, and bless us, and cause his face to shine
among us. 59. 5. Even thou o Lord God of hosts, o* God of Israel, awake to
visit all the heathen, and be not merciful unto all that transgress
maliciously. 13. Consume them in thy wrath, consume them that they be no more,
and let them know that God rules in Jacob, even unto the ends of the world.
16. 20. Put them in fear, o Lord, that the heathen may know that they are but
men. 140. 8. Let not the wicked have his desire o Lord, perform not his wicked
thought, lest they be to proud. 84. 8. O Lord of hosts hear my prayer,
hearken o God of Jacob. 143. 6. I stretch forth mine hands unto thee, my
soul desires after thee as a thirsty land. 20. 1, 2, 3. The Lord hear thee
in the day of trouble, the Name of the God of Jacob defend thee, send thee
help from the Sanctuary, and strengthen thee out of Zion: Let him remember all
thine offerings, and turn thy burnt offerings into ashes. Praise.
21* 1^. The King shall rejoice in thy strenth o Lord, yea how greatly shall he
rejoice in thy salvation! Thou have given him his hearts desire, and have not
denied him the request of his lips. 60. 3, 4. Thou have showed thy people
heavy things, thou have made us drink the wine of giddines. But now thou have
given a banner to them that fear thee that it may be displayed because of thy
truth. 46. 11. The Lord of hosts is with us. The God of Jacob is our refuge.
24. 19. Who is the king of glory? The Lord of hosts he is the king of glory 57.
6. They have laid a net for my steps, my soul is pressed down, they have
dug a pit before me, and are fallen into the midst of it. 44. 7. 8. But
thou have saved us from our adversaries, and have put them to confusion that
hate us. Therefore will we praise God continually, and will confess thy Name
for ever. 61. 4. I will dwell in thy Tabernacle for ever, and my trust shall be
under the covering of thy wings. 66. 14, 15. I will go to thine house with
burnt offerings, and will pay thee my vows which my lips have promised and my
mouth has spoken in mine aff^ictions I will offer unto thee the burnt
offerings of fat rams, with incense. I will prepare bullockes and goats. 4 All
the world shall worship thee, and sing unto thee, eue^ sing to thy Name. 68. 32.
Sing unto the Lord o ye Kingdoms of the earth, sing praises unto the Lord. 19.
Praised be God, even the God of our salvation, who ladeth us daily with
benefits.
