The Psalter of David newely translated into English meter in such sort that it
may the more decently, and with more delight of the mind, be read and song
of al men. Whereunto is added a note of four parts, with other things, as
shall appear in the Epistle to the Readar.

Translated and Imprinted by Robert Crowley in the year of our Lord. M. D.
xlix. the xx. day of September. And are to be sold in Eley rentes in
Holburne.

Cum Priuilegio ad Imprimendum solum.

A Table wherein may easyly be found al moveable feasts for ever.
Golden number. ^ies letter. Septuage^ima. Ash We^sdaye. Ester. (...) day. Wit
^udaye. The su^day after the (...). Advent (...). Janu. Febru. March Aprile.
May. ^ d xviij iiij xxii xxv x xxvj xxix Nove^ber. e xix v xxiii i (...) xi
xxvi xxx f xx vi xxiiij ii xij xxvj i Dece^ber. ^ g xxi vij xxv iij xiij xxvi
ij ^ A xxij viij xxvi iiij xiiij xxvi iij b xxiij ix xxvii v xv xxv xxvij
Nove^ber. ^ c xxiiij x xxviij vi xvi xxv xxviij d xxv xi xxix vij xvii xxv xxix
^^ e xxvi xij xxx viij xviij xxv xx^ ^^ f xxvij xiij xxxi ix xix xxv i
Dece^ber. g xxviij xiiij i (...) x xx xxv ij ^^ a xxix xv ii xi xxj xxv iij ^^^
b xxx xvi iij xii xxii xxiiij xxvij Nove^ber. ^^ c xxxi xvii iiij xiij xxiij
x^iiij xxviij ^ d i (...) xviij v xiij xxiiij xxiiij xxix c ij xix vi xv xxv
xxiiij xxv ^ f iij xx vii xvi xxvi xxiiij i Dece^ber. g iiij xxi viij xvii
xxvii xxiii ij ^^^ a v xxij ix xviii xxviij xxiiij iii ^ b vi xxiii x xix xxix
xxiii xxvij Nove^ber c vij xxiiij xi xx xxx ^xiii xxviij ^^^ d viij xxv xii xxi
xxxi xxiij xxix ^^ e ix xxvi xiij xxij i (...) xxiii xxx f x x^vii xiiij xxiij
ij xxiii i Dece^ber. ^ g xi xxviij xv xxiiij iij xxiij ij a xij i (...) xvi xxv
iiij xxiij iij ^^ b xiij ii xvij xxvi v xxij xxvij Nove^ber. ^^^ c xiiii iij
xviij xxvii vj x^ii xxviij d xv iiij xix xxviij vii xxii xxix e xvi v xx xxix
viij xxij xxx f xvij vi xxi xxx ix xxij i Dece^ber. g xviij vii xxii xxxj x
xxii ij a xix viij xxiii i ^une xj xxij iij b xx ix xxiiij ii xij xxi xxvij
Nove^ber. ^^ c xxi x xxv iij xiij xxj xxviij

In the Epistle to the readar you shall find the exposition of this table.

To the Christian Readar.
Lest thou should be ignorant in any thing that is contained in this book
(gentle readar) have here the understanding of the table yt I have set
before the calendar. First thou must seek the Golden number, which this year
of our Lord. M.D.xlix.is.xj. and stands in the first end of the row of
numbers
following.xi.xij.xiij.xiiij.xv.xvi.xvij.xviij.xix.i.ij.iij.iiij.v.vi.vij.viij.ix.x. The next year it shall be.xii. and so forth, so that this time.xix. years it shall be xi. again.

Then must ye know the sundays letter which is found after this sort.

f.e.d.b. a.g.f.d. c.b.a.f. e.d.c.a. g.f.e.c.b. a.g.e. d.c.b g. c e g b d f a

In the first end of this row of letters stands.f. which is sundays
letter this year of our Lord. M.D.xlix. the next year shall be.e. and so forth
as they stand in order, and where.ij. letters be, there is leap year. So that
this time.xxviij. Years: f. in the first end of the row, shall be sunnedayes
letter again.

This done, look the golden number at the leafte side of your table, and then
the sundays letter next following, against which you shall find all the
moveable feasts noted, what month and day of the month they fall.

And here note, that if the golden number stand against the sundays letter
thou shall not take that sundays letter, but the next sundays letter
following. And when thou come to the end of the table, begyne it again, as
though it were rownde and had none end.

Thou have also in this book, a note or song of.iiij. parts, which agreth with
the meter of this Psalter in such sort, that it serves for all the Psalms
thereof, containing so many notes in one part, as be syllables in one meter,
as appears by the dyttie that is printed with the same.

More over, I have added to the end of this book, all the canticles that are
usually song in the church, translated into the same meter, and agreynge with
the same note.

This have I done, to move the to delight in the reading and hearing of these
Psalms, wherein lies hyd the most preciouse treasure of the christian
religion. And so far as my knowledge would serve me: I have made open and
plain, that which in other translations, is obscure and hard. Trusting that
some better learned, will hereat take occasion to add more light. In the mean
time give God the glory for that he has done in me, and pray that thou
may always credit the infallible truth of gods word. And if thou
chance to confer this translation with the translations of the Bible and find
that they disagre: do not forth with dislyke either of them, but first consult
men of learning and judgment in the knowledge of tongues, and know that God
has reueyled to his servant Leo Judas (whose translation I have followed) those
things that were unknown to the^ that before him translated the Psalter out
of the Ebrue.

Farewell. At London the.xx. day of September. In the year of our Lord.
M.D.xlix. Robert Crowley.

Contertenor.
^ That man is happy and blessed, that has not gone astray: In the counsel of
wicked men, nor stand in sinners way,

Tenor.
^That man is happy and blessed, yt has not gone astray; In the counsel of
wicked men, nor stand in sinners way.

Plain song.
^That man is happy and blessed, yt has not gone astray: In the counsel of
wicked men, nor stand in sinners way,

Bassus.
^That man is happy and blessed, yt has not gone astray: In the counsel of
wicked men, nor stand in sinners way,

OVVINO OGLETHROPO INSIGNI THEOLOGO, atque Oxoniae Magdalenensium praesidi,
caeterisque eiusdem Collegij studiosis Robertus Croleus spiritus sancti
auxilium optat assiduum.
EQVIDEM (VIRI STVDIOSISSIMI) postquam hos sacrosanctos Dauidis hymnos ad
exemplare a Leone Judah elaboratum, a Biblia^dro reuisum, atque ab uniuersa
Tigurina ecclesia comprobatum reddidissem Anglice: caepi mecum cogitare, cuinam
potissimum hosce meos labores dedicare co^ueniret. Caepi inquam mecum cogitare:
and inter cogitandu^, occurrunt multi quibus multa debeo, quique mihi uidentur,
suo iure posse, harum mearum lucubrationum laudem sibi uendicare.
Occurritquoque autoris dignitas: cui si responderet nostra translatio, non alij
(mihi credit) quam serenissimo regi quadraret patrono. Erat enim Propheta
altissimi, de quo testatur solus ille omnipotens, uirum secundum cor suum
inuenisse se. Haec dum cogito atque imis sensibus recolere incipio: uos mihi,
uos inquam (a quibus est, si qua sit in me literatura) indissolubilibus
argumentis posse conuincere uidemini: uestrum hoc esse totum, and in uestram
debere cedere gloria^ quicquid id erit quod ingenij mei tenuitas pepererit.
Quum enim rudis adhuc atque omnium literarum expers, Oxoniae studere
instituissem inops, atque inopia coactus ab incepto pene destitissem misellus:
uos (sed precipue tu Oglethrope, ut non dicam solum) in uestra literarum
palestram uestru^ reuocastis Crooleum. Me quidem reuocastis, non muneribus aut
amicorum precibus prouocati, ut (flens dico) plerumque fit Oxoniae, neque spe
premij ducti, nisi (quod suspicor) diuinum expectastis premium: sed nullis
muneribus, nullis amicorum precibus soliciti, me indigum atque omnibus bonis
destitutum, atque uix ausum tale quicquam a uobis petere, libere atque
uestrapte sponte eligere uoluistis.

Adhaec, res ipsa quam tractaui, cum sit totius scripturae pandecte atque uerum
Christianae Ecclesiae Gazophilacium: non nisi eruditissimos and pijssime doctos
patronos decet. Indecorum enim est Martem praeficere Musis, aut Mineruam
Bellonae substituere. Imo contra. Quis unquam qui Gentem domuit, aut prouinciam
bello adquisiuit, eandem ducibus bellorum inexpertis defendendam tradidit? Sed
heus tu (dicet sort aliquis) quos tu Magdalenenses facis? Sunt ne omnium
doctissimi? Non habet Anglia Magdalenensibus doctiores, and qui Christum magis
sapiunt? Sunt patres conscripti, sunt Episcopi, sunt magninominis praelatimu ti
Non est inter eos quisquam dignus qui tuis patrocinetur laboribus? Sunt hercle
ex his doctissimi and dignissimi qui doctissimorum lucubrationibus (quid ni
nostris ludicris) patro cinentur. Alit etiam Oxoniae per multos, quibus uos
(uiri studiosissimi) palmam porrigere non grauabimini scio: non est tamen
quisquam cui ego ingenij mei fructus aeque debeo atque uobis, quibus (ut dixi)
totam illam quae in me est eruditionis s^ntillam debeo. Praeterea ego uos
pernoui, and iam binis lustris uestrae lenitatis experientiam habui, quo sit
quod maiori cum fiducia aus^m a uobis petere laborum meorum patrocinium, and
uestro nomini dedicare, quod alijs uix ausim proponere legendum.

Postremo, uos me nouistis, and eruditionis meae tenuitatem habetis cognitam,
lu^e igitur vestro potestis hoc officija me exigere: ut uos pro Censoribus
semper agnoscam, quibus lucubrationes meas omnes relinquam corrigendas.
Accipite igitur haec (incondita quidem, ut me indicent autorem) and bom
consulite ut uobis est dignum. Atque si quid mepte, indecte, aut minus
eleganter sit dictu^: id totum curis huius uitae (quibus undique opprimor)
ascribite. Solida enim studia integrum requirum animum, neq fieri potest ut qui
manibus uictum queritant (s^m licet studios^simi) aliquid eximij faciant in re
literaria, nisi in eis spiritus il^e sapientiae operetur occulte. Perlegite
igitur obsecro, Psalmorum hunc libellum, hoc tantum animo, ut per uestram
diligentiam, ab erroribus quibus per inscitia^ nostram scatet, quam cito
repurgetur. Ego pro ingenij and eruditionis meae portiuncula, ad sensum
reddidi: uos pro uestra plenitudine annotationibus adhibitis, loca difficiliora
exponite, ut simul cum iucunda lexione percipiatur ueritas. Inuenietis quidem
multa Theologoru^ multorum placitis contraria: nam solam Leonis Iudae uersionem
sum secutus, quod is mihi uidetur interpresprae caeteris omnibus fidelis. Quod
scio tamen, nihil impium aut Christianae ueritati dissonum habet haec nostra
translatio. Imo ut hanc ansam praeripiam calumniatori: Deum (qui renes
scrutatur and corda) conscientiae meae testem assumo, hanc curam mihi fuisse
precipuam, ut uerum and Germanum sensum exprimeret nostra uersio.

Valete, and studiosi studiosis fauete. Ex officina nostra Londini Septembris.
20. Anno salutis nostrae. 1549. Vester Robertus Croleus.

The first Psalm of David.
THat man is happy and blessed, that has not gone astraye:
In the counsel of wicked men, nor stand in sinners way.
The man is blessed, I say, that has not sat in company.
With scornefulmen that thyncke wysedom, to rest in them only.
But has in the law of the Lord set his only delyght:
And will in the same exercise, him self both day and night.
He shall be like a tree planted, fast by the ryuerssyde:
That does bring forth and give her fruit in her due time and tide.
And as the leaf thereof does not fall, but florishe and stand:
So shall all things prospere right well, that he does take in hand.
The wicked shall be nothing like, but as leaves that are dry:
And as the chafe and things of naught, that with the wind do fly.
Therefore the wicked shall not rise, and stand in the judgment:
Neither sinners emonge the just, that seek Gods testament.
For the Lord knows the just man's way, and has it allowed:
But the way of the wicked men, shall be quite destroyed.
The.ij. Psalm.
WHy do the Gentiles run on heaps, with such rage and tumult?
Why do the people sit and muse, and on vain things consult?
The kings and rulars of the earth, do cluster and convent:
Against the Lord and are against his anointed full bent.
Shall we be bound to them (say they) let al their bonds be broke:
And of their doctrine and their laws, let us reject the yoke.
But he that dwells in heaven, does their doings deryde:
And makes the^ al mocking stocks, through out the world so wide.
And in his wrath the Lord will speak to them upon a day:
And in his furye trouble them, and then the Lord will say.
Upon mine holy hill Syon, my king I have poynted:
And over all my chosen flock I have him anointed.
Then shall the king say thus again, his will I will declare:
And eke recyte al manner things, that in his decrees are.
For unto me the Lord him self, said in this wise I wot:
Thou art my dear and only son, to day I the begotte.
It thy request I will give the (as heirs) all nacyons:
And all the borders of the earth for thy possessions.
With a scepter a mase of stele, thou shalt rule them I say:
And shall break them into pieces, as a pot made of claye.
O ye kings and ye rulars al, get ye wisdom therefore:
And eke ye judges of the earth, of learning get ye store.
Se that ye serve the Lord above, in trembling and in fear:
And with reverence se ye do rejoice in like manner.
Se that ye kiss and eke embrace, his only son I say:
Least in his wrath ye peryshe all, and wander from his way.
For his wrath shall full suddenly, be kendled in his breast:
But all that put their trust in him shall certaynely be bleste.
The.iij. Psalm.
O Lord how many be my foes, that against me do rise?
And how many say to my soul, God does him quite despise.
But thou O Lord art^ my target, when I am hard besteade:
Mine honor and my glory both, and holdeste up mine head.
And with my voice upon the Lord, I will both call and cry:
And he out of his holy hill, will hear me by and by.
I laid me down and quyetly, I stepped and rose again:
For why, I know assuredly, the Lord does me sustain.
I do not fear ten thousand men, that compass me about:
Arise (O Lord) my God I say, save me and bring me out.
Thou smytest all thine enemies, even on the heard cheke bone:
And thou have broken all the teeth, of each ungodly one.
Salvation does alonelye, belong to God above:
Bestow therefore upon thy flock, thy blessinge and thy love.
The.iiij. Psalm.
O God (my justice) that do hear me, when I on the cry:
And do set me fre from trouble, hear me mercyfully.
O mortal men, how long will ye bring my glory to shame?
How long will you love vanitye, and seek lies and false fame?
And know that the Lord has chosen for himself the godly:
And that he will give ear to me, when I shall to him cry.
Sin not, but stand in awe therefore, and examine your heart:
And in your secret chamber se, you do your self convert.
Offer to God the sacrifice of righteousness I say:
And look that in the living God ye put your trust always.
Many men say, who will give us wordly goods and substance?
And for to se good fortune and also prosperouse chance?
But upon us thy poor servants, Lord lift thou up a sign:
The light Lord of thy countynaunce that does so clearly shine.
Yet when I saw the great increase, of their corn and new wine.
Thou madeste me rejoice in heart, and not there at repyne.
In peace I shall both rest and sleep, I shall be full quyete:
Because thou only art he that doeste me in salftie set.
The.v. Psalm.
LOrd marcke my words and understand, all my still whisperynge:
Hear me, for I will pray to the that art my God and king.
Lord thou will hear my voice by time, and I will me apply:
Unto the earlye in the morn, and look on the only.
For thou art not the God that does in wyckednes delyght:
Neither shall any wicked thing remain within thy sight.
The rageynge foles shall not consiste and stand before thine eyes:
For thou have hated all such men, as work iniquities.
Such as speak lies thou shall destroy, for the Lord does withstand:
The man that shedeth blood, and that takes disceyte in hand.
But I wylcome into thine house trusting upon thy grace:
And in thy fear will honor the even at thine holy place.
Lord lead me forth in thy justice for fear of mine enmies:
And thine own way defend thou Lord before thy servants eyes.
For in their mouth there is no truth, their inwardes are but dounge:
Their throat is like an open grave, they flatter with their tongue.
Prove them giltye (O God) and let them fall from their counselles:
For their great sins drive them away, for they have been rebels.
And let such as do trust in the, sing and rejoice always:
Let such as love thy name rejoice in thy defense I say.
For thou (O Lord) do bless the just and give him good things still:
And as a spear thy goodness does enclose him from all ylle.
The.vi. Psalm.
Lord check thou not thy pore servant in thine hasty fury:
Neither correct me in the heat of thy melancholye.
Be mercyful to me (O Lord) for I am deformed:
Heal thou me Lord, because my bones are made sore abashed.
But my soul is abashed sore: yea, and right sore troubled:
And thou (O Lord) how long will thou se me so afflicted?
Return (O Lord) set my soul clear, save me for thy mercy:
For in death and the grave there is, of the no memory.
In my sorrowful morning I am weryed out right:
And with my tears my bed and couch I make to flow al night.
My face is wrynckled through anger, and indignacyon:
And it is made exceadinge old, through mine enmyes each one.
Depart from me all ye that be worckers of wyckednes:
For the Lord has heard the voice of my sorrowful dystresse.
The Lord has heard his servants prayer and supplicacyon:
The Lord has received my suite, and mine oracyon.
Let all mine enemies take shame, and be cast down greatly:
Let them be turned back again, and take shame suddenly.
The.vij. Psalm.
O Lord my God I put my trust, and confidence in the:
Keep me from all that persecute me and deliver me.
Let not this man snalch up my soul, like a lion rageynge:
Neither tear it when no man shall come to my rescuynge.
Oh Lord my God, I have not done the thing that they surmyse:
Mine hands to any frowardnes I do not exercise.
If I have done hurt unto him, that did peace with me take:
Yea, when he vexed me causlesse, if I did him forsake.
Then let him persecute my soul, and lay hands on the same:
And let him tread my life to dyrte, and dyminyshe my fame.
Arise (O Lord) in thy fury, when my foes be styrred:
Arise to me with the judgment that thou haste commanded.
And let the company of al people stand the about:
And therefore to go up again do thou not stand in doubt.
Let the Lord judge the nacyons, O Lord judge me also:
And after mine vpryght dealing, so let it with me go.
O ryghteouse God that art searcher, of the hertes and the lust:
Let the ungodly men's sin cease, and govern thou the just.
My shilde, my tergat and defense in God alone I find:
That is the savior of the^, that are of godly mind.
God is a just and upright judge, he is righteouse I say:
And God is moved with anger, and that every day.
If Saul will not return but make his sword ready to fight:
If he will bend his bow I say and him self to wars dyght:
If he will prepare him such darts, as will kyl presently:
And frame his burning arrows, that will pearse so myghtely:
Lo, then he shall travail right sore, to bring forth vanitye:
For he has conceived great gryefe, and shall bring out a lie.
He has trenched and dygged out, a dych for me to fall:
But into the pytte that he made, he slyppeth first of all.
The care that he bent toward me, shall light on his head certain:
So shall ye force, wherewith he would oppress me, turn again.
After his righteousness I will praise the Lord most mighty:
And right so will I sing to the name of the Lord most hye.
The.viij. Psalm.
O Lord, our Lord, how wonderful is thy most holy name:
Throughout the earth? that above heavens thou spreadest out thy fame
Thou haste brought strength out of the mouth of babes and sucklinges young:
For thy foes sakes, to weken them, that revenge their own wrong.
But thine heavens I will behold, thine handiworckes I say:
The moon and stars that thou have made, and prepared for aye.
What thing is mortal man that thou do him never forget:
And the son of man what is he, that thou do him vyset?
For unto God thou have made him little inferior:
Thou have compassed him with such glory, and such honor.
Thou have made him lord of ye worckes that thine hands have formed:
And eke all things under his fete thou have constytuted.
Al flocks of sheep and droues of beasts, thou did to him give:
And eke the labouryng beasts that in the feldes do live.
The fowls that live in the air, with fyshes great and small:
That live by the sea, and all things that pass by the sea wall.
O Lord that art our Lord I say, our master and our guide:
How wonderful (Lord) is thy name, through out the earth so wide?
The.ix. Psalm.
I Will set forth and praise the Lord with all mine heart in deed:
And al his wonderful worckes shall by my be declared.
I will be glad and eke rejoice in the (O thou most hye:)
And to thine holy name I will sing most reioyceyngly.
Whylse my foes shall be driven back, and caused to recoyle:
They shall fall and peryshe before the, as me^ made a spoil.
For thou art my judgment and haste judged all my debate:
Thou ryghteouse judge I say thou have sat on thy judgment seat.
Thou haste blamed the Heathen, and destroyed the wicked:
And for ever also thou haste their name abolyshed.
Now are thy wastes all at an end, O thou fierce enemy:
With the cytyes that thou cuntest down, gone is their memory.
But the Lord does reygne for ever, his kyngedome has no end:
His judgment seat is made ready, to judge them that offend.
And he shall judge the round compass of the world by justice:
And emonge the people he shall give vpryght sentences.
The Lord shall be asure refuge unto the oppressed:
He shall be a salfegarde I say, when men be afflycted.
Such as have known thine holy name styke unto the only:
For thou (Lord) do not forsake them that seek the studyously.
Sing to the Lord that does abide in the cyty Syon:
Show his counselles in each people, and in each nacyon.
For he that does revenge the slain, shall none of them forget:
Neither the cry of such men as are with troubles bysette.
Be merciful to me (O Lord) and do my troublese:
That of mine enmies I suffer, and from death lift up me.
That I may tell all thy praises in the gates of Syon:
And I shall be glad and rejoice in thy salvation.
The Heathen stycke fast in the pytte that they have prepared:
And in the net that they have hyd, their foot is entangled.
The Lord is known by his justice and the wicked tangled:
With the worckes of his wicked hands, a thing to be noted.
The wicked and ungodly men shall slide down into hell:
And all the Heathen that forget the God of Israel.
For neither shall the indigent be forgotten for aye:
Nor the hope of the afflicted be always vain I say.
Arise (O Lord) least mortal man, prevail by main and might:
And let the heathen nacyons be judged in thy sight.
Lord set a master over them, that may keep them still thraulle:
And let the heathen nacyons learn, that they be mortalle.
The.x. Psalm.
Lord why stand thou so far of? why do thou not draw nigh?
Why do thou hide thyselfe in the time of our myserye?
When the ungodly waxes proud, the afflycted does smart:
Let them be taken in the wicked counselles of their heart.
For he prayseth the wicked man, for that he desires:
The couetouse he calls bleste, the Lord he blasphemeth.
In his haute lokes the wicked man, sets all things at naught:
The God of might is never found in his ungodly thought.
The laws and constytucyons of God do grieve him still:
At all ceasons they do wythstande his most ungodly will.
Thy judgments Lord are lifted up, full high above his sight:
And against all his enemies, he threateneth to fight.
He will think and say in his heart, I will not bow nor bend:
From discommodities I will my self ever defend.
His mouth is full of periurye, disceyte and usury:
Oppressyon and vanitye do under his tongue lie.
In the courts he lays awayte, to kill the innocent:
And against the multitude of the pore his eyes be bent.
Like as a lion in his den, he wayteth in secret:
To take the afflycted, that is with myserye besette.
That he may take the poor I say, that is in myserie:
By drawing him into his net by craft and subtyltie.
Through his force and his violence is broken and oppressed:
The multitude of them that have in mysery no rest.
And in his heart thus has he said, God forgets certain:
Turnynge aside his face that he might not se them again.
O Lord and God, arise I say, lift up thine hand and power:
Forget thou not the afflycted, but do thou them succor.
For why should the ungodly men God in such sort blaspheme:
And in their heart say that thou wylt not require it of them?
But thou have seen, for thou do marcke ungodliness and wrong:
To put the same into thine hand, so mighty and so strong.
The miserable multitude commit them selfs to the:
For thou art wont to succor such as without succor be.
Break the vngodlyes arm, and thou shall seek the wicked man:
And his ungodliness, and shall find neither of them than.
The Lord is king for ever more, and when all is ended:
And from his land all the heathen people have peryshed.
Lord thou haste heard the poor men's cry, and wylt govern their heart:
And unto them thine ear thou will diligently convert.
That thou may revenge the pupyl, and the poor oppressed.
That he^seforth the like be not by mortal me^ attempted.
The.xi. Psalm.
IN the Lord have I put my trust, how to my soul say ye:
Out of your mount even as the byrd, se that thou away flee?
For lo, the wicked bent their bow, and set their shaftes therein:
That in the darcke they might shote them, that in heart do not sin.
Seeing the nets be broke therefore, and the laws set at naught:
What could the just man do therein, though he took care and thought?
But the Lord in his holy place has his throne in heaven:
His eyes behold, and his eye leddes do search the sons of men.
The Lord allows the just man, but he hates deadly:
The wicked, and such as do love force and iniquity.
Upon the wicked he will rain snares, fire and brymstone:
And eke a stormye burninge wind, this is their lotte each one.
Because the Lord him self is just, he loves ryghteousnes:
And with his countenance he will look upon the gitles.
The.xij. Psalm.
O Lord do thou save and keep now, for frendshyppe there is none:
The true and faithful of promise are from emonge men gone.
With his neighbor each man speaks words disceytfull and vain:
With smoth lyppes, but with double hertes they speak to them certain:
The Lord shall cut of al such lyppes as speak fair, but falsely:
And the tongue that speaks great things herself to magnifye.
All such (I say) as do say thus, let our tongues be walkinge:
Our lyppes are on our side, and who is our Lord or our King?
The Lord shall say, now will I rise, for the destruccyon:
Of the oppressed, and the nedies lamentacyon.
And them I will restore to health, they shall not be oppreste:
I will give them a breathynge time, and eke a quyete rest.
The Lords sayings are pure sayings, as silver well tried:
That in an earthe^ coffen has been seven times will fined.
O Lord do thou save and keep them, keep back the flatterar:
Out of this generacyon keep him back for ever.
For when me^ of most wicked life do reign and rule the route:
Then do the ungodly wander on each side round about.
The.xiij. Psalm.
Lord how long wylt thou forget me? what forever and aye:
Lord how long wylt thou hyde thy face from thy servant I say?
How long shall I consult in mind, and in mine heart travail?
How long shall mine enmies against thy poor servant prevail?
Look back and answer me (O Lord) illumyne thou mine eyes:
And suffer me not in the death to sleep in any wise.
Lest mine enmye should say, I have against him prevailed:
And such as vex me, should rejoice, if I were weakened.
But I trust in thy great goodness, and bountiful mercy:
And in thine health mine heart therefore rejoices certaynely.
I will sing to the Lord I say, with heart unfeignedly:
Because he does requyte to me all things abundantly.
The.xiiij. Psalm.
THe folyshe and Insipient, whose thoughts are ever vain:
Do in their heart say folishly, there is no God certain.
They follow ways that are corrupt and ahhomynable:
There is none that does the thing that is good and laudable.
The Lord looked down from heaven upon the sons of men:
To se, if there were any wise or to seek God given.
But al had fallen and were corrupt together in their way:
There was no man that would do good, no not one man I say.
What knew they naught? al are wicked, they eat my flock as bread:
And on the Lord they do not call, in them there is no dread:
There shall they be cast down with fear the Lord will them affraye:
For God is in the nacyon of the just men for aye:
Ye do deryde and laugh to scorn, the counsel of the poor.
Because the Lord is his whole trust, his help and his succor.
Oh would to God Israel might have health out of Syon:
Would God, I say, the time were come of their salvation.
That God might bring his flock again out of captyuytie:
That Jacob might rejoice, and eke Israel be merry:
The.xv. Psalm.
Lord, who shall have his dwelling place, in thy tabernacle?
Who shall, I say, find quyete rest in thy most holy hill?
That shall the man that walks right, and does that vpryght is:
And he that in his heart to speak the truth do never mysse.
He does not slander with his tongue, nor do his neighbor ylle:
Neither does suffer him to be reuyled by his will.
The wicked and the reprobate, are aye vile in his sight:
But such as fear the Lord, he does honor both day and night.
And if he swear or make promise concerning any thing:
Though it should be his hynderaunce, to pass he will it bring:
He sets not his money out, to usury or gain:
Nor takes any brybe to put the innocent to pain.
Who so he be that will these things diligently apply:
The same shall never threat to fall, but sta^dvp still stoutly.
The.xvi. Psalm.
Save me (O God) do thou vouchsalfe my defender to be:
Save me I say, because I have put my whole trust in the.
Unto the Lord thus haste thou said (O my soul within me:)
Thou art my Lord, and my goodness nothing can be like the.
With the saints that dwell in the earth and men of noble fame:
I am delyted, and with al mine heart I love the same.
Though men do increase their Idols and multiplye them still:
And gredily seek for to have other men's gods at will:
Yet will I not taste the cup of their bloody sacryfyce:
Nor with my mouth rehearse the name of the^ in any wise.
The Lord is the porcyon of my part and cup certain:
O Lord, my lot and heritage, thou do always sustain.
The coardes that measured my part, in pleasant places fell:
Yea and a noble heritage chanced to me right well.
The Lord that has been my succor and counsel will I praise:
For my very reins do enstructe me in the night always.
I do prepone and set the Lord always before mine eyes:
He is still at my right hand, least I fall in any wise.
Wherefore mine heart shall be right glad, so shall my tongue rejoice:
And my flesh shall rest in safetye, without tumult or noise.
For thou shall not forsake my soul at the sepulchersyde:
Nor suffer that thine holy one do into the pit flyde.
The path of life thou wylt show me, and full joy in thy sight:
And the pleasures at thy right hand for ever day and night.
The.xvij. Psalm.
Lord hear the thing that rightuouse is, give ear unto my cry:
Marcke well ye prayer that I make to the unfeignedly.
Let my judgment proceed from the, judge me Lord in thy sight.
And let thine eyes consider well, all such things as are right.
Thou have searched mine heart thoroughly, and visyte me by night:
Thou haste tried me, yet canste thou not, blame any thing by right.
For the secret thoughts of mine heart, and my words do agree:
The secret thoughts and open words, are all one thing in me.
In the affairs of mortal men, I have taken good head:
Of the ways of the destroyer, for that thou haste preached.
Ground thou my steps therefore, I say,
Lord in thy foot paths all:
Lest that my fete should slyp and I should be ready to fall.
On the I call (O God) for thou art wout to grant to me.
Give ear to me and hear my word, Lord God I beseech the.
O thou that by thy power kepeste, such as do trust in the:
From their enmyes, make thy mercies wonderful upon me.
Keep me as the eye apple, and under thy wings me hyde:
From the wicked that use to waste, and my foes on each side.
With their fatnes and great richesse, my ways they have stopped:
And with their mouth presumptuouselye, proud words they have framed.
Even now they do beset our ways and eke compass them round:
And ernestly they do seek to stake their nets to the grownde.
Mine enmye is as the lyo^, that rampeth for his pray:
And as the lions whelpe that does lurcke in his den I say.
Arise (O Lord) prevent thou him, cast him down by thy might:
Set my soul free from the wicked, that is thy sword to fight.
Set me free from these mortal men, that are thy power and hand:
Lord set me free from them whose mind, to worldly things does stand.
Set me free from them that do seek their portion in this life:
Out of thy storehouse fill their mawse, thereby to end their strife.
That their children may have wherewith them selves to satisfy:
And that there may be some what left to their posterity.
But I will look upon thy face in ryghtuousnes in deed:
And when I shall rise like to the, I shall be satisfied.
The.xviij. Psalm.
OVt of mine in most bowelles Lord and from my very heart:
I will love the, for my whole power and only strength thou art.
The Lord is my castle of stone, and eke my fighting toure:
My rescuar and eke my God, and my rock of succor.
To him I will cleave and styke fast, he is my shylde in deed:
And also the horue of my health, and sure castle at need.
The Lord that is worthy of praise, I will aye call upon:
And I shall be preserved from, mine enemies each one.
The bands and great sorrows of death had compaste me about:
And the swifte streams of wicked men, had fearde me with their route.
The cords and sorrows of the dead, had gyrded me certain:
So had the snares of death it self, me sone overtaken.
Whylse I therefore stood this in doubt and knew no remedy:
With heart I did call on the Lord, and to God did I cry.
And out of his holy temple, he heard my voice straight way:
Even as soon as my cry was entered his ears I say.
He was moved and then the earth did shake excedyngly.
The bottomes of hills were shaken, because he was angry.
At his nosthyrles there yshued smoke, and at his mouth fire hot:
In such manner that at the same, coals were kenled I wotte.
He bowed the heavens and so came down by his wonderful might:
And under his feet was dearcknes, and the daseynge of sight.
On Cherub he was carried, and flewe forth as I find:
Being borne up and sustained, by the wings of the wind.
Like a tent, for his closet he set dearcknes on each side:
Nygh unto him, and black waters, with clouds boeth thycke and wide.
Through the excedyng great bryghtnes, that in his presence was*
Great hayle and burning coals also, did through his clouds pass.
The Lord did thunder from heaven, and the most high did speak:
Great hayle and also burning coals, out of his clouds did break.
He shot forth shaftes and scattered, his foes and did them wound:
And much lyghtnynge wherewith he did cast them flat to the ground.
Then were the most deep places, of the seas made right open:
The wonderful deep seas, I say, whither the waters run.
And at the check thou gave them, Lord when thou waste angered.
The bases and grownd worckes of the earth were uncovered.
But from heaven the Lord sent down his hand and set me free.
And out of most myghtie waters, by force he did draw me.
He set me free from deadly foes that were mighty and strong:
And from my spytfull enemies, that were my masters long.
These did prevent me in the time, of my calamity:
But the Lord was my leaneynge staff, and sure post to stand by.
He brought me forth into a place, wide and full of pleasure:
And set me free because he did bear to me great favor.
The Lord requited me my mede, after my ryghtuousenes:
And gave to me reward after mine hands vngyltines.
For the ways of the Lord I did, always keep and observe:
And from my God I did never declyne a side nor swerve.
For in my sygth all his decrees, and laws I do hold fast:
And the manners that he does teach, from me I do not cast.
Before him do I lead my life pure and undefiled:
And so I keep myself that I do naught that is wicked.
The Lord therefore requiteth me, as my life is vpryght:
And as mine hands are innocent, and gylt less in his sight.
Thou wylt show mercy unto him, that does study mercy:
And wylt be faithful to such as do in deed faithfully.
To the curteise thou art gentle, but unto the froward:
That walk crokedly, thou also geuest alyke reward.
For people that be afflicted, thou do preserve and keep:
And eyes that are lofty thou do pull down and cause to weep.
And thou (O Lord) art he that do give my candle her light:
And my Lord God is he that does make all my dearcknes bright.
For in the do I break through the armed armayes all:
And in my God (I say) I do, leap quite over the wall.
The way of God is without spot, and the Lords word is pure:
And to all them that trust in him it is a targate sure.
For who is it bysydes the Lord, that is a God of might?
Or who is it bysydes our God, that is a rock sure pyght?
The same is God that teaches me, to be myghtie in wars:
And makes my way expedite, in martial affares.
He makes my fete like the fete, of the hyndes that are swyfte:
And he it is that places me on high in my stepe clyfte.
He does enstructe mine hands to war and teaches me that skyll:
He gives me strenght in mine arms, to break a bow of stele:
Thou hydst me with thy shylde of health, thy power does me sustain.
And of thy goodness causest me over many to reygne.
My steps and my path under me, thou haste made large and wide:
Lest my ioynctes should stacker and then it might chance me to slide.
I persecuted mine enemies, and did the^ apprehende.
And did never return till I, had brought them to their end.
I wound them in such sort that they can never rise again:
And under my fete they do fall, as men that are quyte slain.
Thou do enstruct me unto war, with the power martial:
And when any rise against me, thou castest them down all.
Thou causest that my deadly foes, do turn their back to me.
And that I may destroy al them that mine enimyes be.
They called and cried but there was none, that would them keep or save:
Unto the Lord they cried, I say, and he no answer gave.
I pound them like unto the duste, that with the wind does fly:
So do I break them like the dyrt, that in the streate does lie.
From the peoples contentions, Lord thou do set me free:
Thou make me head of nations, strange people do serve me.
So sone as they heard with their ears they did to me apply:
Strayngars sons submitted them self unto me faynedly.
The strayngars wythered away, their fresh courage did fall:
And in their secret closettes they were sore amassed all.
Let the Lord live and let him be praised that is my stay:
And let the God of my soul health, be extolled I say.
It is God that gives me power, for to revenge my wrong:
And that does subdue unto me, peoples mighty and strong.
It is God that does lead me out from my deadly enmies:
Lord thou do bring me up from the^ that do against me rise.
And from the man that does purpose me wrong and violence:
Thou do deliver me I say with careful diligence.
And for this cause (O Lord) I will, in the Heathen praise the:
And will sing to thine holy name, wherso ever I be.
And for the greatness of the health, and prosperouse lyueynge.
Wherwyth thou do enrych David, thine own anointed king.
And for the health whereby thou do with benefits apply:
Thine anointed David and eke his seed eternally.
The.xix. Psalm.
TO us the heavens do declare, gods wonderful glory:
And the compass thereof does show his handworcke truly.
The day that succedeth shall teach us yet a little more:
And the night following shall show more then that went before.
They have no manner of language, nor words sowndynge with noise.
They speak not as men use to speak, no man does hear their voice.
Yet went their rule through out ye world, all men have heard their sound:
And their words went into the coasts, of all the world sorownde.
In these heavens the Lord has set, a dwelling place and tent:
For the sun that with his bright beams, is always resplendent.
And as a brydgrowme he comes out of his bower bright:
Right cherfully to run his raze, like to a man of might.
At the utmost part of the east, he does his raze begin:
And in the vtmoste of the weste, is his returning in.
And under the heavens that be so wonderful and wide:
There is not one that from his heat may him absent or hyde.
The Lords law is pure and perfect, turnynge the soul to it.
So is his testimonye true, geueynge the simple wit.
The decrees of the Lord are straight, and make a man's heart light:
So is the Lords precept most pure, and makes the eyes bright.
The fear of the Lord is right pure, and does ever excel:
So are his judgments true and just, this do I know right well.
They are more to be desired, then plenty of pure goulde:
And sweter then the honey comb, that droppeth many fold.
Yea in them thy pore servant is chiefly admonished:
And in the observance of them, much hyre is promised.
Who is able to mark his fautes, and them to understand?
To purge me from my secret fautes, Lord do thou take in hand.
And put from me all great mischiefs, lest they overcome me:
And then from all great treaspases, I shall innocent be.
O Lord that art my sure defense, and do revenge my right:
Let my words and thought of mine heart be pleasant in thy sight.
The.xx. Psalm.
I Beseech God the Lord hear the, in all thy misery:
And that the name of Jacobs God do place the in safety.
And that he help and succor the, from his sanctuary:
And that out of Sion he do underset the surely.
And that he do remember all thy gifts or sacrifice:
And that thy fat bre^t offeringes, be pleasant in his eyes.
God grant he give the thy desire, even as thine heart does will
And that all thy mind and counsel he do thoroughly fulfill.
Then with singing we will rejoice in thy salvation:
And with triumph set up bannars in our gods name anon.
For the Lord will fulfill al thy requests, this is no nay:
And then shall each man in his heart break out in words and say.
Now I acknowledge that the Lord, has preserved his king:
And has heard him out of heaven where he is abiding.
I acknowledge he has heard him out of his holy place:
By the saueynge strength of his power, and his plentiful grace.
Let some put their trust in charettes, and some in horses hye:
Yet the name of the Lord our God will we speak of truly.
They fell underneath their burden, and were quite destroyed:
But we stood styfly under it, and were still strengthened.
The Lord shall aye preserve and keep his own anoyted king:
And in the day when we shall call he shall give us hearing.
The.xxj. Psalm.
Lord in thy might and power the king shall be glad and merry.
And in thy saueyng health he shall rejoice excedyngly.
Thou haste given him his hertes desire, without any delay:
And of the things he has asked thou have not said him nay.
With the best and most pleasant gifts thou haste him prevented:
And right so with a crown of goulde, his head thou have crowned.
He asked life of the and thou haste given to him certain:
Such lenght of days that he shall be, when no time shall remain.
Through the health that thou gaueste him, right great is his glory:
Upon him thou have set honor, and bryghtnes great plenty.
Thou haste set him that he has aye plentye and abundance:
Of all good things, so do thou chere him with thy comtenaunce.
For in the Lord the king puts, his trust unfeignedly.
And shall stand stydfastly through the goodness of God most hye.
Thine hand has found all such men as, thy deadly enmies be:
And thy right hand has found all such, as ever hated the.
Like a fornayce in thine anger, thou have them all kenled:
The Lord has eat them in his Ire, fire has them consumed.
The fruit of their bodies thou haste rowted out of the land.
And haste not suffered their seed emonge men for to stand.
For they went obout to noye the, and for to do the ill:
They invented such wyckednes, as they could not fulfill.
But thou made them as a but, to shote at with thy bow:
And with thy string thou leuelledste even at their face I know.
Extolle thy self Lord in thy power, set up thy self on hye:
Then shall we sing and celebrate thy power most worthyly.
The.xxij. Psalm.
MY God, my God, why dydest thou, forsake thy pore servant?
From mine health and my roreynge cry, how far art thou distant?
By day I call on the my God, but no answer I hear:
And eke by night, but unto me no silence does appear.
Yet art thou the holy rular of praise in Israel:
Thou art, I say, the holy one that emonge them does dwell.
Our fathers have trusted in the, thou haste ben all their stay:
They have trusted in the and thou haste set them tree I say.
They have cried to the I say, and are delivered:
They have put all their trust in the, and are not ashamed.
As for me I am but a worm, I am no man in deed:
I am an opprobrye of men, of people despised.
So many as do look on me, do laugh at me always:
They mock, they mow and move their heads, and with them self they say.
He has left all things to the Lord, let him set him at large:
And for the love he bears him, let the same him discharge.
But thou art he (O Lord) that haste out of the womb drawn me:
And in my suckynge days I did put all my trust in the.
From the day of my birth I have been left to the only:
And from my mothers womb thou have ben my God certaynely.
Do not withdraw thy self far of, be not from me absent:
For there is no man for to help and trouble is present.
Great bulls have compassed me round with an unruly route.
And mighty men of Basan have beset me round about.
Against me have they opened their mouth wonderful wide:
Like as a lion that rampeth and roreth in his pride.
I am poured out like water, my bones are let aparte:
And as the wax that is molten, so is in me mine heart.
My strength dries up like a shell, and my tongue cleaves fast:
To my chekes, and into the duste of death brought me to haste.
Dogs and ylle men have me byset, and bound me in their bands:
And as a lion they have gnawen my fete, and eke mine hands.
I might have numbered al my bones, they were seen so planely:
But these men look upon me, and are delyted greatly.
They have divided emonge them all my garments I wotte:
And which of them should have my cote, they have tried by lotte.
But thou (O Lord) be not far of, O my strength and my power:
Make haste (O Lord) thy poor servant for to help and succoure.
Deliver my soul from the sword, and let not me be torn:
With mad dogs, nor with lions teeth, nor with unicorns horn.
Thine holy name will I declare to my brethren each one:
And praise the in the middle of the congregacyon.
All ye that fear the Lord, praise him, praise him all Jacobs seed:
And all the seed of Israel, fear ye the Lord in deed.
For the poor man's afflyctyon he has not neglected:
Neither turned away his face, but heard, when he cried.
Being in a great concyon, I praise the Lord only:
And in their fight that do fear him, my vows perform will I.
The poor and the abject shall eat, they shall al have their fill:
Such as seek the Lord, shall praise him, and their heart shall live still.
And all the quartars of the earth, shall have remors of mind:
And shall convert them to the Lord, as reasone does them bind.
All the housholdes and families that on the earth be found:
Shall humble them before his face, and lie flat on the ground.
For unto the Lord only al kingedom does appertain:
And emonge the heathen people the Lord him self does raygne.
The fat and welthy of the earth, shall eat and do worshype:
And all mysers shall bow to him, because he does them keep.
All such shall bow their knees to him, as do fall in the duste:
Because he kept their life, when that they said, needs dye we must.
The ofspringe and posterity shall him serve and obey:
And for ever more unto him their trybute shall they pay.
To the people that is not borne, they shall resort and tell:
His justice and his equity because it does excel.
The.xxiij. Psalm.
THe Lord is my sheperde, and I shall never stand in need:
For in pasture exceadinge good, he leads me to feed.
He causes me to lay me down in pasture full of grass:
And dryueth me to caulme waters, that be so clear as glass.
He calls my soul back again, and causes me to make:
My journey in the way of right, for his holy names sake.
Though I should go through the valey of the shadow of death:
I will be without fear of ill, all the days of my breath.
For thou art aye present with me, thou do me not forsake:
Thy rod and staff do comfort me, and do me merye make.
Over against my foes thou wylt spread a table for me:
Annoynte mine head with oil, and fyl my cup with great plenty:
But let thy merciful goodness follow me all my life:
And then shall I dwell in thine house without debate or strife.
The.xxiiij. Psalm.
THe earth and all that it holds, do to the lord belong:
The world and all that dwell therein as well the old as young.
For it is he that above all the seas has it founded:
And that above the fresh waters has the same prepared.
Who is it, that shall ascend up, into the lords mountain?
And who shall in his holy place abide still and remain?
That shall the man with giltlesse hands and heart pourged thoroughly.
Who does not give his mind, nor swear to fraud nor vanitye.
The same shall receive of the Lord blessinge and al increase:
And of his God and sauyoure he shall have ryghteousnes.
This is the nation of them, that seek the Lord I say:
It is the seed of Jacob, that seeks his face always.
Lift up your heads and open ye gates, and ye doors eternal:
And then that most gloriouse king shall pass in at you all.
Who is that king so gloryouse? the Lord strong and mighty:
The Lord that is most noble in the power of chyualrye.
Lift up your heads and open ye gates, and ye doors eternal:
And then that most gloryouse king shall pass in at you all.
Who is that king so gloryouse? let us know which is he:
The Lord of Hosts is that same king, so gloriouse to se.
The.xxv. Psalm.
O Lord, to the I lift mine heart, my God I trust in the:
Let me not take shame, lest my foes should rejoice over me.
Yea, Lord let none that trust in the, be put to open shame:
But let them that do fall from the, be put in all the blame.
O Lord, make thy ways known to me, teach me thy laws I say:
Do thou use me unto thy paths, and train me in thy way.
Lord, lead thou me forth in thy truth, and by use make me strong:
For thou art God my Savior, whom I seek al day long.
Remember thy mercyes (O Lord) and eke thy great goodness:
For sense the world was first create, they did yet never cease.
Lord bear not the sins of my youth any longer in mind:
But forget all the wickedness, that thou do in me find.
But for thy goodness sake (O Lord) I humbly beseech the.
According to thy great mercy, be thou myndfull of me.
The Lord is good and eke rightwyse, no man can this deny:
And therefore will enstruct sinners in the way certaynelye.
He will guide the meke in judgment, they shall do right I say:
And the lowly in spyryte he will accustom to his way.
All the ways of the Lord are found mercy and truth certes.
To them that keep his covenant, and his testymonyes.
O Lord forgive my wyckednes, for thine holy names sake:
For mine iniquity is great, do not thou me forsake.
Whosoever fears the Lord, the same he will lead in the way:
That he him self shall choose, and wylbe his succoure and stay.
His mind shall tarry in good things, ever without greuaunce.
His seed also shall have the earth for their enherytaunce.
The Lord shall make his secret known to them that do him fear:
In like manner his covenant, shall unto the^ appear.
Wpon the Lord my God mine eyes are always surely set:
For he it is that does still louse, my fete out of the net.
Look back on thy servant (O Lord) and take on me mercy:
For I am succourlesse I say, and in great myserye.
The sorrows and cares of mine heart are made most large in deed:
To lead me out of my trouble, Lord God do thou make speed.
Lord be hold mine afflyction, and eke mine heauynes:
And take away from me my sins and all my wyckednes.
Consider thou mine enemies, for they are right many:
And wythall vyolent despyte they do hate me deadly.
O Lord, I say, keep thou my soul, and eke deliver me:
Let me never be put to shame, for I do trust in the.
O Lord, let perfectnes of life, and equity keep me:
Because I tarry for thy grace, and put my trust in the.
O God redeem thou Israel and thy people each one:
From al their trouble and from al their great afflyctyon.
The.xxvi. Psalm.
IVdge me (O Lord) because I have walked innocently:
And trusting in the Lord, I shall stand up most steadfastly.
O Lord, do thou search and prove me, try thou my renes and heart:
For I beholdinge thy mercy will not from thy truth stert.
I do not sit emonge such men as walk in vanity:
Neither go I in unto them that work disceytfully.
The company of wicked men I do hate most deadly:
And with the ungodly I will not sytin company.
In innocencye will I wash mine hands wythoutten doubt.
And then thine holy aultare (Lord) I will compass about.
That I may speak the words of praise and magnyfye thy name:
And eke declare thy wonders al, and thy wonderful fame.
The dwelling of thine house I have loved most entierely:
And the place of the tabernacle of thy great glory.
Gather thou not my soul emonge them, that dosynne in deed:
Neither my life emonge such men as love blood for to shede.
In whose hands wyckednes is still studied for before:
And whose right hand is never void of brybynge gifts great store:
But I do walk innocentlye, I study no man's ylle:
Redeem me Lord, and show mercy to thy poor servant still.
My foot stands in the straight way, I do not go astraye:
In all companies I will praise the Lord of might for aye.
The.xxvij. Psalm.
THe Lord is my light and mine health, of whom should I fear take?
The Lord is the strength of my life, who should cause me to quake?
Whylse ylle men set their men in raye, my flesh for to devour:
Mine enmyes did stumble and fall, none could be their succoure.
Though whole armies should bysydge me, mine heart shall nothing fear:
And though wars should grow against me, yet would I not despeare.
I have axte one thing of the Lord, and will require the same.
That I may dwell all my life time in his house without blame.
That I may se the Lords be autie, so wonderful in sight:
And walk about all his temple, that is so goodly dyght.
For in his tent he will hyde me in time of myserie:
He will hyde me in the secret of his tent pryuelye.
He will lift me up on the rock, he will lift up mine head:
Above my deadly enimyes, that have me compassed.
I will offer sacryfyces in his tente with singing:
I will sing and rehearse an hymn unto the Lord our king.
O Lord hear thou my voice, wherwyth I do upon thy call:
Be merciful to me I say, and hear my prayers all.
For thy sake has mine heart said thus, seek the Lord, O my face:
For I will endeavor (O Lord) thy favor to purchase.
Hyde not nor turn thy face from me, for thou art my succor:
Leave me not of nor forsake me, O God my savior.
For when my father and mother forsake me utterly:
Then does the Lord gather me up, and keep me in salfetie.
Teach me thy way Lord, and lead me in a path that is right:
For their sakes that lay wait for me, to take me if they might.
Give me not up to their pleasure, that with me be angry:
For false wytnes stood against me, and threate me injury.
Save that I trust to se the pleasure of the Lord of might:
In the land of the living, I had dispeared out right.
Look for the Lord, trust in him still, make thine heart stout and strong:
And tarry for the Lord I say, revenge not thine own wrong.
The.xxviij. Psalm.
O Lord my strength I cry to the, be not deaf, lest I be:
Made like them that fall in the pyt, if thou speak not to me.
Hear the voice of all my prayers, whilse I do on the cry:
And lift up mine hands toward the door of thy sanctuarye.
Do not repute or reken me emonge the ungodly:
Neither emonge such men as do commytte iniquytie.
Number me not with them, I say, that do speak peaceably:
With their neighbors, but in their heart, do al myschiefe study.
Give them according to their work, let them be rewarded:
According to the wyckednes that they have studied.
According to their handy worckes so requite them their mede:
And give to them the just reward that they have deserved:
Because they marckt not the Lords works, nor things made by his might:
He will cast them all down again, and not build them out right.
The Lord of might is most worthy, to be always praised:
Because he has heard my request, and has it accepted.
The Lord is my strength and my shylde, in him mine heart trusted:
And I received help, wherefore mine heart is delyted.
And with my song I will praise him, and eke his holy name:
I will remember his goodness, and teach other the same.
The Lord is the strength of them all that to David did clynge:
Right so is he the saueyng health, of his anointed king.
Preserve and keep the people Lord, and bless thine herytaunce:
Feed them (O Lord) and promote them, do them ever advance.
The.xxix. Psalm.
AScrybe unto the Lord all ye, that in strength do excel:
Ascrybe glory and honor to the Lord of Israel.
Ascrybe all glory to the name of the Lord most mighty:
Honor the Lord in comlynes, most decent, and holy.
The Lords voice is upon waters, the gloryouse God thundreth:
Wonders upon many waters, the Lord him self worcketh.
The voice of the Lord is in power, without him there is none:
The Lords voice is magnificence, he does great things alone.
The Lords voice breaks Cedre trees, it breaks them in twain.
The Lord I say breaks the great Cedre trees of Lybane:
And he causes them for to leap, like a stere or bullock:
Lybaine and Sirion as coltes of the unicorns flock.
Great flammes of fire slyt in sunder, the Lords voice shuteth out.
The many fold kinds of lyghnynge are, the Lords work no doubt.
The Lords voice makes the desert as of child to travail.
The Lord makes Cades deserte, to trauayl without fail.
The Lords voice causes hyndes travail, and makes the wodes bare:
But in his temple all men do praise him with all their care.
The Lord sytteth in the deludge, that ouerfloweth wide:
He sytteth Lord and king, I say, and does ever abide.
The Lord gives his people power, them self for to defend.
Mercy and peace to his people, the Lord does ever send.
The.xxx. Psalm.
I Will praise the (O Lord) because thou haste me broke and worn:
But haste not suffered my foes, for to laugh me to scorn.
O Lord my God, in my sycknes I have cried to the:
I have called on the, I say, and thou haste healed me.
Lord thou haste called my soul back, from the brym of the pyt:
And haste restored me, that I should not fall into it.
Ye that have felt the Lords mercy, sing a Psalm unto him:
Set forth the memory of his holiness with an hymn.
For his anger bydeth not long, and when he is pleased:
He gives life unto each man, that has on him trusted.
Though they come home wepeynge at night with a sorowefull voice:
Yett in the morn comes gladness, they shall again rejoice.
Certainly I said in this wise in my prosperity:
I will never bow nor yet bend, but stand up still stoutly.
For thou (O Lord) had placed strength on thy servants mountain:
But as soon as thy face was hyd, I was troubled again.
Unto the my Lord did I call, in this mine heavy case:
And did with most erneste prayar, fall down before thy face.
What should my blood profit if I should go down to the pyt?
Shall dust praise the? or shall thy truth be declared by it?
O Lord, hear and grant my request, be merciful to me:
O Lord I say be thou mine help I humbly beseech the.
My wepeyng and waylyng thou have into a dawnce turned:
So haste thou loosed my sakcloth, and me with joy clothed.
Wherefore each man shall sing to the, glory wythouten stay:
O Lord my God for ever more I will praise the I say.
The.xxxj. Psalm.
O Lord I trust in the alone, let me never have nay:
Deliver me in thy justice, when I do to the pray.
Bow down thine ear to me I say, deliver me outryght:
Be my defense and sure castle, to save me by thy might.
For thou art my rock and sure ground and my defense at need:
Wherefore for thy names sake lead me, and drive me forth to feed.
Bring me out of the net that they have laid and hyd for me:
Because my might and eke my strength, remains whole in the.
Into thine hands I do commit my soul unfeignedly:
Thou haste redeemed me, O Lord, the God of verity.
I have hated all such men as do follow vanity:
But in the Lord I have always trusted unfeignedly.
Of thy mercy I will rejoice, thou that lokest on my pain:
And that in my great misery doeste not my soul disdain.
Neither haste shette me in the hand or power of mine enmie:
But haste set my foot all at large, and at full liberty.
Be merciful to me (O Lord) for I am sore oppreste:
Mine eyes dasle, and eke my soul and bealy take small rest.
Sorrow freateth my life away, mourning bryngth my last day:
My strength fails through wyckednes, al my bones waste away.
All my foes and enmies have made, a raylynge stock of me:
But chyeflye such in very deed as of my neighbors be.
My fryndes and my famyliars have hated me outright:
And when they saw me come abroad, they fled out of my sight.
I was forgotten utterly, as a man that is dead:
So was I made like a vessel, that long sense perished.
I heard that many blamed me, and laid faults to my charge
Fear and tremblyng stood about I might not walcke at large.
Whylse they consulted together, and did their wits employe:
How to invent away to take my pore soul subtylly.
But I have put my trust in ye (O Lord) unfeignedly:
And with mine heart thus have I said, thou art my God truly.
Lord my life days are in thine hand, let me never be thrall:
Set thou me free from mine enmies and persequutours all.
Lyghten thy countenance upon, thy pore servant I say:
And for thy merciful goodness, save me with out delay.
O Lord let me not ask in vain, because I call on the:
But let the wicked have that shame, in the grave let them be.
Let lyeynge lyppes have naught to say, which speak most craftily:
And eke proudly against the just, and most dispytfully.
Right large are the good things that thou do keep for them that be:
In thy fear, and that thou dydst in their sight that trust in the.
Under thy face thou shall hyde them, from all men's conspyrynge:
From the debate of tongues thou shall hyde them in thy dwelling.
The Lord is worthy for to be praised of old and young:
For notably he showed me his mercy in a town strong.
When I fled hastily, I thought, I am cast of surely:
But thou heardst the voice of my prayer, when I did to the cry.
All ye true servants of the Lord, love him unfeignedly:
Who does defend the faithful and plage the proud plentuousely.
Be strong and myghtie, for the Lord will cause your heart be strong:
So many of you as do trust in him boeth old and young.
The.xxxij. Psalm.
THat man is blessed that is lyghted of his transgression:
And whose sin is hid in the hope of his salvation.
The man is bleste to who^ the Lord does not impute his sin:
So is he bleste within whose breaste no disceyte does begin.
Whylse I do daily with my self, sometime thyncke secretly:
And some time break out with weeping, my bones consume greatly.
For night and day thine hand and power, lies upon me heavy:
My iuse and moisture are made like things that summer does dry.
But when I had told the my fault and had not hyd my sin:
And after that I had this thought, it is best I begin:
For to confess unto the Lord, all my transgression:
Forth with thou dydst give me of all my sins remission.
Wherefore each goodman will pray the dureynge the time of grace:
And the floude of the ragynge waves shall not come to his place.
Thou art mine hydynge place and wylt, keep me from misery:
And wylt beset me with the mirth of men that escape hardly.
Thou have said, I will teach the, in the way thou should go:
And with mine eye and clear knowledge, I will help the also.
Be not like to the horse or mule, that do naught understand:
Whose chawes thou must bynd with a bytte ere they follow thine hand.
The sorrows of the wicked men, are right many in deed:
But he that does stycke to the Lord shall never stand in need.
Be glad in the Lord (O ye just) and rejoice in his sight:
Sing unto him so many as are in your hertes upright.
The.xxxiij. Psalm.
Rejoice ye just men in ye Lord, praise does good men beseme:
Praise ye the Lord with harppe and lute, play on ten strings to him.
Sing a new song, syngeswete music with blowynge of trumpet:
For the word of the Lord is right, and all his worckes sure set.
He loves justice and judgment, these things please him greatly:
And the earth is replenished, and full of his mercy.
At his word were the heavens made by his wonderful might:
And at the breathynge of his mouth, all their armies so bright.
The waters of the sea he does, congregate as an heap:
Right so in most secret closettes, he does lay up the deape.
Let all the earth and all that dwell in the world praise the Lord:
Because all that he says is done, all is made at his word.
He disapoynteth the counselles of ye Heathen each one:
And does differ the subtyle thoughts, of each great nation.
But the Lords counsel stands still, and the thoughts of his heart:
Do not decay but are fully fulfilled in each part.
The people that has the Lord for their God has right good chance:
So has the flock that he has chose for his enheritaunce.
The Lord looks down from heaven, and does all men behold:
He looks down from his dwelling boeth upon young and old.
He has made the hertes of all men together in his power:
And understands all their worckes, every day and hour.
The king is not kept in saulftie, through his great army:
Nor the strong man does escape daynger, because he is mighty.
The horse is a disceytfull thing to be preserved by:
Though he be strong, for he shall not deliver certaynely.
Behold the Lords eye looks on such me^ as do him fear:
So does it on such as trust on his mercy so tender.
That he might deliver their souls, out of the hands of death:
And nouryshe them at such time, as honger them oppresses.
Let our souls (therefore) look for him with all obedience:
For he is our help, and also the shylde of our defense.
For in him shall our heart rejoice, because we do cleave fast:
Unto his holy name, which is our comfort and repaste.
Lord, let thy mercyful goodness upon thy servants be:
Even as by trust and confydence we do depend of the.
The.xxxiiij. Psalm.
AT all times and ceasons I will praise the Lord God certain:
For in my mouth his holy praise does ever more remain.
My soul shall glory in the Lord, and in none other thing:
Which when the afflicted shall hear, they shall make reioyceynge.
Se that with me you magnify, the Lord that is above:
Let us praise his name together, as reasone does us move.
I sought the Lord diligently, and he heard my request:
And from al fear that I was in, he has set me at rest.
Men shall look back to him and shall run to his company:
Their faces shall not blushe for he will none of them deny.
The Lord heard this afflicted man when he did on him cry:
And then he did preserve and keep him from his miserye.
The angel of the Lord does pytch his tents about them all:
That ieare the Lord and does set clear, such men as erste were thrall.
Taste and see that the Lord is good, and full of all mercy:
The man is blessed that does trust in him unfeignedly.
O ye saynctes of the Lord fear him, and do him reverence:
For to such as fear him there is no need nor indigence.
The young lions, and fierce tyrannes, suffer honger and need:
But such as seek the Lord shall have, good things plenty in deed.
Draw nere my sons, draw nere I say and give to me good ear:
Come unto me, I say, for I will teach you the Lords fear.
Who so thou be that doeste desire to live and good days see:
Look that in thy tongue and thy lyppes, none ylle or disceyte be.
Flee from ill and do that good is, whereof comes no blame:
Seek thou for peace diligently, and then ensue the same.
Upon the just man the lords eyes are full fyred and bent:
And his ears to the prayars of such as be innocent.
But his stern lokes are bent on the^, that do work wyckedly:
That out of the arth he may cut their fame and memory.
The just men cry, and the Lord does hear and grant their prayer:
And out of all their myseries he does them deliver.
The Lord is still ready at hand with them that do repent:
And keeps them, whose spirit is to repentance still bent:
Many yuelles and misfortunes do the ryghteouse man befall:
But the Lord does deliver him, and ryd him of them all.
And all the bones of his body the Lord keeps certain:
So that not one emonge them al can be broken in twain.
But ill chance and mysfortune shall destroy the ungodly:
And such as hate the just, shall be destroyed utterly.
And the Lord shall redeem the life of his true servants all:
And of them that do trust in him none shall peryshe or fall.
The.xxxv. Psalm.
TAke thou my strife in hand (O Lord) assaute them that saute me:
Take the to shylde and spear and rise mine helper for to be.
Pull out thy spear, come out to mete my persecutours fell:
Say to my soul, I am thine health, thy matters shall go well.
Let the^ that seek my life, take shame, and eke ignominy:
Let them be driven back with shame, that thyncke evil unto me.
Let them be made like to the dust, that with the wind does fly:
And let the angel of the Lord drive them vyolently.
Let their way be darcke and slyprye, that they may slide and fall:
And let the angel of the Lord persequute them with all.
For without cause the pytte of their net have they for me hyd:
Right so a great trenghe for my soul, causeles they have dug.
Let the mysery that they did not fore se on them fall:
And let the net, they hyd, take them, and let them be made thraule.
But my soul shall greatly rejoice in the Lord God for aye:
She shall rejoice in his salfegarde, and all my bones shall say:
O Lord who is like the? that do rescue the conquyred:
And take the poor and nedye from him that has him forced?
There did arise fierce witnesses, men violent in deed:
And asked me of things, that I never Imagyned.
They requited me euel for good, such was their cruel will:
And for ye help they had of me, they sought me for to kill.
But when I heard that they were sick, and with disease grieved:
I ware sack cloth, and with fasting my soul I afflicted.
The prayer that I made for them when they were in distress:
I would should light upon my self in time of heaviness.
I went as though my faithful friend or brother had dyed:
As one that mourns his mother in black I was clothed.
But in the time of mine halting when I was weakened:
They did rejoice excedyngly and were congregated.
The lame flocked against me when I did thyncke nothing less:
And from their bitter raylynge words, they did then never cease.
And the dissembling hypocrites, that do serve their bealy:
Did grenne and gnaske their teeth at me, as men full of envy.
O Lord how long wylt thou behold, this and fuffer them still?
Rydde me from their oppression, and from their cruel will.
Then will I celebrate thy name, in a great company:
And will praise the in a people that is strong and myghtie.
Let them not rejoice over me, that causeless my foes be:
Neither let them wyncke wyles with me, that without cause hate me.
They speak no word that should bread peace, peace is not their intent:
But against the quiet they do disceytefull words invent.
They thruste out the mouth against me, and stornefully they say:
Haha haha, our eye has seen, this man's utter decay.
And thou (O Lord) haste seen this thing do thou not dissemble:
Neither be thou far of from me, when they do assemble.
Arise, awake, that thou may judge my cause as right does stand:
My God and Lord, arise that thou maiste take my cause in hand.
O Lord my God, for thy justice do thou give me my right:
And suffer them not to rejoice, over me in thy sight.
Let them not say thus in their heart, haha we have our mind:
Let them not say, we have eat him, let the^ no such cause find.
Let them all take shame and rebuke, that of mine ylle rejoice.
Cloth them with shame that speak against me with a bragging voice.
Let such as would I had my right, rejoice greatly, and say
The Lord that would his servants peace be magnifyed always.
And on my tongue (Lord) thy justice shall sown dylygently:
And upon thy most worthy praise my tongue shall run daily.
The.xxxvi. Psalm.
THe ungodly man's wickedness testyfyeth in mine heart:
That of the fear of God there is in him no manner part.
For in his own conceyte he does stand wonderfully well:
Till such time as his wyckednes does all hatered excel.
Unjust and disceytfull are the words of his mouth each one:
And of the doctrine that does teach to do good, he will none.
In his bed he inuenteth sin, and does himself address:
To walk forth in a wicked way, he does no vice repress.
O Lord thy mercy is above in the heavens so hye:
And above all the elements thy truth and verity.
Thy justice is like great mountains, and thy judgments right deep:
Boeth man and beast thou wylt (O Lord) always preserve and keep.
Thy merciful goodness (O God) is right famous in deed:
And to thy charge the sons of men have them self committed.
Through the great ple^tie of thine house they shall be druncke I thyncke:
Of the stream of thy delicates, thou wylt give them to drink.
For the vene or fountain of life is in thyn hand or might:
And in thy bryghtnes thy servants shall always perceive light.
Spread out thy mercy over them that do acknowledge the:
And eke thy ryghtuousenes on them, that of upright heart be.
Let no foot of pride come to me, make proud men from me fly:
Let me not be moved by the power of the ungodly.
For among them such men as have wrought wyckednes did fall:
They were driven magrea their head, they had no stay at all.
The.xxxvij. Psalm.
THough thou se many wicked men, be not therefore angry:
Neither do thou envy them that do work iniquity.
For as the heye they are cut down, full suddenly in deed:
And as the florishyng grene grass they shall be sone dried.
Put thou thy trust in the Lord and do the thing that good is:
Dwell in the land and nourishe faith, doing no thing amysse.
And se thou do delyght thy self, in ye Lord God alone:
And then shall he give unto the, thine hertes petition.
Cast thou thy way upon the Lord, let him govern it still:
Lean upon him that he may do by the after his will.
Then shall he bring thy ryghtuousenes abroad like a clear light:
And thy judgments and perfect life, like as the myddaye bright.
Keep thy thought secret to the Lord, and wait upon his will:
Do not stomach the good success, of the man that does ylle.
Remitte anger without delay, and let thy fury pass:
Let not thine anger be so great, that thou commit trespass.
For such as do evil shall perish, and be cut out doubtless:
But they that wait on the Lords will, shall the earth aye possess.
Yet a little while and then the wicked shall be nowhere:
And when thou lokeste toward his place, there shall no man appear.
In the mean time the afflycted, shall all the earth possess:
And shall be thoroughly delited with prosperouse success.
Against the just and godly man, the wicked does invent:
And gnasheth at him with his teeth, his wrath is so fervent.
But the Lord laugheth him to scorn, because he does forese.
His last day and destruction nygh at hand for to be.
The wicked do draw out their sword and bend their bow with might:
To cast down the pore nedie slocke, and kill them that go right.
But their own sword shall pearse their heart, and stryke it through quite:
And all their bows shall be broken, they shall do us no spyte.
The little that the just man has, is much better doubtless:
Then the great richesse that the noble wicked men possess.
For the arms of the ungodly, shall be broken in twain:
But the just men the Lord him self, will underset certain.
The time also of innocents, the Lord knows right sure:
And the enheritaunce of the^ shall evermore endure.
In the time of adversity, they shall suffer none ylle:
And when the honger is most great, they shall aye have their fill.
For the ungodly shall perish, the Lords enemies shall.
Be wasted like preciouse lambs, smoke shall consume them all.
The ungodly renneth in det and does not pay again:
But the just man is liberal, and gives much certain.
For his blessed children shall have, the earth by heritage:
And his curssed sort shall be cut out ere they come to age.
The Lord rules a man's fotesteppes, and lyketh well his way:
When he slydeth he falls not, for the Lord does him stay.
I have been young and am now old, yet the eyes in mine head:
Did neuerse the just deserte, nor his seed beg their bread.
For he is daily lyberall, and does lend with good will:
And his seed and posterity, have of al things their fill.
Fly thou from ill and do the thing that is good and godly:
And then thou maiste be sure thou shall ever dwell pleasantly.
For the Lord loves just judgment, he does therein delyght:
The ways of them that do justly are pleasante in his sight.
His saynctes he does never forsake, but keeps them for aye:
But the seed of the ungodly, he routeth out I say.
The just men shall possess the earth by right of heritage:
And shall inhabyte upon it to the end of all age.
The just man's mouth does commune of wisdom and sapience:
So does his tongue speak just judgment with careful diligence.
In his heart the law of his God, is grounded and fast pyght:
His footsteps shall not bend nor bow his life shall be upright.
The ungodly man lays wait and watches the just still:
He seeks opportunity him to murder and kill.
But the Lord will not suffer him to fall into his hand:
Nor to be found wicked when he does at his trial stand.
Trust in the Lord and marcke his way, se that thou do not rage:
And he shall the promote to have the earth by heritage.
And when the ungodly men shall be clearly routed out:
Thou shall se and behold the same with reioycynge no doubt.
I my self saw a wicked man, full violent was he:
And did sprede forth him self as does the fresh buddynge baye tree.
And the same passed by, and lo, he did no more remain:
I sought him, but after that time he was not found again.
Observe and keep a perfect life, and trust for that is right:
For that man only that does so, shall have peace in gods sight.
But the ungracious sort shall all be destroyed no doubt:
And at the last the ungodly shall be all routed out.
The health and salfgard of the just, is from the Lord alone:
Who is all their strength in the time of their affliction.
The Lord shall help and deliver them from the ungodly:
And shall keep them, for in him they have trusted certainly.
The.xxxviij. Psalm.
Lord check thou not thy pore servant in thine hasty fury:
Neither correct me in the heat, of thy melancholy.
For thy shaftes be fastened in me, they styck fast in my side:
And thy power is more heavy on me then I may abide.
Through thy displeasure there is in my flesh nothing sownde:
And by means of my sin no peace to my bones can be fownde.
For mine inequities do clyme over mine head certain:
And as an heavy burden are more then I can sustain.
And through mine own fond folyshnes my byles are rankelled:
And flow out with matter that was in the^ putrified.
I go crooked, well most two fold, and am priest down greatly:
Every day I walcke about wonderful heauyly.
For a foul and most fylthy byle, does cover mine hyppe bone:
And in all the parts of my flesh, whole place do I find none.
I am turmoyled and tossed and broken passing sore:
And the great sorrow of mine heart, makes me cry and rore.
O Lord thou do all my desire right well perceive and se:
And the deep syghynges of mine heart, are not unknown to the.
Mine heart beats within my breast my strength has me failed:
And the very light of mine eyes, is greatly decayed.
My friends and my famyliars, stand on the other side:
Over against my wound, and my neighbors afar of bide.
In the mean time such as do seek my life lay snares warelye.
And such as seek mine evil, speak evil, and do disceyte apply.
But I am like one that is deaf, and do hear naught at all:
And like the dombe that does not open his mouth to cry or call.
I am like unto the man that does hear nothing certain:
Nor has ought in his mouth to make for him answer again.
For I tarry for the (O Lord) I put my trust in the:
And thou (O Lord) my God I say, shall make answer for me.
For thus I thought (O Lord) let not so great reioyceyng be:
Emonge them that do when I slide, make such bragges against me.
For now it stands so with me, that I must live lame aye:
And my sorrow can never go from me by night nor day.
For I do still confess my fault, and mine iniquity:
And for my sin I am troubled in heart excedyngly.
But in the mean time mine enmies do live and be made strong:
And they increase that without cause, hate me and do me wrong.
And they that requite evil for good are against me sore bent:
Because I follow the thing that is good with full consent.
Forsake me not (O Lord my God) stand not for of from me:
Make thou haste to help me (O Lord) for mine health lies in the.
The.xxxix. Psalm.
THus said I with my self and thus I have purposed long:
I will observe my ways that I offend not with my tongue.
And whylse the wicked is present, I will my mouth restrain:
Even as with a right strong halter, or with a bridle rain.
Through long silence I was so dombe that I could speak nothing:
Of good nor bad, yet in the mean time my sorrow did spring.
Mine heart waxed hot within me whylse I thus murmured:
A certain fire burned outryght, and then my tongue lowsed.
Mine end and measure of my days (Lord) show to me plainly:
That I may know how long I must live in this misery.
Lo, thou haste appointed my time much shorter for to be:
Then an hand breadth, yea it is naught, compared unto the.
Certes the stouteste man of all, is of right small valor:
Though to men's sight he seem to stand never so firm and sure.
Man follows his fantacie, and does folyshly rage:
He heapeth up not knowing who shall have his heritage.
And now (O Lord) what thing is it, that I look for to have?
For truly mine hope lies on the, of the only I crave.
Deliver me from al vices and all things ungodly:
And make me not a mocking stock to men full of follye.
I was made dombe and spoke no word, my mouth I opened not:
For thou thy self haste made me so (O my Lord God) I wot.
Take thou from me thy scorge therefore, plage thy servant no more:
For at the styrrynge of thine hand, I am amassed sore.
For when thou do with chiding words, chastise a man for sin*
Forthwyth all his goodly beawtie to consume does begin.
And as the moth wastes the cloth, right so Lord do thou than:
Waste all that is comlye in him, so vain a thing is man.
O Lord hearken to my prayar, and give ear to my cry:
Be not deaf when I weep to the, hear me mercifully.
For I am a strainger with the, my dwelling is not here:
I am only a sogenar, as all our fathers were.
Turn a side yet a while from me, that I may recover:
Before I do depart from hense, and be as one no where.
The.xl. Psalm.
AFter I had long looked for the Lord right carefully:
At last he did give head to me and hearken to my cry.
From that wretched pyt and thycke mire, he has pulled me out:
He has set me upon the stone, and made my footsteps stout.
And in my mouth he has set a new song praise to our God:
Which thing many shall se and fear, and shall trust in the Lord.
That man is bleste that ever shall make the Lord his defense:
And shall not pass upon the proud, nor men of light credence.
O Lord my God, thou have wrought and done many things in deed:
Thy wonderful worckes done for us, can not be numbered.
Which if I should once take in hand, to set forth and declare:
Many more then I can nu^bre I know right well they are.
Sacrifice and meat offering, thou do not love I know:
But have bored mine ears through, making me base and low.
Thou haste made me thy bond servant, and haste not required:
Brent offeringe nor sacrifice for sin to be offered.
Then did I say, behold I am ready at hand with the:
In the first pagine of the book it is written of me.
I assent (O my God) to do all that thou doeste allow:
And in the mids of my bowelles thy law is placed now.
I have preached thy righteousness, in a great company:
Lo, I never forbade my lyppes, this knowste thou certainly.
Thy righteousness I have not kept, with in mine heart secret:
Thy sure promises and thy health, I have still abroad set.
I have not ceased to declare, in a great concion:
Thy goodness and thy verity, thy mercies Lord each one.
Neither do thou keep back (O Lord) from me thy mercies free:
Thy goodness and thy verity, do evermore keep me:
Because innumerable euelles, had so oppressed me:
My sins did so possess me that I could none of them see.
They were many more in number then the hears of mine head:
Wherefore mine heart has failed me, I became like one dead.
Let it please the therefore (O Lord) to set thy servant fre:
Make haste (O Lord) do not tarry but come and succor me.
Let them suffer shame and reproufe that seek my soul to kill:
And let them be driven back with shame, that delight in mine ill.
Let them that say haha, haha, to me in scornful wise:
Be quite wasted because they did my rebuke enterprise.
Let such as do seek the, rejoice and eke be glad in the:
And let them that love thine health say, praised might the Lord be.
But I am afflicted and pore, the Lord cares for me:
Thou art mine help and redemer, my God do not tarry.
The.xli. Psalm.
Happy is he that with the pore uses him self wisely:
For the Lord shall deliver him in time of misery.
The Lord shall keep him, and to him, he shall his health restore:
That on the earth he may enjoy pleasures yet a while more.
For thou (O Lord) do not favor thy pore servant so ill:
As to permit his enimyes to use him at their will.
And lyinge in his sycknes bed, thou shall him still sustain:
And in his weakness thou shall change all his whole bed certain.
Wherefore do I also say thus. O Lord be good to me:
Heal thou my soul, for I also have sinned against the.
Mine enmies curssed me and said, when shall we se him dye?
When shall his name perish and be put out of memory?
And when any of them came to me, full vaynely he spoke:
And thought evil in heart, but when he came abroad out it brake.
Emonge them selves mine enemies, did whysper together:
Against me, and thus did they thyncke on my mischief ever.
Some great myschyfe is fallen on him, he shall perish certain:
Sith he is laid sick in his bed he shall not rise again.
Yea and my most familiar, whom I trusted greatly.
And he that fed at my table, spurned me suddenly.
Thou therefore Lord be good to me, show me mercy in deed:
Set me up on my fete that I may requite them their mede.
By this thing do I know my self in thy favor to be:
Because my foes do not rejoice nor tryu^phe over me.
And because I am innocent of life thou wylt me stay:
And wylt set and appoint me in thine own presence always.
Let the Lord God of Israel be praised evermore:
From time to time praised be he, Ame^ say we therefore.
The.xlij. Psalm.
Like as the hynde does cry after the swifte renneynge water*
So does my soul cry unto the (O God my redemer)
My soul is thyrstie after God, the God that lives aye:
When at the last shall I appear before gods face I say?
My tears have been my sustinau^ce boeth by day and by night:
Whylse they have daily said to me, where is thy God of might?
So sone as I remember how I led them in a route:
To the house of the Lord my God, my soul I do pour out.
When I remember how I led forth a great company:
Singing and praysynge God, then does mine heart rejoice greatly.
O my soul why art thou so sad, and in me, so troubled?
Trust in God, for I will thancke him, for mine health received.
O my God, my soul in my breast does dispear utterly:
Because I am compelled in the wyldernes to lie.
Because I do remember the being against my will:
In the land beyond Iordayne and Hermonims little hill.
One depenes calls an other, as loud as thy stremes run:
All thy floudes and thy storms do pass over mine head often.
His merciful goodness the Lord shows to me by day:
And by night I dosyng and pray to God that lives aye.
Thus will I say to God my strength why do thou me forget?
Why do I go in mourning robes when my foes me byset?
When my foes say, where is thy God? and revile me daily:
It is as though they thrast asworde into my bones fiersly.
O my soul, why art thou so sad, and in me so troubled?
Trust in God for I will praise him, for mine health received.
I will celebrate him I say yet a while for mine health:
And for that he seweth him to be, the God of all my wealth.
The.xliij. psalm.
IVdge me (O God) and take my cause in hand and do me rydde.
From a wicked people and from a man false and wicked.
For thou my God, art my whole power, why haste thou put me by?
Why do I mourn when mine enmies do frete me cruely?
Send me thy light and verity, let them lead me the way:
Unto thine holy hill, and to thy dwelling place I say.
That to gods aultare and to God, my joy and reioyceynge:
I may enter, and to my God I may on mine harppesynge.
O my soul why art thou so sad, and in me so troubled?
Trust in God for I will praise him for mine health received.
I will I say celebrate him, for the health wherwyth he:
Shall make me glad and eke declare him self my God to be.
The.xliiij. Psalm.
O God we have heard with our ears our fathers have us told:
The worckes yt thou dydest in their times, and in the verneyers old.
To plant them in, thou haste by force, driven the heathen out.
Thou haste afflicted nations, but have made these men stout.
They did not win the land neither their health by their own might:
But by thy power and thy favor that hadste in them delyght.
And thou thy self (O God I say) art my Lord and my king:
Let the health of Jacob him self be at thy disposeynge.
Through the we shall shake them of that vex us in any wise:
And through thy name we shall neglect them that against us rise.
I will not put my confidence, nor my trust in my bow:
For my sword or other weapon shall not save me I know.
But thou do preserve and keep us from our adversaries:
And do make them ashamed that do hate us in such wise.
In God we do daily rejoice, in God we do glory:
And thy name do we celebrate (O God) eternallye.
But thou have cast us of and have brought us to open shame:
Thou go not forth with our armies, nor do prospere the same.
Thou turnest us to flight before our enemies I say:
And they that hate us most deadly do carry home the pray.
Thou haste appointed us as sheep, chosen to be killed:
And emonge Heathen nations thou haste us scattered.
Thou have sold thy people for naught this do we se full well:
Thou do not reyse the price of the^ setting them out to sell.
To be reviled of our neighbors, thou do set us out:
And make us a mocking stock, to them that dwell about.
Thou make us a matter for the heathen to talk of:
And a worthy matter whereat all nations may scoff.
Mine ignominy and reproach, is daily in my sight:
And shame has covered my face, to thyncke on their despyght.
I blushe I say to hear the talk of them that rail at me:
And for my foes and such as would so feign revenged be.
All these things do happen to us, yet we forget the not:
Neither be we found unfaithful, in thy comnaunt I wot.
Our heart returns not back ward, we favor thy ways still:
Neither do our steps swerve a side, from thy paths and thy will.
When thou dydste waste us in the place where the great dragons were:
And cover us with the shadow of death which man does fear:
If we had then forgote the name of our God and our king:
Declareynge our hertes to a straynge God of man's inuentynge:
Thyncke ye God would not have required it incontinent?
For he knows the secrets of the heart and the intent.
But for thy sake we are killed daily, this is certain:
And are esteemed as a flock appointed to be slain.
Awake, why do thou sheep (O Lord) awake (O Lord) I say:
Do not cast of thy pore servants and forsake them for aye.
Why doeste thou hyde thy face from us and thy bright countenance?
Forgetting our affliction and our deadly greauaunce?
For our life is made very base, no better then the duste:
Our bealy cleaneth to the grownde, to live we have no lust.
Arise, help us (O Lord I say) in this our great distress:
Redeem us for thy great mercy and for thy great goodness.
The xlv. Psalm.
SOme goodness does mine heart belche out, my meaning is godly:
My worckes and deeds unto the king plainly declare will I.
My tongue is like the pen of one that writes most swyftely:
And in my talk I speak my words very expeditely.
But emonge mortal men thou art, most eloquent of all:
Thou haste a grace in words, for God gave the gifts eternal.
O thou myghtie man gyrde thy sword upon thy thygh I say:
Thy glory and magnificence put on and the array.
And in thine own magnifice^ce ride thou prosperousely:
Upon the word of truth, mekenes, and that deals truly.
And thy right hand and myghtie power shall the enstructe and teach:
To do things that are wonderful, and beyond all men's reach.
Thy shaftes exceeding sharp shall pearse the heart of such as be:
The kings enmies, and much people shall be subject to the.
Thy princely seat shall stand for aye, O God strong and myghtie:
The scepter of thy kingdom is the mase of equity.
Thou loueste right and hateste wrong, because God anointed
The with the oil of gladness more the^ other elected.
All thy garments do savor of, Mirre, Aloies, and gynger:
Brought out of house of Iuory, to make the myr^er.
Emonge thy noble women are kings daughters most demure:
And thy wife is at thy right hand, decked in gould most pure.
Give ear daughter and marcke me well, bow down thine ear I say:
Thou doste forget thy people and thy fathers house for aye.
For the king does very greatly lust after thy beauty:
And for because he is thy Lord, honor thou him only.
The daughter of Tirus also, shall with gifts sue to the:
And in like manner shall they that of the richest sort be.
All the kings daughters glory is within forth contained:
Her garments are of most pure gould, right conyngly weaued.
In robes embrothered she shall be brought unto the king:
Her handmaydes and companions men shall unto the bring.
They shall be brought to the I say, with joy and reioyceynge:
And after that they shall come to the palaice of the king.
And in the stead of thy fathers, children shall the succeed:
By whom thou shall appoint the whole earth to be governed.
I will be myndefull of thy name for ever more I say:
And therefore shall the nations celebrate the for aye.
The.xlvi. Psalm.
GOd is our refuge and our strength in all our misery:
And a most present succor in our great adversity.
Wherefore we will not fear though the earth move out of her place:
And though the hills emydde the sea, do threate to fall apase.
Yea though the waves thereof should rage and forowe up the slyme:
And make the great hills tremble when they do against them clyme:
Yet shall the streams of the river still refreshe gods City:
And the holy place of the tents, of the Lord God most hye.
God is in the myddle thereof, wherefore it shall not fall:
He shall help it before it do take any harm at all.
Let the heathen styr up tumultes, and kingdoms make styrrynges:
And let the earth break in sunder, with passing great criynges:
Yet does the Lord of hosts still stand fast by us at our need:
Jacobs God is our strong tower and our defense in deed.
Come hither and veholde the worckes of the Lord with your eyne:
What wonders he has wrought on earth, through his power divine.
To the utmost parts of the earth, all wars he appeaseth:
He breaks bows, he shreddeth spears, and charettes he burns.
Send back and acknowledge that I am the Lord God alone:
Most high emonge the nations, on earth like me is none.
The Lord of hosts is on our side, he does still take our part:
Jacobs God is our high castle, he will not from us starte.
The.xlvij. Psalm.
YE people all, clappe with your hands, declare your heart thereby:
Sing unto God with merry voice rejoice most hertily.
For the Lord is most high I say, and eke to be feared:
A right great king he is by whom all the earth is ruled.
He subdueth whole contreys of people us to obey:
So does he right great nations under our fete I say.
He has chosen and pyked out for us our heritage:
The worthynes of Jacob whom he loved in young age.
God ascends with fresh singing, and with great melody:
With the blaste and sown of trumpettes, the Lord goes up on hye.
Sing unto God, sing unto him, sing ye unto our king:
Sing to our God and king I say, always without ceaseynge.
For God is king of all the earth, and rules in the same:
Sing unto him, sing conynglye unto his holy name.
God reygneth over nations and the Heathen alone:
God sytteth on his pryncely seat and in his holy throne.
To the people of Habrams God, great rulars are joined:
Because he does excel them that have the earth defended.
The.xlviij. Psalm.
THe Lord is great and much praised, and magnified still:
Within the city of our God, and in his holy hill.
The mount Sion on whose north side the great kings town stands:
Is a goodly country and is the joy of the whole earth.
God is known and acknowledged in his own palaices:
To be a castle of defense, to such men as are his.
For lo, kings came together and so passed by alonge:
And were amassed at the sight, and driven forth headlonge.
This fear and sorrow takes them even as vehemently:
As the throws of a woman that should trauay^e by and by.
And as the eastern wind that doteh blow with great storms of hayle:
Is wont to break the ships that do upon the salt sea sail.
As we have heard so have we seen, in the Lord of hosts town:
In our gods city which he has made sure for falling down.
O God let us conceive in mind, thy goodness and mercy:
In the myddle of thy temple and thy saynctuarie.
Like as thy name, so does thy praise (O God) go through the land:
And abundance of justice is in thy power and right hand.
Let the mount of Sion be glad, let Iudes daughters rejoice:
For thy judgments, when they shall hear, thine holy word and voice.
Se that ye go about Sion, compass it about round:
Number all the lettle turrettes, that in her walls be found.
Marcke her forefence diligently, and her palaices hye:
That you may make report of it to your posterity.
For this is God, and our God is for ever and for aye:
He shall direct and govern us even to our dyeinge day.
The.xlix. Psalm.
ALl people hearken and give ear to that, that I shall tell:
Boeth high and low boeth rich and pore, that in the world do dwell.
For why my mouth shall make discourse, of many things right wise:
In understanding shall mine heart his study exercise.
I will enclyne mine ear to know things full dearckely spoken:
And eke upon mine harp I will make my dearcke speech open.
In the time of adversity, why should I stand in doubt?
If the wyckednes of my steps should compass me about.
Emonge them that have great richesse, and do trust therein most:
And in the multitude thereof, do aye glory and boaste:
There is not one that any way can his brother redeem:
Nor pay to God ye ransom that, he does for him esteem.
For, to redeem their souls from death the price would be to hye:
To make them so perfect that they might live eternally.
And to make them that in them self they should no such cause have:
But that they might live ever and never come to the grave.
For it is plain that as well the wise as the folysh dye:
And leave their goods to other men, but foles die utterly.
Their grave shall be their house for aye, and eke their dwelling place:
Though lyueynge here they studied vain glory for a space.
But man does never long abide in estimation:
But shall be like a beast falling into destruction.
This their purpose and way they walk is their follye in deed:
And yet of their posterity, their worddes are allowed.
They are placed emonge the dead, as they were flocks of sheep.
And death is he that feadeth the^, and has them for to keep.
And at the judgment day the just, shall rule them as a king:
Their beawtie shall decay, and the pyt shall be their dwelling.
But God shall deliver my soul out of the power of hell:
Because he has received me, in his house for to dwell.
When any man is enriched, be not afeard therefore:
Or when the glory of his house increases more and more.
For when he dies he shall not, all these things with him take:
His glory shall not go with him, but shall him quite forsake.
Because they count them selves happy, in this vain life only:
When a man is good to him self, then praise they him greatly.
Unto their fathers nation, let all these men go right:
Let them not have fruition of confortable light.
But man does not expende and waygh, his own nobility:
Wherefore he shall be like the beast that dies utterly.
The.l. Psalm.
GOd that is Lord of judges, spoke, and did together call:
As many as do dwell from the sun rysynge to his fall.
The most noble and famous God, out of Sion shall shine:
And give a perfect presidente of beauty in men's eiene.
Our God shall come unfeignedly, with fire before his face:
And on each side a fierce hurl wind, his enemies to chase.
The heaven above and earth byneth, he shall unto him call:
That with judgment he may contend against his people all.
Gather to me mine holy ones, that would seem so presyse:
And that made me a couenau^te concerning sacrifice.
Bring them hither and the heavens shall their justice declare:
And God himself shall be their judge who knows what they are.
Give ear (O ye that will be my people) for now speak I:
O Israel give ear for now I will thy matter try.
Give ear to me I say for I am God of power myghtie:
I am thy God (O Israel) I tell the certenlye.
I will not blame the for the lack of doing sacrifice:
For I se thye brent offeringes daily before mine eyes.
I have no need to take of the a calfe or a bullock:
Neither the got that feadeth in thy cote or in thy flock.
For all the wild beasts of the earth are mine own good in deed:
So are all the beasts that do on a thousand mountains feed.
I know the fowls of the mountains, I say I know them all:
And in my power are all the beasts, that in the fields do cralle.
If I should chance to be hungry, I need not to tell the:
Sith the round world is mine with all the things that therein be.
What, do you thyncke that I will eat the flesh of bulls myghtie?
Or drink the blood of gotes that ye do shede so plentuousely?
Sacrifice thou praise unto God, and pay in any wise:
Unto the most high thy vows and things that thou do promise.
When thou art in adversity, then on me se thou cry:
And when I shall deliver the, then set forth my glory.
But God says to the ungodly, what comes in thy brain?
That to rehearse my sacraments, thou do never refrain.
Why do thou brag of my comnante, with words to none effect?
Seeing thou hateste all knoledge, and do my words reject.
If it chance the to se a thief, in him thou haste delyght.
And with the shameless whore hunttars, thy part is also pyght.
Thy mouth thou haste addyct to euel and for to speak amysse:
And thy tongue does still frame the thing, that most disceytfull is.
Thou sytteste in judgment and do speak against thy brother:
And do revile most spitfully, the son of thy mother.
Thus haste thou done, and when I do, let as I did not se:
Thou doeste Imagyne that I am in all points like to the.
I will therefore contend with the, and declare thy trespase:
And in order I will set forth, thy faults before thy face.
I pray you understand this thing, you that have forgotte God:
Whether there be any that can preserve you from my rod.
Who so makes sacrifice of praise does glorify me:
And this is ye way whereby he shall Gods saueynge health see.
The.lj. Psalm.
LOrd God for thy great goodness sake, be merciful to me:
And for thy passing great mercy, purge mine iniquity.
From mine iniquity good Lord, wash thou me plentuously:
And from my sins and trespases do thou me mundifie.
For mine offenses I confess, and do none of them hyde:
My sins Lord and my wyckednes do in my sight abide,
I have offended the alone, and sinned in thy sight:
wherefore thy words shall be found true, and thy judgments upright.
Behold Lord in iniquity, was I made and formed:
And was not fre from wyckednes, when I was conceived.
For lo, Lord thou love the truth, even from the very heart:
And have showed me of thy wisdom, even the secret part.
Purge me with Isope and I shall, be pure and clean I know:
Wash thou me, and then shall I be more whyt then is the snow.
Bring thou to pass that I may hear great joy and reioyceynge:
And that they whom thou haste brought low, may thy great praises sing.
Turn thy face from my wickedness and look not on my sin:
To blot out mine iniquities, Lord God do thou begin.
Create, Lord God within my breast, an undefiled heart:
And in my bowelles Lord renew, a spirit that will not starte.
Cast thou me not out of thy sight, ne do thou me forget:
Neither do thou thine holy spirit, from thy pore servant fet.
Restore to me the reioyceynge, Lord of thy saueynge health:
And with thy principal spirit Lord, stablishe thy servants welthe.
To the transgressers of thy laws, thy ways I will declare:
And to the shall be converted, men that great sins are.
O God, the God of my soul health, deliver me from blood:
And my tongue shall with joy declare, the boeth ryghtwise and good.
Open thou my lyppes good Lord, and teach my tongue to speak:
And then my mouth without ceasyng, shall in thy praise out break.
For if sacrifice did please the, I would give the such things:
But thou delitest not good Lord, in the brent offerynges.
A pensiefe and a troubled spirit, is to God sacrifice:
A broken and a contrite heart, God thou wylt not despise.
Lord God, of thy bountuousnes, do thou favor Sion:
That the walls of Jerusalem, may be builded anon.
Then shall please the brent offerynges, and sacrifice of right:
And on thine holy aultare Lord, men shall fat bullockes dyght.
The.lij. Psalm.
THou tyrant why reioycest thou, in that thou do amysse:
Sense the goodness of God our Lord daily among us is.
Ways to corrupt and to destroy, thy tongue does still invent:
Even as it were a sharp rasour, that to cut is still bent.
Thou do delyght rather to hurt, and thine anger to wreake:
Then do to well, and for to lie then right and truth to speak.
All words that bring destruction, and do thereto belong:
Thou loueste for to spread abroad with a disceytfull tongue.
Wherefore God shall scatter thy stock, and take it clean away:
He shall cut the out of thy tent, and make thy rote decay.
Which thing when the rightwise shall se, then shall they stand in awe:
And shall laugh and make reioyceynge, at the sight that they saw.
They shall say, lo, this is the man, that in God has not trust:
But in the heap of his riches, and in his wicked lust.
But I like a grene olyue tree in the Lords house I say:
Have put my trust in his goodness, for ever and a day.
Because thou haste me made good Lord, thy preases will I tell:
And will trust in thy name because thy sanctes do like it well.
The.liij. Psalm.
THe folysh and insipie^t, whose thoughts are ever vain:
Do in their heart say folyshlye, there is no God certain.
Corrupt they are in all their ways, made abominable:
To find one good among them all, there is no man able.
Upon the sons of mortal men, God looked down from heaven:
To se if there were any wise, or for to seek God given.
They have gone astraye together, and are corrupt each one:
That has done the thing that is good, there can not be found one.
How can they have knowledge (says God) that work iniquity:
And like bread eat up my people, and do not on me cry?
There feared they excedynglye, where fear in deed was none:
Because God does all them destroy, that besiege the, Sion.
Because God is their enmie thou haste made them ashamed:
Would God that out of the (Sion) Jacob might be saved.
That God might once make an end of, his peoples servitude:
That with great joy and reioycynge, Jacob might be endude.
The.liiij. Psalm.
FOr thy names sake help me (O God) in thy strength deliver:
Thy servant (O God) hear my prayer, do my words consider.
For strayngars and straynge nations against me do arise:
And tyrants that seek my soul have no God before their eyes.
Behold (I say) it is the Lord, that does mine enemies let:
And he is still present with them, that do me underset.
Mine adversaries and my foes, he shall with iuell reward:
And shall them all destroy because, he does his truth regard.
I shall make to the sacrifice, with fre and wyllyng mode:
And will set forth thy name with praise, because thou art so good.
For out of all afliction, thou haste delivered me:
And my desire upon my foes, Lord God, mine eyes do see.
The.lv. Psalm.
Give ear to my prayer (O God) and do not thy self hyde:
From the humble petition, that I make at this tide.
Give ear I say to me (O God) and answer me again:
For in my prayer I make moan and grievously complain.
And that through the outragiouse cry of enemies in deed:
And through the great vexatio^, of men that are wicked.
Which wicked men do against me practice their wickedness.
And in their passing great anger, put me to great distress.
Pensife and heavy is mine heart (Lord God) within my breast:
And the horrors and fears of death, have me greatly oppreste.
Exceeding great fear and tremblyng have lighted on my lot:
And most horrible dread also, has quelled me I wot.
Wherefore I say, would God I had, wings like unto a dove:
For then would I fly hence where none of these things should me move.
Lo then would I get me far hence, and dwell in wilderness:
And would make haste for to escape this tempest of distress.
Destroy them Lord and slit their tongues take on them no pity:
For I have seen unrighteous and strife in the city.
These things compass the walls thereof, boeth by day and by night:
And in the mids thereof greuaunce, and wyckednes are pight.
In it I say is wyckednes, even in the inner part:
At no time do gyle and deceyte, out of her streets depart.
Of a man that had hated me, or that mine enmie were:
The proud checkes and the reuilynges, I could suffer and bear.
But sense thou art my captain, my fellow and my friend:
Thy reuylynges and threatenynge, do my mind sore offend.
For we have had sweet and secret, communication:
In the house of the Lord our God, and have together gone.
Lord, let death strike them suddenly, let them be buried, quick:
For in their secret houses, Lord great wickedness does stick.
As for me, I will cry to God, and will his mercy crave:
And then the Lord I am right sure, will his pore servant save.
At evening, at morn and none tide, I will mourn and complain:
And then to hear his servants voice, the Lord will not disdain.
It is he that delyuereth, his servants soul in peace:
From all that lie in wait for it, who are many doubles.
That God I say that lives aye, shall hear his servants prayer:
And shall plage them of whose mendment, men may justly dispayer.
They fear not God, but lay hands on, such as cleave unto him:
And so they break his covenant, and do it not esteem.
Their mouths are softer then butter, yet are wars in their mind:
Their words are much more smoth then oil, yet swerdes ye shall them find.
O cast thy burden on the Lord, and he shall the sustain:
For he will not suffer the just, in troubles to remain.
In the mean time (O God) thou shall thrust headlynge in to hell:
The blood thyrsty and disceyuers, that are fires and cruel.
They shall not live out half their time, nor half their life days see:
But as for me (good Lord) I will still put my trust in the.
The.lvj. Psalm.
BE merciful to me (O God) for men will tread me down:
They fight against, and trouble me daily in field and town.
Under their feet mine enemies, do tread me down daily:
For they that proudly fight against, thy servant are many.
Nevertheless, at every tide, when fear inuadeth me:
Then do I put my confidence and trust only in the.
In God I will set forth his word, and in him put my trust:
And as for men I do not pass, let them do what they lust.
They are offended at my words, and do them daily carpe:
All their study is to hurt me, on this one string they harp.
They cluster and run together, they spy on every side:
They watch my steps because my death, of them is desired.
They have a trust for to escape, but that is all in vain:
For God will not in his anger whole nations, refrain.
My rennynges from mine enemies, in persecution:
Thou haste by number in thy book, and eke my tears each one.
So often as I call on thy name, mine enemies do fly:
Whereby that thou art God my Lord, I do know certenlye.
Whatsoever God sends me, I will take in good part:
And in the word of God my Lord, I shall conforte mine heart.
In God my Lord my confidence, and only trust shall be:
I will not stand in dread nor fear what man can do to me.
To the will I pay al my vows (O God) and will be hight:
And pay to the boeth laud and praise with all my main and might.
For thou sauest my soul from death, and my feet from falling:
That I may walk before the in the light of the lyueynge.
The.lvij. Psalm.
BE merciful to me (O God) be merciful to me:
For the soul of thy pore servant puts her trust in the.
Under the shadow of thy wings, my hope is pytched fast:
Where mine only refuge shall be, till wyckednes be paste.
I shall call and cry unto God, that is highest of all:
To God I say that does help me up again when I fall.
The same shall send from heaven down and shall deliver me:
From the reprofe of him that would my confusion see.
He shall, I say, send unto me even for his mercies sake:
And for the faithful promise that, it pleased him to make.
My soul is set in the mids of the lions full of Ire:
And I my self am laid among men that do flame with fire.
Their teeth are sharp and persynge speres, and sharp arowes I wene:
Their tongues are swerdes well made to cute and are excedyng kene.
Set up thy self (O God) above the heavens that are so hye:
And above all the earth exalte thy praise and thy glory.
A net they have laid for my fete, and put my soul to blame:
They have dygged a pyt for me, and are fallen in the same.
To sing and give the praise (O God) mine heart is ever pressed:
To setforth thy great praise, I say, my mind is redye dreste.
Awake my tongue and strength to speak, for thou art my glory:
Awake my lute and eke my harp, for I will rise erlye.
Among the people will I give thanks unto the O Lord:
And among the heathen my tongue shall thy praises record.
For the greatness of thy mercy reaches up to the sky:
And thy faythfulnes and thy truth, touches the stars so hye.
Set up thy self (O God) above, the heavens that are so hye:
And above all the earth exalte, thy praise and thy glory.
The.lviij. Psalm.
O Ye the sons of mortal men, ye gods and men of might:
Do ye give rightuouse sentences, and judge men's matters right?
Nay, but rather you Imagyne mischief within your breast:
And by your violence men are sore laden and oppreste.
So sone as these ungodly men were borne they went astraye:
And from their mothers womb they learned untruth for to say.
Their poysens are like the poysens that in fell serpents are:
They are like the deaf Idder that does use to stop her ear.
For the adder does stop her ear lest she should hear happily.
The voice of the charmar that does by charms work skylfully.
Of these men's mouths break thou the teeth (O God) and smite in twain.
The chafte bones of the lions whelppes who are cruel certain.
That they may fall away like the water that fast does ren:
And that when they shote their arrows, the same may be broken.
Let them consume as does a snayle, that turns into slyme:
And as the fruit that a woman, bears before her time.
Year that your sharp and prickynge thorns, shall be ready to prick:
Gooddes wrath like to a stormye wind, shall take you away quick.
When the rightwise shall se these things they shall rejoice greatly:
And they shall wash their feet in the blood of the ungodly.
Then shall men say the rightuouse are certain to have reward:
For the Lord God judges the earth who does justice regard.
The.lix. Psalm.
MY God, deliver me from the^ that be mine enemies:
And defend me from them that do against thy servant rise.
Deliver me (O God) from them that do work wyckedly:
And save thy pore servant from such men as are blood thristie.
For lo they lay wait for my soul, and conspyre against me:
Not for any offense or fault (Lord) that in me they see.
Not provoked by me, they do hastly them selfs prepare:
Wherefore arise thou and help me, and look upon my care.
O Lord of hosts, O Jacobs God, awake, visit the heathen.
Show thou no mercy, to them that to wickedness are given.
Let them return empty at night, and let them hole like hounds:
And make them wander round about, the cities and the towns.
Behold they speak against me with their mouths, and swerdes are hyd:
Under their lyppes, for they are not for such things reproved.
But thou (O Lord) shall ever have them in derision:
The heathen (Lord) thou shall deride, and laugh them all to skorne.
I do ascribe to the (O God) all my strength and my power:
For thou art my falfegard (good Lord) and only defender.
Thy goodness to thy pore servant thou show plentuousely:
And let me se my desyer upon mine enemy.
Lord destroy not them suddenly, lest my people forget:
But as thou art our defender, do them in sunder set.
For their proud and statly words Lord take thou them in their pride:
And for their perjury and lies, suffer them not to bide.
Consume them Lord in thy fury, consume them clean away:
That they may know that God rules in all the earth this day.
Let them return empty at night, and let them howl like hounds:
And make them wander round about the cities and the towns.
Let them wander about I say, and seek whereon to feed:
And let them not find sustinaunce, to satisfy their need.
With reioyceynge I shall declare thy might and great goodness:
Because thou art my tower of strength, and refuge in distres.
To the I say (O God my strength) will I rejoice and sing:
Because thou art my whole defense, and most merciful king.
The.lx. Psalm.
O God thou dydest us forsake, reject, and waste moved:
But now thou art pleased again and have us received.
Thou dashedest the earth together, and brakest it in twain:
But now repare the brackes thereof, for it shakes certain.
Hard chance and miss fortune thou have laid on thy peoples lot:
And haste given us such wine to drink, as is deadly I wot.
Yet haste thou given a sign to them that do walk in thy fear:
That they should triumph in thy truth, and in no wise dispeare.
Let thy power save thy beloved that they do not dispeare:
Show forth thy power I say good Lord, and hear thy servants prayer.
Because God has spoken the word with in his holy place:
I shall with joy divide Sichem and Sochothes vale by pase.
Galaad and eke Manasses are mine, but Ephraim*
Is the key of my kingdom, and Judah my laws does deem.
In Moah will I lay my fylth, and over Edom skyppe:
And thou palastine sue to me for favor and frendshyppe.
Who shall lead me into that forte, that myghtie strong city?
Who shall conducte me to Edom and my salfe conduct be?
Shall not thou do it (O my God) who did us forsake:
And would not walk with our men when we did the wars take?
O God, help thou in all distress, for man's help is but vain:
But we shall fight stoutly through God, by whom our foes are slain.
The.lxj. Psalm.
OH God hear thy pore servants cry, and hearcken to my prayer:
And let not my voice and my cry in vain trouble the air.
From the utmost parts of the earth I shall cry unto the:
In the distres of mind when mine heart amassed shall be.
Then shall I say, Oh Lord set me upon thy rock so hye:
For thou art my refuge and strength against mine enemy.
In thy tente will I dwell for aye that I may dwell salfly:
Under the shadow of thy wings is my desire to lie.
For thou (O God) have heard my vows and pondered my desires:
And such men as do fear thy name, Lord thou have made thine heyers.
To the king do thou give long life, that his years may enduer:
Through many generations, to thy will and pleasure.
Let the king sit before the (Lord) for ever and a day:
And let thy mercy and thy truth preserve the same always.
Then shall I never sease to sing, unto thy holy name:
That I may perform all my vows daily unto the same.
The.lxij. Psalm.
ONly on God my soul looks and has to him respect:
For in him and in none other, mine health takes effect.
For he only is my sure grownde, my salfgard and defense:
So that my fall can not be great through fleshly violence.
How long will you study disceyte against all manner men?
Ye shall al perish as the wall, or hedge that is broken.
Lord, these men would blot out my life, they play the liars part.
With the mouth they do pray for me, but curse me with their heart.
Nevertheless (O thou my soul) do thou to God enclyne:
For from him only does thy trust and thine only hope shine.
For he only is my sure ground, and my salvation:
I shall not fall, he is my strength, and my tuition.
Mine health lies in God alone, my glory and my might:
And in the Lord my confidence, and only trust is pyght.
O put your trust in him always, ye people of the land:
Pour out your hertes before the Lord, in whom our hope does stand.
As for men they are all but vain, and delyted to lie:
And are as light in a balance as is vain vanity.
Put no trust in mysse gotten goods, ne serve you vanity:
And when you do flow in richesse, set not to much thereby.
God has spoken this one thing twyse, wherefore it is certain:
And I myself have heard him say, that in him strength does raygne.
He said also that in the Lord, is goodness and mercy:
And that he does reward each man, after as his worckes be.
The.lxiij. Psalm.
O God thou art my myghtie God, my salfe guard and defense:
Wherefore I will seek the each day with carfull diligence.
My soul thyrsteth for the (O Lord) and my flesh has a lust:
To taste of the in this dry land, where for water is duste.
Thus do I that I may behold the in thy holy place:
That I may se thy mighty power and glory of thy face.
For life it self is not so sweet, as thy loueyng kyndnes:
Wherefore to show thy worthy praise, my lyppes shall never sease.
And so shall I during my life, always magnify the:
And in thy name lift up mine hands, as it becomes me.
Then shall my soul be satisfied, as with most sweet fatnes*
And therefore shall my lyppes rejoice, and my mouth show thy praise.
O Lord, when I lie in my bed, I shall remember the:
And when I wake out of my sleep, on the my thought shall be.
For thou only art he from whom, all mine help does proceed:
And in the shadow of whose wings, my soul is delited.
O Lord, my soul cleaves to the, thy righthand is my stay:
Let the^ that would destroy my soul, syncke down to hell for aye.
Make them of force to fall upon the edge of the sharp sword:
And of the rauenyng woulfes Lord, let the^ be devoured.
But the king shall rejoice in God, and each man be praised:
That swereth by his holy name, and liars mouths stopped.
The.lxiiij. Psalm.
IN my complaynt Lord hear my voice, and hearken to my cry:
And preserve my life from the fear, of the fierce enemy.
Lord, hyde me from the counsel of men that are ungodly:
And from the vprores of such men, as do work wyckedly.
For these men do sharpen their tongues, even as they were sharp swords:
And as with a bow that is bent, they shote forth bitter words.
That they may hurt men privily whose life is innocent:
And stryke and wound them suddenly, not feareynge to be shent.
They make themself strong in mischief and study snares to hyde:
And then they say thus with themselves, how can these things be spyed.
They do imagyne wyckenes, and keep it in couerte:
Each man hydeth his mischief in the botto^ of his heart.
But God shall stryke them suddenly, even with a sharp arrowe:
Whereby they shall be sore wounded, and pearsed quite through.
Yea their own tongues shall make them fall, and be as men forlorn:
Then shall as many ass them laugh and drive them to scorn.
All men shall se this thing I say, and shall boldly confess:
That gods own hand has done this deed, to punish wyckednes.
But the just shall rejoice and trust, in God the Lord only:
And all that be of upright heart, shall joy excedyngly.
The.lxv. Psalm.
O God, thou only art worthy to have praise in Sion:
And that all ye people do pay, their vows to the alone.
For thou hear ye prayers of thy people in their need:
Wherefore all men resort to the, with full trust for to speed.
The reckenynge of our wyckednes, was more then we could pay:
But thou Lord for thy great mercy haste put our sins away.
The man that is chosen of the, is happy and right sure:
That in thy court and temple he, shall dwell in great pleasure.
O God our health, O the refuge, of all coasts of the land:
And of them that do dwell far of, in the seas and sea sand.
O thou I say, that by thy power, haste set the hill so sure:
And art ever gyrded about, with strenght that will endure.
O thou that do quiet the seas, and the rude peoples rage:
In thy justice thou have sharplye threatened thine heritage.
So that all they that dwell far of, shall fear when they shall se:
Thy tokens, for thou makeste boeth even and morn to praise the.
Thou haste caused the earth to chappe for lack of her due rain:
And haste with plenty of water, shot up her chappes again.
O God thy river is brymme full, whereby thou do prepare:
All manner grain for man, which thou causest the earth to bear.
Thou doeste water her forowes and causeste her cloddes to fall:
Thou supplest her with water dropes, and geuest increase with all.
Thou do crown and set forth the year of thy passing goodness:
And to pour down dropes of plenty, thy clouds do never sease.
The pastures of the desert are fair and full of plenty:
And the little hills are beset with all fertylytie.
The fields and valleys of the earth have for their covering:
Such flocks of shipe and plottes of grain, that they rejoice and sing.
The.lxvj. Psalm.
ALl earthly men rejoice to God, and praise his holy name:
Set forth his praise I say and give glory unto the same.
Say unto God, Oh in thy worckes how wonderful art thou?
For the ple^tie of thy power does cause thine enmies to bow.
All they that dwell upon the earth, shall honor the, O Lord:
And shall all sing to the and to thy name with one accord.
Oh come hither and se the worckes of God and tell me then.
How far his cou^selles do excede the wit of mortal men.
The sea he turned to dry land and gave passage thereby:
Wherefore our fathers did rejoice in him excedyngly.
By his power he has aye ruled the world and does behold.
All contreys with his eye so that no rebels dare be bold.
O ye people, preach ye our God, and make his name be known:
By you let the voice of his praise, throughout the earth be blown.
For this is he that does preserve our souls ever on live:
And suffers not our fete to slyp when we with Satan strive.
O God, though thou do prove and try us as silver is tried:
And doeste lead us into prison and make us there be tied:
Though thou, I say, do suffer men over our heads to ride:
And that most fires and sharppe torments we do suffer and bide:
Yet do thou bring us out again into a place of rest:
And do not suffer thy servants for aye to be oppreste.
I will therefore into thy house, Lord God with sacrifice:
And will not leave my vows unpaid to the in any wise.
For when I was in trouble Lord, then with my mouth I spoke:
And in the doloures of mine heart all these vows did I make.
Brunt offeringes that are right fat I will offer to the:
Of the sweet smoke of rams, bullockes, and gotes the same shall be.
Come hither and give ear alye in whom gods fear does dwell:
For of the things that he has done to my soul, I shall tell.
With my mouth I did cry to him and call on him alone:
Wherein my tongue declared that like him there is found none.
If in mine heart I would have had respect to wyckednes:
No doubt the Lord would not have heard me in my great distres.
But now God has given ear to me and heard his servants prayer:
And has granted my whole request even as I did desire.
God is to be praised therefore, which neither did put back:
My prayer neither suffer me his mercy for for to lack.
The.lxvij. Psalm.
BE merciful to us (O God) and bless us at thy will:
And lyghte^ thy bright countenance among thy servants still.
That through the earth thine holy way may be certainly know.
And thine health through out all contreys for all they are thine own.
Let the people praise the (O God) let all people praise the:
And let the^ al rejoice because they be judged by the.
Let them rejoice in the I say, and be merry and glad:
Because all nations of the earth by thy justice are ladde.
Let the people praise the (O God) let all people praise the:
And let the earth bring forth her fruit, as thy pleasure shall be.
Bless us (O God) I say our god, bless us in verite:
That all that dwell upon the earth may stand in awe of the.
The.lxviij. Psalm.
THe vpriseyng of God puts his enemies to flight:
And causes al them that hate him to fly out of his sight.
For as smoke vanishes away and wax is molt with fire:
So does the wicked perish from gods sight in his great Ire.
As for the just, they do rejoice before God And are glad:
They are delyghted inwardly, and can never be sad.
Sing unto God, sing to his name, and make a perfect way:
To him that rides in high heaven, whose name is Lord for aye.
Rejoice before him for he is father to fatherless:
And in his holy house he does, the wydowes cause redress.
He is the God that makes peace, and breaks prisoners band:
And causes traitors for to dwell, in an unfruitful land.
When he went out through wyldernes before his peoples face:
The earth shoke and the heavens molt before him in his place.
God of his goodness sent down rain upon his heritaunce.
And filled all the barrant plottes thereof with abundance.
That his people might dwell therein, thus did the Lord prepare:
For his pore flock and gave his word to such as for them care.
The kings that had great armies fled, they fled and took the foil.
And such men as sat still at home, have divided the spoil.
What though no doves fether have been more vile then they in sight?
Yet shall they be as preciouse now, as gould that shyneth bright.
When the almighty had scattred, the kings that there did raygne:
The^ did it gliste^ like the snow, on zalmon that mountain.
Gods hill Sion, is like Basan for wonderful plenty:
An hill it is that abounds with all fertility.
O ye great hills, ye myghtie kings, why do ye hate this hill:
Sith it pleases the Lord and he will dwell thereupon still?
His horsemen are twenty thousand, and his angels many
In whom he is as in Sinai, in his sanctuary.
He is gone up on high and has with him men that where thrall:
He has received gifts for men, yea for his foes and all.
Thus has he done that he might be the Lord praised for aye:
For as the God of our health he gives us gifts each day.
Our God (I say) and savior he is whilse we have breath:
And by him alone we escape, the sharppe passage of death.
Yet does he wound the heads of them that are his enemies:
And the crown of the head of them that from sin will not rise.
Thus said the Lord, I will restore my people home again:
From Basan and from the deep sea, they shall not there remain.
Therefore I say (O my people) thou shall not fail to tread:
In thy foes blood and thy dogs tongues shall be therwyth made read.
The manner of the going of my God, my Lord and king:
Is well seen in his holy place, where he is abydyng.
The syngyng me^ do go before, then follow the mynstrelles:
And last of all the fayer maidens playinge upon tymbrelles.
O ye that descend of the flock of mighty Israel:
Praise ye the Lord in such order as ye have heard me tell.
First little Benjamin rules, and Judah is your strength:
Then Sebulon and Neptali, are captains good at length.
It is god that has given you this strength you may be sure:
O God confirm the same in us that it may still endure.
For the kings do offer to the mo gifts in sacrifice:
Then be made at Jerusalem after the temples guise.
Rebuke the myghtie men of arms, that in arms can do well:
And the strong men of every land, that for lucre rebel.
Disparse them that delyght in wars and let messengers come:
Out of Egypt and Ethiope, and sue to thy kingdom.
Sing to the Lord (O ye kingdoms of the earth) and rejoice:
To him that rides on the heavens, and stretches out his voice.
Ascribe to him all might and power, for his glory does raygne.
Over Israel and his power, above the clouds certain.
O God thou art to be feared, in thy sanctuary:
For thou geuest power to thy flock, and art of praise worthy.
The.lxix. Psalm.
Help me (O God) for I am like to perish out of hand:
For I do syncke into the myer, where is no place to stand.
Into deep waters I am fallen, which do me over flow:
I am werie with loud criynge, my throat wareth dry now.
With often lokynge up to my God, mine eyes begyne to fail:
And they that hate me without cause, are now like to prevail.
For they are more in number then the heirs are on mine head:
Whereby they cause me to pay that I never received.
What ignorance has caused me, to do Lord thou doeste see:
My sins Lord and my wyckednes, are not unknown to the.
O God of hosts, let not them that to the with faith repare:
Have cause by that they see in me, to fall into dispeare.
For in thy cause do I suffer, all this rebuke and shame:
And am cast out from my kynred, and made straynge to the same.
The thought that I take for thy house, is great breaking to me:
And I take all such words to heart, as men speak against the.
If I did ever fast or weep, my body for to tame:
The same has been cast in my teeth, as a thing worthy blame.
I lapte my body in sack cloth, and ware it for a coat:
And then began they for to skoffe and ieste at me I wotte.
Yea they that sat in the town gates the rulars and the kings:
Iested at me, and the drunckardes made the^ songs of these things.
But I make my prayer to the (O Lord) that I ne mysse:
Of help through thy goodness and truth, when thy good pleasure is.
Pulle me out of the deep myer, and from drownynge me keep:
Deliver me from enemies and from the waters deep.
Lest the surges do ouerflowe, and the syncke swalowe me:
And the deep pytte shut up his mouth, when I shall therein be.
O Lord grant my request to me, even for thy goodness sake:
And as thy mercies are many, oon me pity take.
Hyde not thy face from thy servant, for I am now troubled:
Make haste (O God) and shortly let my request be granted.
O Lord draw nygh unto my soul, let it be salfe through the:
And because of mine enemies, Lord God deliver me.
Thou know what rebuke I do bide, what shame and dishonor:
For all they that do trouble me, are in thy sight each hour.
Through the rebuke mine heart is broke and heavy is my mind:
I look for some to pity me, but no conforte I find.
They did give me gall in my meat, and when I was thyrsty:
They gave me vinager to drink, such was their cruelty.
Let their table be made a snare, to take themselfes with all:
And where they trust to live in peace, there let them take a fall.
Darken the eyes of their judgment, lest they should look and see:
Make their loins weak and break their backs, that thus have done to me.
Pour out thy wrath on them and let thine hot anger them quell.
Let their houses be made deserte, and none therein to dwell.
For when thou have stricken a man, they persecute him still:
And such men as thou haste wounded, they endeavor to kill.
Let them increase in wyckednes, and never se justice.
Wype them out of the book life, from emo^ge the rightwise.
As for me, sith I am afflict and sorrowful of mind:
His salfgard in thine health (O God) let thy pore servant find.
Then shall I praise gods, holy name, with most joyful singing:
and shall magnify the same with most hertie thanckes geuynge.
This thing is more accepted, with the Lord and does him move:
Much more then to offer a calfe that has boeth horn and houe.
O ye that live in misery, se this thing and be glad:
For ye that seek God ernestly, shall not in heart be sad.
For the Lord hears the nedie, in most merciful wise:
His bondmen and his prisoners, he does never despise.
The heavens, the earth, and eke the seas, and all that therein crepe:
Shall praise the Lord in his doings, and of his words take keep.
For the Lord shall preserve Sion, and Iudes cities restore:
That men may dwell there, and possess that land for ever more.
The neuiews of his servants shall enherite it I say:
And all that love his holy name shall dwell therein for aye.
The.lxx. Psalm.
O God make haste to deliver, thy servant at his need:
And let me have thine help good Lord, with al haste and quick speed.
Let them suffer shame and rebuke, that bear my soul such spyght:
And let them be put back with shame that in mine hurtes delyght.
Let them be driven back (I say) because they seek my shame:
And do behold my myseries, and rejoice in the same.
But let the^ rejoice and be glad, that ernestly seek the:
And let them that love thine health say, let gods praise in us be.
Make haste to me (O God) for I am pore in myserie:
Mine helpar and my pledge thou art, O Lord do not tarry.
The.lxxj. Psalm.
IN the (O Lord) have I trusted, and thought my self certain:
Wherefore let me never have cause to say this trust was vain.
But for thy justice sake rydde me, and do me deliver:
Bow down thine ear to me, O Lord, and be my defender.
Be thou my fort whyther to fly, I may always be bold:
Thou intendest to save me Lord, for thou art my strong hold.
Pulle me out of the power of them that are wyckedly bent:
And out of the grypynge of the peruers and violent.
For thou art he on whom only I do trust and depend:
Lord God my trust has ever been, that thou should me defend.
Sense the time that thou drewest me out of my mothers women:
I have trusted on the, from whom al my glory does come.
Many take me for a monster, but thou art my defense:
And my mouth shall not lack thy praise, nor thy magnificence.
In the time of mine old age, when my weak members shall shake.
then cast me not out of thy sight, ne do thou me forsake.
For they that be mine enemies, have had much talk of me:
And they that lay wait for my soul, often in counsel be.
Persecute and lay hands on him (say they) you shall him take:
There shall no man deliver him, for God does him forsake.
O God, my God, be not far of from me when I shall need:
And for to help thy pore servant, Lord God make thou good speed.
Let them perish with shame enough, that do my life envy:
And let them be hyd with rebuke, that do mine hurt study.
As for me I shall patiently, abyd thy good pleasure:
And shall increase thy praises still, wyle my life shall enduer.
Thy justice and thy saueyng health my mouth shall daily show:
The end whereof or just number never yet could I know.
I will therefore begyne to speak, only of thy great might:
And only thy justice shall be present with me in sight.
From my youth to this present time thou haste me enstructed:
Wherefore thy wonderful worckes shall by me be declared.
Forsake me not till I be old, and have preached thy power:
To them that be, and thy strength to them that shall come after.
O God that haste wrought so great things, who can be like to the?
I shall extol thy justice Lord, as it becomes me.
Many and great are the troubles, that through the on me fell:
But thou shall restore me to life, and bring me out of hell.
Thou shall augment mine honor and increase my dignity:
And after all my troubles I shall have comfort of the.
Wherefore (my God) upon my lute I will sing and praise the:
And all my songs upon mine harp, shall praise thy verity.
O holy one of Israel, when I shall to the sing:
My lyppes and soul that thou have bought, shall flow with reioyseynge.
Yea and my tongue shall daily speak (Lord) of thy righteousness:
When rebuke and shame shall light on the^ that do me oppress.
The.lxxij. Psalm.
O God give to the king knowledge to judge matters aright:
And in ye heart of the kings son, let thy justice be pyght.
That he may govern the people according to justice:
And defend the cause of the pore, in judgment and assice.
Let the mountains and myghtie kings give all their people peace:
And let the little hills be just, to all men more and less.
Let them revenge the oppressed, and keep the pore from wrong:
And punish the wrong doars that are for the pore to strong.
Let them fear the so long as the sun and the moon shall shine:
And let thy fear always abide before the rulars eiene.
Let the king be to the people, like rain to a medowe:
And as the dropes of rain are to, the earth that men do plowe.
Let the just flourish in his time, much peace be therein found:
Till such time as the moon shall cease to keep her compass rownde.
Let him bear rule from sea to sea, and from the watersyd:
Even to the uttermost lymettes, of all the earth so wide.
Let them that dwell in wyldernes, fall down before his face:
And let his foes and enemies, lycke the duste of the place.
Let the kings that rule the Islands that are in the mydse as:
And kings of Arabie and Saba, bring him gifts of prease.
Let all kings and all nations, him honor and obeie:
For he shall hear the pore man's cry, when all help is away.
He shall be merciful to them, that be pore and nedie.
And shall preserve the lives of the^ that live in poverty.
From disceyte and from injury, he shall their lives redeem.
And in his sight their blood he shall, as preciouse esteem.
The pore shall live and shall give goulde of Saba to the king:
They shall always pray for him and daily give him blessing.
The high mountains of his land shall bear corn in such plenty:
That they shall look like Libanus to men in the city.
His name shall continue for aye, and in it shall rejoice:
All nations, and the Heathen shall praise him with one voice.
Let the Lord our God be blessed, the God of Israel:
For he alone worcketh wonders in heaven earth and in hell.
Blessed be the holy name of his glory for aie:
Let his majesty fill the earth, amen, amen I say.
The.lxxiij. Psalm.
How good is God to such as be, of heart perfect and pure:
Yet were my fete like for to slyp, my steps were nothing sure.
And why? Because I fondly fall, in envy and disdain:
To se that foles and wicked men have peace and bide no pain.
They are in no daynger of death, nor lykely for to dye:
But do remain excedyng strong and exceeding myghtie.
They are free from adversity, when other men be shent:
And with the rest they take no part, of plage or punishment.
Whereby they be full gloriously in pride so high extold:
And are in wrong and violence, wrapped so many fold.
Their eyes are solne for very fat, they are so fallen away:
The vain thoughts of their wicked heart, they practice night and day
By their wicked exemple are other men corrupted:
And the most myghti and high God, by them is blasphemed.
For they stretch out their mouth to heaven and do against it cry:
But on the earth their wicked tongue, walks most pleasantly.
The flock therefore of flaterars, do furnish up their train:
For there they be full sure to suck some profit and some gain.
Tush tush say they, unto them selves, is there a God above?
That does know and suffer this ill, and will us not reprove?
Looe, ye may se how wicked men in richesse still increase:
Rewarded well with worldly good, and live in rest and peace.
Than why do I from wyckednes my fantasy refrain?
And wash mine hands with innocents, and cleanse mine heart in vain?
And why am I scourged each day, as subject to all blame:
Or why should I every morn, sustain rebuke and shame?
Than had I almost said as they, mislykyng mine estate:
But that I should thy children judge, as folk unfortunate.
I me bethought (therefore) how I might this thing understand:
But yet the labor was to great, for me to take in hand.
Until the time I went into thine holy place, and then:
I understood right perfectly the end of all these men.
And namely how thou set them upon a slyppry place:
And at thy pleasure and thy will thou do them all deface.
Than Lord how sone do they consume, and fearfully decay:
Even as a dream when one waketh, their Image goes away.
Thus grieved was mine heart full sore, my mind was much appreste:
So fond was I and ignorant, and in thy sight a beast.
Yet am I still by the, and thou holdeste my right hand fast:
And with thy counsel do guide me to glory at the last.
Bysyde thy self what thing have I, in all the heavens above:
To delight in, sith in the earth I do the only love.
My flesh and eke mine heart fail me, so does my God never:
For of mine heart God is the strength, and my part for ever.
And lo all such as the forsake, shall perish euerichone:
And they that trust in any thing saueynge in the alone.
But it is good for me (O God) to hold me fast by the:
And to put my full trust in the, and tell what thy worckes be.
The.lxxiiij. Psalm.
O God why art thou still absente from us what displeasure:
Has made thy wrath so hot against, ye shep of thy pasture?
Oh thyncke upon the church yt has of ancient been thine:
And that thou have redeemed (Lord) even before our eine.
Thyncke on the kynred that is thine by right succession:
And on the place where thou have dwelt, the holy mount Sion.
Lift up thy foot and destroy all the enemies for aye:
That have wrought wyckednes with in thine holy place this day.
Thine enemies have roared in thy co^gregations.
And have erected their own signs, to be signs and tokens.
Their axes are seen glytter as when men hew wodde on hills:
The selynge of the holy place they break down with their bylles.
They have broken thine holy things and set fire on the same:
They have broke down and poluted the dwelling of thy name.
Thus said they in their heart, let us all vex them in one band:
So brent they all gods synagoges, that were found in the land.
Our signs and tokens we se not, no Prophet does remain:
There is none emonge us that can tell us ought for certain.
O God how long shall thine enmy do the dispyte and shame?
Wylt thou suffer him ever to blaspheme thine holy name?
Lord, why wythdrawest thou thy power? Why does thy right hand bid.
Still in thy bosom? pulle it out and let thy foes destryed.
O God thou art my king for aye, and haste been ever more:
There is none health in all the earth that is not of thy store.
In thy great power thou dydest divide the seas and brakest the head:
Of Pharoo that great dragon, who of that wound is dead.
The heads (Lord) of the whale that was, of excedyng greatness:
Thou have broken and made him meat to men of wyldernes.
A welsprynge and a rennynge stream, thou haste made in dry land:
And haste made the great rivers dry, by the power of thine hand.
The day and eke the night are thine thou haste them in thy power:
Thou have prepared light and sun, to serve us at their hour.
Thou have set and appointed all the limettes of the land:
The summer and winter also, are the work of thine hand.
Remember this (O Lord) because, thy foes do the revile:
And the braynsicke and folyshe folk, thine holy name defyle.
Give not the life of thy turtle into thine enmies hand:
Neither forget thy church for aye, that of the pore does stand.
Be myndfull of thy covenant, for all the earth is hyd:
With the dwellynges of men that are most cruel and wicked.
O suffer not the simple to return again with shame:
For the pore and the indigent are they that praise thy name.
Arise (O God) and judge thy cause, and let thy servants see:
That thou art myndfull of the checkes that foles use to give the.
Do not forget the words of them, that wythstand the so sore:
for their pride and presumption, increases more and more.
The.lxxv. Psalm.
WE do acknowledge the (O God we do acknowledge the:
And sith thy name is not far of thy worckes declare will we.
When I shall call a counsel for to judge things in thy sight:
Then shall I give true sentence and judge all matters aright.
As for the earth is like to fall and all that therein dwell:
But I have underset her posts, that she may stand right well.
Thus said I to the folysh men, se that ye be not mad:
And to the wicked, be not proud of ought that may be had.
Do not, I say, you folysh men, lift up your horns on hye:
Neither do you in countenance declare your great folly.
For high degree comes to man neither from east nor weste:
Nor yet out of the wyldernes from any cruel beast.
For herin God alone is judge, to set up whom he lust:
He lyfteth up one and casts an other in the duste.
For in his hand he has a cup of strong and myghtie wine:
Whereof he fills to all me^, such is his power divine.
The lies and dregs the rof also, he does not leave byhynd:
But all the wicked of the earth do them in their cups find.
As for me I will preach for aye, and sing to Iacobes God:
I will break all the wicked horns even with an Iron rod.
I will, I say, destroy the power of them that be wicked:
And such as delight in justice, I will se exalted.
The.lxxvj. Psalm.
IN Judah God is surely known, and eke in Israel:
His holy name is had in price, and men like it full well.
His tabernacle and his tent, is in Salem pytched:
And in Sion his holy seat and dwelling is builded.
There has he broken the arrows that came forth of the bow.
The shyld, the swerd, and all the raye, he brake also I know.
O Lord thou art much more noble, and more magnificent:
Then are the robbars of the hills that to spoylynge are bent.
The men that were of haute courage, are now become a pray:
They are slain and have slept their sleep, so slender was their stay.
All men that were strong and myghtie and able for to fight:
Have not by strenght optayned ought, but are turned to flight.
When thou rebukest men that fight on horse or in charet.
Then are they cast into slumber, and do the^ selves forget.
For thou (O Iacobes God I say) art terrible in deed:
And who can abide in thy sight, when thy wrath is moved?
Once thy just judgment was showed down from heaven upon man.
Then shoke the earth and great silence through out the same began.
This thing was done when God arose to minister judgment:
And to save them that on the earth were weak and impotent.
For when thou do punish one man and plageste his fury:
Then do thou put the rest in fear to deal so cruelly.
Make and perform vows to your God, all you that nygh him be:
Look that ye bring gifts unto him, for terrible is he.
He stops the breath of rulars, and causes them to die:
And the myghtie kings of the earth fear him excedyngly.
The.lxxvij. Psalm.
WHen I did lift my voice to God, and did upon him cry:
Then did he give ear unto me and heard me wyllyngly.
In the day of my trouble I did to the Lord resort*
By night my power was scatered, my soul took no confort.
When I called God to my mind, then was my sprite troubled:
And I mourned excedyngly, and my courage faynted.
O God thou dydest know certainly the watches of mine eyes:
I was amassed and could not speak out in any wise.
Then did I call to memory, the times that erst have been:
And the years that in the old world our fore fathers have seen.
My verses in the night did I call to my memory:
And with mine heart I co^muned, and did mine own sprite try.
Then said I, will the Lord forsake his poreseruant for aye?
Will he never be pleasant but thus terrible always?
Is his loueynge kyndnes quitte lost has he no more in store?
Shall the sprite of true prophecy never be heard of more?
Has God forgotten utterly, how to be merciful?
Will he hold in his mercies like a man that is irefull?
Yet at the last, thus did I thyncke, this is but my weakness.
For the right hand of the high God, may change all things certes.
The worckes of the Lord will I call to memory therefore.
And will not forget the wonders that he did heretofore.
I will also (O God) thyncke on all thy worckes secretly:
And to speak of thy counselles Lord, I will my self apply.
For all thy ways and thy counselles, are holy and upright:
No God therefore can be so great, as art thou God of might.
For thou alone have brought to pass things straynge and wonderful:
And emonge the people thou have made thy power notable.
For thy people are revenged by thy great pour full well:
That is to say the children of Iosephe and Israel.
The waters did se the (O God) the waters did se the:
And lost their strength, and the deep began amassed for to be.
The darcke clouds sent down showeres of rain in wonderful plenty:
And the clouds sent forth thunder clappes, and thy arrows began fly.
The noise of thy thunder clappes and the flashes of lyghtnynge:
Appeared round about, and the earth fell in a trembling.
Thy ways are in the sea and thy paths in waters full strong:
And thy footsteps are not espied, either of old or young.
Thou dydeste lead thy people like a simple flock of sheep:
And by the hand of Moses and Aaron thou dydest them keep.
The.lxxviij. Psalm.
ATtend my people to my law, and to my words enclyne.
My mouth shall speak strange parables, and sentences divine.
Which we our selves have heard and seen, emonge men that are old:
And that for our enstructio^ our fathers have us told.
We will not therefore hyde these things from their posterity:
But to them that shall come after, we will tell them plainly.
We will (I say) tell the Lords praise, his strength and his glory:
And eke all his wonderful works, to our posterity.
For with a certain charge he gave a law in Israel
Which was that all fathers should these things to their children tell.
That their posterity, that is, their sons young and tender:
Might when they come to age know them and teach them their chylder.
That they might have the better hope in God that is above:
And have his holy worckes in mind, and keep his laws, for love.
And not be like their fathers that were false and of such sprite:
That would not frame their wicked hertes to credit God a right.
The sons of Ephraim went out in arms and thought to spoil:
Shothyng their darts, yet in the day of war they took the foil.
For why? they did not keep with God, the promise that was made:
Nor yet would walk or lead their life according to his trade.
But they forgate his worckes and eke they smally esteemed:
The wonderful and noble acts, that to the^ he showed.
Within the land of Egypt and, in the field of Tanim:
In the sight of their fathers were great wonders wrought by him.
He did divide and cut the sea, and brought them through it dry:
And bade the waters stand as still as things heaped on hye.
He led the^ secret in a cloud, by day when it was bright:
And all the night when it was darcke, with fire he gave them light.
He brake the rocks in wyldernes and gave the people drink:
As plentiful as when the wells do flow up to the bryncke.
Out of the rock of stone he brought fresh water streams at need.
And made the waters for to re^ne like great rivers in deed.
Yet for all this against the Lord, their sin did still increase:
And styrred him that is most high to wrath in wyldernes.
They tempted God within their hertes, like people of mistruste:
When they cried to have such meat as served to their lust.
Then said they thus, against the Lord in their vnfaythfullnes.
How can this God prepare for us a feast in wyldernes?
Behold he struck the stony rock, and floudes furthwyth did flow:
But can he give to his people, boeth bread and flesh also?
When God heard this, he waxed wrath with Jacob and his sede:
So did his indignation, on Israel proceed.
Because they did not faithfully, believe and hope that he:
Could always help and succor them in their necessity.
He gave charge to the clouds above, and they brake in sunder:
And rayned them Manna to eat, a meat of great wonder.
He gave them heavenly grain, I say, man fed on strong men's foede:
He sent vitayles down unto the^, much more then did them good.
He caused the east wind to cease under the heavens hye:
And the southwest wind he brought in by his power by and by.
Then fell down flesh as thycke as dust, and foul, like the sea sand:
Which he did cast a mydde the place, where all their tents did stand.
Then did they eat excedyngly, and all men had their fylles
He satisfied their appetites, according to their wylles.
But as the meat was in their mouths, his wrath upon them fell
And slew the flower of all the youth and choice of Israel.
Yet fell they to their wonted sin, and still they did him grieve:
For all the wonders that he wrought they had no fast believe.
Their days therefore he shortened, and would not let them reign:
And all their years he finished, in right shot space certain.
But ever when he plaged them, they sought him by and by.
Reme^brynge then he was their strength and help as God most hye.
Though with their mouths they did but gloss, and flatter with the Lord:
And with their tongues did faynedly disse^ble every word.
For why? their hertes were nothing bent to him nor to his trade:
Nor yet to keep or to perform, the promise that was made.
Yet was he still so merciful, to the^ worthy to dye:
That he forgave their wyckednes, and would not them destroy.
Yea often times he turned his wrath and did himself abuise:
And would not suffer al his whole displeasure to arise.
Remembryng that they were but flesh, and even as a wind:
That passes away and cannot return by it own kind.
How often times in wyldernes, did they their Lord provoke?
How did they move and styr their Lord, to plage them with his stroke?
And how often did they turn away, from God him for to prove?
Teaching Israelse holy one what things did him behoue.
They were not myedfull of his power nor of the day when he:
Redeemed them from strayte bondage and great captivity.
Neither had they in memory, ye wonders wrought by him:
In Egypt, and in the country, that lies about Tanim.
When by his great power he turned their waters into blood:
That no man might receive his drink at river ne at flood.
A multitude of flies also, he sent them to devour:
And paddockes that should them destroy, such was his myghtie power.
Their fruits and their increase he gave, to the caterpyller.
And all the labor of their hands, unto the grass hopper.
With hayle he did he stroye their vynes, so that they were all lost:
And beat down their mubberie tres with stones made by the froste.
And yet with haylstones once again, the Lord their cattle smote:
And all their flocks and herbs likewise, with thunder boltes full hot.
He cast on the^ his hot anger, his wrath and fury strong:
Great sorrow of heart and angels ill, to trouble them emonge.
The^ to his wrath he made away, and spared not the least:
But gave unto the pestilence, the man and eke the beast.
He struck also all the first borne, that up in Egypt came:
And all the eldest or first borne within the tents of Cham.
But as for all his own dear flock, he did preserve and keep:
And carried them through wyldernes, even like a flock of sheep.
Without all fear boeth safe and sound, he brought them out of thrall:
Whereas his foes with rage of seas, were overwhelmed all.
And he led them into the bounds of his sanctuary:
Even to this hill which his right hand and myghtie power did bye.
Thense cast he forth the Heathen flock, and did their land divide:
And in their tents has he caused Jacobs kynred to bide.
Yet did they for all this provoke, and styr up their God still:
And would not keep his testament, nor yet obey his will.
But as their fathers turned back, even so they went a straye:
Much like a bow that would not bend, but break and starte away.
With the aultares that they builded on hills that were so hye:
And with their images they did, provoke God to envy.
This heard God, and his wrath began to kyndle in his breast:
And for their wyckednes he did them much hate and deteste.
In so much that he left Silo, the tent or dwelling place:
Wherein before he had dwelled among men for a space.
He let them take the arcke also, wherein his power does stand:
And gave up his magnificence into his enmies hand.
His people he gave to the sword, wrath with his heritage:
Fire eat the young men and the maids came not to marriage.
And with the swerd ye priests did, perish euerychone:
And not a wydowe left on live, their hard chance to be moan.
With that the Lord began to wake, as sleep had held his eiene:
Or as a myghtie champio^ reioyseynge after wine.
The plage of pyles he sent his foes even in the fundement:
And put upon them such a shame, as should be permanent.
This not wythstandynge, Iosephes rent he did franckly refuse:
And the kynred of Ephraim, he would in no wise choose.
But the kynred of Jude he has, chosen therein to dwell:
Even the holy mount Sion, which he did love so well.
There did he buyld up his temple boeth sumptuously and sure:
Like to the ground that he has made for ever to endure.
Than chose he David him to serve, his people for to keep:
And him he took and brought away, even from the foldes of sheep.
As he went after bagged ewes, the Lord did him advance:
To feed his people Israel, and his enheritaunce.
Then David with a faithful heart did them pasture and feed:
And did prudentlye to his power, govern them all in deed.
The.lxxix. Psalm.
INto thine heritage (O God) the Heathen are entered:
The palayce of thine holy place, Lord they have defiled.
They have also brought thy city, holy Jerusalem:
Into an hudge and most rude heap, as it has pleased them.
With thy servants dead bodies they have fed the fowls that fly:
And the beasts of the earth with flesh of men that lived godly.
They shed their blood, like as water about Jerusalem:
And there is none remaining that might take and bury them.
Our neighbors have reviled us as men that are forlorn:
And they that dwell rownde about us, have laughed us to scorn.
How long (O Lord) how long I say? will thou be wrath for aye?
Shall thine envy burn like fire, whose heat does not decay?
Pour out thy wrath on the heathen that do not the confess:
And on the kingdoms that do not call on the in distress.
For they have devoured Jacob, and eaten him up quite:
And have destroyed all his dwelling howses in dispyte.
Remember not our former sins, but forgive us quickly:
For we are weakened (good Lord) and that excedyngly.
O the God of our health help us, for the praise of thy name:
Deliver us, and take mercy on our sins, for the same.
Why should the Heathen say, where is their God whom they do praise?
Revenge the blood of thy servants on the^ (Lord) in our days.
Let the gronynges of the captyue ascend up in thy sight.
And them that be judged to dye, keep on live by thy might.
O Lord requite our neighbors with seven times the open shame:
That they have gone about to lay upon thine holy name.
So we that be thy people and the flock of thy pasture:
Shall setforth and declare thy praise, whylse the world shall endure.
The.lxxx. Psalm.
O Thou shepeherd of Israel, of my words take good keep:
Thou that do lead forth Joseph as he were a flock of sheep.
O thou I say that haste thy seat upon the Cherubim:
Shine forth upon thy pore servant, and show thyselfe to him.
Before Ephraim Beniamim, and Manasses also:
Styr up thy power and come to save thy pore servants from woe.
O God, restore us once again, and make thy face to shine:
And then shall thy servants be false in thy presence divine.
O Lord and God of hosts, how long wylt thou be angerie?
And how long wylt thou the requests of thy people deny?
Thou have fed them with dolfoull tears, even as with bread I thyncke:
And have droncke to the^ of a cup, full of tears to the bryncke.
Thou haste appointed us to be our neighbors mocking stocks.
And to suffer our enimes, to lade us with their mockes.
O God restore us once again, and make thy face to shine:
And then shall thy servants be safe, in thy presence divine.
Out of Egypt (Lord) thou have brought the vine of Israel.
And for place to plant it in thou, dydste the heathen expel.
Thou dydeste purge the rynde there of and that diligently.
And when it was roted it did, the whole earth occupy.
The shadow thereof did cover the hills that be so hye.
And her bows the great Ceder trees, that be strong and myghtie.
She stretched forth to the sea side, her branches that were stout:
And unto the fresh water side, her buddes she did shote out.
Why have thou broken down her hedge, that who so passes by:
May pluck and break of her branches, and cause her rote to die?
The wild, bore of the foreste does, her utterly destroy:
And allwyld beasts of the field, do eat her gredily.
O God of hosts we the beseech, return, look out from hye:
Look hither and come down to se, this vyneyard by and by.
Viset, I say, the vineyard that, thy right hand has planted:
And this ofsprynge which to thy self thou haste so assured.
It is burned up with fire, and is hewn down quite:
They must needs perish if thou do, look on them with despyte.
With the man of thy right hand let, thy power and strength remain:
And with the son of man whom thou do with the entertayne.
Then shall we not return from the, that do our life restore:
But will call on thine holy name, for aye and evermore.
Restore us (O Lord God of hosts) and make thy face to shine:
And then shall thy servants be salfe in thy presence divine.
The.lxxxj. Psalm.
Sing unto God with reioyseynge, who is our force and might:
And endeavor with loud trompettes Jacobs God to delyght.
Begyne a Psalm and play to it, with tabrete and with harp:
And with the sweet and solemn lute with notes pleasant and sharp.
Blow with the horn the blastes that are used at the new moan:
The time wherein our sacrifice is poynted to be done.
For this is a rite and custom of strength in Israel:
And a law that with Jacobs God has been accepted well.
And this remembrance did he leave emonge Iosephes kynred:
When by his myghtie power they were, salfly from Egyptled.
O Israel my thyncke I hear, a voice worthy regard:
The language is but strange to me, such as I have not heard.
Thus says the voice. I have pulled his shoulder from burden: And his hand
did leave the labor, of the great break oven.
In trouble I dydset the quyte, when thou dydste on me cry:
And gave an answer unto the, by thunder secretly.
And when thou dydste contend with me, at the waters of strife:
I had a suer trial of the manner of thy life.
But hearken O my people, for my word shall the assure:
If thou wylt hearken to my voice, my will and my pleasure.
There shall be no straynge God in the, se thou do them not keep:
Take heed that in nowyse thou do, any stra^g God worshype.
Thy Lord and God am I that have the out of Egypt brought*
Open thy mouth and ask of me, I will deny the nougth.
But my people heard not my voice, Jacob did me forsake:
Wherefore I gave them liberty, their hertes desire to take.
Oh if my people had heard me, and walked in my way:
How sone should I have brought all their enemies to decay?
And how sone should I have turned, my power against them all:
That do infest and trouble them, as people bond and thrall?
All such men as do hate the Lord, their bond slaves should have been:
But the end of my peoples days never man should have seen.
I would have fed them with the flower, and fyneste of the wheat:
Out of the rock they should have had, honye whylse they would eat.
The.lxxxij. Psalm.
IN the company of judges, God stood amyd them all.
And gave sentence on them that werein judgment partial.
How long, said he, will you deserne and judge matters awrye?
How long will you pervert judgment, and judge things contrary?
Revenge the rore and fatherless, discharge the wretch of bands:
Ryd the weak and the nedie out of the wicked men's hands.
But they ne know nor understand ought, but walk in the way:
Of dearknes, whereby the whole earth is lykly to decay.
Certes, I said you are all gods, and sons of the most hye:
But yet as men and eke tyrannes, ye shall fall down and die.
Arise (O God) and judge the earth, for to the do belong:
(By thy birth right) all nations, be they never so strong.
The.lxxxiij. Psalm.
O God, behold thou kepest in thy self in silence still:
Dissemble not (O God) ne cease to work after thy will.
Forlo, thine enmies make vprores, and they that do the hate:
Lift up their heads, and do nothing of their courage debate.
They have co^sulted subtyly, Lord against thy people:
And against thine elect these men have holden a counsel.
Come on (said they) let us destroy them and their nation:
Let there remain of Jacobs name, no manner mention.
For with consent of heart these have conspired together:
And made a covenant against the that lyueste ever.
That is to say the Edomites and eke the Ismalites:
The Moabites, the Hagarenes, and eke the Gebalites.
The Amonites, Amalekites, and eke the palestines*
And they that dwell in Tiria, and in all the confines.
To them also are joined the assirians I wotte:
Who were the chief ayed and succoure unto the sons of lot.
As thou dydst to Madianites, at the river Kison:
And to Siser, and to Labin, so do to these echone.
For they were broken at Endor, and thereby brought so low:
That from the donghill of the earth, no man could them well know.
Let these men and their rulars have the thing that Oreb had:
And as Seeb, Sebah and Salumna do the^ reward.
These men have said, let us calendge and cleym to us and ours:
All the tabernacles of God, his dwellynges and his bowres.
O my God, make the^ like a wheel, that no sure rest does find:
And as the stubble of the earth, that rouleth with the wind.
Let them be like the fire that causes great woods to frye:
And like the flamme that burns up, the mountains great and hye.
So persecute them with thy storms that they do no rest find:
And cast them flat upon the ground, with thy myghtie whyrlwynde*
Lord, dashe al their faces full of ignominy and shame:
That they may be forced to seek after thine holy name.
Let their shame and confusion be more and more daily:
Let them be shamed and then let them perish utterly.
That they may know that thou (whose name is Lord) art he only:
That beaxeste rule through all the earth, as Lord and God most hye.
The.lxxxiiij. Psalm.
O Lord of hosts, how bewtifull and how goodly in sight:
Are the tabernacles and tents, that in thy champe are pight?
To dwell in the Lords courts, my soul does long excedynglye:
And to be with the lyueynge God, mine heart and flesh do cry.
For the very sparowe has found a place wherein to dwell:
And the swallowe a neste where she may keep her young ones well.
O Lord of might, that art my king and eke my God for aye:
Thine altares are the place whereon these birds do find their stay.
Happy and blessed are all they that in thine house do dwell:
For they shall still extol thy name and thy great praises tell.
Happy are the men that do put their confidence in the:
And in whose hertes thine holy ways are evident to se.
When they pass through the vale of tears, with wells they shall it store*
And the rain shall fill the fyshe pondes till they will hold no more.
From heap to heap they shall proceed, in great possession:
Each of them shall plainly appear before god in Sion.
Lord God of hosts, hear my prayer, O Jacobs God take heed:
O God our shild behold the face of Christ thine anointed.
For in thy courts one day passes, a thousand days elsewhere:
At thy door, then in wicked tents, I would dwell much rather.
For the Lord God is a clear sun, and eke a tergat sure:
And gives grace, honor, and all good things unto the pure.
O Lord of hosts, that man is bless and must needs happy be:
That puts his only trust and his confidence in the.
The.lxxxv. Psalm.
O Lord thou wylt be merciful to thine own land doubtless:
And wylt ryd all Jacobs kynred, from thrauldome and distress.
The wyckednes of thy people, Lord thou wylt take away:
And all their sins and trespases, thou wylt hyde I dare say.
Thou wylt take away all thine hot anger and furiouse fervor:
And wylt assuage thine hot anger and wrathful displeasure.
Restore us, O God of our health and our salvation:
Restore us, and leave of thy wrath and indignation.
What? Wylt thou be still wrath with us, shall thine Ire have none end:
Wylt thou thy fury to the last of all ages extend?
Art thou not he that will return and us to life restore?
That thy people may be praised in the for evermore?
O Lord show us thy great goodness, and exceeding mercy:
And of thy saueynge health let thy pore servants have plenty.
I will hear what the Lord says, for all his words doubtless:
Do bid his people and his saynctes, declyne from wyckednes:
Certes his health is not far of, from them that do him fear:
So that our country needs not, of honor to despeare.
Mercy and truth are met in one and are come together*
So have justice and peace joined, kissing one the other.
Fayeth shall spring up out of the earth, her rote shall not decay:
And justice shall look down from far, out of the heavens graye.
The Lord also shall give mercy, and our land her increase:
And justice shall walk before God, and tread in the plain ways.
The.lxxxvj. Psalm.
O Lord give ear to thy servant, and grant me my request:
For I (a pore and simple wretch) am vexed and oppreste.
Preserve my life (O Lord) because, my lyueynge is upright
Do thou save thy servant (O God) who trusts in thy might.
Be good to me (O Lord) because, I call on the daily:
There thou my mind, for unto the (O Lord) I lift it hye.
For thou (O Lord) art good in deed, and eke full of mercy:
Thy bountiful goodness is large, toward all that on the cry.
Give ear (O Lord) to my prayer, and ponder my request:
In my trouble I call on the, for to hear thou art pressed.
There is not one among the gods (O Lord) like unto the:
Neither is there any that does such worckes as thy worckes be.
All nations that thou haste made, shall come and honor the:
And shall set forth thy name (O Lord) with praise and with glory.
And that because thou alone art great and strong in their sight:
And do wonderful acts, and art alone the God of might.
Direct me in thy ways and I shall in thy truth proceed:
O Lord constrayne mine heart to fear thine holy name in deed.
I will praise the (O Lord my God) and that with all mine heart:
And from the praises of thy name, my mind shall never sterte.
For doubtless thy mercy toward me does in greatness excel.
For thou haste rydde my soul out of the lougher pyt of hell.
The proud and arrogant (O God) are risen against me:
And the cruel sort seek my soul, and have no fear of the.
But thou (Lord God) art ready to mercy and forgeuenes:
Slow to anger, long sufferyng, and full of faythfullnes.
Look back and take mercy on me, Lord after thine old won:
Give thy strength to thy pore servant, and save thine handmaydes son.
Show some sign of thy love toward me, that such as do me hate:
May shame to se that thou Lord do me help and consolate.
The.lxxxvij. Psalm.
THe bases and foundations of Sion are fast set:
In the mountains and hills that are boeth holy and sacrete.
The Lord bears more favor to the cities of Sion:
Then he does to the residue of Jacobs nation.
Right noble things (O gods city) are reported of the:
Reported in the (O Sion) right noble things there be.
Rahab, and such of Babylon as have known my name:
I will have kept in memory, as right worthy of fame.
Lo palestine is worthy praise, because therein were borne:
Boeth zor and they of Ethiope, of whom I thyncke no scorn.
But of Sion it shall be said, that many of great fame:
Have been borne there, and the high God shall eke confirm the same.
In his writtynges the Lord shall cite the peoples every one:
And of them all, the chyefest man was borne in this Sion.
In the (Sion) are all my wells whereout all they do spring:
That in my trase do lead the dance, and do my praises sing.
The.lxxxviij. Psalm.
Lord God mine health, before thy face I cry boeth day and night* Let my
request, I the beseech, be present in thy sight.
Bow down thine ear unto my cry, for my soul has her fill:
And my life is brought to ye grave, through the plenty of ill.
But now am I compted with them, that go into the pyt:
And am compared to a man, that of strength has no whyt.
As one fre from all manner things that to this life belong:
I am accounted emonge them, whom fatal death has stonge.
I am I say like to the dead, that in the grave do sleep:
Of who^ there is no memory, ne does thine hand them keep.
In the lower pyt of troubles, Lord thou have placed me:
In places that are darcke and deep so has it, pleased the.
Thy fervent indignation, has quelled me well most:
Thou have cast out thy pore servant, in troubles to be toste.
Thou haste caused mine acquayntaunce, to fly far of from me*
And through thy means they do abhor, thy pore servant tose.
I am enclosed in such wise and hedged round about:
That I ne can by any means, find ishue or way out.
Throughsore pain and affliction, mine eye sight fails me:
O Lord I call and cry all day, and lift mine hands to the.
And do thou show wonders to them that in the grave dolye?
Or shall the dead arise again, and praise the worthyly?
And shall thy mercy and goodness be preached in the grave?
Or thy faith in destruction, where none has mind to crave?
Or shall thy wonders be well known in places dark and blind?
Or thy justice in such a place, where nothing is in mind?
But I (thy pore servant) have cried to the (O Lord) I say:
And my prayer shall the prevent in the spryng of the day.
O Lord why do thou put me back, and my pore soul repel?
Wylt thou (Lord) hyde thy face from me, and show thy self cruel?
Wretched am I, and from my youth have been still at deaths door:
And with perplex and doubtful mind I sustain thy terror.
Thy furies and rageynge angers, have gone over me quite:
And thy terrors and great threatenings, have killed me downryght.
They have daily environed, and beset me about:
And to gyrd me in together, they have not stand in doubt.
My friends thou haste set far from me, and eke my neighbors all:
And haste caused mine acquayntaunce into darcknes to fall.
The.lxxxix. Psalm.
THy mercies and thy goodness Lord I will sing without stay.
And with my mouth (Lord) will I cause, thy truth be know for aye.
For with my self, thus have I thought Gods mercy lasts aye:
And in the high heavens his truth he has set with sure stay.
Thus has he said, with mind elect I have made a comnaunt:
And with an oath I promised, to David my servant.
Thy seed I will confirm for aye, and make it to enduer:
And in all ages that shall come, thy throne shall remain sure.
The heavens (O Lord) celebrate, and praise thy wonders all:
So do the sanctes thine holy truth, when they their counselles call.
In heaven, who is it that may be the Lords fellow right?
And which of the strong men shall be, like unto him in might?
For God must be greatly feared in holy men's counsel:
And must be had in reverence of them that nygh him dwell.
Lord God of hosts, who is like the? Oh thou that art myghtie:
All things that are about the Lord, are truth and verity.
Lord thou do rule the great furies and rages of the seas:
And when they do lift up their waves, thou do them all appease.
Provide Pharao thou dydest beat, even as a dead body:
And with the force of thy great strength, thou dydst thy foes destroy.
The heavens are thine, so is the earth, none can this thing deny*
The whole world and all things therein, thou haste made certainly.
The north part and the south also, thou haste made and formed*
Thabor and Hermon shall rejoice, when they hear the named.
Thou haste an arm full of all power, all might does therein stand:
Lord thou do fortify thy strength, and lift up thy right hand.
Thy prince like throne is vndersette, with equity and right:
Mercy and truth go before the, and are still in thy sight.
O happy people that confess, the signs of gods presence:
For in thy light (O Lord) such shall walk with great reverence.
They shall daily joy and rejoice, Lord in thine holy name:
And in thy ryghtuousenes they shall, purchase them self great fame.
For of their joyce and strength (O God) thou only art the flower:
And of thy mere goodness thou wylt extolle our might and power.
For our shyld of defense is a thing of the lords geuynge:
And the holy one of Jacob, has given us our king.
Then to thy prophets (by a dream) thus saydest thou, in effect:
I will supporte and aid David, for he is mine elect.
I have found David my servant, and have him anointed:
With holy oil that by my power he might be strengthened.
The enemy shall never be, able him to deceive:
Neither shall the froward have power, my servant for to grieve.
I will braye all his enemies, even before his face:
And such as do him hate I will destroy with outen grace.
My truth and eke my mercy shall be with him at his need:
And in my name his power shall be excedyng great in deed.
I will put his hand in the sea, his power shall thither reach:
And over the rennynge rivers, he shall his right hand stretche.
He shall call on me at his need and shall say in this sort:
Thou art my father and my God, and of my health the forte.
Mine heyer will I ordeyne him, above the kings all:
My mercy and promise to him, for ever keep I shall.
I will make his sede eternal his stock shall never die:
And his royal seat will I make, like the time of the sky.
If his sons will forsake my law and not walk in my steps*
If they will break mine ordinance and not keep my precepts.
Then with rods will I visyte them, for their going astraye:
And will with scourges punish the wyckednes of their way.
Yet my mercy and great goodness will I not take from him:
Ne break my covenant with him, for my truth I esteem.
I will not break my covenant, neither my words deny.
I will not change but be the same, and never contrary.
I swear once by mine holiness, and thereto will I cleave*
I will keep promise with David, I will him not deceive.
His sede shall be perpetual, it shall never decay:
His royal seat shall continue as long as night and day.
It shall be as fyrme and as sure, as the moon in the sky:
Which is a most certain wytnes in the heaven so hye.
But thou haste forsaken David, and art turned away:
Thou burnest with anger against thy Christ and king I say.
The promise that thou madeste with thy seruante thou haste broke:
And have cast his crown to the grownde by the force of thy stroke.
All his hedges thou haste pulde up, and left him wide open:
His fences and his suer moundes, thou have torn and broken.
Each man that passes by the way, takes at him a snatch:
His neighbors do laugh him to scorn, and use him like a patche.
Thou haste set up the power of them that do him sore infeste:
And haste made them that be his foes, to rejoice and to ieste.
Yea the edge of his sword thou have made so dull as a bar:
Thou haste not given him uictorie, ne thupper hand in war.
Thou haste caused his dignity, to cease and not be found:
His royal throne and princely seat, thou haste cast to the grownde.
His young and luster days thou haste cut of and shortened:
Myth shame, reprofe and dishonor, thou haste him covered.
How long wylt thou be hyd (O Lord) wylt thou be hyd for aye?
Shall thine hot indignation burn like fire without stay?
Remember how small time I have lived, and say certain:
Whether thou haste created and, made all mankind in vain.
For what man is he that lives, and that none end shall have?
And that is able to preserve, his life out of the grave?
O Lord, where be thine old mercies, and ancient goodness*
Which thou swarest unto David even of thy faithfulness.
Be myndfull Lord of the rebuke that thy servants sustain:
All the rebukes of much people in my bosom remain.
They are thine enemies (O Lord) that have us reviled*
And have checked the tariaunce, of Christ thine anointed.
For ever ought the Lord to be praised emonge all men:
Praised be he therefore I say, for aye. Amen Amen.
The.xc. Psalm.
O Lord thou haste been our refuge, and place wherein to dwell.
In all the time that erste has been, so long as tongue can tell.
Before the mountains were up spronge and the rownde earth formed:
From all ages that ever were, thou haste been God in deed.
Thou leadest man back till he be well most grownde in sunder:
And then thou say (O mortal men) return again hither.
For in thy sight a thousand year are as the day last paste:
And as the quarters of the night, that pass away in haste.
Thou make them to pass away hastly as does a sure:
They are like dreams and as the grass, they do not long endure.
As in the morn the grass is grene, and gathers him might:
So does it dry and is cut down again ere it be night.
For thine anger makes us faynte, and as weak as a straw:
And when thy wrath is kendeled, then dowe stand in awe.
Thou haste set our iniquities plainly before thy sight:
And all our secret sins thou haste, made open in the light.
When thou art wrath, then all our days do pass and slide away:
We end our years in shortter space, the^ any man can say.
The years that we use to live here, are but three score and ten:
And if any live to four score, they are very old men.
Now the very best of this time, is but labor and pain:
And yet it passes sone away, and we are gone again.
Who knows the force of thy wrath, and of thy displeasure?
For on him that fears the most, thy wrath lyghteth most sure.
Tell us plainly therefore that we may know the certain sum:
Of our life days, and then apply our minds to get wisdom.
Return (O Lord) how far, I say, shall thy fury extend?
Be pleased with thy pore servants, let them not the offend.
Satisfy us with thy mercy, erly before the prime:
Then shall we rejoice and be glad, all the days of our time:
For the days in the which we did thy punishment sustain:
And for the years of misery, make us rejoice again.
Let thy work shine in thy servants, let them be known for thine:
And in the children of them all, Lord let thy glory shine.
Thy decor and thy comlynes, Lord God be in us aye:
Confirm thou the worckes of our hands, confirm thou them I say.
The.xcj. Psalm.
Whosoever rests in the secret, counsel of the most hye:
The same abides in the shadow of the most myghtie.
Unto the Lord thus will I say: Thou art my sanctuary:
Thou art my castle of defense, to my God cleave will I.
For he will keep his servant from the snare of the hunttar:
And from the deadly plage that is, the commune distroyar.
With his wings will he cover the, right false shall thou be there:
Thou shall be hyd under his truth, as under shylde and spear.
Thou shall not need to stand in fear, of soden fears by night:
Neither of the sharp arrowe that does fly by the day light.
Thou shall not need to fear the plage, that wounds in the darcke:
Nor that destroys when the sun, passes by the none marcke.
For though one thousand fall by the and ten at thy right hand:
Yet shall there no hurt come at the, thou shall in saftie stand.
Thou shall see like for like given, only to the wicked:
And with thine own eyes shall thou see, these things executed.
For thou (O Lord) art my refuge, wherein my trust does lie:
Thy dwelling place thou have pytched, in a place very hye.
No maneryll shall come at the, thou shall be in saftie:
Neither shall any plage approach, or to thine house draw nigh.
For he shall give commandment to his angels for thy sake:
That they shall keep the in thy ways, and the charge of the take.
In their hands shall they carry, the and safly the conueis:
That thou ne dashe thy foete against, any stone in the way.
Thou shall tread on the Leopard, and eke the adder fell:
So shall thou spurn the Lions whelpe and the dragon cruel.
Because he has embraced me, he shall not suffer shame:
I will give him the upper hand, for he co^fest my name.
He shall call on me and I will, hear and succor his need:
I will deliver him and make, him gloriouse in deed.
His life shall be so long that he shall wysh to live no more:
Mine health and my salvation, I will give him in store.
The.xcij. Psalm.
Now is it mete (O thou most high) osynge unto thy name:
And for to celebrate the Lord, and to increase his fame.
To preach his mercy and goodness erly before the pryme:
And also to declare his faith, and truth in the night time.
On the instrument of ten strings and lute with notes sharppe:
And eke on the loud instruments, and also on the harppe.
For thou (O Lord) haste with thy worckes, made me merry and glad:
In the worckes of thine hands I will rejoice and not be sad.
O Lord, how great and myghtie are thy worckes in this world rownde?
Thy counselles are exceeding deep, and eke passing profounde.
I gross head and one of dull wit does not perceive this thing:
Neither has the fool in this case any understanding.
That is, that where the wicked do like grass grow and florishe:
They floryshe to none other end, but for aye to perish.
But thou (O Lord) art high for aye, forlo thy foes do die.
So many as delight to sin, do perish utterly.
But mine horn and my strength shall be lift up and set on hye
Like the horn of an Unicorn, a beast strong and myghtie.
I shall be anointed with oil that is boeth new and fresh:
There shall no cause of feebleness, remain with in my flesh
Mine eye shallse his onwe desire, upon mine enemies.
And mine ear shall hear like of them, that do against me rise.
The just shall flourish like the palm whose leaf is ever grene:
And shall grow up like ceder trees, that in Libane be seen.
For they being set and planted, in the house of the Lord:
Shall flourishe in the courts of our God and spread out abroad.
Yea they shall budde and bring forth fruit when they are far in age
They shall be full of sap and iuse; their color shall not swage.
That they may preach the Lord (that is my strength) to deal justly:
And that in him is no deceyte, he does nothing awrye.
The.xciij. Psalm.
THe Lord is king and has put on magificence princely:
The Lord I say has put on strength, and made himself ready.
Yea the round compass of the earth is made so firm and sure:
That it shall not threathen to fall, but shall stand and endure.
Thy throne (O Lord) and princely seat, was appointed before:
From the begymynge, and thy self haste been for evermore.
The fresh waters lift up their noise, they lift it up on hye:
Their surges and their waves they do, lift up toward the sky.
Yea more then the wild waters and the great storms of the sea:
Such is the great power of the Lord, that in heaven has the swea.
For that thou (Lord) haste spoken of thine house fair and holy:
The same shall remain firm and true, time out of memory.
The.xciiij. Psalm.
OH Lord God, thou that plagest them that dolyue wyckedly:
O thou reuengeynge God I say, show thy self openly.
Auaunce thy self, O thou yt art judge over all the land:
And let the proud have their just hyer, and reward at thine hand.
How long? how long (O Lord) shall the wicked rejoice proudly?
Shall they all escape, and brag and boste themselves outragiousely?
O Lord they do freate thy people, and wear them clean away:
Such as thou cleymest by birth right, they vex and grieve, I say.
They do kylwydowes and strangers, and murder fatherless:
And then they say the Lord sees not, Jacobs God has no guess.
Ye doltysh sort of the people, to learn I you advise:
Ye foles I say, what time shall we, se you prudent and wise?
How should he that has made the ear, lack the power of hearing?
And how should he that made the eye, lack the sense of seeing.
He that does check whole nations, and teaches men science:
Should not the same rebuke you for such force and violence?
The Lord has known that all the thoughts of man's heart are but vain:
As are all the inventions of an inconstante brain.
Happy is the man (O Lord) whom thou wylt keep in awe:
Right so is he whom thou wylt train and enstruct in thy law.
That thou may ordeyne rest for him, against the troublouse time:
Whylse the pity may be dygged for, the ungodly man's crime.
The Lord will not his own people, reject or cast away:
And such as he has made his own he will not leave for aye.
Till he have restored judgment, to the rule of justice:
Which all that be of pure heart, shall follow in their guise.
Who could have risen up for me against the ungodly?
Or who could stand with me against them that live wyckedly?
Except the Lord had helped me, and succored my need:
My soul (no doubt) should have dwelled, emonge the dead with speed.
When I said (Lord) my foot does slyp then dydst thou me sustain:
And when my thoughts did trouble me, thou contortedste again.
Lord, art thou like in any point, to men of cruel saw?
That do invent ways to oppress, under color of law?
They run together against the soul of a man gyltlesse:
And do pronownce innocent blood gyltie of wyckednes.
But unto me the Lord stands for a forte and defense:
And my God is the strength wherein I put my confidence.
And he shall requite them their sin, and stroy them utterly:
In their malice, the Lord (I say) our God shall them destroy.
The.xcv. Psalm.
COme, let us all rejoice and sing to the Lord that is one:
Let us sing to the suer grownde of our salvation.
Let us prevent him and fall down before his face with prease:
Let us sing unto him with psalms, and study him to please.
For the Lord is a myghtie God, a rular and a king:
A myghtie king above all Gods thatin earth have rulynge.
In whose hand are the most secret, and darcke dens of the grownde:
And eke the high tops of the hills, where ever they be fownde.
The sea also is his for he did it facion and frame:
So did his hand the continent, that lies within the same.
Come on therefore let us honor and fall down in his sight:
Let us knele before our maker, that is the Lord of might.
For he is our God and we the people of his pasture:
And the flock of his myghtie hand, of whom he takes cure.
If ye will head his voice this day, ye shall have no hard heart.
As in the time when ye strove and tempted me in desert.
When time your fathers tempted me, they did me thoroughly try:
So did they se my worckes also set out before their eye.
This nation did I forbear with pain forty years day:
So that I said, they err in heart and do not know my way.
Then swear I to them in the Ire and great he ate of my breast:
That they should never enter in to dwell with in my rest.
The.xcvj. Psalm.
Sing a new song unto the Lord, in faythse ye accord:
All ye that dwell upon the earth, sing this song to the Lord.
Sing to the Lord, and praise his name preath his salvation:
Tell his glory and wondrouse worckes in every nation.
For great and myghtie is the Lord, and of much praise worthy:
And to be feared above all the gods that are sohye.
For all the gods of the people, are nothing of valor:
But the Lord has made the heavens that are stydfaste and sure.
Honor and glory are present before him in his sight.
Might and magnificence are in his sanctuary pyght.
O ye housholdes of nations, ascribe unto the Lord.
Glory and power, I say ascribe all such things to the Lord.
Ascribe I say unto ye Lord, glory worthy his name:
Bring sacrifice and enter in, to his courts with the same.
Bow your self to the Lord in his most goodly sacrarie:
As many as dwell on the earth, fear ye the Lord on hye.
Tell the Heathen, the Lord does reygne, the earth shall stand stidie:
For he shall minister the laws with right and equity.
Let the heavens be merry and glad, and let the earth rejoice:
Let the sea and all things therein give out asoundynge voice.
Let the corn field and all that is therein rejoice I say:
Then all the trees of the foreste, let them, sing out for joy.
Let this be done before the Lord, because he is comeynge:
For he comes to judge the earth, and try each man's doing.
He shall judge the round world I say in right and equity:
And all the people of the same, he shall rule faithfully.
The.xcvij. Psalm.
LEt the earth and the Islands all, rejoice and be merry:
For only the Lord God reigns, and has the imperie.
About him are clouds and darcknes, no man can him behold:
Right and equity are the stays that do his throne uphold.
The fire of extreme judgment shall, go out before his face:
And shall on each side burn his foes with out favor or grace.
His lyghtnynges have lyghtned the world on each side round about:
Which thing when the earth saw she did for sorrow stand in doubt.
The hills molt at the Lords presence, even as the wax melts:
At the presence I say of him, that all the world rules.
The heavens have declared his justice manifestly:
And all peoples have plainly seen, his honor and glory.
Let all that worship Imagies, and in vain Gods delight:
Be confounded, ye Gods, I say, fall down in the Lords sight.
Sion heard this and was right glad and Iudes danghters (O Lord)
Rejoiced for thy just judgments, and did the same record.
For thou (O Lord) art above all, that upon the earth are:
Above all the Gods and rulars, thou art exalted far.
Hate vice all ye that love the Lord, for his, who seek goodness:
He does keep and deliver from, wicked men's cruelnes.
To them that be rightwise and just, light is sown and does spring:
And unto men of a sownde heart, grows up reioyceynge.
Be merry in the Lord ye that are full of righteousness:
And rejoice when ye be myndfull, of his great holiness.
The.xcviij. Psalm.
Sing a new song unto the Lord, for he has wonders wrought:
By his holy arm and own strength health to him self he brought.
His health and his salvation, has he made known and seen:
He has reueyled his justice, before the heathens eien.
He has had mind of his mercy, and truth toward Israel:
All the coasts of the earth have seen, our gods saueynge health well.
All ye that dwell upon the earth sing praises to the Lord:
Break out in voice and eke rejoice, and sing in musickes cord.
Sing to the Lord upon the harppe sing Psalms to your harppynge:
Make sweet noise with trumpettes and shawmes, before the Lord and king.
Let the sea and all things therein, give out a sowndyng voice:
Let all that dwell upon the earth, in like manner rejoice.
Let the fresh waters clap with hands, as pleased with the thing.
And let the mountains so rejoice, that they sease not to sing.
Let this be done before the Lord, because he is comeynge:
For he comes to judge the earth, and try each man's doing
He shall judge the rownde world I say in right and equity:
And all the people of the same, he shall rule faithfully.
The.xcix. Psalm.
EVen when the Lord reigned alone, the people made uproar:
Whylse he sat upon Cherubim, the earth was moved sore.
The Lord is great and myghtie in his own city Sion:
So is he high and above each people and nation.
Let them set forth and celebrate thy name (Lord) worthyly:
For it is great and worthy fear, and eke passing holy.
A King loves ryghtwise dealing, but thou preparedst it
And in Jacob thou do the thing that is boeth just and fyt.
Exalt I say exalt the Lord our God that is on hye:
And fall down at his fete for he is sacret and holy.
Among his priests was Moses, and his brother Aaron:
And of them that did cry on him, good Samuel was one.
They cried to him and he heard them, and spoke to them again:
Out of a cloud, and to keep all his laws they were right feign.
O Lord our God, thou heardest them, and dydst them not deny:
Thou wast to them a loueynge God, plagegeynge their vain study.
Exalt the Lord our God, and cast your self prostrate on grownde:
At the hill of his holiness, for holy is he fownde.
The.C. Psalm.
ALl earthly men sing to the Lord and worship him gladly:
Come merrily into his sight, reioyceynge hertily.
Acknowledge that the Lord is God, for he is our maker*
And not we ours, but his people and flock no doubt we are.
Enter his gates to give him thanckes and his courts to sing praise:
Set him forth with praises and laud his name all manner ways.
For the Lord is right merciful, and eke right good I say:
His mercy shall never have end, neither his truth decay.
The.Cj. Psalm.
Mercy and judgment will I sing, of them my song shall be:
Of mercy and judgment (O Lord) I will sing unto the.
I will walk wisely in sure way, till thou do come to me:
Without spotte or blemysh of heart, in mine house will I be.
I will purpose no wyckednes, ne deed worthy of blame:
All wicked doars will I hate, and put from me the same.
The perverse and the froward heart shall not abide with me:
Neither shall the maliciouse, of mine acquayntaunce be.
Such as their neighbors mysse report in secret, I will stroye:
I will not abide such one as, with proud heart looks hye.
Such will I seek to dwell with me, as be faithful in deed:
And such as walk innocently, shall serve me at my need.
He shall not dwell within mine house that worcketh any gyle:
And he that speaks lies shall not, dwell with me any while.
All the ungodly of ye earth I will destroy quickly*
That the wicked doars may be put out of the city.
The.Cij. Psalm.
O Lord, hear and grant my prayer, and do it not deny:
And let my great and loud cryinge, come up to the on hye.
Hyde not thy face from me (O Lord) but hear me in distress:
And when I call to the for help, grant it with redines.
For my days be wasted like smoke, and my bones brent like fire:
Mine heart is wythered like heye, to eat I ne desire.
My bones and flesh clean together, through sorrow of mine heart:
I am made like the pellicane, and howlet of desert.
I have watched and am become, like a sparowe alone:
Syttyng on the rydge of the house in whom confort is none.
I was daily reviled of, such as mine enmies were:
And they rejoiced over me, and began by me to swear.
I did eat ashes like as bread, and blende tears in my cup:
For thy great wrath because to plage me thou dydst lift me up.
My days are gone like a shadow, and I am dried like hay:
But thou Lord shall continue still, and be in mind for aye.
Rise up (O Lord) and take mercy, and pity on Sion:
Because the time poynted thereto, does now draw fast upon.
For thy servants bear favor to, the stones of that city:
And to cast out the duste thereof, they do desyer greatly.
And let the heathen fear the name, of the Lord in like case:
And all the kings of the earth the majesty of his face.
For the Lord built Sion and was seen in his majesty:
And regardyng the pores request, he did it not deny.
This thing shall be left in wryttynge, to our posterity:
And people that shall then be borne, shall praise God certainly.
For the Lord looks from above, from his sanctuary:
And he shall look upon the earth, out of the heaven hye.
That he may hear the waylynge of men in captivity.
And deliver them out of bonds, that are judged to die.
That men may celebrate and praise, the Lords name in Sion:
And his praise in Jerusalem, his habitacion.
When the peoples and kingdoms all, shall be brought into one:
To honor and worship the Lord, the Lord I say, alone.
But he has afflicted and broke, my strenght upon the way:
And has cut of and shortened my time and fatalle day.
I will therefore say (O my God) take me not at myd age:
For thine yers continue for aye, and shall never aswage.
For thou dydst first lay the grownde work of the earth that is rownde:
And the worckes of thine hands also, the high heavens are found.
Which all shall perish but thou shall remain still unmoved*
All things shall war old like a cote, and be by the chaynged.
But thou bydest the same for aye, thine years shall have none end:
Let the sons of thy servants bide, and do their sede defend.
The.ciij. Psalm.
MY soul preach and declare the Lord, preach and spread out his fame:
And eke my bowelles every one preach ye his holy name.
Preach and declare the Lord, I say, my soul, and keep in mind:
The benifites and great goodness, that in him thou dydst find.
He forgeueth the all thy fautes, and thine iniquities:
And heals all thy syknesses and thine infirmities.
From the power of the destroyer he sets thy life free:
His benifites and mercies all, he heapeth upon the.
With things that are dulcet and sweet, he does aye fill thy mouth:
That like as does the egle thou may recover thine youth.
The Lord with justice does revenge, all such as are oppreste:
And to deliver innocents, he is ready and priest.
His laws and his commandments, to Moses did he tell:
So did he to Jacobs children his studies and counsel.
The Lord is kind and merciful, when synnars do him grieve:
Long sufferynge with patience, and ready to forgive.
He uses not to chyde and braule with worddes continually:
Neither to be still myndfull of a wrong or injury.
He does not use to handle us according to our sin:
Ne rewards the wickedness that we have lived in.
For as the space is wondrouse great, twyxt earth and heaven above:
So is his goodness much more large, to the^ that do him love.
He does remove our sins from us and our offenses all:
As far as is the sun risynge full distant from his fall.
And look what pity parents dear unto their children bear:
Like pity does the Lord bear to, all such as do him fear.
For our state and condition, he knows certainly:
And that we be naught else but duste, he has in memory.
He knows also that man's time is, like to the wydderynge hay:
Or like the fair flower of the field, that fades sone away.
Whose fair beauty the stormy wyndes, do utterly disgrace:
And bring him out of knowledge with men that dwell in that place.
But yet the goodness of the Lord toward them that do him fear:
Shall dure for aye, and his justice, toward their nephews so dear.
Toward such, I say, as keep his hestes and bear in memory:
His laws and institutions, to do them perfectly.
The Lord has prepared and set, his throne in heaven so hye:
And his kingdom rules all things that are under the sky.
Ye angels of the Lord, preach him, ye myghtie men I say:
Put the Lords business in ure, and to his word obey.
Preach the Lord, O his armies all, preach and set him forth still:
For whylse ye be his mynisters, ye do perform his will.
O ye worckes of the Lord preach him, throughout his imperie:
Preach him my soul, cease not my soul, to preach the Lord boldly.
The.ciiij. Psalm.
MY soul preach and set forth the Lord, O my Lord God say I:
Thou art myghtie in noble acts, and clad with bright glory.
For my God is clothed with light, eue^ as with a garment:
And has spredde forth the heavens as, the curten of a tent.
He has builded his parlars in, the waters up on hye.
And has made the clouds his charet, and does with the wind fly.
All such he has made spirits as, do on his message go:
So has he made his ministers hot flameynge fire also.
The earth also he has builded upon grownd work so sure:
That for the perfect work thereof, it might ever endure.
In like manner he has hyd the deep as with a garment:
To make the waters stand above the hills was his intent.
But they fly and dare not abide when thou byddest them stay:
And at the sown of thy thunder, they run hastly away.
They run, I say, over the hills, and eke the valeys wide:
Until they come unto the place, where thou wylt they shall bide.
A marcke thou have set, over which they may not pass certain:
Lest they should over flow the earth and cover it again.
Then sendest thou forth springynge wells, whose stremes do rore and cry:
That they may run between the hills, that on each side are hye.
That all the wild beasts of the field, might drink thereof plenty:
And that the wild asses also, might drynck when they be dry.
And that the fowls of the air, that on the trees do sing:
Might live nygh them haueynge fast by, their abode and dwelling.
Out of the clouds (his dwelling place) he gives the hills rain:
With the fruit of his worckes he does fill the earthfull certain.
He brings forth hay for catell, and grass for man's tyllage
That bread might spring out of the earth man's honger to assuage.
And wine to make man's heart merry, and oil his face to chere:
And bread that makes the heart strong, at all times of the year.
And the Lords trees are full of sap, as Ceders in Libane:
Where byrddes bread and storckes make their nestes in fyr trees to remain.
To the gotes he has given the hills to serve for their refuge:
And to the conies and the hares, the clyffes and rocks so huge.
The moon he made, that she might aye divide the time aright:
And the sun knows certainly his going down at night.
It is night (Lord) so sone as thou, do bring in the darcknes:
And then do all the beasts raynge, that live in wyldernes.
Even as the Lions whelppes that do, rore and cry at their pray:
And that they may seek for their meat, that God provides aye.
And when the sun is up they do get the^ selves home certain:
And then they go into their dens and lay them down again.
But man takes his work in hand, and does him thereto dyght.
And does apply his business, till it be almost night.
O Lord, how great are all thy worckes which thy wisdom hache made?
Thy richesse and possession, do the earth ouerlade.
The sea it self is wide and broad, where, of beasts that do crall:
The mumbre is exceeding great, as well of great as small.
There go the ships and that great fyshe, and sea monster I say:
That casts forth floudes of water, whom thou madeste there to play.
But all these things do put their trust and confidence in the.
That thou wylt give them their fedynge, when their due time shall be.
And when thou geuest, they gather, things mete for their fedeynges:
And when thine hand is open, they are filled with Good things.
But if thou hyde thy face from them they are troubled certain:
And if thou take their breath, they dye, and turn to duste again.
Again, on the contrary part, beasts are create certain:
If thou send forth thy breath and do refreshe the earth again.
Let the majesty of the Lord, never come to an end:
And let him rejoice in his worckes, which can not be emende:
If he behold the earth far of, then does it shake for fear:
And if he do but tutch the hills, they smoke up in the air.
So long as I shall live therefore, to the Lord will I sing:
To my God will I sing, I say, whylse I shall be lyueynge.
Ind all my talk concerning him, shall be dulcet and sweet:
And I will rejoice in the Lord, as for me it is mete.
As for the synnars shall be slain, and perish of the grownde:
And the ungodly shall no more, remain for to be found.
My soul preach and set forth the Lord, praise him wythouten stay:
Haleluia, praise the Lord all faithful men I say.
The.cv. Psalm.
Confess and acknowledge the Lord, and call upon his name:
Teach his studies to the people, and make them learn the same.
Describe the Lord and sing to him, and talk of his wonders^
Rejoice in his most holy name, and be his glad sekears.
Let them all have a merry heart, that seek the Lord I say:
Seek ye the Lord and eke his power, seek the Lords face always.
Remember the wonderful things, that by the Lord are wrought:
And eke his signs and the judgments, that his mouth has forth brought.
O sede of Habraham I say, that worshypt God truly.
O children of Jacob, that was chosen most certainly.
O ye children of gods chosen, our Lord and God is he:
Whose judgments are in all the earth, most evident to se.
For he is ever myndfull of his faithful promises:
And of the word he would have kept, in thousands of ages.
This did he confyrme by promise, to Habraham truly:
And by an oath to Isaac, byndynge him self thereby.
To make this a law to Jacob, he set it in sure stay:
And to make it a covenant, to Israel for aye:
And thus he fayde. To the will I give the Cananites lands*
To make them thine enheritaunce, I put them in thine hands.
When they therefore were very few and an household full small*
And were strangers in that country and had no ground at all.
And when they from one nation, to an other did flyt:
And eke from kingdom to kingdom, and did in no place sytte.
Yet did the Lord suffer no man, his people to oppress:
But for their sakes he plaged kings, and put them to distress.
Tuche not (said he) mine anointed, men dedicate to me:
Ne hurt any of my prophets, that preach my verity.
Then caused he a great famen upon the earth to rise:
And made all manner vitales scant, beyond all manner syse.
And before them he sent a man, for to prepare their way:
Iosephe was sold into bondage, and servitude I say.
They bound his fete in fetters strong, he was there like to dye:
Until the time his cause was known, and Gods word did him try.
Then sent the king and took him out, the rular of that land:
He that had rule of much people, did relesse Iosephes band.
And in his house he gave him rule, over boeth great and small:
And in all his possessions, he gave him rule of all.
That he might rule his officers, after his own devise:
And that he might teach the elders, wisdom to make them wise.
Then Israel (Iosephes father) down into Egypt came:
And Jacob lived a straynger, in the country of Cham.
And the number of his people God did increase greatly:
And made them for their enemies, to strong and to myghtie.
Then turned he Thegyptians hertes, to hate his people all:
That they might study by disceyte, to make his servants thralle.
Then sent he Moses his servant, a man faithful in deed:
And Aaron whom he had chosen, his business to speed.
These men wrought his wonderful worckes, emonge his enemies:
And his signs in the land of Cham before his peoples eyes.
Then sent he such a dearckenes that it made all things obscure:
Yet did these men never repugne, his word nor his pleasure.
Their waters he turned to blood, and slew their fyshes all:
And the earth brought forth frogs that did in their kings closetes crall.
And at his commaundment there came on them all manner flies:
And into all their coasts there came lysse far beyond all syse.
And in stead of their sweet suers, he gave them storms of hayle:
And in their land there rayned down, flammynge fire without fail.
He struck and destroyed their vynes, and eke their fygge trees all:
And all the trees of their contreys, whereon those storms did fall.
At his commandment also, there came grassehoppars fell:
And many more caterpyllars, the^ any man could tell.
These did devour and eat up quite all the grass of their land:
They did suffer no manner fruit upon their ground to stand.
In fine he slew all the first borne, of their country certain:
That is to say even the first fruits, of all their might and main.
Then led he forth his flock loded with silver and with gold:
And in their kynreddes none was weak, were he never soolde.
And all Egypt rejoiced much, when they began to depart:
For the fear of the Lords people, had stryke them to the heart.
He spread abroad a cloud in stead, of a veyle them to hyde:
Right so did he a flameynge fire, to shine in the night tide.
And when the people cried to him, he gave them quayles plenty:
And with bread that fell from heaven he did them satisfy.
And last of all the great rock brake, and waters began flow out:
Through places that were passing dry, like a riuerfull stout.
For he retained still in myde, his promise most holy:
Made to his servant Abraham, who worshipt-him truly.
And he led forth his own people, with joy and reioyceynge:
So did he his beloved men, with most joyful singing.
And to them he gave the contreis, of men that were Heathen:
That they might possess things that were by their labor gotten.
To the end that they might observe his laws and hold his lay:
Wherefore I say praise ye the Lord, praise ye the Lord I say.
The.cvi. Psalm.
Confess, confess unto the Lord, for he is good I say:
Confess to him for his mercy, continues for aye.
Who can be able to declare, the strong worckes of the Lord?
Or to speak of all his praises, and the same to record?
Oh happy are they that do keep, judgment and therein stay:
Right so are they happy that do work righteousness always.
Lord for the love thou bear to thy flock remember me:
And visit me Lord for the health, that remains in the.
That I may se thy chosen sort, live in felicity:
And may rejoice with thy people, and with thy stock glory.
We have sinned as greatly as ever our fathers did:
We have done unjustly and have wrought things that are wicked.
Thy wonders in Egypt they did not weygh and scanne wysly:
Ne kept thy greateste benifites, in perfect memory.
And when they came unto the sea, there were they unruly
At the red sea, I say, they were rebels stout and sturdie.
Yet did the Lord preserve them all, for his names sake only
That his strength and his myghtie power might be more known thereby.
And he rebuked the red sea, and forthwyth it was dry:
And then he led them through the deep, as through desert saflye.
And he saved them pulling them, out of their enmyes power.
And eke from their enemies hands, he did them deliver.
But the waters overwhelmed, their enmies in such sort:
That none of them was left on live, to make thereof report.
Then gave they credit to his words, and began his praise to sing:
But straight way they forgate his worckes minding his laws nothing.
They burned with concupiscence, in the desert doubtless:
So they tempted and proved God, in the rude wyldernes.
And he gave the thing that they did so ernestly desire:
But wythall he gave them a plage, for their reward and hyre.
More over in their tents they did Moses envy and hate.
And so did they Aaron that was to the Lord consecrate.
Wherefore the earth did open her, and did Dathan swalowe:
And all Abirase company, it did ouerwallowe.
The fire also burned full hot in these men's company:
The flameynge fire that burned up, men that were ungodly.
More over they made them a calfe, at Oreb that montayne:
And gave honor to an Image that fire had molt certain.
So changed they the majesty, of their God most myghtie:
For an Image of ox or cow, that eats grass daily.
And they forgate God utterly, that had them salfly kept:
And that had wrought so noble things in the land of Egypt.
They forgate him I say, that had, at Cham great wonders wrought:
And fearful things at the, red sea, through which he had them brought.
He had decreed to destroy them, till Moses his chosen:
Had made request in their behalf, and his anger broken.
They did also forsake the land, that they had desired:
Geueyng no credit to the word, of him that promised.
And in their tents they murmured, and did in heart repyne:
Neither were they obedient, unto gods word divine.
Then swear he to them that he would, destroy them in deserte:
And their seed emonge the heathen, and scatter them aparte.
Then did they join them selves unto Ball Peor, as their head:
And then they eat of things offered, unto gods that were dead.
And by their own studies and ways, they did kendle Gods Ire:
That most cruel destruction, might be their worthy hyre.
As when good Phine has stood up, and thought good to destroy:
The shamlesse worckar of his will, that plage might cease thereby.
Which thing was imputed to him, for justice right and true:
And in like manner shall it be, whylse time shall continue.
At the water of strife also, their Lord they provoked:
And for their sakes good Moses was, at Gods hand punished.
For they had so vexed his mind, and eke his patience:
That he spoke some thing with his mouth that lacked reverence.
More over, they spared such men, as the Lord bade them stroye:
They occupied with the Heathen, and learned their worckes thereby.
So that they worshypt their Idols, which were to them a snare:
For to deuelles they killed their sons, and daugthers without care.
The gyltlesse blood of their children, they shed in sacrifice:
To the Chananites Images, in most ungodly wise.
And in their deeds they were unclean, and wicked was their way:
And in their own inventions, they wandered astraye.
And the Lord was exceeding wrath, with his people therefore:
And hated his enheritaunce, that had sinned so sore.
In so much that he gave them up, into the heathens hands:
And would their enemies should rule, boeth them and eke their lands.
Yea their enemies vexed them, and did them sore agreue:
And caused them magre their head under their power to live.
Sometime he set them free but they, by their ways that were vain:
Provoked him, and their mysse life, made them still pore again:
Yet when he saw their miseries, and heard their doleful cry:
Myndfull of his promise to them, he showed his great mercy.
He pitied them, I say, after his plenty of mercies.
And made them find favor in the sight of their enemies.
Keep us (O Lord that art our God) and gather thine elect
From emonge the heathen that do, not love the nor thy sect.
Keep us, I say, that we may still thine holy name confess.
And celebrate the with praises, after thy worthiness.
The Lord God of Israel is, to be praised foraye.
Let all the people say Amen, praise ye the Lord I say.
The.cvij. Psalm.
Confess, confess unto the Lord, for he is good I say:
Confess to him, for his mercy continues for aye.
Let such as ye lord has made fre, say now unfeignedly:
That he has set them fre from the power of the enemy.
And that he has gathered them out of all regions:
From east, from west, and from the north, and the south nations.
And when they wandered in desert, through ways in wyldernes*
Wherein they found no dwelling place, in their need and destres.
And when through great honger and thirst, they faynted in their mind:
They cried to him in their dayngers, and did him ready find.
He did deliver them I say, and led them the right way:
To a town of inhabitaunce, and gave it the^ for aye.
Let them confess then and ascrybe, to the Lord his mercies:
And eke the miracles that he has done before men's eyes.
For he glutteh the hungry soul, and fylleth with good things:
The soul that is like to perish for lack of norishynges.
Such as sat in utter darckenes, and extreme misery:
Because they did wythstand gods word, and set nothing thereby.
The same he made right pensyfe and eke of mind desperate:
That they might fall and no man should help them in that estate.
Yet when they cried in their dayngers, he pulde them out of pain:
He led them out of thycke darckenes, and set them fre again.
Let them confess them and ascribe to the Lord his mercies:
And eke the miracles that he has done before men's eyes.
For he brake down the brazen gates, and cast them wydde open:
And the great bars of Iron he has in sunder broken.
The foles that by their wicked life, have got sycknes plenty:
So that their soul abhorred meat, and they were like to die.
Yet when they cried in their dayngers he pulde them out of pain.
And his word sent he healed them, and made them clean again.
Let them confess them and ascribe, to the Lord his mercies:
And eke the miracles that he, has wrought before men's eyes.
And let them offer sacrifice of hertie confessing:
And let them tell forth all his deeds, with most joyful singing.
Such as in ships go to the sea, and do their busynes there:
Have seen gods worckes and his wonders that in the depthe appear.
Fo^^^ his word the stormy wyndes, lift up the waves on hye:
Now up to heaven, and then they fall, down to hell by and by.
In these troubles their hertes do fail, and they are turned round.
And wander like men that are dro^cke, their wits are nothing sownde.
These also cried in their dayngers, and he brought them from pain:
He laid, the storm and eke the waves, and made all caulme again.
Then they rejoice because God has brought them to quiet rest:
And set the^ in such an haven as lyketh their heart best.
Let them confess then and ascribe, to the Lord his mercies:
And eke the miracles that he has wrought before men's eyes.
And let them extolle him in the company of people:
And praise him emonge the elders, when they do assemble.
For he turns the rennynge streams into a deserte ground:
And dries up the water sprynges, where much water was found.
So does he turn che fruitful grownde, into barante and dry:
Because they that do dwell thereon, do live so vitiousely.
And full of water he causes, the wyldernes to stand:
And eke great plenty of welsprynges, where erste was most dry land.
And there he places the hongry, and such as lacked food:
To build a noble city there, and a dwelling right good.
And that they might there till corn fields, and eke great vinyardes plant:
That might bear fruit in such plenty, that there should be no want.
Further he does them prospere so, that they increase greatly:
And their cattle he saves so, that none of them do dye.
Yet are they minished also, and do somethynge decay:
Sore vexed and oppressed of their own rulars, I say.
For God despyseth the rulars, sometime, and that greatly:
Making them wander in desert, through which no way does lie.
But the pore he preserves aye, out of all misery:
And their housholdes he handles, as they were sheep truly.
Which things when the good sort dose, they rejoice and be feign:
And the wicked have naught to blame, or whereof to complain.
Who so (therefore) is wise, let him keep these things in his mind:
And consider what benifites he does in the Lord find.
The.cviij. Psalm.
Mine heart is made ready to sing (O God) and eke to play:
On instruments melodiouse, O my glory I say,
My lute and eke mine harppe arise, for I will wake erlye:
In the morning with the day spring, my Lord to magnify.
And unto the will I confess, throughout all regions:
And will sing and set forth thy name, emonge all nations.
For thy mercy Lord is so great, that the heavens it does pass:
And thy truth reaches to the sky, that does the earth compass.
Be thou more high then heaven (O God) and let thy majesty:
Be higher then the earth that is, under thine imperie.
And that thine elect and chosen, may be delivered:
By thine own power save us, and let our request be granted.
Because God has spoken the word, within his holy place:
I will with joy divide Sichem and Sucoths vale by pass.
Gibead and eke Manesses are mine, but Ephraim:
Is the key of my kingdom, and Judah my laws does deem.
As for Moab, is my wash pan, on Edom will I walk:
And over Palestine will I, sing and pleasantly talk.
Who shall lead me into strong holds, into towns of defense?
Who shall lead me into Idume, full of magnificence?
Shall not thou do it (O my God) who dyddest us forsake:
And would not walk with our men, when we did the wars take?
O God, help thou in all distres, for man's help is but vain:
But we shall fight stoutly through God, by whom our foes are slain.
The.cix. Psalm.
O God whom only I do praise, whose name I magnify:
Hold the not still, but speak (O Lord) and show thy self thereby.
For the mouth of thy wicked man, and the mouth disceythfull:
Are open against me, and talk, with a tongue right gylefull.
And words that do spring of hatered, have compassed me rownde:
And without cause they assault me, and beat me to the ground.
For the love that I bear to them, they are mine enemies.
And yet do I pray for them all, in my most hertie wise.
And for the good I do to the^, they render evil to me:
So do they hatered for my love and my great charity.
Against such one (O Lord) styr up, the wicked of the land:
And let his adversary stand, styflye at his right hand.
When he shall be brought to judgment, let him be found wicked*
And when he prays, let him then with sin be infected.
Make his life days few and give his office to an other:
Make his children fatherless, and an wydowe their mother.
Let his children wander and beg and seek foed over all:
When they come out of their houses, that are lykely to fall.
Let the vsurar bygyle him, of all he does possess:
And the enmie take all that does by his labor increase.
Let there none chance to him that would take upon him pity:
Ne that would work a benifite to his posterity.
Let his ofsprynge be in daynger, of the destruction:
And his name have an end in the next generation.
Let the Lord call to memory, his fathers wyckednes:
And not forgette his mothers sin, his plages for to increase.
And let them be still in the sight, of the Lord God most hye:
That out of all the earth he may blotte these men's memory.
For this man could show no mercy, but persecuted still:
The pore abiecte of dolfull heart, him to murder and kill.
And curssynge he loved which did, chance unto him in deed:
But blessing he forsook which is, far from him severed.
He put on curssynge as a cote, which into him is gone:
As water goes into the flesh, and oil into the bone.
Let it be his garment therefore, for ever and for aye:
And eke the gyrdle wherwyth he may gyrd him self each day.
These things has the Lord prepared for mine adversaries:
And for such as speak ill against my soul in any wise.
But thou (O my Lord God) be still with me ready and priest:
And for thy name deliver me, for thy mercy is best.
As for me, I am vile and pore, and mine heart is wounded:
I vanishe as a shadow and, am sharply tormented.
My knees do faynte for lack of food my flesh is abated:
And now my bodies habit, and beauty is altered.
I am to them a raylynge stock, they shake their heads at me:
Help me O Lord my God, and save me for thy great mercy.
And let them understand and know that this great power is thine:
And that thou being the Lord doeste these things by power divine.
As for them, let them curse and ban, but do thou bless again:
Let them rebel and be shamed, but make thy seruante feign.
Let mine adversaries put on, ignominy and shame:
Let them wear reproach as a clock, and deck them with the same.
I will confess unto the Lord with my mouth plentuousely:
I will pray and magnify him in a great company.
For he stood at the pores right hand, to save his soul from them:
That boasted them to have the power, him to save and condemn.
The.cx. Psalm
THus said the Lord unto my Lord, at my right hand sit thou:
Till I make all thine enemies, under thy foot to bow.
The rod of thy power the Lord shall send forth, out of Sion:
Over thy foes thou shall therefore, have the dominion.
Thou haste a people most ready, when thou shall gyn to raygne:
And thy birth is right noble and eke right holy certain.
The Lord has sworn that thou shall be a priest everlasting:
As was Melchisedech, and he repents him nothing.
The Lord stands at thy right hand, as a defense myghtie:
Who beat down myghtie kings in the day when he was angry.
Messiah the redemar shall judge in most upright wise:
The heathen, and then al shall be filled with dead bodies.
He shall I say judge the heathen, when he shall the heads break:
In many regions and shall, his wrath upon them wreake.
He shall drink of the swyfte river that renneth in the way:
And for that cause he shall lift up, his head on high I say.
The.cxj. Psalm.
With heart and mind I will confess unto the Lord of might.
In the counsel and company, of men that are vpryght.
For the worckes of the Lord are great, and wonderful in sight:
Which are sought of as many as do in the same delyght.
His worckes are glory and honor, he is praised thereby.
And his justice does still remain, and bide eternally.
His miracles and wonders he, has left in memory:
He is a Lord so bountuouse, and full of all mercy:
To such as feared him he gave, meat prepared by pray:
And has in mind his couenaunte, and his promise for aye.
The power of his own worckes he did, to his people advance:
In that he gave them the heathen, for their enheritaunce.
And the worckes of his hands are truth and eke judgment upright:
And all his constitutions, are firm and surely pyght.
Yea they are establyshed that, they may continue aye*
In truth and eke in right judgment, they are all done I say.
He sent such men to his people, as should them deliver.
And bade them that his covenant, should be kept forever.
The Lord, I say, has given this charge, unto his own people:
Whose name no doubt, is most holy, and eke most terrible.
Gods fear is the rote of wisdom, and such as therein stay:
Do attain to wholesome knowledge and are praised for aye.
The.cxij. Psalm.
THe man is blessed that does fear the Lord and does delyght:
In his holy commandments, to walk therein upright.
For his sede shall be found myghtie, in the earth every where*
And the nation of the good, shall luckyly prospere.
Great plenty of goods and riches shall in his house remain:
And his justice shall continue for ever more certain.
Light does arise unto good men, when they sit in darcknes*
To the bountuouse, and merciful, that follow ryghtuousenes.
The good man heapeth benifites, and lends plentuousely:
And does all his own business, exceeding equally.
For he shall never be moved, till time of times be paste:
And for ever his righteousness, and his justice shall last.
And when he hears heavy news, fear shall him nothing prycke:
Because his heart is stablished, and does to the Lord stycke.
His heart, I say, is stablished, so that he can not fear:
Till upon all his enemies, his wyshes do appear.
He gives to the pore each where, his justice shall bide aye:
His power shall be set up on high with great glory I say.
That seeing this the wicked may, be wrath and gnashe his teethe:
And eke consume him self and get naught that he desyrethe.
The.cxiij. Psalm.
O Ye that do honor the Lord, praise ye his name I say:
For his name is to be preached, now and hense forth for aye.
From the vpriseynge of the sun, to the place of his fall:
The holy name of the Lord is of praise worthyest of all.
For the Lord is higher then are all nations truly*
And so is he higher then the, heaven that is so hye.
Who is like unto our Lord God, that rules things on hye:
And yet looks on things in heaven, and that on the earth dolye?
Helyfteth up the weak out of the duste to stand upright:
And eke the pore out of the dounge, he brings by his might.
And that to the intent he might, him emonge princes place:
Emonge princes of his people, I say, to give him grace.
He makes the wife of the housse, that was barren before:
A joyful mother of children, praise ye the Lord therefore.
The.cxiiij. Psalm.
WHen Israel should go forth of Egypt from servitude:
And Jacobs house from a people, boeth Barbarouse and rude.
Then was Judah certe^ly made, the lords sanctuary:
And in like manner Israel was made his Imperie.
The which thing when the sea had seen it fled backward certain:
And the great river Iordayne was returned back again.
As for the mountains ceased not, like wanton rams to skyppe:
And the little hills began to play, as do the lambs of shype.
O thou sea, what is the bytyd, that thou go back again:
And thou Iordayne what thing is it, that does thy course restrain?
And ye mountains what causes you, like wanton rams to ship:
And you little hills for to play, as do the lambs of shype?
And thou earth se thou quake also, in the lords fear always:
Se that thou tremble in the fear of Jacobs God I say.
For he makes a standing pole of the rock that was dry:
And of the flynt a spryngynge well, rennyng out plentuousely.
The.cxv. Psalm.
FOr thy mercy Lord and thy truth vouchsafe to amplify:
The glory of thy blessed name, and not our vain glory.
For why should the Heathen say thus, with a disdaynefull mind?
I pray you where or in what place, should we these men's God find?
Why should they speak such words I say, with thoughts excedyng isle?
Sith our God is in heaven and does all things that he will?
But these men's Images are made, of gould and silver vain:
And are the vain worckes of man's hand, fruits of an idle brain.
For they have a mouth and speak not, and eyes that do not se:
So have they ears and do not hear, such worthy things they be.
They have a nose and do not smelle, and hands that do not feel:
So have they fete and do not walk, neither once move their hele.
And with their throat they do bring forth no manner voice at all:
And for help in their daynger they, can neither cry nor call.
Like unto whom such shall be made, as do make them certain:
And so shall all that put their trust, in things that are so vain.
O Israel, trust in the Lord, O faithful men I say:
Trust in the Lord that is your help, and your bucklar for aye.
O ye that be of Aharons house, and the high priests kynne:
Trust in the Lord that is your help, and targate to trust in.
All ye that fear the Lord, I say, have in him confidence:
For he it is that is your help, and targate of defense.
The Lord that makes the household of Israel happy:
And eke the household of Aharon, has us in memory.
And he makes all that fear him, happy and fortunate.
As Well such as are very small, as ye myghtie and great.
He shall also heap unto you, good turn upon good turn.
Not only unto you I say, but eke to your children.
And you he has alredie made, happy and fortunate:
Even he, I say, that did the heaven and eke the earth create.
And the heaven is reserved, for the Lord God alone.
But the earth he has given to men, for the^ to dwell upon.
As for the dead they praise not God, they do no mercy crave:
No more does any emonge them that go down to the grave.
But we shall preach and set forth God from henseforth ever more:
We shall declare his myghtie worckes, praise ye the Lord therefore.
The.cxvj. Psalm.
I Love the Lord because he heard mine humble voice and cry:
And because he gave ear I will, call on him till I dye.
The cords of death had gyrded me, and eke the straytes of hell:
Had caught me and I was fallen into daynger cruel.
But I called on the Lords name and thus I said in deed:
Lord for thy mercy deliver, thy servants soul at need.
The Lord is full of benifites, and eke of justice all:
And our God is right merciful, when we do on him call.
The Lord that uses to defend, the sylley simple sort:
Preserved me when I was weak, and was all my conforte.
My soul, return into the place, of thy quiet and rest:
For the Lord has done good to the. even as thou desyreste.
Thou have plucked my soul from death, Lord, and his cruel stynge:
So haste thou done mine eyes from tears, and my fete from slydynge.
Wherefore I will live holyly, before the Lord I say:
In the contreys and regions of men that live for aye.
My faith and promise unto God, I held most constantly*
Even when I was forced to say, I am decayed greatly.
Yea when I said in my swyfte chase, and when I fled in haste:
All men are false, there is none true, or that of truth does taste.
What worthy thanckes therefore shall I, give to the Lord say ye:
For all the benifites that he, has showed unto me?
The cup wherwyth men use to give thanckes for health received:
The same will I take and call on the Lords name so blessed.
And now before all his people, to the Lord will I pay:
All vows that I have made to him, or else shall make for aye.
For with the Lord the death of such, as serve him loueyngely:
Is of such price that none of them, shall suffer death vaynely.
Ah Lord I am thy pore servant, thy pore servant am I:
And the son of thine handmayden who dydeste my bonds untie.
To the therefore I will confess, and that with sacrifice:
And will call upon the Lords name in my most faithful wise
Now before all the Lords people, all my vows will I pay:
In his courts at Jerusalem, praise ye the Lord I say.
The.cxvij. Psalm.
ALl nations praise ye the Lord, praise and extolle his name:
All people of the world preach him let your life do the same.
For his mercy toward us I say, does excel ever more:
And his truth abides for aye, praise ye the Lord therefore.
The.cxviij. Psalm.
Confess, confess unto the Lord, for he is good I say:
Confess to him for his mercy, continues for aye.
Now let Israel say that his mercy dureth for aye:
And let Aharo^s house say that his goodness does not decay.
Yea let all them that fear the Lord, eue^ now stand forth and say:
That his most merciful goodness, continues for aye.
When I was in affliction, on God then called I:
And he granted all my request, and that aboundauntly.
Wherefore the Lord taking my part, I will not stand in fear:
Of any thing that man's wit can invent to do me dear.
For when the Lord is one of them, that comes to help me:
Then shall I se all my desire upon mine enemy.
For it is better to trust in the Lord then in man vain.
So is it to trust in the Lord then in princes certain.
If all nations did hedge me, in compass rownde about:
Yet do I trust by the Lords name, to cut me a way out.
If they should compass me about, I say, and hedge me in:
I do not doubt, by the Lords name, away out for to win.
And though they compass me about, like bees when they do swarm:
Yet shall they faint like fire in thorns, and do me little harm.
And I trust that through the Lords name, whereon I do still call:
I shall cut a way out and set myself fre from them all.
Oh thou that waste mine enemy, thou made me fall certain:
But yet the Lord has helped me, and set me up again.
For God it is that is my strength, my salfgard and my wealth:
So is he my reioyceynge song, and eke mine only health.
In the dwellynges of the ryghtuouse are joyful reioyceynges:
For their health received when the Lords power has done great things.
The Lords right hand gate the better, the Lords power did great things:
I shall not dye but live and show forth gods myghtie doings.
For God has chastened me well, and brought my stout heart low:
But yet he has not suffered, that I should dye I know.
Oh open unto me the gates, of righteousness that I:
May enter in there at (I say) by the lords free mercy.
For other wise none can enter by any holiness:
When I am entered in therefore, to God will I confess.
This gate (I say) of fre mercy, is the lords gate therefore:
In at the which the rightuouse men, shall enter ever more.
To the therefore (O Lord) I will, confess with heart and mind:
Because thou haste heard me and I, do in the mine health find,
For the stone that buildars cast out, is made the head corner:
which thing no doubt the Lord has done, and we count it wonder.
That day therefore is it that the Lord has made at his will:
Let us therefore in it rejoice, and be glad in heart still.
Ah Lord keep me, I the beseech, Ah Lord I beseech the:
Give thou a prosperouse success, and good fortune to me.
To him that comes in the Lords name we wyshe all good thing.
And luckye things to you that are, in his house abiding.
God is the Lord that brings us, light of prosperity:
Wherefore to the aultare couers, do ye sacrifice tie.
Thou art my God, and unto the, will I confess always:
And the will I extolle, for thou art my lord God I say.
Confess, confess unto the Lord, for he is good I say:
Confess to him for his mercy continues for aye.
The.cxjx. Psalm.
O Happy are they that do keep, of life the upright way:
And that walk in the prescript path of the Lords law I say.
O happy are they that do keep, all the Lords witnesses*
And do seek him with all the heart that is in their breasts.
For such as walk (Lord) in thy ways, do nothing wyckedly.
For thou badeste that men should keep thy laws diligently.
Oh that my ways were guided so, to keep thy laws aright:
That I were not ashamed to have thy precepts in sight.
And unto the will I confess, and that unfeignedly:
When I shall learn the judgments of thy justice perfectly.
And if thou do not forsake me, but help thy servant still:
With erneste study shall I keep, thy decrees and thy will.
How should a young man lead his life wythouten spotte or blame:
Namely if he should keep it as thy word teaches the same.
But seeing that I do seek the, with all my very heart:
O Lord do thou not suffer me, from thy precepts to sterte.
And seeing that I have laid up thy word within my breast:
To the intent I would not do, ought that thou forbyddest.
O Lord thou ought for to have thy praise preached I say:
Teach me thy decrees and thy laws, thy path Lord and thy way.
For all the judgments of thy mouth, I do use to rehearse:
And thy way does delight me more, then all worldly riches.
And of thy constitutions and laws I do reasone:
So do I inwardly behold, thy paths at each season.
In thine holy decrees also, my delight do I set:
And will never by negligence, thine holy word forget.
Show thou this benifite to me, thy servant that I may:
Live and keep thy most holy word, and my life therein stay.
And from mine eyes draw thou the veyle that I may once epsy:
The wonderful wisdom that lies in thy law secretly.
And when I am in a strange land, hyde not from me thy will:
For my soul does wonderfully, desire thy judgments still.
But thou rebukest the proud that they be execrable:
Strayeynge from thy precepts in ways most abominable.
Remove from me all rebuke Lord, and right so all despyte:
Because to keep all thy wyttnes, is mine only delight.
For the very princes consulte, and speak evil against me:
Because I reasone of such things, as in thy decrees be.
And because that thy wyttenesses are mine only delight:
And eke mine only consellours boeth by day and by night.
When my soul lies upon the ground and is had in disdain:
Then according to thy promise, refreshe thou it again.
I have told the my business, and thou gave ear to me:
Wherefore to teach me thy decrees, I humbly beseech the.
Grant me to know the way of thy laws and thine ordinance:
And then to talk of thy wonders, I will take no grenaunce.
For fear when I was left alone, my soul is much wasted:
Refreshe thou me again therefore, as thou haste promised.
Turn thou from me the way of lies, invented by man's brain:
And with mercy set before me, thy law that is certain.
For I have chose the certain way, and have therein delyght:
And right so have I thy judgments ever before my sight.
And sith I stycke to thy wyttnes, and fle the way of blame:
O Lord put not thy pore servant, to vilanie or shame.
And after thou have set mine heart, at large in liberty:
In the high way of thy precepts, I will run lustily.
Lead me forth (Lord) into the way, of thy decrees and will:
That I may walk forth in ye same during my life days still.
Teach me to keep thy law and I, shall keep it wyllyngly.
Lead me the path of thy precepts, for theri^ delight I.
Bow down mine heart unto thy will, and not to auarise:
And from all vain and Idle things lord turn away mine eyes.
Lord make me lively in thy way, and grant the thing to me:
That thy word promises to them, that stand in fear of the.
And put from me rebuke, the fear whereof changes my mood:
For thy judgments Lord are upright and also passing good.
Behold thy constitutions, I do desyer greatly:
By thy justice do thou therefore, make thy servant lively.
Let thy gifts and thy benifites, chance unto me, (O Lord:
And eke thine own salvation, as thy word does record.
That I may have words to answer such as do on me rail:
And tell them that I trust thy word, which does me never fail.
And from my mouth take not the word of truth, for I tarry:
For thy judgments, and will observe, thy laws eternally.
And I will walk at liberty, and stand in fear of naught:
Because thy constitutions, I have busily sought.
And I will speak of thy wyttnes, in the presence of kings.
And will not be ashamed of so good and godly things.
And in thy precepts which I love, I do my self delight:
I love to have thine holy laws still present in my sight.
And to thy precepts which I love, Lord will put mine hand:
And will dispute of thy decrees, and ekem thy truth stand.
Be myndfull of the word that thou spakeste to they servant:
Wherwyth thou broughtest me in hope as by a sure warrant.
For this is mine only solace, in all my miseries:
That thy word does me recreate, in comfortable wise.
And when the proud laugh me to skorne, and that excedyngly:
Yet do not I turn from thy law, but walk therein duly.
And when I call to memory, the mercies by the wrought:
From the beginning of the world, they do conforte my thought.
But when I thyncke on the wicked that do thy law forsake:
Such soden fear falls on me, that I tremble and quake.
As for me when I am at home in my house where I dwell:
My delight is to sing thy laws, and thy decrees to tell.
And in the night I am myndfull, Lord of thy blessed name:
And do endeavor for to walk, in thy law without blame.
Which law is now become my law, and way wherein to go:
Because I keep thine ordinance, both in weal and in woo.
O Lord thus said I without fail I said for a surety:
That to keep thy most holy word, is my bounden duitie.
With all humility of heart, I do thy face behold:
Wherefore be merciful to me, as thy word has me told.
My ways I have considered, and that diligently:
And have brought my fete back again, thy wyttnes to apply.
I have hasted without delay, or slowthfull tariaunce:
That I might keep all thy precepts, with faithful obeysaunce.
The cords of the wicked have gone about to draw me back:
But the remembrance of thy law, my mind did never lack.
In the mydest of the night I did arise for to confess:
To the because of the judgments (Lord) of thy righteousness.
And I am a companion, to all that do fear the.
And keep the constitutions, that thou (Lord) doeste decre.
And let mine heart be pure and clean in thine holy decrees:
Keep mine heart clean and I shall not take shame in any wise.
My soul faynteth whylse doubtfully it does desire thine health:
For in thy word have I my trust and confidence of wealth.
Mine eyes have failed whylse I look thy promise for tose:
In so much that I may well say, when will thou confort me?
For I am now like a bottel, that in smoke has hanged.
Yet thy decrees and eke thy laws, I have still remembered.
How long Lord shall thy servant wait, how long shall he tarry?
When wylt thou punish them that do vex me so cruelly?
The proud have dygged me trenches, and caves to fall into:
Wherein against thine holy law and thy decrees they do.
All thy precepts are faith and truethe, none can this thing deny:
Help me therefore at such time as, they vex me unjustly.
They had welmost destroyed me, in the land where I dwell:
Yet I forsook none of thy laws, as thou know full well.
Lord for thy mercy quicken me, and make me be lively:
And then the wytnes of thy mouth I shall keep certainly.
Thy word stands Lord in heaven, for ever and foraye:
And thy promise through all time, who makeste the earth stay.
And those things abide to this day, at thy commandment:
For there is nothing that is not to the obedient.
And except (Lord) thy law had been, my delight and pleasure:
In my distres and misery, I had perished sure.
Neither will I ever forget, thy constitutions:
Sith by them thou dyddeste confort my lamentations.
And seeing that I am thine own, to keep me take thou thought:
For all thy constitutions, I have ernestly sought.
The wyckedmen lay wait for me, that they may me destroy.
When to weygh thy testimonies, I do my self employ.
I se that al things have an end, though they be most perfect:
But thy precepts we se to be, most largely abroadeset,
Oh Lord how exceedyng great love unto thy law bear I?
Sith my communication, is of the same daily.
By thy precept thou haste made me, more wise then mine enmies
For that is still all my study, and eke mine exercise.
I am also wiser them they, that do thy servant teach:
And about thy testimonies, I do spend al my speech.
I do perpende and weygh all things, better then men of age:
Because thy constitutions, I keep wythoute^ rage.
My fete I do keep back from all, ways they dole lead to vice:
Because I keep thine holy word, in my most faythfullwise.
I do not part from thy judgments, ne go from them astraye:
Because thou haste prescribed me a rule and perfect way.
Oh how sweet is thine holy word to my taste and judgment?
Certes there is no sweet honey can my mouth so content
Out of thy constitutions, I do weyghe things justly:
And have therefore hated each way, that deals not truly.
Thy word is a burning candle, unto thy servants fete.
So is it a light to my way, my pathe is light by it.
I have sworn and will constantly, do and perform the same:
That I may keep the judgments of thy justice without blame.
I am deiect excedyngly, and cast down to the grownde:
Wherefore do thou refresh me lord, as thy promise does sownde.
Accept thou such oblations Lord as I freely name:
And enstruct me in thy judgments, and make me learn the same.
I am still in daynger of death, my life is sore beset:
Yet do I not thine holy law at any time forget.
The wicked and ungodly men, have bent a snare for me:
Yet from thy constitutions, I swerve in no degree.
Thy wyttnesses are unto me enheritau^ce for aye:
For they are the join of mine heart, my comfort and my stay.
I am addict to thy decrees, my mind to them I bend.
That I may execute the same for ever to the end.
I hate the thoughts whereby my mind is drawn away from the:
But thy law and commandments are beloved of me.
Thou art my suecoure and refuge, my shylde and my target.
And in thine holy word mine hope, is pygh and surly set.
Depart from me ye wicked men, keep me no company:
For I keep the commandementes of my God ernestly.
Underset me with thy word Lord, and I shall live certain:
And make me not ashamed and to have hoped in vain.
Establish me (O Lord) and then, shall I be salfe in deed:
And shall by the sight of thy laws be always delited.
Thou wylt spurn at all such as go, from thy decrees astraye:
For their wyles and their subtlety is found disceyte always.
All the wicked men of the earth, like dross thou doeste destroy:
Wherefore I love thy wyttnesses, and thy testimony.
For fear of the my body doethe, tremble excedyngly.
And thy judgments thy servant does fear most reverently.
I have done judgment and justice, I have done no man wrong:
Give me not up therefore to mine oppressers that are strong.
Delight thy servant with good things let him lack no goodness.
And suffer not such as are proud, me to grieve and oppress.
Mine eyes have failed whylse I look, for thine health doubtfully:
And for thy rightuouse promise that thou madeste certainly.
According to thy great goodness, Lord deal with thy servant:
And enstruct me in thy decrees, and eke thy conuenaunte.
I am thy pore servant I say, wherefore enstructe thou me:
To understand all such things as, in thy wyttnesses be.
And now is it a mete time for the Lord to work his feate:
For they have broken thy law Lord, and do thy will forgete.
Wherefore I have loved thy law, and thy precepts each one:
More then I have loved fine goulde, or most preciouse stone.
And for this cause I do defend, all thy laws as most right:
But all disceytfull ways I hate, and owe them most dispight.
Because thy laws and wyttnesses, are wonderful to me:
Therefore, I say, my soul has kept them in simplicity.
The very entrance of thy words, and the first opening:
Brings light and enstructeth the simples understanding.
And for this cause do I open, my mouth and my breath draw:
Because I do greatly desire the precepts of thy law.
Look back to thy servant and deal with me mercifully:
As thou art wont with them that love, thy name unfeignedly.
Form thou my steps Lord with thy word, let them therwyth agree:
And let no manner of vain thing, have the rule over me.
O Lord redeem thou me from al humane oppressions:
That I may keep shine holy laws, and constitutions.
And show thy chereful countenance unto thy pore servant:
And teach me thy decrees and eke, thy holy covenant.
Great streams of water do descend, down from thy servants eyes:
For their sakes that keep not thy laws, nor thy testimonies.
Lord thou art just and thy judgment is straight before our eyes:
And thou have given straight charge to keep all thy testimonies.
My wrath and indignation, does me deadly greauaunce:
Because mine enemies have not, thy words in remembrance.
Thy word (Lord) is a thing most pure and purged of all fylth:
And it is the only thing that, thy pore servant louethe.
I am in deed but very base, and also despised:
Yet do I not forget the things, that thou haste ordained.
Thy justice is such a justice, that it does still endure:
And thy law is the verity, most sincere and most pure.
Great daynger and great misery, have me deprehended:
Yet with thine holy precepts Lord I am still delited.
The justice of thy wyttnesses, is eternal I say:
Teach me therefore that I may live, for ever and for aye.
Because I cry with all mine heart, Lord grant thou my request:
That I may well observe and keep, all that thou decreeste.
Because I cry to the I say, do thou save me at need:
That I may well observe all thy, testimonies in deed.
The dawning and the break of day, I do prevent and cry:
And in thy word and sure promise, a faithful trust have I.
Mine eyes do prevent the vigilles and waking time of night.
That of thine holy word I may dispute some what aright.
Hear thou my voice (O Lord) I say, even for thy mercy sake:
And according to thy judgment, do thou me lusty make.
Such men as follow wyckednes, nygh unto me do draw:
Such men (I say) as now are gone, a great way from thy law.
But thou also (Lord) art at hand, with me pressed and ready:
And all thine holy precepts are, most sincere verity.
Which thing I knew by thy wyttenes long time before this day:
For thy testimonies have been for ever and for aye.
Look back upon my misery, and set thy servant free:
For I have not yet forgotten, the law thou gaueste me.
Plead thou my cause and let me be, by the delivered:
And offer me thy word that I may be recreated.
Thine health is far from the wicked, they shall not it enjoy:
Because to seek out thy decrees, none of the^ does employe.
Thy mercy (Lord) is manifold, to it thou art still bent:
Wherefore refreshe thy pore servant, after thine own judgment.
I have erred as does a sheep, that goes head long to dye:
But seek thou me because I have thy laws in memory.
The.cxx. Psalm.
IN my great perile and daynger, to the Lord did I cry:
And he gave ear and eke granted my request by and by.
O Lord deliver thou my soul, from lyppes that use to lie:
And eke from a disceytful tongue, which cause the soul to dye.
O thou disceytfull tongue I say, what can be like to the?
Or what thing may God to the add, whereby thou may worse be?
Thou art like unto the arrows, that from a strong man flee:
And also like the burning coals of the Juniper tree.
Woes me that I am a straynger, emonge men of Nesech:
And that I dwell in Cedars tents, like a miser and wreche.
My soul has lived long emonge men that hate quietness.
For when I that love peace do speak, to wars they do them dress.
The.cxxj. Psalm.
Mine eyes lift I up to the hills, to God that is on hye:
For thens my confort and my hope, and only help have I.
Mine only help comes to me, down from the Lord above:
From him I say that made heaven and earth that does not move.
When the Lord takes charge of the, thou shall tread stydfastly:
And thy kepar shall not desire to sleep or close his eye.
For lo, he is nothing slepy, neither shall sleep at all.
That has Israel in keeping, as rular over all.
It is the Lord that keeps the, and shadoweth the from ille:
It is the Lord that is present even at thy right hand still.
The sun therefore shall not stryke the, by day with his beams bright:
No more shall the contagiouse moan, in the time of the night.
The Lord shall keep the salfe and sownde, none evil shall come the nigh:
And he shall keep thy life also, thy soul shall never die.
The Lord shall keep the salfe I say and be thy defender:
In all things that thou go about, from hense forth for ever.
The.cxxij. Psalm.
WHen men say in this wise to me, go we to the Lords house:
Then am I made right glad I say and exceeding ioyouse.
In thy gates (O Jerusalem) in thy gates so goodly:
Our fete have stand and there have we, been a great company.
Jerusalem was first builded, for to be a city:
And a place where men might be knyt, in a society.
Up to the which kynreddes do go that of gods stock are found:
To confess him out of the law wherwyth Jacob is bound.
For there are seats of right judgment and justice appointed:
That is to say the seat of the house and stock of David.
Oh wyshe you to Jerusalem, peace and prosperity:
And that all may go well with them that do love that city.
Peace be within thine utter walls and eke prosperity:
In all thy goodly palaices wherein thy princeslye.
For my brethren and my friends sake, I will speak all such thing:
As unto thy felicity, and wealth is belonging.
And for the love of the house of the Lord our God I say:
Things profitable unto the, I will seek for always.
The.cxxiij. Psalm.
OH thou that dwell in heavens, and art there still present:
To the do I lift up mine eyes, my mind to the is bent.
Lo as the servants eyes are fyxte upon their masters hand:
So do we look on our Lord God, and do before him stand.
And as the handmaydes eyes behold the hand of her mestres:
So are our eyes turned to him, till we feel his goodness.
Deal mercifully with us Lord, deal thou mercifully:
For with contempt we are filled, and that in great plenty.
Long time now has our soul benfull, of the rych men's mocking:
So has it ben long satisfied, with proud men's despysynge.
The.cxxiiij. Psalm.
Now may Israel salfly say, we had all dyed in deed:
Had not the lord that is redye with us helped at need.
Except the lord had helped us, when me^ against us rose:
In their Ire they had eaten us, alive as I suppose.
By this time they had drowned us, as waters that do flow:
And as a swyfte streme they had gone, quite over our heads now.
By this time, I say, the waters, that swell excedyngly:
Had overcome our syly soul, and caused us to dye.
We must preach and set forth the Lord, we most praise him I say:
That has not given us to their teeth, that we should be their pray.
For our soul has escaped their snare, and is now at large set:
Even as the sparowe that breaks out of the foulars net.
The net is broken now I say, and we are escaped:
Our help therefore is in his name, that has all things formed.
The.cxxv. Psalm.
ALl such as do trust in the Lord, shall never be moved.
More then the holy hill Sion, that is surly founded.
And as about Jerusalem, are high hills on each side.
So shall the Lord compass his floke from hense forth at each tide.
For the part of wyckednes shall not with the just remain:
Lest from doing iniquity, their hands should not refrain.
O Lord do thou good unto them, in whom thou do good find:
And to all such as thou know to be of a good mind.
And let such as do wyckedlye, have the wyckedes reward:
At the Lords hand, that Israel may live now in salfegarde.
The.cxxvj. Psalm.
WHen the Lord shall restore Sion, out of bondage again:
The^ shall we be like men yt dream that they have lived in pain.
Our mouth and tongue shall be full with laughter and singing then:
And the Heathen shall say the Lord, has done much for these men.
The Lord (no doubt) has done with us, things that are great in deed:
And we are made merry thereby, and greatly conforted.
Oh Lord, lead thou us home again, out of captivity:
Even as thou causeste the rivers of the south part to dry.
Let them that sow their seed with tears, and water of thyre eyes:
Rejoice when they shall reap the same, in most plentiful wise.
The man that bears the seedlepe, shall go on still weeping:
But when he shall carry the sheaues, he shall return singing.
The.cxxvij. Psalm.
Unless the Lord do build the house, ye buildars lose their pain:
And except he keep the city, the kepars watch in vain.
It is in vain that you do rise, so sone and rest so late:
And that you get your vitayles with pain and sorrows so great.
Sith in the mean ceasone God does grant sleep and quiet rest:
To his dearlynges and all such men, as his heart lyketh best.
Behold the byrthryght of the Lord, is chylder and young frye:
And the wages that he gives, the fruit of the bealye.
The children that be borne in youth, whylse boeth parents be young:
Are like the arrows that are shot, by a man that is strong.
And happy is he that fylleth his quiver with the same:
For when they shall strive with their like, they shall sustain no shame.
The.cxxviij. Psalm.
Happy and blessed is that man, that fears God aryght:
And walks forward in his ways, with all his main and might.
Things gotten with his labor he shall eat of at his need:
He shall be blessed and shall live, most welthyly in deed.
In his house sides his wife shall be as a vine most fruitful:
And his sons like Olyue branches rownd about his table.
For lo, in this sort is the man made blessed and happy:
That does stand in dread and fear of the Lord unfeignedly.
Out of Sion the Lord shall give, to him this good blessing:
To se Jerusalem in peace, all days of his lyueynge.
And to se the sons of his sons, descendynge of his blood:
And eke the state of Israel, boeth fortunate and good.
The.cxxix. Psalm.
Now may Israel say they have fought right sore against me:
Very often from my youth up, that mine enemies be.
Right often they have fought against me from my yougth (may he say)
Yet against me could they never, prevail ne have their way.
The plowmen have plowed my back and made there forowes long:
But the just Lord has cut the bands, of men wicked and strong.
Let all that hate Sion take shame and be driven back and made:
Like grass that grows on houses, and does suddenly fade.
So that the reapar can not find enough to fill his hand:
Neither the byndar his arm full, to lay within his band.
Neither do they that pass by say, the Lord give you blessing:
In the Lords name we wyshe you good and increase of all thing.
The.cxxx. Psalm.
FRom the deapth of all misery, O Lord on the call I:
Lord hear my voice and let thine ears, give head, unto my cry.
For if thou (Lord God) wouldeste marcke sins, who could then be saved?
But thou art full of clemency, and art therefore feared.
For the have I looked (O Lord) so has my soul also:
And in the do I put my trust, boeth in well and in woe.
My soul does look and tarry for, the Lord from the morn tide:
From morn to morn I say my soul does for the Lord abide.
Let Israel wait on the Lord, for with him is mercy:
And with the Lord redemption, is wonderful plenty.
For he redemeth Israel, from al his wyckednes*
And sets all his people free, from their iniquities.
The.cxxxi. Psalm.
O Lord, mine heart has not been proud, neither mine eyes lofty:
I have not sought praise in great things, neither clymed to hye.
Ille might I speed if I have not, though myself none other:
Then the young child that is weaned, at home with his mother.
And the soul or the mind that does, within my body rest:
Is like the child that lately has been taken from the breast.
Oh Israel, wait on the Lord, trust still in him I say:
Put all thy confidence in him for ever and for aye.
The.cxxxij. Psalm.
O Lord be myndfull of all things that have vexed David:
That to his good, all his trouble, may be always turned.
For he has sworn unto the Lord, and vowed solemnly:
To the myghtie God of Jacob, and said for certentie.
Ille might I speed, if I enter my tent or clyme my bed:
Or if I shall grant any sleep, to the eyes of mine head.
Or if I suffer mine eye leddes, to wyncke or do once nodde:
Till I find a place for the Lord, and house for Jacobs God.
Him have we heard in Ephrata, there have we heard his sound:
And in the fields of wyldernes, present we have him found.
Go we therefore to his dwellynges, and throne where he does sit:
And let us fall down and worship, the stole under his fete.
Arise (O Lord) thou that shall come, into thy quiet rest:
Arise thou, I say, and let the arcke of thy power be priest.
Let thy priests put on rightuousenes. and let thy good men sing:
And for thy servant David's sake, say not nay to thy king.
The Lord swear truth unto David, and will it not deny:
That he would set upon his throne, some fruit of his bealy.
If thy sons shall keep my comnaunt and laws that I shall teach:
Their sons also shall wear the crown, so long as time does reach.
For the Lord has chosen Sion, to be his seat, sayeinge:
This is mine everlasting rest, here shall be my dwelling.
For I have chosen her and will give her vitailes plenty:
And with bread will I feed her pore, and them all satisfy.
Her priests I will indue with health they shall be in salftie:
And the good me^ that dwell in her, shall sing reioyceyngly.
In her will I make David's horn, and his power for to spring:
And in her I have prepared, a candle for my king.
Whose enemies I will endue, with rebuke and with shame:
But upon him shall aye flourish, his crown and diadeame.
The.cxxxiij. Psalm.
BEhold how good a thing it is, and how pleasant to see:
If brothers can dwell together, and in all points agree.
It is like as if good oyntme^t, that smells most swetely:
Being shed on the head should drope, on the bearde by and by.
The beard I say of the high priest, that was named Aharon:
And should drope on ye cape of the garments that he had on.
Like the dew of mount Hermon that, on Sions hille does fall:
Where the Lord bade blessing should be, and life sempiternall.
The.cxxxiiij. Psalm.
Behold ye servants of the Lord preach ye the Lord of might:
All ye, I say: that stand present, in the Lords house by night.
Lift up your hands with holiness, toward his sanctuary:
And preach the Lord, show forth his praise, and eke his great mercy.
The Lord give the out of Sion wealth and felicity:
The Lord I say that made the earth, and eke the heaven hye.
The.cxxxv. Psalm.
OH ye yt be the Lords servants, praise his name without stay
Al ye yt stand in ye Lords house and our gods courts I say.
Praise God (for why? ye Lord is good) and sing unto his name:
For it is full pleasant and good, wherefore praise ye the same.
For God has chosen unto him, Jacob and Israel:
To be his people and his flock, this do I know right well.
For I know that the lord is great, and does all gods excel:
And does all things at his pleasure, in heaven, earth, and in hell.
From all the borders of the earth, he draws up clouds I know:
He turns lyghtnynges into rain, and makes the wyndes blow.
He struck and slew all the first borne, as well of man as beast:
That were of the frye of Egypt where his flock was oppreste.
He sent forth signs and eke wonders, amyd Thegyptians land:
So did he to king Pharao, with all his guard or band.
Many and sundry nations, he did also destroy:
So did he kill right many kings, most puisaunt and myghtie.
He destroyed Sichon himself, the king of Amorrites:
And Og king of Basan, with all kingdoms of Chananites.
And he gave their enheritaunce, and their byrthright, I say:
To his people that it might be, their heritage for aye.
O Lord thy name is eternal, so is thy: memory:
Thou shall never be forgotten, thy name shall never die.
For the Lord shall judge his people, he shall revenge their wrong:
And from his flock he shall return with a reioyceynge song.
The Images of the heathen, are of gould and silver:
The work that man's hand has brought forth, and molten together.
For they have mouths and do not speak, and eyes and do not see:
So have they ears and do not hear, such worthy things they be.
They have a nose, yet in their mouth there is no breath at all:
They have no breath to speak to such as do upon them call.
Like whom all such men shall be made, as do make them certain:
And so shall they that put their trust in things that are so vain.
Ye house of Israel, I say, preach ye the Lord therefore:
And ye house and stock of Aharon, preach the Lord ever more.
Ye house and kynred of Levy, ye priestlye nation:
Preach ye the Lord, O ye that fear the Lord preach him each one.
The Lord that has his dwelling in Jerusalem for aye:
Must have his praise out of Sion, praise ye the Lord I say.
The.cxxxvj. Psalm.
Confess, confess unto the Lord for he is good I say:
Confess to him for his goodness continues for aye.
Confess unto the God of gods, whose goodness does still last:
Confess unto the Lord of lords, whose mercy is not paste.
Because his goodness has no end, he does wonders alone^
And by his wisdom he has made the heavens euerychone.
Because his mercy is endless, he has lyfted up grownde:
Above the waters, and has made, two lyghtes boeth great and rownde.
Because his goodness has no end, he made the sun so bright:
To rule the day, and eke the moon and stars to rule the night.
Because his mercy is endless he slew the first borne all:
Of the Egyptians and brought Israel out of thralle.
Because his goodness has none end, he did this with great might:
And with an arm that was styfly stretched out in their sight.
Because his mercy is endless he did the red sea slyt:
In sunder and brought Israel, salfe and sound through it.
Because his goodness has none end, he drowned Pharao*
Subuertynge him in the red sea, and his army also.
Because his mercy is endless, he led through desert land:
His own people, and slew great kings, that did his flock wythstande.
Because his goodness has none end, he slew kings most myghtie:
Sichon him self that was the king, of Thamorrites City.
Because his mercy is endless, he slew Og Basans king:
And gave their land and heritage, from them and their of spring.
Because his goodness has none end he gave Ogges land I say:
Unto his servant Israel, for ever and for aye.
Because his mercies endless, he had us remembered:
At such time as we were but vile, and were sore oppressed.
Because his goodness has none end, he has set us all clear:
From them that were our enemies, as well far of as nere.
Because his mercy is endelesse, he does all beasts feed:
And gives to each lyueynge thing, such fode as it does need.
Confess, confess, I say unto the God celestial:
Whose bountiful goodness shall last and be sempiternall.
The.cxxxvii. Psalm.
Upon the rivers sides we sytte, and weep most bytterly*
In Babylon, when Sion does come to our memory.
And upon the grene wyllowe tres, that grow in Babylon:
We have hanged up our sweet harpes, and instruments echone.
For there, they that made heaps of us, required us to sing:
And to make mirth, saying let us, hear of Sion somethynge.
But how should we sing the Lords hymns with mirth and melody:
In a straynge land where we are kept in such captivity?
But (Oh Jerusalem) if I forget the in mine heart:
I pray God that my righthand may forget all musyckes art.
And that to the roufe of my mouth my tongue may be set fast.
If I be not myndfull of the, in time of my repaste.
Remember Lord how Edomes sons have them selves behaved:
At such time as Jerusalem, was wasted and spoiled.
Make it euacuate (said they) remove every stone:
Till ye come to the very base and first foundation.
Oh thou daughter of Babylon, that art now wasted thus:
The man is bleste that may requite, things that thou dydst to us.
The man is bleste that may lay hand upon thy little ones:
And dashe them hard against the rock, and against the hard stones.
The.cxxxviij. Psalm.
I Will confess to the (O Lord) with heart unfeignedly.
And will sing unto the before the judges openly.
In thine holy temple I will honor and eke confess:
Thine holy name for thy truethes sake, and eke for thy goodness.
For thou haste made thine holy word more excellent in deed:
Then all the things that ever have been of the declared.
In the day when I called the, thou grauntedst unto me:
And by that mean thou dyddest make my mind stronger in the.
Wherefore all the kings of the earth (Lord) to the shall confess:
Because they have heard thine own words and thy faithful wyttenes.
And they shall sing of and describe the Lords ways and his will.
Because his majesty is great, in all his doings still.
For the Lord of himself is hye, and sees things that be low:
And such things as be haute and hye, he does afar of know.
When I shall be amydde daynger, then shall thou refreshe me:
And dashe my foes upon the nose, and set thy servant free.
The thing that the Lord has begone in me, he will no doubt:
Fully finish and make perfect, and bring it well about.
O Lord thy bountiful goodness, is eternal in deed:
Neither does thy work pass thine hand, till it be finisshed.
The.cxxxix. Psalm.
Lord thou have searched and known me, thou do know when I sit:
And when I rise, and long ago thou knoweste my thought each whitte.
My going and my syttyng down, thou have thoroughly tried*
And all my ways thou haste foreseen, and them thoroughly searched.
For on my tongue there is no word, but thou haste known it well:
I never spoke one word (good Lord) whereof thou could not tell.
Before and eke behind thou haste made me in fassion:
And to me thou haste put thy hand, in my creation.
Wonderful science thou dydste show, when thou dydeste me frame.
Which was more high, then that I could ever attain the same.
Whyther shall I go from thy spirit, or from thy presence flee?
For if I clyme up into heaven, thou art there before me.
And if I make my bed in hell, or go down to the grave:
Thou art present there and seeste all the corners of the cave.
If I should take flight toward the east, and dwell be youde all seas.
thy power shall reach and rule me there, as it shall the best please.
And if I shalsaye with my self, the dearcknes shall me hyde:
The night it self is a bright light about me on each side.
Dearcknes does hyde nothing from the, for night like day does shine:
And the dearckenes and eke the light, are boeth one in thine eien.
And thou haste my reins in thine hand, and thy possession:
And in my mothers womb thou haste, made me in facion.
I will confess to the because, I am wrought wondrousely:
And because thy worckes do excel, which my soul knows chiefly.
My styffnes and my bones (good Lord) were not unknown to the:
When I was formed in the place, where is no light to se.
And when I was framed and wrought, even in the longhest part:
Of all the earth, even as it had been by the Phrigians art.
Thine eyes saw me being but seed, conceived without shape:
And to be written in thy book none of my parts did escape.
This was done many days before, my members were formed:
And not one of all those days was from thy fore knowledge hyd.
But (Oh Lord God) how few of thy thoughts do I understand?
And yet grow they not to great sums and many a thousand?
Which if I would rehearse by tale, many mo would they be*
Then the sand and when I awake, I do still thyncke on the.
But if thou kill the wicked man (Lord God) for his deserte:
Then let the man that does sheade blood, from thy servant depart.
For they being thine enemies, do speak most hardily.
And do rashly usurp thy name committyng blasphemy.
Oh Lord should I not hate thy foes and cruel enemies:
And vex my felfe when they resyste the and against the rise?
Yea with most deadly hate I will, persecute them I say:
And will take them as enemies, and deadly foes for aye.
Search me (O God) and know mine heart, let naught be therein hyd:
Do thou prove me and know my thoughts, whether they be wicked.
And look if any thing be ille, that I do Imagyn:
And lead me forth into the way that all men must go in.
The.cxl. Psalm.
Lord set me free from the man that to wyckednes is bent:
And preserve thy servant from the man that is violent.
And from such men as Imagyne, all myschiefe in their heart:
And do daily run together in wars to play their part.
And from all such as whett their tongues, as does the serpent fell:
And have like poison in their lyppes as the adder cruel.
Lord keep me out of the power of him that is ungodly:
And save me from the violent, for these would me destroy.
For the proud men have secretlye, laid snares and cords for me:
So have they stretched out their nets and snares where my ways be.
And thus have I said to the Lord, thou art my God I say:
O Lord receive thou with thine ears, my voice when I do pray.
O Lord, Lord, thou art all the strength that must be my succoure:
Thou do defend mine head from strypes, when I must take armoure.
Lord, make thou not the wicked man, his desires to obtain:
Ne prospere thou his diligence, in victory to reign.
Let the mischief that with their lyppes they have builded, as well:
Light on the rest, as on the head, of them that do me quell.
Let burning coals be cast on them, let them lack for no pain:
Let God sone cast them down with fire, lest they should rise again.
Oh let the man that has much talk, have no sure dwelling place:
And let evil huntte the violent, till he fall on his face.
I know that in the abiectes cause, the Lord will do judgment:
And will revenge their cause that be, boeth pore and impotent.
Certes the just men will confess, and acknowledge thy name^
And the good men shall still abide, in thy sight without blame.
The.cxli. Psalm.
O Lord, upon the do I call, wherefore haste the to me:
And with thine ears receive my voice, when I do to the cry.
Lord, let my prayar stand instede of incense in thy sight:
And the lyftynge up of mine hands, for sacrifice at night.
O Lord appoynte thou to my mouth, a guard and custody:
And a thing that may keep the door of my lyppes in saftie.
Do not enclyne or bow mine heart to any wicked thing:
Lest by wicked men's help I do things thereto belongeynge.
Neiter do thou suffer me Lord to use their deyntye things:
Nor to be given to their waste, and to their bancketynges.
Let the just stryke me with good will, and tell me of my miss:
Let not mine head refuse ointment, that most preciouse is.
For so shall I remain and pray, for them that my foes be:
Whylse they imagyne and invent, all ill things against me.
Let their judges be sent down by stony places and near:
My words, for they shall be pleasant, and full of hertie chere.
Our bones are scattered nygh death and the mouth of the grave:
Like as where one has cloven wodde, or dygged up a cave.
But unto the (O Lord, O Lord) mine eyes do I still cast*
And have my trust in the, wherefore, turn not my soul to waste.
Keep me that I fall not into the snare they sored for nie:
Neither into the snares or gynes of men that wicked be.
And let the ungodly and the wicked fall together:
Into their own nets, but let me, walk on still yet further.
The.cxlij. Psalm.
With my voice and most hertie words, to the Lord will I cry:
And with my voice also I will pray to him busily.
In his presence I will pour out, my words and tell my mind:
And will open to him all the dainger that does me bind.
And when the spirit that is in me does faynte for very woe*
Then do thou know my path, and that they hyd esnares where I go.
When I do look on the right side, no guide there do I see:
All ways to escape are closed up, none takes thought formuch
Wherefore (O Lord) I cry to the and on this wise I say:
Thou art mine help and portion, emonge them that live aye.
Give ear and hearcken to my cry, for I am pore in deed:
And set me fre from them that have against me prevailed.
Rydde me, I say, from them that be my persecutours fell*
And lead my soul out of prisone, wherein they do me quell.
That I may acknowledge thy name, and that the just may be:
Full of joy for the benifites, that thou haste showed me.
The.cxliij. Psalm.
Lord hear my supplication, and perceive my desire:
And for thy truth and thy justice, grant that I do require.
Lord enter not with thy servant, into judgment and right:
For no lyueynge man can be found, that is just in thy sight.
For the enmie does persecute, my soul most cruelly:
And has dashed my life against, the ground most spytefully.
And into dearcke places he has, thruste me headlonge also:
Even as I were like to the men that, were dead long ago.
And my spyrite within me does faynte, and does begyne to sail:
And mine heart within my body, is stricken with marvel.
Yet do I call to memory, the times that earste have been:
And to comment and treat of al thy deeds I do begin.
I do comment and speak (I say) of all that thou haste done:
And of the work of thine hands (Lord) I do talk and reasone.
Mine hands I have opened to the, and lift them up on hye:
And my soul does wish after the as the earth that is dry.
O Lord do thou hear me shortly, and grant me my request:
For my sprite is allredy faynte, and fails in my breaste.
unto the sing.
For God gives health unto kings, and has delivered:
His servant David from the sword that would have him killed.
Deliver me, and set me free, from strayngers power and might:
Whose mouth speaks vain things and eke their hand do nothing right.
That in their youth our sons may spring, and grow up like young trees:
And our daughters like embossementes, decked like palaices.
And let our store houses be full, yeldynge vitayle for aye:
And our ewes yeane eleauen thousand in our streates and highwaye.
Let our oxen learn to labor, let not our walls fall down:
Let there be none exyle of men, nor out cry in our town.
That people is happy and bleste, that lives in this sort:
Bleste is the people whose God is, the Lord of all confort.
The.cxlv. Psalm.
OH thou that art my God and king, I will the magnify:
And thine holy name will I preach time out of memory.
I will preach the daily I say, my worckes shall do the same:
And without end of time I will praise thy most holy name.
Great is the Lord and most worthy of all praise without doubt:
Whose magnitude is such that it can not be searched out.
Al times do praise thy worckes (O Lord) they are allwaye praised:
And right so are thy noble acts, evermore declared.
I will talk of the decore of thy majesty's glory:
And of the things that thy hands have, wrought so wonderfully.
The strength of thy wonderful worckes, men shall declare and preach:
And thy magnitude and greatness, I will declare and teach.
The memory of thy goodness, and passeynge great mercy.
Men shall bring forth and celebrate, thy justice merrily.
The Lord is good and merciful, and also patient:
Not hasty to be revenged, but to much mercy bent.
Toward all men is the Lord right good, none can this thing deny:
And upon all his ha^dye worckes, he shows his mercy.
All the worckes of thine holy hands (Lord) do to the confess:
And men that be thy loueynge friends, do the preach and wytnes.
The majesty of thy kingdom men do declare and preach:
And of thy strength and fortitude they do frame all their speech.
That unto men they may expound, thy doings so mighty:
And eke the majesty of all thy noble imperie.
Thy kingdom is sempiternall, it had no beginning:
And thy rule lasts through all times, and shall have no ending.
All that are like to fall, the Lord does hold up and sustain:
And such as are alredie down, he lyfteth up again.
The eyes of all things look on the, and do thy will abide:
And thou doeste give them their due food, in their due time and tide.
Thine hand thou set wide upon, and do full satisfy:
The appetite of all the things that live under the sky.
The Lord is just in all his ways, unjustly does he naught:
So is he benign and gentle, in all that he has wrought.
The Lord is priest and still at hand, with all that on him cry:
To all I say that call on him, with heart unfeignedly.
And to all such as do him fear, he does all that they will:
He does hear their clamor and cry, and eke keep them from ille.
The Lord keeps all that love him, none ille shall come them nigh*
But he destroys all that be wicked and ungodly.
My mouth shall speak the Lords praises and all flesh shall declare*
His holy name from time to time till no time be to spare.
The.cxlvj. Psalm.
MY soul praise thou the Lord for I, will praise him my life long:
And whylse I live unto my God, I will aye make my song.
Put not your trust or confidence, in princes or in man:
That has no manner power to save, though he do what he can.
Whose body when the breath is gone, shall turn to earth again:
And then shall all his thoughts decay, as most foleyshe and vain.
The man is bleste that has the God, of Iacobbe for his aid:
And whose hope and only trust is, upon his Lord God stayed.
For he made boeth heaven and earth and all things in the same:
And has kept his true covenant, for ever without blame.
So does he revenge the oppreste, and nourishe the hungrye:
And the Lord lowseth the captyue, that live in misery.
The Lord does open the blyndes eyes, and lift up such as fall:
And the just (that walk in his ways) he loves above all.
He keeps strayngers and makes Orphantes and wydowes hye:
But he depraueth men that are wicked and ungodly.
The Lord thy God, I say, Sion, shall reign for ever more:
Through all ages and times I say, praise ye the Lord therefore.
The.cxlvij. Psalm.
Praise God, for it is very good, and pleasant for to sing:
To our God, and to give him praise, is also besemeynge.
For the city Jerusalem, the Lord does build certain:
And will gather such as are fled, and bring them home again.
He heals the broken herted, and eke their sorrows all:
He has the number of the stars, and does them by name call.
Our Lord is great, and eke of power exceeding great in deed:
Whose wisdom and intellygence, can not be numbered.
For he does bring up to honor me^ that are oppressed:
And to the ground he does cast down, such men as are wicked.
Sing to the Lord with verse for verse, and thanckes geueynge also:
And sing to our God with the harppe, that so swetly does go.
For he does hyde the sky with clouds, and make rain for the ground:
And causes great plenty of grass on high hills to be found.
He gives pasture and fedynge, unto the beasts all:
And to the ravens young chyckenes, that do upon him call.
That he delyteth in is not the force of horses strong.
Nor yet the legs of myghtie men, be they never so long.
And in such men as do fear are him, the Lord has his delight:
And in such as do tarry for his mercy day and night.
O thou city Jerusalem, praise the Lord without stay*
And thou Sion praise thou thy God, and walk forth in his way.
For he does fortify thy gates, and make thy door bars strong.
So does he give felicity, unto thy children young.
And he has ordained that peace, should in all thy coasts be:
And with the fatnes of the wheat, he has satisfied the.
He sends down his holy word, unto the earth so low.
That it might run forth spedilye, and that men might him know.
He gives snow as white as woule, such is his power and might.
And like ashes he sprinckeleth, the hoar froste in the night.
He casts out his Isse like plates, who can his cold sustain?
And sendynge down his holy word, he melts them again.
He melts them again I say, and makes the wind blow:
Upon them that the waters might, take their right course and flow.
But unto Jacob he gives, his word and his precept:
And to Israel his decres and judgments to be kept.
He has not dealed on this sort with any nation:
Nor showed his judgments unto them, praise the Lord, O Son.
The.cxlviij. Psalm.
OH you heavenly citisens, praise ye the Lord on hye:
Praise him in the high places and do his name magnify.
Praise ye him (Oh his angels all) that are his messengers:
Praise him also all ye that be his heavenly soldiers.
Oh sun and moan, praise ye the Lord, and all ye stars so clear*
praise ye the Lord, Oh ye heavens, that most high do appear.
Ye high heavens I say praise him, and ye waters that be:
Heaped together in the clouds, the Lord your God praise ye:
Let these things praise the Lord I say and eke his holy name:
For at his only word he has create and made the same.
And them he has established, for ever to abide:
And appointed them an order from which they can not slide.
Praise ye the Lord ye lyueynge things that on the earth do go.
Ye dragons and ye deapnesses, praise ye the Lord also.
The fire, the hayle, the snow and myste, and eke the wind stormy.
That follows the Lords precept, let it praise him on hye.
The mountains and al little hills, the tree that fruitful is:
And all the Ceders of the wodde, praise ye the king of bliss.
Let all brute beasts and crepeynge things, and all the birds that fly:
Let the kings of the earth and their peoples praise him truly.
Let the princes and all judges, that rule the earth by might:
All young men and eke all virgynes, praise him boeth day and night.
Let all men that are of years old, and of time ancient:
And also men of growing age, to the lords praise be bent.
Let these I say, praise the Lords name, for it only is hye:
And does excede the earth and eke the heaven in glory.
And he has made his people strong, and his friends praise worthy.
The sons of Jacob, a people that he sets store by.
The.cxlix. Psalm.
Sing a new song unto the Lord rejoice in him alone:
And sing his praise in his dear church and congregation.
Let Israel rejoice in him, that made him of nothing:
And let the children of Sion, rejoice in their own king.
Let them praise his name with the pype, and eke with the tymbrelle:
And sing to him upon the harppe, that sowneth sweet and well.
For the Lord does favor his flock, and eke his people all*
And does set forth all such with health, as are captyue and thralle.
Let them that be gentle and good, rejoice with great honor:
And in their beds let them rejoice, and sing with great pleasure.
Let gods praise be still in their throat, let them speak no vain word:
And let gods word be in their hand, as a two edged sword.
That on the Heathen they may be revenged of their wrong:
And right so correct the peoples that they shall dwell emonge.
And that with manicles they may bind their princes each one:
And eke their Lords and maiestrates, with fetters of Iron.
That as it is written, God may, revenge him on them all:
Which shall be praise to his dearlynges. that on his name do call.
The.Cl. Psalm.
Praise ye God in his holy place, and congregation:
And praise him in the sure grownde of his dominion.
Praise him for his myghtie powers sake and his valiauntnes:
And right so do ye praise him for, his exceeding greatness.
Praise him with the sown of trumpet, praise him with harppe and lute:
Praise him, I say, with the tymbrel and with the pype or flute.
Praise him with organnes and rebecke, and cymballes of loud sownde.
Praise him, I say, with such cymballes, as make the voice rebownde.
Let each spirit and lyueynge thing, praise God boeth night and day:
Let them all work his holy will, praise ye the Lord I say.
The end of the Psalter.
Magnificat etc. Luce. i.
MY soul does magnify the Lord every day and hour:
And my spirit does rejoice in God that is my savior.
Because he has looked upon his ha^dmaides low degree:
For lo, hense sorth men shall report me right happy to be.
For he that is myghtie has done right noble things to me:
And therefore is his name holy and ever more shall be.
And his mercy is stretched forth upon all progenies:
From age to age, on the^ that have his fear before their eyes.
By the power of his myghtie arm, he has worthyly wrought:
He has scattered the proud men, in their own secret thought.
He has deposed the myghtie out of their royal place:
And promoted them to honor, whose degree was but base.
The hungry he has filled with, good things in great plenty:
So has he sent the rich away, without and quite empty.
He has taken into favor Israel his seruante:
That he might be myndfull of his mercy and covenant.
Even as he has spoken unto our fathers heretofore:
That is to say Habraham and his seed for evermore.
Nunc dimittis etc. Luc. ij.
LOrd, now letteste thou thy servant, depart from hense in peace:
According to thine holy word, and thy faithful promise.
For now mine eyes have seen thine health and thy salvation:
Before the face of every people and nation.
Alyght to lyghten the Heathen through out the world so wide:
And the glory of thy people Israel on each side.
Benedictus etc. Luc. i.
THe Lord the God of Israel, is for to be praised:
For he visited his people, and has them redeemed.
And in the house of David his servant he has erect:
The home of health for us that be his chosen and elect.
As he has spoken by the mouth of his prophets holy:
That from the beginning have been preachars of verity.
Declareynge that we should be made salfe from our enemies:
And from the power of all them that hate us in any wise.
That toward our fathers he might use his bountiful mercy:
And call his holy testament into his memory.
And that he might perform the oath that he had firmly sworn:
Unto our father Habraham long before we were borne.
And that he might give us the power to serve him without fear:
Being free from our enmies power, whose heavy yocke we bear.
And that in holiness of life and justice in his sight:
All the time that we shall live here, as well by day as night.
And thou child shall be called the prophet of the most hye:
For thou shall go before his face, his ways to make ready.
To give his people knowledge that they shall their soul health win:
Only by the forgeuenes of their trespass and their sin.
By the bowelles of the mercy of our God most myghtie:
Where with the bright day spring has now visited us from hye.
To shine to them that sat in deaths shadow and in dearcknes:
To set our fete straight in the way that leads unto peace.
Benedicite etc. Daniel.iij.
ALl ye worckes of the Lord, praise him, speak well of him I say:
Praise and extole his holy name for ever and for aye.
O ye that be the Lords angels and messengers at need:
Speak ever well of him, praise him, and extole him indede.
Ye heavens speak well of the Lord, praise and extole him aye:
All ye waters that are above, do ye the same I say.
Al ye powers of the Lord, se that ye speak good of him still:
Praise and extole him evermore according to his will.
Sun and moon speak good of the Lord, praise and extole him aye:
And ye stars of the high heaven, do ye right so I say.
All rain and sweet dew bless the Lord, praise and exalte him hye:
And ye wyndes of God se ye do the same eternally.
Fire and heat speak good of the Lord, laud and praise him ever:
Cold winter and hot somerse ye do in like manner.
Ye dewes and hoar froste, bless the Lord, praise and extole his name:
Froste and extreme rigor of cold, do ye always the same.
Ise and snow, speak good of the Lord, extole him ever more.
And ye nyghtes and days se ye do walk after the same lore.
Lygh and darckenes bless ye the Lord, laud and extole him aye:
Lyghtnynge and clouds do ye the same, wythouten stop or stay.
Let the earth speak good of the Lord, and bless him for her store:
Let her laud and extolle his name with praises ever more.
Ye mountains and ye little hills, se that ye bless the Lord:
Laud and extole his holy name always with one accord
All ye things that budde on the earth, the Lord your God bless ye:
And let his laud and extollynge ever emonge you be.
Ye sprynges, speak ye good of the Lord, laud and extole him still:
Ye seas and fresh rivers also, do the same with good will.
Ye whalles and all things that move in the waters, bless the Lord:
Laud and extole his holy name always with one accord.
All fowls of the air bless the Lord, praise and extole him aye:
All beasts (wild and tame) se that ye do the same thing always.
Ye sons of men bless ye the Lord, laud and extole him still:
And let Israel do the same with full consent of will.
Ye priests of the Lord, praise the Lord, extole him evermore:
And all ye servants of the Lord, follow ye the same lore.
Ye spirits and souls of just men, bless ye the Lord always.
Ye saynctes and ye of humble heart, do the same without stay.
O Ananie, O Azarie, and thou O Misael:
Se yt ye cease not to extole ye Lord of Israel.
Te Deum laudamus etc.
WE praise the as God, and confess the, the Lord for to be:
And as father everlasting, all men do worship the.
To the cry all angels, the heavens with all the powers therein:
Without ceaseynge cry unto the, Cherub and Seraphin.
Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath, they cry:
Heaven and earth are full with thy majesty and glory.
The gloriouse company of Apostles do praise the:
So do the number of prophets that so praise worthy be.
The noble army of martyrs praise the with their wytnes:
And the holy church through the world, does the always confess.
They do confess the, father of infinite majesty:
With thine honorable and true son, whom thou haste only.
The holy ghost the confortoure they do also confess:
And thou (O Christ) art the king of glory that is endless.
Thou art the everlasting son of the father certain:
Who to deliver man dydste not the virgynes womb disdain.
When thou hadste overcome the stynge of death thou dydste open:
Unto all faithful beleuers, the kingdom of heaven.
Thou sytest at the right hand of God, in thy fathers glory:
And to come thense to judge thou art looked for certainly.
To help thy pore servants therefore we humbly beseech the:
Whom with thy preciouse blood thou haste redeemed and made free.
Cause thou them to be numbered and had in memory:
With thy chosen and holy saynctes, in eternal glory.
Lord make thou thine own people salfe, bless thine enheritaunce:
Govern them and set them on hye, do them ever advance.
We do daily bless and praise the, we praise thy name, I say:
From time to time for evermore, from age to age for aye.
Vouchesafe (O Lord) this day to keep thy servants from all sin:
To take mercy on us (O Lord) to take mercy begyne.
Show thy mercy on us (O Lord) let it upon us be:
As we have put our co^fide^ce and only trust in y^.
I have trusted in the (O Lord) in the have I trusted:
Grant therefore Lord that thy servant be never confounded.
Quicumque vult etc. Athanatius.
WHo so wylbe saved must keep before all other thing.
The Catholycke and common faith that of the truth does spring.
Which faith unless a man do keep whole and undefiled:
No doubt he shall for ever more perish and be dampened.
And the faith catholycke is this, that we worship truly:
One God in three persons and the same three in unity.
And that neither confoundynge the persons making them one:
Nor yet diuidyng the substance that is but one alone.
For the father and son are two distynct persons in deed:
And from the^ boeth ye holy ghost is also divided.
Yet of these three persons there is but one divinity:
Equale glory and in like sort eternal majesty.
For look what one the father is, the son is of that sort:
And right so is the holy ghost, the author of conforte.
The father is in create and was never made certain:
No more was son nor holy ghost that together do reygne.
The father is immense and can never be measured:
So are the son and holy ghost immense, not contained.
The father is eternal and had never begynynge:
So are the son and holy ghost and shall have no ending.
Yet are there not three eternal, with outen beginning:
But only one eternal God, that shall have no ending.
Even as there be not three unmade, nor three unmeasured:
But one God that was never made and one vnconteyned.
In like manner the father is evermore almighty:
So are the son and holy ghost in their divinity.
Yet are there not three in substance that be omnipotent:
But one only almyghtie God that has the regiment.
The father is God and so is his only son also:
With the holy ghost, yet not three, but one God and no more.
So is every one of them Lord by him self alone:
Yet are they not three Lords I say, they are all three but one.
For as truth causes us to call each person God and Lord:
So to call the^ three gods or lords, does not there with accord.
The father has not been made nor created of any:
Neither be got at any time the truth to testify.
The only son of the father, comes from him only:
Not made neither created but begote eternally.
And from the father and the son, the holy ghost does spring*
Not made, create, neither begote, but only procedynge.
One father and not three therefore, we acknowledge to be:
One son and eke one holy ghost, we confess and not three.
And in this holy trinity, there is no thing in deed:
That in time is more ancient, or else that does succeed.
There is nothing greater or less, but the three persons all:
Are of like time and are also emonge them selves equale.
So that in all points (as is said) boeth one in trinity:
And also three must be worshypt in one sole unity.
Whosoever ever therefore will be saved eternally*
Let not the same fail for to thyncke thus of the trinity.
It is also necessary unto salvation:
That he believe most steadfastly, Christ's incarnation.
The upright faith therefore, is to believe and to confess:
That our Lord Jesus Christ, gods son, is God and man doubtless.
God of his fathers substance and got ere the world began:
And borne in the world he is of his mothers substance, man.
He is perfect God in substance, so is he perfect man.
Consistynge of a reasonable soul and of flesh humane.
He is equale with his father touching divinity*
But his fathers inferior in his humanity.
Who though he be boeth God and man, yet is he never twain:
But one only Lord Jesus Christ, boeth God and man certain.
One not by turnynge the godheade into man's vile nature:
But by takeynge humanity unto the godheade pure.
In conclusion he is one, not by confution: Of the substance, but by the
unity of the person.
For as the reasonable soul and, flesh are one man only:
So is God and man but one Christ, the truth to testify.
Who suffryng for our health went down to the sprites infernal:
And the third day he rose again from emonge dead men all.
He went up to heavens and sytteth at his fathers right hand:
Whense he shall come to judge boeth quick and dead by sea and land.
At whose comeynge all men must rise again in their bodies:
And give a count of their own deeds, and that in most strayte wise.
And such as have done well shall go into life eternal:
But the evil doars shall into eternal fire fall.
This is the commune faith which must be firmly believed:
Of all such men as certainly do trust to be saved.
Glory be to God the father, the son and holy ghost:
As has been, is, and eke shall be, till mind of time be lost.
FINIS.

