DANIEL HIS CHALDIE VISIONS AND HIS EBREVV: BOTH TRANSLATED AFTER THE Original:
and expounded both, by reduction of heathen most famous stories unto the exact
propriety of his words (which is the surest certainty what he must mean:)
and by joining all the Bible, and learned tongues to the frame of his work.

Let him that reads (Daniel) understand.

Mat. 24. The wise will understand.

Dan. 12. AT LONDON Printed by Richard Field, for William Young dwelling near
the great North door of Paul's, where the other works of the same author are
to be sold. 1596.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LL. OF HER M. MOST HONORABLE PRIVY COUNSEL.
THE Prophet Nathan (right H. 2. Sam. 7.14.
) told David of a son that should build a temple unto God, and sit upon a
throne for ever: touching whom, as Daniel penneth all his book which I present
unto your Lordships, I request your patience to judge by a short sum* what
use my explication may have in our Church and state. That speech of Nathans was
commonly understood of Solomon: but indeed belongs more unto his brother 1.
Chron. 3.5 Luke. 3.31.
Nathan to whom David gave the Prophets name* that by it the godly might see
from what line he should come, which always sat on the right hand of the
father. And that the Elder son of Bathsheba, for whom David made the most
heavenly Psalm of repentance, Psalm. 51.
should not want his dignity, God gave him praerogatiues very fit to allure
the world unto higher matters. He built by Gods commandment a temple of
Masons work: and sat after a sort (in Gods speech, 1. Chr. 29.23
) upon the throne of the Eternal. 1. King. 9.6.
Yet God spoke unto him for the people, and he unto God before the people, 1.
King. 8.47.
words touching that his kingdom should not stand. Eccl. 1.
And in his whole book that teaches how all things under the sun are
vanity, the whole drift is to expound the truth of the promised throne. When
his line should end in Ie-Choniah, the Eternal Iah swears, that if Choniah
were a signet upon his finger he would pluck him thence and plucked his name
from the kings: (...) Iah and Choniah made the kings name.
and preaches, o earth, earth, earth, write him childlesse: for none of his
seed shall sit upon David's throne. Him Nebuchadnezar kept in prison 37. y, and
overthrew Salomons kingdom and temple, 2. King. 25.27
with all the implements: that Judah should look to the other house of David,
for the true throne. Then Jerusalem was to be taught a new, in what sort they
should see to peace. For them the book of Daniel is a Comme^tary handling
principal points of their Chap. 1. and 9.
seventy years thraldom: and seven times that space unto Christ his
ascension, to reign in the house of David for ever: Chap. 7.
who destroys utterly as with a flood City and temple: to show that such
outward things of man's work could not be fit for to be meant in the most
glorious promise unto David. So Jerusalem surprised by the Chaldea^, and razed
by the Roman, is the limits of his story. For the middle space he handled
certain principal heads, touching Zorobabels people, and the enemies.
Zorobabel was the only of Nathan that bare rule: and that, to build a temple:
and to receive the promise of Christ, as in Ag. 2. Then his family has an
express declaration what throne belongs unto them. Chap. 7.
For they are termed the Saints of the high Trinity: who shall possess a
kingdom for ever, yea for ever and ever. And Daniel shows thrones set up,
and one like the son of man coming into the world, and again, ascending
unto the king everlasting, and reigning aey over all nations. And this much is
the sum of their comfort. Touching the kingdom: he names the nations that
should successively take it from the^ with open injury to their Religion. The
Chaldeans had begun. Alexa^ders injury was in that the Priests for one year
should name their sons Alexanders: and all Judah should take their dates from
his reign, and he their Emperor would be a God.
The Persians co^quering them should continue. Next Great Alexander. So
interchangeably, the Seleucidae and Lagidae, unto ten tyrannical kings. But
afterward they should be weakened: that Daniels people might hold their own
kingdom. He names the Romans: but not as enemies here, unto their Religion:
yet touches their coming up: that all might know by what nation Christ should
be killed: when by his birth time the fourth kingdom should fall through the
Romans. And they should be the second Babylon to Jerusalem. But seeing they
meddled not with the Jews, until they called for their help: and that, when
the Machabees had usurped long a kingdom against Jacobs will, no less enemies
to Zorobabels house then the others (as their family perished alike utterly:)
so the severity of God was not to prophecy a comfort against the Jews
calamities, called for by their own profaneness, and as it were, open request.
For Caesar and Pompey were called into partaking by striving Machabees: and
before had made league and friendship with Judah Therefore comforts in such
dealings might not be sent from heaven. The plainness of Daniel is great:
Daniels plainness.
telling of matters that all the world would note. Strabo knew Nebuchadnezars
greatness: In Theoph.
Berosus better. Eusebius. 9.
Abydenus touches his prophetical trance: as hearing of that his
Proclamation or Epistle sent unto all the world. Cyrus Conquest of Babel all
nations knew: Xerxes fall was more in speech and Alexa^ders stories better
known in most people then their own: his victories, ambition of Godhead,
quick death, and ruin of family. And again his Captains partitions of
spoils: their falling to four chief kingdoms: and two of them principal,
Syria and Egypt, coming unto perpetual strife among them selves: these
heathen observed: who knew likewise the strange success of Ptolemie Lagidas:
Diod lib. 18. and 19. Pausan. in Attic.
the stranger of Seleucus Nicator: their league in friendship: their sons
falling out: their seeking atonement by that Marriage of Berenice: App. in Syri.
their greater wars upon her death: the ouerrunning of Syria, to win the
syrname (...): Polyb. 5.
a further revenge in Philopators victory. Again the other sides conquests to
syrname Antiochus great: Appian. Strabo.
his Cleopatras marriage with Ptolemie: his inuading Greece* his fall by Rome his
Church robbing: his two sons Church robbing: their three extraordinary
deaths: these matters be most famous among the heathen: And Antiochus
Epiphanes subtlety in ouerreaching his brother and two nephews: his coming
up in Syria: his three inuasio^s of Egypt: Tacitus.
his endeavor and cruelty to have extinguished Iudahs Religion: these matters,
are the most famous of any in heathen stories. Macrob. 2.
When we add unto them the jest of Augustus, how it was better to be Herod's
hog then his son: Aegl. Su^tonius. Tacitus.
because of his slaughter at our Lords birth: and Vergils harping at a child
coming from heaven, noysed doubtless by Jews: and the expectation of all the
East of a king arising then to rule all the world: and Tacitus for Christ,
Pilate, and Christians: and lastly the manifold writers of Ierusalems fall the
last part: then we shall have open, all the humane points of Daniels book.
When we join from Divinity story Nathans prophecy for Nathan: Ben Arama
upon Exodus
Salomons Eldership in a touch of throne and Temple: the threefold charge to
write Iechonias childlesse: Ierem. 22.
the counsel of God in the kingdoms fall: the blessed title of Nathans house:
the high Saints and kings for ever: Dan. 7.
the thrones, one for God, and an other for the R. Akiba. upon Dan. 7: in
Sanedrin. (...)
son of David: the setting up of kingdoms to deal with David's throne, to
take notice of their Religion: the time of a kingdom eternal prefixed in a
most plain speech long before, and made famous by 120. Dan* 9.24. Dan. 6.
Extra. 1.
nations paying Judah a subsidy to return: and our Lords mediation from the
Gospel: this being done Daniels matters will be all known unto us. The tongues
which he uses may somewhat trouble us: why he should write the greater part of
his book in Chaldie, and the same matter again in Ebrew: and why his Ebrew
has affected peculiaritie of phrases: yet reasons sensible may soon be
rendered. The Chaldie tongue was both known to his nation, and should soon be
their usual, when they had lost their own in Babylon. Besides the North,
East, South Dialectes, Syriaque, Arabique, Ethiopian were near the Chaldie:
so that with a little pains they might learn it. Now it was fit for David's
throne ruling all the world, to be penned into the largest language of the
world, and then most flourishing. So he shows: that God sets up kingdoms,
and puts down kingdoms: and how a kingdom from heaven stands for ever.
This he teaches in Chaldie: as also the state of the world to come: never
showed so clearly before. He declares how the faithles tyrants perish for
ever: and Judah reigns by Christ: as by him also all nations do. When his
visions name the oppressors: and his nation the oppressed, then he writes in
Ebrew, and prophetique phrases known only to his learned brethren. The sum
of him is this: and his phrase is thus. I think my commentations upon him
somewhat profitable to the good of our state. Them I commend to your L L. to be
regarded according to the sage honor of her M. government.

Your Lordships to command. HVGH BROVGHTON.

To the Christian Reader: of Daniels plainness.
WHen this Prophet is cleared, from the opinion of hardness, which men do
conceive of him, then with hope of perfecting labor, desire to read him will
increase. And the holy man must be cleared. For otherwise men would think
Daniel a torme^ter of souls rather th^n a teacher, if he wrote unto all
nations (in their greatest perplexities) matters unfit for their capacity.
Besides the duty of clearing him, facility will be at hand. For the matters
which only make him hard, are soon taught. Stale errors still hinder the
negligent in the truth, who run upon custom, and will take no pains to
examine the right. But thus it does stand. When the promise of Nathan is
considered touching the throne of David to stand for ever, and the case of
Salomon^ house weighed, how in Iech^nias it failed utterly: and then the house
of Nathan the next brother comes in, first Zorchabel, then two families of
him, Abiud, for the Kings right, Rhesa, father unto our Lord, then the hardest
part is gone. All must grant that this has been long hid. For scant any of
the world mark our Lords right line, from the text. Yet a few words might open
it fully. Only many impatient of the truth, cause grief, and thereupon some
more difficulty: otherwise all here requisite might be soon known. For the
matter is the easiest, standing upon a plain story: and the principles are so
few, that a child might write them. They are often handled, that such as care
for the^ may be instructed many ways. The next matter of darkness arises
touching the nations oppressors and oppressed. The doubt sprang, for that
Daniel in his Chaldy visions names neither. The solution is easy. In his
Ebrew visions he names both the one and the other: and they can contain no
other matters then the Chaldy. Therefore the nations in all are doubtless. And
seeing Cha. 8. in a vision upon Babels fall, Elam first, next Iauan have all
the dealings unto the end of wrath: the last dealer must be Iauan. Also the
afflicted in the last dealings are termed Daniels people, and the holy people:
and they are afflicted for the holy covenant. Where any may see of what times
he was to speak. For who knows not, that the last afflictions that the holy
Jews had, with loosing their lands revenues, was under Antiochus Epiphanes.
Now the nations being known, the places will be known. And for undoubted
certenty the land Tzeby on the holy mountain is named, The soil of the
afflicted. The middle sea and dead sea have it betwixt them: and Tzeby is in
Ezekiel the attrihute of Iudaea. And the places of the visions are the fittest
for these poincts. At Eular and Tigris the plain sights were showed. Which
should import dealings from Kings of those quarters. All this while nothing
brings in the Romans. They are reserved to greater harms. And such as bring
them into Daniel, where they are not blamed, disturb learning as much as they
disturb the world. But Daniel is not to blame. He gives no cause why men
should so deceive themselves. And thus these parcels the most in difficulty are
made easy. Another is no less unjustly blamed: the time which he has most
clear, and tells plainly. Yea only he tells when the first captivity
began: and how he was of it. The end is most famous in him. And the phrases for
our Lords death time, would make a learned Varro amazed: The seue^ty
Hebdomades. We have here greater matters the^ how he at 84. had written seventy
Habdomades of books. And never any could be plainer then he in that. If we will
not believe him, but heathen forged studies, we should try particulars. So true
heathen would bear record unto Daniel. Now, heathen 2000. years have filled
all Libraries full of lies: with forged Olympiades, forged Chaldeans, forged
Atchontes of Athens, and forged Consuls, that the unstayed and unlearned now
adays can triumph to see, what store of leasings can be brought against
Daniel. But the same will not see, how all the millio^s of Judah, and of
Christians upon the other captivity writings, check the error. So again
Daniel is cleared. One poinct remains, his tongues: where any may see, that
in the Chaldy he studied for plainness: writing in the most general tongue,
yet near Arabique, and so as most general yet. For his Hebrew, the learned
may not complain: for to them it is easy. And all should be senseless, if in
plain matters, and matters of danger, he might not have leave to hide his
mind from the wicked. Further difficulties we have not in him: after the
consideration of David's throne and two families, Salomons falling, Nathans
standing for ever: of the nations oppressed, long kept close for safety, in
his later speeches named for certainty: of the oppressors likewise and of
their countries: and last of his times and tongues. The difficulties of which
being softened, none can tell what to imagine hard. And to mollify the readers
labor, I will contriue into matter following, introductions to his whole sum
and Graces: and join the kings and Pictures for him: pictures before set in
another book: which coming forth, greater with greater, lends Daniel the
former willingly. To him they belong.

The sum and graces of Daniel.
THe holy Prophet Daniel tells what Kingdoms shall oppress David's house
from Iudahs captivity unto the birth of our Lord: Few words contain the
whole su^me of Daniel for all his chief heads.
and endeavor to control their Religion. Also of our Lord he shows: his
continual protection, and payment of his foes, his coming into the world, his
making strong the Covenant for all nations, his precious death, his glorious
ascension, and his kingdom over all nations. And lastly how he will destroy
the City and Temple, finishing the policy which he gave by Moses, that Jews
and Gentiles may be equally Gods people. Those kingdoms which Daniel sets
forth, are first the Chaldeans, What kingdoms in Daniel oppress the religion
of Gods people.
who destroyed the City, Temple, Kingdom and house of Solomon: and meant in
Babel to have set up idolatry. The next is a joint power of the Medes and
Persians, who overthrew them and would have made their own kings as Gods, and
stayed the building of Gods Temple, and sought to destroy the Jews nation. The
third is compact of all the States of Greeke-land (who put down the former):
In Alexanders power, which King in his pride earnestly labored to be holden as
a God: and caused the Levites to name their sons Alexanders, and all the
Jews to take their dates from his reign. The fourth and last, is of the same
nation for their Kings (called Seleucidae and Lagidae, by the first of their
houses) dwelling North and South from Judah situated betwixt them both. By these
Judah was most vexed, and endeavor used to have abrogated the holy Covenant. At
our Lords birth these nations were fully spoiled of all government, and
Romans, that meddled not with religion.

How every kingdom is seven times spoken of.


another set up, to whom tribute was paid over all the world. In plentiful
variety Daniel sets them forth. First in a huge image of four metals
beaten to powder: and he expounds the Image so, that by a profane king he is
therefore highly advanced. Long after he sees them in a sort fit for a
spiritual man to judge of: in four savage beasts cast into the fire: and
joins a most heavenly exposition and comfort of his nation: how from his
people, an eternal kingdom shall fill all the earth. Again, the kingdom of
Babel is figured by a Tree, touching in height the heavens, in breadth the
corners of the earth: and to that also Daniel affords an exposition. Likewise
the other kingdoms are semblanced by a Ram and Goat-bucke, and both in
sundry horns: and now all the Nations are plainly named, This vision should
have cut off all doubt for Daniels kingdoms. This specially might end all
controversy.
who be therein contained. So six times every one State is declared all over,
the later declarations adding clearenesse to the former. Moreover, the seventh
Narration most plain (as teaching in proper language) is not wanting: for the
coming up, idolatry chastisement, and overthrow of these kingdoms. A skillful
Reader must fetch from others the daily dealings, which the wisdom of God
knew at needless to foretell by Daniel: and therefore he passes them over; in
their due places the Reader shall find them marked in observations upon the
Prophet. The comfort of the holy people is most sweet in this Book. The
degrees of his visio^s.
Christ in profane eyes is a base stone, and heathen Kings goodly metals: but
he beats them to dust, and becomes a great mountain. In Daniels even they
are beasts cast into fire, and the Son of man coming in the clouds into the
world: afterward going unto the Ancient of days, he, sits on an eternal
throne. The times 2300 days. Chap. 8.
Sundry other heavenly apparations Daniel has: as when the wonderful Numberer
(called in Daniel, Palmoni) calls an Angel, Gabriel: and bids him teach
Daniel the very days from the first of the rage against Moses laws, unto the
last of the Grecians dealing against the Temple. And after that his senses had
been acquainted with so exact an account unto the very day, for a particular
hinderance of the truth, he sees a hand writing, Chap. 5. Chap. 9.
(...) MEAN MEAN: and soon the former Angel numbreth most exactly the time
unto our Lords death. And again, soon after he has a vision like that of
Christ in the Chap. 1.13. Chap. 12. Three years and half, and days 1290 and
days 1335 al these are, the first from the polluting of the holy Temple unto
the recovery: the other two: unto several comforts against Antiochus: which
the present Age should mark, even to the exact days.

The whole sum of Daniel is 600 years: from since the Chaldeans took
Jerusalem, until the Romans took it.

The tongues of Daniel.


Revelation, and of three Angels, one silent, another teaching him the sum of
his book in plain speeches: another asking a question of times, and taking an
answer, with the very particular days of two famous near matters. These two
confirm the wonderful account of Christ his own set time for redemption.
Dan. 9.24. Farther then which the date of times might not go in the Prophets,
beyond the glorifying of the King: but therein it was to rest. By like
reuolutions, men might know, that Christ would grant them the like space to
repentance, that they losed not their land: as he gave in the wilderness to
prepare them that should enter into the land. And so it fell out alike: 40.
years they spent in the wilderness, 40 after our Lords death in the land. And
so the whole warning that Daniel gave the Jews to beware of their Deluge, is
just in space the same that Lamech gave to the old world at Noah's birth, 600
years before the flood. From Nebuchadnezers first year, 70 of captivity:
thence 7 times that space in expressed words, laid down in Scripture, and 40
afterward not recorded, nor to have been recorded in scripture, but marked of
heathen by the event. This is the compass of Daniels times: which they that
cast not aright, shall be disturbed.

The state of the world when he wrote, and the tongues which he used, call us
to farther admiration. His Prophecy was written in the most distressed times
of the world, to be such a jewel, that being seen, it might have redressed
the calamities of those days. For, when the kingdom of Judah was to be
plagued by the tust God: all the world was plagued also, with more alterations
of kingdoms and wars then had been before. The Zohar notes this, truly and
wonderfully
And then God by Daniel writes first in the heathens language the Syriaque or
Chaldy tongue: which East and South best knew. In that he shows how the Image
of the worldly po^pe, and all the wicked are made as dust before the wind: and
profane Empires are as beasts troubling the sea of life: A general knowledge
of Law and Gospel is taught in Daniel by kingdoms, many perishing and one
standing.
perishing at the last in a fiery lake: from the throne of a Judge
everlasting, with whom there is no shadow of change. Also he tells of the
kingdom that cannot be corrupted, set up by one like the Son of man coming
in the clouds, and going again unto the ancient of days, to sit for ever in
glory. All this, and other matters of the present Age, Daniel penneth in the
language most known of any one: that the heathen might be benefited.
Notwithstanding the Jews have in this work their prerogative. For in the
tongue used only of them; he penneth the self same matter: naming plainly
what people he before spoke off, and that in sundry sorts for exact
certainty. And he limiteth the time, The phrase of 70 seuens, being compared
with former times, will show that God ruled al times of Judah: in an order easy
to consider.
when all nations should be brought into the holy covenant, in a more
wonderful sweet speech, for the present matter, and for the frame of all the
Bible, then a man's mind could ever have thought upon. Yea though one had an
hundred mouths and an hundred tongues, and a voice of steel, he should not be
able to show the use of his two tongues, how plentiful commodities they have,
his Chaldy or Syriaque, and his Hebrew. We have no Chaldy save two Chapters of
Ezra, so ancient as his by 400. years. And of such as write thence in Chaldy,
translating the Hebrew, Chaldy, Syriaque, Ethiopian, Arabique: all four use
Daniels Syriaque.
Onkelos (...), and the author of Targum Ierusalemy upon the Law, Jonathan Ben
Vziel upon the Prophets, and the uncertain translaters of the other holy
books, all their works make great use of half his, the Chaldy part: and so
does the Syriaque translater of the New testament continually frequent his
style. Neither was the (...) Dan.2.26. is in no Chaldy, but in the Ethiopian.
Heb. 2. and 4. etc.
Ethiopian ignorant of him, or negligent to use his phrases. Also the Arabique
Translaters of both Testaments, challenge as good a part in him as any of the
former: And although none, but Linguists, can thoroughly judge of this
commodity, yet any man may see what great honor God gave to the Prophet, that
draws his little Chaldy through so many and so large works of those diverse
nations. A wonderful recompense to the Chaldeans for using Daniel well.
Even as the Chaldeans gave cups of cold water to Daniel when he requested it,
rather than of the Kings wine, God would not have them loose their reward: but
made that language which they taught him, to have honor through all the world
unto this day. I omit how his Chaldy style teaches to distinguish old Rabbines
in either Talmuds from new, by the tenor of the Grammar, and stirs
judgment to mark by the style later Rabbines from the elder. Yet I may not
choose but warn somewhat of this. Also in our days the Chaldy paraphrastes
are beholding to him. For whereas they were so confused, that to Grammar of
them could be made, the learned Mercerus and others after him, Daniels Chaldy
caused the Chaldy paraphrastes new honor in our age: so perpetual is the holy
man's glory. Elias Leuita moved a question whether the Chaldy could be brought
to Art. That Gordia^ knot was cut, by breaking all their uncertainty with
Daniels sword by our learned Christians.
vowell them after Daniels Chaldy, to their great honor, and all wisemens
contentment. Now touching his Hebrew style, wherein he penneth the vision of
the Ram and Goat, his own heavenly prayer, Gabriels speech for the name and
office of Christ, containing all skill of knowledge: an heavenly vision of
Christ, in holy view, the Hebrew style of all this: and yet more specially for
a long oration of the stouter Persian kings fall: of great Alexander, his
rising and fall: his houses rooting out: his Captains, many parting the
spoil, but four principal: and of them two houses dealers with the Jews,
and their particular dealings unto Antiochus Epiphanes: his rage from placing
of his Idol three years and an half, his falls after the placing of that
Idol, one at the day 1290. another at the day 1335. his comfort by an argument
from the resurrection in all these troubles: this rare matter has not only
wisdom, but wit for specialty of style; that blasphemous Porphyry and all
might have seen more than a man's wit in the Hebrew phrase. Such his matter and
languages be. To conclude, we see how in troubles he pictures the camping of
the Angels about Christ's servants, what enemies they should have, and what
those should suffer, how and when Christ by him self would make
reconciliation for sin, and sit on the throne of glory: how in the most
common tongue, the matter is spoken, so far as men then could quietly accept
it: how peculiarly it was spoken for the peculiar persons, and in a peculiar
phrase: where the wicked otherwise would have raged intollerably. And we may
see how Daniel joins both Testaments, ending the Ceremonies, and breaking the
partition wall of the old: and laying the foundation and groundworke of the
New. Also how God (perfect in all knowledge) draws the Heathen Stories (from
Herodotus unto Liuie) to be servants unto Divinity: Prophecies in the East
tongues, for matter recorded in the Western, should stir study and honor of
study for both.
that when all the world had marked all the particulars of the Persians and
Greeks, fallen out according as it was foretold, they might assure
themselves, that the matters touching their calling into the heavenly
Jerusalem, should be likewise in due time accomplished. This much may be holden
in some sort the sum of the gracious Daniel his Graces: but the thu^der of
Gods power (as Job speaks in a like matter) who but he in his text, or one
of Daniels wisdom is able to declare? Now let us hasten to his matter:
taking by the way the Kings of his narrations: and using graue^ pictures to
the pictures of his pen in due place. But by the way the Reader must be showed
faults of printing.

Faults escaped.
In B 2. read sooner killed then Euergetes died. And in Prol. Epiphanes, 8.
horn, not 9. In Chap. 9.14 the Lord was watchful. In H 4. (...) Romans 3. not
4. In I 3. (...) not (...), the sentence is, Search and you shall find it. In
the Arab. Geogr. (...) for (...). Abel Phada Ismael, I trow is the author. I
thought by the notatio^ that g was the letter, and not #: but the notation in
the Arabique, Psalm. 3. Lifted up, is fittest. In page vlt. l. 1. who heard,
not, was heard. Lin. vlt. (...) not (...). Further faults the gentle reader
must search.

THE KINGS BELONGING to the Image in DANIEL.
Chaldeans.
NEbuchadnezar: by notation, Nabo (Esa. 46.1. (...)
) is Lord of keeping or storing.

Euil-Merodac: a principal is Merodac. Ier. 50.2. (...)


Bel-She-Azar: Bell is he that storeth. Bel-Tash-Azar Daniels name is of the
same notation. And Bel-Azar or Belesis in Diodorus Siculus, book second: where
he has most noble stories, doubtless meant of our Daniel, how in wars he
prevailed: encouraging nations by prophecies of victory. Here the three kings
bear names of three Babylonian Gods: Nabo, Merodac, Bell: as Abbakuk notes,
that the Chaldean would attribute this his strength unto his God. Ab. 1.11. The
planets were their chief Gods: termed of foretelling as Nabo or of kinghood,
as Ched. is mat. 26. in Arabike Mar, Dan. 2. Rac. Genesis 42. in Onkelos. Shed, in
Mat. 27. in Arab. Sac, Ier. 25 and Kimchi in ALN. Nego, Venus in Rabbines
commonly.
The Massorites upon the fifth of Daniel note for both their names thus; (...)
That is, from the beginning of the book unto (...) that night was killed etc.
Chapter 5.30. Beltesh-Azar-Bel-sh-Azar. o Shin is written before k Aleph. But
after, That night. Chap. 5.30. Belt-ksh-zar. Bell ksh-zar. k Aleph is written
before o Shin. Of this I was specially to warn, because even the Hebrew
printers, whom eye sight should have guided, have not observed the difference,
none of all without some negligence: so that but for the Massorites the text
had been corrupted: and my observations should be thought to disagree with the
original upon Chap. 1.5.7.8. and 10. These three Chaldean kings make the
golden head, the Lion, and the (...): as the Persians and sundred Greeks have
their arms,

Of the Persian kings, whereof they whose names are in Hebrew are extant in
scripture. The Greek names are as heathen write and term them.
(...)
(...). Darius.

(...). Cyrus.

(...)
(...). Artaxashta: Artaxasata or Artaxiasata, as Strabo writes towns, named
from the kings name.

or (...)
(...). Ahashueroth.

The fourth: Daniel 11.2. (...).

called (...), also (...) or (...)
(...). Darius Artaxashta, or Artaxasta: thorough Ezra, from Chap. 7. as the
Massorites there note.

(...). Darius. These three are passed over in Nehemiah.

(...). Artaxerxes. These three are passed over in Nehemiah.

(...). Ochus. These three are passed over in Nehemiah.

(...)
(...). Darius. Neh. 12.

The Greeks whole.
(...)
Alexander the great, the notable horn in the forehead of the Goate-bucke.

(...)
His posterity, Hercules and Alexander. These with the principal parters of
his kingdom, make the belly and the sides of brass: the Leopard with four
heads: and the Goate-buckes notable horn: and the four that came up for it.

The Greeks parted.
The Southern all are in Strabo. Geog. 17.
(...)
Ptolemy Lagides 1. horn, the king of the South. Dan. 11.5. Ptolemy
Philadelphus. 3. horn. v. 6. (...). Bernice his daughter is married to the
king of the North, and killed. Ptolemy Euergetes her brother. (...). One that
stands up from the Impe of her roots. 5. horn. v. 7. Ptolemy Philopator.
(...). 7. horn. v. 11. (...). He in whose times the lawless Jews will be
stirring and perish. Ptolemy Epiphanes. He had with his wife Cleopatra Syria in
dowry. v. 18. (...). ^ horn.
The Northern all are in Appians Syriac.
Seleucus (...)
Nicator, 2. horn. (...) v. 5. Antiochus Soter, who dealt in no special sort
against the Jews: and therefore is omitted in Gabriels speech. Antiochus Theos.
4. horn. v. 6. (...). Seleucus Callinicus: soon killed. Antiochus the great
v. 10. 6. horn. (...). He that marries his daughter to the king of the
South, he shall also consume Iudaea. Seleucus Philopater: (...) the taxer: 9.
horn. v. 20. Antiochus Epimanes:(...) the vile: the 10. horn. v. 21.
These kings make the iron of the two legs, and somewhat of the iron and clay:
thinking by marriages to make atonement, for Syria and Iudaea, but further
falling out. These also such as are noted with Hebrew, make the ten horns of
the fourth beast: and in these days the Jews the high Saints begin to
recover their kingdom. In particularitie Daniel speaks no further of them.

The clay weakness of the Images legs.
Southern.
Ptolemy Philometor and Ptolemy Physcon.

Ptolemy Lathurus.

Ptolemy Auletes the Piper.

Cleopatra. Strab. 17. All after the third Ptolemy, were corrupt in
wantonness, and ruled cruelly. But the seventh and eighth the Piper specially.

Northern two at once.
Demetrius Soter. Demetrius Nicator. Antiochus brother to Demetrius, he killed
himself. Cleopatra wife to Demetrius killed him: she had married her brother
Antiochus: and had children by Demetrius. Seleucus and Ant. Grypus.
Seleucus was killed by his mother Cleopatra. Grypus poisoned his mother.
Sele^cus. he drove out Cyzicen, and was killed.
by Antiochus. An. Cyzicenus, he drove out Grypus. Antiochus, who married his
mother in law Selene. Tigranes drove him out. And Pompey refused to suffer his
son to raign^.


Antiochus Eupator. Alexander. Diodotus, who married Ptolemies daughter. Tryphon
killed by Antiochus.
Trogus Pompeius notes, that thus by the discord of the brethren of
consanguinitie, the East became under the people of Rome. And so all may see
how iron and clay the mixture in man's seed not cleaving together, gives
testimony to Daniels vision.

Of the times and years which these kings reigned.
WHereas these profane kings are compared with Scripture, we must take heed
lest we grant unto them a longer time of reign then the holy text has for the
same ages: for so we disanull the authority of Gods word. Yet former ages have
been in that blame a long time. This may be spoken of them in general: that
the whole years of no kings out of Gods people, have or were to have their
whole sum in holy record. Besides, heathen are so uncertain, that they agree
not for the years of any one king betwixt Nebucadnezar and Julius Caesar. Yet
when heathen are thoroughly examined from age to age, by particular testimonies,
and by the lives of most famous men, they shall be found to agree very well so:
with that which Scripture testimonies and lives require. Though strong errors
like hedges of thorns stop the passage of the truth. The truth must be
confirmed from them: for better satisfaction of such as brave more in heathen
studies then Divinity.

Of the Chaldeans time of reign.
THe Jews agree universally, that from the first of Nebuchadnezar unto the
death of Belshazar, the time is seventy years. And if Christian Commenters
had followed them in that agreement and truth, it had been better with us.
Whereas the second captivity by some, the third by some others, is made the
beginning of the seventy years: so a great rent is made in the holy story.

Of the Persians true times: and erroneous The negligent ancient give Cyrus
Cambyses, Darius y. spent together and before Babel sell, the same distinct, and
after: and to Darius 46. who lived but 43 Codoman gives Artax. I. 59. fully:
and Pl^t. to Art. II. 62. to help out the 100 erroneous The record of Euripid.
75. in Suid. and of Timoth. being in those his times, in which Philip reigned,
this will end the strife: and heathen other lives infinite: as Aristides
daughters, and Them. Phal. Lais and Demost. acquaintance; Platoes and Dionys and
all commonly then of fame will cut about 40. y. off at a clap.
sleights that deceived.
From Darius Hystaspeos age about 20. at Babels fall he living but 43. unto
Xerxes war 6. years after his death, are 30. years. Then Artaxerxes reigned,
at home Herod. and Ctes.

Artaxerxes in all 42. Clem. 1. Storm. He died in the seventh of the
Peloponnesian wars. Thuc.

Ochus 8. clear y. 16. with his father, 11. with his son.

Artaxerxes 42. Clem.

Alexanders Epistle to Darius in Arrianus, argues that Ochus reigned but a
little before Philips death. Yet Olympikes give him liberally a score of years.
Ochus three. Darius about five.

Sum 130.

Of the Grecians times from Clemens: (but Epiphanius differs in twelve years
excess, and Maximus Monachus comes shorter.)
Alexander six years.

Ptolemie Lagides forty.

Ptolemie Philadelphus seven and thirty.

Ptolemie Euergetes five and twenty.

Ptolomie Philopator seventeen.

Ptolemie Epiphanes four and twenty.

In this age Judah recouereth their own government.

Ptolomie Philometor five and thirty.

Physcon nine and twenty.

Lathurus six and thirty.

Auletes nine and twenty.

Cleopatra two and twenty.

Sum 300.

The Romans unto our Lords death threescore years, so arise 490.

Thus we may see, how they little examined the heathen, who could not see that
some agreed most exactly with the Scripture. Now The Arabia^s in an Arabike
commentary upon Genesis 10. have Suidas just number at our Lords birth: so
belike agreeing here, with Suidas.
Suidas has for all the Greeks times about thirty years less then Clemens.
They who think that true, may pardon the Greeks, thirty in their forty of
excess: past from Lysanders vnwalling Athens, or Phyle stirs in the life of
them who saw it: and heard Dinarchus cite their testimony against Demosthenes,
after Alexanders death: of which sort Aeschines and Demetrius Phalereus are
cited by them selves and others. Such as heard not of Greciaes most monstrous
lying, may pay the one with the other. In sound learning and religion, that
must stand in sum which best agrees with scripture for the same times:
otherwise Greeks disagree, for each kings years.

The Nobles of Judah, that touch principally the book of Daniell.
IN sundry parts and sundry manners spoke God of Redemption to the fathers,
before the days of David: and to him he promised that his seed should sit upon
a throne for ever. That speech was fit to allure all men unto searching of the
spiritual kingdom. But the carnal still understood that carnally. The ten
tribes despised it, and went to Ohelehem, and Elohehem, to their own tents and
Gods. Salomons house hoped to hold still that outward kingdom, and would not
believe otherwise, the most of them, till the Chaldean took away, and
overthrew all their state. When the visible kingdom fell, all Judah was to be
resolved what should become of David's throne. The whole book of Daniel is a
satisfaction for that perplexity, and clear, being considered for that point,
how Salomons house being extinct in Iechoniah, the house of Nathan, from
Salathiel, Pedaiah, and For Zorobabels house, the only then true and right
princes, of all the world, Daniell has his revelations, and his 490. years
are to be compared with their lives in two families.
Zorobabel, come to be heirs of the kingdom. But as the kingdom of Christ
first suffers and has glory after: so they and their faithful shall be
conformed. Babel, the Medes with Elam, and Greeks, whole and parted, shall rob
them: but they shall possess a kingdom for ever and ever. And when the
seventy years of Babels rage give a taste of Gods defense and revenge, they
are told of that celestial speech, how at seven times that space, the most
holy will bring an eternal kingdom opened for all. Thereupon the faithful of
the nation go from Babell unto Jerusalem, where the Lord should be king, and
restore the state, and build the Temple. Ezra and Nehemia declare their story
unto The testimony of Josephus that Iaduah and Sanballat saw Gre^^ Alexander,
wherein both Jews and Gentiles hitherto agree, that, by Ezra and Nehemias
personages utterly co^futes all heathen used chronicles.
Iaduah, who and Sanballat saw great Alexander. The troops of them are stars
for the story under the Persians: to check heathen that with false regester
of times, as poetical Heliades, or Phaetontiades, will disanull the prophecy
of the due season. And specially the kingly families of Zorobabel: whose
regester in the two Evangelists is more worth then all heathen records. Thus
it stands.

Zorobabel.
1. Abiud. 2. Eliakim. 3. Azor. 4. Sadok. 5. Achin. 6. Eliud. 7. Eleazar. 8.
Matthan. 9. Jacob. 10. Joseph.
The succession of these ten heirs to the Crown, must with our Lords three
and thirty years, make up 490. They were afflicted, to be about 45. years
each one before they took to build families.

Zorobabel.
1. Rhesa. 2. Iohanna. 3. Judah. 4. Joseph. 5. Semei. 6. Matthathie. 7. Maath.
8. Nagge. 9. Hesli. 10. Nahum. 11. Amos. 12. Matthathie. 13. Joseph. 14. Ianna.
15. Melchi. 16. Levy. 17. Matthat. 18. Helie. 19. Marie. 20. Jesus.
Daniel.
CHAPTER. 1. The beginning and the end of the seauentie years captivity.
Here consider an easy account of Gods provident government, since Moses
times. In the seventh year the land was parted. Thence the first of Samuel
falls in the seventh Jubilee: and thence unto this year, are seven
seauenties. See verse 21.
third year of the reign of Iehoiakim king of Judah, Y. W. 3402.
came Nebuchadnezar king of Babel unto Jerusalem, and laid siedge against it.

Iehoiakim king of Judah, and part of the vessels of the house of God: and he
carried them into the land of Shinar, the house of his gods: and he carried
the vessels into the treasury of his gods.

Aspenaz lord Chamberlain, that he should bring certain of the children of
Israel, of the kings Esaias told of this. Chapter 39.7.
seed, and of the noblest:





Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah:

Daniel, They had been all named: of God, a judge, merciful, and strong.

That is, Belkeepeth treasure: but see Cha. 10. how he alters it.


Belteshazar, and on Hananiah, Shadrach, and on Mishael, Meshach, and on
Azariah, Abednego.

Daniel set in his heart, that he would not defile himself with the portion of
the kings meat, nor with the wine which he drank. Therefore he made request
to the chief Chamberlayne, that he should not A practice of Leuit. 11.
defile him self.

The effect of Salamons prayer. 1. king. 8, 50.
favor and pity Daniel.

Daniel: I fear my Lord the king, who has appointed your meat, and your
drink. Wherefore should he see your faces worse lykeing then the other
springalles, which are of your sort? then shall you make guylty my head unto
the king.

Daniel to Or to the Melzar, that is, Steward, a name of an office.
Melzar, whom the chief Chamberlain had set over Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael,
and Azariah.









Melzar took away the portion of their meat, and the wine that they should
drink, and gave them Pulse.

Daniel had understanding in all Therein his whole book excels, declaryng
the coming up, idolatry, chastisement, fall: of the Babylonians,
Medes-and-Persians, Greeks, whole and parted: and how Christ defends the holy
Jews, until the redemption.
visions and dreams.

3407.3471.
the end of the days that the king had commanded to bring them in, then the
chief Chamberlain brought them before Nebuchadnezar.

Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah: and they stood before the king.



Daniel continued unto the Then the 70. of Captivity ended, and the seven
seauenties are told for redemption, out of Satan's captivity: by our Lords
death, erectyng a kingdom over all the earth.
first year of king Cyrus.

CHAP. 2. The state of the Hebrews, until the birth of our Lord, under the
Caldeans, Medes-Persians, and the Graecians: The kingdom of Christ shall
after that fill the whole earth. Daniel is a new Joseph.
IN the second As Joseph in the second after skill in dreams expounds
Pharaohs, so God disposes these times alyke, the enchanters alyke, guydeth and
aduanceth Joseph and Daniel alike
year afterward (in the reign of Nebuchadnezar) Nebuchadnezar dreamed
dreams: and his spirit was disquieted, and his sleep brake on him.

Then the king commanded to call the Enchanters, Astrologians, and the
Sorcerers, and the Caldeans, for to declare to the king his dreams. So they
came and stood before the king.

And the king said unto them: I have dreamed a dream, and my spirit was
troubled to know the dream.

Then spoke the Caldeans to the king in While the visions are general, and
cause the Jews no danger: so far Daniel writes in the Syriaque tongue,
general over the east, al hence to the 8. chapter. But when the oppressors be
named, Medes and Persians, and Greeks, both whole and also parted, about Judah:
into Egypt, and to the North, and the Jews ar plainly described the people
whom god defends: then the eight chapter, and al after, he writes in Ebrew:
and has a commandment to keep close the plain exposition in chapter 12.4
Syriaque: O king, live for ever. Tell to thy servants the dream, and we
will show the interpretation.

















killed: and they sought Daniel and his fellows, that they might be killed.

Daniel stayed the counsel and edict, through Arioch the kings Provost
martial, which came forth to kill the sages of Babel.

Arioch the kings officer, Why hasteneth the decree from the king? Then Arioch
made known the matter unto Daniel.

Daniel went, and prayed the king, that he would give him time, and he would
show the king the interpretation.

Daniel went to his house, and made known the matter to Hananiah, Mishael, and
Azariah, his fellows:

Daniel and his fellows should not perish with the rest of the sages of Babel.

Daniel in a vision by night was this secret revealed. Then Daniel blessed the
God of heaven.

Daniel spoke and said, The name of God be praised for ever and ever. For
wisdom and courage are his.







Daniel went to Arioch, whom the king had appointed to destroy the sages of
Babel: he came and said thus unto him: Destroy not the sages of Babel, but
bring me before the king, and I will show the king the interpretation.

Arioch in all haste brought Daniel before the king, and thus said unto him: I
have found a man of the captives of Judah, that will make known to the king
the interpretation.

Daniel, whose name was Belteshazar: Art thou able to make known unto me the
dream which I have seen, and the interpretation thereof?

Daniel answered before the king, and said, The secret which the king has
demanded, no Sages, Astrologians, Enchanters, entral-lookers, are able to show
unto the king.

Nebuchadnezar what shall be Or, in the end of days: that is, unto Christ: as
Eb. 1.1. and so Genesis 49. Esa. 2. Ezekiel. 38
in the days following. The dream, and the visions of thine head upon thy bed,
are thus.





In holy Daniels eyes they are four beasts: which to profane men's capacity
god shows as goodly ^owers.
Image: this Image was great, and his brightness was excellent: it stood
before thee, and was terrible to behold.

The Kingdoms that ouerruled the holy Ebrewes

Babylon.70. years. Medes and Persianes.150. Alexander state.6. Magog and
Egypt.294. y^ Image reigned.500. y^



Babel alone 70. years, not Assure.
Head of fine Gold, his Medes and Persians, two kingdoms here as one against
the Jews 130. years.
Breast and Arms of Silver, his Great Alexander, with the whole power of Greek
states, which made him then king for the Persian war. Diod. book* 16. six
year.
Belly and his Sides of Brass,

The Legs are in Cha. 11, the successors of Alexander, in two, the mightiest
kingdo^es, Egypt and the North the one 294. years.

The error of taking in hither the Romans is hurtful, to al Daniels book, and
to all christianity, and other stories, and has no color of truth from
Daniel.


Legs of Iron, and his Feet part of Iron, and part of Clay.

The Stone is the power of Christ, weak and base in men's eyes, unless they
look on the f^^^e throne Dan. 7.
was cut without hands, which smote the Image upon his feet of Iron and Clay,
and brake them in pieces.











Whom? even the Jews nation: but the witty prophet hydeth that, which would
cause them to be more hated of the heathen.
and bruise.

of Iron, as thou saw Iron mixed with earthy clay.

In comparion of Judah, and in dealing against them, unto Antiochus Epiphanes,
or somewhat further.
hard, and shall be partly brittle.

In marriages which are handled in cha. 11.6. and 17.
mingle them selves in the seed of man: but they shall not cleave one to
another, even as iron can not be mixed with clay.

When the kingdoms of the Selucides, and the Ptolomies are fallen.
days of these kings, shall the God of John the Baptist looked to this, and
our Lord also, saying, the kingdom of heaven is come: and so did S. Paul. 1.
Tim. 1.17.
heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be corrupted: and the kingdom
shall not be given to an other people: but it shall break and finishe all
these kingdoms: and it shall stand for ever.

witty Daniel tells first, how the last shall be destroyed, and not how
Nebuchadnezars house first should fall. So he deals in Chap. 7. verse 11. and
12.
Iron, the Brass, the Clay, and the Silver, and the Gold, the great God makes
known to the king, what shall come to pass hereafter. Thus the dream is
true, and the interpretation thereof is sure.

Nebuchadnezar, fell upon his face, and worshypped Daniel, and commanded to
offer oblation and sweet odours unto him.

Daniel, and said, Of truth your God is the God of Gods, and the Lord of
kings, and the reuealer of secrets, seeing thou could open this secret.

This was about two years before the captivity of Iechonias: an encoragement for
the faithful to go willingly to Babylon, their own nobles being so advanced
there.
Daniel a great man, and gave unto him many great gifts: he made him governor
over the whole province of Babel, and high Chauncelour over all the sages of
Babel.

Daniel prayed the king and he set Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, over the
charge of the Province of Babel: and Daniel was in the gate of the king.

CHAP. 3. The king having dreamed of the Image, soon after makes an Image of
gold, wherein the idolatry of Babel is confuted by Daniels advanced fellows,
the angel of God accompanying them in the fire: and the king by decree
confirming the honor of their God.
NEbuchadnezar the king Y.W. 3408
made an Image of Gold: whose height was sixty cubits, his breadth six
cubits. He set it up in the plain of Dura, in the province of Babel.

Nebuchadnezar the king sent to assemble the Chaldy officers must be termed of
us after ours, next theirs in use and notation.
Princes, Dukes and Lords, Judges, Receauers, Counselors, Shyrefes, and all
the officers of the Province, to come to the dedication of the Image which
Nebuchadnezar the king set up.

Nebuchadnezar the king set up: and they stood before the Image which
Nebuchadnezar set up.



Nebuchadnezar the king set up.

of burning fire.

Nebuchadnezar the king set up.



Nebuchadnezar the king, O king live for ever.





Seeing only the captiued with Daniel are accused, we may know that this was
before Iechonias captivity, some year or two about Nebucadnezars seventh
year.
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego: these men O king, nothing regard thy decree:
thy gods they serve not, nor worship the Image of gold which thou have set up.

Nebuchadnezar in wrath and choler commanded to bring Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego. Then those men were brought before the king.

Nebuchadnezar spoke, and said unto them. Is it of purpose Shadrach, Meshach*
and Abednego* Will not you serve my gods? and, will not you worship the Image
of gold which I have set up?

ye fall-downe and worship the Image that I have made The imperfect speech
argues his heat
: And if ye worship not, the same hour ye shall be cast into the mids of the
furnace of burning fire. And what God is he that can save you from my hands?

Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, answered, and said to the king:
Nebuchadnezar, we want not an answer for thee concerning this matter.





Nebuchadnezar was full of choler, and the image of his face was changed
against Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. He spoke, and commanded to heat the
Furnace one seauen-folde more then it was wont to be heat.

Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, to cast them into the mids of the furnace
of burning fire.

other garments, and cast into the mids of the furnace of burning fire.

Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, them the flame of the fire kilde.

Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, fell bound into the mids of the furnace of
burning fire.

Nebuchadnezar the king was astonyed, and rose up in have: He spoke, and said
to his rulers: Did not we cast three men bound into the mids of the fire?
They answered and said to the king: True, O king.

The doubtful words in the Heathens spech have been well taken of the ancient,
as they best might mean.
the son of God.

Nebuchadnezar unto the mouth of the furnace of burning fire. He spoke and
said: Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, the servants of the high God,
come-foorth, come. Then Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, came forth from the
mids of the fire.



Nebuchadnezar spoke and said, Blessed be the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego, who has sent his Angel and saved his servants, that trusted in him,
and changed the kings commandment, and yielded their bodies, rather then they
would serve and worship any God, save their own God.

Yet wicked Ioakim would not cease to deal amysse in Judah, until he was
buried as an Ass, and had his carcass made as dung, being cast away unburied.
Ier. 22. and. 36.
And I make a decree, that every people, nation, and language, which speaks
amiss of the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, shall be cut in pieces, and
their houses shall be made a dunghill: because there is not any other God, which
can deliver in this sor^.

Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, in the province of Babel.

The story of the Kings, Jeremy, and Ezekiel, will show about 28. years
acts done betwixt this and the matters of the next Chapter.
CHAP. 4. The Golden bead imputes his victories, not to the God of heaven, but
to himself, and his God, until he had been madd seven years: then he
proclaymeth Gods power over all the world.
The common distinction of the chapter here agreed not with the argument,
wherefore I left it.

The chastisement of the Idolatrous king.


NEbuchadnezar king.Y.W. 3443.
unto all the people, nations, and languages, that dwell in all the earth,
peace be multiplied unto you.





He had not conquered Egypt until after 27. of Iechonias, or his own 34 Ezekiel
30. Wherefore this vision should be about his 36. Y. And this proclamation
about an year or two before his death, at 45. Y. reign, 8. years after the
vision.
Nebuchadnezar being at rest in mine house, and floryshing in my palace.

.Y.W. 3435.
Saw a dream, which made me afraid: and the conceytes upon my bed, and the
visions of mine head troubled me.





Daniel, whose name was Belteshasar (according to the name of my This place
argues that he forsook not wholly his Idolatry.
God) who has the spirit of the holy gods in him: and before him I cold
the dream.

Belteshasar, Provost of the Enchanters, of whom I know, that thou have the
spirit of the holy gods, and no secret is hard to thee, tell the visions of
my dream that I have seen: I mean the interpretation thereof.













As Salomons Temple, that seven years work^ of many thousands, was by him
destroyed.
seven seasons pass over him.

Babel is a tree Dan* 4. as before Assure had been Ezekiel. ^1.

Nabucadnez^r drive from his Kingdom: liueing with beasts. 7. years restored
to his honor. da. 4

gives it to whom he will: and sets over it the most abject among men.

Nebuchadnezar have seen: therefore O Belteshasar, tell the interpretation
thereof, for as much as all the Sages in my kingdom are not able to show me the
interpretation. But thou art able: for the spirit of the holy Gods is in thee.

Daniel, whose name was Belteshasar, was astonished for an hour, and his
thoughts troubled him. The king spoke, and said. Belteshasar, Let neither the
dream, nor the interpretation thereof trouble thee. Belteshasar answered and
said: My Lord, the dream be to them that hate thee, and the interpretation
thereof to thine enemies.









(...) and they have brought the vessels of his house before thee: and thou,
and thy nobles, thy wives and thy concubines, have drunk wine in them, and
have praised Gods of Silver and Gold, Brass, Acon, Wood, and Stone, which
see not, nor hear, nor understande. But thou did not honor God, in whose
hand thy breath stands: and whose are all thy ways.



MEAN, That is, He has numbered, he has weighed, and they divide.
MEAN, TEKEL, V-PARSIN.

MEAN, We may see many reasons why the Chaldeans could not read this
Scripture. They knew not God, to be one, and to rule men's affairs. Besides,
they knew not their own impiety: but said in their heart: There is no God.
Wherefore they knew not who should be weighed, specially in the Balance. And
touching the Medes and Persians, now their besiegers, they little thought that
they could surprise the strong Babel: and bragged, how they were victualled for
20* years siege, as Xenophon records. Thus the matter was hard for them. The
wisdom of Daniel is rare in his commentaries: in telling first, the story of
the true God, in whom we live, move, and have our being: after, of
Nebuchadnezars greatness, and just fall; of worse dealing in Belshazar: and
thereupon how God numbered the years of his kingdom; and how the twice In MEAN
MEAN.
telling, imported a numbering with a witness, and full ending of it: and whom
specially God weighed: and how he makes the partition by Madaj and Paras, who
are the Parsin partners: he departs somewhat from the words to clear the
matter the better. And we are to mark the lively providence touching the
families of Scripture. Babel the oldest wicked monument which was buylt, to the
great ruin of all the godly Families, by Nimrod the Nephew of cursed Cham, to
the great grief of Sem and Iapheth: whereupon Adams one tongue was made 70.
which Babel ended the Jews language, the first tongue, that it was common in
no Kingdom after that: This kingdom is overthrown by Madaj of Iapheth, and
Elam of Sem: that all should here remember Noah's time, and his speech touching
Iapheth and Sem. The kings of which two Patriarchs, are presently called to
the faith, joined in Conquest and Empire, and proclayming of Gods truth over
all the world: and both are taught in the heavenly Oration of Gabriel, the
clear sum of both Testamentes, from Dan. 9, 24. And touching the syllables
of Paras and Peers, as Gods eye regarded the allusion: So Madai a Meater or
Measurer, is more evident, and to be as well noted, but less needed wanting,
being the playner, that we might look even unto Iapheths tongue, how God ruled
it in the giving of a name to his third son, Madaj.
God has numbered thy kingdom, and finished it.

TEKEL, thou art weighed in the balance, and art found wanting.

PEERS, thy kingdom is parted, and given to Madaj and Paras.

Belshazar, and they cleathed Daniel with Purple, and a chain of Gold about
his neck, and made a proclamation concerning him, that he should bear rule
the third in the kingdom.

Belshazar king of the Chaldeans Xenophon had heard, how Cyrus entered Babel on
a night, when the Chaldeans kept a great Feast: and brake into the Palace (when
the Courtiers were banqueting) and killed the King.
slain.

Darius being ^2: at the fall of Babel, which reigned 70. years, falls to be
borne at the eight year of Nebuchadnezar, when he carried the king Iechoniah
captive, and all the Nobles* and ten thousand valiant men: and all Jerusalem,
and all saving the base of the land: and had carried away all the treasure of
the house of the Lord, and brake all the vessels of the Temple which king
Solomon made. Then Madai, who with Elam must revenge the cause of Judah, had a
Prince borne. Doubtless the wise Jews would tell the Medes of their
expectation: and the King would better affect Judah. I can not see to what
better purpose Daniel should tell the kings age: then, how God provided a
Darius Madaj a searcher out, and a requiter. Ezra the learned Scribe cha. 10,
16. uses the word Darios, beside all ordinary form of grammar, for to
search: just in the letters of Darius: in searching out impiety: alluding unto
the kings name and office: and Psalm. 10, 15.
remed^^ when he struck.
Darius In that there were Parsin part^^s, not of Madai only, but also of
Elam: we must know that Cyrus king of Paras or Elam* was f^l^^ in Empire with
Darius. And of that we have express warrant in 2. Chr. 36, 20. where the Jews
are servants to the Chaldeans until Paras reigns. And there Cyrus tells,
that the Eternal, the God of heaven had given him all the kingdoms of the
earth. Which kingdoms, if he had gotten them by inheritance quietly, had not
bin so in special sort said to be given him. And this uniting was known to
the heathen Greeks, in whom the Persian armies are called Medes. Aesch. con.
Ctes. and accordingly the 70. Translaters put for the Hebrew text Paras, the
term Medes in this text 2. Chr. 36, 20. applying themselves to the profane
Greeks kind of phrase. But Daniel here names Darius only, because matter
touching him only of the two Kings follows in the next Chapter, that the
Reader should not be troubled with any further questions touching Cyrus:
Whereas yet Arrianus no^eth that Cyrus was by Law-worshipped as a God: No less
then, the decree following here, gives that honor to Darius* in Cha. 6.
Madai received the kingdom, being about threescore and two years old.

CHAP. 6. The idolatry of Madaj and Paras, in making their Kings Gods, with
brutish penalty upon the contemners: confuted by Daniel, and judged by the
Lions, even unto a public imperial honor by decree for Daniels God. The
Chaldy wherein this Chapter is written by Daniel, is mixed with Arabique: which
tongue the Persians here seem to have much used.
Y.W. 1471. A wonderful year: for Babels fall, Lionshumblenes, the Angels
oration, two Emperors christian Proclamations, and a general subsidy over
120, nations for Iudahs return.
Darius thought it good, to set over the Kingdom an hundredth and twenty
Princes, which should rule the whole Kingdom.

Daniel was Chaldy one: but in ver. 3 it is plain that principal is meant.
principal: to whom those Princes should give account, that the King should
have no damage.

When the original is also our language: as 15 times y-then or by the^, in
this chap. in Daniels tongue: it is an oversight not to mark it.
Than this Daniel used authority touching the Stewardes and Princes: as the
spirit was excellent in him: so that the King thought to set him over the
whole kingdom.

Daniel, concerning the Kingdom. But they could not find any occasion or
fault. Because he was faithful: that nothing amiss and faulty could be found
in him.

Daniel any occasion, unless we find it against him concerning the law of his
God.

The Chaldy term of Daniel is also Ebrew: and from psalm. 2. in, Wherefore did
the heathen RAGE, or keep a stir. And doubtless Daniels spirit thought of
David his fathers term.
assembled with a stir to the King, and thus they said unto him: King Darius,
live for ever.

the Lions den.

Madaj and Paras, is not to be altered.

Darius wrote the Letter, and Act.

Daniel when he knew that the letter was written, went into his house: and his
windows being open in his chamber, toward Jerusalem three times a day he
kneeled on his knees, and prayed, and gave thanks before his God, as he did
afore-time.

bestirred them together, and found Daniel making petition, and craving grace
before his God.

Madaj and Paras, which is not to be altered.

Daniel, Chap. 5, 13.
of the children of the Captivity of Iehude, Chap. 2, 12.
nothing regards, O king, thy decree, nor the Act which thou have written.
For, three times a day he makes his petition.

Daniel set his heart to save him: and till the Sun went down he labored to
deliver him.

kept a stir with the King, and said to the King: Know king, that it is the
law of Madai and Paras, that no Act or Statute which the King sets, may be
changed.

Daniel, and cast him into the Lions den. The king spoke and said to Daniel:
Thy God whom thou seruest always, he will save thee.

That the will of none should seek further means to destroy Daniel.
will might not be changed concerning Daniel.

So Bath, the Arabique here, and in Mat. 21, 17. is taken. Tenath fasting
Dacheu^n musicque Cau^n windows Bal an heart, be Arabique in Daniels terms, as
Aben Ezra notes.
conceaued-all-nyght fasting, and would have no music to come before him:
Also his sleep fled from him.



Daniel with a pitious voice. The king spoke, and said unto Daniel, O Daniel,
the servant of the living God: Thy God whom thou seruest always, has he been
able to save thee from the Lions?

Daniel With a voice not distressed as that of the king was.
talked with the King: O King live for ever.



Daniel out of the Lions den. And Daniel was taken-vp out of the den, and
no hurt was found on him, because he believed in his God.

Daniel, and into the den of the Lions did they cast them, their children,
and their wives: and or-euer they came at the ground of the den, the Lions
had the maisterie over them, and brake-in pieces all their boones.

Darius the King wrote Chap. 4, 1.
to all people, nations, and languages, which dwell in all the earth, Peace be
multiplied unto you:

Chap. 4, 6.
make a decree, that in all the dominion of my kingdom, men tremble and fear
before the God of Daniel. For he is the living God, and continues for ever:
And his Chap. 2, 44.
kingdom is that which shall never be corrupted, and his dominion shall be unto
the end.

Daniel from the power of the Lions.

Daniel prospered in the reign of Darius, and in the reign of Cyrus the
Persian.

CHAP. 7. The Kingdoms which were showed for the capacity of Nebuchadnezar in
a goodly Image, are now again showed, above 60. years after the other, to the
prophet Daniel him self, in the forms of four Beasts. And whereas their
worldly destruction, was likened to chafe carried away by the wind: now their
eternal punishment is expressed by fire. And the Stone before cut from the
Mountain, is here the Son of Man, honored with the throne of the eternal
Father.
Daniel transposeth ye dome-letter, Aleph in ye kings name, giving him closely
a notation fit for the vision. Bel-she-Azar, is: Bell is he that storeth riches.
But this name is: Bell on fire by the enemy (God) as I touched it before. The
Massorites note the diversity of the writing upon Dan. 5 and translaters should
not omit that.
Bel-Eshe-zar king of Babel, Daniel saw a dream, and visions of his head upon
his bed. Then he wrote the dream: even the head of the matters he declared.

Daniel spoke, and said* I saw in my vision by night, and lo, the four minds
of the heaven did strive upon the great Sea.

The Jmages metalles, in Daniels sight ar^ beasts *

The Golden head is nou^ a Lion* the arms* and breast are a bear^ setting up,
on Government from ^ East to three costs * (...)

The Greeks are boeth these beasts first the state whole, and son^* after come
to four chief* thence they of Mago^g and Egypt *



For Babel destroyed Iudahs kingdom. Paras meant once to have destroyed the
whole nation in one day. Alexander required Judah to take the date from his
conquestes, and to name the Priests sons Alexanders, all borne in one year:
and meant to have been a God. The Seleucidae meant to have altered all Iudahs
religion: and to devour ye whole wealth of the nation.
one diverse from an other.

The golden head, and the great tree: the power of Babel
Lion, and had Eagles wings. I beheld til his wings were plucked off, by
which he mounted above ye earth, and he was forced to stand on the feet as a
man: and a man's heart was given him.

Chaldy, Shetar: which term, is a government still: and never (as I find) for
aside, Madaj and Paras, 2. arms in one breast, now set up a joint government.
government, and had Three costs of the world, from the east, which before it
held: West, North, South, as it is told chap. 8, 4.
three or, costs.
ribs in his mouth betwixt his teeth: and thus they said Esaias. 21. Up Elam,
ascend Madaj.
unto it: Arise, and eat much flesh.

Alexander the great and Graece for the first partition, that was brought unto
four: Perdicas or Antigonus, Ptolemy, Seleucus, and Lysimachus.
a Leoparde: which had four wings of a bird upon his back. And that Beast
had four heads. Also, dominion was given unto it.

The Seleucidae, and Lagidae; the two legs
fourth Beast was exceeding fearful, terrible and hard: as having great iron
teeth. It devoured and brake in pieces, and stamped the residue under his
feet: and it was unlike all the beasts which were before it: and it had ten
horns.

Antiochus Epiphanes.
horn came up, a little one, amongst them: and three former Kings.
horns were plucked away before it. And lo, eyes like the eyes of Antiochus
Epiphanes was not right heir, but as a private man: and as a friend to the
kings, whom by much policy he defeated.
a man were in that horn: and a mouth speaking presumptuous things.

One for God, the other for (Ben) David: as R. Akibah confesses in the Talmud
Sanadrin in Dine Mammonoth. page. 38. b.
Thrones were set up: and the Ancient of days sat. His garment was white as
Snow, and the hear of his head like ye pure Wool. His throne was flames of
fire: the wheels of it, a burning fire.





As in the Images ruin he began with the legs first, and not with the head
that first perished: ^o here first he speaks of the last, for ye safety of
his own nation, that the Chaldeans should pike no quarrel for this vision.
Now the rest of the Beasts, they had had their dominion taken away: The Jews
grant Christ to be here so termed and if we had not deceived them by missing
of reconcilyng S. Matthew and S. Luke* by forging a general fourth Monarchy,
and by a false chronicle: refusing the playnnes of Daniel chap. 9, ^4. by all
lykelyhood they would long ago have come to the faith.
as space in life was given them, for a time and a season.

The incarnation of our Lord, and coming into the world in the year 3927.
came one like the When our Lord continually terms him self the Son of
Man in the four Evangelists* he most graciously calls us to weigh this text.
SON OF MAN. Our Lord h^s ascent^o^* at 490 after Daniels year of praying
for return: Y.W. 3960. subduct thence three years and an half for our Lord
his preaching: by Dan. 9, 25. and full 29* years for his age by the Law in
N^m. 4.3. for 30. yeere^ of age to do work in the Tabernacle* as S. Luke
notes his age: and you may see how Daniel knew when our Lord should be borne.
After Babels fall years 457.
Afterward he went to the ancient of days: and before him they brought him.

The conclusion of our Lords prayer, most heavenly calls into our minds
this speech and ^eacheth of the king, of eternity the incorruptible: which
joins Jews and Gent^les in one kingdom.
power, and glory, and kingdom: that all people, nations, and tongues, should
serve him. His power is a power eternal, which can not alter* and his kingdom
is that which shall never be corrupted.

Daniel felt my spirit perted within my body, and the visions of my head
troubled me.

The proper meaning.
truth of all this: and he spoke unto me, and made me know the interpretation
of the matters.

They are savage beasts in consideration of their dealyng against the familyes
of our Lords ancestors the house of Zorobabel, and the nation that should have
their kings from it.
great Beasts which are four, are four He speaks ye term kings rather
the kingdoms, that the next verse short in the Chaldy, should not be
mistaken, and ye none should think of four kings to hold a kingdom for ever,
yea for ever and ever. He was to speak short: as wyllyng to hyde his mind
from savage heathen.
Kings, Their arysing, what it means, it may be gathered by the next verse:
arysing over the kingdoms of the saints, and withholdyng it.
arising from the earth.

The house of Zorobabel, Abiud, Rhesa, and the godly of their nation.
Saints of the Highest is in the plural number: in the Chaldy for the
singular, as Aben Exra notes. We may be sure that it is spoken so, to teach us
of the divine persons: as Abraham speaks Genesis 20, 13. and David 2. Sam. 7,
22. Here it was fit, in a distinct vision of the son, and the father, as
thrones are plural. verse 9.
highest shall The translation used in our Churches is singular in this point:
and the Geneua can not stand with color of divinity, reason, or with the
terms: For ever and ever.
take the kingdom, The house of Zorobabel, who should have inherited the
kingdom of Judah: has in lieu of that, the cheifest glory that can be given,
to be pronounced saved for ever, before they were many of them borne. Their
names have notation fitted hither, Zoro-Babel, fan Babel, that the Golden
head (as the rest of the Image) became like cha^fe. Dan. 2, 35. So these names
are: against the Persians. Abi-hud* My father owes the glory. Eliakim, God is
he that setleth: etc. All still had relation unto this text: and so we may see
what a stately Vlam or Porch the Genealogy makes, before the temple of the New
Testament: and a goodly commentary upon this place.
and hold a kingdom for ever, yea for ever and ever.

Partly unlike, because two kings, Syria and Egypt, both claymed right over
Judah, since the days of Seleucus Nicator, and Ptolemy Lag^, and made
continual wars for it: but unlike also in cruel spoylyng, and hatred of
relygion: which Babel, Madaj, and Alexander, more favored.
unlike to them all, exceeding fearful: whose teeth were of iron, and his
nails of steel: which did eat, and brake to pieces, and stamped the residue
under his feet.

Of the kings Seleucidae and Lagidae, which greatly troubled the kingdom where
the house of Zorobabel should have reigned, to the glory and comfort of all the
world.
ten horns that were in his head: and concerning the last which came up:
before which, three fell. And that was the horn which had those eyes, and the
mouth speaking presumptuous things, and his look was stouter then his fellows.



Judah.
Saints of the most high: and the time approached that the saints should
hold the kingdom.



Antiochus Epiphanes, who defeated his brother Seleucus his brothers son, and
the son of his sister Queen of Egypt.
last shall arise in the end of them, and he shall be unlike the former, and
shall put down Daniel cha. 8 and 11. enlarges this: of the vileness of
Antiochus Epipha^es, and further of his endeavor to have abrogated ye Jews
religion.
three kings.

Sabbathes, Passover, Pentecost, Expiatio^ day, the feast of Tabernacles, new
Moons, ye seventh years rest, and such.
times and All Moses ceremonies.
Law: and they shall be given into his hand A time, here is a year: times, two
year: and half a time, half a year.
for a time, and times, and half a time.

About 150. year before our Lords birth are spent in this wastyng, to the
uttermost of Syria and Egypt, where wars among them selves and the Machab^es,
and most of all* the Romans, consumed the^: which long destructio^s are handled
in Ezekiel 38. and 39.
to wast and to destroy it, unto the end.

Salvation comes from the Jews.
kingdom, and the power, and the greatness of the kingdoms under all the
heavens shall be given to the people of the saints of the most high. Upon this
all the new Testament goes, and Paul to Timothe speaks, when he checketh the
Jews, not knowing whereof they spoke, and advanced the Gospel, and praise of
the king eternal, vncorrupt, unvisible, God only wise. Also the Revelation,
after the destruction of Jerusalem, is a heavenly commentary upon this part.
His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom: and all dominions shall serve and obey
him.

reaches ye end of ye matter. I Daniel was greatly troubled in my thoughts,
and my brightness was changed in me: and I kept the matter in my heart.

Here end the visions of Daniel: which the Prophet penned in the tongue known
over the East and South: wherein the Jews are not descried plainly to be the
people, for whom God plagueth the kingdoms: and the Heathen might be drawn to
think somewhat better of the God of heaven.
Of the Visions penned in the Jews proper language.
HEnce, unto the end of Daniel, the visions are penned in the language spoken
only in Daniels own nation. Moreover the speeches be full of artificial
terms, known only to the Jews: and some never spoken before: yet by their
composition easy. This was needful to be done. For the Persians would hate
the Jews, if the prophecy of their fall by the Greeks, had been published in
the tongue known over the East. Also, the Greeks would have raged much more;
if their shame had been written in a common language. And none could abide the
Jews to claim only to be the nation only good: or yet to be capable of
heavenly matters, to be so familiarly told, as Daniel had taught them.
Therefore he was not to give such pearls to Hogs: but to write them in the
holy tongue: which the Heathen studied not.

Close phrases, used in chap. 8.
To save the Jews from hatred and danger, these close phrases Daniel uses.
For the Son of God, The Prince of princes. Verse. 25. And Palmony, The
wonderful numberer: a term easy by composition, and by the matter, proper to
God: but never used, save verse 23. And Prince of the army, called Michael,
from chap. 10. and 12. So Aben Ezra calls him Michael. The Angels name is, An
holy one. And a peculiar name: Gabriel, a man of the mighty: meaning God. From
these visions, the Hebrews note in Ierusalemy Ros hasana: that their Fathers
brought Angels names with them from Babel. Perek. 1. page. 56. col. 4.
The Jews are called the Army of heaven, the Stars, the Army, and Holy
people. Their religion, the Truth: their Temple, the Sanctuary, and the Holy.
Antiochus dealyng against them, the treading of the Sanctuary and Army under
foot. Judea is called Tzeby, as in Ezekiel chap. 20. an ornament, or Roe, of
all lands: and so in Dan. cha. 11, 16, and 41, and 4^. Therefore I hold it
best, to have it a proper name to Judea. Some equivocations touching Gods
enemies, were to be verse. 23.
spoken in terms doubtful, to the vn^br^^ed, as when the Angel calls the
King, whom the Machabees story shows to be the worst that ever the earth had
borne: a King hard faced, and minding hid things: that is in deed, impudent,
and practicing most unhuman dealinges against women and children: and
prophannesse against God, and all religion, Atheneus further sets forth
Antiochus Epiphanes. The vnheedy might take the words: For fierce of
countenance, and understanding dark sentences: For in deed the words will
abide both. But the witty Daniel would marvel, that any should miss, to
give to an enemy of Gods people, the worst that could be, those attributes
which best agreed with his whole dealings, spoken in ver. 10, 11, 12, and 14.
And thus for this Chapter, and the other, we are to weigh Gods counsel, why
they are unlike the other visions, in Ebrew, spoken closely to the Jews: and
also, why God commands to close some of them, as here verse. 26.

A little must be spoken of the evening morning 2300. at touching the story.
Thus Abraham Aben ezra expounds it. I think this the plain meaning of it:
that six years and certain months Israel continued in the days of
Antiochus in great affliction. And so it is written in the Greek story. And
behold this number is of mere days: and the sense: Two thousand and three
hundredth morninges, or days. And they make six years of the Suns years,
and three And almost the fourth, as Ralbag notes
full months. And they are days after the Moons year near six years and
an half. Therefore the Angel said: And the vision of the evening and the
morning is true: he means, that so it is properly. This much Aben ezra
confesses: which confession of his, will ch^cke all the Jews further errors,
for the fourth kingdom. Likewise Ralbag holds the rest of the speech to be
of Antiochus that tormented the Jews. This must be again touched, with the
phrase, the last end of wrath. verse. 19. that the Romans thereby are none of
Daniels four kingdoms.

Here properly are they named that follow ye head a^ lion Babel

The Ram i^ the Kings of Madai and paras. The buck is the King of Iauan the
horn betwixt his eyes is the first King Alexander. ye four are the four
Christ Kingdoms, one ly^le horn i^ Antiochu^ Epiphan^^.



CHAP. 8.
Daniel sees now, not in a dream in the night (as in Cha. 2. and Cha. 7.
oppressors of the Jews unnamed:) but in a vision, awaked, nations properly
termed: arising, and cut off: Madaj and Paras. Iauan or Greece. And what manner a
Greek shall practice the end of Gods wrath against the Holy Daniels people.
This chapter expounds the second and the seventh, and tells by implication,
the certainty of Babels fall, by the arising of the Persians. Remember that in
time, this matter went before that of the 5. chapter.

The Jews commonly hold, as in the Paln^ud in Megilah, that this was the last
Y. of Belshazar: not long before the m^ttars of the fifth chapter.
third year of the reign of king Belshazar, a vision was seen to me: to
me Daniel, after that which was seen to me In the first of Belshazar. cha.
7.1.
before.

Not in a dream on night but awaked, in a vision.

The arms and breast, and the Bear, are here now in ye (...) vision, that u^ah
should be ^^ll^^ll in this matter.


in a vision: and thus it was. In the seeing, I was then in Susan, the palace
Royal, which is in the Province of Ela^. Now I saw in a vision: and when I saw
it, I was at the Vbal in Dan. is not in the Bible, but in this vision twyce:
Iubal in Ebrew is a River The affinity of Eulai the flood, shows that there
it should be so taken for a r^uer.
River Vlaj*

Madaj and Paras were kingdoms of great fame before they conquered Babel.
Madaj of old the stouter: and Paras kings Cyrus, Cambyses, Darius Histaspis,
had reigned all in several authority some good years before Babel fell, as
their years by Greeks are reckoned.
two horns: and the two horns we^^ high: but the one was higher then the
other, and the highest came up last.

All the Brass and ^ron. cha. 2 Also the Leoparde, and the fourth beast, ar in
this Bucke; and this is a sweet co^mentarie upon the^.
Goat Bucke came over the face of the whole earth, and touched So swiftly
great Alexander conquered the East in six years, as flying rather then going
on ye earth.
not the ground: and this Bucke had a As in deed Alexander was ye notablest
for his strange success in wars of any king that ever warred.
notable horn between his eyes.

This place is a sweet abridgment of all great Alexanders co^questes.
heat of his strength.

At Granicon water, in his first fought field he did well.
fiercely with him: and he At Issicon, the second battle he did better.
smote the Ram. and Thirdly, at Gaugamela, he killed of Darius men about
600000. and gate ye Empire.
brake his two horns. And there was no strength in the Ram to stand against
him: but he cast him down to the ground, and stamped on him. And none could
deliver the Ram from his power.



So in Eze. 20 6* the land flowyng with milk and honey given to Israel, is the
Tzeby of all lands: the ornament, pleasure, and noblenes, or as it were the
Roe: so much Tzeby signifies in Dan. 11. Daniel in this phrase, puts Judah
in mind of that oration which God makes in Ezekiel.
Tzeby.







Temple.
Holy, and Army, to be stamped upon?

This phrase is taken from Genesis 1, 5. The euenyng and the morning was made one
day.
euening-mornyng two thousand and three hundredth: Then shall the Holy be cleansed.

Daniel had seen the vision, and sought for the meaning, behold, there stood
before me like the similitude of a man.

The only bare Angel in scripture, which has a proper name: given here in
distinction from Daniel, to one being like ye similitud of a man: his name was
told: A man of God.
Gabriel, make him there to understand the vision.

Ezekiel and Daniel only, being in visions of angels, are so spoken to: Son
of man: as Aben ezra, and Abr* Shallum note.
Man, that, for the time of the end the vision is.



This place most strongly overthrows their error, which feign the Roman
Monarchy to be meant by the legs of the Image chap. 2. or by ye fourth beast,
chap. 7. seeing that the Greeks are the dealers in the end of wrath, spoken
of Daniels people. And it had bin a strange thing, that this last vision,
repeating the former, should leave out the Romans, if they had bin spoken of
before. Seeing it were good to have had that told^: and God never omitted the
good of the Church.
last end of wrath.

Madaj and Paras.

Genesis. 25, 25.
hearie Bucke is the king of Grecia. This place proves, that of Iauan the
Greeks come.
Iauan. And the great horn between his eyes, is the first Great Alexander.
king.

Of many kingdoms arysing from Alexander, four in the end bear the sway:
and in time, two: whereof the chap. 11. will speak.
four kingdoms, that shall stand up The Angel speaking to witty Daniel a
word beside form of Gra^mer Iagnamednah, drawing ye masculine genesis into a
foeminines place, Iod put for Tan, in one letter, shows as much as Daniel saw
by the attribute Notable, in the four horns verse* 8. These witty speeches in
the servants of the holy spirit, require diligence and care to mark them.
stoutely from the nation. But not in the strength of the other.

That is, full power over the Jews: otherwise they reigned as long again, in
their own country.
kingdom, when sinners shall come to the full: there shall stand up a King
Impudent Antiochus Epiphanes spoken in the Machabbes, and of heathen very much
for impudency against all divinity, humanity, and common w^t, is here
described. Of Polyb us he was called Epimanes: that is, Mad.
hard faced, and mindyng Eb. Chidd^th, is properly hyd things, as in Psalm. 78,
2. And whereas to understand hard sentences, that is a matter of a wise spirit:
it can not be that the Angel would so think of Epimanes, as to make him
understand dark sentences, who knew least of any that way* Hyd myschiefes he
minded, not hyd parables.
hid things.



By sickness, and by the hand of God.
hand.

Proper and needyng no further explication.
true. Now shut thou up the vision: for it shall be after Aboutes 300. years are
from the death of Balshazar, unto the death of Antiochus Epiphanes.
many days.

Daniel was stricken and sick certain days: and I arose, and did the kings
business: and I was astonished at the vision: But none could As I had a
commandment to shut up the matter, so I refrayned my countenance from, open
expressing of my grief.
mark it.

CHAP. 9. At the end of the 70. years captivity, Daniel praying for return,
is told that the delivery to Jerusalem is presently granted him: and the
eternal, by our Lords death is showed: that it shall be at seven times seventy
Y. from the hour of his prayer. So long Jerusalem shall have the prerogative
to be the holy City. But then the Heathen shall be equal in the covenant, and al
Moses ceremonies must cease. For enforcement to behold that, Christ will
destroy the City and Holy place, in the age following. His prayer is penned
with special regard, even of the very Ebrew syllables to the prophets, from
whom the matter of his speech is taken. Those places must be marked.
After he had been taken out of the Lions den, and caused Gods truth to be
advanced generally, he prays for Jerusalem.
first year of Darius the son of Achashuerosh, of the seed of Genesis 10. 1
Chro. 1.
Madaj, in which he was made king over the realm of the Chaldeans.

Daniel marked by books, the number of the years, whereof the word of the
Lord had been unto Jeremy, for accomplyshing in the Daniel has the very Ebrew
term of Jeremy Chorboth: And by Jeremy he must be expounded. Thus stand
Ieremies words. cha. 2^. And this land shall be-come Chorbah (that is, a
wilderness) an astonishment: and these nations shall serve the king of Babel
seauentie years. In a known matter his shortness of speech was fittest.
Properly the utter ruins of Jerusalem was not but 52. years. The Geonym (the
Ebrew Doctors so termed) said, that Daniel was deceived. His strictnes of
phrase might have told them, that he had Jeremy before his eyes, and could not
be deceived, though he had not bin that Daniel the wise. But terms all
Ierusalems state in the captivity, by a term properly true only in the greater
part, sending the reader to Jeremy for the full meaning. Also, God in Moses.
Leu. 26, 34. uses the same synecdoche and short speech: whom the holy man
delighted to follow.
ruins of Jerusalem seventy years.



E^od. 32, 31.
Oh Lord, Deuteronomy. 10, 16.
the mighty God, the great and fearful, who Deuteronomy. 7, 9.
keeps the covenant and the mercy, toward them which love him, and toward
them which keep his commandementes.

He keeps even the very letters of Salomons prayer. 1. king. ^, 47.
We have sinned, we have transgressed, we have done wickedly, we have
rebelled, and we have turned back from thy commandementes, and from thy
judgments.

Leuit. 26.
obeyed thy servants the Prophets, which spoke in thy name, to our Kings, to
our Princes, and to our Fathers, and to all the people of the land.

Judah, and the dwellers of Jerusalem: and all Israel, the near and the far
off, through all the countries whither thou have Leui. 26, 32. Deuteronomy. 30.
driven them, for their He has the very phrase of Leuit. 16, 4.
offense wherein they have offended thee.







Israel have transgressed thy law, and turned back, that they would not hear
thy voice. Wherefore there is poured upon us the Deuteronomy. 29, 28. Leuit. 26.
curse, and the oath, that is written in the law of Moses, the servant of God:
Because we have sinned against him.

spoke against us, Deuteronomy. 28.
and against our judges that judged us. For under the whole heaven has not
been done the like as has been This may be the abridgeme^t of Ieremies
Lamentations.
done upon Jerusalem.



In Jeremy, Chap. 2. an allusion is used: for in the Ebrew (...) shakad:
signifying both speedy and watchful caring: and the almo^d tree, that buddeth
most speedely of any: in which sense, the almond tree flourishing, is used in
Ecclesiastes 12. for gray hairs soon arising in our shortage. Daniels term
here in the Ebrew, honoreth and reme^branceth that text.
watchful concerning the evil, and brought it upon us. For the Lord our God
is righteous in all the works which he has done: seeing we obeyed not his
voice.

Leuit. 26. If they confess their sins, and the sins of their fathers, I
will remember the covenant with the former, how I brought them out of the land
of Egypt.
that have brought forth thy people out of the land of Egypt, by a mighty hand,
and have gotten thy self a name as this day, we have done wickedly.

Esaias. 52.1.
city Jerusalem, thine holy mountain. For, because of our sins, and for the
iniquities of our fathers, Jerusalem and thy people are a reproach to all that
are about us.

Number. 6. verse. 25. The blessing of the high sacrificer is in the same speech.
shine upon thy sanctuary, that lies desolate, for the Lords sake.

Daniels Ebrew has the very letters of Ezekias prayer, Esa. 37.17.
Incline O my God, thine ear, and hear, open thine eyes and see, our
desolations, and the city whereupon thy name is called: for we present not our
supplications before thee, for our righteousness, but for thy great tender
mercies.

Esaias. 38.2.
The cursed Jews at this day, repeat on their expiation feast, this prayer
often, in Cether Malcuth: a book of their common prayers: But stop their ears
against the Angels words from God, touching Christ, the true worker of this
expiation 490. years exactly from the time of this prayer: as appears verse.
24 where our tottering for the meaning of it, has furthered the Jews
destruction, and more hardened their hearts.
name is called upon thy city, and upon thy people.



When this Angel tells Zachary, of his name Gabriel, and is sent unto Mary,
he calls them to think upon this text: that by conference of Moses Number. 4.
and Daniel here, they might better consider the time of the promise. And, to
have that cause hodlen in peculiar dignity, by the message of this Gabriel, no
other Angel, being a created spirit, has a proper name. Michael is Christ
with the best learned Christians, and no less then Jehovah and the Angel
Jehovah, in the words of Zoar, and many other Ebrew DD.
Gabriel whom I had seen before in a vision, came unto me flying with
vehemency until he touched me, at the Oblation had with it, prayer: and
evening prayer time was at their ninth hour, our three of the clock: as
appears by Act. 3.1. At the same hour, the Lord made himself that oblation
which here the Angel tells: even most exactly when it should be performed.
time of the evening oblation.

His oration contains an abridgement of the new Testament, and a light of the
old: and Daniel knew all before, but the time, which brings a greater
clearenesse unto all. Therefore the time considered with the matter, is that
which he calls here the skill of understanding: and it must be counted a
great error, to hold that a small matter, and specially the disanulling of
Gods truth, by heathen forged and most vain and iarring antiquities, to make
from Babels fall to Tiberius 18. wherein our Lord died. 590. against the
express 490. which the Angel counts to be wisdom which he speaks off:
yet old Greeks did so.
skill of understanding.

word: which I am come to tell, (...)
because thou art Chamudoth is the most amiable term of any which can be
given. As the attribute is, so is the matter here, Chamudoth full of grace.
greatly beloved. Therefore By this commandment doubled for vehementer charge,
he condemns the world, that regards not to be instructed in this doctrine,
sent from heaven by an Angel unto Daniel, and penned for all nations use.
Wherefore we must give better heed unto the speech, least we flow and fall.
For if the word spoken by Angels fall out sure, and every trespass received
just recompense, how shall we escape, neglecting so great a charge of looking
unto our own salvation, where the vision is so clear that no doubt can be
moved by any plain heart, that will rest in Gods authority: nor yet from
heathen studies, by such as thoroughly search the ancient of them: and the
only fit to bear authority.
conceive the word: g and perceive the clear vision.

The clear vision for the certain time of redemption, wherein the Jews
through all the Gospel agreed: and also all the East, as Josephus records:
and Tacitus and Suetonius, do both touch it. A verb singular to a substant*
plural teaches in Ebrew an exact account then meant: as Auenarius notes upon
this phrase. (...).
is pared out for thy people, and for thy holy city: to consume wickedness,
and to abolish sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring
righteousness euer-lasting, and to seal vision and prophet, and to
shew-Messias the Holy of Holiest.

Of the 70. seuens.
Seventy seuens make 490. in ordinary speech. But that Daniel might conceive
how at the beginning of his prayer upon considering of Jeremy for that 70.
years of captivity ended, God took notice of his meditation, the Angel
touches that seventy: showing how exactly seven times that space is declared
before hand: for the Jews prerogative, continuance of Ceremonies and
meditation, how reconciliation of sin is truly made: That every Sabbath in
the mean while they might learn to enter into the rest of Christ.

How the 70. seuens end the holy Chronicle.
Five, as it were, chains of time are in Scripture: all drawn through so many
several matters. The first is continued through the Ages of the Fathers unto
the death of Terah: who falling into Idolatry, gave occasion to end that
honor, of making the Fathers to draw the worlds age in theirs. After the
death of Terah, Abraham has the promise of Christ, and is called unto Chanaan.
For that promise: one tenor of certainty is linked unto the Lamb, Temple and
Salomons death, after his Idolatry: and held on, while Abraham's tribes held
the faith of Christ. Thence a new state, measure of it, as a third chain,
comes in. Judah holds a kingdom, unto Sedekiahs captivity: and Jeroboam
draws Israel to sin: which time is termed Isreal's sin: by God to
Ezekiel, chap. 4. when he shows unto him the fall of Jerusalem: with which
fall, also famous 40. years of Iudahs warning must end. Which 40. are
complete from Ieremies prophesying in the 13. of Josias, at the beginning of
the 19. of Nebuchadnezer when the city was brent. And that continuance of
Iudahs kingdom is in one sum given by God. 390. y. Ezekiel. 4. The particulars
vvherof are cast by the kings of Judah and Israel, just into that sum, by
sundry learned. And Abraham Ben David in Cabala shows that the Jews
universally, but that they hid their mind, held the time so. The fourth chain
contains the continuance of Nebuchadnezars 70. years. Whereof 18. are past
before the kingdom of Judah falls. And this chain was made before hand, and
when it came to the last link, the hand writes upon the wall that God MEAN
MEAN, had numbered, had numbered: and Daniel had a chain of gold for expounding
of it. As Ovid gives the Sun four horses which draw him: Pyroeis, Eous,
Aethon, Phlegon: So more fitly may these four drawers of the Sun be termed:
The first a fiery Pyrocis: The next where Abraham comes from the East is
Eous: The third when the temple is burnt, is Aethon truly. And the fourth in
heat against Babel is verily from the fiery throne aparching Phlegon. The fifth
passes all admiration: that which here the Angel gives, to draw all the
world unto Christ.

How the Chain of Jubilees attends upon this.
IF this chain be made by him that made also that of Jubilees, which must
begin when Jesus conquereth and parts the land: (that is in his eight
year:) it will, by fifties end with this sum: and if it do so, there is a
double strength. Now it does so most exactly. For years are by this chain
beginning at Iosuahs eight 1400. Jubilees 28. at our Lords death. Wherefore
that golden chain which Homer gives unto his Jupiter: by which all the Gods
drawing could never pluck him down, but he could hang them, land and sea in
the midst of the air: fastening it in the top of the heavens: that is nothing
in Imagination to the strength of this: at which though Jews and Gentiles,
pluck now adays never so feloniously, or boysterously, they shall not
prevail: But when this finds particular trial even by heathen approbation,
as men's lives, it draws them to be set in balances and found higher then
vanity: as I showed for Ebrew lives in the Preface.

Of Daniels People.
AS Daniel prayed for Gods People, so he had this kingly honor, that they are
termed his People: even such of the nature. As Aben, Ezra rightly does take it
for to seal Messiah.

An exposition of the former Law phrases: by the common terms of men.
Our Lord Mat. 24. gives the same commandment for this oration. Let him that
reads Daniel understand. The contempt of which commandment has been the
ruin of the world. Cyrus in Ezra makes proclamation of suffering and helping
Israel to return to dwell at Jerusalem. In that grant the building of the
City for houses and distinction of streets, must needs be understood. at.49.
y. troubles it is by clearer grant, walled: in a tyth of this time: by
Nehemiah having special regard unto this parcel of Prophecy.
Know then mark. From the outgoing of the Ezra. 1.1.
word to restore and to build Jerusalem, unto Here only in Ebrew and twice
here Messiah comes a mere proper name: hence made famous John. 1.41. and 4
25. Also hence the time of his coming was granted by all sides. Now the 62.
seuens are parcelled alone only, that the last may be handled alone, for our
Lords story: in speech of which he handles first the principal matter: our
Lords death: nothing to him being just, but for us, and nothing to hold him in
the grave, who can raise up him self; So he expounds reconciliation for sin
with bringing in of eternal justice. Also he expounds how thereupon the
Cities prerogative shall cease: from being an holy City. That he does with
most vehement terms: Knowing how the Jews ioyed in their City: mark the
words.
Messiah the governor seuens be, John. 1.41.4.25.
seven: afterward, seuens sixty and two. In the other, it shall be restored and
builded street and wall and See Ezra and Nehem.
troublous shall these times be.

Mat. 16.21. (...)*
Messiah shall be Hence does S. Paul say: I taught nothing but that which Moses
and the Prophets taught: that Christ was to suffer and being the first from
the dead, should show light unto the People (Jews) and to the nations. And
before, Jesus our Savior, after his Disciples knew assuredly that he was the
Christ the son of God, the Rock. Deuteronomy. 32.7. thence he teaches how he must
be killed and rise again: but they did hardly conceive it. Now they who doubt
in what part of the seven our Lord should die: are too diligent. For that was
taught first of all: before any partition: even at 490. from his speech.
killed, and Mat. 17.1.
nothing to himself. Thereupon the City Act. 6. to come (...)* plainly means
so.
and holy place shall he destroy: even the governors own people, in the next
Mat. 24.34.
generation: and their end shall be with a flood: and at the end of the war
shall be a final judgment of utter desolations.

(...) Many, not Jews but all As Romans 5.15. (...), all, and Mat. 26, 28.
to the Many the last seven. Yea half that seven shall bring to an end
sacrifice and offering. Afterward by an army of loathsome infidels he shall
make desolation, even till utter wast and final judgment be powered upon the
desolate. The heathens calling, into the rest of Christ, sealed in Baptism,
bread and wine: the burying of Moses, the lothsomnesse of Rome, that killed our
Lord, and Iudahs just fall for infidelity conclude all: handled here severally
as they belonged not but collaterally, unto the former speech of v.24.


A reduction of the Gospel unto the oration of Gabriel.
THe oration of Gabriel contains an abridgement of the new Testament: and all
the Gospel may be easily reduced unto it. The book of S. Matthew will be
sufficient for example: when we touch by the way some special poinctes of the
other Evangelists. And first of all, the beginning from Abraham and holding on
to Joseph by the kings right, that touches how Christ is (...) Governor, is
here twice the attribute of Messiah: and erroniously applied in the later place
unto the Roman Emperor, by the Jews and by us, thorough vnheedinesse in one
Hebraisme.
(...) King, prince and governor of Judah. And there the speech of Emmanuel
declares how he is the most holy: and the name Jesus for saving his people
from their sins, that plainly shows who makes reconciliation for sin.
Now the coming of the wisemen, called in Persique, Magi, unto Jerusalem, that
had his plain ground hence. For by the holy city, none but Jerusalem was
meant: and under the Persians this doctrine was first embraced and made famous:
of a king to arise at Jerusalem: at 490. y. which matter so clear, was easily
kept in memory 457. that when 33. before the end a Comet did in the air argue
in the East a clear favor of a noble light, they knew that a king was meant:
and could think of none, but of the famous one, whose kingdom was foretold
that it should be at Jerusalem by the 490. years, and begin at 30. later then
their present time. Likewise when 30. y. after, John comes baptizing, and
telling that the kingdom of heaven was come, the nation was nothing
astonished: but knew the phrase used in Daniel, Chap. 2. for the state which
should be in Judah, next after the manifest abolishing of the image there: The
age of 30. years is made so famous: by rare men and by the Law that almight
look for somewhat in Christ aunswerable unto that.
which began when our Lord was born in Bethleem, and the Angels proclaimed his
birth, (and the tribute of the Romans over the world, argued all the images
ruin, by the exaction of a general tribute over all nations) and was to be
proclaimed openly in the state when the king was 30. years old: as David was
reigning in Ebron: the Levites by the Law Number. 4. entering into the work of the
tabernacle, a token of this work: and fittest at that age as Joseph at 30.
ruled Egypt: and three of each other fathers, from Selah, he, the next save
one, Peleg, the next to him save one Serug were fathers at 30. where God would
never have disposed thrice equality of years in fathers, but for a monument
(...) and tresadmirable.

Now the Baptizing argues most of all a common consent of the nation, that an
admission into a new kingdom, of troops together was then looked for. The
Babylonian Talmud records in Iebamoth page 76. and Rambam (the expounder of
it in plain Ebrew) in Asure Biah. perek 13. that in the days of David and
Solomon, Baptizing was used in Judah for proselytes. Autorised hence for the
rest of Christ; from Moses toil of Ceremonies.
when many thousands of heathen became Proselytes: they were admitted only by
Baptism without Circumcision: as the Jews in Egypt washed their garments
upon their calling thence: and the leapers their bodies: and likewise the
sacrificers washed their bodies, at their function. So now when the testament
was to be made for the Many, that is, for all nations, Baptism was not
strange, neither is John an astonishment for that: but demanded whether he be
Elias or Christ, or that special Prophet named in Deuteronomie: where the
agreement in time gave occasion of all the demands. Moreover In that our Lord
repeateth in chap. 7 19. the very syllables of John's words, 3.10. he therein
approves his authority. The like do the Prophets often.
when our Lord preaches openly, he confirms John's speech: saying, repent,
for the kingdom of heaven is come: and speaks as Daniel of the kingdom that
never shall be corrupted, Chap. 2. which kingdom is here expounded. Likewise
when the Lord makes that famous Sermon upon the mount, all his speech tends
to show the nature of the kingdom of heaven: how it is not pompous, but for
the poor in spirit, for the mourning, for the meek, for hungry and thirsty
of justice: and to be short, for the godly persecuted. And the rest of his
Sermon remoueth Pharisaicall hindrances of access into such a kingdom.

Hither belong the miracles most clearly, to show that God spoke by his son
Psalm. 2. the The Syriaque (...) Heb. 1.3. from Esa. 4. and the 70 in (...) and
Ionatha^ expounding all that of Christ with Jeremy and Zacharies both for the
same, these by one term open all the covenant.
Brightness of glory, (...) Esa. 4. which washes the uncleanness of the
daughters of Sion, bringing in eternal justice. The raising up of dead by his
own authority, the making wine of water presently, the multiplying of corn
and fish: these were works proper unto the Son of God. And these, fit for the
striker and the healer. The cleansing of leprosies, the strengthening of
palsique nerves and lunatique brains, the cooling of burning agues: the
raising up of the bowed* the sight-gift unto the blind, the freshing of the
withered hands, the gift of legs to the lame, ears to the deaffe, tongue to
the dumb, eloquence unto the stammering, and healing of all sicknesses: these
doings expound Esaias, and show who takes away all our infirmities, and brings
in justice eternal So the casting out of devils might make any Iannes or
Iambres confess the finger of God: and the kingdom of heaven to be come in
the due time: the devils expressly confessed the holy one of God, and the Son
of God: as the deuillish Aben Ezra does upon v. Where only Christ is named
plainly Messiah, there the Jews deny the term to be a Nowne proper: and yet
to the verse before they join Messiah: as meant there. Such a spirit of
giddiness is in them. Christians of judgment should more joy in the twice
spoken (...) his name here by the Angel, the^ in any worldly delight. This
well-handled might turn Turk and Jew. For on this they stagger in this,
whether Messiah was to be killed, and was the son of God after the spirit of
sanctification.
24. acknowledge Christ the most holy: though where twice he is named Messiah
and only there, and in the exposition, he there would place earthly sinful
persons. But the Pharisees were openly pronounced of our Lord to be of their
father the devil: that stood not in the truth, but became a murderer from the
beginning. The Psalmist might see a walker on the sea. The breaches of the
waves were mighty: but his voice rebuked the seas: As the sea was his and he
made it: so it bare him up like the dry land: yea the sea rejoiced and the
store of it, when a fish paid tribute: and showed that Christ knew what fish
had swallowed a stater: and how the same would come quick to Peter's angle:
when also fish at his commandment came so into the nets, that they ouer-laded
two botes: and did come also great ones 153. into the net, and brake it not:
there David must be remembered how the fish of the seas, that pass through the
passage of the paths of the seas, show unto what man all things were made
subject. Here Job might see a walker upon the mountains of sea: and glory
larger then the sea: and here the fish would tell him this much. Also the earth
could not stand still, but must acknowledge who settled it. Here Ezekiel might
have seen after an earthquake, the fountain of all resurrection: and Amos
would tell, that when the Son darkened the Sun at noone day, Israel
should take heed of utter darkness: where Malachie would teach, that there
the Sun of justice arose with health in the skirts of his garments. Moreover
Elias would tell, that the mind which rent the stones, if they saw not God in
it, would after send a fire upon City and Sanctuary, when the Lord should not
be in it. Upon these miracles the Centurion said* Truly he is the Son of
God, and so the most holy. The fasting a^ Moses and Elias: and shining before
Moses and Elias talking of his Exodus passing at Jerusalem, there Law and
Prophet say: here in Daniel is told the wisdom, and here is the place of
understanding. The resurrection makes the Jews (...) by their own term in
Ierusalemy, (...) in S. Paul. When they make Isaak to bear his own cross, to
be after a sort recovered from death, to be thereby as it were the ground of
all their prayers. They speak many things of open trial by the third day: and
make this the glory of all. Thus in Midras Bereshith they do speak. Upon the
third day Abraham did lift up his eyes. It is written he will quicken us after
two days: the third day he will raise us up: and we shall live before him. In
the third day of the Patriarchs it is written: and Joseph spoke unto them the
third day: in the third day of the spies it is written; and hide your selves
there three days. Ios. 2. In the third day of the Law it is written; and it
fell out on the third day: so in the third day for Jonah: as it is written; and
Jonah was in the whales belly three days and three nights. And in the third
day of the ascending from captivity it is written: and we were there three
days, and in the third day shall be the resurrection (as it is written:) he will
make us alive after two days Hosea 6. and in the third day it is spoken in
Ester: In the third day Ester did put on the (...) (properly) kingdom: the
kingdom of her fathers house. By what justice? Thus do the Rabbines speak: Now
all these looked unto the resurrection: wherein the Church and her assembly of
the righteous put on the kingdom: now also the ascension shows justice
brought in, confirmed by the wind, fires tongues, and speaking of these matters
to all nations under the heaven: a^ all the miracles of the Gospel belong
directly hither. All further speeches of doctrine keep them within this
compass which follow after the sermon upon the mountain: or yet went before
it. The chief heads shall be touched: for our Lords speeches in the Gospel, and
his doings or sufferings, which all tend to the stre^gthening of this testament
for the many. And seeing this must be in effect the same that Moses law was:
the chief of it, the difficulties taught in ceremonies, and poin^ts perverted
by the Pharisees, were to be handled by our Lord, and the known matters to be
recorded by his Apostles: as where S. Luke records his line to Adam, that
chain draws all the story unto it: and all the times be stars for the
same. Such things were to be penned. But our Lords speeches How they belong to
the speech here of making strong the covenant.
touch us. Many orations are of his Godhead in S. John. They are a co^mentary
upon the first entrance of Genesis: as John begins with a commentary for it
and him. How God rests on the Sabbath and yet works, the Son does teach:
and the joining from God, of Adam and Eve, this is brought as a ground of
expounding Deuteronomy. 24. Adams fall from the beginning, with Satan's murder is
taught expressly: that none of us should stagger in that: and how, as Pharisees,
all natural be Satan's children. Abel is termed the just: and his death applied
unto Ierusalems destruction here told. The careless at the flood are
remembered: and the calling of (...) from East and West directly belongs
hither. Abraham for that is cited, as with whom they shall feast in heaven: so
in forsaking all for Christ, and for seeing his passion in Isaak, for
immortality, in that God was, after his death the God of Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob. The name of Israel, and Angels ascending and descending, are mentioned
principally. Moses comes wholy as a Martyr and witness of Christ. Matthew.
17. His miracles be glaunced at, by the finger of God: where 2. Tim. 3.8.
Menachoth. 9. fol 85. Egyptians in Numenius. lib. 3. Eusebius. pr^ p. 9.
Iannes and Iambres damn the Pharisees. The 12. in the Apostles number, and
the 70. in the Disciples, show that our Lord honored and made glorious the
Law, as Esaias told of him. The Law for every commandment is expounded by him,
as by one that could season speech: the two tables: by two general
commandments: to hear that Jehovah, our God, Jehovah is one, who must be
loved with all the mind, soul and strength: And the neighbor, as a man
would vvish to be loved Against Ierusalemy. Nedar* Per. 9. that does teach to
strik one that strikes.
of another. Messiah is taught with faith for the first commandment: for the
second, spiritual idolatry makes the Jews Satan's sons: their swearing, as
by Their Talmud still has the phrase.
their heads in private speeches is corrected as a light naming of God: the
superstitious befooling of the Sabbaths rest is often controlled: honor to
parents is applied against Pope-like greedy begging for the Church. Murder is
drawn (against the (...) the rabbines later then Ezra.
Kadmonim or old Rabbines the cited, and rested upon, the bare words; unto
unjust anger or taunts. Likewise adultery unto the sole desire. Witnesses are
taught to testify without sin: and the ambition of desiring thy neighbors,
is drawn also unto giving all away, that Christ may be followed. The Judicials
in sundry heads are drawn to a greater charity, then the civil officer can
force: and all by this law: Thou shall be perfect with Jehovah thy God. And
there the ground of all learning is handled: the applying of all actions unto
the nature of God, manifested in his creation: in shining and rayning upon good
and bad. All Leuiticus was expounded to the Samaritan^: in that the ceremonies
of it should have their end: and the Jubilee for setting all free, is explaned
from Esaias. The lifting up of the serpent is opened unto Nicodemus: and from
Deuteronomie the hanging upon the tree past not unhandled: where Christ being
lifted up will dravv all unto him. Moreover the commandment, Give glory
unto the Eternal, the ROCK, that is conveyed unto the chiefest speech of all
the nevve Testament, and scope here: where Christ is acknowledged the ROCK. A
matter where Jew and Pope make shipwreck of al. The Jews In Ierusalemy
Thaan. where the blood comes up to the horse bridles. Perek. 4. fol. 69. col.
1.
confess, that the ROCK gave them up to the Romans. And Rome will have the
Rock to be under them. As though for killing of Christ they had deserved that
honor: and cannot see, that God unchangeable must needs plague them for ever
for that, above all all nations under the cope of heaven. And where as in that
same song of Moses, Our Lords holy words, though few, and his works open all
the Law.
the Jews are rejected: that is spoken often by our Lord. So he affoordeth
unto us the marrow of all the Law. His going to Egypt, suffering, and forty
days viewing the land, is ouer-set in works: to Israel, Lamb, Isaacke, and
twelve spies, and his shining like the sun, with his ascension to Enoch, his
assumption and years according to the sons course. As the Prophets are
commentaries upon the Law: so it belonging unto the sufferings here told, they
must all likewise, belong.

The synagogues godly discipline, was the same which the Lord speaks off: and
the Apostles practiced: as any may yet see, in the Talmud. Though Pharisaical
parts mar all, (...)
And in his expositions, in his phrases, and in his actions he goes through
them all. Besides the express Prophets, the Ebrewes particular decrees, and
learned speeches were to be confirmed. Such as plain reason of all knevv to be
good. Our Lord reverenced the divine school of Sanedrin at twelve: sitting
amongst them, hearing them and posing them: the reverence of all gestures,
which their decrees have for the synagogue, and reading of the Law, was showed
by him self. Just excommunication allowed: and their law of excommunicating
them who misuse authority practiced even upon the Scribes and Pharisees and
all Jerusalem. And all their doctrine of traditions now in the Talmud utterly
damned. Yet what they had from the ancient, worthy praise he allows, all that
terms, phrases, and prouerbiall sentences: The world to come, the dead,
tasting death, resurrection of the dead, Their Gemara. Berachoth. 9.
(...), forgiveness in this world, Paradise, Gehenna, and Gehenna large (...).
in Mid. Til. eating and drinking the object of faith, eating and drinking in
the world to ^ome, carrying of the cross of Christ. These are taken from E^r^e
Doctors common use, yet abiding in record, yea and to singular use, jod and
prick: and in the Greek prouerbiall speech A and O after the Ebrews, from
Aleph unto Tha^. In Ben Arama. So he taunteth the Talmuds (...) Raka: the
swearing by the head: the Corban: their Abothenu and Rab. Such he blamed. And
thus, he that was in the form of God, and held it no robbery to be equal
with God, yet took the form of a servant: and the speeches of the base. Yea
and to look back to some of his works and words, we shall see more how he
condescended unto us. From the water of Jews Purification he made his wine:
From Baptism used of them without commandment, and of small authority: he
autorizeth a seal of entering into the rest of Christ: using the Jews
weakness as an allurement thither. From bread In Ra^bam, (...), at the
Passover, washing, a special sort of sitting (...) bidding celebrate,
remembering Messiah days, and Egypts thral dom, dipping their soppes, thanks
or blessing with a loaf, and a cup of wine, and thereupon a Psalm song: all
these our Lord went through.
and wine used with the Lamb, being without all commandment of Moses, but
resting upon the common reason given by the Creator, he autorizeth a seal of
his own self, of his very flesh and blood, that we should still eat and
drink it, and feed upon the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the
world, until we grow into the perfect man, into the measure of the stature of
the fullness of Christ. And as the householder at the Lambs suppers end,
blessed God, first taking bread: and again taking the wine: so, that we should
not turn his seal into superstition he follows that plainness. Showing the
sum the same: a Lamb for Lamb: and bread with wine of higher authority,
and likewise after, as they used, he song the Psalm 113. fit for the matter.
From the Jews synagogue, where they meddled not with ceremonies no more then we
now, (they with Circumcision as we with Baptism) from their sincere orders,
grounded upon the plain light of reason, (against which nothing but ambition
can once open the mouth) he settled an order for ever for his Church: whereof
his Apostles show the practice: and he caused their enemies even the Pharisees,
to record all the Apostles manner to have been from Ezra. And gave special
charge to his Apostles, (...) Rambam and Ierusalemy in (...) agree much with
the Apostles.
(...), and not to be titled (...), by which term Demosthenes distinguishes
Athens from policies of Kings, titled (...) and (...). This should have been
marked by the Bishop of that City through whose policy Christ was crucified:
who will be titled Soter and Euergetes, yea and Theos, more to be skopht of all
Jews and Turks, then the Seleucidae and Lagidae were of Plutarch in Aristide,
and such others. Our Lord forbad not his disciples to desire to be first: but
requires that their superiority should be in service. And their practice
taught the world, how rightly they understood his charge. Our Lord and his
Apostles labored to teach all men, renowming and making glorious all the Law.
The Pope and his, to disgrace and to corrupt all: to win a superiority, to
continue in blindness, and to be openly guilty of whole ignorance touching
the kingdom of heaven. But I must return unto the Lords speeches, for
reduction of all the holy Ebrewes learning unto the Gospel. One thing here he
was not to stand upon: the Massorites or Ebrew Grammarians diligence for the
Ebrew text. But in two words he confirms all their pains: borowing terms
from them: (...), and (...). Twenty times does the spirit handle the alphabet
order: once in Psalm. 25. But for one Greek copy where the names of the letters
are found, that would not soon be seen, by reason of (...) in other letters.
37.111.112. eight times in 119. once in 145. in Solomon once, six times most
distinctly for the confusion of Judah, in Ieremies Lamentations. Yet all this
while no one letter is named. Belike when Judah came from Babel, and kept their
tongue by schools, not by daily speech, they first used those names. And before
that, Greeks had them: as Sigma or San, old in Herod. And Homers books are
named after the letters. To confirm the Ebrewes the Lord names one of two
kinds. One with a name, Ebrew and Greek (...). In Homer. (...). And (...).
Likewise in the elder Talmud the Ierusalemy jod is handled most famously, and
so fit for this matter, as any thing lightly can be found. Three matters of jod
are handled: the two first somewhat hard to express: one an accusation of
Solomon, expressed in Ebrew by jod: another of more difficulty: the third shall
come after the Ierusalemy. (...)

This speech the Ierusalemy has for jod: Ierusalemy in Cohen Gadol. fol. 20 b.
how it is not a small matter that jod is taken away from Saraj to make Sarah:
which the Greek having not in their tongue, could not so augment, but were
fame to use the augmentation in r, to make Sarra: which poinct the holy Ghost
follows (...) Romans 4 19.9.9. Heb. 11.11. 1. Pet. 3.6.
still in the Greek new Testament, calling therein still to mind, jod rejected.
But when jod taken from Saraj, being the last letter of a woman's name, comes
first to make Jesus, in the son of Nun, jod appears The Ebrews hold it a
law to be straightly observed, as from Gods majesty, that Saraj and Abram should
be no further their names. The Prophets and Apostles keep it.
not contemned, that well might it be a prouerbiall speech: One jod in the Law
will not be found idle. And so we see how he before whom all the earth is like
the dust of a balance, yet descends unto our speeches for the least letter
of all the Ebrew, and unto the name of it, to the countenancing of the Gra^mer
study, as a most learned profession: that the Ebrew and Greek should not be
despised without open contempt of Christ his authority. Now the name of (...)
a prick is rare. Plutarch has the term. None beside of heathen that I
remember. S. Matthew and S. Luke both have it. Though punctum has no quantity,
yet the term here is of great quantity and dignity. The Jews note fifteen
words in the Law with Psalms and Prophets, The Massoreth in Nu. 3.39. does
show which be they.
pricked over the heads, for special deep consideration: and so written from
the first copies: and Ramban prefacing to Moses, declares how all the Ebrewes
honor the warning of weighty matter in them. They call them (...). (...). For
Aethiop. letters I take Greek.
But that term is not used in the Ebrewish of S. Mat. nor in the Syriaque, or
Arabique. Neither be any of all their terms ancient. The Aethiop. is near the
Greek. So that we are to search whether pricks as the fifteen strange: or
other pricks which are vowels or accentes be meant. The (...) pricks only of
marking, and likewise accents are no part of the word. Therefore, I trow, vowel
pricks must needs be meant. Which poinct conteyneth the most exquisite depth
of the Ebrew tongue. And so far does our L. condesce^d to our studies: as to
omit neither Ebrew nor Greek: but takes a touch that authorizeth all the rest.
Now as I made this long digression, of our Lords confirming the covenant, with
descending unto Rabbine studies, I think it not amiss to join Rabbines
hither: not for one jod: but for all the twenty and two letters how often they
are used. Thus the case stands. Rabbi Sadaias learning from the Massorites
how often every letter came in Ebrew: searched for Scriptures which had the
like number: most from Numeri and Ezra: and from such sentences made
Tetrasticon or four verses for memory from those matters: not unto any further
wit for sense. Now he begins his verses with Aleph: where he speaks of
Alephs number: with Beth for the like: and so for every letter: and takes
words whose first letters arithmetique being taken for so many thousands in
the first verse: and in Only the final forms which you see put alone in the
margent, argue that the same in the text must be meant for hundreds as they
mean.
ordinary arithmetique in the second: matcheth the number of the letter. So in
(...)

Aleph in the first tells, that of Aleph he entreats. (...) and (...) being
42 in arithmeticke, and the first letters of their words make here 42000. the
other three first letters (...) make 377 in ordinary Ebrew arithmeticke. So
Aleph is used times 42 377. By this the student may help himself. Only this
warning may withal go, that sometime his textes, which I write in rubrique,
could not afford an exact agreement: but come very near. Now the sonnet of
the Rabbine shall speak.

The certainty of the Ebrew. (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
Here the reader must help the print: where the text of the right colume should
change place with the left.
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
Thus we have a miraculous record for the Scriptures certainty. In explication
somewhat more may be added. Great capital letters are in certain distances: as
Gimel in Hith Gallach: distant 2600 from the great Vau in Leuit. 11. These and
such are known to few. Now whereas 848 margin terms are used: according to
which they read and not according to the text: some (as David Kimchi) thought
that done, as to help a corruption of the text in Captivity. Elias defends
most learnedly the Massorites text against all color of arguments brought
against it from Talmuds or other. And this much for the Ebrew writ, in this
end, as it were, of Daniel. But now I will go on unto his last vision,
expounding the 8. Chapter. The 9 Chapter is the last for time: and so plain
for Christ, that no further exposition could be. The contempt of which note
has caused jews to perish still, and hindered all nations.

CHAP. 10. Daniel has one vision describing Christ the most holy: and an other
of an Angel: who shows unto him in general, the affairs of the Jews
distress under the Persians: And how the Persians are ruled by this Angel,
until the king of Iauan, Alexander the great comes.
When the work of the Temple was hindered. Ezra 4, 14.
third year of Cyrus king of Paras, a speech was revealed unto Daniel, whose
name was called That is: He brast out a fire upon the enemy: even the Chaldean.
By displacing a dumme letter, he makes his name to mean so. See what it was.
Cha. 1, 7.
Belteshazar. And the speech was Ebr. Truth expounding signs. Eb. Zaba: army
by Aben ezra, meaning the wars told here. Time it is by Ralbag. Both fall out
fitly: therefore I thought good to join both.
proper: and the army-like ordered time, great. And he understood the
Contained in cha. 11, and 12.
speech, and had understanding in the Of this that he saw upon Tigris.
vision.

Daniel Because Iudahs enemies had prevailed, to the hindrance of ye Temples
buylding.
was in heaviness three seauens of He puts a distinction, for the seauens
of years, told chap. 9, 24. And for them the translation must be a like:
though, Weeks be the ordinary fit term here.
days.



Called Tigris of Greeks: in notation, Sharp-swift. The Persians chief glory
was in those quarters: and likwyse the Sel^ucianes Throne. And Seleucus Nicator
buylt upon Tigris Seleucia; the most famous town of all, which he buylt.
Hiddekel.



sight of lightnyng, and his eyes like Lamps of fire, and his arms and his
feet like the color of polyshed Brass: and the voice of his words, like the
voice of a multitude.

Daniel only saw the vision, and the men which were with me saw not the
vision* But a great quaking fell upon them, and they fled away to hide them
selves.





The person that next speaks, termed a resemblance in fight as a man, is
thought to be Gabriel, named chapt. 8, 16. at whose co^mying to him Daniel was
frighted, and fell in a slumber on his face to the ground: and was touched by
him, and set upon his feet. who also chap. 9, 25. tells of Christ: as here
again,
Now behold, an hand touched me, and set me upon my knees, and upon the palms
of mine hands.

Daniel, thou gracious man, understand my words, which I speak unto thee:
and stand upright. For now am I sent to thee. And when he had spoken this
speech to me, I stood trembling.

Daniel. For from the first day that thou did set thine heart to
understand, and to chasten thy self before thy God, thy words were heard,
and I am come for thy words.

Paras stood against me. And behold, That is, Archangel. Jude. 9. which term
is hence taken: here Angels are the first princes in comparison with rulers on
the earth: and the captain of their host is the first of this company.
Michael the first of the chief Princes came to help me: and I remained there
by the king of Paras.





Or, my sorrows turned: but the matter tells whether is principally fit,
though both go together.
joints are loosed in me, and I retain no strength.







Even to show what shall befall thy people, as it was told verse. 14.
wherefore I am come unto thee? And now I will return to A 120 years after
this vision, great Alexander set on Asia. Now whereas Cyrus perished in the
Scythian wars, soon after the hinderance of the Temple: and Cambysessone
after by a wound in the thigh* given by himself against his will: and Darius
Hystaspis lived but 43. Y. (in Ctesias) aged about 20. Y. at Tomyris and Cyrus
war, and for Esters sake, had somewhat a longer reign, that Darius her son
(by the Jews) might be of some good years to help Judah, when he reigned in
Xerxes absence, and still after: and Xerxes great army perished, to the
astonishment of all the world: we must in all those affairs, look unto the
Angels speech: and consider the government of God, by the army of heaven for
Judah, termed the Army of heaven. And likewise for the kings that reigned
after Darius, that buylt Jerusalem: that they had somewhat better success: if
we enter into the sanctuary of this vision, we may see what the counsel of God
was touching them: and use heathen stories, for a commentary upon this place.
fight with the Prince of Paras: and when I am A 120 years after this vision,
great Alexander set on Asia. Now whereas Cyrus perished in the Scythian wars,
soon after the hinderance of the Temple: and Cambysessone after by a wound in
the thigh* given by himself against his will: and Darius Hystaspis lived but
43. Y. (in Ctesias) aged about 20. Y. at Tomyris and Cyrus war, and for
Esters sake, had somewhat a longer reign, that Darius her son (by the Jews)
might be of some good years to help Judah, when he reigned in Xerxes absence,
and still after: and Xerxes great army perished, to the astonishment of all the
world: we must in all those affairs, look unto the Angels speech: and
consider the government of God, by the army of heaven for Judah, termed the
Army of heaven. And likewise for the kings that reigned after Darius, that
buylt Jerusalem: that they had somewhat better success: if we enter into the
sanctuary of this vision, we may see what the counsel of God was touching
them: and use heathen stories, for a commentary upon this place.
gone away, the Prince of Iauan comes.

Michael This attribute shows who Michael must needs be holden: not a
created angel: but the only Archangel, and the captain of the host of the
Lord, the son of God, who thought it no robbery to be equal with God. And so
much ye name signifies. Only Christ stands for his church: which all the
world seeks to oppress.
your Prince.

CHAP. 11. Gabriel gives now an exposition of the matters figured by the
Image: great, goodly, and tirrible: by the beasts that came out of the Sea:
and by the other that battered at the river Vlai, in more particular sort, then
the former three expositions of those three visions showed the matter: so that
this is the seventh time, that the same nations are spoken off: thrife
figured, and as often expounded before. This speech teaches of their particular
dealinges, in such playnnes, as the Heathen afterward penned their doings.
He reckons how many kings of Persia shall be soon cut off, or overthrown,
for hindering the work of the Temple. Thence, he passes over to great
Alexander, and gives an abridgement of all his stories: his arising, his fall,
and his houses: of his four principal successors, of the many others lesser
then they, of two the mightiest: whose families should all their time, both,
claim the kingdom of Judah: And he gives an history aforehand of ten
Kings, the ten horns of the fourth Beast: showing in them the rigor of the
iron legs, and iron teeth: how not only they devoured Judah in their taxes,
and other yearly revenues, but trod it more down, by their continual
camping in it, from both their chief kingdoms. And in Antiochus Epiphanes,
the last instrument of wrath against the Holy covenant; he continues a long
speech, as he was chiefly to be looked unto: of his treacherous coming up in
Syria, by poisoning his brother: of his preparing against Egypt (where by the
way Judah felt the beginning of the 2300. days oppression:) of his great
success in his first voyage into Egypt: of the second, with bad success: and
his vehementer rage against the Temple, by his return through Judea: which
rage held three years and an half: of a third voyage, wherein he spoiled
Egypt exceedingly, and returned through Judea to Elymais: and of his death by
the hand of God. All these things are handled of him so particularly, that all
the wise of those days might be confirmed to stand to the truth, seeing
aforehand what should be their event: and all of all ages mark in whom the
last visions of Daniel ended, that the prophecies might draw men unto Christ:
and not beyond him, as the Jews now adays would pervert his sayings, and
turn them in most senseless wise against Christianity, and to their own
eternal ruin. For all this, Heathen stories are for us sure witnesses, of the
Angels meaning.
A repetition of Babels fall.
Darius the Madaj, So that by the Angel the golden head was broken to powder:
by the petition of the watcher, the axe was laid to the root of the tree, and
the Lion plucked, and Balshazar slain: that the Stons power might be known,
and the highest might be seen to sit upon the fiery throne, with books open:
and the hand writing might be perceived to come from God: and Michael to stand
up. We are likewise to regard Christ a gouerner, through al these kings, that
shall reign before the buyldyng up of the Temple. So this angelique oration,
may be unto us as a book of the wars of God: even to call profane writers
to the use of holy stories, and proof of the Gospel, which after these so many
particulers, was in the set time to be showed.
I stood a strength and a fortress unto him.

Of 4. Persian kings, plagued for the Temple.
That is, propriety of the visions of the Image and Beasts: which we may not
expound, but according to the Angels commentary: which stands in matters so
famous, that men out of the Church, will bring us stories most exactly agreeyng
with the Angels words: that our enemies may be good judges
truth. Yet After Darius named before, Cyrus, Artaxasta, or Artaxerxes called
of the Greeks Cambyses: and Achashuerosh, that married Ester, called Darius,
son of Hystaspis. To these three, the Persians gave these attributes: Cyrus
was a father, Cambyses a master, Darius a whorder up. Herodot in Thalia
three kings stand up to Paras: and the Xerxes, that received from Darius
great store, besides the yearly revenues. Aeschylus the Greek poet, in Persis
a tragedy, made upon Xerxes flight, brings in Atossa (that is) Adassa,
talking of this great wealth and how God brought the Persian pride into a net,
to spoil all their riches. So famous God would have every part of the Angels
oration: that the stages in Graecia might hear, how for some angring of God,
that huge camp and that cloud of men, as Themistocles speaks, in Heredot*
was s^attered, beside al hope of men.
fourth shall be far richer then they all: and through his strength by his
riches, he shall Daniel knew without any further telling, what would be the
success, for hinderyng the Temples buyldyng from the fiery throne Chap. 7. and
from the flaming eyes Chap. 10. even that they should feel the discomfiture of
all their strength for that: and have their former kings soon cut off. How
soon they were cut off, Herodotus and Ctesias will conclude that to us. For
Herodotus makes Darius Hystaspis to be aged about 20. years, when Cyrus
prepared wars against Tamyris, and to die, 6. years before Xerxes entering
into Graecia: and by Ctesias he lived but 43. years. So about 30. years after
Cyrus voyage, this story of the Persians fell out: and like the waters of
sharp swift Tigris, the other kings days fled away.

What times of the Persians Gabriel passes over. Soon after Xerxes voyage,
Darius a young king at home, furthereth the Temples work, and acknowledges
the hand of God to have paid Kings and people for their hinderance. Seeing his
20. touches the 49. for buyldyng Jerusalem: as it was showed else where, his
second falls at 32. from the return. That Jews and Gentiles may be found
to agree for one purpose by several occasions. The Temple and religion had no
further hinderance by the Persians: Wherefore the Angel passes over all their
times unto Alexander, years near 100. Ester, Ezra, Nehemiah, Aggai, and
Zachari, show the further dealinges of those years.


stir up all against the kingdom of Iauan.

Of Alexander, and his family.
The belly of brass, the body of the Leopard: and the notable horn, Alexander
the great: with all speed he conquered Asia, and would needs be made a God:
upon the success, that he did what he listed. Of Judea he required, that their
dates should be taken from his reign: and all the Sacrificers sons borne
that year, should be called Alexanders. Into Graecia he sent to be helden a
God of them. And Callisthenes the Philosopher, that dissuaded him from seeking
that honor, was carried about in a cage, in a most opprobrious sort. That made
him to be cut off quickly, and his family to be rooted out, as the Angel
foretells.
king shall stand up, and bear a great dominion, and do as he list.

Arideus his brother, Philips son, was made king in Macedonia: Olympias,
Alexanders mother killed him: Cassander killed her, and poisoned Alexanders two
sons, Hercules and Alexander, Paus. in Boeot. So Alexanders family was rooted
out. He that will see further streams of fire, issuing from Gods throne, upon
all these families, how Cassander and his house fell, and how all the rest,
shall find this most plentifully marked in Greeks, even to every one of his
Macedonian Captains, how all their families perysh, saving two: as God
ordained afflicters of Judah. Diodorus Siculus records much of this, in his
books 18.19.20. Appian, Pausanias, and Polybius parcels. Thus it was. After
Alexanders death, his principal Captains agreed, that Alexanders brother
Arridaeus, should be King, until his sons came to be elder: And Perdiccas
should be Regent: and Seleucus in his office, Master of the Horse: an office
next the highest. And by counsel, the Provinces were thus appointed: Ptolemy,
should have Egypt: Laomedon, Syria: Phylotas, Lycia: Pithon, Media: Eumenes,
Paphlagonia: Antigonus, Pamphylia, Lycia, and great Phrygia: Cassander, Caria,
Meleager, Lydia: Leonnatus, Phrygia upon Hellespontus: Lysimachus, Thrace:
Antipater, Macedonia: other provinces should continue with such as Alexander
had placed in them. Hereupon, rivers of fire flamed from the Throne. Dan 7. and
the spoylers spoil them selves. Perdiccas quickly kills Meleager. Ptolemy
settled in Eg^pt, killed the former incumbent Cleomenes, a friend to Perdiccas.
Perdiccas comes against him with all his power: is soon killed, beyond all
man's expectation. Antipater is then Regent: and the partition altered, and
Antigonus made Bishop (Episcopos) of Asia: and Seleucus Duke of Babylon. After
this, Ptolemy also remoueth Laomedon from Syria (and Judea) and holds it.
Philotas kilde Pithon: he, and Eumenes are kylde by Antigonus. Antipater dyed
by old age: thereupon styrres in Macedonia root out Alexanders house, when
Olympias kilde Arrideus and Cassander, son to Antipater, kilde both
Alexanders children. Antigonus he grew mighty, and dryueth Seleucus to flight,
from Babylon to Egypt: and becomes so great, that in Persia he was holden
void of all controversy, the Lord of Asia: he had robbed Seleucus of Babylon,
and wan Syria from Ptolemy, and subdued unto him self all from Media to
Hellespontus. But Ptolemy recovered much of Syria again. He and Cassander
rulyng Macedonia in his fathers room, and Ptolemy and Seleucus, make now the
four heads of the Leopard, and the four notable HORNS. Lysimachus only of
the small Dukes was least: he also joins against Antigonus. Antigonus the
principal of the four, prepares against them, and dryueth Ptolemies Garrisons
from Syria, and Phoenice or Judea. Ptolemy sends Seleucus to Babylon: who
recouereth his own Country: and Antigonus overcame Ptolemy by sea at Cyprus:
where Demetrius his son is named a King, by the soldiers. Thereupon the rest
also, are, of their soldiers, crowned. At the last, Antigonus is kylde, and
his Countries parted among the four Conquerours. Seleucus obtained Syria, from
Euphratres unto the sea, and high Phrygia: And soon all thence to the river
Indus. Here Judea becomes litigious, in that Ptolemy had it, lost it, wan it,
and lost it again: and at ^he last it falls by a kind of agreement, for the
most part to Seleucus. Lysimachus after this was killed by Seleucus* App. in
Sir. And Cassanders children were all kylde. Paus. So, exactly and properly,
two houses only remain of all Macedonians, that were soldiers with Alexander
to be mighty in the world: the one in Babylon and the North parts, the other
in Egypt. Further matters of these two houses, we may pursue upon occasion
offered from the textes following.
kingdom shall be broken, and shall be divided toward the four winds of the
heaven: and not to his posterity, nor according to his dominion which he bare:
For his kingdom shall be plucked up, and be for others beside those.

Of the two legs, joined to the belly and sides. cha. 2. the two kingdoms
which remained of Alexanders Princes: which make the fourth beast with ten
horns.
Ptolemy Lagides the first HORN.
king of the Egypt, named verse. 8. and 42. and 43. where Edom, Moab, and Ammon,
joined together, help very much to keep the speech certain, of what men it
was to be understood. The countries of Ptolemy Lagides are reckoned by the
Poet Theocritus thus: Eidyl. 17. Egypt, Pheoenice, the Arabias, Syria, Lybia,
Ethiopia, Pamphylia, Cylicia, Lycia, Caria, the Cyclades: the knowledge of this
will help us for some speeches following in this prophet: and for Ezekiels 38.
chapter.
South shall be Daniel should regard his strength principally, how it touches
Judah. And so it fell out. For Ptolemy soon after he held Egypt, invaded
Judea: and took Jerusalem on a Sabbath, pretending frendshyp, and not
hostility. Agatharchides Chius, and Joseph. Antiquit. 12.
strong: and an Seleucus Nicator, or, Conqueror: the second HORN.
other of Alexanders, not Ptolemyes: though some take it so, the whole tenor
of the speech will have it meant of a several kingdom, and not of Pto.
Philadelphus. The Angel speaking to Daniel, knew that he would help him self
by the matter, in all doubtful terms. And as I touched it before, he was to
speak somewhat darkely, for tht Jews safety.
his Princes, who shall be Even touching Judea. For though Ptolemy wan it from
Laomedon, and often recovered it from Antigonus, yet in the last conquest over
Antigonus, it was agreed upon, that Seleucus should hold Syria: as his house
pleads in Polyb. book. 5.
stronger then he, and bear dominion. His dominion shall be the Seleucus had
kingdoms underneath him 72. and was the greatest of all Alexanders
successors. He was so strong, that when upon a time a Bull going to be
sacrificed of Alexander, brake loose, he alone set upon him, and killed him
with his hands, and no other weapon. Whereupon, he bare in his arms Horns.
App. in Syriac. This heathens observation is not unfit to draw men further to
consider: how from his house horns arise, in an other respect. He buylt cities
through his whole kingdom: Sixteen Antiochias, after his fathers name, and
five Laodiceas, after his mothers name: nine after his own, Seleucias: four
after his wives, three Apameas, and one Stratonicea. Now the most famous of
them were the Seleuciae: the one upon the Sea (the myddle Sea) and Seleucia
upon Tig^is, and Laodiciea in Phoenice (or the land of Is^ael) and Antiochia
under mount Libanus, and Apamea of Syria. Other cities he termed by Grecian or
Macedonian cities: or by his own works, or king Alexanders. Wherefore you
shall find in Syria, and further many of Greek, many Macedonian cities names:
Berroea, Edessa, Perinthos, Maronea, Callipolis, Achaia, Pell^, Oropus,
Amphipolis, Arethusa, Astacos, Tegea, Chalcis, Larissa, Herea, Apolonia: and in
^^rthia, S^^^ra, Calliope, Charis, Hecatompolis, Achaia. In the Indian^
Alexandreschata. Some are named by victories of Seleucus himself: Nicephorion
in Mesopotamia* and Nicopolis in that Armenia which is next to Cappadocia. This
heathen catalogue of Towns built by one man, is a condemnation of the
Rabbine^, that will not take notice, what king and kingdom must be meant by the
Angel, in this place* Aben Ezra confesses, that the king Gog is here meant:
and it is their common grant (a^ Kimchi shows in many of the Psalms) that
when the house of Gog is overthrown, the Messiah reigns. Then let us examine
Ezekiel with Daniel. Ezekiel chap. 38. names Gog, Magog, Meshec, Tubal, Gomer,
Togarma: and the North quarters. Paras, Cush and Put, shall join with them.
The Greeks there rightly speak, for Mosoch (as they read it) Tubal and
Thorgam^* that the Nations about Pontus, Cappadocians, Galathians, Iberes and
Armenians, are meant. For in those quarters, those sons of Iaphet left
monumentes in the names of Nations, Mountains, or Rivers: which argue who left
them, with less change in consonantes and vowelles, then Strabo often
complains that he finds in Greek writers for Nations names. So that the
confession of Aben Ezra, and the arguments of many our learned, that Seleucidae
are meant by Gog in Ezekiel, may well be considered here, touching the king of
the North. And specially Gods goodness: how by the state of the time, all the
world might know, when Christ was to come into the world: and be acquainted
with one tongue wherein the Apostles might write. Ezekiel tells that when
Gog, the Seleucidae were overthrown, the Lord would be glorified over all the
earth. Now seeing the Seleucidae were Greeks, and continued their strength by
Greeks officers and armies: as also the Ptolomies: by this means the Greek
tongue spread long before over the west, bare sway also over the East and
South. And when Romans, whose own proper language was Latin, had ouerrun all
those dominions and spoke in all their government a strange language in
Seleueus towns: all might know that Christ was to be borne soon after. And to
this day the Jews hold, that upon Gogs fall, Christ's coming ought to be: as
Kimchi named by me above very often, and Rambam in More Nebuchim. Christians
who make Ezekiel in Gog speak of things to fall out after the coming of
Christ, unto the end of the world, have been a great furtherance of many Jews
eternal destruction: and entang^^ng also much of this Chapter and their own
ruin.
greatest dominion.

Of the mixture of Iron and Clay, how the two parted Kingdom, the two legs;
Dan. 2. joined in man's seed, and Marriages, cleaves together as Iron and Clay:
a daughter of the South king being given to the Northren.
About 70. after Alexa^ders death.
certain years, The Lagidae and the Seleucidae.
they shall be joined together: and the kings Bernice D. to Pt. Philadelphus.
daughter of the South, shall come to the king of the Antiochus Theos, or the
God: who had already a wife called Laodice, by who^ he was poisoned: Berenice,
by her sons kilde with her child and all her train: and Philadelphus soon
after this marriage, dyed.
North to make agreement. But she shall not retain the strength of the arm:
Neither shall he stand and his arm. And she shall be given over, and they that
brought her, and he that begat her, and The states of Asia, Just. 27.
her strengthener, in those days.

Ptol. Euergetes.
impe from her roots shall stand up in his (...) a word not used before.
place and he shall come against the army: and shall come into the force of the
Seleucus Callinicus.
king of the North, and deal against them, and win.

(...) Vnuowelled is either Idols, or else high states That makes Translaters
differ. And the allusion is pleasant: how the Angel comfort Judah, in that
the Idolatrous are as the Idolles with God: And extremely taunteth the
superstition, of Magog or Hierapolis.
states, with their precious vessels of silver and gold, shall he carry into
captivity into The name of Egypt in a story of Alexanders successors, must
needs cut off all controversy, touching the king of the North, and Magog:
that none but Seleucidae can be the men. So that the very name Egypt being
used here, in the story which all Heathen would presently acknowledge to set
forth Ptolemie surnamed Euergetes, that is, Gracious Lord, for spoiling Syria,
and again in the end of the Chapter. verse. 42. and 43. and in an history no
less then a Prophecy of Antiochus Epiphanes king of Syria, spoiling Egypt:
this one term might have kept both Jews and Gentiles, from bringing the
Romans or Turks to be meant here, in these stories, opening properly the
Image, and the Beast. But as we bring the profane Empire into those sayings
which are spoken of Antiochus Epiphanes: So the Jews Raloag and Aben Ezra saw
no reason why the continuers of the Empire, Constantine* and other Christians:
and the Turk might not be brought in: If once men grant that these matters
fall out in the last days: and not as reason required draw unto Christ his
first coming. And because it is evident, that Christ was not to come, until
these matters fell out: upon a false supposit on borrowed from us, they
continue a leprosy of the world. A sufficient preservative against which, the
Angel left one word, even Egypt: using it once, twice, thrice. So one word
spoken in due form, is like Apples of gold, and witty works of silver. Prou.
25.10.
Egypt. And he shall stand, years, above the king of the North.

How Heathen that never knew Daniel record the event of this matter.
THe Heathen for this story, as in my former of Greeks, must be my warrant.
Thus it depends upon the friendship which was betwixt Ptolemie Lagides and
Seleucus Nicator: who Diodorus book 17.18.19.20.
joined help continually, to make them selves strong. Magas, son to Ptolemie
Lagides, brother by mother also unto Pt. Philadelphus married the daughter of
Antiochus Soter, son to Seleucus. He, undertaking wars against his brother
Philadelphus, caused his father in law to break the league, which Seleucus
and Lagides their two fathers made. Thereupon Philadelphus sends forces into
Antiochus countries, Which falls out after the death of Soter, and not long
before the death of Philadelphus.
to busy him at home. This much Pausanias records in Atticis. This breach
wearying both sides, might well force them to seek a new atonement, which here
the Angel tells: and Appiane the profane writer, does record for good
divinity use, in these words in Syriac. After Seleucus, the first successor
was Antiochus, surnamed Soter, that is, a Savior: because he drove the
Brennus from Britanie and France then did war into the East.
French out of Asia: He married his stepmother Stratonice, like to dye for love
of her: the Physician Erasistratus told the father. Which matter is most famous
in many Heathen vvriters: and among them infamous. And 2. Cor. 5. the H. Gh.
seems to call his story into mind. Next, unto him was Antiochus begotten
by that marriage, called of the Milesians Theos, the God, because he did put
down their Tyrant Timark. This God was poisoned by his wife: two he had,
Laodice, and Berenice, the DD. of Ptolemie Philadelphus. Laodice killed him, and
after him Berenice, and an infant of Berenices. In revenge of that, Ptolemie
her brother, being then king, kills Laodice, marches unto Syria, and unto
Babylon: and now first the Parthians rebel, upon the stirs in the kingdom
of the Seleucidae. Deuteronomy. 32. (...)
Thou all might see who is the true God, when the very enemies are sufficient
judges. Foretell events without help, none but God can. Here an Angel from
God foretells matter most fit for the Iron and Clay showed to Nebuchadnezar
68. years ago: and ^n heathen is an indefferent recorder of the event. And we
see then who be the persons which the Angel speaks off, what daughter, of
a father king of Egypt, is married, and to what king of Syria, what success it
had: and who being an impe from her roots reuengeth her death, and inuadeth
the others kingdom: The not marking of this point has postered all libraries
with books giving strength unto Jews and Turks, to make Christians thought
senseless, and condemning their own selves: in far the greatest part of our
own writings. The learned of late see it. The unlearned should not strive. To
the legs of the Image these matters belong.
how they seek by marriages to make agreement: which cleaves together no
better, then Iron and Clay, but that the marier and marie^, dye for it: and the
killers with the killed, pay for their doings. These be most noble examples:
to show the justice of the Judge sitting upon a fiery Throne. He that married
his fathers wife: (which very marriage is most famous and infamous among the
Heathen) first is troubled with wars for his own daughter: that his
incestuous son is driven for peace, to mary unto the disturbance of all his
kingdom: and admitting a title of God, dies not a men, but by poisoning from
his own wife. Of Seleucus Callinicus Iustine vvriteth* and bestows his ^7.
B^oke to be a very fit Commentary for the story of this Prophecy, and for
the justice of Gods judgment. There Seleucus, through Laodices pricking
forward, begins his reign with the death of his stepmother Bernice, and
her child Ptolemy her brother warreth: the Cities in Asia reu^^^. Seleucus
fleate vvra^^: he scant saved his naked bodie^ (...) brother Antiochus banked
for his kingdom, tell robbers killed him: Eumenes was much from him: Ptolemy,
and the French spoiled him: He dyed by a fall off an house: so paying for his
murder* This the Heathen notes.

So the king of the South shall come into the kingdom: and If by sedition at
home he had not been called home: he had easily won all the kingdom of Syria
Just. 27
return into his own land.

Of Antiochus surnamed the Great.6. horn.
Seleucus Ceraunus and Antiochus the Great. Of them Appian Alexandreus wrote
thus. After Theos, Seleucus the son of Theus and Laodice reigns in Syria,
syrnamed Callinicus. After Seleucus, two sons of Seleucus: (either according to
his age) Seleucus and Antiochus. Seleucus being weak and poor, and unable to
rule his army, was poisoned by his friends, and reigned only two years.
Antiochus was syrnamed Megas, or the great: and reigned 37. years. These be
the two kings which here be meant. And an heathen indifferent, eue^ Appia^
shows unto us why the Angel should name the^ in the plural number: and soon
turn ^o the singular. Polybius records to the same effect: Book 4. in these
words. Antiochus was the younger son of Seleucus Callinicus. He upon his
fathers death, when the kingdom came to his brother, at the first led a
private life, in the higher part of the kingdom. Soon after, when his brother
passed over the Mount Taurus with his forces, and was killed by guile, he
obtained the kingdom: being then not past fifteen. Also for the time Polybius
writes thus. About one time Ptolemy left this life by sickness, and Ptolemy
called Philopator succeeded in the kingdom. At the same time Seleucus fitz
Seleucus Callinicus or Pogon departed this life, and Antiochus his brother
succeeded in the kingdom of Assyria. This was by his account about 100. years
after Alexanders death. These be thou are good co^ enters for this, too as for
all the rest.
sons shall war, and gather a multitude of great forces: And the one shall
Antiochus continued voyages and ouerflowed with prosperou^ success. Now he was
restored* a^ the Angel tells Polybius unawares expounds Daniel* Book.5. He
shows how Diodotus Lieutenant to Philopator in Coelesyria, (wherein Judea is)
evil recompensed for good service, agreed with Antiochus to yield unto him the
Cities in Coelesyria. He willingly accepted that hope: and the matter was put
in speedy execution. By the way he wan Seleucus his ance^tour^ strongest hold,
situated betwixt Cilicia and Phoenice, upon the sea that is betwixt Cyprus and
Phoenice, which Euergetes wanne from his father, and Philopator held. Presently
Diodotus sent him word, that he held Ptolemais himself for him, and Tyrus by
one Panaetolus. One Nicolaus from Philopator besieged Diodotus: but Antiochus
camp raised the siege, and wan both Towns well furnished for wars. Then
lesser towns yielded without resistance. When Ptolemy openly betrayed, neither
could, nor sought to help. So Antiochus recovered the most places of Syria and
Phoenice.
continue voyages, and ouerflow and ouer-run, and shall be restored, and shall
war at the others fortress.

Of the great Armies of Antiochus and Ptolemy Philopator.
Polybius records, how Antiochus was put in hazard for all his kingdom
beyond Taurus, by Molon and Alexander two brethren, who despising his young
years, meant to have hold all. Christians must mark, that God will have his
word true besides man's hope. His elder brother Sell. Cerannus was soon
dispatched. But that Gods word may be clear: the other finding his own
mightiest servants rebels: God, beside his hope, does bring them to horrible
killing of themselves, and has his enemies (as Theodotus above named)
mightiest traitors for him: he represseth (being a child) his home enemies: and
also beside hope, prevails by his foreign: so far as God had foretold. But
when so much is accomplished, then as far again beyond man's expectation, God
peyseth the ballaunce to the other side. Ptolemy Philopator fled to Memphis his
chief strength. Agathocles and Sosibius, his chief governors and counselors,
had no better hope of safety, then to seek delay by sending Ambassadors for
peace: and stirred the Rhodians, Byzantians, Cyzicens, and Actolos to do the
same. Whence when they came to both kings, they found opportunity for Ptolemy to
prepare all things needful for wars. Captains of Greeks of best fame, and
of all sor^^^ are obtained. Soldiers from other bands called unto this
service, are daily practiced for all cheualrie: and the Ambassadors from
Antiochus unto Ptolemy are ^n Memphis most gently entertained: but see not what
preparation he makes in Alexandria. Antiochus having obtained the most part of
Syria and Phoenice, had no great care to practice his Army: but thought, that
he should without war have the rest to yield: and that Ptolemy durst never
now hazard his whole estate. In this hope he thought to match Ptolemies
Ambassadors, who came to him unto Seleucia, as much by pretense of justice, as
by strength. Here we may see how the counsel of God is brought about in man's
co^fusio^: that Iudaea should be still vexed, betwixt two kingdoms mighty
North and South: and the legs of Daniels Image bear a proportion from him
which proportioned all the earth.

This particular naming of places near Iudaea may serve to many good purposes,
beside the present argument of showing what special care the gracious goodness
of God had, for to make these matters clear which might allure all the world
unto Christ.


Antiochus said, that his surprising of Seleucia was no injury unto Ptolemie:
because those quarters were won from Antigonus Monophthalmus by Ptolemies help
for Seleucus, not for him self: and that then also Coele Syria by agreement
was granted unto Seleucus, that Ptolemy warred for Seleucus, and not for him
self: and that this was the common grant of all the Kings. When Cassander,
Lysimachus, Seleucus overcame Antigonus, they swear that Coele Syria should
belong to Seleucus. The Ambassador, from Ptolemy spoke for their side, of
great Leage-breach, of Theodotus treason, of Antiochus invasion of Ptolemy
Lagides possessions: saying, that Lagides helped Seleucus upon this condition,
that Seleucus should have Asia, and he should hold Coele Syria and Phoenice to
himself: but after long debuting nothing was concluded: and thereupon
Antiochus prepared to win the rest of Syria. But Gaza is fortified by
Ptolemy. Sundry towns Polybius reckeneth that he conquered: Through he
comes to Berytos, recovering Botrys and Theou Prosopon. He burnt Trieris and
Calamus by the way. Of Sidon he missed: but wanne Philoteria set upon Jordan.
Thence he comes to Atabyrion, (Tabor) on a Mountain fifteen furlongs high,
and surpriseth it. There Hippolochus a Thessalian falls unto him from
Philopator, to his great encouragement, having four hundred horse. Pella,
Camous, Gephron, Abila, Galatis, became also his. And Gadara, one of the
strongest holds there. In Arabia, Tarabata Massana was won by him with much
pains: and thereupon Rabat Aman, where, companies that shrunk unto him, he
sent to keep the quarters of Samaria. All this Polybius records, that we may
look unto the Angels words, how he should prosper, so far as the Angel said:
Make voyages, and ouerflowe, and recover his fathers losses: and come even unto
the fortress of Egygt, to fight with the King of the South, at his own
Fortress at Raphia: Of which town Strabo speaks thus; Beyond Gaza stands
In th'Arab. Geogr. it is called (...): where (...): that is, standing high
after the Arab. is the fittest notation.
Raphia, where the field was fought between Ptolemy the fourth, and Antiochus
the great. Then Rinocolura, Syrbonis, and other parts of Egypt. So famous God
would have the Angels term here of Fortress to be.

Of Ptolemy Philopator, and his Army gotten to be great, against Antiochus the
great: after which victory he is a seventh Horn to Judah.
The Angel uses Daniels term, Cha. 8.7. spoken no elsewhere, showing his
notice, reverence, and love to Daniel.
deal fiercely, and Polybius living with Scipio the noble warrier in this age
records this war, in more particulars, then Penelope saw the description of
the Trojan: where was Simois, where Priamus palace, where Achilles, where
Ulysses tents: and all other affairs. He describes Raphia where they fought:
how it is the next City to Egypt after Rinocolura: and near Gaza. He
reckeneth the chieftaines, of what nation they were: what companies, and what
nations they had under them: of what number, as Ptolemies footmen 70000. Horse
5000. Elephants 73. Antiochus footmen 62000. Horse 6000. Elephants 102. Also he
tells all the fighting: where at the last, beyond all hope, Philopater has a
great victory, and such an hand over Antiochus, that if he could have pursued
with courage, he might have spoiled him of his kingdom. The 12. v. may well
contain the pride of Philopater against God, and destruction of the Jews:
handled Match. 3. And as well may be applied unto the greatness of his
victory, and licentiousness thereupon: which Iustine book 30. does note to
have been the beginning of the decay of his court. Also Polybius notes, that
Cleomenes king of Spar^, being with him a prisoner, seeing his behavior, upon
advantage slew him.
come forth and fight with the other, with the king of the North: and shall set
forth a great multitude, and the other multitude shall be given into his hand.



All these matters may best be handled together: proceeding in one tenor of
victories. We may see here most lively how Iudaea is wasted by the fourth
beast, which has teeth of iron and steely weapons: and how it treads under
foot that which it does not eat. Joseph. Ant. 12.3. touches the most of all
this. How Antiochus wanne Judea: how after Philopaters death, Antiochus
Epiphanes sent Scopas into Syria, who recovered many towns, and by wars
overcame Judea: how Antiochus not long after overcame Scopas, and destroyed a
great part of his army: how the Jews yielded unto him willingly: and help
him to besiege Ptolemies garrisons which held the castle. For all this,
Polybius book 16. is cited of Josephus, that the heathen still may be judges of
Daniel. Also he records the placing of his daughter Cleopatra to Ptolemy
Epiphanes: yielding unto him Coele Syria, Samaria, Judea and Phoenice, in the
name of a dowry. Moreover he records what favor he showed unto the Jews
for their willingness of subjection, and affording victuals unto his army:
how he restored Jerusalem, left almost void of men (so it was wasted by his
armies before, and wars of contrary victors) and how he granted many
immunities for the Citizens and the Priests. All this from the very Decree of
Antiochus. Moreover he touched Lydia and Phrygia reigned by Antiochus: and how
from Mesopotamia and Babylonia he removed thither 2000. families of Jews: as
the most trusty of all his subjects, and fittest to repress all stirs
there that the Lagidae made upon loss of those countries. And for proof of
his narration he brings an whole Epistle of Antiochus written to his General
Zeuxis. That record testifies how many Jews resisted the king of the North.
Now touching them which were carried away by Philopaters allurements, to be
lawless, and to forsake religion, Antiochus Decree granting all Judah their
own laws, contains also in effect the rooting out of the other: and plain
reason would tell that Judah would stir him unto that. Their allurements from
religion is touched. Machab. 3. how the king of Egypt entised Jews unto
Atheism. Appian also in his Syriaques touches much of this: how Antiochus
wanne from Ptolemy, Syria and Cilicia: and came with an exceeding great army:
how he pretended the giving of his daughter in marriage to Ptolemy: and yet
thought to have invaded Egypt: and missing of that hope gave to Ptolemy his
daughter, and Syria in dowry. This much the heathen knew. The Angel tells
even his heart and counsel: that by his daughter he thought to have dispatched
Ptolemy Philometor: and notes his dullness: how when he meant to dispatch the
other, his action tended rather to destroy her. But that she took another
safer course. Also for the Isles, that is Greeks countries, and the beginning
of falling out with the Romans Appian does record that. He names
Hellesponteos, Aeoleas, Jonas, Phocaea, Euboia, Delos, Samos, conquered by him:
and also his going over unto Thrace. And how Smyrnaei with Lampsaceni and
other^ resisting him, sent Ambassadors unto the Roman Proconsul: who debated
the matter with Antiochus, why he should come from Media to Hellespontus with
so great an army: and why he took Syria and Cilicia from Ptolemie: how after
many other Ambassages, nothing toward peace falling out, and Antiochus reigning
over many and mighty nations set upon the sea coasts, and Romans being killed
and captiued in Delos, the Roman wars brake out* and Lucius Scipio the
Consul^s ordained General: The (...) or state here named: To whom the famous
warrior Scipio Africanus the first is joined an assistant. Now Annibal (...),
his adversary, the Carthaginian was with Antiochus: yet that Gods counsel
might stand, he could not rule Antiochus with his best counsels, to have
invaded Italy and have wasted it: as Annibal had done. But in Graecia he
fought, and upon small losses he fled: void of all counsel, leaving strong
holds full of treasure, armor, and victuals whole for the enemy; still
complaining that God was against him: and dealing as one from whom: God had
taken away all judgment. He sought after this peace with great offers: but
liked not of refusal, and fought again, and was put to extreme shame, as the
Angel here does term it. These were the conditions. That he should relinquish
all Europe, and all Asia, unto the Mount, (...), called so (...), by the
greatness, (...). Which name shows the East tongues much alike: through the
East it reached. He might not come further West: besides he should yield up all
his Elephants: and so many ships as he should be commanded: should give twenty
hostages such as the General should prescribe, and for the charges of the
wars forthwith 500. Euboica Talents, and in 12. years twelve hundredth, by
equal yearly portions, and restore all captives. These conditions of shame he
was feign to take. And among the pledges Antiochus his son was one: who,
being of as bad disposition as an Antichrist, starteth hereafter from Rome to
be over the people of God: that we should less marvel, when the like should
arise there again. Appian records these matters for Greeks: Liuie, more at
large for the countries of Latin studies: and Iustine for children: that if we
had applied these stories of Cleopatras marriage in Egypt, and Berenices into
Syria, Assyria, or Babylonia, we might see the legs of Daniels Image
expounded: and when we marked such sedition springing hence that overthrew both
kingdoms, and the chiefest here handled and all written even of heathen, we
might see how sure Daniels words are: who saw, that as iron could not be mixed
with clay, so these affinities of one Macedonian kindred should never hold sure
atonement.
set forth a greater multitude then the former. And at the end of times (that
is, years) he shall come often with a mighty army and great riches.





Heb. hand.
forces.

even as to destroy her. But she will not stand: I mean, she will not be for
him.

So in Genesis 10. the countries of Graecia all about Hellespont, are termed: as
Daniel knew and heathen should not know.
Isles, and take many. But a state shall make his shame rest on him self:
without his own shame he shall pay him again.

The death of Antiochus the great.
Justin. b. 32. shows that Antiochus being pressed by the Romans with an
heavy tribute, either for covetousness or for necessity, as he went to
spoil a temple Dindymei Iouis, he was killed. Strabo an ancienter, speaks
more likely: that going about to rob a temple of Bell in Elam, the nation did
set upon him and killed him. The Angel tells that his ruin should be in his
own land. Now the Angels speech: He shall be no more found: that, touches the
manner of his death: as he was killed by a tumult Barbarian in sacrilege: and
left void of all glory. Thus the sixth horn was broken: as the seventh
Ptolemie Philopator by Cleomenes. Polyb. 5.
shall be overthrown and fall, and be no more found.

Of Seleuc. Philopator, the 9. Horn.
(...). lieu or steed, the Angels term, new, but plain in form.
place, a sender forth of an extortioner: in the honor of the kingdom. But he
shall be broken within few days: yet not in open anger nor in battle.

Of Antiochus Epiphanes the 10. horn, in whom the iron of the Syriaque leg
does end, and on whom the rest of Daniel goes: how he is a little horn, a
plucker away of three before him: of his Seleueus Philopater loved his fathers
steps of Church-robbing. Jason of Cyren abridged by him which wrote the second
of the Machabees, shows how Seleucus would have robbed the Temple of
Jerusalem. Although that book is full of Rabbique tricks, and has some
openly Talmudicall, as making Nehemias to be all one with Zorobabel, the
builder of Altar and Temple, as the Babylonian Talmud does in Sanedrin, and
has many childish flourishes, yet as we use heathen even fables for substance
of a narration, though covered with light stuff: we may cite that author for
so much: hearing from God by heathen what Seleucus would be. His poisoning is
here described: a breaking, not by face to face, not by wars. So close guile,
as poisoning must be the third kind. Appian in Syriaques shows all: thus,
When Antiochus the Great was dead, Seleucus his son succeeded. And he did set
free his brother Antiochus from the Romans hostage, yielding his son
Demetrius in lieu of him. Now when Antiochus returned from hostage, and was
about Athens, Seleucus dies by the treachery of one Heliodorus that was about
him. That Heliodorus usurped the reign: but Eumenes and Attalus remove him:
and settle Antiochus in it, winning that man's favor: being now upon offenses
in suspicion of the Romans. And so Antiochus the son of Antiochus the great
obtained the reign of Syria. He had his syrname Epiphanes, because the
kingdom being catched at by others, he comes to be seen their king. Mark how
the Angel touched all these matters and more.
brother (by Heliodorus slight, though he after would have reigned,) of his
brothers son, and of his sister Cleopatras son: and how he had eyes like a
private man: and a mouth speaking presumptuous things.
Here six years story is comprised: how Antiochus was vile as an hostage and
prisoner, but viler for his manners* called therefore Epimanes, witless, of
Polybius in Athenaeus: in whom his manners are noted to be strange: part of them
shall be here laid down. He would (says Polybius) sometimes steal out of the
Court from his servants, into any part of the city, and be a second or a third
in any company: often found in golddsmithes shops, and a companion with the
common sort, and the basest strangers that came to town: and when he should
perceive any youths minding a drinking together, he would steal upon them,
with his pot and Music: that the most part would for the strangeness leave
the company. Also oftentimes casting off his royal robes, he would walk in a
gown in the courts, craving an office, and taking one by the hand, embracing
another, he would desire them to give him a voice: sometimes that he might be
Steward of the market: sometimes Shiriffe: and obtaining his office he would
sit in an iuorie chair, after the Romans manner, and hear the market bargains
with great sadness: whereby the better sort could not tell what to think of
him: some thought him very simple: some others stark mad. Likewise in his
gifts he was no wiser. He would give some, dise, some, dates, some gold: and
meeting some whom he never saw before, he would bestow upon them unhoped
rewards: in sacrifices and honoring the God, he passed all that have reigned.
The Olympeion of Athens, and the huge image at Delos altar show that. He used
to wash him in the common bathes, full of the basest sorts: and had tankards
of the dearest ointments carried in for him. Where when a certain man said:
Happy are you Kings, which use such sweet sentes: he said nothing then, but on
the morrow, as the other was bathing him self, he came upon him, and caused a
very great pot of the dearest ointment stacte, to be powered on his head, that
all standing by tombled in ointment: and some falling down for the
slipperinesse caused laughter, as did the King him self. What infinite
thousands of pounds he bestowed on a Triumph, having heard of Paulus Aemylius
the Roman General, it would be too long to tell. That fell out when he had
spoiled Egypt, in his last voyage. And this of Polybius will serve, to show
his spoiling nature here touched. How he came by his kingdom, and was able to
ouerflow. Appian above showed that, even by two wealthy kings helps. His
pretense of right was the society made with his brother: who (I think) is here
named the Prince of the covenant, or agreement. To mean it of Ptolemy
Philometor who reigned first six years after him, it may be thought somewhat
harder. The spoiling and robbing of his own country, may well be understood
to be for Attalus and Eumenes armies that made him king against the states
will: who denied him the honor of the kingdoms. He began to reign in. 137 of
the Greeks. 1. Match. Which account must be taken from Alexanders death and not
begin 14 years later: where men imagine, that because then Alexanders family
was utterly rooted out, and the Captains were called first kings, they fixed
their date. For if Claudius Ptolemie say true, that from the first of
Nabonassar 424. Alexander dyed, and the seventh of Philometor is thence 574.
The first of Philometor being at 142. after Alexanders death, his seventh
should be at Antiochus his first, and so he could not be set upon by Antiochus.
This shows what uncertainty heathen have in their supposed exquisite
particulars. And herein Codoman deserves praises for amending the common
error from Greeks: as we expound them. Likewise the Romans records for
Paulus Aemilius go hard, whose triumph falls after Antiochus death by the
former recknings. My partener Beroaldus herein twice followed the common
error, which by the way I was to amend.
stand up a vile person: to whom they shall not give the honor of the
kingdom: but he shall come quietly, and get the kingdom by subtleties.

Seleueus Philopater loved his fathers steps of Church-robbing. Jason of Cyren
abridged by him which wrote the second of the Machabees, shows how Seleucus
would have robbed the Temple of Jerusalem. Although that book is full of
Rabbique tricks, and has some openly Talmudicall, as making Nehemias to be
all one with Zorobabel, the builder of Altar and Temple, as the Babylonian
Talmud does in Sanedrin, and has many childish flourishes, yet as we use
heathen even fables for substance of a narration, though covered with light
stuff: we may cite that author for so much: hearing from God by heathen what
Seleucus would be. His poisoning is here described: a breaking, not by face to
face, not by wars. So close guile, as poisoning must be the third kind.
Appian in Syriaques shows all: thus, When Antiochus the Great was dead,
Seleucus his son succeeded. And he did set free his brother Antiochus from
the Romans hostage, yielding his son Demetrius in lieu of him. Now when
Antiochus returned from hostage, and was about Athens, Seleucus dies by the
treachery of one Heliodorus that was about him. That Heliodorus usurped the
reign: but Eumenes and Attalus remove him: and settle Antiochus in it, winning
that man's favor: being now upon offenses in suspicion of the Romans. And so
Antiochus the son of Antiochus the great obtained the reign of Syria. He had
his syrname Epiphanes, because the kingdom being catched at by others, he
comes to be seen their king. Mark how the Angel touched all these matters and
more.
Prince of the covenant.

overcome with a small people.

this for a good while.

The dealings of Antiochus Epiphanes touching Ptolemie Philometor and Judah:
whence the troubles of Judah. 1. Match. begin.
With Antiochus dealings against Egypt his doings against Iudaea fall out. it
he was to take still in his way. His inuasio^ of Egypt is handled in Liuie
book. 45. How he pretended to help there one brother against the other, (two
Ptolemies they were:) and wan all Egypt but Alexandria, and left it to
the elder brother: But he had a great garrison still at Pelusium. That made the
elder brother suspect him: and thank him but only for a fashion for all his
help: here it is told. The brethren agreed: Antiochus returned with a fleet by
sea, and camp by land into Egypt, and requires Cyprus to be granted him,
with Pelusium and the soil about it. Ptolemie craves the Romans aid: who
then had their fleet near, Popilius is sent with letters from the Roman state
commanding Antiochus to depart from Egypt: the king taking the letters said he
would consult upon an answer: Then Popilius draws a circle about him with his
staff, and bids him consult within that. He was feign to yield, though it
grieved him to the heart. Ptolemie thanketh the Romans as having his kingdom
by their favor: and Antiochus likewese sends to Rome word that they shall in
all things command him. So we see how these legs draw now to be clay like:
and how the little horn has broken once three horns, his brother, his son
Demetrius and his sisters son king of Egypt, whereby the marriages make iron
to be clay.
shall stirre-vp his strength and his heart against the king of the South, with
a great army: and the king of the South shall combat in war with an army
very great and strong: But he shall not stand, because they will cast devises
for him.

(...) used Daniel 1. only and here*
the portion of his meat shall break him: and the other army shall ouerflow,
and many slain shall fall.











The dealing of Antiochus against Iudaea.
I Think it good to touch briefly all Antiochus dealings against Iudaea here
together: which are conteind verse. 28. and from verse. 30. unto verse. 40.
wholy. Thus it stands: at his going to Egypt he dealt with the Jews that
forsake Gods Law: and there begin the days 2300. in the 142. since Alexanders
death. In 143. he returns and deals in open cruelty: then he had further
intelligence with them tha forsake thet holy covenant. This is plentifully
handled in 1. Much. 1. verse. 23. how he polluted and robbed the temple. After
two full years. 145. of the Greeks. Jason a mischievous dealer against the
holy covenant with 1000. men did set upon Jerusalem, and made great slaughter,
sparing none. Now Antiochus returning, from Egypt, and knowing this, thought
that the nation would rebel, and minded to weaken them more. 2. Match. 5.11.
He surprised the holy City, having Menelaus his leader: who most wickedly
forsook the holy covenant: he destroyed 80000. in three days some slain:
some sold: and he charged that no age nor sex should be spared: and such as
fled unto the hous-toppes should be killed cruelly. So young and old, men and
women, boys, gyrles and infants were slain. This the Angel foretold, that
they should fall, by sword, fire, captivity, spoils, and he should not regard
the tenderness of woman. Now touching Antiochus dealings over Religions,
which the Angel terms, against every God, and which phrase S. Paul
translateth: against all that is called God or worship, and how he exalts
himself against the God of Gods: Polybius touches the former, and the books
of Machabees the later. Thus Polybius in Athenaeus vvriteth: (...). In
sacrifices and honors about Gods he surmounted all that ever reigned:
Olympieum in Athens: and the huge Images at Delos altar, argue that. The
profane Polybius might think of his Religions vehemency for the urging,
which was for the Jews, unto it: which must be countenanced with great
charges. And concerning his exalting of him self against God for all the Law,
days 2300. for the temple, Jerusalem, and Gods people with torments and death
three years and an half, the Machabees show that: vvhither, once for all I
refer the reader. There it will appear how he did set his heart against the
holy covenant: how he had intelligence with the forsakers of the holy
covenant, Jason, Menelaus and such which were come to the fullness of sin:
how he by great promises allured to mischief the covenant, and much prevailed:
how he advaunced in honor heathen whom he favored to rule the many in Judah,
and parted the land into a gain, how arms from his polluted the Sanctuary
with banqueting, harlots and Idolatrous sacrifices; and inhibited all Moses
Religion: and required practice of his heathen, and punished the refusers, many
days by sword, flame, captivity, spoil: how the Machabees were helped with
little help: how the teachers by all good example, and giuers of true
knowledge in holy covenant were overthrown: As Eleazar their old Scribe,
with his most grave oration: and the seven brethren, who handled this Angels
oration most divinely: all these matters may thence be fetched. And specially
how he never was moved with the tenderness of women, but tormented them,
against all nations humanity, for their laws: that is often and much
recorded. But touching his own concubines, Tarsenses and Malleotae rebel, (by
Theodoret) for that their towns were given to queanes allowance. Now for the
God of all might, how in his place he honoreth, yea a God he honoreth whom his
fathers knew not, Jupiter Olympius, and causes the forces of the God of all
might to have a strange God, and maintained by Apollonius the author of
abominations, the most loathsome infidels as the loathsome beasts in Leuiticus
and soldiers working desolation: these points all together may be fetched
better from the Machabees then here mixed. The Angel was here to take
special heed that his phrases should be dark for heathen, and clear for them
that knew the Ebrew Prophets style. In opening of them a, speech somewhat long
must come in after their translation.

And the wicked dealers against the covenant he shall make profane by guile:
but the people that know their God shall (...)
lay hold and practice.

And the teachers among the people shall give instruction to many: who shall be
overthrown by sword and by flame, by captivity and by spoil many days.

And when they are overthrown, they shall be helped with a little help: But
many shall join unto them fainedly.

And some of the teachers shall be overthrown, to be tried, and to be purged,
and to be whited, unto the times end. For the set time is (...) Mat. 24 6.5. Is
a most oratorious exposition of the phrase.
yet to come.

And the king shall do what he list: and exalt him self, and magnify himself
above all ( 2 Thessalonians. 2 4. Translateth this better then man's wit would.
that is called) God: and against the God of Gods shall he speak (...). 2. Pet.
2.
swelling things, and prosper until the anger be finished: for a severe
judgment is to be executed.

And unto the Gods of his fathers will he have no regard: likewise unto the
tenderness of women, or unto any God he will have no regard, but will magnify
himself above all.

The Angel to Daniel or Iere. in (...) and (...) is plain, which term is for
God: and not an Idol. Iere. 16.19. He of purpose uses all hard terms? What
could be hard unto a learned Hebrew and who would let enemies know his mind.
almighty: in his place he will honor; yea a God whom his fathers knew not
will he honor, with gold and with silver, and with precious stones and with
iewelles.



Antiochus his third voyage into Egypt: against Ptolemie Philometor.
as chap. 8.^.
push at him: and the king of the North shall come against him like a whirlwind
with charet, and horses and ships many: and shall come through countries, and
flow and pass over.

Ezekiel. 20.
Tzeby land: and many lands shall be overthrown. But these shall be safe from his
hand: Edom and Moab and the chief of the sons of Ammon.





How Antiochus bestowed the spoils of Egypt and of other countries, as
Polybius in Atheneus records, as a witness unto the holy Angel.
I Think good to lay down here Polybius words touching Antiochus, who came
up poorly, and saw his father distressed and his brother likewise, when both
were forced to Church-robbing. The sum is this, that he bestowed infinite
cost upon a triumph to imitate Paulus Aemilius: having gotten the wealth by
spoiling young Philometor, and breaking league with him: by the contributions
of his friends: and by robbing most Churches. Wherein he would manifestly be
above every God. The learned will best like the authors own words: neither
can our tongue so well express them. Thus Athenae^s brings Polybius words.

(...) (...).

This record I hold much worth, seeing it agrees so fitly with the robbing of
Egypt: and also might well be the cause of his necessity (proceeding from
prodigality) to spoil the temple of Persepolis mentioned. 2. Match. 9. The
Romans can not be holde^ any of Daniels four kingdoms.
An old opinion that the Romans are one of the four kingdoms in Daniel, made
men draw them as enemies to Gods people into this oration. They are in the
comers with ships from (...) Moses phrase Number. 24. used here, made Daniel
know by like reuolutio^s: that the Romans here arising should afflict: as these
four kingdoms: and hold on unto the end: and he knew that they should be the
killers of Christ.
Chittun indeed: and therein Daniel remembering Balaa^, knew that hence the
Romans might should increase: to afflict Assure and Eber, whose chief Christ
was, and that they should hold-on unto the end: and specially be the loathsome
infidels which should destroy Jerusalem. But the Romans dealt not against the
holy Jews laws of Religion, which matter here was to be handled: nor meddled
with the Jews till the nation by sedition called for them: and Gods severity
was not to give them comfort touching ill called for, by their own
looseness, but against such as by force continued the vvith-holding of their
kingdom: And no word here will agree with the Romans: unless we dare
make Scripture a nose of wax. The Jews indeed since the days of Methargem
Ierusalemy would have the Romans meant, one of Daniels four kingdoms: and
yet them selves the only nation blessed. Eusebius and other Christians would
draw the Romans in, but would also have heathen Christians to be afflicted
here; So the Angel is made to speak in the clouds, and all gracious Daniel
sealed up, as inexplicable: and the stories drawn beyond Christ, before they
reach near unto him, and Jews hardened, and Christianity weakened, and all
Libraries pestered with errors of infinite confusion. And unless we be
content to rouoke our erroneous notes for the Romans in Daniel. chap. 2.7. and
here, 11. and likewise for Ezekiel. 38. and a little upon Zachary 6. for the
four Monarchies, we shall do our selves great injury: and break the law
which forbids to lay a stumbling block before the blind: and, I fear, be
counted of small conscience in Religion. He that would willingly continue an
error to disturbance of the Bible, is no better affected then those four
beasts that go into the river of burning fire. Herein Printers should
specially show conscience, that their actions continue not error for gain,
after blame just and profitable.

Of Antiochus Parthian war and breaking without hand, chap. 8. and casting into
the fire, chap. 7.
The blasphemer of Christians Cornelius Tacitus, commending this Antiochus,
says, that if he had not been hindered by the Parthian wars, he had drawn
the Jews from their (as the blasphemer spoke) barbarous superstition. As the
testimony of Satan is cited in the Gospel, so may his be hither, for this.
Florus in Liuies abridgement LIX does touch the war of Anthiochus king of
Syria and Phraates the Parthian. But Tacitus comes near the words: To
destroy and sack many. Who the many be, the next verse does show: they that
dwell between seas at holy mount Tzeby. Now Tzeby used verse. 16. and chap.
8.9* in Daniels own phrase, from Ezekiel. 20. was a plain designatio^ of Iudaea.
Moreover the Babylonia^ term of a court Aphadno should argue a Babylonian
king. The term hard to Greeks, and plainest to Jews, and fittest for the
matter, to teach and save them from harm, that here bears a sweet grace in
it. Moreover the phrase planting of the tents of his court is most fit for
Antiochus: who chasing at Judas Machabaeus prosperities, stayed half his army
and his son with Lysias ruler of all from Euphrates unto Egypt: to have
destroyed Jerusalem, and the Jews memory utterly. Now the coming to his end
is plain, that of one man, not of a Roman Aristocratie all must be
understood: and the breaking without hand, touched in chap. 8. is in effect the
same here: where all man's help is removed, and sickness from Gods hand is
closly meant. 1. Match. 3. and 6. the 2. Match. chap. 9, clear this. And now we
are come unto the end of wrath. The Angel touched Babels fall: the Persians
punishment in Xerxes camp, the speedy coming up of Alexander, his pride,
death and rooting out of his house: his four chief: their reduction unto a
couple, their place in North and South: their falling out and seeking agreement
by marriages: and what ten afflicted Judah vehemently: and sets forth the
last so fully that none can doubt who the man should be: and for all this
heathen are good recorders. So Daniels difficulties are opened by him self:
and for Antiochus Epiphanes he writes rather a story then a prophecy.
Observations more, touching the afflictions, for comfort be added, with
explications, but no new Princes matters.
tidings shall trouble him from the East, and from the North: and he shall go
forth with great heat to destroy and sack many.

Eb. (...) a Babylonian term, often used in the Babylonian Talmud. The Greek
kept it (...).
court between seas at holy mount Tzeby: and he shall come to his end, and
none shall help him.

CHAP. 12. A further explication of the afflictions under Antiochus Epiphanes:
and notes upon the whole oration.
The name is in Iud. 9. and Apoo. 12.7.
time shall stand up When Antiochus going to war against Parthia leaves
Lysias behind him, to have rooted out the Jews: then (...) Michael, that is,
he who is in the form of God and holds it no robbery to be equal with God,
even the Angel of the covenant, shall stand in the Jews defense.
Michael the great Prince which stands for the children of thy The term of
Daniels people in this place must needs mean the Jews: and here their
troubles for Religion, not the heathen Christians affliction must be understood.
people: Now it is evident that the holy Jews nation were never tormented for
true Religion through their whole state, but under Antiochus Epiphanes.
Therefore it is clear, that the Angel spoke here of those days. And this one
speech might have kept Daniel in his true meaning, that we should not draw men
beyond Christ, for these troubles stories, before we draw them to him.
and there shall be a time of trouble; such as has not been, since there began a
nation, unto that time and at that time thy The pronouncing of Jews salvation
in troubles and suffering persecution, makes the cause yet plainer, and every
argument here should be reckoned of high price, specially the end of
afflictions, that they bring us unto salvation: through which afflictions, all
must go, who will live godly in Christ, as they are chosen of eternity unto
this state. This term of book, from Moses and book of life, Philip. 4*3.
Apoc. 3 5.13.8.20.15. all these are chained with references of the later unto
the former: and that of Moses is expounded in the verse following, with open,
clear and proper naming of the resurrection: in Moses properly never named,
but taught by strong consequences: as in telling that the earth was cursed,
unable to afford blessedness here: in showing Enochs years and taking away
(into paradise,) as the Arabique translation of Ebrew 11. has for the Greek
(...). Also in Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and Sarah, who being pilgrims and
strangers in Chanaan, without all purpose of returning to Mesopotamia,
professed that they looked for a City whereof God was the builder.

When the Eternal Angel Jehovah, the God of Abraham, Isaak and Jacob
contains in describing of him self the gift of life to those Patriarchs, by
reason that he is the God of the living and not of the dead, the doctrine of
life Eternal is sure: but so taught that profane Epicures cannot reach so far
as to reply once against it. Likewise where God says Deuteronomy. 32. I kill and
quicken, the order of the speech contains the resurrection: and the best
meaning that can be grounded by Religion and propriety upon Gods words, that
is the right meaning. The Ebrewes upon Leuiticus 26. render a great reason why
Moses never names life Eternal, nor death Eternal plainly: but the general
term LIFE signifies the one: and so by death means the other: and for
keeping the law, promises, corn, wine, peace, victories, many children: and
contains not life eternal but under a covering, thus: My tabernacle shall be
amongst you: and I will be your God: Likewise why for breaking the law he
propounds but outward punishments, and with addition: Of his Face being
against them: weighty matter do they bring of Moses counsel. When the law
was given scant any were in the world who believed that God was* and made the
world, and ruled it. Where if open speeches of Eternal state after this world
had been told: their unbelief therein would have kept them from all searching
touching the present world his government, and of God his being and unity.
Therefore by open things he provoke them unto the unvisible closly. The
Prophets did the like, alluring by outward blessings unto the Eternal, and by
outward sorrows, as weeping, gnashing of teeth, fire and brimstone Topheth and
such, betokening Eternal misery. But for the time when the holy Jews were to
lose land and life, then plainly the resurrection is named, even here. In
Chapter the seventh: A kingdom for ever: yea for ever and ever, is named: but
so in phrase that some translaters turned that unto the wicked. One Printer did
amend the fault, which stood by mistaking a little particle Van: But the next
edition wallowed in the former mire. That shows our weakness touching
speeches of Eternal life: when we know not whether the phrases touch the
blessed or the cursed. The speech here expounds the former: And the holy
Ghost in the Epistle to the Ebrewes handles this place most properly, as one
spoken for the comfort of the Jews that lived in Antiochus persecutions*
Ebrewes. 11.35. They were racked, refusing to be set free: that they might
obtain the better resurrection. Who cannot see that the phrase of better
resurrection calls us unto this place?

Moreover the Gospel, has a special relation unto this place. John. 5.21.
The feast (...) was kept (the dedication told. 1. Match. 4.59.) at Jerusalem:
and it was winter: and Jesus walked in the Temple, in the porch of Solomon: and
the Jews compassed him about, and said: how long do thou keep our souls
in doubt, if thou be Christ, tell us plainly. Jesus said unto them: my sheep
here my voice: and I give them life everlasting, and none can take them from my
hand. My Father, who gave them me, is above all: and no man can take them from
my Fathers hand: I and the father am one. Here we see the notation of
Mi-cha-el, one with the Father. Now the giving of life Eternal unto them whom
the father gave him, that is, which are found written in the book: and keeping
them that none can take them out of his hand, these show who is Michael that
stands up for his people: And the attribute of great Prince, as before the
first of the chief Princes, that is, translated by the Saints Paul and Jude,
Archangel. And as the voice of the trumpet is Gods voice (Psalm. 47.6.) where
the Lord ascends with the voice of a trumpet, (so he did at the law giving)
and Christ says John. 5. the dead shall here the voice of the son of God:
all which are in the grave shall here his voice, and they shall go such as have
done good into the resurrection of life, and such as have done evil into the
resurrection of judgment: In like manner S. Paul speaking of the resurrection,
takes his phrases partly hence, and partly from the Psalm and Gospel: 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. The Lord will come down from heaven (...) (that is) with the
voice of Archangel, with the trumpet of God: and the dead shall arise.
Mentioning the resurrection which here in Daniel is most clearly taught, he
could not do better then touch some phrase hence: as translating: The GREAT
PRINCE, by ARCHANGEL. The Jews, who cite Daniel in their Zohar, Talmuds and
Commentaries but seldom, yet cite this of the resurrection very much: as in
Ros he sana, Perck. 1. fol. 14. B. and Sanedrin. Perek. 21. fol. 92. It were an
ambitious labor to quote how often all their other noblest do the same. For
this cause S. Paul speaking of the resurrection, does by a special phrase
call them unto this text of the resurrection, according unto their own manner:
and shows that the Archangel is God, and Lord of the trumpet. But our Lord
does press them more with it, showing himself to be the son of God* John.
5. And using continual speeches that expound this of Michael, and touch the
resurrection, here named.


people shall be saved, all that shall be found written in the book.

The better resurrection and the worse: Eb. 11. to life, and to Judgment,
John. 5.
the many of them John. 11.
that sleep in the Gene. 1.
earth of Gene. 3.
dust, shall Esa. 26.
awake: some to life everlasting, and some to all shame, to Es. 66. vlt. The
Scripture of like phrases teach us to make the force of every word here used.
lothsomnesse everlasting. With the naming of life Eternal, he touches the
glory of it: which here is laid before the eyes in shining terms: a taste
whereof Daniel felt in the glory of the Angel Gabriel that came to him now,
chap. 10. Whose brightness he could not abide: and the description of Christ
was more glorious. Now all that be faithful are told here, that they shall be
like Angels. Our Lord translateth this sentence thus: Then the just shall shine
as the sun, in the kingdom of their father. Here the Angels was to name in
troubles, for the more stay of the people: The wise counselors: and keepers of
the people in the holy covenant: As Mattathias, and Judas that had M. C.B.I. in
his standart, the first letters of (...). Who is like unto thee o Eternal,
among the Gods? Such was Eleazar the old man, and valiant Martyr: such were the
seven brethren and the mother that suffered together: and the holy Ghost does
record their salvation in their hope of the better resurrection, and that they
saw the promise before hand: as they might unto the very hour. But we may not
think that any other faithful be less in glory. A poor trades man who in
small knowledge overcomes Satan, fights as valiant a combat as Daniel, who
has openly the army of heaven to assist him. Now all the just are of
understanding in Gods covenant, learned and wise: and show occasion unto others
of the like: though some are more employed herein and sooner called, and bear
longer the burden: who have the timelier joy. In justice given be Christ equal
to all, we are saved: and thereby every one faithful shall shine as the sun.
This Conclusion is heavenly against the persecutions of Antiochus: and Daniel
might know hence that when our Lord, who is acy in the form of God, came in
the flesh, he would show a taste of his glory, as he showed to Peter, James,
and John upon the mountain, which as he commanded the Disciples not to tell,
until his resurrection, so Daniel hides it from profane enemies, who would
turn all into flowers, or fables: and as hogs rent the holy people, for
casting pearls unto them. Therefore an holy charge follows.


Of keeping close these Prophecies.
The like commandment was given. chap. 8.26. Where Elam and Mada^, and Iauan
were named. Here though they be not named, they are so plainly described, that
any learned heathen would tell rightly what kingdoms must be meant. Now that
the Prophet should not sorrow for closing such profitable matter, he is
comforted: that when these matters out: many will search further to abound in
knowledge: as the Jews in the Machabees are testified to have done. And
Romans too deal with these matters, as Vergil, Aeg. 4. Polybius, Dion
Cassius, Tacitus and many others, and Porphyrie in Eusebius commends the
Jews skill in Prophecy, which doubtless this book gave them: to tell events
for these days.


The (...) and hiding of the mind, which Daniel used.
ANd here I think it not amiss, to show Daniels own practice in style of
sealing up his sense, even where he vvriteth in the common language the Chalde
tongue, following the order of his Chapters. And first of all, Daniel only
mentions the first captivity.
though he only handle the first captivity: yet he would not date it from
the first of Nebuchadnezar: as lothing to have a profane king over Gods people
to bear a date of their thraldom: and taking unto himself, being of Iudahs
kings that honor, of measuring the captivity. So verse. 1. and last of chap.
1. he must be understood, as setting the limits of the 70. years. In chap.
2.1. he wonderfully tells the date from his own standing before the king:
closly comparing himself with Joseph for the like time, and Nebuchadnezar with
Pharaoh. In expounding the Image, when he began with telling how the feet
perish, and comes last unto the head that perished first, this pleased
Nebuchadnezar, as though he should not soon fall. None, without marking an
allusio^ in the Chaldy, can ever know why Daniel should break the native order
of speech: for clay, iron, brass, silver, gold.
In the same speech when he joins iron, brass (...) Chaspa and Caspa, clay
and silver: he shows his care to please the cruel tyrant, and his own
readynesse of wit in the allusion: besides the depth of the natures, that
silver termed Caspa of desire, is but Chaspa, mere dust. And through the whole
matter, his silence touching Judah, and leaving the oppressed by the iron, as
though all nations had felt the iron of the legs, this help his people: and
the ignorance of his closeness made 1500. years error in us. The third and
fourth and fifth Chapters, neither needed nor suffered hiding: therein he fully
sets forth the Babylonian shame, and Gods glory. So in the sixth he dealt
with the Persians. The seventh bears his wit in Five points of great
importance have been mistaken in expounding Daniels 7. chap. The name
Belash-zar: eue^ of Ebrew Printers: the Saints of the high: who they be, who
there hold the kingdom: the speech of the three former beasts: who the fourth
beast means and specially all the speeches which in truth are of Antiochus
Epiphanes.
Belesh-zar, showing that Bell becomes a fire of sorrow from the fiery throne.
Likewise in speaking first of the last beasts ruin: and returning to speak
of the former: and using terms of equivocation, as we yet mistake them: that
the Chaldeans could pick no quarrel. For thus the words might seem to
mean: verse. 12. Concerning the others beasts, they had taken away their
dominion: yet their lives were prolonged for a certain time and season. What
the argument calls for, and how the words will abide another sense, all may
see. Like verse. 18. Vau signifying And, or which, the taking one for the
other, would keep Daniels people from blame: and they might see an exposition
in the Chapter. Therein also his terming of the Jews the Saints of (...)
them the holy Trinity, that contained no danger: yet great wisdom. While
the kings of Judah lived: Iakim, Iackin, Zedekias profane as heathen, God
would show kingdoms over them in no worse sort, then they would vvish to
appear, as in the Image: and then he gave his own people no name: a bad he
might not, a good under those kings he could not: But when Salomons house was
extinct, and our Lords ancestors right comes in, then it was fit that a
name should be given them of the highest approbation. And all this while he
durst adventure to write in the commonest language of East and South: to help
many, and danger none. But chap. 8. where Babels fall is gathered by Elam
arising: and Elam fell by Iauans arising, and the nations be named, and Judah
surely described to any Jew: and he is commanded to close it up: then he not
only dissembled his grief for his people, that should fall from being
stars: but vvriteth in Ebrew, and uses terms that amaze the vnbeedy unto
this day: Palmonie, and Tzeby, amazed the wicked Jews continually. In the
ninth he is vvonderfull: where, while he penneth his own words, he plainly
teaches by his style how ready he was in Moses and the Prophets. When he
penneth the Angels: he makes a cloud white toward Israel, black toward
Egypt. Thence a true Israel may look to our Lords death forward: and turn
unto Moses even by Sabbates iourneys: and thence may see heathen confusion of
stories. In the tenth he hid his mind: not telling wherefore he fasted:
because in Persia, he might not blame the kings hinderance of the Temple: when
his grief is relieved by showing how four kings and Xerxes camp shall soon
fade he knew that Tigris swift waters were a fit resemsemblance of the
speed, and knew that they should be punished for the Temple. By keeping close
his mind, he saved his from danger. Arraxasta that granted leave to go forward
with the temples work does acknowledge closly why Xerxes camp was overthrown.
And any that considered the Jews state might know his counsel. Now touching
Judah under the Seleucide, and Lagidae, and the describing of the legs of
iron, there he hides his mind most vvittily. Daniel might well think that
some heathen would learn Ebrew: and Ebrewes revolt unto heathen, and tell his
secrets, unto the kings spoken off. To prevent that he so fills his speech
with phrases of difficulty, that none but the humble will seek to
understand him. So the pronounes for Seleucus Nicator and his whole
description, will vvearie any slothful: verse. 5. and so phrases of Berenices
case, specially (...), the verb. Likewise in Pt. Here in Daniel is the hardest
text to translate of any that I know.
Euergetes, verse. 9. the transposing of terms deceived the sleepy. And ofter
the term Many signifying the Jews nations many, would entangle many an
enemy. Now in Antiochus Epiphanes matters, he uses many closures. The holy
covenant, for the Religion of Moses: the Sanctuary of Mauz, for, of God: and
Mauzim, all strength that is almighty, in, verse. 38. and 39. the fortes of
Mauzim for the temple of Jerusalem, and sundry particles of difficulty, but
unto a practiced Ebrew in verse. 38. and 39. Also Chaldie terms as (...),
Aphadno, his court, and (...) treasures, with strange Eb. (...) and (...) for
agreement, and (...) for, in his steed, these would vvearie the profane: and
all that count not the kingdom of heaven worthy searching for, Names of
Christ: Palmony. chap. 8. Messiah. chap. 9. Michael. chap. 10. and 12. Also
(...) chap. 3. even by Midras Rab. Stone cut without hands. chap. 2. and one
clothed in white linen etc. chap. 20. and 12. and Prince of the army. chap.
8. Michael there by Aben Ezra.
as an hid treasure. Also Michael the great Prince, named great by an Angel, in
the company of two other Angels, this would disturb the unstayed: who knew
not unto what former person, as Palmony and Messiah, this was to be referred.
The notation would teach such as knew the holy Trinity, who the person was
no less then we are warranted from Apo. 12. and from S. Jude. In the
Apocalypse, where Michael and his Angels fight, Christ and his servants come
in the exposition. In S. Jude the burier of Moseh is Michael, who in Deuteronomy. is
(...) the Eternal. Also the author of this speech, the Lord rebuke thee Satan,
is in Zachary the Eternal, and the Angel of the Eternal: By this we may well
know who Michael must be. And all of stayed judgment will soon acknowledge,
that it cannot stand with the playnnesse which is in Christ, that the Angel
should call Daniel unto any speculation of Archangel, but of the son of God:
nor to teach him to vvade in things which he could not see, to hold any
created Angel our great Prince. Angels are in Esaias of one degree called by the
Argument in handling, The Scripture never reaches of any superiority in
created Angels: but as above earthly Princes.
Seraphim: Burners (of the City and Temple) in Ezekiel Cerubim by Mosehs
term: in whom one sise and measure shows how all are equally ministering
spirits, to be sent on service for such as are to inherit Salvation. As
Palmony in the eight Chapter is expounded the most holy Christ in the ninth:
and none was there above Gabriel but he, so none here may be. And when our
Lord, John. 5. disputes of the resurrection, as a work for the son of God,
therein calling us hither, he expounds closly, who Michael must be. These
points keep Daniel mystical unto all that be not of the Church. As all his
book must needs be hid from them that weigh not, what point of Religion
touching David's throne was now to be opened. But they who know that all Judah
seeing Salomons house at end, would require from God a further explication of
David's son and throne Eternal, spoken by Nathan. 2. Sam. 7. and consider that
Daniel is a Commentary upon that point: that the crown shall be ouerturned,
ouerturned, ouerturned: (as in Ezekiel,) until he comes to whom it
belongs: they who know that, will soon know what Daniel must mean: even
that all his book is but an explication of that doubt: how Salomons house
being extinct, our Lords godly house continues the right: and how all nations
stand up against it: first under Chams broad, of Babel, next under Sems Elam:
all this in the East: and long under Iaphets Westward, that Greek might be
made common for Noah's Prophecy and allusion unto Iaphets name: Bar Kapra in
Ierusalemy: (...) The Rabbis saw by Noah's allusion: that the new Testament was
to be written in Greek.
of persuading in his language to dwell in Sems tents. This being considered,
the whole frame of the holy story will tell how much of the building might
belong to Daniel or any Prophet, for to make up. And this was not he to tell
in his book: but to give closly an answer, unto the close demand of all his
own nation. Little would the heathen have believed him, that the house of
Zorobabel were the high Saints: that Zorobabel should be as a signet in due
time, that mountains should be plain before Zorobabel: and that Zorobabel had
a name teaching by and for whom the Golden Babylonian head should be fanned.
These points would heathen no more regard, then Herod regarded Joseph, the
carpenter: and the Machabees, Jacob, Matthan Eleazar. So we see that Salathiel
and Pedaiah in Babylon, were of no account: and Zorobabel in Judah of small
authority: and Abiud, Eliakim, Azor, Sadok, Eliud, not so much as named in any
place, beside the holy register. The notation of their names compared with
Psalm. 89. would teach what their hope was: and that Psalm brings Aethan
as chiding with God for strange dealing in the promise of the kingdom: so
that a certain Spanish Jew cited by Aben Ezra being at his wits end, would
not read the Psalm. If Judah to this day could not conceive a right the nature
of their kingdom: The Jews to this day look for a pompous kingdom, silly
caytifes.
much less would the heathen have rested in plainness, joyful only for the
world to come: when they believed not that the world was made: nor that the
highest ruled the kingdoms of men. Christ him self speaks in verse. 10. The
wicked will not understand: but the wise will understand. To them it is given
to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven: and to them which are without,
all things are in Parables. For that cause, both a charge is given here to shut
up the words and to seal the book: and in phrases Daniel does the same, and
in all his Method. And as in due time many ran to search, whereby knowledge
likewise increased* So we should search now that our knowledge might increase.

An Angel demaundes how long the wonders of Antiochus dealings shall prevail:
and has an answer from chap. 7.25. that it shall continue three years and an
half. And thereupon the Greeks hand set upon the holy people shall be bruised.
The greatness of these matters here is set forth, by the Angels atte^dance and
desire to look into them: likewise the certainty by the number of witnesses,
two, yea three in all, as among men the law holds that proof sufficient.
That certainty must needs import plainness in the matter. The place at
Tigris was fittest to betoken dealings in time at those quarters: As at Eulai
the River Daniel saw Paras and Madai rise and fall. Upon Tigris Seleucus built
Seleucia. There abouts also this Antiochus after his Church robbing was foiled.
Moreover the notation is very fit. (...) sharp, (...) swift: As these dealings
upon Gods enemies should be sharp and swift. Strabo notes that the Rivers
name is an arrow in the Medes tongue: and so it is by Curtius in the Persian.
And both nations seem to have the same language either wholly or near. The
name and fame of the River is ancient. In Adams Paradise it was one of the
four: that, with it, as the first of Ebrew stories began: so the last in the
Ebrew Prophets should end. God tendereth in all points man's weakness: to
contriue much into a little room, to be easier learned and remembered. There
Babel did set up a Tyranny, at the towers building: and Nemrod of the youngest
house began rebellious dealings. There Elam son of Sem wanne the superiority
from Senear and Nemrod: thence they and two more come against Abraham, and
fall. And as Egypt in Pharaoh after Babel troubled the Church, so in these
dealings they do: that by admonition of place all might be better wayed. Full
many be the like reuolutions for places and times in the Ebrew stories: which
observation will help much. The Angels demand is like John Baptistes of
Christ, for his Disciples surenesse, not for his own doubt. The matter was
showed to Daniel Chapter 7. There comes up in the fourth beast one little
horn, which brake three horns, and had eyes like a humane man, but a mouth
speaking great matters, until thrones of judgment were set up, and for the
great words which the horn spoke, the beast was k^ld, and the body cast into
the fire. There that horn made war with the iholy: until the ancient of
days came, and Judgment was given to the Saints of the holy Trinity, and
the Saints held their kingdom. There the Angel expounds it of one king
that should abase three: which Antioch. did: first to Seleucus, next to
Demetrius, thirdly to Ptol. Philometor. The same should speak words against
the highest, and consume the Saints of the high Trinity, and think to alter
times and law: and touching that point, they should be given into his hand, for
a time, and two times, and half a time. Now the term time put for a year,
was seen chap 4. in Neb. and the Angel could not be ignorant of that: But
whereas all Antiochus dealings against Moses were. 2300. days before the 25 of
Casleu, to distinguish the whole rage from the removing of the sacrifice, that
was to be noted. And those dealings are termed wonders. Seeing the (...)
continual sacrifice was (...), as Christ's death was: the counsel of Christ
in giving that into a Tyrants controlment, and the Sabbath which had been since
Adams time, and his holy servants to be tormented; this was indeed a great
wonder. The reason was rendered, chap. 11.35. and here verse. 10. Christ tells
it in the same terms that the Angel used: only he alters their order, as I
will show when I come unto the verse. The answer follows.
Then I Daniel looked: and behold, two others stood, one on this side the brinke
of the river, and one on the other side the brinke of the river.



(...) a speech of difficulty: to the vnebrewed, but plain by the matter.
The attire here, and the whole persons description chap. 10.5.10.5. shows a
sacrificer holy, and higher then the heavens. Moreover the gesture of standing
upon the waters imports that of the Psalm: how as God calmeth the waters, so
he calmeth the waves of nations. And this vision answers unto Jobs speech:
that God walks upon the high waves of the seas. The metaphors and visions of
the Scripture have a clear resemblance of that which is taught for men's
affairs. Besides, the gesture and oath calls into mind, Deuteronomy. 32. a comfort
even for these times. I kill and make alive, I strike and I make whole: and
none can take away from my hand. When I lift mine hand unto heaven, and say, as
I live for ever, if I whet the blade of my sword, and my hand lay hold on
judgment, I will requite vengeance unto my adversaries, and pay my foes. I will
make drunk my arrows with blood: and my sword shall eat flesh: from blood of
slain and captive: from the head of vengeance upon the enemy. Rejoice o
heathen with his people. For he will revenge the blood of his servants: and pay
vengeance unto his adversaries: and be reconciled unto his people. The words
of Moses begin their execution in this place, and hold on unto the full calling
of the heathen. So the gesture of lifting up the hand and swearing calls all
this unto Daniels mind. The sum of the matter here contains two things:
the rage of Gods enemies, and the punishment. The rage is for three years and
an half. So the term, Time, by synecdoche in Dan. 4. as I told was taken: and
Greeks commonly at this day: call an year a Time, and three years three
(...) times. This time was noted by Josephus in Bell. Iud. 1. (...). That is,
Antiochus syrnamed Epiphanes surprised Jerusalem by force, and held it three
years, and six months, and is cast out of the country by the sons of
Chashmonai, that is: the Machabees. He presently hindered the continual offering,
when his Idolatrous garrisons being abominations through Idolatry, and
desolaters by trade, held the holy temple. Josephus also here handles the
brusing of the hand set upon the holy people, under the casting of Antiochus
out of all the country. The Rabbines commonly note the same: even in the
Babylonian Talmud, and Rambam writes a common place (...), as (...). John. 10.
upon the recovery of the temple. There also the driving out of Antiochus is
handled. The Jews testimony should be strong against them selves and good for
our surenesse, for fame of matter here told. Thus Ra^bam writes in his first
Tome in Megilah and Chanucha Perek 3. Tremellius names his work Talmud. In
the time of the second temple Iauan gave decrees over Israel: and abrogated
their Policy: and suffered them not to study the law and commandments: and
laid hold upon their substance and their daughters: and they went into the
temple: and made breaches, and polluted the clean. And Israel was in great
distress through them, which oppressed greatly, until the God of our fathers
pitied them, and saved them out of the others hand, and delivered them, and the
Chashmonaim (The Machabees) the high Priests killed them, and saved Israel from
their hand: and set up a king of the Prists more then 200. years before the
second desolation. And when Israel prevailed against their enemies, and
destroyed them, it was the 25. of Chasleu, and they entered into the temple,
etc. and for this cause the wise men of that generation ordained that eight
days beginning from the 25. of Chasleu should be celebrated with gladness and
songs: and they kindled candels, in the evening at their houses doors every
night of the eight. And these days are called (...). Dedication, and they
admit no mourning nor fasting: as the days of Purim. Thus the goodness of God
forced them to keep a famous memory of their deliverance from their
persecution. Upon which story, they should look into the Prophecy: which
none can deny to be for a vehement persecution: and common reason would tell
them that the first which fell out in the vehemence here told, must needs be
meant by this. The consideration of this story with the Prophecy, would have
taught them of the person, the teller of the time: the high sacrificer: who
would himself suffer in like sort, three years and an half, all gain saying
of sinners: teaching that which these visions declared. They held their own
kingdom about 150. years in reasonable quietness: but they to whom Christ
gave victories, disdisdained the office of white linen and continual
sacrifice, and would be heathen-like kings, and brought in Saducisme. Yet our
Lord called them much unto consideration of this text. For, his disputations
that he raised up the dead at the later day, his present miracles of the
raising Talitha, his being at the Dedication feast: his speech there that he
was the son of God: his phrase of Lazarus sleeping, taken hence from verse. 2.
his speech with Martha that he is the resurrection: his persuasion, that she
acknowledged him to be the son of God, which was to come into the world: that
is by Daniels phrase the Prince of the people, which honor no created Michael
might usurp: and as I touched, his suffering under the Pharisees a time, two
times and half a time: from the 15. of Tiberius beginning, unto half his
eighteenth, all these dealings still called, unto these matters. And this
matter being twice told should have been easy unto them, specially having so
many antecedents: that nine horns rushed before Antiochus Epiphanes, and he was
a long dealer not only against Syria, but also against Iudaea, before this
time of placing his garrison in Jerusalem comes to be in record. And seeing
thrice here times near half a seven should fall out in strange euentes, they
should look diligently unto our Lords half seven.
clothed in linen which was upon the waters of the river, when he held up his
right hand, and his left hand unto heaven, and swear by him that lives for
ever, that it shall be for a time, times, and an half: and at the finishing of
brusing the hand, that is, upon the holy people all these things shall be
finished.

Daniels demaundes concerning the time when the Jews should begin to recover
their state from the Greeks: with speeches of Christ touching the darkness of
all the oration, and counsel for the afflictions of the godly.
Daniel having heard of affliction for three years and an half, in general
terms, having no note from what special mark the time should begin, was to
confess that he understood not. He knew in chap. 8. that by days 2309. from
Antiochus first checking of Moses law, the temple should be recovered. But knew
not whence this account here should begin. Moreover by reason that the brusing
of the hand plaguing the holy Ebrewes was here joined, and he might well think
that it should not fall out presently with the recovery of the temple, he was
to require a further explication. The Lord does answer, and first acquainteth
him further with the whole matter: showing that as the Angel bad him close up
and seal the words, that pearls should not be cast before hogs, nor holy
things before dogs: so these matters were to be spoken in such sort that
until the age of their execution, the particulars should not be evident. The
trial of the faithful required that: whose practice in martyrdom had not bin
so great, if the season of their deliverance had been clearly told. For they
would have for a time withdrawn the^ selves. Here the repeating of verse. 35.
from chap. 11. of the Angels speech, though there the order went: tried,
purified, whited, this shows one and the same persecution to be meant. And
seeing we expound that of Antiochus times and not of the Romans, this also
being spoken, a confirmation of that must be equally of Antiochus: wherein I
marvel how antiquity could ever miss. The removing of the continual
sacrifice, (...) must be taken for the first removing that could fall. The
term Tamyd, or daily sacrifice must stand in his propre sense. For a trope may
not be used, but where the hearer may easily discern it from propriety:
otherwise the speaker may be charged of untruth. Also the holy people and
Daniels people should argue that the Jews were meant here: and so they hold
universally: and by reason that we carry these stories beyond Christ they do the
like. As Aben Ezra makes the little horn to be the Turk: and locketh for
special affliction three years and an half under him. So men make the word
of God flexible. And we should have taken heed of the warning here: None of
the wicked will understand: But men of skill will understand. Now seeing the
very profane heathen speak that of Antiochus Epiphanes, which agrees exactly
with the end of the last, the 11. chap. and these points are but a commoration
upon them, and no new states matters: the profane would tell us that we
entangle our self wilfully: and wilfully disturb all the Bible, mistaking
whole nations for the Images legs: perverting the marks of marriages in it:
mistaking the fourth beast, what kingdoms it contains, disgracing the speech
of the Buck, openly showing therein the end of wrath, disgracing extremely all
this last oration, drawing likewise Ezekiel for Gog and Magog out of place:
confounding Daniel with the revelation: and confounding the tenor of
narrations for nations through all the Bible. Moses laid down what nation
should be the holy people until Christ came: and how all the other families
should strive against that. The Prophets were to be but commenters upon him, to
lead unto Christ and not beyond him: and they might term no one nation holy
but Israel: and were to show how all the ancient nations of Babels dispersion
would be busy with Israel. While we confound this distinction, we confound
with it all narrations of Scripture. The wise will understand it, to be so. Now
as he that seeks does find, and he that asks receaueth, and he that
knocks obteineth opening, always, so to Daniel this now falls out: By
mentioning one (...) or mark and adding two near matters, touching brusing of
the hand set upon the holy people, he is fully contented and satisfied in these
words.
understood not: then said I, o my Lord when shall be the end of these things?





Infidel garriso^s destroying the temple: as in Rambam above was showed.
loathsome of desolation, days shall be a thousand two hundredth and ninety.

Daniel knew the end of those wonders mentioned by the Angel, when it should
be: from chap. 8. even with the clensing of the temple: But knew not the
special note of their beginning. In answering concerning two points for the
brusing Seleuci^n the (...) or mark of the other is taken: a mark of
sacrifice. Men count the dates of kings reign stately: But God holds other
matters of greater account: as the promise unto Abraham, Gene. 12.430. before
the law: the persecution and Ieroboams idolatry 390. before the Temples flames:
Daniels prayer. 490. before the passion, and chap. 8. a mark backward, the
Temples clensing after. 2300. days dealing against Religion in some sort. So
here, the taking away of the continual sacrifice is made a date for a day of
payment, for a double payment from God. Antiochus was enforced to confirm
Religion restored by Judas in the 148. year of Seleucid^^n, which in the 145.
he hindered. Three years, seven months and some 13. days might be in this
while. Another comfort is added, for the patie^t in these persecutions: eue^
the death of the persecutour. As the martyrs told him that God would pay him.
The closse blessing of the patient imported what kind of comfort was meant in
that sum: forty five days after the other: the death of Antiochus should
fall out in 149. Seleucid^n. 1. Match. 6.16. Though man's observation reaches
not commonly unto days: yet when for the years they speak well, by Gods
authority added, we may gather the just days. And these were the points which
were fit for to be revealed in particulars, the restoring of the sacrifice, and
the tyrants death. Now further matters how the clay of the legs should be
broken, how the fourth beast should do when his horns hence are broken: and
the Buckes vnhorned fading body, even how Demetrius and Antiochus son fall
out: Antiochus race should end: Demetrius house should be divided: they should
match with Egypt, and perish like dogs: these matters might be marked by
humane skill: and they touched not matter worthy particular prophecy: nor the
Jews great care. And Daniel knew in what year from his talk he would come
into the world: by which time an evident token should be over all the world,
that the house of-Seleucid^^n or Gog perished, by the Latin nation and tongue,
reigning in those quarters: and he knew the very nation that should reign,
even the next offspring of Cittim unto the Macedonians, the Cetij, which was the
first name of Italians, in Sudas, in Latin. And therefore the manner of brusing
the Greeks, and particular dealings were to be sealed up, as needing no long
warning. And so the Lord concludes that Daniel should look for no mo
reuelatio^s all his life time: but rest in these, and continue contented with
his rare lot, if any thing was sealed touching the Persian kings payment:
thirty years hence Ezra should see it: and for the temples hinderers, Agge
and Zachary should reveal it. Now the visions of Zachary for our Lords
coming, and Ierusalems fall, they touched not this argument of sorrow and
fasting of Daniel: and some points were to be reserved unto the Temples
ornaments.




The Conclusion.
Thus Daniel had a sufficient Cathechisme for all the world: bringing the
heavens down unto the earth, that the earth might be exalted unto heaven,
Daniel would teach heathen to season their humane stories with divinity.
Strabo knew that Nebuchadnezar was an Hercules and reached unto Spain, and
brought a Colonie unto Pontus: But Daniel was to tell him who gave the Lion
such wings: Diodorus thought the Chaldea^s great Philosophers: but Daniel
tells what deceivers they were: and records their own kings censure: and
how young Ebrewes were found ten times better then they: how corruption and
leasing was their practice: how when the king had forgotten his dream, they
promise an exposition, when he forgot it not, but told them, they could say
nothing: how a matter written from heaven on the wall chap. 5. passed their
skill. Hence Diodorus might have been wised. Likewise Abydenus who records
Nauocodrosors trau^ce, might by Daniel have seen it clearer. And so Herodotus
might have gotten more hearers in Olympia, if to Cyrus surprising of Babel he
could have joined Daniels 5. chap. The same text would have made Xenopho^s
Muses more Attique, showing how in ba^quetting the Chaldea^ king was killed.
Athenaeus with his Berosus and Ctesias for the same feast might see God serve
with sauce. So for Cyrus death Herodotus might have learned the cause: with
learning Daniels fasting. And the writers of Susan, the City of Darius
Hystaspis, made the glory of Persia, might see in Daniels visions chap. 8.
Susans honors confirm his book. Aeschylus and Herodotus might have penned
the one his Tragoedy, the other his story, more plentifully then they did of
Gods stroke in Xerxes fall, if they had looked into Daniel: much they marked,
but might more. Diodorus again with Arrianus, for Alexander might have seen
all told in Daniel. And Diodorus might have marked, from what curse Alexanders
Captains made such a slaughter among the^ selves. Here he might have seen,
why he should say that Ptolemy Lagides came up by help from heaven: and why
Seleucus became soon greatest: and have brought true Prophecies, for that
Pausanias might behold to what use he noted the affinity and league betwixt
Lagidas and Seleucidas: and how Philadelphus name (...) made famous the marriage
beginning betwixt the two legs. Appian and Justin might have made, not
Polybius and Trogus, but Daniel their author: and Polybius in the pleading for
Syria, might have beheld Judah cast as a bone betwixt two dogs. Here Liuy had
for him, by who^ it fell out, that Antiochus came into the West with a camp of
nations scant heard of in Italy, Medes, Cadusians, and such many names strange
in West ears: by who^ Antiochus wanted counsel, that he was soon brought to
loss of almost all: his death in Strabo and Justin, should have bin referred
to Gods counsel in Daniel, and Jason of Siren that noted Church robbing in
Seleucus, should have noted the text in Daniel. And in Antiochus Epiphanes his
coming up into Syria, his 3. voyages into Egypt: his crossing of Ebrewes
laws, his death, his vile nature, Polybius, Liuie Athenaeus, Florus, Appian,
all might know these dealings foretold. Also Tully that termed Iudahs Religion
a Barbarous superstition, and the people a nation borne to bondage, might
guess by Daniel that the judge on the fiery throne, the stander up for
Daniels people, would have his tongue pricked for those speeches. And the same
orator might have guessed by skill in Daniel, why the Romans feared to help
Egypt the clay legs by their feigned Sybilles, was heard by some Jews
counsel, who would tell that when the legs were broken from God, all
assisters of them should be as resisters of God. So Brennus of our nation with
his great camp, was plagued as a resister while the legs were iron, and
Antiochus that drove his company out of Asia, was syrnamed Soteria Savior. And
therein Pausanias might have seen the counsel of God. Again where Vergil
brings in Augustus triumph, over Cleopatra and Antonie, even vltima Bactra,
from East hence, Extremos hominum Morino^, he might have seen how God called
nations from the rising of the sun unto the going down to behold the
breaking of Daniels image: and to think of a child coming from heaven: as
Vergil peruersly heard. By Daniel, not Venus, Neptune, Minerua nor Actius
Apollo should have been the giver of victory, but the God of heaven. Daniel
must needs be holden a stately author, that has all these so much belonging
to him, and the goodliest part of all Vergils wit, that, in Augustus triumph
licking the dust of the toes of Daniels image. Yea and former Roman affairs
of Pompey and Julius Caesar: the one killed in Egypt, for helping the king the
Piper out of the dust: the other for Cleopatra: those duly looked unto, would
justify the fiery throne of Daniel. Yea all the stories of the Romans coming
up, being here yet, not as enemies to Gods holy covenant, but men rewarded for
plaguing the legs, all commenteth upon Daniel. Besides Augustus jest in
Macrobius, how it was better to be Herodes hog then his son: that justifies
the story of persecution at our Lords coming from the clouds to make a
tabernacle among us. Over and besides all this, the speech of wicked Tacitus
against Christ crucified under Pontius Pilate, and of Christian Religion, these
have a good use for Daniel, and all the declaration of the Jews calamities in
the last destruction of Jerusalem, or ever since: written by profane heathen,
all serve Daniel alike. And the matters are so plain that if men would but
grope, they might have found Christ in Daniel: where the pompous of this world
be fanned as chaf: the wicked, as beasts burn in fire unquenched, and the
humble may find justice Eternal, to shine like the sun in the kingdom of
the Father.

Psalm. 119.96. (...)

