The Preface to the Reader.
PLutarche a noble Philosopher, and a diligent Historician, writes in the life
of Demetrius a king of Macedonie, that when an old woman came to him,
beseeching him to hear her speak, and he made answer that he had no leisure,
the woman looking upon him, said to him again with a loud voice: why, have
you no leisure to rule, as a king should? Which words so pierced the kings
heart, and so greatly prevailed in him, that he forthwith gave her audience,
and from that day, none came to him for any matter, but gently, and with all
diligence he did hear them, and discuss their causes. Boysteouslye were these
words spoken of a subject, and not with that reverence that was meet to be
given to a king. Notwithstanding, as Cicero witnesses in the second of his
Tusculanes: Tristis res est dolor, sine dubio, aspera, amara, inimica naturae,
ad patiendum tolerandumque difficilis: Sorrow is a grievous thing, without doubt
sharp, bitter, and an enemy to nature, hard to suffer and forbear. Sorrow
(as I suppose) constreyned the seelye woman to speak as she did, and veras
exprimere voces, and to utter the truth. On the other side consider, not only
the gentle nature of this noble prince, but also his great wisdom, in
considering nothing to be more seemly for a governor, then to hear men's
causes indifferentlye, and to see all wrongs redressed. Nihil (says the same
Plutarche) tam egregium tamque proprium Regis esse videtur, quam iusticiae
opus, Nothing is so excellent and so properlye pertaining to him that is a
magistrate, as justice. I have read that the Tribunes, which were officers
chosen for the defense of the Commons of Rome, had their gates or doors never
shut, neither by day, nor by night, in token that thither might be the recourse
of al them that had need of succor. So ought every gouernoure, whether he be
spiritual or temporal, to be a succor, and as it were a castle and a fortress
to them that be under his tuition. Dion Cassius in his books that he wrote de
principe, amongst other precepts, wills chiefly and above all things, that
whosoever be the head of the people, be a diligent worshipper and follower of
God: next, that he be loving to his subjects, if he will have them to be
faithful to him, and love him as subjects should their prince. For it is not
of likelihood, said Dion, neither does nature permit, but that he that loves,
should be loved, when we see dogs to fawn, and horses to neye to them, of
whom they be cherished. Again, he would have such rulers to call themselves
shepherdes and feeders of men, rather then otherwise. So Homer calls a king
pastorem populi, a shepherde and feeder of the people. And Plato in his
Dialogue called Minos, writes, that Minos and Radamanthus, which gave laws to
ye men of Crete, were the true shepherdes of men, which was not spoken of so
noble a Philosopher without a just cause: for nothing does more nourish,
maintain and uphold a common wealth then law, which, as Tullie in secu^do de
natura deorum says, est recti praeceptio, prauique depulsio, a commander of
that which is good and honest, and an expulser of all that is naught and
dishonest. Now, as a shepherdes care is to see his sheep fed in wholesome
pastures, and to be kept safe from wolves, and al other beasts that would
weary and destroy them: and if any in the flock be infected with any outward
scabbe, or inward malady, to remedy it betime: or if the contagion admit no
help, but is incurable, to have such a one away from the flock, that he hurt
none of them that be whole: Even so must he that will be a shepherde of men,
study for the good ordering and quietness of the multitude, over whom he has
charge, and that all enormities that might disturb a common wealth, whether it
be spiritual or civil, be expelled, and that all faults be redressed with
due correction, using lenity and severity, after as hope or despair of
amendment shall appear. Neither has the name of a shepherde lacked his
pre-eminence at any time. That good Abell, ad cuius munera deus respexit, to
whose gifts and sacrifice God had respect, was a shepherde: Abraham, in whose
seed God promised, that all nations should be blessed, was a shepherde: so
was Isaac his son, and Jacob his nephewe, and his sons also. Moses that
noble captain, and deliverer of God his people, was a shepherde in the land
of Madian. David, of whom S. Steven said, that God gave this testimonye:
Inueni David filium less, virum secundum cor meum, qui faciet omnes voluntates
meas: I have found David the son of Iesse, a man after mine own heart and
mind, which shall do all my will. Act. 13. This noble king David was a
shepherde. These I suppose almighty God would have to be ensamples to all
them that be in authority, for as Paul says: Quaecunque scripta sunt, ad
nostram eruditionem scripta sunt, All things that are written, are written for
our instruction, that as they fed that seely innocent cattle, so should all
Magistrates that profess his sons name, learn to govern the people in the
obedience of his doctrine, that they might be innocents manibus, and puro
cord: nec iurantes in dolo proximo suo, Innocents of their hands, and of a
pure heart, which use no deceit toward their neighbors, but in all their
doings show themselves to be veras oues pascuae Christi, the true sheep of
the pasture of Jesus Christ, who says: Bonus pastor animam suam dat pro
ouibus suis, A good shepherd gives his life for his sheep. Few words, but
full of pith: And never could mo things be spoken more compendiouslye. For
what will he refuse to do? what labor, what travail, what pain will he
forsake, which for yt perfourmance of that he goes about, will not spare his
own life? If a good shepherde sets so great store by his sheep, if he love
them so tenderly, that he will rather lose his life then to see the^ in any
danger, what will he not do else for them? How can it be otherwise, but that
he will see his flock fed in wholesome pastures? how can it be thought, that
he will not tarry with them to keep them from wolves, from dogs that fall to
biting of them, and from other like ravenous beasts? Who would imagine him to
be so negligent, that he will not in the evening bring them home to the cote or
fold? Will he not, trow you, if any be strayed, go seek him out, and bring
him again to his fellows? If any be sick, will he not see him helped with all
diligence? See therefore what a great matter our Savior did comprehend and fold
up, as it were, and knit together in a bundell, all that can be desired in a
good herdesman. O that governors who^ god has put in authority, per quem
reges regnant, by whom kings do reign, who had Peter, if he loved him, to
feed his sheep, who has also constitute under him feeders upon the earth,
some spiritual, some temporal, O, I say, that they would diligently look
upon these words: A good shepherde gives his life for the sheep, and
seriouslye ponder in their mind what a charge is hid in this short sentence,
how many things princeps pastorum, the prince of shepherdes, as Peter calls
him, does require of them whom he has made herdsmen under him, whose duty is
to be good pastors and faithful feeders like to their master. O that they
would call to their mind, that they must at length depart hence, and come where
it shall be said to every one of the^: Read rationem villicationis tuae, Give
account of thy bayliwike, Come forth and show how thou have fed my flock that I
committed to thy hands: Thou Bishop, how haste thou visited thy diocese,
what Parsons, what Vicares haste thou admitted? Thou Archedeacon, how often
haste thou visited and seen every curate to do his duty? how have thou
redressed al enormities and slanders within thy jurisdiction? Thou parson,
thou vicare, thou curate, how have thou fed thy flock with good ensamples of
charity and virtuous living, with keeping of hospitality to thy power, by
preching wholesome doctrine, in reverently ministering my Sacraments? Thou king,
how haste thou ruled thy Realm? What laws laws haste thou made for the
setting forth of my glory, for the extirpation of heresies, for maintenance
of equity, for punishment of wrong, for provision, that things may be sold
at a competent price, that covetous men make no dearth to their condemnation,
when I give plenty? Thou Lord, how haste thou governed under thy prince?
Thou man of woorship, how haste thou endeavored to have quietness kept, and
the princes laws to be obeyed? Thou Justice, how haste thou ministered right
indifferently to all persons? Thou Mayor or head officer in any City or
Town, how haste thou kept thy self clear from perjury? how haste thou
seen good order observed, and al ydlenes and dissolute manners to be banished?
Finally, thou, whatsoever officer or Magistrate thou be, how haste thou
regarded the common wealth, and preferred it before thy private lucre or
commodity? O that these things were considered: for as sure as God lives,
these accomptes will he call upon straytly. None shall escape, Cui multum datur
(as S. Gregory says) multum ab eo quaeretur, He that has much given him,
shall make a great account thereof, and much shall be of him required: And at
that day percase he shall reckon him self most fortunate and happy, that
had least in this world, and least to do. And he peradventure most
unfortunate, that has most to do in this world, unless he order it well,
unless he order it righteously, justly, and ordinately.

Now, good Reader, thou haste heard, that Christ says: Bonus pastor animam
suam dat pro ouibus suis, And to put thee out of doubt who is this good
shepherde, he says: Ego sum pastor bonus, and cognosco oues meas, and
cognoscunt me meae. I am the good shepherde, which will give my life for my
sheep, by my death to purchase the^ life, that as I will rise, and dye no
more, so shall they after their bodily death arise at the last day, never to
dye any more, but to live always with my father and me. I know my sheep, not
all only that they be mine, but I so know them for mine, that I will be their
succor in their tribulations, I will strengthen them in their persecutions, I
will receive them into my joy and glory, I know them, and they know me.
This is then required of the sheep, that they know their shepherde. Three
properties must be in every man or woman that shall have this worthy name to be
called a sheep of Christ. The first property is, that our Savior says,
that his sheep do know him. This knowledge have Christ's sheep of him, that
by his godhead he is their father, by his manhood he is their brother, and by
his benefits he is their loving lord and master. They know it is he, and
none other, that has made their peace with God his father: Ipse enim est pax
nostra, for he is our peace ( Ad Ephesios secundo) he has gotten us forgeuenes
of our sins, he has delivered us out of the bondage of the devil, he has
purchased heaven for us, he is to us Turris fortitudinis, the Tower of our
strength. The second property of Christ's sheep is, to hear their
shepherdes voice, and to give no ear to the voice of any stranger. You will
ask me peradventure, how you should hear him, which although he be verily
and bodily here with us in the Sacrament of the Aultare, yet in his humane
form he is ascended up into heaven, and sits on the right hand of his
father? Whereunto I answer, that we must hear his voice sounding by the
mouth of his Church, which is the very true spouse of Jesus Christ, Quam
sanctificauit, mundans eam lauacro aquae in verbo vitae, whom he has
sanctified and purified with the bath of water in the word of life, vt
exhiberet ipse sibi gloriosam ecclesiam non habentem maculam aut rugam, to make
it a glorious Church to himself without spot or wrinkle ( Ad Ephesios. 5.) If
we hear the church, we hear Christ: for as the holy Bishop and Martyr
Irenaeus writes in the forty Chapter of his third book, Vbi ecclesia, ibi
and spiritus, and vbi spiritus dei, illic ecclesia and omnis gratia, spiritus
autem veritas, where the Church is, there is the spirit of God, and where the
spirit of God is, there is the Church and all grace, and the spirit is
truth. Wherefore as the same godly father writes in ye forty and three
Chapter of his fourth book, we be bound to be obedient to the Prelates of
the Church, his qui successionem habent ab Apostolis, to them that have their
succession from the Apostles. Reliquos vero (says he) qui absistunt a
principali successi-, and quocunque loco colliguntur, suspectos habere quasi
haereticos oportet, As for all other that go away from the principal
succession, we ought to suspect them as heretics. These are Ireneus words in
the place now alleged. And Christ says him self: Qui vos audit, me audit,
He that hears you, hears me. Wherefore, if we will hear Christ, as his
father has commanded us, Ipsum audite, Hear him, Math. 17. then must we
hear the Church. The Church is our most holy Mother, whom we ought to have
in great reverence, and to commit our selves wholly unto her, to hear her,
and, like obedient children, to do what she bids us. What the Church
holds in matters of religion, that must we hold: what the Church
prescribes, it is our duty to follow: what the Church forbids, that are
we bound, under pain of damnation to avoid in any wise. S. John in the fourth
Chapter of his first Epistle bids us be ware, that we believe not every
spirit, but to try the spirits, whether they be of God or not. Then, how can
they be of God, which go from the Church? S. Augustine in the exposition of
this Epistle of S. John, tractatu primo, writes thus: Qui ecclesiam relinquit,
quomodo est in Christo, qui in membris Christi non est? Quomodo est in Christo,
qui in corpore Christi non est? He that leaves the Church, how is he in
Christ, that is not in the members of Christ? how is he in Christ, that is
not in the body of Christ? By the which S. Augustine affirms, that the
Church, which is the spouse of Christ, is also the mystical body of Christ,
and Christ is the head of the Church. As many therefore, as be Christ his
sheep, they hear their shepherdes voice in the Church. They will not hear
the voice of strangers, as of Luther, Oecolampadius, Zuinglius, Calvin, and
like heretics, which for all their gaye words, and crying still, Christ and
the Gospel, may have every one of them, these verses of Persius in his fifte
Satyr worthily spoken to him:

Pelliculam veterem retines, and front politus Astutam vapido seruas sub
pectore vulpem. Thou keep still thine old hyde upon thee, and bearing a
fair face, thou wrappest a wylye fox under thy vaporous breast. These be they,
of whom S. Peter speaks in the second Chapter of his second Epistle:
Magistri mendaces, qui introducunt sectas perditionis, Lying masters, bringing
in sects of perdition, and denying the God that bought them. Howebeit, sithen
it is so, as Paul says, There will be always ravening wolves, Act. 20.
non parcentes gregi, not sparing the flock, And among our own selves will men
arise, speaking perverse things, And such is our frail nature, that as the
witty Horace says: Decipimur specie recti,


We be soon deceived under the color of truth. It behooves us to follow the
counsel of our head and principal master Jesus Christ, which teaches us an
excellent document of heavenly philosophy, saying: Attendite vobis a falsis
Prophetis, Take ye heed to your selves, and beware of false Prophets, which
come unto you, in vestimentis ouium, in sheep clothing, but inwardly they
are Lupi rapaces, Ravening wolves: We must, I say, beware, that we be not
deluded, and under color of Evangelical verity, be made to receive
pernicious and damnable heresies, as alas the more pity, has miserably
chanced to our noble Realm of England, under color of bringing us to truth,
leading us away from the truth, to the utter decay of all godliness, and
setting up of counterfaite religion. The weed has now over grown the corn,
evil, hurtful, and soulequelling weeds of heresy have ouergrowen,
oppressed, pulled down to the ground, and utterly choked the good corn of
christen religion, and all ecclesiastical constitutions. All you therefore
that have been seduced, and taken weeds for wholesome flowers, beware least
with the stenche of such rotten weeds, ye infecte your soul to everlasting
damnation. The infallible truth is daily opened unto you, The falsehood is
mightily convinced, as shall plainelye appear in the Discourse here following.
Stand no more in the defense of that, which you may easily know and see with
your eyes, if ye will not be wilfullye and obstinately blind, to be nothing
but deceit: What do I call it, deceit? nay, I call it a most venomous poison
to the soul, yea, and an hellishe draught of endless death. Play not the
part of a mad man, of whom Horace writes in the second book of his
Epistles, that he was angrye with his friends, for that they had caused him to
be healed of his phrenesie, and restored to his wits again: Be not angrye,
that you may (if you will) be brought out of the foul miste, into the clear
air, from darkness to light, from an horrible phrenesie to godly wisdom.
Follow the wholesome counsel of Saint Paul in the fourth to the Ephesians, Vt
non simus amplius pueri, qui fluctuemus, and circumferamur quouis vento
doctrinae, per versutiam hominum, per astutiam qua nos adoriuntur, vt imponant
nobis, That we be no longer children, and fleet too and fro, carried hither and
thither with every blast of doctrine, by the wilines and craftines of men,
wherewith they set upon us to deceive us. There have been a great many such
sprongen up in our Realm of late, which have taught us wrong Lessons:
Emendemus ergo in melius, Let us amend therefore. The third property is, that
the sheep do follow their Shepherde: This property is of so great
importance, that without it the other two cannot avail. It is not enough to
know Christ to be our refuge, our help and succoure: It is not enough with
that also to hear Christ speaking to us in his Church, except we follow
Christ and his Church, and show our selves willingly to do that which the
Church commands us. We must fast, when the Church commands us, and as
it bids us: We must pray as the Church instructs us, We must do those
good works that the Church teaches us to do. In obeying the Church, we
obey God: if we be disobedient to the Church, we disobeye God. For as
Chrysostom says upon the first Epistle to the Corinthians, vt corpus and
caput vnus est homo, ita vnum est ecclesia and Christus, As the body and the
head is but one man, so is Christ and his Church one thing. Do therefore as
the wise man bids thee, Audi disciplinam patris tui, and ne dimittas legem
matris tuae, Hear the discipline of thy father, and forsake not the law of
thy mother: I mean, thy mother the holy Church, whom as many as forsake,
they forsake God also. For as holy Ciprian writes de simplicate praelatorum:
Habere non potest deum patrem, qui ecclesiam non habet matrem, He can not have
God to be his father, that knows not the Church for his mother. Ye may see
here euidentlye, that this holy man would have us to be obedient unto, and
diligently to keep, the ordinances of our fathers, and not to institute every
day new fashions, as men most unconstant, and full of new fangles. The
Lacedaemonians are praised, that they suffered no strange ware to be brought
into their City, whereby the Citizens might be effeminated and corrupted in
their manners, and for the same cause they extol greatly Licurgus, which made
the same law. Now, if the Lacedaemonians were so serious obseruers of their old
laws and customs, what a shame shall this be to us Christian men (which were
not taught of Licurgus, but of Christ himself) daily to alter and change,
not content with those rites and Ceremonies that were ordained of ancient time
out of memory? Irenaeus teaches in his third book against the heresies of
Valentine, and such other: whose words taken out of his fourth Chapter of the
said book, I will briefly rehearse: Si quae de aliqua modica quaestione
disceptatio esset, nonne oporteret in antiquissimas recurrere ecclesias, in
quibus Apostoli conuersati sunt, and ab eis de praesenti quaestione sumere quod
certum and re liquidum est? If any controversy should be of any question,
were it never so little, must it not be meet to have our recourse unto the
most ancient Churches, in the which the Apostles were conversant, and of them
to receive the plain certainty thereof? It follows, Quid autem si neque
Apostoli quidem Scripturas reliquissent nobis, nonne oportebat ordinem sequi
traditionis, quam tradiderunt his quibus committebant ecclesias? But what if
the Apostles left nothing written of that matter, must we not follow the
tradition of them, to whose governance they committed the Churches? Here have
you the mind of Irenaeus, who was near unto Christ his time: for as S.
Hierome testifyeth in an Epistle to one Theodora, he was Disciple to Papias,
who was S. John the Evangelists scholar. He would have men to be taught of
Christ, of his Apostles and their successors, and not of every one, which
rashelye and without lawful authority takes upon him to be a teacher.
Christen men should be obedient to christen ordinances, and follow that
doctrine that is allowed by them that are lawfully called, and have the censure
of doctrine committed to them. Such were the Apostles, called and put in
authority by Christ. Such were they, to whom these again gave the charge
over any faithful congregation. Such are all they which have so from time to
time been lawfully called by them that have power to put others in authority,
and so succeeded in due order, else, Quomodo praedicabu^t nisi mittantur, How
shall they preach, except they be sent, as it is written in the tenth to the
Romans, and sent by them which have authority to send. Did not S. Paul for
that purpose leave Titus in Crete? Did he not also give Timothy charge to lay
hands to quickelye on no man? To these that be thus lawfullye ordained and
called to have cure and charge of souls, ye are bound to give an ear: by
these ye must be ruled in matters of religion, as obedient children to their
spiriritual fathers. And this bids S. Hierome, writing to Nepotian: Esto
subiectus pontifici tuo, and quasi animae parentem suspice, Be subject to thy
Bishop, and reverence him as thy souls father. The same lesson teaches
Chrysostom in an Homilye, De recipiendo Seueriano, where he begins thus:
Sicuti capiti corpus cohaerere necessarium est, ita ecclesiam sacerdoti, and
principi populum, As it is of necessity, that the body cleave to the head, so
it is likewise of necessity, that the congregation cleave to their Priest and
spiritual ruler, and the people to their prince. And within a few words
after he alleges for the confirmation of this matter the Apostle writing thus
to the Hebrews, in the thirtenth Chapter: Obedite praepositis vestris and
obtemperate eis, quia ipsi peruigilant pro vobis, quasi pro animabus vestris
rationem reddituri, Obey them that have the oversight of you, and do as they
would have you, for they watch for your sakes, as they which shall give
accoumptes for your souls. This obedience does our Savior require of all men,
saying: Qui vos audit, me audit, He that hears you, hears me. This
obedience to Christ's Church has continued throughout all Christendom time
out of mind. And if the authority of the learned and holy fathers ought to
bear swaye and prevail, as of right it ought to do in deed. Arrogantium
enim hominum est, maiorum suorum authoritatem aspernari, and se illis ingenio
vel sapientia anteponere: For it is the manner and property of proud arrogant
persons to contemn the authority of their elders, and to prefer themselves
before themin wit or learning. If the consent of all christen Regions should be
regarded, probabilia (says Aristotle in the first Chapter of the first book
of his Topikes) quae videntur omnibus vel plurimis, Those things are probable,
which all men, or at the least, the most part do judge to be so. If the long
continuance of time must be of importance, In his enim (as witnesses S.
Hilarie upon the hundred and eyghteene psalm) tanquam in coelo verbum dei
permanet, in quibus hoc verbum non offenditur, In the^ does the word of God
abide, among whom that word is not offended. If these three, I say, The
authority of the learned Fathers, The common consent of christian Regions, The
long continuance of time, may be a sufficient testimony for the verity, we
have the true Gospel, and ye true sense of it: Our religion is the very
christian religion, The order of Ceremonies that the Catholic Church does
use, is the right order, Our fasting and praying is according to the
Scriptures, Our Church is the true and lawful spouse of Christ, from the which
as many as separate them selves, they are no sheep of Christ's fold, they are
reprobate persons, they are the children of Beliall, they are ympes of hell.
You know what order your fathers kept, how they lived, and how they believed:
You are not ignorant, how you have been brought up, instructed and trained
in the laws of Christ. Whosoever goes about to infringe or break any part
of that godly order, of that ancient custom and laudable usage, he is an
heretic, an enemy to God, a murderer to man's soul, a disturber of the
common wealth, a subuerter of all honest discipline, and therefore most
unworthy to live among men.

I have heard, read, and seen many things, yet can I not read, hear, or
see any world more contaminate and prove to all kind of vices then this our
age is. And howbeit before our days have been in all times and ages men and
women very vicious and monstrous in their living, yet then virtue was virtue,
and vice was vice: But now in our corrupt time, we have lost the true names
and use of all things, and virtue with us is taken for vice, and contrarily,
vice is coumpted for virtue. They that be studious of modesty, obseruers of
temperancie, and lovers of sobriety, they be now a days called
Pinchepennyes, and such that hunger droppeth out of their noses. If any be
virtuous, and folowers of the Catholic, which is ye true religion, they be
called Phariseys and Papists: The discrete man, he is called an hipocrite, and
the small talker a fool and an ignorant person. On the other side, they that
lead their lives in all kind of ryote, they be called hansome men, men of the
right making, and such as can tell how to keep honest men's company.
Again, the statelyer that one goes, the higher that he looks, and the
stouter and malapertlier that he speaks, the more is he praised among ye
worldlings for a wise man, who will not suffer himself to be ouertroden and
made a laughing stock to every Rascal. With such vain glorious praises be
such proud Thrasoes extolled and magnifyed of the more part, and no small
number are given to flattery, and enhausing of Clawbacks, that never could
that saying of Terence be better verifyed then it is now: Obsequium amicos,
veritas odium parit, To hold up men's yea and their nay, in holding with the
hare, and running with the hounde, gets a man friends, but he that will lay
flattery aside, and tell the plain truth, shall get nothing but hatred. Thus
in these days vice is extolled, and virtue contemned: Ill rule is made of, and
good rule neglected.

O heart dissimuled, which under color to be just and true, can cloak unto
us hypocrisy for devotion, ambition for gentleness, covetousness for
competencie, cruelty for zeal, bold babbling without learning for eloquence,
flourishing, Rhetorike without fruit or reason, follye for gravity, wilines
without wit, and fleshly wanton liberty, for liberty of the Gospel. This is
nothing else but the devils drifte, always covering his poison under some taste
of sugar: Fallit enim vitium specie virtutis and vmbra: For the sum and end
of all their false doctrine, is nothing else but malice with murder, to the
overthrow of Christ's religion, and the true ministers thereof. This is their
sheep clothing, for an unhappy reformation: Nam impia sub dulci melle venena
latent, Under sweet honye is deadly venom hid. O blind ignorance, and
ignorant blindness, O cruel and damnable mischief coming from ye bottomless
pit of hell. O intolerable furiousnes and heresy more detestable then it may
any longer be suffered: The great displeasure, the extreme vengeance, the
cruel plagues of God hang over our heads, if this horrible heresy be not
shortly removed from men's minds. O good God, how long will thou suffer this
intolerable abomination? It shameth me, it abhors me to think, that these
shameless beasts are not ashamed to speak of the most belssed Sacraments
of Christ's Church: who is able to express either by tongue or pen their
wicked abomination? why have we a pleasure to forsake the true understanding
of Gods most sacred word, and become folowers and bondslaues of the devils
cou^terfeite* and deceiptfull expositions, and carnal reasons set out by his
ministers, who in religion are so divided, that now they dream one thing, and
now another: this day they like, to morrow they mislike, and one is against
another of them, even in the highest mystery of Christ his religion. And no
marvel, for the devil is their chief head, whom they serve, and he is full
of lies, variaunce, division, and discord: and under him their Schoolemasters
were Hus, Luther, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Bucer, Melancthon, and the
Archeheretike Calvin, whose heresies are confuted in the Discourse hereafter
ensuing. These with the rest of that rabble did never agree one with another, in
their doings there is no unity, no certainty at all: and therefore such
masters, such scollers come of them. And this division, this inconstancy of
doctrine was a manifest toke^, that they were not the children of our true
mother the catholic Church, nor ministers of of Christ, but the children of
the devil, and ministers of Antichriste, yea, very Antichrists. For whosoever
(says S. Augustine) is gone from the unity of the Catholic Church, he is
become an Antichriste. These Antichrists have borne a great stroke now too
long time in our Realm of England, in who^ is no constancy, no stedfastnes of
religion and doctrine: These are they that have damnably deceued you, and have
with their damnable preachinges intised you from Church to Church, from an
heavenly Church, to a malignant Church: from a loving mother, to a flattering
harlot: from the condition of grace, to the state of perdition: from truth to
falsehood, from faithful believing to carnal reasoning, from saving Christ to
deceauing Antichriste. But (good Reader) beware, be not deceived, and be not
ashamed to arise, that haste so shamefullye fallen, be not ashamed to come home
to your mother the Church, since she is not ashamed to receive you: Let not
follye lose the thing that grace has so preciously offered and purchased: Let
not wilfulnes and blindness put out so great light as is now showed unto thee,
but embrace most humbly the doctrine of our Mother the Catholic Church, so
shall you sit in the lap of so tender a mother, which will cherish you into
life everlasting. Choose ye best, whiles choice lies in lot.

A notable discourse, plainly and truly discussing, who be the right ministers
of the Catholic Church.
The first Chapter
Calvin your Patriarch does lay to our charge a great and an outrageous
boldness, saying (according to his opinion) that we have introduced or taken in
hand the ministry of Jesus Christ, without being called to it by him that
did institute Aaron in the said estate. And because that he himself can
better then I express his complaint or accusation, I think it best to set
forth his own writings, which, according to his disciples opinions, are of
great force and virtue. In his book of Insti. ca. 18. Art. 58.
His words, as you may read, are these. Seeing that the Papists hear S.
Paul say, that no person ought to take upon him, or usurp the name and the
honor of Priesthood, Heb. 5.
but he that is called to it as Aaron was. And that Jesus Christ took it not
upon him self, but did obey the vocation of his father, either they ought to
show, that God is the Author and institutour of their priesthood, or else they
must confess, that they are not called of God, seeing that of their own
boldenes they have taken it in hand.

These are Caluins words, by the which the reader may gather, that Calvin
does enjoin us to render him an accoumpt of our vocation. And although that
it be so, that by the Civil law one ought to try the right of the
possession, L. Si quis ad se ad leg. lul. de nil. publ. etc
before he come to demand it, and the spoil (as we are to him and his
fellows, as touching our Temples and Reuennues in many places) ought to be
restored again before the suit proceed: Yet, releassing this, that the law
does allow us, we are content to answer to his demand: adding this request
thereto that both you that are his disciples, and he, do make ready your
papers to answer us the like as touching yours. But before I proceed in mine
answer (under correction of a man that thinks to have such good eyes) me
seems, that his argument is but very simple: to sai, that of we cannot show,
that God is the Author of our Priesthood, that we should be constrained to
confess, that it is not of God, seeing that without being called, we take it
upon us. For, what reason is there, I pray you, in this? for although it were
so, that of our own private power and authority, without being called, we
should take it upon us, it should not follow by that, that it is not of God.
For by that reason one might say, that GOD was not the author of the
priesthood of Aaron, seeing that Dathan, Number. 16.
Abyron, and Ozias took it upon the^ of their own boldenes: 2. Paral. 26
the which is not true. And as touching this, that he says, that our order of
priesthood is not of God, we will prove that false in some other place, but at
this time we must treat of our vocation, to answer him and his accomplices,
how and by what virtue we exercise our ministry. We are called to this
estate, according to the ordinary way: that is to say, by the right
succession of Bisshops and Pastors, and by the continuance of one Catholic
faith, derived from the Apostles to our days, without the interruption of it
universally: for in diverse places of the world it has been ever clear and
certain, manifestlye shining like the light set on the table, Math. 5.
to give light to all those of the house, and not under the busshell, to be
shadowed with darkness. Ephe. 4.
S. Paul, after that he had recited by order the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, I
mean, of the Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists, he does declare at the last
the cause why they were instituted, being for the edification of the mystical
body of Christ, the which is the Catholic Church, until (says he) that in
the unity of faith we go to meet him. He takes his similitude of many that
come from diverse ways, and meet all in one way. And thus he means, that
the spiritual edification of the Church, ordained of Bishops, Pastors and
Doctors, shall endure, until that the Gospel be preached through all
nations. By the effect of the which Gospel, both French, Spanish, English,
Greek, Persian, Arabian, Latins, and Barbares, with many other nations which
were to tedious to name, have met together, having of great antiquity, all one
kind of Catholic faith by the Apostles and their successors for ever. As the
son of God, before he suffered, did attain and arrive to the perfection of
his age: even so, his mystical body of the Church shall continue in this
world, until it be perfect in his members, and that the number of the chosen
be accomplished. And eue^ as a material building cannot be perfectly achieved
without continuance of workmen and Masons: even so the spiritual building of
the Church cannot be achieved without the succession of Bishops and Pastors,
preaching, or causing the word of God to be preached, which is the very
spiritual building, the which has been ever common and visible in the Church,
according to the prophecy of Esaye. Sap. 61. who meaning to declare the care
that God takes as touching the preservation of his Church, he did say, as it
were representing the state of Jerusalem. I have established and ordained
watchemen upon the walls, the which shall never hold their peace, neither
day nor night. These watchemen are those, that have announced to us our
salvation: They are the trompettes of Jesus Christ, which never have left
their sounding in the true Church of God, from the Apostles time unto this
present day.

The.2. Chapter.
SAint Paul follows this discourse in the fourth Chapter unto the Ephesians,
where as he does declare unto us the fruit that does proceed of this
succession of Pastors, and of the perseverance of the reasonable sheep in one
kind of spiritual doctrine, called the unity of faith. For he says, that
God established this order to that end, that we should not be like light
children, carried away with every blast of false doctrine, through the
subtilitie of men, and their crafty words, full of deceipte. In these words
you do see, how the Apostle does declare unto us the counsel and the
intention of the holy Ghost: I mean, that we should be constant in our
faith, the which is grounded upon the word of God, and interpreted and
declared unto us by the Doctors and Pastors, that successively have continued
in one kind of faith and Catholic religion, from the first time that it was
preached, without turning with every wind, but rather that we ought to stand
firm and stable. Here is to be noted, that when the Apostle does tell, how he
has left us pastors and doctors, to warn us of the subtilitie of false
teachers, he does use a certain greek word very apt for this purpose, the
which has in English the signification, of the playing or cogging at dise.
And even as he that has no great skill, if he play with such a one, he will
soon loose his money, because the other can cast what he will: Even so, if a
simple man, being unlearned, do chance to talk with such a one as can cog,
or (to speak plainly) falsely interpret the Scriptures, he may soon be
deceived: as we see it daily happen to many, that play away and put in
hazard the rest of al their spiritual inheritance, I mean, the faith, which
has been left to them by their fathers, from age to age, since Christ's
time. Thus have the Arrians, the Nestorians, and diverse other heretics
deceived many a man, as I will show more at large hereafter.

The.3. Chapter.
THe place that I have quoted of the Apostle does show, how dangerous a thing
it is to fall into the hands of such Coggers of the scriptures, and likewise
how certain a thing it is, to follow the interpretation of the ancient
Doctors, standing to that, that ever the Catholic Church has taught, and
not to turn at every blast. Upon this matter one Vincentius Lyrinensis, who
flourished above a thousand years agone, Lib. con. haer.
he says thus: If any man perchance demand, saying: Since that the rules
of the Scripture are certain and sufficient of them selves: And what need
have we then of the authority of the Church? He answers: For that (says
he) that the secrets and mysteries of the holy Scriptures are such, that
every man does not understand them, and interpret them after one sort, but
that of one place this man and that man shall seem to mainteyne their
opinions, being clean contrary one to another, so that, look how many men,
so many interpretations: For, one way it is interpreted by Nestorius, another
way by Arrius, another way by Sabellius, and so forth, according to diverse
heresies that have risen from time to time. And therefore it is necessary for
the knowledge of the truth, among so many errors, to draw the right line of
the Prophetical and Apostolical interpretation, according to the rule and
true sense of the Catholic Church.

This is the learned opinion of this ancient father Vincentius Lyrinensis.

The.4. Chapter.
WHose discourse does make me remember the Complaynt that the Soul does make
unto her Spouse JESUS CHRIST, being both represented, Canti. 1.
by Salomo^, and his legitimate spouse. I pray thee (says she) O my dear
friend, tell me in what place thou do lie and rest at noone days, for I
would be very glad and desirous to follow the flocks of thy fellows? The
which is as much to say, as if she meant thus: I see many sheperdes in these
mountains, which have great abundance of sheep, I see those of the Roman
Church, I see Donatistes, I see Nouatians, or, to speak of our time, I see one
flock follow Luther, another flock follow Zuinglius, another follow Calvin,
another the Anabaptists, another the Sacramentaries, and so forth diverse
others, of whom when I demand particulerly, Whose is this flock? they do al
answer me, It is of Christ, and every one says, this is the Catholic
Church, every one does say, that he is his fellow, that is to say, as
touching the guyding of his flock. Now it is not possible, that they do all
teach the truth, considering how they vary among them selves: therefore I do
desire thee to tell me, where thou do rest thy self at noone days? that is
as much to say, teach me, which is the true Catholic Church, which does
celebrate the true mystery of the Cross, which is the place, where thou wast
nailed at noone days, being nailed both hands and feet? Hear now the
answer of Jesus Christ: If thou do not know the place where I rest, O
most beautiful among all women, follow thou the pathe that thy flock has
made before thee, setting thy tabernacle or thy lodge, hard by the tabernacle
of thy Shepherds. If we well note, and understand this answer, it will
learn us that, that shall suffice to keep us from running ever astray. The
sense is this: O thou Christian, which art troubled in thy conscience, not
knowing, because of so many heresies, which way thou shall go, or how thou
shall decerne the true religion from other false doctrine, take my counsel,
the which is, to follow step by step the flock that went before thee. If
that a thousand, or two thousand sheep run over a plain, those that come
afterward, do not they know well the path that is made before them? do not
they discern the way that the first went? Yes surely, although there be no
Sheperd to guide them. And if thou do answer, that this does not suffice,
for I do see diverse paths, I see the pathe of the Caluinistes, the path of
the Lutherans, and the pathe of those of the Roman Church: but yet do not I
know which flock I should chose. To this I answer thus: Canti. 1.
Set thy Tabernacle by the Tabernacle of the Shepherdes, and of thy Pastors, I
mean, that I would have thee to lean to that flock, that can lead thee from
age to age, and from year to year, unto the Cross of Jesus Christ, on the
which he was nailed at noone days: and there it is where thou ought to
quiet thy self and thy conscience. Then to begin: If thou do ask the
Caluinistes, Where is the true faith (the which, as they say, does consiste
in the true preaching of the word of the Lord, and in the administration of
the Sacraments, according to the institution of Jesus Christ) they will
answer: It is at Geneua, the Lutherans will answer, At Wittemberge, and the
Anabaptists will answer at Monasterium: The Vbiquitaries, they will
answer, At Tubinge: and the Trinitaries, At Petricone: and so consequently of
the rest. And then pursue, and ask farther, where it was twentye years agone?
They will say, in the said Cities: but if thou come to demand of them, where
it was a hundred or two hundred years agone, if they are ashamed any thing at
all to lie, they will not answer at all, for there is none of them, that can
deny, but that Luther, who began to preach his new Gospel the year. 1517.
was the first beginner of all these troubles, and the father of all those that
teach this reformed religion. Then is it far from that place, where thy
friend was nailed at middaie, or where he was crucified above. 1500. years
agone, before the new Church was dreampt of. And therefore thou may
easelye perceive, that this flock cannot lead thee to the place that thou
do desire: and consequently, that is not the flock that we should follow.
Then let us com unto the Roman Church, and demand, where was this flock an
hundred years agone? They will answer thee, In France, Spain, England,
Germany, and so over all Christendom. And if thou ask, where it was. 500.
years agone, they will say, In the said places. And a thousand years agone
likewise: and likewise, a thousand and five hundred years agone. This flock
then will not leave thee by the way, as the others do, but it will lead thee
unto the very time of the death and passion of Christ, by continuance of one
doctrine, and by succession of pastors, which Solomon does call the tabernacle
of the Shepherdes: And therefore this is the place where thou must seek thy
Tabernacle, and quiet thy conscience to the end, that thou be not a lost
sheep, and that thou be not ready to turn at every blast of new doctrine,
that our new Coggers of the Scriptures do set forth, to deceive the simple
sheep.

The.5. Chapter.
THe like unto this is confirmed by Vincentius Lyrinensis (of whom we have
spoken before) for he says in the book above named that that person ought to
be esteemed a true Catholic, that has nothing in greater commendation then ye
true religion of the Catholic faith: yea, although it were the wisest man in
the world, and the greatest Philosopher, and the fairest speaker that ever was,
if he came to speak against the old doctrine that has been taught us of our
forefathers, time out of mind, we ought (says he) to disdain that learned
Clarke with all his philosophy and cunning, and to hold our selves to the
ancient opinion of the Church, the which has continued until this present
day. And if that now one should bring a new doctrine, that was not heard of
before, contrary unto that, that has ever ben taught in ye Church, say, yt it
does not apperteine unto the state of the Catholic faith, and that it is no
religion, but a temptation. And therefore, if we will be saved, we ought to live
and dye in that faith that has continued by succession of Pastors, even from
Christ's time unto these days. Lib. 4. contra haeres. cap. 65.
S. Irenaeus a very famous writer, in his fourth book against heresies, the.
65. Chapter, who was within a few years of the Apostles, Archbishop of Lions,
writes the very like, saying that the true faith and the true knowledge of
God, is the doctrine of the Apostles, and the ancient estate of the Church
throughout the world, according to the succession of those Bishops, unto whom
only the Apostles committed the custodye of the Church throughout the world,
the which (says he) is come to us. This said Irenaeus does write in his
third book, and second Chapter, that he and his fellows did withstand the
Valentinians and the Marcionistes, which were great heretics, by the
traditions of the Apostles, that is to say, the doctrine not written, but
receued from age to age of the Apostles, and so continued till their time. He
says likewise: unto the Traditions which are of the Apostles, and that by
succession of pastors have been used in the Church, we do persuade and provoke
those that speak against Traditions. He writes as much more in the third
Chapter of the said book: Forasmuch (says he) as it were to tedious to set
forth in one book the Successors of all the Churches, and to tell them one by
one, we do overthrow those, that for vain glory do seek to gather
disciples together, teaching them contrary to that that does apperteyn unto the
Traditions of the Apostles, the which we do show to them by the said
Traditions, and by the faith that has been taught and is come to us by
succession of the Bishops of the great and ancient Church of Rome, the which
was founded by the two glorious Martyrs and Apostles, S. Peter and S. Paul.
These are his words in his third book aduersus haereses, the fyfth Chapter.
And at the beginning of the said Chapter he says thus: All those that will
understand the truth, may presently regard the traditions of the Apostles,
which are manifest throughout the world, and we cannot coumpt the number of
those that have been instituted and ordained Bishops in the Church, and their
Successoures till our days, which have neither known nor taught any thing
like unto the fables and tales that these do preach unto us. etc. Not without
cause we may now a days say the like of the Lutherans, Caluinistes, and
other sects of our time. After this he does set forth all the Popes of Rome,
from S. Peter unto Eleutherius, which was Pope in his time. And he did affirm,
that that number did suffice to prove, that the doctrine of Marcian and
Valentinian was false and very hurtful, because that it was unknown, or at
the least not received or approved by the Church, being under the governance
of any of those Popes. Then with greater reason ought prescriptio^ to take
place against a new doctrine, which has been unknown this 1500. years, or at
the least, if any body sought to publishe it, he was condemned as a false
pernicious heretic

The.6. Chapter.
S. Augustine in his Epistle. 365. about the like matter, does set forth all
the Popes by order, which have been from S. Peter's time until Anastasius, which
was pope in his time, and by his continual succession he does prove, that the
doctrine of ye Donatists is heretical, because that none of those popes which
he did recite, nor no part of the Church did receive it. I pray you, may not
we say the like by the Caluinistes and other heretics. The said S. Augustine
in the Epistle that he does call Epistola fundamenti. Cap. 4. does write the
reasons that did keep him under the obedience of the Catholic Roman Church.
And among other, he does allege the common consent of all nations, and the
continual succession of Bishops. And in his book which he made against the
adversary of the old and new law, he does name the succession of the
bishops, as most certain to answer to that that we said before of S. Paul:
Ephe. 1.
I mean, yt he would not have us to be wavering and doubtful in our doctrine,
but yt we should be firm and stable, ye which stablenes is obtained by the
knowledge and intelligence of the Scriptures, according to the traditions of
the Church, and the succession of the Apostles and Bishops. The Church
(says S. Augustine) from the Apostles time has continued through the
certain succession of the Bishops, until our days.

The.7. Chapter.
YOu do study as much as you can, to reject our succession, and not
without cause, knowing that this only does suffice to overthrow all the
heresies of those new reformed Gospellers. Calvin, as the most apparent, does
seek to prove that our reason is of no force, because that the Greeks have
had ever succession of Pastors, and yet we do not hold them as Catholics.
But if the Reader do well note that, that we have already said, he shall
find the answer unto this objection, I mean, because that the Greeks have
not had succession and continuance of doctrine, called unity of faith by the
Apostles, the which ought ever to be joined to the continuance of the Pastors,
to show the true recognisaunce of the Catholic religion. There is none that
do study and read of those matters, but that do know the unconstant faith of
the Greeks, as touching the proceeding of the holy ghost: the which error
they had abiured at the last Council of Florence, and yet notwithstanding they
did turn to it again, besides diverse other light things, to speak
moderatelye, which are not approved by their ancient fathers, S. John
Chrysostom, S. Cirill, S. Basil, and Athanasius, nor yet by our adversaries at
this present time. The which errors I have no need to set forth in this
book: for my intent is but to speak of that, that pricks us at hand,
because of ill neighborhood. Some do allege unto us the negligence of our
pastors, and their ill lives, for ye which cause they say, that the mentioned
succession cannot take place. But this argument is of no force: For although
that the careless lives of some Bisshops and ecclesiastical persons have been
so great and so hurtful unto the blud of our Savior Christ (I mean, to the
souls bought with it) yet notwithstanding that, the Church has not lost the
succession and continuance of one doctrine, as touching the administration of
the Sacraments by those that were deputed by the Bisshops. If one should see a
Prelate doing nothing, and his lieftenant doing all, which of those two would
you take to be Bishop? they have both divided their charges: the one receueth
the profit, the other takes all the pain. If they be both content, what loss
do you feel? he that has any interest, let him valewe the damage. And
although that the negligence of the Bishop be not excusable before God with the
diligence of the deputy, nor his conscience clear, yet this ought to suffice,
that though his faults be through negligence, or through evil living, yet that
ought not to perturbe the assurance of our doctrine, the which we have taught
us by the word of God, interpreted by the true doctors, that have been before
us, agreing in unity of faith, as I have alredie said: For neither the
naughtines of Achas, Number. 1. nor of Ioram, nor of diverse other great sinners,
which are enrolled in the book of the generation of Jesus Christ, were not
able to withstand the fulfilling of the promise of God made to Abraham, that
is to sai, that he would be borne of this line: Even so, the ill lives and
conversation of diverse wicked Popes, that have followed after Saint Peter, have
never been able to move Christ to break his promise, that is to say, that
the faith of his Church should never fail, Math. 16. and that the gates of
hell, (that is to say) of infidelity, which are the ports of damnation,
should never prevail against it. Esa. 58. Our adversaries therefore, that take
such great pains to set forth in golden legends the lives of the wicked popes
that have been since S. Peter's time, thinking thereby to overthrow the
succession of the Catholic ecclesiastical faith, do no less offend God,
then if they should go about to prove the promise of God made to the
Patriarchs to be vain, because of the evil lives of their successors.
Therefore those that do reproach unto us now, that the popes of our days are
not altogether so holy as S. Peter, we do confess it. But they cannot deny, or
they will confess unto us, that ye above named evil kings, Achaz, Ioram,
Manasses, Amon, Iechonias, and others did lead no such holy lives, as
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, or David: and yet notwithstanding those evil kings
have been set forth in the generation of our Savior, as the Fathers of the
just Jesus Christ. Let them judge the^ that have any wit, whether this be a
great folly or no, to see how these crafty Coggers of the Scriptures should
make many simple persons refuse to be the Popes spiritual children, because
they were sinners, seeking thereby to overthrow all the ancient customs of
the Church.

The.8. Chapter.
Upon Moses Chair there sits (says our Savior Christ) who? not the
godliest men of the world, but the Scribes and Pharisees: Do that they say,
but not that that they do. But if our new Gospellers had been in those
days, they would have told Christ, that his commandment was not to be
observed, because the lives of Anna and Cayphas were not correspondent unto
those of Moses and Aaron: for the first came to the vocation of priesthood,
being called of God: but the last attained to it by the vocation of their
purses, and yet notwithstanding, rather then our Savior would break this
harmony of the mystical body of the Church, he was not only content to
permit, that Caiphas should execute his office (although he was unworthy, as
one that came to it by Simony) but rather he did confirm his Pontificate with
the gift of the spirit of prophesying, with the which he was as fullye
inspired as ever was David, Esaias, or any of ye rest, and al to teach us that,
that I have already said: I mean, that the Ecclesiastical order, and the
administration of the Sacraments, do not consist in the good or evil lives
of the Pastors, but only of God and of his word, interpreted by them. As
touching that that appertains to our health, God has no regard to the life
of the magistrate temporal or ecclesiastical: for he can as well serve him with
an evil person to do good to the common wealth, as of a good, as the godly
prophecies of the wicked Balaam do well witness. Number. 24. And here is to be
noted, that when we talk of the succession of Bishops, and of the doctrine
continuing in the Church, we do not mean only to talk of the Popes, but of
all the Bishops and other having Ecclesiastical charges, not only at Rome,
but through all other places, where the true preaching, and right
administration of the Sacraments be used. And therefore you do pretend in
vain, to prove, that the above mentioned succession has been interrupted by
the dissension of Popes and Antipopes, and by the Civil wars that have been
at Rome in times past. For although that the Sea of Rome was vacant for a
time, the Chaires of the Bishops in France, Spain, England, and over all
Christendom were not vacant, they did not for their debates let to administer
the precious body of Jesus Christ, and the rest of the Sacraments, to preach
and teach the people, doing many other godly deeds. And to be brief, the
Civil dissension at Rome did not cause the rest of the people throughout
Christendom to break the unity of their faith, which they held before their
discordes. The ambition of the popes of Rome was in nothing prejudicial unto
those that held the integrity of their faith, nor through the reason of their
ill gouerna^ce our savior Christ did not lose his rightful inheritance.

The.9. Chapter.
Now seeing that we have yielded you a full account of our vocation to the
ministry: if we may be so bold, I think it is no great presumption to
demand the like of yours. For even as Calvin has heretofore called upon us
to have us prove, that we are the children of God, or otherwise he would
absolutelye affirm, that God can not be called the author of our vocation to
the ministry. We say likewise, that if you do not show the like of yours,
you shall give us leave (although it be against your wills) to say that
yours comes not from God, but from the procurement of his aduersarye.

Tertulian, who, as you know, above 1200. years agone, speaking against such
as you are, in his book de praescript. haeret. does write these words. Edant
origines Ecclesiarum suarum, euoluent ordinem Episcoporum suoru^ per
successiones ab initio decurrentem. Hoc enim modo Ecclesiae Apostolicae cursus
suos deferunt, sicut Romanorum Clementem Episcopum a Petro ordinatum: id
proinde, vtique et coeteri, exhibeant, quos ab Apostolis in Episcopalibus
constitutos, Apostolico semine radices habeant.

You see well by these words, how that Tertulian does continue with the
succession of the Pastors, the which he does affirm to be necessary,
saying: that you, and such as you are, ought not to be received to the
ministry of the Church, nor to teach the people, contrary to the
ecclesiastical order, except that you show the antiquity of your table. And
it is necessary (says he) that you reckon your Pastors and Bishops by order,
and how they have succeeded one after another: for this is the way that the
Churches do maintain their right. The said Tertulian does ground his
similitude upon the custom of the Civil governance. For when that those
yare princes or Lords do suruaye their lands, the subjects are bound to
show, what bands they hold of them, setting it all forth by account, showing
by what tenure they hold their copy, and whether it be demeanes or freeholde,
coming by inheritance or bought: they ought likewise to name him that had it
before, and by their own title to overthrow all other persons that may make
claim unto it. According to this pattern and order we have given you account
of our inheritance, although we were not bound to it, setting before your eyes
the similitude of Solomon, by whom our Savior Jesus Christ is represented.
That same Solomon does give the sheep that runs astray counsel, to set
his Tabernacle by the Tabernacle of the Sheperdes, and to follow their flock,
until he come to the place where Christ was nailed on the Cross at noone
days. The which counsel, as the most certain (according to Tertulian his
opinion) we do follow, thinking it sufficient, to keep us firmly in the
right and ancient Catholic faith. For we that are the sheep of Christ, do
follow, as touching our religion, the steps that our fathers led before us,
and, as it were, going up upon the ladder of Jacob. Genesis 28. we mount by
degree and degree, I mean, from year to year, and from age to age, until
that we come to S. Saturim, S. Denice, S. Marcial, and S. Gratian, which were
those that did first teach the Catholic faith in Tholose, in Paris, and to
those of Guyenna and Lorayne, and so consequently to all the rest of the
Saints, that first did teach the Catholic faith through all Christendom,
whom we do call in judgment before God, to defend that faith which they have
given us, from hand to hand, they may call upon the Apostles which sent
them, and the Apostles may direct themselves to Christ, who by the mouth of
his most loving Apostle does command us to continue in that that was taught
us at the beginning. 1. Joan. 2. And so we shall continue and rest with the
Father, the Son and the holy Ghost. And if any body does come to teach us
any other doctrine, then that which has been taught us at the beginning: I
do not say, written in book, but printed in our hearts, that he be holden as
an Anathema, Galat. 1.
or an excommunicate person, yea, although it were an Angel of heaven. The
which does persuade us, not to receive your new doctrine or Gospel, but to
keep our selves under the governance of our old Pastors and Bishops,
without having any respect to their evil or good lives: for as touching our
faith and salvation, that does unport nothing. The good and holy lives of
Jesus Christ and his Apostles has profited nothing, neither to the obstinate
Jews, nor to the unbelieving Gentiles: Nor in the like case the depraved life
of many evil Bishops that have been at Rome and in other places have not shut
the doors of heaven against those that are true Catholics, and lead
particular lives, the which are two principal points that do quiet our
consciences: I mean, the one, that we believe that, that our Pastors and the
universal Church have believed these thousand and five hundred years: and the
other, that their evil lives cannot hurt us. For as the Apostle does say,
Every man shall bear his own bundell.

The.10. Chapter.
Now to turn unto the taking of your accounts, may it please you to show us,
how you have followed the steps of the flock of Christ, according to the
counsel that we gave to his reasonable sheep, as we have said before, Who
has taught you the way that you do follow? what doctors were your first
tutors? who has taught you, that the precious body of our Savior is not
really in the Sacrament of the Aultare? who has taught the doctrine (or, if it
be not grief unto you, heresy) which you would have us to receive as a Gospel? I
know before hand, that you will allege me Jesus Christ, and his holy Apostles,
whose steps you do profess to follow, preching every where, yt there is no
difference between your Church (or to say truth, Sinagog) and the church of ye
Apostles. But I pray, Let me understand by what means you can join your
selves unto the Church of the Apostles, seeing that you condemn and cut off
all the Christians that have been and are between you and them. For to
verifye this, I will allege no other but your own works: for Calvin in his
Institutions at the Treatise of the Supper of the Lord, speaking of the
oblation of the body of our Savior Christ, as it was offered in old time, he
does write punctually these words: Caluinus, in sua institutione tradita de
Coena Domini. I find (says he) that those of old time have changed this
fashion, otherwise then the Institution of our Savior did require, seeing that
their supper did represent a certain spectacle of a strange Invention, or at
the least, of a new manner. There is nothing more sure unto the faithful, then
for them to hold them selves unto the pure ordinance of the Lord, by whom it
was called a supper, to the end, that only his authority may be our rule.
Yet it is true, that when I consider their good meaning, and that their intent
was, never to derogate from the only sacrifice of Christ, I dare not condemn
them of folly, and yet I think, that one cannot excuse them, that they have
not somewhat failed in the exterior form: for they have followed more the
Ceremonies of the Jews, then the order of Jesus Christ did permit. And this
is the point, in which they ought to be resisted: for they have conformed to
much unto the old Testament, not contenting themselves with the simple
institution of Christ, they have to much inclined themselves unto the
shadowed Ceremonies of the Jews law.

These are Caluins words. The Reader may by them see well, how this noble
Reformer of the Gospel does correct al ages and Churches, be they of Martyrs,
Confessors, Doctors, Interpreters, Preachers, or any others, from the
Apostles time unto our age, yet does he not deny, but that having some regard
of their simple ignorance, he is content to be so good to them, as for this
time not to condemn their error or impiety, because that which they did was
with a good intent: but yet fearing, that the bearing the^ to much favor
would trouble his conscience, he gives sentence against them, saying, that
they ought to be resisted, because they were not content with the only
institution of Christ, but rather, that in this case they have followed the
shadows of the Jews. Now, for my part, I think Calvin and his fellows so
scrupulous, that they would not ioyn themselves unto persons that are spotted
with Jewish Ceremonies. And because that all manner of people, how wise soever
they were, from the Apostles time until our days, have fallen into this error,
he does counsel my masters his deformed folowers (according to his sentence) to
follow none of them at all, but only the pure word of the Lord, preached by
Jesus Christ, and by his above mentioned Apostles.

The.11. Chapter.
YOu do know very well, that S. Paul does compare many times ye mystical
body of the Church unto a natural body, seeing yt Jesus Christ is ye head, unto
who^ the body is joined by ioints, bones, and sinews. If one should then
demand of you, how the feet are joined to ye head, you will answer me, by
the legs, which are next unto ye feet. And if I ask you, how the legs are
joined to ye head, you will answer, by ye ioints and by ye reins of ye back, and
so consequently from member to member. 1. Cor. 10.
I do believe, that we are al of one accord, that the end of the world is at
hand, and so consequentlye, that we are the lowermost part of the body, so
that we are the feet or the legs. Then my masters, you that have made so
fine an Anotomie of the Mass, at my request make another of the ministry of
your congregation. If you should see such another as Apelles, that would paint
a man, and that he had drawn his head, and without painting the rest of his
body, he had set his feet under his ears, what would you say to such a
Table? ( Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici:) Would you not think, that he
was a simple painter, or else a great Iester? Even so do you deserve, that one
should laugh at your ministry: For you will join your Church (if it may
be so called) unto the Church of the Apostles, without setting forth any
members between them. You take but scant measure, when you will cut of all the
Bishops, Pastors and doctors that have been from the Apostles time til our
days, they being the members that follow the head of the Church. This may
well be called a new Religion, or to say the truth, it is a mere presumption,
to fly without wings, or to clymbe without a ladder. And I say to you again,
that this is not the way to follow the Counsel of the great Shepherde that I
mentioned before, who does say to us, that if we will not miss the way of the
Catholics, we ought to follow the flock of those sheep that have gone before
us, that is to say, that we should reckon by succession the Pastors that have
succeeded in continuance of one kind of doctrine, the which, as we have showed,
the Catholic Church does, and has ever done.

The.12. Chapter.
AS touching the rest, you have accustomed in your ministry, to use the
imposition, or laying on of hands, and you say, that it is an ancient and
honest Ceremony, Exodus 29.
In this you say ye truth. For as we read, of great antiquity this Cerimonie
has been used, as well in the old law, as in the law of grace. And unto
that did redounde the imposition of hands laid upon the Wether that was
brought to the immolation of the Sacrifice of Moses law: Leuit. 4.
to declare, Number. 8. and. 17.
that those that are ordained unto the service of God, and unto the ministry
of the Church, ought to retain the like Ceremony: and so the Israelites did
lay their hands upon the Levites, and Moses likewise did lay his hands
upon Joshua, when he was made a captain of the Israelites, who did represent ye
Church of Christ. The apostles have used ye like, as we find, where we read,
Act. 8. 19. and. 13.
that S. Peter and S. John did lay their hands upon the Christian people of
Samaria, and S. Paul upon the Ephesians, and likewise the Apostles upon ye
seven Deacons, and upon S. Paul and Barnabas. Tim. ^.
S. Paul does admonish Timothe, not to despise the grace that he had receued
by ye impositio^ of hands, and that he should set forth the gift of God that
he had received with the imposition of the hands of S. Paul upon him. A and. 7.
He does likewise command him, not to use this impositio^ of hands without
discretion, to ye end that he do not co^municat with ye sin of another. Calvin
according to these authorities in his institution book ( Ar. 8. ca. 50.) of
faith does command ye like to be used in his Church. It does appear (says
he) that the Apostles have used no other Ceremony in the vocation to the
ministry but this imposition of hands. Now I think, yt they took this
custom of the Jews, who did present unto god by ye imposition of hands that,
that they would bless and consecrate. After this sort Jacob (Genesis 48.) when he
would bless Ephraim and Manasses, he laid his hands upon their heads. Our
Savior did the like upon the little children, when he did pray. Math. 19. And
as I think, it was all to one end ordained in the law: and therefore, the
Apostles, by the imposition of hands, did signifye, that they did offer unto
God him, that they did receive into the ministry, although they did use it
likewise with those, unto whom they did distribute the visible gifts of the
holy Ghost. How so ever it be, they have used this solemnity as many times, as
they did ordeyne any body to the ministry of the Church, as we see by
example, as well touching the Pastors and doctors, as the Deacons. Now,
although there be no special commandment, as touching the imposition of
hands: yet notwithstanding, seeing that we read, that the Apostles did use it
continuallye, that which they did use so diligently ought to be unto us as a
precept. And surely, it is a profitable thing, to set forth to the people the
dignity of the Ministry by such a Ceremony, and to make him know, that is
thus ordained minister, that he apperteyneth no more to himself, but that he
is dedicated to the Service of God and of his Church. etc. Thus, seeing that
Calvin does confess the imposition of hands to be so necessary for the
ministry of the Church, and that it is approved, as well by the law of
nature, as by the law of Moses or of the Gospel, Answer us then, who was
he, that laid his hands upon Calvin, to safe conduct the charge of his
conscience? You will answer me, Zuinglius, or Oecolampadius, or the others of
his time. And if by chance one would be so curious, as to pursue this demand,
mounting a little higher: I mean, to know of whom these abouenamed have receued
their blessing and imposition of hands, I think you will not name the
Apostles, if you will not have every man to laughe at your follye: for there is
none so simple, but does know, that they died above. 1500. years agone. And
seeing that your patriarch has made us so goodly an oration, as touching this
imposition of hands, affirming it to be necessary, both by the law of
Nature, the law of Moses, and the law of Grace how does it come to pass,
that Zuinglius has not used it, to confirm his ministry.

The.13. Chapter.
If that the good doctor S. Ciprian had been in these our days, Cip. 1.
epist. cap. 6.
might he not well have said against your Scholars, that which he did write
against Nouatus? there needed no other, but in steed of Nouatus to put in
Caluinus or Zuinglius, et nomine mu tato, de vobis fabula narrabitur.

Seeing that the said S. Ciprian does hold and affirm, that Nouatus ought to
be accounted as no Bishop, because he succeeded no body, but rather that he did
make himself a Bishop, without any imposition of hands. Then to what
purpose, I pray you, are ye of the opinion, that Calvin and Zuinglius are such
faithful ministers, considering that they are as far from proving yt
confirmation of their ministry, as ever was Nouatus. You will answer me, yt
you have no need of the impositio^ of hands of ye Papists, superstitious
Idolaters and Infidels. But this makes your cause never ye better: for if you
are so scrupulous by nature, that it goes against your consciences to come to
kneel to our Bisshops, you should (I say in times past) have required your
ancient ministers to have given you a warrant for ye co^firmatio^ of your
estate, when one does demand of you, since when your religion begone, you are
not content, to claim the beginning from the Apostles, but rather, stepping
hardly forward, ye are not content to stay at David or Abraham, but you must
needs fetch it from Abell, yea, from Adam. And if one should spur you
forward, you would go, I know not whether. Then seeing that your Church is so
ancient, and that it has endured till our days (if we will believe you) it is
not like to be true, that it has been destitute altogether of ministers: for
although it be so that God did greatly afflicte the Israelites with the
captivity of Babylon, yet did he never leave them without comfort of good
doctors, such as Daniel, Ezechias, Abdias, and many others: Even so you, that
think in your own heads, to be the people of God, I cannot think (if it be
so) he would so have given you over, as to want ministers to comfort you in
your afflictions, and to ordeyne your ministry, by the imposition of hands,
What stays you, that you do not go to them, seeing that you have nothing to do
with ours? And if you say, that you have done so, do us so much pleasure, as
to let us hear their names, and in what time they did florishe, or otherwise
you may pardon us, if we give no credit to your feigned imaginations.

The.14. Chapter.
Calvin does allege to us, that the Apostles do say, that is, that no body
ought to take upon him the honor of the high priesthood, except he be called
to it as Aaron was, meaning by that to conclude, that of our own authority
we have usurped the dignity of priesthood. We have answered him at large of
our vocation by the succession of Pastors joined with the imposition of hands.
I do demand of him, or of his, if they can make any true answer to the like
objection. You do lay to our charge the ill lives of our Popes and Bishops, and
the naughtines that you pretend to find in our Preachers: but al those
inuectiues serve to no other purpose, but to show how you keep a learned
school of railing, the which pre-eminence we do yield to you without any
debate or process, for ye may attribute that unto your selves as your own by
right, in steed of the imposition of hands, which ye want. But in one thing to
my judgment you are greatly ouerseene, and that is this: Why do ye not fill
both sides of your Book, in the one you set forth at large without
omitting any point of their ill dooinges, all the naughty lives of our
Pastors and Bishops: but the other sides of the leaves are empty, you
should have written on them the holy lives of your Ministers succeeding one
after an other this thousand and five hundred years. When the Popes
Bonifacius and Gregorius did govern ill their Seats at Rome, which were
the good and holy Ministers that did their duty at Geneua? When our Doctors
did preach against god in times paste, in what part or under what sign were
your Ministers lodged, that did then preach the pure word of the Lord: if
they did hyde them selves, they did not follow the pure word of the
Lord, the which you say is necessary too know the true and faithful
believers. For Christ does say, Matthewe. 10. That he that shall deny him
before men, him will he deny before his father in heaven. And S Paul does say:
Romans 10. That with the heart one does believe to Justice, and with the mouth one
must confess to salvation. But to say the truth, your religion was not then
found out, and the Grandfathers and great Grandfathers of Calvin had never
dreampt of the heresies that now their reformed child has set so newly
abroche. And therefore think it not strange, if that those people that are
not light headed, send you to preach in new found lands, as one that has
here at home given manifestly judgment against himself, confessing, as we have
alleged above, that the Church of God has used the imposition of hands,
yours has not done so: and therefore it does follow, that it is not of God, and
that, that does follow consequently, is, that it is of the devil. For we know,
that you allow no Purgatory, I mean, no mean between them both.

The.15. Chapter.
YOu will say to me, that this argument ought to take place in an ordinary
Commission, but yours is extraordinary, as that was of the Prophets of the
old Testament, whom God did send to correct the Scribes and Pharisees: and
that eue^ so God has inspired you and others of your sect to the like effect,
that is to say, to correct the superstitious lives and doctrine of the
Papists Idolaters: and by this, as far, as I can see, ye are Commissaries of
God in his behalf: and ye may say well with S. Paul (although ye have not been
ravished unto the third heaven) that ye are not sent by man or of man, Gal. 1.
but by the authority of our Savior Christ. But what would you say, if we
should speak against it, as a number do, and that to revenge this quarrel, we
should write against your Commission, we might well aid our selves with a
Sillogisme of our savior Christ, if we would come to plead the matter, Ioh.
6.
which is this: He that is of God, does obey the word of God: but you do not
obey the word of God, therefore ye are not of God. I know that you will deny
the Minor, and therefore it does appertain to us to prove it. Christ does
say: Give unto Coesar that, Mat. 22.
that apperteyneth to Coesar: and to God that, that apperteyneth to God. That
is to say, to speak familiarlye, Give Geneua unto his Lord, and the
Bishopric unto his Bishop. Now, you do not obey this commandment, and
therefore, as one that does not apperteyne unto God, you have provided your
self a new master. And because we would not have some to think, that we
that are not of the country do bear false witness against you, or, that we
do it without having any interest unto the matter: I am sure, that all the
world does know, that ye have set all France in as ill an estate, as ye have
done the dukedom of Sauoye: In that that appertains to ye Church, is there
any Bishopric or dioces left, where ye have not sought with all your power to
preach your holy doctrine? where have ye forgotten, that, that Saint Paul
does say, which is: Romans 10.
How shall they preach, if they are not sent? What right have you, to come
to reap other men's corn? Do not you remember that, that Tertulian does
write against your elders that did persecute the Catholic Church, against
whom he says in his book de praescriptione haereticorum: What are ye, and
from whence do ye come? By what right, O Marcian, do thou cut down my
wood? why do thou, O Apelles, remove my lands? And a little after he says:
The place is mine, I have been thus long time in possession, and before thee I
have good title and evidence, to maintain my right, of those, to whom it did
appertain, which left it me by inheritance from the Apostles. etc. Our
Church of France, which is one of the principal members of all the Catholic
Church, might with good cause say unto you the like. And I pray, what would
you answer? you cannot deny, but that above a thousand years before ye were
borne, that the faith in which ye were baptized, and the which you have
falselye denied, was planted, I do not say, in this only kingdom of
France, but over all Christendom. If you pretend any right to the contrary,
show the reason of your possession by the evidence of the ancient doctors,
and after come to demand it, as I have said before: I mean, that you should
yield the ecclesiastical government, which you have usurped in many places
with to great liberty of conscience, and license to do evil, which is the
very death of the soul, as Saint Augustine does say. Epist. 166. And after
that ye have restored France to his old estate, then there will be more
apparaunce of the matter, that ye are sent to preach the true word of God,
then there is now. But in this estate that ye are, although that God had given
you commission (the which he never thought) he would have called it back,
because of your noble acts. Theodosius and Arcades, which in old time were
Emperors of Rome, (L. si quis in tantam. cod. vnde vi.) did establish or make
an Edict, that if the true owner or lord of a thing should use any force, or
to seek by the way of violence (without staying for the sentence of the
Judge) to get possession of his own from another man, yea, although the other
had no right to it, he should not only lose the possession, but likewise the
property: but if it were found, that he that did enter by force, had no right
to the Mannur, he should not only be deprived of it, but moreover he should
be condemned to give as much more of his own unto him, against whom he had
used the force, as the thing was valued at, that he sought to usurp. If one
should call you, my masters the new reformed Gospellers, to such a
reckening, ye might well pack up your pipes, and transporte your fidelye into
another country, for you should have no other remedy, but to run away
with the goods, and preach poverty.

The.16. Chapter.
FOr your defense you allege no other reason but your good zeal, and your
ardent Apostolical affection, the which has moved you to sow this seed of
sedition. You say, that the field is great, and there are few good reapers,
but if you mark that, that does follow afterward, and to take the counsel
of the wise: Christ does not command therefore, that every one should
take his sickle, and go, and cut down other men's corn. But he says: Mat.
15.
Pray the master of the work, to the end, that he send more woorkemenne to
his vine. He does teach us, that if we see any estate out of order, we
should pray to God to redress it: And in the mean time we ought to correct
and amend our own lives: for if every man were for him self, God would be for
us all. Yet, notwithstanding this, it is not reasonable, that under the color
of a good zeal, a servant should take in hand an act of so great importance,
without express commandment of his master, as it is said. But now that we
are come to talk of your good zeal (if it please you) let us know, if those
ardent flames of charity have so inflamed you, that you have overthrown the
Chaires of the negligent Pastors and Bishops, and in their rooms ye have
collocated your ministers in every place, where ye could bear any swaye, as it
does appear in many towns and Cities in this Realm. I do not doubt, but
that you will do the best that ye can to do the like with the rest, I mean,
as well Temporal as Spiritual. For eue^ as God (of whom ye speak so often)
does make no exception of persons, even so you, that call your selves his
Lieuetenants will make no difference between the evil estates and the good.
Every one does know that the administration of justice is very honorable
before God, and that there be many in this vocation that would not for any
thing do any wrong unto the widow and fatherless child, and yet we see and
know by experience, that there are many others that without any conscience, do
take brybes and offer wrong, both to the fatherles and to the widow, the
which crimes are no less in that estate, then the careless living of the
Bishops and Pastors. So that I think by this, that he that has given you
charge and power to turn the Bishops out of their seats, ye Curates out of
their benefices, and the Monks and Abbots out of their Abbeys, because of
their evil livings: would likewise extend your commission, to put down
Lords, Knights, Judges and Gentlemen, because of the corrupt lives of many of
them. And to make an end of the reformation, your holy Ghost, and those
zealous flames of the spirit, would move you to go a little higher: for there
is nothing done, but the spirit may amend it. Against the great trees, strive
the great winds, and against great dignities great abuses. It is not unknown
to all me^, that there are good and godly Catholic princes and kings, which
are surely to the people the great gifts of God: but likewise one cannot
deny, but that there has been and are diverse ill princes that do govern
their people carelessly and without Justice. And if by chance your Gospel
should fall into some kingdom, where ye prince were not so sage nor so wise as you
would have him: in your conscience, what would you do to him? I think, yt that
very zeal (if you could) that has moved you, under ye coulor of a refor-
Gospel, to trouble so much our state, would likewise command you, to
dispossess those kings that do abuse their own kingdoms, even as well as to
deprive those Bishops that do abuse their bishoprics. But, O Lord, what a
Gospel is this, if it be permitted, yt the people shall call their princes to
account, or, that they may correct their superiors under ye color of a
reformed gospel, what seditions, troubles and wars shall we see over al
Christendom? we shall see fulfilled, to our great harm, ye prophecy of Esaias,
who says: Cap. 3.
The people shall seek to raise one against another, and every one against
his neibour, the young man shall disdain the old, and the ignoble the noble. etc.
But what coulor soever ye cloak your new gospel wtal, ye run far wide from him
that does command us to obey all creatures for the love of God. Romans 13.
He does not regard, whether they do acquit their charge or no, for the
obedience of the inferiors is not limited by the duty of the superiors. Romans
13.
All power does come of God, says the Apostle, and he that resists that
power, does resist the ordinance of God, and they that do with say it,
acquire for them selves damnation for ever. He does make no distinction of
persons, whether it be a Magistrate Ecclesiastical or temporal, whether it be a
king or a Pope, a Bishop or a Lord, he does talk generally of al powers that
are established by God, to make us live in peace and tranquillity. God had not
chosen of his good will Caesar the Emperor of Rome to be king of Jerusalem, as
he did choose Saul, David, Solomon and the rest, for of his own ambition and
insatiable cupiditie, he had usurped the kingdom apperteyning to the house of
David: yet our Savior did command that they should pay him tribute. Math. 22.
The which commandment he him self did fulfill to teach others obedience.
God did like wise permit that the wicked king Nabuchodonozor should destroy the
kingdom of Jerusalem, to punish the wickedness of those that dwelt in it. And
although he had invaded the kingdom of Judah, to the which he had no title nor
right, yet does god protest that he gave it him, and he wylleth and does
command that they should obey him, even as if he were the best prince of the
world. Behold (says God by the Prophet Jeremy, Cap. 27.) you shall tell your
Lords that I make the earth, the men, and the beasts that walk on the face
of the earth, through my great strength and mighty arm, and I have given it
to whom it pleases me: And so now I have given al these Lands and countries
to Nabuchodonozor my servant king of Babylon. Besides this, I have given him
the beasts and the feelds to serve him, his son, and his sons son, until
the time of his earth come: also of him many people and great kings shall com,
and shall ordein, that the kingdom, or the people that shall not serve
Nabuchodonozor king of Babylon, I will visit that people (says the lord)
with the sword, pestilence, and hunger, until that I consume them in his
hands. etc. But if you my masters the new reformers of the Gospel had been in
those days, what would have bridled your burning zeal? Could ye not with a
little better cause report of Nabuchodonozor that, that ye report of the Pope:
for who is that Nabuchodonozor, that we should submit our selves unto him? He
is not a king, he is not a Tiraunt, he is not an Emperor, but a Robber, a
Cutthrote, more cruel then any kind of wild beast. Is it not by him, that
the Prophets have represented the spoyler of nations? for God, when he would
cause Esaye to talk of the fall of Lucifer, Cap. 14.
he does discrye it under the person of Nabuchodonozor: then how will you
have us to submit our selves to be subject unto him, whom God does liken,
not only to a devil, but to the Captain of all the deuilles of hell? Many
causes do persuade us, not to obey him. First, his wicked and abominable
life. Secondlye, our religion, for we believe in God, that created heaven and
earth: but as for him, he is more then a woorshipper of Idols, for he is one
that called him self a God. Thirdelye, he is not of the line of David, by whom
God had promised to establishe his Kingedome, for he was a stranger, and
such a one as got into the kingdom by force, making him self a king, not by
righteous election, but by violent compulsion, so that, considering all these
things ye might well, according to your zeal, have found fault with his
reign, but god would have stopped your mouths, saying as I have written
above, I have created al things, and I give them to whom it pleases me. Or as
he says in Job, Cap. 34.
It is I that cause Hypocrites to reign, to punish the sins of the people.
Or as he says in the. 4. of Daniel, I have the pre-eminence over the kingdoms
of men, and I give the^ to whom it pleases me. And he that speaks against
him that is put in authority, although he be as evil as Nabuchodonozor, he
shall perish thorough the sword, famine, or pestilence, or that that is worse,
through eternal death. These are the very words that god spoke by the
Prophet, Math. 11.
and therefore says Christ, Come unto me, and learn in my schole, for I am
humble and mylde of heart, I have obeyed Pylate, and Annas, and Cayphas, I have
suffered the sentence of death, and have been nailed between two thieves, and
I took it patiently for your sakes. Learn of me to be my disciples in the
school of humility, and you shall find rest in your spirits. The which true
rest in deed is for every man to examine diligently his own conscience, and
to commit to God the consciences of his Superiors.

The.17. Chapter.
ANy man may easilye perceive by this discourse, that you have no great reason,
in saying that that you say, and much less to do that that you preach, I
mean, to begin the reformation of the Church by the way of force, the which
is a thing contrary to all laws divine and humane, Cod. vt nemo in sua causa
iud.
which defend that one should be Judge in his own cause: and you will not
only be a Judge, but a party, resembling in this him that gave the blow to
Christ, Ioh. 15.
unto whom the answer was made, If we have done ill, prove it before the
Judge, seeing that you are our accusers. If you say, that God has given you
power, to know, to judge, and to exempt, that is to say, to drive us out of
our possession, and to cause the people to forsake that religion, which they
have mainteyned these 1500, years and vpwardes, show us your commission with as
sure a warrant, as so great a matter does require, seeing that you say, that
ye are sent extraordinarily, as Moses was to redeem the children of Israel out
of the captivity of Egypt, that is to sai, according unto your interpretation,
ye children of God, and the true faithful out of the false religion of the
Papists, of yt which the Pope Antichriste, and worse then Pharao, is the head
and master. Thus ye use to expound and morali^^te the figures of the old
Testament, in favor of the Catholic Church: yet is it so, that when God
spoke unto you about so zealous a thing as this, ye forgot one thing that does
hinder greatly your Commission. You should have showed god, yt the Commission
which he gave you, was like to breed no less mischief amongst the Papists,
then Moses did among yt Egiptians. For I am sure (if any to try you, would take
your oath) that you would swear, that the Pope is as ill as Pharao, and we as
hard hearted as the Egyptians. Therefore, why did ye not demand of him a
Rod to convert into a Serpent, and to pass dry foot over the red Sea?
Why did ye not require at his hand, that it might please him to authorize
his word preached by your ministers with Signs, miracles and tokens, as he
did, when he sent your fellows the Apostles, seeinge that you are Prophets,
how comes it to pass, that you have not foreseen, that we would not believe
you: for who is he (although he were a devil) that could not say as much. But
we have one disauowe which God has given to many, which do report that they
do come from him, which does greatly overthrow the authority of your
commission. He does say in the.14. of Hieremie, The Prophets preach falsely in
my name, I have not sent them, I have not commanded them, nor I have not
spoken unto the^: but they prophecy unto you false visions and naughty
diuinations, to deceive your hearts. And likewise in the.27. Chapter, I have
not sent them (says the Lord God) and they prophecy in my name falselye, to
the intent I should forsake you, and that as well you as your prophets should
perish. Item in the.29. Let not your Prophets seduce you, that are amongst
you, nor your Southsayers, and do not mark the dreams that ye dream, for
they do prophecy falselye unto you in my name, seeing that I have not sent
them, says the Lord. etc. So that, although it were true, that God has sent
you (as it is false) we might with a just cause pretend an excuse of ignorance,
and to say with great assurance that, Genesis 20.
that Abymilech said unto God, where he threatened that he would kill him,
because he kept Abraham's wife. O Lord God (said he) would you kill a poor
simple nation? Shall it be said, that we believe all those that feign to come
in your name? have not you commanded us by the Apostle, That we should not
believe every spirit: 1. Ioh. 4.
and that the Angel of darkness does transfourme himself into an Angel of
light? Have not you commanded to be written, that we should beware which way
we take, and that such a way does seem good, the which notwithstanding
does lead unto damnation and perdition. If any, saying, that he is our
princes servant, should come to demand a sum of money in his masters name
and that he had neither his hand nor his seal to warrant his demand, would
not we send him away like a false merchant, fering that he would deceive us?
then with greater reason ought we to fear the committing of our faith, and the
hope of our salvation into their hands, whom we know not, nor that cannot show
any miracles, to confirm their preaching, as ye Apostles did. Mat. 28.
Qui confirmabant sermonem, sequentibus signis. That is, which did confyrme
their preaching with Signs or miracles following: why do not they sai, as he
said, whose successors they profess to be, the signs of my commission and
Apostleship have been accomplished among you with signs and miracles. 2. Cor.
12.

The.18. Chapter.
YOu do answer us, as yt Jews were answered by Christ, when they did
demand him to show some Miracles: Mat. 12.
The generation adulterous and perverse does demand signs, but no sign
shall be given them. etc. But this comparison can not be applied unto us, for we
are not so hard of belief as the Jews, nor you such faithful messengers of
God, as Christ was, of whom the Jews did demand some signs of obstinate
hatred, after they had seen so many lame healed, so many blind receive their
sight, so many deaf hear, and so many dispossessed that had spirits: but as
for you, we have seen your commission not to have extended so far, as to
restore a fly to life again, or to heal a lame goose, although that greater
matters are required to confirm so strange and so new a reformed Gospel.
These words do make you mad, crying out and preching in every place, that
your Church ought not to be called new, but rather, that it is old and
Apostolical, and that your doctrine is the very same that S. Peter and S.
Paul did preach. And to draw the simple people to believe that, that you
say, you do declare your faith, saying that you do believe, and do preach,
that there is one God in Trinity of persons, and the second, which is our
Savior became manne from the womb of the virgin, and that he suffered and did
rise again, and to be brief, you show, that you have profited in your
religion, for you have been but forty years (which is the time since it
began) in learning the great Creed, and the Pater noster, the which you
could not learn in a thousand and five hundred of ours. But in all this you
say nothing to the purpose: for we do not demand of you, whether you can
well your Cathechisme, the which you having learned of us, you teach to
others. And as Sampson said: Iud. 15. If you had not labored with my Cow, ye
would never have hit my Riddle. That is to sai, That if that our Church had
not nursed or taught you, which are her rebellious children, you would have
known nothing: for it is of our Church, that you have learned the principles
of your faith. She is the Cow that has nourished Calvin in a Chanonrie of
Noyon, and Theodore de Bexa in the Priorie of Louinnam hard by Paris: and
consequentlye all the other ministers, which have learned all that they know,
at the Convent of S. Fraunces, S. Dominick, S. Augustine, and of S. Bennet,
where ye were nourished spirituallye, as touching your doctrine: and
temporally, as touching the mainteyning of your study, at the charge of that
Church, against the which ye do now so strive, as the Camels, which sometime
reward their masters for their good keeping with yerking and biting: so that
coulor it how you list, ye cannot deny, but that ye set forth new devises.
For although it is so, that your heresies (which to please the ears of the
unlearned, ye call the reformed Gospel and pure word of God) have been in
times past, yet they were buried in the very depth of hell, and you have raised
them again, cloked with new coulors. But although it were so, that your
doctrine were not new, but very old, yet ought not you to be more privileged
the^ Moses and the Prophets, whose simple and plain words the world would
not believe, although they preached no new doctrine, no more then you say that
you do. Moses did show many miracles in Egypt, 24.
and why? was the principal cause to deliver the children of Israel out of ye
captivity of Pharao? No surely: for to what purpose, I pray you, should God
show such great power and might against a simple worm of earth? Is it like to
be true, that he should move the whole heavens with such great darkness,
Exodus 19.
to send so many notable plages, to bring him to yield, which had confessed his
wickedness, for the torment that he suffered with the flies, the frogs, and
Grasshoppers? Surely no, he himself does show the cause, it is to the end,
that my name be known over all the earth: that is to say, that men should
know, that he is God. If we come to the Apostles, we shall find likewise, that
their doctrine was not new: for when they began to preach, unto the Gentiles
and Idolaters, they did not at ye first preach Jesus Christ, but they did seek
to blot out of ye minds of ye simple people, ye foolish opinion that they had
in ye multitude of gods, and to teach the^, that there was but one god, who had
created the heaven and earth, who sends rain in time of need, and all
things else that are required for the sustenance of in. This is ye doctrine that
S. Paul did preach, as we read in the Acts. Act. 14.
This doctrine was not new among men, although it were so, that they were
Paynims: for not only in Moses law, nor in the law of Grace, but even by the
law of Nature God has been known, even of those which were not of the
family of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, unto who^ the promise of the Incarnation
of Christ was made. Of this does Abimilech the king of Gerar bear witness, who
did excuse himself before god, for the wife of Abraham: he could never have
known, how to talk thus with God, if he had not known him. Besides this, he
made Abraham to swear by the invocation of the said God, Genesis 20.
that neither he, nor his heirs should suffer any damage by his posterity.
Genesis 24.
Bathuell did likewise know God, when he confessed, that he was the author of
the marriage of his daughter with Abraham's son: even so Abimilech the king of
the Palestines, and Phicol and Ochosath said unto Isaac: We hear that God is
with thee, and therefore we are come to make alliance together. Iud. 2.
Adonibezeth, although he were a Gentile, did not he confess one God, when he
said, that he had given him ye self same punishment that he had given ye. 70.
kings? Job and al his friends, although they were Gentiles, have avouched one
God to be the Creator of heaven and earth, even as well as the Israelites, as it
does appear by the discourse of the said Job. If we read the histories of
the Paynims, we shall find, that they bear witness of one God among themselves.
Diogenes Laertius in the lives of the Philosophers, does write, that the
Emperor Adrian did demand of a philosopher called Secundus, what God was.
He answered: God is an immortal spirit, incomprehensible, containing all the
world, a light, and a sovereign goodness. True it is, that this Secundus was
bolder to speak of God, then another Philosopher called Simenides, of who^
Tullie does write in his first book De natura deorum, unto whom, when the
tyra^t Hyero did demand of him, what God was, and that he had given him diverse
days of respit to answer him, at ye last he said, that he did acknowledge in
him an infinite of all things. Cicero himself in the first question of his
Tusculanes, does govern and give the being to all things. And in diverse places
of that work he does well express, yt he knew well, that there was one God,
and that ye gods that the Gentiles did worship, were but mortal me^, And in the
said book he says, that we know God by his works, in the which he does not
much differ from David, saying: That the heuens declare the glory of God, Psalm.
18.
and the firmament does anou^ce his works. And in ye. 40. chapter of Esaias, when
god did talk with ye Gentiles, he did call his works to bear witness of his
greatness. Lift up your eyes (says he) and behold who has made this. Sap. 13.
And ye Sage does say, yt men through their vaniti have not known God by his
works. Romans 1.
And S. Paul does absolutely condemn the^, saying, ye they can procure no
excuse of ignorance, for the invisible things (such as is the divinity of God)
may be know by the visible things. And therefore they are inexcusable, having
hidden the truth of God to injustice: for after that they have known him, they
have not given him that thanks and honor, that they should have done, but
they have been deceived through their own subtilitie, and making a profession
of knowledge, they have been found foolish and ignorant. S. Augustine. 8.
lib. de Ciu. dei. ca. 24. does recke^ Mercurius, called Hermes Trimegistus,
among these, forasmuch as he did continue in his own error, although he
knew by that (that one may see in his own writings) that his auncetours did
err greatly in ye making and worshipping of so many Gods.

The.20. Chapter.
LActantius Firmianus in his book of his divine Institutions. Cap. 5. writing
against the Gentiles, does prove, that there is but one God, and he does
allege as witnesses all the old learned Philosophers, such as Thales,
Milesius, Pithagoras, Anaxagoras, Cleanthus, Anaximeus, Crysippus, Heno, Plato,
Aristotel, Seneca, and others. Octauius likewise, a christian Orator, disputing
against Caecilius, as then a Gentile, does allege likewise, to confound
these old Philosophers, and he does add more, Xenophon, Spensippus,
Demaritus, Strato, Act. 12.
Theophrastus and many more. S. Paul likewise, preaching to the Athenians,
does protest, that he does teach them no new thing, but rather him whom they
did worship, and did not know. By the which it is plainelye to be seen, that
the Apostles did not announce unto the people any new law, for it was very
old, and notwithstanding, they did confirm it with miracles. And if you say,
that although those learned Philosophers had a knowledge of God, as it does
appear by their works: yet there is found in them no mention of Jesus
Christ, and therefore, that it was necessary to approve that doctrine with
signs and miracles. But contrariwise, that you in your new reformed Gospel,
do preach the old Apostolical law, I do answer you to this, that the.9.
Sybilles did speak of his coming and birth, even as plainly as any of the
Prophets: and amongst other Sybilla Erithrea did as fully prophecy of the
coming of our Savior to judge the quick and the dead, as any other prophet,
as S. Augustine does testify. Li. 1. de ciui. dei. cap. 23. Likewise of his
death and passion, and of the miracles he should do before his death. The
Oracles of the false gods have likewise declared unto the Gentiles the
coming of Christ, as Lactantius Firmianus does write, Lib. ^. ca. 15.
lib. 4. cap. 15. in his book of the divine institutions. Nicephorus in like
manner does write how Augustus Caesar sacrifising to the God Apollo, Pythius
in his temple could get no other but a very brief answer, then Caesar did
demand why he could not make him then as fullye answer as he did at other
times, Apollo was constrained to say the truth, the which was, that a young
Hebrewe child borne of late did commanded him to retire him self into his
hell, unto whom he was forced to yield obediently, forasmuch as he was god,
and governor of the other gods, and therefore that he did counsel the said
Caesar quietly to retire himself, and to make no more ado: the verses are
these, Me puer Hebraeus diuos deos ipse gubernans
Cedere sede iubet, tristemque redire suborcum,
Aris ergo dehinc tacitus abscedito nostris.


The.21. Chapter.
THus you see that Jesus christ was anounced among the gentiles before the
coming of the Apostles, who notwithstanding this did not let to set forth the
doctrine that they were sent to preach, with many notable miracles, although
they did not reach but that doctrine that was very ancient: And although that
their doctrine was new and unknown to the Gentiles, yet you cannot allege,
that it was so unto the Jews: for they being studied and learned in Moses
law, they heard nothing of the Apostles, but had been prophesied by the
Prophets. Does not S. Paul say at the beginning of his Epistle to the
Romans, that he was separated to preach the Gospel, the which God promised by
the holy Scriptures. S. Peter talking with the Jews, Act. 3.
does give them plainelye to understand, that his was no new doctrine,
because yt he did preach Jesus Christ, of whom Moses had prophesied long
before, saying thus. God shall raise a Prophet among your brethren, Deuteronomy. 16.
you shall obey him as you do me, and he that does refuse it, shall be put to
death. S. Peter says afterward: All the prophets that have been from
Samuel unto this time, do announce unto you these days, that is to say, the
doctrine that we do preach. That that the Apostles did preach unto the Jews,
that is to wit, the remission of their sins, by the death and passion of
Christ, it was no new thing: for as S. Peter said unto Cornelius, Act. 10.
All the Prophets have witnessed, that these that believe in him, shall obtain
remission of their sins: for it had been so prophesied by Esaias. cap. 55. unto
ye people, above.800. years, saying that he had laid upon his son all our
iniquities, as it does appear in his book, in the which he does show him
self more an Evangelist then a Prophet: for there he does write the torments
of our Savior, even as if he had been present at his passion. David likewise
does talk of ye like, where he does mention, the extreme affliction of our
Redeemer, and of the gal, the Isope, and the Vinager. Daniel did not only
discrye the death of our Savior, but therewithal, the very time that he
should come. And to be brief, all the Prophets have announced unto the Jews
that, that the Apostles did preach unto them. Now, if we desire to know why
this old doctrine preached, as well to the gentiles as to the Jews by the
Apostles, was confirmed with many miracles, which they did in the name of God,
who sent them, the cause is this: the devil had so obscured and hidden the
truth over all nations, that superstitious Idolatrye had taken place in steed
of the true service of God, so yt ye poor Painims did not put their trust in
one God, but in a multitude of gods. And in like manner, the true religion
given by god to ye Israelites, had been troubled, and almost clean abolished
by the traditions of the Scribes and Pharisees, in the which they did trust,
for the justification and remission of their sins. The like do you report
of us, and of your great curtesye ye are content to match us with the
superstitious Jews, and Idolatrous Paynims, plating your selves in the degree
of the pure Gospellers, and the true children of God, taking upon you the
Succession of the Apostles, and calling your Congregation, the true Catholic
and Apostolical Church. This soundes notablye well, but seeing that your
cause is absolutelye to refourme the Church, as they did, preaching the
ancient doctrine of God, as they did, and dealing with superstitious
Idolaters, that cleave more to the traditions of men, then unto the pure
word of god, as the Jews. Seeing the^, that our case is reported unto the
similitude of the Jews, and yours to the Apostles and Prophets, how comes it
to pass, that you do not as they did, seeing that you are sent from one
master? Why do ye not make your commission appear by signs and miracles,
seeing that God has ever done the like heretofore, when he has sent the like
Commission to yours?

The.22. Chapter.
YOu do conjure us by the name of the living God, to receive your Gospel and
pure word of God, or else you do threaten us, that you will shake off the dust
of your feet in testimony against us, because that we will not believe your
words. But in this matter ye do allege a wrong text: for we were very
simple, if we should forsake or remove the foundation of our Church, upon
such an occasion as I will show by this discourse that does follow, I am
sure that you are not ignorant, how that Luther, after he began to preach,
his Gospel was not found barren: for immediatlye after his beginning, he did
engender another Gospeller, that is to wit, Andrew Coralstadius, and from
thence was produced another, called Zuinglius, and of Zuinglius, Oecolampadius.
Then, Thomas Muncerus, considering, that he had no less the gift of the
spirit then the rest, he began to forge a new Gospel of the Anabaptists,
with ye which he thought to gratifye the Town of Milhouse, who had received
already the Gospel of Luther. But the Senate of that Town, being weried
already with to many strange Gospels, they advertised Luther your first
Apostle of it. And he wrote to them again, that Thomas Muncerus ought not to
be received, if he could not prove his vocation by some miracle. And if you
demand where I have found this, I say to you, not in the works of some
lying Papist, but in the Commentaryes of your dear Historiographer master
Sleydon, Li. 8. fo. 4.
who has so good a grace in his writing, and is so moved with the truth of
his spirit, that he does omit nothing in his History, but that, that does go
against himself, and the professors of his religion. I do wish those that
do understand the Latin, to read this answer of Luther in the
Commentaries them selves, and for the rest, I will set it forth, translated,
not by me, but by a minister of your own sect, called Robert Preuost, who
dwells in a segnorie of Berne. According to his translation, the words are
these. Luther was of opinion, that the Senate of Milhouse should do very well
and wisely, to demand of Muncer, who had given him commission to teach, and
who had called him unto it. If he say, that it is God, let them demand of
him, to show some sign or miracle to prove his vocation: and if he could not
do it, that they should banishe him: for it is common to God, to declare his
will by some miracle, at any time when he will have the common custom and
order changed.

These are the words of Luther. We ought to yield that that is right to every
body, and not deprive any man of the praise that he does deserve. And so I say,
all the Catholic Church is bound to give praise and thanks to Luther, for ye
memorable good and wise counsel that he has given, for he has taught us, how
we shall expel and overthrow, not only ye heresies that he did preach unto us,
but likewise yours, and those of all the rest. For if it be so, that every time
that god will change the ordinary custom (such as ours) to an
extraordinarye (such as yours) there ought miracles to be showed by those that
come extraordinarily. By this good and godly advise, we know, that Martin
Luther, nor none of you all, which do come extraordinarily, as he did, do come
from God, but rather from the prince of darkness. Calvin does confirm this
opinion of Luther, as touching the vocation of the ministry: for upon the
third Chapter of S. Luke, in his harmony, he does say thus, None ought to
attribute unto himself by authority any office, forasmuch as it is great
temeritie: such persons did nothing of them selves except it were, being called
to it by God. Of this we gather, we ought to enterprise nothing of our selves:
for if that the great Prophets have attended to be called of God, what are
those, that in these days take it upon them of them selves, we ought to
answer, that they are presumptuous fellows. etc. like unto Calvin and his
fellows.

The.23. Chapter.
ALthough that by the testimony of your own doctoures ye are condemned, yet
you do still mainteyne your ill cause, saying, that ye ought to be received to
preach the Gospel extraordinarily, that is to say, without the commission of
the Pastors and Bishops, being those that are sent us by the permission and
ordinance of God. And you say, to maintain your Commission extraordinary,
that you have ye holy Scriptures, which you do allege, the which alone ought
in this behalf to be of more credit, then all the miracles that ever the
Apostles did. For it may so chance, yt by subtle devises and impostures of
the devil, miracles may be falselye counterfaited, but not the Scripture
which is the touchstone of the truth, as it shall be seen by experience, when
the child of perdition, otherwise called Antichriste shall come. For he, to
confyrme his saying, shall show such great Signs and Miracles, that the very
elect should be seduced, if it were possible. Now to answer unto this,
which is a notable way to deceive the simple and unlearned, I say, that if the
alleging of Scriptures should maynteyne you, and favor your cause so much
as you do say, our side were driven to hard shifts: for then we might be
blamed before the seat of God, not only for not receiving your Gospel, but
likewise, for refusinge the Gospel of diverse heretics that have been many
hundred years before you were borne: which did all allege the Scriptures, as
it does appear by the three passages written unto the Hebrews above
mentioned. Cap. 6. 10. and. 12.
By the which the Nouatians did pretend, to verifye, that the mercy of God
was denied unto him, that did offend after his Baptism, joined with that that
is written in the first book of the Kings. If man (said the good Helye)
does sin against man, he may agree with him again: but if he come to
offend God, who shall he be that shall pray for his sin? Did not the
Arrians allege Scriptures, to maynteyne, that Christ was not God and manne?
Yes surely, as many places or more then the Catholics. Saint Augustine does
write in his book De haeresibus, ad Quoduultdeum, That there was in his time a
certain sect of heretics that taught, that for a man to be saved, he ought
to be gelded. And they did allege the nynetenth Chapter of Saint Mathewe,
where CHRIST does praise the Ennuches, which have gelded them selves for
the Kingedome of heaven. And if a man were disposed to forge another heresye
like this, he might soon find scripture to mainteyne it, being ill
interpreted: for he does command, that we should pull out our eyes, and to
cut off our hands and feet every time, that through them we are
scandalizated: for (says he) it were better for one to enter blind or lame
into the kingdom of heaven, then to be condemned, having all our members: so
that, taking these words as they are plainly written, we ought to cut the
members from our body. Besides this, he that would forge an heresy somewhat
more pleasant and easy, one might soon do it: the which is, that for to go
to Paradise, we have no need of hose, shoes or money, because that our Savior
did so command it to his Apostles. An heresy of the Puritans.
One may likewise prove by the Gospel, that we have no need of Magistrates
nor other Superiors, forasmuch as our Savior has said, that one is your
Lord and master, namely Christ. Moreover, a man may prove by Scripture,
that one ought to retain nothing unto him self, if any other demand it,
forasmuch as it is written, If one demand of you your coat, you ought not
only to give it, but your dublet also: and if that one give us a box on the
ear, it is not enough to take it patiently, but we must turn the other cheek
also. Iouinian a great heretic, did teach, that a Christian after his
baptism does no more offend God, yea, that he could not, although he would.
Who would not hate such a blasphemous error as this? yet if the alleging of
the Scriptures ought to suffice, he may be preferred before master Calvin as
more ancient: for he does allege S. John in his first Epistle, Cap. 5.
who says: We know, that he that is borne of God, does not sin, for the
generation of God does preserve him, and the ill spirit shall not touch him.
And in the same Epistle he says: Cap. 3.
Every man that is borne of God, that is to say, baptized, he does not sin,
for the seed of God does dwell in him, and he cannot sin, for he is borne of
god. S. Augustine does write in his.89. Epist. ad Hilarium, that the Pelagians
and Maniches, among other heresies that they did mainteyne, they said, that
it was impossible for rich men to enter into Paradise, until they had sold
all their goods, and given them to the poor, and that all things ought to be
common. The which doctrine is easily to be mainteyned by the Scripture ill
understood: Math. ca. 10. and, 16.
for our Savior does say, that for to be his Disciples, we must forsake and
renounce all that we have, in testimony of the which the first Christians at
Jerusalem did sell all their possessions, and presented the money of them to
the Apostles to give to the poor. And that that is worse, the Adamites did
mainteyne a greater error then this, and more brutishe, the which is, that all
men's wives should be common, and they did call this the true Gospel, and the
pure word of God, alleging for it the first and eight of Genesis, where God
does say: Increase and multiplye, and replenishe the earth. If you do say,
that this is a foolish opinion, I confess it to be so: but that very Church
which has condemned this heresye of theirs, does likewise condemn yours.
When the devil determined to fight with Christ, he thought he could in no wise
aid him self so well, as with the holy Scripture, persuading him, that the
best way for him to show him self to be the son of God was to break his
neck, castinge himself down from the Pinnacle of the TemTemple. And he did
allege this text saying, Psalm. 90.
as it is written: That the Angels of God should so preserve him, that he
should not hurt his foot against the stones, following that David said. And
if I should go about to write all the places of Scripture that the heretics
have alleged, to mainteyne their horrible errors, I think surely, I might
make a bigger book then the Bible.

The.24. Chapter.
IF that the son do hate the father, or the father the son: or if the wife
do hate the husband, or the husband the wife, they may take ye word of God,
ill understood, to defend their cause: for he does command us, that we
shall hate those that are nearest unto us, as under the pain of not entering
into Paradise, if we do contrary. But this ought to be understood, that we
ought not to prefer the love of any creature, how near soever they be to
us, before the love of God. In like manner, he that will say, that we should
not eat of ye blud of those beasts that are smothered, he may soon allege the
Scripture for it, which does say, That at the Council that the Apostles
held at Jerusalem, being present the holy Ghost, this ordinance was made, as
we read in the.15. Chapter of the Acts. And if that one should take in hand
to bring all the places of scripture, that the heretics have alleged to
mainteyne their opinions, I dare boldly say, that he shall find it an
endless piece of work. For among so great a number of false prophets, there
has been very few, or almost none, but they have sought to mainteyne their
opinions by Scripture, drawing the places, as it were by violence, to a
depraved and a corrupt sense, being this the manner of interpreting of the
Scriptures, called at this day the pure word of God, by those that have
professed to be as long as they live, enemies to the truth. The learned and
ancient Doctor Epiphanius, in his first book against heresies, does
allege, as touching this matter, a very familier example, saying, that if
some good Caruer had made the Image of a king, adorned with many Iewelles and
precious stones, and that another should come afterward, and should take the
same Jewels and precious stones, and make with them the Image of a Fox or a
Dog, and that he should say: Behold, here is the Image of a king, would
not every body laugh him to scorn, and say, that he did it in mockery, or
else, that he were mad? Yes surely: for although they be the same Iewelles, and
that very stuff, wherewith was made the Image of the king, yet, because that
this other workman has taken them away, and fashioned them after another
sort, it ought no more to be called the Image of a king, but the picture of a
fox or a dog. Even thus is it with the holy Scriptures, which were left
us by the Apostles and Prophets, for to paint in rich colors the Image of
the great king of glory: but seeinge that you take those precious stones from
the Image of this king, and do appropriate them unto the Image of a fox,
making them serve to cloak your heresies withal, it ought no more to be
called the word of God, nor the holy Scripture, but the word of men, and
false doctrine. And therefore, if you will have it to bear the first name,
you must set it in the first estate, that is to say, that it ought to be
interpreted by him, that did first indite it. It is not by the will of man,
says S. Peter. Epist. 2. Ca. 1. That the prophecy was brought, but by the
inspiration of the holy Ghost, that holy persons have spoken. etc. I know
well, that you attribute the intelligence of the Scripture unto your Sinagog:
But how shall we believe, that the holy Ghost does dwell more in you, then in
all the universal Church, which has continued from the passion of Christ,
until this time? I pray, do so much as answer me, if you my masters be the
lodging of the holy Ghost, where did he make his residence before ye were
borne? I know already your answer, the which is, In the hearts of the
faithful. And where were those faithful? Marye, where the holy Ghost was.
Answer thus still, and ye shall be sure, that ye shall not be ouertake^: for it
is as good as to play Handie dandie, and so ye shall accomplish the old
Proverb, the which says: It is as far from Dover to Caleys, as from Caleys
to Dover. But to the end that all the world may see the great hazard of
eternal damnation that those run into, that are so ready to believe every
body, thinking that they are assured of their health, forasmuch as those that
seduce them, say behold, there is the Scripture, it is the pure word of God
and the very Gospel, I will set forth some heresies, that have been in times
past condemned by the Catholic Church: the which notwithstanding have been
as well, yea, and more largelye confyrmed by Scripture, then you can confyrme
any of yours.

The.25. Chapter.
THe Catholic Church continually has faithfully holden, and does hold, that
our Savior Jesus Christ is true God and man, having taken natural flesh in
the womb of the virgin Marye, whollye like unto ours, as touching the corporal
essence, that is to say, excepted only sin, the which body he did form
of the very flesh and substance of his mother, by the operation of the holy
Ghost, who has wrought so notable and excellent a work, that two contrary
or diverse natures are miraculouslye joined and united in one person, without
confusion or conversion of the one substance into the other, but by
conjunction and union of them both, called by the divines, Hypostatique. This
doctrine has ever been received and holden by the Church in equal degree of
truth and reverence, with the rest of the points of religion, which now you
seek to abolishe. And notwithstanding this, diverse Ministers and Preachers
derived from the sacred consistoryes of Valentinus, Photinus, Manes, Theodorus,
Nestorius, Apollinaris, Eutichus, Macharius, Eutiocheus, besides a great number
of other famous heretics that I cannot here name, have sought to teach the
contrary, saying, that they were sent from him that sent the Apostles, to
refourme the Church, not by the Traditions of men, which you call Papisticall,
but by the pure word of God. For even like you, my masters, did Valentinus and
his fellows begin the reformed Church, taking upon them the correction of all
the Magistrates and Fathers in times past, saying that they did abuse the
people, because that they taught, that Jesus Christ had taken flesh and blood
of the Virgin Marye, saying, that this was a great error: the which ought to
be reformed, and that the people should believe, that he brought his body
from heaven, and that he caused it to pass through the womb of the virgin
Marye, as the water does through the channel. This Gospel was very strange,
yet the said Valentinus did not want Scripture, as you have to confyrme it,
interpreting it, eue^ as you do interpret here in France. He did allege for
his text the third of John, where Christ does say: No person is ascended to
heaven, but he that did descend from heaven. And therefore did he maintain,
that seeing Christ is in heaven, and descended from heaven, that he took no
flesh of the virgin Marye. Nestorius another notable heretic, did link his
Gospel to Apollinaris opinion in this case, seperating the manhood from God,
and saying that the son of man ought not to be called GOD: for seeing (said
Apollinaris) that this man is descended from heaven, it does follow, that he
took no flesh of the virgin: and besides this, Ioh. 6.
Christ says: I am descended from heaven, not to do my will, but the will of
my father. Here he does not speak, as one that is God, for if it were so, he
would have no other will but the will of his father, and so he does speak
like a man. And he says, that he is descended from heaven: for the which
cause this same Valentinus did take the conclusion of this Gospel to his
advantage, for the third authority that is written in the first to the
Corinthians, where S. Paul says: the first manne is of earth earthlye, the
second is of heaven heavenly. The which passage or place is as fyt to serve
Valentinus opinion, as all the places that you, and all those that hold your
opinion can allege.

The.22. Chapter.
ANother Minister likewise called Apollinaris followed after these, sent by the
said master, and yet according to his saying, he did preach the pure word of
God, affirming that the Church ought to be reformed, which had believed, yt the
two natures were contained in Jesus Christ, and that the true religion was, to
believe, as it is written in the first of John, that the word was in deed
become flesh, or converted into flesh: And to confyrme this, he did allege ye
said place, where S. John does say: And the word was made flesh: and when the
Catholics did reply against him, saying that yt verb or word took flesh,
and not as touching the conversion of one substance into another: he did
fortify his Gospel with another text, where S. John does write of the marriage
at Canaa, where the water was changed into wine, that is to say, as touching
the very substance of the water, which was turned into wine: Even so says
he, that it became at the very Incarnation of Christ, alleging that that we
have said, And ye word was made flesh. Arrius, which was the most famous
heretic that ever has been, did pretend to verifye an other Gospel: and
his was, that our Savior Christ had not taken at his Incarnation, a perfect
soul, as other men have, but that he had only a body, and that his divinity
did supplye the absence of his soul. Of this opinion was Apollinaris,
Theodorus, Mossnestenus: and Nestorius came after, and they did blame the
Catholic Church, because it did teach the said union, called, as I have
said, Hipostaticque, that is to say, of the two natures in one person. And
they did allege for their argument a very subtle reason, the which was, that
God did inhabit within the body of our savior, as he did within a Temple,
that is to say, by grace, and not by being united together. And therefore, even
as it were a great follye, to say that God is a Temple, that so it is to say,
that God is a man. This Gospel did seem very new, yet did not they want
Scripture to mainteyne it, and that more plainer, then ever I could see any
place, to mainteyne your heresies. Christ did say unto ye Jews: Ioh. 2.
Undo this Temple, and in three days I will build it again. He meant it by
the Temple of his body, says S. John. Then the body of Jesus Christ is the
Temple of god, and god is not his temple. See whether this be not a notable
argument to deceive the simple man that is not used to read how the doctors
expound these hard places. And moreover they did allege S. Paul in the first
to the Colossians, where he does say, that the plenitude or fulness of
divinity does dwell in Jesus Christ corporally, they do allege this place
greatly to their purpose, to prove, that God is a Temple, that is to say, by
grace, and not being united. For the third place they take the. 8. of John,
where Christ does say: He that has sent me, is with me, and he has not left
me alone. And therefore Theodorus and his fellows did conclude, that there was
no more union between the divinity and humanity of our Savior, then there
is between God and us. 1. Cor 5.
Of the which S. Paul does speak, where he says: He that is joined to God,
is made one spirit with him.

The.27. Chapter
IT does suffice, that one may see by these fellows, how soon one that is
ill disposed may allege scripture in corrupt sense, to mainteyne such
heresies as these, the which I will not stay to confute: for (thanks be to
God) they do not reign now, for they have perished and their auauthours, as
you shall and your folowers, if ye do not repent in time. And besides this,
our doctors have fullye answered by textes of Scriptures these old heresies,
as you may see in all ye ancient ecclesiastical writers, and confuted them,
not only with pithye reasons, but with the true word of God, and the
authority of diverse general Councels. And if I have noted here some part,
both of their authors, and of them, to show, how they did seek to confyrme
their damnable opinions, I do it, only to warn the simple people, that they
should not so soon give ear to false Pastors, which have nothing in their
mouths but the holy Scripture, and the pure word of God, covering the cups
of their poison with the gold and precious stones which they have taken from
the Image of the eternal king, to painte those subtle Foxes that will lead
them all to damnation. And therefore in the name of God I do desire those that
are not much used to read the Scriptures, nor to hear how the Church and the
Doctors do expound the hard places, to beware, how they read them, for
fear of falling into error, taking only the letter, which many times has a
contrary sense to that that is outwardlye written. For if so many men of
great learning and excellent understanding have found such great rocks in this
rough sea, which have many times overthrown their ships: how dangerous then
must it needs be unto those that will take it in hand so doubtful a
navigations, having little skill or none at all. But as for you my masters of the
contrary side, you can sail with all tides and al winds giving ye
governance of ye ship or the guiding of the stern, without consideration to
all kind of people. We have at this day in France (I will not say in
England) many that have the holy spirit, Interpreters of the Scriptures: And
forsooth, what are they? Mary Pedlers, Cobblers, Tanners, Bankrouts,
Runnegates, and such others: which having no other living, sue to my Lord
Bishop, and he makes them ministers, being not one of them, but has the holy
spirit: for as soon as they can say, the Lord, and rail upon the Pope, the
Bishops, and all the learned men that have been in times past, Oh, these are
great doctors, no place of Scripture to them is hard, all the ancient
doctors were men, and the general Councels did err. I know, that you do
maintain your opinion with the saying of Christ, Ioh. 8.
alleging it as other heretics have done, the which is, That the heavenly
father has hid these high and profound things from the great Clerks, and has
revealed them unto the meek and humble. This is true, but it ought to be
understood, to the humble and meek of spirit, and not to those which trust
so much to their own wits, being puffed up with arrogant ignorance, that
they think to know more in three days reading, then the Doctors could in
fyftie years study, faining themselves to be like the Apostles, as if that
god, governed by their appetites, did send every month the feast of Pentecost.

The.28. Chapter.
I Pray Syrs, since you are so absolute, answer me to this objection: Is it
good to believe all manner of people, that do allege the Scriptures, or no? If
ye say, yea, why do not you believe the abouenamed Valentinus, Apollinaris,
Hebion, Cherintus and Nestorius, with diverse others that have sought to
mainteyne their errors with the new and old Testament. If you say no, but
that we ought rather to follow the counsel of S. John in his first Epistle,
cap. 4. The which is, not to believe every spirit, but that we ought to prove,
whether it be of God or no: What proof will you show us of yours? Show the
privilege that you have, by the which God does enjoin us to believe your
Gospel, rather then the Gospel of the Pelagians, Nouatians, Nestorians, and
other such false Apostles, considering that they have alleged the Scriptures
as well as you. If you say, that they were heretics, abusers of the people,
and rauishing wolves clothed in lambs Skins, and false Interpreters of the
Scriptures, all this is certain: But what though the like report goes of
you? Ye say, that ye are sent from God, to refourme the Church, They say as
much. They preached, that the Pope was Antichriste, shewinge themselves very
eloquent in detracting and railing against ye Catholic Roman Church, you do
the like. At every word they did allege the Scriptures in their Sermons, to
confyrme their doctrine, as you do for yours. That that they preached, was
called by them the Gospel, and the pure word of the Lord: these are the very
terms that you use among your holy prophets: they have been condemned as
heretics by the general Councels, you are so likewise. They did appeal unto
the pure word of God, you do the like: Yet are they proved to be false cogging
knaves, and so shall you. Then seeing there is so great an uniformity between
you, upon what ground shall we confyrme that reason that should condemn
them as heretics, and allow you for Catholics. S. Augustine in his
Epistle.161. did put unto a Donatist called Honoratus this problem: We desire
thee, not to think it much to answer us to this: what cause do thou know,
or what thing has there been done, that has made Christ lose his inheritance,
spread over all the world, to come to be contained only in Afric, and there
only to remain? We put the like question to Calvin, Beza, Virett, and the
rest, that it may please them to tell us, if that by chance they have been
advertised, through what occasion our Savior Christ has lost his
inheritance, that is to say, the Church spread over all the world, to
remain now in the latter days, with a company of rude Swizers, or in two or
three corners besides, and not among the rest, (for there is a great number of
good Catholics) what badge can ye show, or what sign to make us know, that
you are the successors of the Apostles of Christ? If that the Scriptures that
you allege, ought to be a sufficient proof, we are content to accept it, if
you will be content to grant the like unto the abouenamed heretics, which
have fortifyed their camp with as many places more, then you do allege.
Now if that (notwithstanding the Scriptures by them alleged) you do condemn
them as heretics, because that they did interpret them contrary to that that
the Church does teach (and to say truth, you can imagine no other excuse) to
what purpose do you take upon you the names of Catholics, seeing that you
commit the like offense? The diversities of those old heresies grounded upon
the Scriptures ill interpreted, do teach us, that we should not permit the
noise of your reformed Gospel that sounds so shrill, to make us reele from
our ancient faith, and without going so far to seek that that we have so
near at hand. Let us talk of the present time, how many contrary sects
does there reign? how many heads of heresies? Some are Lutherans, some
Anabaptists, some Puritans, some Protestants, some Precisians, and all these do
fortifye their camps with Scriptures, to fight one against another. The
Zuinglians and the Caluinists on the other side do write, that all these do
err, and they prove it by Scripture. The Anabaptists laughe at all the rest.
The Prophets Celestes, which is another sect, do no less, grounding them
selves upon their revelations, because that David says: Psalm. 84.
Hear what the Lord does speak in me. The Deists or Trinitaries, which are
come last of all, cry out and say, that all they are heretics, and they
prove it by the old and new Testament. I pray now tell me, which of al
these shall I receive, seeing that they do all allege the holy Scriptures?
If we receive some and not all, those that are refused will say, that we offer
them wrong: for they have their shoppes stored with as good stuff of the
Scriptures, and as well alleged as all the rest. If we receive them all, it
will be a renewing of the old confusion of Babylon, through the neglecting of
so many Gospels. If you say, that we ought to follow those that conform
them selves most unto the pure word of God, that will come to one end: for
if I do demand of you, how we shall know which do conform them selves
most unto the truth, you answer me, that it must be done by the grace of
the holy Ghost, sent by the Lord, if with a true heart he is inuocated of
the faithful. Seeing you know so well the way how to agree together, how
comes it to pass, that you have not used it this forty or fifty years, which
are the precinctes of the time, since your ancient Church began: seeing
that you have assembled so many times together, why have ye not prayed unto
the Lord, to send the spirit of truth to make peace amongst his Apostles? I
think that you are not so vnshamfaste, that you will deny the quarrels and
debates that have risen among you: I do not say, in light words, but in
great battles, in railing processes, in horrible excommunications, sent from
the Churches of the Lutherans unto the Caluinists, and from the Caluinists unto
the Lutherans, as I have set forth at large in the book that I made of the
Sacrament: and therefore ye are greatly ouerseene, that ye have not inuocated
the spirit of the Lord, as Calvin has taught you in his Cathechisme, to the
end that you may come to some accord.

The.29. Chapter.
Now to turn again to our former purpose, if it were so, that of our own
free deliberation we were minded to forsake our Catholic religion, the
injurious disputations that you use among your selves, were sufficient, to
make us to suspende our judgment, without leaning to any of both parties,
until that we could see you more resolute in your opinions, being the
hardest matter, the knowing in what country the residence should be kept for
that matter. You have given absolute sentence, saying, that the Catholic
Church has erred, even from the Apostles time unto this present, in praying
to God for the souls of those that are dead, constituted in a third place
called Purgatory. You should, me think, at the least allow a third place,
although it be not that, to receive the souls of those, whose consciences you
have so troubled, that they know now, neither what is their faith, nor of
what religion they should be: for when they read Luthers works they are
Lutherans, when they meet with Caluins works they are Caluinists, and at the
last they do not know, which side in deed is ye truest, being both false: and
therefore I think it were good, that a sequestration were made, that neither God
nor the Devil might have part of their souls, till there were a farther
inquirye made of such a number of sects, and that some good and honest
arbitratour might give judgment as concerning which party has most right.
And in the mean while I beseech God, to open so the eyes of the people, that
they may see both your errors and their own, and that through the
abundance of their sins he permit them not to fall into an Heathenisme,
unto the which you do seek to draw them with so many contrary Gospels.

The.30. Chapter.
IT does appear well by that that I have said, how the assurance of your
vocation to the ministry is but founded upon sand, forasmuch as you do
seek particulerly a contrary meaning every one to his own particular sense,
being not this the way that an extraordinarye minister sent from God, should
use to confyrme his doctrine: for this has been the custom of all old
heretics, as I have already said. There is a very great difference between
setting forth the Scripture to refourme ones religion, and to reform ones
conditions: for when there is any question of the refourming of ones manners,
there is no need to regard, whether the doctrine be new or old: for (as the
Apostle says) let every man take it to his own sense: but when it is to be
talked of, as touching ones faith, the Catholic ought greatly to beware of
singular interpretations, and to hold them as very suspicious. He ought to
follow the sentence that is holden and taught by the ancient Catholic
Church, without making any account of all these new devises: for even as, when
one will repair an old house, he dares commit it to any Mason, although his
cunning be but small: but if the foundation must be touched, he will seek the
best masters he can find: Even so, when one will correct me for my evil life
or conditions, although that it be so, that he that seeks to reform me be not
of the wisest of the world, and that he allege to me some place or figure of
the Sceipture, not altogether to the purpose, yet all this ought to turn to me
to one effect: for I know his meaning, although he cannot well express it, the
which is to have me change my naughty life, and to leave my ill conditions.
But when he shall come to touch my faith, and to persuade me from that that
all my auncetours did ever hold, from that that ye Catholic Church derived
from the Apostles has holden and does hold, and from that that both the
Scripture, and the general Councels, and all the ancient doctors teach and
affirm: In the repair of this foundation I ought to trust none but even the
very best, I mean not one or two, but all these that I have named. And now,
if you say, that they may all err, I pray, remember the old proverb that
says: He is a fool that thinks that he only is wise, and all the other
fools, and that it is more agreeable to reason, yt one only should err, then
one great multitude: for as they say commonly, two eyes see more then one, and
four more then two.

The.31. Chapter
Our Savior Christ did approve his vocation after another sort the^ you do
yours. Search (says he) the Scriptures, Ioh. 5.
for they bear witness of me: he does not say, yt they are Judges, as you say,
for you will have none other arbitrator but the word of God. You know, that
they are two different things, to bear witness, and to be a Judge, and yet the
scriptures of the old Testament do contain, not only the verity of the
doctrine of our Savior Christ, but therwithall the very sufficient probation
of his person, to teach us the true word of God, and to overthrow and destroy
the whole kingdom of Satan, as it is plainlye seen by those that list to
look upon the oracles of the old patriarchs and Prophets. It is written in
the third of Genesis, that God said unto the woman that her seed should
break down ye serpents head. And likewise in the said book there is mention
made of this divine seed of Abraham: Genesis ca. 12 15. 19. 22. and. 24.
and in the. 15. and. 53. Chapters of Esaias, and in the. 2. Psalm David does
talk of it. And in like manner Daniell, Moses and Aaron with all the rest of
the prophets in their sacrifices have very perfectly painted the coming and
passion of our Savior. Moses left written in the prophecy of Jacob, that ye
Messiah should come, when the Royal scepter and the administration of it
should be taken from the line of Judah. Daniell was not content to say as the
rest, that he should come, but he did assign the very time, that is to say, by
the seventy two weeks, counting from the fourth year of the reign of
Zedechias, until ye time that our Savior was nailed upon the Cross, ye which
time was just five hundred years. Then, seeing that Christ came at the very
prescribed time, he might well have said unto the Jews, that the scriptures
did bear witness of him. But yet to say the truth, if he had done no other but
this, he had not fully approved his vocation, to condemn their incredulity.
For they might have said unto him: We know well, that by the saying of the old
prophets the Messiah should come of the line of Jacob, about this time,
forasmuch as the Scepter of this kingdom is taken from the line of Judah, to
be delivered unto Herod: But what though, is this a good consequence: the
Messiah ought to come about this time, therefore it is I? No no, show us your
Commission, let us see some Signs, how we shall know it: for if we should
receive you as our king, it may be, that some other would come and crave the
like, saying that we were abused. Our Savior Christ sore fearing this
objection, took another witness with him besides the scripture, I mean his
Miracles. The works that I do (says Christ) in the name of my father, Ioh.
5.
bear witness of me. The like proof is made, when S. John Baptist sent his
Disciples to our Savior, Mat. 11.
to have him teach the true belief that they should have in him: this
question was put to him, Art thou he that should come, or ought we to attend
for some other? Go your ways (said Christ) and tell John what ye have heard
and seen. The blind receive their sight, the lame do walk upright, the dumb
speak, the deaf hear, the lepers are cured, the dead are raised again, and
the poor are preched unto, the which is as much to say as, tell John, that I
am the true Messiah, and that he ought to attend no other. I do verifye my
doctrine both by the Scripture and by Miracles. For first Esaias does write,
that when the Messiah should come, he should do the Miracles above mentioned.
Then, seeing that I have done them in your presence, it follows, that I am he
that should come. Thus you see Sirs, that both the Scripture and Miracles were
necessary for the confyrmation of the coming of Christ among the Jews, who
were never harder of belief then we are, according to your opinion: and
therefore blame us not, if we send you packing like Coggers of the Scriptures,
the which do neither bear witness of your coming, nor yet do any miracles,
the which two things and more are necessary to make us believe your reformed
Gospel.

The.32. Chapter.
YOu do allege the invincible patience of your holy Martyrs in times past,
for at this present, if it plesed God that you did martyrizate no more souls
with your false preching, then there are bodies that suffer for your doctrine,
your sect were nothing so dangerous as it is. You glory in your Martyrs of
times past, which have sealed with their own blood the doctrine of that holy
City Geneua. But in this ye are much deceived, for S. John Chrysostom in his
first oration against the Jews does say, That the pain does not make the
Martyr, but the cause: for otherwise the thieves and murderers might claim the
like title, although they suffer for another cause: for we honor and love the
Martys (says he) not for the torments that they do suffer, but for that it
is for Christ, and that they suffer for Justice. And S. Augustine in his
first book contra Epistolam Parmeniani, Capit. septimo, writing against some
of your fellows that presumed to be Martyrs, he does say, that every one is not
a Martyr that is punished by the Emperor, or by the king for matters of
religion, otherwise (says he) the devils might attribute unto themselves the
glory of martyrdom, because they suffered persecution at the christian
Emperors hands, when thoroughout the world, their Idolles were pulled down,
and they cast out, and those that did offer sacrifice unto them greuouslye
punished: then (says he) the Justice is not certain through the passion, or
for having suffered death: but the death and passion is glorious, when it is
for the sustayning of the true faith. And therefore (says he) our Savior,
because he would not have the simple deceived under this color of truth, he
did not only say: Blessed are those that suffer (but he added) for Justice.
But this can in no wise be attributed vnvnto those heretics that suffer, to
separate the union and concord of the Catholic Church. And in his book de
vnitate Ecclesiae, contra Epistolam Petiliani, he does write, that the
Donatists, which were a sect of heretics that reigned in his time, to confyrme
their doctrine, they did not attend, that others should put them to death, but
they did cast them selves down from high places: Others did burn them selves
in the fire, to be honored after their death as Martyrs: and that is more, they
did threaten men, if they would not kill them. S. Ciprian in like manner does
write in the first book of his Epistles, in the first Epistle, that though
an heretic suffer death for Christ, that does not confyrme him as a Martyr,
but that his death is the very punishment of his error, and that he cannot go
to heaven, which is the mansion of the humble: for seeing that he does separate
himself from the house of peace, which is the Church (ye know well of what
Church he does speak) that he cannot be received into heaven. etc All those
that have written the historyes of the Bohemians, do say, that in the time of
one Zischa a martial minister of the heresye of the Heborites or Hussites,
there were a certain sect of heretics called Adamites, like unto the old
heresye of the Nicholaites: for they did say, as these do, that men's wives
should be common, and they went al naked, every one taking the woman he liked
best, whom he did carye unto their minister, and before him he did say, The
holy Ghost does inspire me to lie with this person: then the said reverent
father did give him his blessing, saying: Increase and multiplye, and so they
went away. This abouenamed Zischa, although he had done a number of wicked
deeds, yet he determined to abolish and take away this sect, and so he caused
two women to be burnt for this abhominatio^, the which two (notwithstanding the
torment of the fire) did sing and give thanks to God, for that it had pleased
him to permit them do die for so holy and so just a quarrel. Did not Michaell
Seruet, who was once master Caluins derling, rather desire to suffer at Geneua,
then he would confess, that Christ was God? and yet, notwithstanding his great
patience, (or to say the truth, deuillishe obstinacy) cannot be sufficient to
make him a Martyr, nor to persuade you, to believe his doctrine. There is a
certain minister of the Lutherans called Ioachim Westphall, who in a work of
his does mock at Calvin, who did vaunt, that within these five years above an
hundred had suffered death, to sustain the Gospel of Geneua: and he does
answer him at large, proving yt the sect and doctrine of ye said place ought
not to be approved for the multitude of false martyrs, for the Anabaptists
whom he does justly condemn, have had of their sect a great many more, for in
less then three years there has suffered a great number more the^ ever there
did suffer of Caluinistes in fyueteene. And to conclude this matter, the said
Westfal. does say, that the devil has his Martyrs (even as well as god) with
whom like a good Sergeant he does march, giving the vauntward unto the martyrs
of the Caluenistes that have suffered at Geneua. So that if one demand of the
Lutherans, whyther go those that dye in the religion of Calvin, of Beza, or of
the Anabaptists? they say, To the Devil. And if one demand of the Caluenists
in like manner, Whither go the Anabaptists and the Lutherans? they say in
likewise, To the devil. And who would put the like question to the Anabaptists,
I am assured they would say as the others, To the Devil. For my part I believe
you, I assure you, all three, And seeing that ye agree so well, that one serve
for an others harbe^ger, we were very fools if we should stay your passage,
but let you go al to the devil for company, for I think if you were al gone,
our debates would cease, and hell would be so full, that the devil would long for
no more.

The.33. Chapter.
THere is a certain minister of the Lutherans called Heshusius, the which
within these three years has made a book against Calvin, Peter Boquin,
Theodore de Beza, and Guliel mus Elcimalcius: and he says amongst other
things, that Carolstadius, Zuen feldius, Calvin, and Beza do show well the
uncertainty of their faith by the diversities of opinions that there is
amongst the^, the which fault (says he) does proceed of this, that they have
forsaken the true sense of the scripture to follow the opinions of their own
heads. And in that very book the said Author does give the lie to Calvin,
because that in that he wrote against the abouenamed Westphal, he says that
Martin Luther and his adherentes did acknowledge him as their brother, ye which
thing he mainteynes to be false. Thus seeing ye agree together like dogs and
cattes, and that al these sects have confirmed their false doctrine with the
shedding of their own blood, it is best to conclude, as we have said before,
That it is not the pain nor the torment that does make the righteous martyr,
except we should say, that diverse contrary messaungers are sent from one
master, the which is notoriously false, for that good king from whom the truth
does come in deed, has so good a memory, that he does never send contrary
messangers, but rather his faithful servants do al with one voice and one
accord honor him, as the father of our Savior Jesus Christ.

The.34. Chapter.
SOme of your godly sect (to verify that the vocation of your ministry does
come of God) do set before our eyes the holiness of those new Christians, that
is to say, how they never swear, but yea for yea, and no for no, that they do
no wrong to no man, that they do neither rob nor steal, but that they are
content with yt that god has sent the^, and that they are very charitable to
the poor: then seeing yt our Savior does say, that one shall know the tree by
ye fruit, we ought to co^fes (sai they) yt the tree being good, the fruit is
good yt is to say, their religion is good, seeing that by ye grace of god it
does produce such sweet and pleasant fruit. I answer you first to this, yt our
savior does not give general rules, but that that most commonly does happen, as
when he says, Luke 6
that of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, would you affirm by
this, that his meaning was universally? God forbid that he that is the author
of al truth should mean so stark a lie. Do you not remember what speech he
did use to the Phariseys, Mat. 15.
when he said, This people do honor me with their mouths, but their hearts are
far from me? you see that this sentence is contrary to the other, if you do
not understand it as I have said, that is to say, that many times a man does
utter that that is in his heart: as a Ruffian takes great pleasure to talk of
quarrels, a proud person to talk of hautie enterprises, a covetous man to
talk of riches or gaynes, and so it is of al other sins. But with all this a
man may not affirm truly, that hypocrisy does never reign in their hearts,
whose mouths are full of Gods word. Dani. 15
The Judges of S. Susan, had not they God and his laws in their mouths, and
the devil in their hearts? John. 18.
We have a law (said the Jews and Pharisees against Christ) and according to
this law given us by Moses, he ought to dye. The zeal of Justice did sound
in their mouths, and hateful envy did dwell in their hearts. And therefore
you see many times that man does speak contrary to that that he thinks, and
even so it is of ye sentence of our Savior, when he says, that by the fruit
one shall know the tree. For many times naturally the fruit is good, although
the tree be worth nothing, as the famous lives and works of diverse heathen
Philosophers do witness, of whom the holiness and scrupulositie of conscience
was such, that I do believe assuredly that at the day of Judgment a great
number of Christians which lead Paynims lives, will be confounded with the
example of those men that knew not god. Thus of the first, the fruit is good,
but the trees are worth nothing, for their religion was false and Idolatrous,
applying as S. Paul does say, Romans 1.
the truth of God to unrighteousness. And as for the second, the trees are
good, being graft upon the true Catholic Religion, but the fruits do
degenerate from the stock.

The.35. Chapter.
IF that the sense of this Proverb be hard for you to digest, I am content
to stay until your stomach be somewhat better, assuring myself that you can
interpret it no way unto your advantage. There is nothing more certain then
the good tree to bear good fruit, if one does not make him change his own
nature, but if one do graffe upon it some Crabstocke or some other kind of
wild fruit, the tree can bear no other but Crabbes or wyldinges: Even so we
Chrystian persons, who are the trees of God planted by the pleasant fountain
of his grace, and purged with the holy water of Baptism to bear fruit at our
season, so that we take ever to prospet withal, the dew of his grace that
planted us, I mean, the faith of our Savior Jesus Christ, so long we bear
good fruit, as it is said before, alleging the 3. of S. John, ill understood
by Iouinian, He that is borne of God does not sin, for the generation of God
does preserve him, and the enemy of our health shall not touch him. And in the
said Chapter he says again, All men, or every man that is borne of God does
not sin, for the seed of God is in him, and he can not sin, because he is
borne of God. By this it is not meant that Baptism (the which he does call the
being borne of God) does take away from man the power or liberty to do evil,
for if he will degenerat from the grace that he has received by the Sacrament
of regeneration, and that in steed of growing graft upon the stock of the
love of God, which is the true life that he will fructify toward his death
and destruction, in this case he is no more the son of God, for as Christ
says, John. 8.
If ye be the children of Abraham, do the works of Abraham. But as he does
continue and has this good will, which was taught by the Angel unto the
Shepherds, and that he does continue, having the grace that was inspired in
him by the holy ghost at his baptism, so long he does not sin unto eternal
death, for the generation of God, that is to say, the grace received by this
holy Sacrament, does so defend him, that the devil can not persecute him to
death, being not able to prevail against him, and as long as this good seed,
which is the word of god, does dwell in him, he cannot sin, and if he did
sin, the sede would no longer remain in him. The holy ghost says, Sap. 1.
The wise man shall refuse the hypocrite and dissembler, and shall depart from
the vain and crafty cogitations, and therefore the grace of God and sin can
not dwell together, nor we ought not think S. John's words strange, in that
he says, That he that is borne of God does not sin, for it is as much to say,
as that one can not serve two masters, and that he that serves god can not
serve the devil. 1. Cor. 10.
For S. Paul says, You can not assist at the Table of god and of the devil
altogether, for what communication is there between Justice and Iniquity, or
between Jesus Christ and Belial. And he that does love this world declares
him self an enemy unto God. And a little before he had said, He that does
commit sin, is the son of the devil, the which does not affirm, that a
sinner cannot be the son of God, if he repent and do penance: but in the
mean while, he that is in actual sin, or has a mind to do evil, is as then
not the son of God, but the son of the devil. The good tree does not
bear ill fruit: for although the fruit do rot or perish upon the tree, that
corruption does not proceed of the tree, but of the worms, birds, or of
some other kind of vermin: and therefore, when they say, that by the fruit
we shall know the tree, and by the works the faith, this ought to be
understood, when the fruit does ripe in season, and that it has the natural
humor and property of the tree. And in a man, that he have the influence of
the true faith, and not otherwise: for even as the rotten fruit hanging upon
the tree, does not digress nothing from the good Stock: even so the yil
works of us that are Christians, ought not to stayne our holy and Catholic
religion. For the corruption of our ill fruits comes of our selves, and not
of our religion, the which does defend us from doing that we do, I mean, to
swear, to blaspheme, to commit adultery, to do any man wrong, or to offend
God any way. He that does desire then by the fruit, to know whether the tree
of our religion be good, he ought not to bend his eyes to look upon the
rotten fruit, as if that were sufficient to prove the goodness of the tree: but
let him look upon the good fruits, Such are all the Doctors, as well of the
Greek as Latin Church, so many good Emperors and virtuous Kings, Princes,
Dukes and earls, which have reigned in France, Spain, Germany and England,
and over all the world, and have dyed in the faith, leaving their works to
bear witness of their good fruits. The which have builded so many fair
hospitals, to help and releue the poor, so many goodly Colleges to enterteyne
fatherles children at their books, so many foundations and works for the
common wealth, and that have builded so many sumptuous Abbeys and houses of
Religion, the which you with your godly zeal have not only robbed and
spoiled, but that that is more odious, you have pulled the^ clean down, to
deface the memory of our Auncesters, and to acquit al these which are notable
monumentes, you brag of the good deeds that your good Christians do, which
are much like unto the gaynes of those that use to cogge at dise, for although
they win much it is never seen: or like the Jews, which to color their
horrible cruelty in putting our Savior unjustly to death, they went and bought
with the money that they gave to Judas a field to bury the dead. And so you
having robbed and spoiled from the religious houses and Abbeyes more then you
are able to restore, you think to acquit it all with giving a little to the
poor. No, no, these devises are but vain, if by the fruit the tree be known
(as Christ says) let them that have any judgment, look upon the fruit of
our trees, and then judge, whether they be good or no.

The.36. Chapter.
Now seeing that you have visited our gardein, If a man may be so bold, I pray
lend us the keys, that we may in like manner visit yours, and that we may see
the fruits of your religion. Read all ye histories written from the Passion of
Christ to our days, and you shall find, that all those sects that have left
our Roman Church, have done more mischiese in one year, being separated from
the said Church, then they did in an hundred years before. But because our
meaning is not to recite all the acts of your predecessors, enemies to the
Catholic church, it shall suffice to make a short discourse of those that have
been of late days, I mean the Bohemians or Hussites, whose folowers you do
affyrm your selves to be: for in your godly book of Martyrs, you have placed
John Hus as the first Martyr of your ancient Church (who was burnt for an
heretic about a. 120. years agone) even as we accoumpt S. Steven to be the
first Martyr of our Church. Now, to know, whether ye be of the opinion of
the Hussites or no, that I leave for some other time, and for this present I am
content to condescende to that that you have written, I mean, that John Hus did
preach your Gospel, and made a number of such faithful persons as you are,
and that he suffered death to sustain your religion. Then let us see, what
good fruit this did produce unto us: Those that have written the stories of
Boheme, and among others Eneas Siluius, do testifye, that in the year of our
Lord God. 1418. there was a certain monk that became an Hussite in the City
of Prage, which is the Metropolitan of that Kingdom, the which accompanied
with a number of companions as zealous as himself, they did execute so horrible
a cruelty, that eleven of the principal Magistrates were driven to flee from
the City, to save their lives, and seven more (for in all they were. 18.)
being taken by them, they did cast them out at the windows of their own
houses, and did kill them with their spears as they fell. This was done,
Sigismondus being then Emperor, in the time of Martine the first Pope of
Rome of that name, and Vneslaus being then king of Boheme. The next year after
the death of this said Vneslaus, they did spoil all the monasteries, Abbeyes
and Churches of the said kingdom. And among others, one John Zischa, who was
their captain in the City of Prage, he made them all pass through the edge
of the sword, without sparing man, woman or child. And the like was done in
another Town of the said kingdom called Messim, the year. 1423. It were to
tedious to write all their cruelties, they did not care, whether those of their
company were of their sect or no, for some were Idumeans, some Palestines, some
Moabites, and some other Amelecites: even as of your bountiful goodness ye call
all those that will not be of your sect, Papists, Infidels, Hipocrites and
Idolaters: and therefore we may justly say, that you are their right heirs
apparent, although ye have gone somewhat before them, and (as our Savior
said) accomplished the measures of your fathers by the heroical acts that
you have done in this (almost desolate) kingdom of France, there needs no
other witness to prove it, but the testimony of your own eyes and ears, which
have heard and seen more almost the^ any man can write. Therefore I beseech
you, not to reproach any more the abuses of our ecclesiastical ministers: for
although it be so, that they have need of some reformation, yet I do think
it is necessary to choose some better stayed persons then you are, for you
have done more harm in five years, then ours have done in a. 1500. S.
Augustine in the first book of the City of God, does magnifye in the
Christians behalf the divine favor of God: for he does write, that when the
Goths did destroy and spoil the City of Rome, the Romans (although they
were not Christian) did retire them selves for their sauegard into the Churches
and Temples of the Martyrs. And the Goths being but a barbarous nation, had
that respect to God, that they never durst nor would enter into those holy
places to do the^ any displeasure. You which make so great profession of the
Gospel, have showed your selves a great deal more cruel then those barbarous
people: for they did pardon all those that went to the Temples, and you have in
many places spoiled the Churches, and murdered all those that ye found in
the^, so yt one might well say to you that that Optatus Myleuitanus in his book
con. Parm. Donatist. the which was, yt the Donatists ought to be content (and
you likewise) to have wounded the members of the Church, and to have divided
the people of God, at the least you should have spared the aultares and the
temples, and not to make war against the stones.

The.37. Chapter.
YOu make us but a very slender answer, saying, that we were the first, and
that you do no other but that that we have taught you. If we should say the
contrary, I know who should say the truth: but to avoid all quarrels, the best
is (following ye council of our Savior) to give you more then you demand. Let
us put ye case, that we should confess to be the first, does it follow
therefore, yt your matter is good? I pray do but consider ye verdict that you
both give of your selves and of us. We are (according to your sacred gospel and
Apostolical judgment) no other but poor and simple Infidels, and superstitious
Idolaters: but contrariwise, you are Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, ye true
children of God. Seeing the^, that god has showed you so much favor, and
poured upon you the bountiful gifts of his grace, how have ye sought so
cruellye to revenge your selves against his express commandment. Is this the
way of reformation, to show your selves as ill as we or worse? saying that
the matter falls out so plainly, I pray you be not so obstinate, give place
unto the best to reform the rest, for to be worse then you I think none can be
found. You my masters, that can make such tedious sermons, and rail at large
against our Popes and Bishops, why do you pass over so lightly the faults
of your ministers? you set out gloriously the titles of Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, and extraordinary messengers of God for your selves: as good
Godfathers ye now christen our popes and bishops, calling them ravening and
greedy devouring wolves. In this ye do greatly abuse the intellection of the
scriptures: for if you mark well that that our Savior does say, John. 10.
ye shall find, that ye run far wide of the text, and the similitude of the
wolf does full well appertain unto your ministry. There he does declare the
difference that is betwixt the good shepherde and the bad (which he does call
Mercenarium) and the wolf. The good Shepherde is he, that does hazard and
venture his life for his flock: The ill Shepherde is he, that takes the milk
and the wool from the sheep, and lets them rome without taking any care to
keep them. The wolves seeing them rome abroad, scatered from the flock, does
devour all those that are ill kept. The good Shepherde is our Savior Christ
and his Apostles, and all the good Bishops that did florishe in old time, and
all the holy Confessors and martyrs that have lived in the golden age, when ye
blood of our Savior Christ was yet hot boiling in their hearts. The ill
shepherdes have followed after, which have not cared for their sheep. The
wolves (which are the heretics) seeing this have scatered the sheep out of
the fould of Christ, which is the catholic Church, where they had been borne
spiritually, that is to say, regenerated with the grace of the holy ghost, and
the Sacrament of baptism, to follow the sects of perdition. If all our
Shepheardes had been as careful to keep their flocks as they ought to have
been, your Congregation had never ben so strongly builded as it is at this day
in France. And therefore you offer your Church (if it may be so called)
great wrong, when you speak against the abuses of ours, for our sins have
been and are the principal foundation of your buildinge. And even as the worm
is nourished in the Aposteme with the ill humors, even so you feed of our
faults, and are nourished with our sins, your fire burns with our wood:
and if we would amend our lives, I know how soon your religion would
decay. And therefore our Pastors are not wolves, but they have permitted the
wolves to devour their sheep, and so they shall answer for them before the
throne of the eternal Judge, who does advertise them by the Prophet
Ezechiell, that they shall answer for all the mischiefs that happen unto
their sheep, many of the which are scabbed and full of diseases: and
therefore I would have you to cause some body to choose among yours and ours
those that are best,, to the end, that through this division, and your aid,
we may take the rest. I think, that if any thing condemn us, it will be this
cause, forasmuch as we have continued in that doctrine which was preached unto
us at the first, as you your selves can not deny, if you will confess the
truth.

The.38. Chapter.
ALl our ancient doctors, as well of the Greek, as of the Latin Church
since the Apostles time, and the Christians of all the four quarters of the
world, which were in those days, have made their promises and vows unto God,
even as we do now, and at their baptism they did use even those very
Ceremonies that we do, with the self same exorcismes, adiurations and
annoyntings, that we do use in our Catholic Church, which you call
Papisticall: and to prove this true, we will bring ye said ancient doctors as
witnesses, if it please you to read the places that we will quote. Tertulian
(who lived very near the Apostles time) does make mention in his book that
he entitled, De resurrectione carnis, of the annoynting used at the Baptism,
and of the renouncing the devil and all his pomp. In his book De corona
militis, he does speak of the third dipping under the water, in the name of
the father, the son, and the holy Ghost. S. Ciprian the Martyr, who was
above. 1300. years agone, does write in the second volume of his Epistles,
Epist. 12. how they did use in his time to give the holy Chrisme unto the
children that were baptized. Origin in his twelfth Homily, and in diverse other
places of his works does make mention of the renouncing of the devil at ones
baptism, and of the making of the sign of the Cross upon childrens faces
when they were christened. S. John Chrysostom in his. 12. Homily, upon the
first Epistle to the Corinthians. Cap. 4. And in his first Homily upon the
first Chapter to the Ephesians, he does make mention of the said renunciation
made from the devil and all his works. Read I pray, if it be your pleasure,
S. Aug. in Psalm. 31. Aug. li. 15. contra Iulia. Pelag. li. 1. Cap. 2. Item de
nuptiis et concupiscentia. Lib. 1. Cap. 20. In Ioanne^, tract 33. In Canonicam
Ioannis, tract. 3. et Tractat. 6. Et de ecclesi. dogmat. Cap. 31. De Simbolo,
lib. 1. Cap. 7. et lib. 2. Cap. 11. Et libro de his qui initiantur sacris. Cap.
1. Basilius de Spiritu Sancto, Cap. 15. et. 75. Arnobius in Ps. 27. All these
Doctoures, which were above a thousand years agone, if you read in them the
places that here I have quoted, you shall find, that they did use at the
Baptism of their children those very Cerimonyes that we do now use, and
that you do so mislike. And as for Confession, before the receiving of the
Sacrament, our Savior Christ does teach us, that the Ecclesiastical
Ministers have authority to bind and forgive sins. Ioh. 20.
S. Ciprian in his fyfth Sermon De lapsis, Mat. 16.
Origin upon the thirty and seventh Psalm, and in Leuit. Hom. 2. S.
Augustine lib. 2. de visitatione infirmorum Cap. 4. S. Ciril. libro. 12. in
Ioannem, Cap. 56. S. Hierom in Ecclesi. Cap. 10. All these Doctors, according
to the Scriptures, in these places do confyrme auriculer confession. And as
for praying unto the Saints in Paradise to help us with their prayers, read
Origin, in his third Homily upon the Canticles, and in his second book upon
Job, and in his eight book in Ecclesi. Read Chrysostom, in his eight Homily
upon the Epistle to the Ephesians, the fourth Chapter, and S. Augustine, in
his twenty book against Faustinus, the one and twenty Chapter, and Saint
Hierom against Vigilantius. All these make mention of the praying unto the
Saints. And for praying for the dead, Read Tertulian in his book De
Monogonia, and in his book De Corona militis, and Saint Ciprian ad plebem
Furnensem, and in the first book of his Epistles: and Origin in Hieremiam.
Hom. 12. Item in Epist. ad To. lib. 8. cap. 11. Read Chrysostom, in his third
Homily upon the Epistle of S. Paul to the Philippians, and S. Aug. li. 2. de
genesis against the Maniches, Cap. 20. and in the Incheridion ad Laurent. Cap.
110. Item, libro de cura pro mortuis agenda. All these Doctors, whose works
have continued these. 1200. years, do teach us all these things that now
we do observe, the which they left in writing by the ordinance of God, to
confute such heretics as you are.

The.39. Chapter.
ANd if I did not think, that it would be to tedious for the Reader, I would
set forth the rest of our Catholic doctrine, and the confyrmation of it by the
testimony of such a number, of not only Doctors, but therewith al holy
Confessors and Martyrs, which have suffered for our religion, and that have
taught us, both by word of mouth, and by writing, all that we do use at this
day, teaching us to live and dye in it and for it. I would have you answer me
unto this: Do you think, that they be in heaven or in hell? I know well, that
mere scrupulositie of conscience will make you not express plainelye that,
that your works do teach, and that you will remit this question to ye
judgment of God. But this is not to the purpose, for I do not demand of you
any absolute answer, as if you had been in heaven or hell to see it: but this,
to utter in your conscience, what you think of those that have holden,
mainteyned and confessed our faith (whom you call Infidels and superstitious
Papists) are they condemned? If you say, yea, Then wherefore was the blood of
Christ shed on the Cross? it had been better that he had never suffered, if
this were true. If you say, that God would be merciful to them, because
their error proceeded of ignorance, and so, that he will have pity of us,
because of ours. But I know, that you will say, that we are now inexcusable,
because that we do refuse the truth that you do preach. By the self same
reason our auncesters can allege before God no good excuse, forasmuch as they
do make no account of the receiving of such ministers as you are, and that have
preched the like Gospel that you do announce unto us. S. Hierome and all the
Christians of his time are then condemned, because they would not receive the
Gospel of Vigilantius, who did even as you do preach, that we should not
allow the exposition of the doctors, nor honor the relicques of Martyrs. S.
Augustine is likewise condemned, because he wrote and preached against the
Arrians, who taught as you do, that it is an offense to pray for the dead. And
to be brief, if that which you do preach ought to be called the Gospel and
true word of God, since the Apostles time there has been never a Christian
Doctor in the Church: for they have all taught the contrary to your forged
Gospel, as every man may see, that will take the pain, but to look in their
works, or to read those places that are quoted by me and diverse others that
have confuted your heresies many a hundred year agone by their authorities.
Let them then that have any eyes, behold the hazard that ye run into, and
so many others throughout the world, which follow your opinion. If one
should come to accuse another of falsehoode, and that before he be assured of
this matter, wherewith he did seek to attaynt the defendaunt, would not one
think his matter very great, or his knowledge very small, to run headlong
into the danger of that crime, which, if he could not prove, he should be
condemned for himself. What then shall become of you, O most simple sheep,
which seek with feigned arguments to condemn, not one or two, but all ye
Christians and Catholics that have been in this world since the Passion of
Christ, the which have refused and reproved your doctrine as heretical, and
have taught us this that we hold at this day? But now to answer unto that
that was mentioned a little before, and that which a number of your flock have
told me, when I have co^ferred with them, which is, that the error of our
predecessors was not imputed unto the^, forasmuch as these good simple people
went to work after the grossest sort, thinking to do well, and that as then
they did not understand well the truth, which is now brought to light through
your Gospel. I say, that in this ye are deceived more then half the value of
your religion: for before some of them dyed, they had forgotten more then ever
you have learned, for all that, that you know you have learned it of their
books (or stolen it, to say the truth) interpreting both their works and ye
Scriptures contrary to the truth of their meaning. And although it were so that
they had al erred, your colored excuse of simplicity could avail them
nothing, for the word of God would accuse them. 2. Cor. 4.
If the Gospel (says S. Paul) had been hidden, it has been hidden to those
that have perished, the spirits of the which the God of this world has
blinded: then if that those unto whom the truth has been hidden have
perished, wherefore does your excuse serve them? This being true, as it is most
like, I mean, yt they have not erred, nor that you only shall be saved, and
they all condemned. To my judgment our auncesters with all their simplicity did
never err so much as your disciples do, to follow such masters, as condemn
that faith that the catholic church has taught and mainteyned these. 1500,
years, to mainteyn those heresies that have been buried in hell many an hundred
year agone, and now are called up again by Martin Luther, Calvin and his
fellows.

The.40. Chapter.
IF that by a good and a right title your disciples call them selves the
children of god, this makes me believe that the saying of our Savior is
fulfilled in them, Luke 16.
ye which is, The children of this world are wiser in their generation then the
children of light: To prove this true, we see this daily experience: for a wise
worldly man when he does put out his money to gain, he will not trust the
promise so soon of one or two or three, as he will do the bonds of a whole
Town or City that should warrant or assure his gain. But you nor your
disciples have not done thus, but rather ye contrary. It had been better for
you to have first put your faith and trust in God, believing that he has
given his holy spirit, and declared the meaning as touching the Scriptures
unto the Catholic Church, and not to hazard the hope of your salvation,
putting it into the hands of Luther, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, and three or
four other such pelting merchantes, which have newly set up shoppes at
Wittemberge, Geneua and Losane, which one of these days we shall see
bankruptes, as their predecessors have been before them, the which after that
they had deceived the poor simple Catholics, and gained some of their souls
for the devil, they have at the last sold all their their honesty and
credit, so that at this day, except that it be those that read the ancient
historyes, no body else does remember, that ever they lived in the world. You
are come now last of al to make up their merchaundise, but your credit can
hardlye be good before God: for you shall have against you all the ancient
Catholic Church, which has continued visible since the coming of Christ
unto this day, all the doctors of all the universities, all the Empires,
Kingdoms and private state throughout all the world, which have received and
honored this doctrine, that you call Papistical. And if you say, that you
will not trust men, but the very word of the Lord, we agree to the like, that
we ought all to believe the Scripture, but we vary about the interpretation, for
you interpret it after one sort, and we after another: you expound it after a
new sort, and the Catholic Church does follow the old exposition of the
ancient Doctors and traditions which you have forsaken: or to say the truth,
your Ministers have led the sheep astraye from the old flock, at the
departing from the which they have been all scatered abroad, some following
Luther, some Calvin, some the Anabaptists, and so forth, for the which the
Popes and kings and others that have had the government of the Church, shall
answer at the last day of judgment, for as much as while they slept, you have
come and sowed weeds among the good corn. Then seeing you are the sheep that
rome astray, what excuse can they make before God, that wilfully follow your
steps? We confess, that we are the poor sheep of God that have continued
with our old flock steadfast and whole, as touching our religion, but very
weak and sickly as touching our manners: that is to say, full of sins and
vices, attending some sage physicians to heal us, and good pastors to keep
us, casting out the chafe from the corn, I mean, cutting off those abuses
that are offensive not to such scrupulous consciences as you have, but unto
him that does threaten them for the careless lives of their sheep, and so to
continue in that ancient faith that by succession of pastors we have receued
from the Apostles.

The.41. Chapter.
I Know well, that you will take this confession of mine to your advantage,
saying that for fear of being infected with our superstitious diseases, you
have separated your selves from ye common flock: but if you do consider my
first words, they have barred you al manner of ways to reply justly: for I
have already said, that although we be sickly and weak sheep, as touching our
doings or manners, yet, in regard of our faith (thanks be to God) we are safe
and sound, keeping still that integrity of religion that by succession of
pastors we have received from the Apostles, without adding or diminishing any
thing to the ground of our catholic belief: for as for ceremonies the Church
has used the^ ever as touching yt time and the place, to ye honor of god, and
edification of our neighbor: and therefore, if you did separate your selves from
our kind of living, to lead a holy solitarye life, as ye holy Heremites and
saints have done in times past, forsaking ye conversation of ye common people,
to live in contemplation, without seperating the^ selves from ye communion of the
Church, in the which they have been baptized, and had received their faith,
your doings had been as much worthi of praise in that respect, as now they are
damnable, considering how you forsake the common tabernacle, within the which
both you and we have received the Sacraments of regeneration, and our
spiritual food altogether. And to the end that no body run astray from
the right path that he should follow, the good Christian ought to fix in his
mind this resolution, I mean, to serve God, and to live in the Catholic
faith, commonly or privately: for when there is any question put, as touching
the life, the common way, Mat. 7.
as Christ does say, does lead one to perdition, and the narow way does
guide unto the port of salvation. But if one speak of religion, the contrary
is verifyed: for the common way is the way of health, and the private way is
the path of damnation. The Prophet David in the. 24. Psalm, had a regard to
this, when he prayed god to teach him his ways by the religion, and his
paths, by the manners and customs.

The.42. Chapter.
NOw to turn to the partition that we have upon the. 34. and. 37. of
Ezechiell, and upon the tenth of John, it is plain, that we are the flocks
of weak and sickly sheep: and your disciples are the sheep that run this
way and that way astraye: those that are our ill prelates take upon them the
title of Mercenarij pastoris, but unto your Ministers the titles of devouring
wolves, may be applied without any scrupulositie of conscience: for you watch
to none other intent, but to make the sheep run out of the fold, and to
devour them, because that our pastors have not taken care to keep them. And
although they be not excusable, as well for their silence, as for their
naughty lives, I see not your Patriarchs and zealous Ministers amend much
them selves, the faults that they find in us: for besides the true and
certain experience that we have had by the trial that we have seen to our
cost in this Realm within these five or six years, I have read full many a
golden Legend of your sacred martyrs and holy Bishops, which do not altogether
redound to the honor of your pretended reformed Church. And among others
Theodore de Beza Caluins successor in the Pontificate seat of the holy City
of Geneua, of whom such things are preached abroad, that if the one half of
them be true, he is scant so good a man as S. John Baptist. And because I
would not have you to mislike them for their religion, I will not allege, to
verifye this, any Catholic author, but some of Luthers Successors your
first founder, who taught you to write so learnedlye (I would say
raylinglye) against the Church of Rome. In his book of the true body of
Christ in the sacrif. written in Latin.
Tilemanus Heshusius a Minister of the Lutherans, in the book that I have
already noted, does openly accuse the said Beza of great infamye, that he
did not only content the fancy of his mind, with leading a luxurious and a
licentious life, and to stayne his vow with a bolte of adulterous love, but
that that is worse, he himself has set forth in writing al his lascivious
acts, the which (says he) he has song in sacrilege ryme to the Instrument,
to manifest his sin to the whole sight of the world. And in that very book
he does say, that Beza, who (as I have told you) is a Bishop of the holy City
of Geneua, is an infamous monster, whose naughty life any man may read set
forth by himself in his own Epigrams: and notwithstanding (says he) to hear
him speak, you would think he were Saint John Baptist, for he can talk of
nothing but of his holy life. This same very Minister in the book where he
writes these things, he does lay to Bezas charge that he took with him to
Geneua another man's wife, without the knowledge of her husband, whose name was
Candida. Thus seeing by the very testimony of those that are our enemies, and
that are your brethren, as touching the seeking to overthrow the Catholic
Church. The principal pillars of your Church are bawdes, thieves and
adulterers, ruffins: why do ye not first begin to reform your selves, to
this intent, that when we see, that you have taken the block out of your own
eyes, we may be the better content, that you should spy the mote in ours.
Remember that our Savior says in the Gospel, that the physician ought to cure
himself.

The.43. Chapter.
YOu that can say so well, that one ought to live according to ye scripture,
and that you will by it refourme us, why do ye not begin with your selves, to
give us the better example. From whence come so many kind of vsuries and
excessive interests as you do use? You call our Church abominable and
adulterous. He that is among you without sin, let him cast the first stone.
You do abhor our Idols (as you term them, talking of our Images) how
comes it to pass then, that some of youres should come so near us that are
Idolaters, as to rob our Churches, and to carye away the Images and relics,
and to go and sell them in other places? But now to make an end of this
discourse, although it were so, that your works were the best of the world,
yea, whollye without spot or sin (as some of you do affirm) yet were not
they sufficient to move us to change our religion, nor to forsake that that
our forefathers have taught us: for although it be so, that our Savior Christ
was as just and as innocent as any can be, has been, or ever shall be, yet
neither his holy life, nor the Scriptures that he did allege, to prove his
coming by the authority of the Prophets, nor the testimony of S. John
Baptist: all these things together were not sufficient to persuade the Jews to
forsake their old laws, and to receive the Gospel, without the testimony of
the great miracles that he did in their presence. He does confess this
plainly, where he says: If I had not done in their presence the works and
miracles that never any had done, they should have no sin. This sentence is
most notable and worthy to be graven in the hearts of all Catholics, to
assure their consciences which are troubled with such diversity of opinions.
For although it were so, that you my masters were the honestest men of the
world, sent from God to teach and preach a true doctrine, yet should we be
excusable before God for not receiving of your commission, even as the Jews
had been for not receuing of our Savior Christ, if he had not done so many
miracles. For we know no cause, why you should be more priuileged then
Christ. And seeing that you have showed nothing to verifye it this way, and
that the Scriptures make no mention of your vocation, nor you show no
miracles, and that your lives are at the least as ill as ours: what moves you
to be so bold and so vnshamefaced, as to threaten us with eternal damnation,
if we receive not your heretical doctrine, the which is so full of discordes
and divisions, that one may easilye gather by this, from whence it came, and
whither it does lead one, although ye have nothing in your mouths, but the
Gospel and the word of the Lord? and as S. Augustine said unto your
semblables. Sola personat apud vos veritatis pollicitatio. I say no more at
this time, but that I beseech God to draw you as nere to us as you are far
from us, and to inspire your minds to turn to the flock of Christ, the
which, both to your own harm and ours you have forsaken.

FINIS.
An offer made by a Catholic to a learned Protestant, wherein shall appear the
difference betwixt the open known Church of the Catholics, from the hid
and unknown congregation of the Protestants.
First, seeing it cannot be denied, Mat. 28.
and to none other, saying only unto them: Mar. 16.
Euntes, docete omnes gentes. Go ye and teach all people and nations of the
world, baptising them in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the
holy ghost, teaching them to observe and keep all things which I have
commanded you. Further Thapostle S Paul being at Miletum, in executing of his
charge and government, gave this admonition to the bishops and priests there
assembled before him, Act. 20.
saying: Attendite vobis, et vniuerso gregi. Take heed unto your selves, and
unto the whole flock of Christ, in the which the holy ghost has ordained
you bishops. Regere ecclesiam dei, to govern the church of God.

And in the thirtenth Chapter of his Epistle to the Hebrews he does command
al other sorts of men, without exception of Emperors, kings, Queens, and
princes, to obey their bisshops and priests, saying: Obedite Praepositis
vestris, Heb. 13.
et subiacete eis, ipsi enim peruigilant, quasi rationem pro animabus vestris
reddituri. Obey your Prelates, and do what they appoint you, for they do
watch, as men that shall render accoumptes for your souls. Seeing that by the
testimonies before alleged it can not be denied, but that the charge and
government of Christ his church, the preaching of his doctrine, the
administration of his Sacraments, was by him committed to his Apostles and
disciples, and to all Bishops and priests as Successors of them, to plant
christian faith and religion in his catholic church universally throughout
all nations, coasts and quarters of the world. Seeing this is by the playnnes
of the said Testimonies of such an undoubted truth, that it cannot be denied:
Now let the learned Protestant, affyrming princes to be the supreme heads of
the Church, either show by some such other like plain testimonies of the
scriptures, that our Savior Christ did commit the chief charge and supreme
government of his Church to Emperors, kings, Queens and princes, to plant
christian faith and religion in the same, or that any one of Christ his
Apostles or disciples did convert any people, land, or country from their
Idolatry and Ethnike kind of living, to Christian faith and religion by
preaching the doctrine of the Protestants: as of only faith to iustifye, the
contempt of good works, and that they be all unclean in the sight of God, the
denial of free will, of the real presence of Christ's body in the holy
Eucharist, of the sacrifice of the most blessed Mass, the abolishing of
Christ his Sacraments, and of all grace and goodness by them co^ferred unto
us, then I shall yield and recant, and not before.

of them, had at all times a special care and regard, not only of preaching
Gods word, but also of the preservation of the same word and Gospel by
writing, of the sacred Bible, and holy Scriptures, and did discern and judge
them from all other writings profane or authentic of all sorts. What
Church has had from time to time the custody of the sacred scriptures, and
most safely has preserved them for the necessary food of Gods people, and
from the corruption of the adversaries, as well Jews and Gentiles, as
schismatikes and heretics of all sorts, but only the common known Catholic
Church of Christ? When therefore the learned Protestants shall be able to bring
proof to the contrary, that their private conuenticles and congregations were
ye first bringers forth of this sacred Bible and the word of God written, the
chief preseruers and defenders of the same in all times and ages, from all
Jews, Gentiles, heretics and schismatikes, Then I will, as I said before,
reuolte and recant.

I shall then yield and recant, and not before.

Fourth, Let the protestants make

Fyfte, If it may sufficiently be proved, that any other Church then the and
used, as the festival days of Christmas, Candlemas, Easter, Whitsontide, the
feasts of thapostles and holy Evangelists, of S. Michaell tharchangell, and of
all halowes and blessed Saints, the observation of the holy fast of Lent, and
Imber days, the fast of thapostles, and of all the aforesaid festiual Eues,
beside the weekly fast of Frydayes and Saturdayes, and the rest yet observed
and allowed on both sides, to the honor and glory of God, Then I will
recante, and not before.

degradation, and such other like. Let the^ prove this discipline to have
proceeded of the Protestants congregations, or to have continued from time to
time, in any other Church, then in the common known Catholic Church of
Christ, And I will then recant, and not before.

Seventh, let me know of the Protestants, and canonized for Saints, when they
were dead, by the protestants congregation, and not only by the catholic
church of Christ, I shall then submit and recant, and not before.

ad consummationem sanctorum in opus ministerij: and so to continue to the
edifying of his body the catholic Church until his coming again. Now if
the Protestants shall be able to prove by ecclesiastical historyes of all ages,
the continuance and use of the said functions and degrees in their
congregations, and that by some orderly succession and plain account made from
Christ his time hitherto, they have never lacked the said appointed officers,
or that any other church the^ the common known catholic church of Christ,
has had at all times the continuance of the same, I shall then recant and
relent, and not before.

Ninth, whereas the protestants by the drift of reason and argument are or
laws to be exeuted, then those which were daily practiced in the common known
Catholic Church of Christ, I will then recant, and not before.

what year of our Lord, under what Pope and Emperor? by what persons of name
it was so wrought and brought to pass, and upon what occasion, and what
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and doctors of their congregations
did gaynesay or withstand the same? And who does make any mention of this
sodeyne and marvelous change of the Protestants religion to Papistrie? what
one eccesiastical writer, or ancient father of the whole world? And when they
shall be able reasonablye to answer, and to satisfye these my demaundes, then I
will recant and yield to them, and not before.

Eleventh, Let the learned Protestant show me what order of service any
Communion, or what else you list, that was in English, or in any vulgar or
common tongue, beside the Hebrewe, Greek and Latin, or that lacked prayer for
the souls departed, or invocation to Saints, or sacrifice for the sins both
of the quick and the dead, or that charged a number to receive with the
priest, or that he could not else consecrate or say Mass receiving alone, or
that the people should take the sacrament for bread and wine, and not for the
real body and blood of Christ, or that they should give no honor to it, or
not reserve the same for the comfort of the sick and diseased people, or that
denied extreme unction, with the rest of the Sacraments, to be behoufull or
necessary for them: Let the learned protestant bring forth and show such a
Communion book, or any leaf, line, or word of any such doctrine, or any
church or congregation, that ever had any authentical service or ministration
of the Sacraments, other then that which is yet daily and openly practiced in
the common known catholic church of Christ, And I shall then recant, and
not before.

Twelfth: I demand of the learned the learned Protestant shall be able to show
good cause and reason, why our Catholic Church, having by their own consent
and approving lawful priests, Bishops and spiritual ministers, not to be also
the lawful, true and catholic church of Christ, I will then recant, and not
before.

histories, and old ancient writers, these things to be the monumentes of
their conuenticles and private congregations, of their faith and religion, and
not of the common known faith, religion, and catholic Church of Christ,
Then I shall in like manner yield and recant, and not before.

Fourthtene, Let the learned Protestant only the holy and blessed fellowship
of the common known catholic church of Christ, And I will then recant, and
not before.

of argument to satisfye these my requests, Then I shall yield and recant,
and not before.

Sixtene, when the protestant shall be able to prove, that those persons

Seuenthtene, I demand of the learned protestant, whether if the whole space
of that thousand years of blindness, wherein their Church lay hid and
unknown, suppressed by papistrie, superstition and Idolatrye, as they term
it, whether they which were then baptized, and openly professed Christ, were
saved or not? If the Protestant do answer, yea, consequently it follows,
that they were saved without the Church of Christ, living in all ignorance,
superstition and Idolatry, as they say. If he answer no, and that there was no
salvation out of their hid and unknown Church, then all men of all degrees,
young and old, for the whole space of the foresaid thousand years (by the
Protestants judgment) perished without all hope of Gods mercy, and were
damned, When therefore the learned Protestant shall be able to prove by good
reason and argument, either that there is a way to salvation without the Church
of Christ, or that all people professing Christ, perished for so many
hundredth years together, Then I will recant, and not before.

Eightene, Let the learned Protestant

Ninthtene, Again, on the other world, for the space of fiftene hundred years
past, exercised preaching, the conversion of nations to the obedience of the
Gospel, that has always had the administration of Sacraments, the hearing of
matters in controversy, the orderlye succession of Bishops, the uniformity of
solemn Ceremonies, and the unity of faith, that has in her self all holy
functions of the spirit, as working of miracles, remission of sins, the true
sense and interpretation of Gods word, that is beautifyed with diversity of
states commended by Christ, as with martyrs, with confessors, holy virgins,
and such other. Let ye protestant prove unto me, that this is not ye true
church, and that we are not bound to obey and believe this church, and none
other, in all controversies and doubts vprising either by ye difficulty of
scripture, or by vain contention and pride of heretics, and I will yield and
recant, and not before.

Twenty, Moreover, let the learned protestant prove, that ye true and
catholic Ioh. 14.
Et ego rogabo patre^, et alium paracletum dabit vobis, vt maneat vobiscum in
aeternum) or falsely to interpret any sentence of holy scripture, or to induce
any error among ye people, or approve unprofitable and hurtful vsages among the
christians, or that she suffers any damnable abuse in her religion, without
open reprehension thereof: Let the learned protestant prove any of these
points, And I will then yield and recant, and not before.

One and twenty, If unity in faith, exercised and used in our common known
catholic church, then in the protestants congregation: And contrariwise, if
discord in religion, licentiousnes in living, contempt of discipline, rejecting
of penance, lothsomnes of fasting, lack of zeal and devotion, disobedience
to Magistrates, Sacrilege, Apostacy, breaking of vows, unlawful lusts,
wantonness in all life and manners, do not agree better, and more clear to the
protestants, then to the catholics, being the plain signs and fruits of a
false church, Then will I recant, and not before.

holy, which had for so long time and space neither the doctrine of Christ's
Gospel taught in it, neither Baptism, nor any other Sacrament of Christ
used to sanctifye them withal, or that it could be called one church, which,
as soon as it grew up, and showed it self to the world, was divided into so
many and sundry sects, of Lutherans, Zuinglians, Illiricans, Caluinists,
Swenfeldians, Anabaptists, and such other: or that it might be called
Apostolic, which could never make an account by orderly succession and
descent from any one of Christ his Apostles, or any other Apostolic man, or
that their secret, hid and unknown congregation was ever of that majesty or
authoriti, yt it had at any one time or season, the true obedience of all
christian nations, or that it was ever able to assemble and gather universal
and general Councels of all nations and christian people, or to exercise any
discipline or correction upon offenders throughout all kingdoms and regions
professing Christ: or that these titles following properly applied by the
Scriptures and doctors to the true church of Christ, could ever be challenged
by any right to their hid and unknown congregation, I mean, these titles,
namelye Corpus Christi, The body of Christ, Sponsa Christi, The spouse of
Christ, Amica Christi, The lover of Christ: Vnice dilecta Christo, Dearly
beloved of Christ: Columba speciosa, The beautiful dove: Domus dei, The house
of God: Columna veritatis, The pillar of truth: Ciuitas dei The City of God:
Ciuitas super montem posita, A City set upon an hill: Fons signatus, A spring
or fountain surely signed and sealed: Sponsa Agni The spouse of the Lamb:
Mulier amicta sole, A woman clothed with ye Sun: Habitatio fratru^ inuice^, a
dwelling of brethren all together, Mons dei, The hill of God, Sacra Anchora,
The holy Anchore: Vinea Domini, Our Lords vineyarde: Terra viuentium, The
land of the living: Ecclesia magna, The great and mighty Church: Archa Noe,
Noes Arche: Vna, Sancta, Catholica, et Apostolica Ecclesia, One, holy,
Catholic, and Apostolic Church: Domus pacis, The house of peace: Domus
refugij, The house of refuge: Domus veritatis, The house of truth: Societas
Sanctorum, The fellowship of holy Saints: Nutrix Christianorum, The Norishe of
the Christians: Vxor de latere Christi, The Spouse out of Christ his side,
sicut Eua de latere Adam, like as Eve was out of the side of Adam. Let the
learned Protestant make proof, that these most excellent propertyes and
peculier Denominations and Callinges may possiblye agree to their hid and
unknown congregations and private societies, or to any other known society
of the whole world, but only to the holy society, most blessed company and
fellowship of the common known catholic Church of Christ, And I will then
relent, yield, and recant, and not before.

Last of all, Certain and assured signs and tokens of false prophets,
heretics and schismatikes.
when these notes following, being most certain and sure signs and tokens of
Antichristians, false Prophets, heretics, and schismatikes, mentioned, and
manifestlye expressed in diverse parts of the scriptures, shall by the learned
protestant be proved more aptly and truly to agree unto us of the common
known catholic Church of Christ, then unto the protestants of so many
sundry and diverse sects and congregations, I shall submit, yield and recant,
and not before.

to Antichrists, false Prophets, heretics and schismatikes, in the
scripture, is, their departure from the common known catholic church of
Christ, wherein they were baptized, and first received christian faith and
religion, of the which sign and token speaks Thapostle S. John, saying: 1.
John. 2.
Ex nobis prodierunt, sed non erant ex nobis, nam si fuissent ex nobis,
permansissent vtique nobiscum. They departed from us, but they were not of us,
for if they had been of us (and of our Church) they would (says Thapostle
S. John) have continued with us still, and not have departed from us. And here
now the learned protestant, not being able to deny, that they have departed
from our common known catholic church, from our faith and religion, wherein
they were first baptized, and not we departed from them, but still remaining
in the profession of the same faith and religion that we first received: he
must needs by the dryfte of argument and reason grant also, that this first
sign and token of false prophets, heretics, and schismatiks was before
spoken of the Apostle S. John, only of them, and not of us.

Romans 10.
Quomodo enim praedicabunt nisi mittantur? How shall men preach except they be
sent? And in his Epistle to the Hebrews he says: Heb. 5.
Nec quisquam sibi sumit honorem, nisi qui vocatur a deo, quemadmodum et Aaron.
Let no man take unto himself honor, except he be called of God, like as
Aaron was. Certain it is, that Aaron was called unto the office and dignity
of a Bishop, ordinarily by Moses, and by external and visible unction. Moses
himself was extraordinarilye called and sent of God, approved by miracle, as
it appears in the fourth Chapter of Exodus. And therefore the Apostle S Paul
names Aaron, and not Moises, to signifye, that all extraordinary vocations by
miracles (as Moses was) are now ceased, and that we must from henceforth be
ordinarilye called by external unction, as Aaron was. When therefore the
learned protestant shall be able to prove their just and due vocation ordinarily
or extraordinarilye to proceed of God, and not only of man, I shall then
yield and recant, and not before.

Third sign and token of false Prophets, heretics and Schismatiks, is, that
they being first departed from the catholic church, and secondarily not
called, do forthwith al of them selves preach and teach contentiouslye and
seditiously against the doctrine before time taught of the common known
catholic church of Christ, as against the Sacraments of Christ his Church,
by a flat denial of many of them, against the real presence of Christ his
body in the holy Eucharist, against ye blessed sacrifice of the Mass
propitiatorye both for the live and the dead, against penance, and worthy
fruits thereof, by fasting, watch, prayer, and all straightnes of life,
against vows, invocation of Saints, prayer for souls departed, and finally
against the church it self, flatlye denying, that Christ has here upon the
earth any Spouse or visible church here to be heard speak, perceived or
seen. The Apostle S. Paul in admonition giving unto us, to beware of this
sign and token, Heb. 13.
says: Doctrinis varijs et peregrinis nolite abduci. Be not you led and
carried away with these diverse and strange doctrines: so termed of Thapostle
S. Paul, because they are not agreing, but contrary to the received and common
known doctrine of Christ his catholic church. When therefore the learned
Protestant s^al be able to prove, that they and their congregations are not the
raysers up of these contentions and strifes, by their preaching of these
strange doctrines, but we, that are members of the catholic Church, Then I
will submit and recant, and not before.

Fourth sign and token of false prophets, heretics and schismatikes, is,
Schisma in ecclesiam introducere, To bring into the church of Christ by their
doctrine, schism, division and seperatio^ of one member from another, and of
the whole mystical body from the true head Jesus Christ. For whereas the
health and salvation of Christ his flock and people does most chiefly
consist in peace, concord, and unity, they therefore which by schism do
divide and disperse his flock, and of one society and fellowship before, do
make many and diverse, they innot sparing nor preserving in unity ye flock of
Christ, are become raue^^ng wolves. Thapostle S. Paul knowing the great
danger and hurt vprising of schism, does most humblye beseech us with all
diligent circumspection to avoid the same, saying: Obsecro vos fratres per
nomen domini nostri Jesus Christi, 1. Cor. 1.
vt idipsum dicatis omnes, et non sint in vobis schismata, sitis autem perfecti
in eodem sensu, et in eadem sententia. I beseech you brethren by the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all say one thing, and that there be no
schisms among you, but be perfect, in one mind, and one meaning. Now if the
learned protestant shall be able to prove, that whereas about the time of three
score years and above, we were al (not only here in this Realm, but
universally in all other Realms professing Christ) of one Church, of one
faith and religion, and of one unity therein: if he shall be able to prove, that
this late schism, whereby we are so divided and dispersed, that some are
become Lutherans, some Zuinglians, some Caluinists, some Puritans and
Anabaptists, did proceed from us, and from the common known Catholic Church
of Christ, and not whollye from their private Church and congregations, and
of the deceptfull and false doctrine by them preached and taught, I shall then
stay no longer, but yield and recant, and not before.

Et non obedire, sed resistere eis qui praesunt in ecclesia dei: And not to
obey, but resist those which do bear rule, and govern in the church of God:
of the which sort of men the Apostle S. Paul gives us warning saying:
Quemadmodum Iamnes et Mambres restiterunt Moysi, 2. Tim. 3.
ita et hi resistunt veritati, Exodus 7.
homines corrupti me^te, reprobi circa fidem. Like as Iamnes and Mambres did
resist Moises, even so do these resist the truth, being men of corrupt mind,
and reprobates in faith. Now when the learned protestant shall be able to prove,
that this rebellion and disobedience to all Bisshops, prelates, and
ecclesiastical governors, is to be found in the catholic church, and not in
the private church and congregations of the protestants, Then I shall yield,
submit and recant, and not before.

Sixte sign and token of false prophets, Quod quaelibet haeresis prae
catholicae fidei peepetua firmitate facile transit ac perit. For that every
heresye, in comparison of the stabilitie and perpetual continuance and firmnes
of the catholic faith, does soon perish and pass away. Thapostle S Peter in
speaking of these false prophets, says: Magistri mendaces superducent sibi
celerem perditionem, et perditio eorum non dormitat: These lying masters do
bring upon them selves a quick and speedy overthrow, and their destruction
shall not be slacked nor slowed. The truth of this testimony is to be tried by
all sectaries and sorts of heretics that ever have been, as of the
Nicolaites, Arrians, Donatists, Maniches, Pelagians, Iouinists, Nestorians,
Nouatians, Sabellians, and the rest of heretics, whose errors and heresies
being never so stoutly vpholde^ by Emperors, kings and princes, yet by
general councels, and censures of Christ his catholic church, they had in
fine their just condemnation and overthrow. What should I here make mention
of the Lutherans and protestants of our time? When the Lutherans here in this
Realm have taken their just overthrow already, for the great desire the
protestants had to prefer the doctrine of the Oecolampadians, Suinglians and
Caluinists. The Suinglians and Caluinists with the rest sectaryes of all sorts
are now here in this Realm at the very near and like point, they being now
ready to yield up the ghost, and to tylte up their heels for the great
desire the common and baser sort of the people have to be Precisians and
Puritans. And they being winked at of the Magistrates, there be no small number
of all degrees and sorts of men that do further and favor them in this their
attempt, to the great increase of the^. It cannot therefore be denied, but that
all sectaryes and heresies are on this wise moving, sitting, and ever passing
from one sect to another, without any long time of continuance or stay in any
one of them, until they come ad profundum malorum, and to a most plain and
open apostacy, to be miscreants, Turkishe, and of Mahomets religion, not
caring or setting by God, nor the devil, neither for heaven nor hell. Now
heresies being thus ficle and moving, the final end of them thus lamentable
and horrible in the sight of God, Let any learned protestant living answer
directlye and playnelye without all cavil, color, or fraud of words,
without all unprofitable and impertinent digressions, not only to this, but to
all the foresaid signs tokens, and demaundes, And I shall for company and good
fellowship with them, leave the common known church, and the plain way of
salvation, beaten by our forefathers for the space of these fyftene hundred
years past, and now wander with the^ in their uncertain bypathes, through
unknown deserts, rough woods, brambles and briars, to seek in the end we
cannot tell what.

And here to conclude, and of my part to minister unto you some occasion in the
relinquishing of these private churches and congregations of sectaries, to
return to the unity and atonement of the common known catholic church of
Christ, where stabilitie and constancy of faith and religion is only to be
found, I shall here lay before you the worthy example of the blessed martyr
Sebastian, by him brought of a loaf of bread to Genserichus then king of the
Vandales, a furious and a barbarous nation, which breaking into Affrike, they
found there many valiant captayns placed by the Emperor Theodosius the
second, for the defense and sauegarde of the country: among the rest was this
Sebastian, by dignity an earl, and a courageous and valiant captain, who
with the rest yielding to the force of Gensericus, was, as Victor de
persecutione Vandalorum writes, for his great wisdom and valiantnes not so
much beloved as feared of the king Genserichus, who being an Arrian, intended
by color of religion to work his death. For Genserichus knowing Sebastian to
be a severe and a perfect christian man, conuented him before the Arrian
Bishops, and under the pretense that amity and frendshippe might be the surer,
and continue the longer betwixt them, Genserichus moved him to become an
Arrian, and to profess the same manner of belief and religion, as he and his
people were of. For answer this holy martyr Sebastian requested Genserichus
the king to command a fine wheten loaf to be brought unto him, and taking it
in his hand (and here to omit many of his words and notable sayings) he
requested the king Genserichus, to command the loaf of bread to be broken in
pieces, to be ground, brought to flower, and boulted afreshe, to be seasoned
with water and salt, and baked again, if then it should in the end prove
better bread then it was before he would not fail to accomplish the king
Genserichus his will and pleasure: but if it were not possible by breaking of
the loaf, and baking of it again, to better it, but to make worse bread
then before, he would not, nor could not consent thereunto: And in fine suffered
death, in ye defense of the christian faith and religion by him already
professed and received, rather then he would condescend to the impayring,
infringing or breaking of any part thereof. And so Genserichus caused this
blessed man Sebastian to dye a holy Martyr. Thus much I have brieflye deducted
out of the history of Victor, to yt intent, that so apt and familiar an
example of so holy and blessed a martyr, might in these perplexities and
doubts in these often changes and mutations of religion, confort ye weaklings
of Christ his church, and bring them to some more better stay, when by this
example of Sebastians loaf, certain and sure we may be, that the loaf of the
unity of Christ his Church, the loaf of his Gospel, faith and religion,
being by schism and heresye never so often broken, never so finely grynded,
boulted, searced and syfted, kneaded, and baked again and again, they shall
never be able to better it, or to bring it to that perfection which it had
before. And therefore all their attemptes to the contrary are most vain, the
only remembrance of this Sebastians loaf should suffice to confyrme the
faithful, to stay the wavering and weaklinges, and to pluck the deceived
back again, and to cause them in leaving of this their fickle waueringnes of
this their proceedinges (as they term it) from one sect to another, from one
congregation to another, and from their scatering abroad with Antichriste, to
stay them selves, and to gather them selves with our Savior Christ into the
unity of his common known catholic church, where they shall be sure to ^ynd
unity of religion, uniformity in all ceremonies and obseruances of the same,
with thattonement of christian faith throughout in all Sacraments and articles
of our Creed, to the pacifying of many contentions and strifes among us, to
the quietation of men's consciences, causing us all professors of Christ, as
brethren here to live together in quietness, peace and unity, to the more
better assurance of the public estate of this Realm, and to the great
glory and honor of almighty God, to whom be all praise, honor and glory
world without end.

Amen.
FINIS.

