THE WHOLE BOOK OF PSALMS: WITH THE HYMNS EVANGELICALL, AND Songs
SPIRITVALL. Composed into 4. parts by sundry Authors, with such several Tunes
as have been, and are usually sung in England, Scotland, Wales, Germany,
Italy, France, and the Netherlands: Never as yet before in one Volume
published. ALSO: A brief Abstract of the Praise, Efficacy, and Virtue of the
Psalms.

Newly corrected and enlarged by Tho. Rauenscroft Bachelar of Music.

Gloria in excelsis Deo. LONDON: Printed by Thomas Harper for the Company of
Stationers, 1633.

THE NAMES OF THE Authors which Composed the Tunes of the PSALMS into 4. parts.
THomas Tallis. John Donland Doctor of Music. Thomas Morley Bachelar of
Music. Gyles Farnaby Bachelar of Music. Thomas Tomkins Bachelar of Music.
John Tomkins Bachelar of Music. Martin Pierson Bachelar of Music. William
Parsons. Edmund Hooper* George Kirby. Edward Blancks. Richard Allison. John
Farmer. Michael Cauendish. John Bennet. Robert Palmer. John Milton. Simon
Stubbs. William Cranford. William Harrison. Thomas Rauenscroft Bachelar of
Music.
OF THE PRAISE, Virtue, and Efficacy of the PSALMS.
THe Kingly Prophet David, Psalm. 47. 6. says; O sing praises, sing praises
unto our God, O sing praises, sing praises unto our King: Sing praises with
understanding. Again, Psalm. 95. 2. Let us show our selves glad in him with
Psalms. And good reason have we to sing chearefully unto God, for the Angels
join their presence and congratulation with the singers devotion, as the same
Psalmist sings, Psalm. 138. In conspectu angelorum psallam tibi; Even before
the Gods will I sing praise unto thee: Wherefore we ought diligently to take
heed, that by ou^ idleness, negligence, and want of practice, we cause not
the Angels to depart from us. And indeed there is no mortal man which can
express in words, or conceive in thought, the virtues of the Psalms, and the
praises of the Lord, if with a pure and serious attention of the heart they
shall be performed as they ought to be.

In the Psalms, are described the rewards of good, the punishments of evil
men, the rudiments of beginners, the progress of proficients, and consummation
of perfect men:

The singing of Psalms (as say the Doctors) comfort the sorrowful,
pacifieth the angry, strengthens the weak, humbles the proud, gladdeth the
humble, stirs up the flow, reconcileth enemies, lifts up the heart to
heavenly things, and unites the Creature to his Creator, for whatsoever is in
the Psalms, conduces to the edification, benefit, and consolation of mankind.

Would thou make a confession, and repent thee of thy sins? Then sing with
remorse and humility the seven penitential Psalms of David, and thou shall
feel the sweet mercy of God and thy mind refreshed with spiritual joy.

Would thou pray? Then pour forth thy soul in the Psalms 25. 54. 67. 70*
72. 86. 143. For the soul of man cannot either feelingly express his misery,
tribulation and anguish of temptation, or more powerfully call upon the mercy
of God, then in these Psalms.

Would thou praise the Majesty of God, or give him thanks for all his
benefits? then sing the 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 111, 113, 144, 145, 146,
147, 148, 149, 150.

If thou be so far afflicted with outward and inward temptations, that thou
seem to be forsaken, then sing heartily the 22. 64. 69. Psalms.

If this present life be tedious unto thee, and that with an ardent desire thou
waitest to see God, then sing the 42, 63, 84. Psalms.

If thou find thy self quite dejected, and as it were forlorn in trouble,
then with compunction of heart sing the 13, 31, 44, 54, 56. Psalms, and when
thou have found ease and rest unto thy soul, O sing to the praise of God, the
30, 34, 103, 104. Psalms, and always whether in the time of adversity, or
prosperity, sing out the song of the three Children, wherein every creature is
invited to praise God.

But do thou desire to exercise thy self in the divine praises and precepts
of the Lord? Content thy self then and sing the 119. Psalm, wherein although
even to the end of thy life thou shall have sought and searched all that thou
can, yet shall thou never perfectly understand the virtues and excellencies,
or reach unto the heights and depths which are comprehended in it: for hardly
is there a verse in that whole Psalm wherein is not mention made of Gods Law,
Commandments, Testimonies and Precepts.

In a word, he that would give these heavenly Hymns their due, had need to
compose a Psalm in praise of the Psalms, that so the devout and joyful soul
might with looking up unto God, reflect upon its own work, and transport it
self unto the quire of Angels and Saints, whose perpetual task is to sing
their concording parts without pause, redoubling and descanting; Holy, Holy,
Holy, Lord God of Hosts. And if Vocal Music be not full enough, let the
Isntrumental be added, Reuelat. 15. 2. They have in their hands the Harps of
God, and sing the song of Moses, and the song of the Lamb, saying, Great and
meruai^^us are thy works Lord God Almighty. Amen.

THE WHOLE BOOK OF PSALMS: WITH THE HYMNS EVANGELICALL, AND Songs
SPIRITVALL. Composed into 4. parts by sundry Authors, with such several Tunes
as have been, and are usually sung in England, Scotland, Wales, Germany,
Italy, France, and the Netherlands: Never as yet before in one Volume
published. ALSO: A brief Abstract of the Praise, Efficacy, and Virtue of the
Psalms.

Newly corrected and enlarged by Tho. Rauenscroft Bachelar of Music.

Gloria in excelsis Deo. LONDON: Printed by Thomas Harper for the Company of
Stationers, 1633.

TO ALL THAT HAVE Skill, or Will unto Sacred Music, I wish CONCORD among
themselves, with GOD, and with their own CONSCIENCES.
HArmonicall Br^thren, I have here undertaken with no small labor, and charge,
to bring the Tunes of the Psalms, Hymns Evangelical, and Songs Spiritual, (
as they are usually sung throughout Great Britain) into one entire volume;
which are so Composed, for the most part, that the unskillful may with little
practice, be enabled to sing them in parts, after a plausible manner.

In my opinion, it is too Laborious a task for any Man to study the attainement
of the Hebrew Musical Accents; For the Tunes used in David's Time, are too
far removed from our understanding. For albeit the Hebrew Musical Characters
are placed sometimes above the Letter, sometimes beneath, yet the knowledge of
what was signified by those Notes and Characters, was only continued by
Tradition, and is now utterly lost, though many at sundry times (as appears
by their writings) have gone about to revive it: But having no better subject
to work upon, then their own weak conjectures, they have but a little
prevailed. I find yet that the Characters now used in the Rushian Church, (
who had their skill in Music from the Graecians) though they differ in the
placing, (because those of the Hebrews are both above and beneath the Letter,
these only above) yet they partly resemble one another in the form.

Again, I find by sundry Manuscripts, that the Latin Church, as well in the
form of their Characters, as likewise in the placing of them, did participate
of both. For first, according to the manner of the Hebrews, they placed their
Notes both above and beneath the Letter. Afterward they used one line above
the Letter, and placed their Notes both above and beneath the line, and that
with a Geometrical distance, as the ascent and descent of the sounds did
require.

In process of time (as all things are brought to their perfection by degrees)
they came to two lines, then to three. And Gu^do Aretinus, a learned man (whom
Histories report to have lived in the time of Henry the 2. Emperor, in the
year of our LORD, 1018.) was the first that invented the uniform of the
Scale, ( which we term Gam^vt) and brought in the four lines, which was and
only is now used in the Church for Phonaskes, distinguished by the Gregorian,
Ambrosian, and Perigrine Tones, comprehended in the distance of a Diatessaron
or a Diapente, viz. a fourth or a fifth, or the Harmonicall proportions of
sesqui tertia and sesquialtera: and by degrees it came to the distance of a
Diapason, which is an eight, and a Duple proportion; in which three
proportions, all Simple and Compound Harmony consists, by the Plagall and
Authenticke division of the Tones and Tropes. The which Phonaskes are explained
by the Tenor part, being the Faburden or Playn-song of the Psalms, Anthems,
and Responces usually sung in the Church in Prose, and Hymns that were
Composed in Verse and Meeter.

The five lines are used for Symphonaskes or Parts Compounded of 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
voices, etc.

The six lines are used for Isntrumental Music, as Organs, Harpes, Lutes,
etc.

But whatsoever the Tunes were in David's time, there is no question but they
were concordant and Harmonious, which could not be, had they not been divided
in parts. For if ye look into 1 Chro. chap. 15. 16. verse, ye shall see how
the Prophet David at the Reduction of the Arc, as likewise Solomon his Son,
at the Dedication of the Temple, 2 Chro. chap. 6. 31. verse, distinguished all
their Music in parts, and appointed such to be Masters and Ouer-seers of it,
as were most eminent for their knowledge in that kind; as Chenaniah the chief
Leuite, to have the chief place, which was to be Master of the Song. An office
which consisted not only in the direction of the Quire, but likewise in the
trayning up of others to sing, that there might be still a supply of able
persons for that service: Asaph the next, and so Heman his Brother, likewise
Ieduthun and Ethan, all of them the most renowned chanters of those Times, and
such as successively in one another absence, were to direct the due
performance of that charge, so that not only the voice of the Singers, but
likewise the sound of the Instruments agreed so well together, that they seemed
to be but one Sound, and one Voice.

Neither was this method confined only to the Old Testament, but sanctified to
the Church of Christ by the prescription of the holy Apostle S. Paul, Col. 3.
verse 16. Let the word of God dwell plenteously in you, in all wisdom,
teaching and admonishing your own selves, in Psalms, Hymns and Spiritual
songs, singing with a Grace to the Lord in your hearts.

I have therefore endeavored for the fitting of every Heart to that Psalm,
which it shall most affect, to place special Tunes, proper to the nature of
each Psalm, (not imitating Art so much, as the natural inclination, but
joining one with another,) and am bold to admonish the Singers that they
observe three Rules.

1 That Psalms of Tribulation be sung with a low voice and long measure, Psalm.
9. 32. 38. 51. 102. 130. 143. etc.

2 That Psalms of Thanksgiving be sung with a voice indifferent, neither too
loud, nor too soft, and with a measure neither too swift nor too slow, Psalm.
18. 23. 27. 30. 31. 46. 48. 66. 81. 104. 105. 111. 118. 122. 124. 126. 138. 144
145. 146.

3 That Psalms of Rejoicing be sung with a loud voice, a swift and iocund
measure, Psalm. 33. 34. 47. 84. 95. 96. 98. 99. 108. 113. 117. 135. 136. 145.
147. 148. 150.

In all which, the observing of Time, Tune, and Ear, will produce a perfect
Harmony.

Accept kindly, what I have labored earnestly, and use it to thy comfort.
Thus I end, humbly wishing to all true Christian hearts, that sweet
consolation, in singing praises unto God here upon Earth, as may bring us
hereafter, to bear a part with the Quire of Angels in the Heavens.

Your well according, and best wishing Brother, Tho. Rauenscroft.

AN INDEX OF SVCH Names of the Tunes of the Psalms, usually sung in Cathedral
Churches, Collegiats, Chapels, etc. As also, the foreign Tunes usually sung
in Great Britain.
English Tunes:
BAthe and Wels, or Glasenbury, Psalms. 19. 63 140 Bristoll. 16. 64 Cambridge.
2. 73. 106. 117. 128 Canterbury. 25 Chichester. 22. 53* 110 Christ's Hospital.
72. 107 Ely. 21. 2. part of the 51. Psalm. Exceter. 15. 65 Gloucester. 10. 48.
143 Hereford. 11. 49. 144 Lincoln. 7. 56. 14^ Lichfield and Couentry. 9. 58
London. 67 Norwich. 5. 55. 102 Oxford. 4. 74 109. 129 Peterborough. 8. 57
Rochester. 24. 82. 139 Salisbury. 17. 54 Winchester. 23. 84. 98. 101. 116 133.
150 Windsor or Eaton. 62. 85. 108 123 Worcester. 13. 47. 97. Woluerhampton. 26.
83
Northern Tunes.
York. 27. 66. 115. 138 Durham. 28. 76 Chester. 31. 80. 129. 146 Carleile. 29.
79 Southwell. 2 p. of the 50. Ps. 70. 134 Manchester. 147.
Scottish Tunes.
Kings. 32. 86 Dukes. 33. 87 Abbey. 34. 88 Dumfermeling. 35. 89 Dundy. 36. 90
Glascow. 37. 91 Martyrs. 39. 92. 99. 118
Welsh Tunes.
Landaph. 40. 93 Bangor. 42. 94 S. David's. 43. 95 S. Asaph or Wrixham. 96
Ludlow. 45
Low Dutch Tones. 12. 60. 114. 131. High Dutch Tones. 112. 125. 127. Italian
Tones. 120 French Tones. 50, 100, 111, 113, 121, 122, 124, 126, 130, the 10.
Commandments. English Tunes imitating the High Dutch, Italian, French, and
Netherlandish Tones. 1. 3 6, 14, 18, 21, 30, 38, 41, 44, 51, 52, 59, 61, 68,
69, 71, 77, 78, 103, 104, 119, 132, 136, 137, 141.
FINIS.
Veni Creator.
T. R. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ COme holy Ghost eternal God, proceeding from above: both ^ from the Father
and the Son, the God of peace and love. Visit our minds, and ^ into us thy
heavenly grace in- spire: that in all truth and godliness, ^ we may have true
de- sire.

MEDIVS.
^ COme holy Ghost eternal God, proceeding from above, both ^ from the Father
and the Son, the God of peace and love. Visit our minds, and ^ in- to us thy
heavenly grace inspire: that in all truth and godliness ^ we may have true
de- sire.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ COme ho- ly Ghost eternal God, proceeding from above: both ^ from the
Father and the Son, the God of peace and love. Visit our minds, and ^ into us
thy heavenly grace inspire: that in all truth and godliness ^ we may have
true desire.

BASSVS.
^ COme holy Ghost eternal God, proceeding from above, both ^ from the Father
and the Son, the God of peace and love. Visit our minds, and ^ into us thy
heavenly grace inspire: that in all truth and godliness ^ we may have true
desire.

Thou art the very comforter
in all vvoe and distress:
The heavenly gift of God most hie,
which no tongue can express.
The fountain and the lively spring
of joy celestial:
The fire so bright, and love so clear,
and unction spiritual.
Thou in thy gifts art manifold,
whereby Christ's Church does stand,
Infaithfull hearts vvriting thy law,
the finger of Gods hand.
According to thy promise made,
thou give speech of grace:
That through thy help the praise of God
may stand in every place.
O holy Ghost into our wits
send down thy heavenly light:
Kindle our hearts with fervent love
to serve God day and night.
Strength and stablish all our weakness,
so feeble and so frail:
That neither flesh, the world nor devil
against us do prevail.
Put back our enemies far from us,
and grant us to obtain
Peace in our hearts with God and man,
without grudge or disdain.
And grant O Lord that thou being
our leader and our guide:
We may eschew the snares of sin,
and from thee never slide:
To us such plenty of thy grace,
good Lord, grant we thee pray:
That thou may be our comforter
at the last dreadful day.
Of all strife and dissension,
O Lord dissolve the bands:
And make the knots of peace and love
throughout all christian Lands.
Grant us O Lord through thee to know
the Father most of might:
That of thy dear beloved son,
we may enjoy the sight:
And that with perfect faith also
we may acknovvledge thee.
The spirit of them both alvvay,
one God in persons three.
Laud and praise be to the Father,
and to the son equal:
And to the holy spirit also,
one God coeternall,
And pray we that the only son
vouchsafe his spirit to send
To all that do profess his name
unto the worlds end.
The humble suit of a sinner.
Robert Palmer.
CANTVS.
^ O Lord of whom I do depend, behold my careful heart: and when ^ thy
will and plea- sure is, release me of my smart. Thou see my sor- ^ rovves
what they are, my grief is known to thee: and there is none ^ that can
remove, or take the same from me.

MEDIVS.
^ O Lord of whom I do de- pend, behold my careful heart: and when ^ thy
will and pleasure is, release me of my smart. Thou see my sorrovves ^ what
they are, my grief is known to thee, and there is none that can ^ remove, or
take the same from me.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ O Lord of whom I do depend, behold my careful heart: and when ^ thy
will and pleasure is, release me of my smart. Thou see my sorrovves ^ what
they are, my grief is known to thee: and there is none that can ^ remove, or
take the same from me.

BASSVS.
^ O Lord of whom I do depend, behold my careful heart: and when ^ thy
will and pleasure is, release me of my smart. Thou see my sorrovves ^ what
they are, my grief is known to thee, and there is none that can ^ remove, or
take the same from me.

But only thou whose aid I crave*
whose mercy still is pressed
To ease all those that come to thee
for succor and for rest.
And since thou see my restless eyes,
my tears and grievous groan;
Attend unto my suit (O Lord)
mark well my plaint and moan.
For sin has so enclosed me,
and compast me about:
That I am now remediless,
if mercy help not out.
For mortal man cannot release*
or mittigate this pain:
But even thy Christ my Lord and God,
which for my sin was slain.
Whose bloody vvounds are yet to see,
though not with mortal eye:
Yet do thy Saints behold them all,
and so I trust shall I*
Though sin does ^inder me a while,
when thou shall see it good:
I shall enjoy the sight of him,
and see his vvounds and blood.
And as thine Angels, and thy Saints
do now behold the same:
So trust I to possess that place,
with them to praise thy name.
But whilst I live here in this vase,
where sinners do frequent:
Assist me ever with thy grace,
my sins still to lament.
Lest that I tread in sinners trace,
and give them my consent
To dvvell with them in wickedness,
vvhereto nature is bent,
Only thy grace must be my ^^ay,
lest that I fall down flat:
And being down, then of my self
cannot recover that.
Wherefore this is yet once again,
my suit and my request:
To grant me pardon for my sin,
that I in thee may rest.
Then shall my heart, my tongue and voice
be instruments of praise:
And in thy Church and house of Saints,
sing Psalms to thee alvvayes.
Venite exultemus. Psalm. 95.
I. Farmer.
CANTVS.
^ O Come and let us now rejoice, and sing unto the Lord: and to our ^ only
savior also with one accord. O let us come before his face, with ^ inward
reverence: confessing all our former sins, and that with diligence.

MEDIVS.
^ O Come and let us now rejoice, and sing unto the Lord and to our ^ only
savior, also with one accord. O let us come before his face with ^ inward
reverence: confessing all our former sins, and that with diligence.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ O Come and let us now rejoice, and sing unto the Lord: and to our ^ only
savior also with one accord. O let us come before his face with ^ inward
reverence: confessing all our former sins, and that with diligence.

BASSVS.
^ O Come and let us now rejoice, and sing unto the Lord: and to our ^ only
savior, al- so with one accord. O let us come before his face, with ^
inward reverence: confessing all our former sins, and that with diligence.

To thank him for his benefits,
alvvay distributing:
Wherefore to him right joyfully
in Psalms now let us sing.
And that because that God alone
is Lord magnificent:
And ek above all other Gods
a King omnipotent.
His people does not he forsake
at any time or tide:
And in his hands are all the coasts
of all the world so vvide.
And with his loving countenance
he looks every where:
And does behold the tops of all
the mountains far and near.
The sea and all that is therein
are his, for he them made:
And eke his hands have fashioned
the earth, which does not fade.
O Come therefore and worship him,
and down before him fall:
And let us weep before the Lord,
the which has made us all.
He is our God, our Lord and King,
and we his people are:
His flock and sheep of his pasture,
on whom he takes care.
To day if ye will hear his voice,
yet harden not your heart:
As in the bitter murmuring,
when ye were in desert.
Which thing was of their negligence
committed in their time
Of trouble in the wilderness,
a great and grievous crime.
Whereas your fathers tempted me,
and tried me every way:
They proved me, and savv my works
what I could do or say.
These forty years I have been grieved
with all this generation:
And evermore I said* they er^e
in their imagination.
VVherevvith their hearts were sore combred
long time and many days:
Wherefore I know assuredly
they have not known my vvayes.
To whom I in mine anger swore,
than they should not be blessed:
Nor see my joy celestial,
not enter in my rest.
Gloria Patri.
All laud and praise be to the Lord,
O that of might art most:
To God the Father and the son,
and to the holy Ghost.
As it in the beginning was,
for ever heretofore:
And is now at this present time,
and shall be evermore.
Te Deum. S. Amb.
Tho Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ We praise thee God, we knowledge thee the only Lord to be: ^ and as
eternal Father all the earth does worship thee. To thee all An- ^ gels cry,
the heavens and all the powers therein to thee Cherub and ^ Seraphin, to cry
they do not lin.

MEDIVS.
T. R. B. of M.
^ We praise thee God, we knowledge thee the only Lord to be: ^ and as
eternal Father all the earth does worship thee. To thee all An- ^ gels cry,
the heavens and all the powers there- in: to thee Cherub and ^ Seraphin, to
cry they do not lin.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ We praise thee God, we knowledge thee the only Lord to be: ^ and as
eternal Father all the earth does worship thee. To thee all An- ^ gels cry,
the heavens and all the powers therein: To thee Cherub and ^ Seraphin, to cry
they do not lin.

BASSVS.
^ We praise thee God, we knowledge thee the only Lord to be: ^ and as
eternal father all the earth does worship thee. To thee all An- ^ gels cry,
the heavens and all the powers therein: To thee Cherub and ^ Seraphin, to cry
they do not lin.

O holy, holy, holy Lord,
of Sabbath Lord the God:
Through heaven and earth thy praise is spread
and glory all abroad.
The Apostles glorious company,
yield praises unto thee:
The Prophets goodly fellowship
praise thee continually.
The noble and victorious host
of Martyrs sound thy praise*
The holy Church throughout the world
does knowledge thee alvvayes:
Father of endless majesty,
they do acknovvledge thee.
Thy Christ, thine honorable, (...)*
and only son to be.
The holy Ghost the Comforter,
of glory thou art King
O Christ, and of the Father art
the Son everlasting.
When sinful man's decay in hand
thou tookest to restore:
To be inclosde in Virgins womb,
thou did not abhor.
When thou had overcome of death
the sharp and cruel might,
Thou heavens kingdom did set op^
to each believing vvight:
In glory of the Father thou
do sit at Gods right hand:
We trust that thou shall come our judge
our cause to understand.
Lord help thy servants whom thou have
bought with thy precious blood,
And in eternal glory set
them with thy Saints so good.
O Lord do thou thy people save,
bless thine inheritance,
Lord govern them, and Lord do thou
for ever them advance.
We magnify thee day by day,
and world without an end:
Adore thy holy name O Lord,
vouchsafe us to defend
From sin this day. Have mercy Lord,
have mercy on us all:
And on us as we trust in thee,
Lord let thy mercy fall.
O Lord I have reposed all
my confidence in thee:
Put to confounding shame therefore
Lord let me never be.
The song of the 3 Children.
T: R. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ O All ye works of God the Lord, bless ye the Lord, praise him and ^
magnify him for e- uer.

MEDIVS.
^ O All ye works of God the Lord, bless ye the Lord, praise him and ^
magnify him for ever.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ O All ye works of God the Lord, bless ye the Lord, praise him and ^
magnify him for ever.

BASSVS.
^ O All ye works of God the Lord, bless ye the Lord, praise him and ^
magnify him for ever

2
O ye the Angels of the Lord,
bless ye the Lord, etc.
3
O ye the starry heavens hie,
bless ye the Lord, etc.
4
O ye the waters and the sky,
bless ye the Lord, etc.
5
O all ye powers of the Lord,
bless ye the Lord, etc.
6
O ye the shining Sun and Moon,
bless ye the Lord, etc.
7
O ye the glistring Stars of heaven,
bless ye the Lord, etc.
8
O ye the shovvers and dropping dew,
bless ye the Lord, etc.
9
O ye the blowing winds of God,
bless ye the Lord, etc.
10
O ye the fire and vvarming heat,
bless ye the Lord, etc,
11
Yea VVinter and the Summer ^ide,
bless ye the Lord etc.
12
O ye the devves and binding frosts,
bless ye the Lord.
13
O ye the frost and chilling cold,
bless ye the Lord, etc.
14
O ye congealed Ice and Snow,
bless ye the Lord, etc.
15
O all ye nights and lightsome days,
bless ye the Lord, etc.
16
O ye the darkness and the light,
bless ye the Lord, etc.
17
O ye the lightning and the clouds,
bless ye the Lord, etc.
18
O let the earth eke bless the Lord,
yea, bless the Lord, etc.
19
O ye the mountains, and the hills,
bless ye the Lord, etc.
20
O all ye green things on the earth,
bless ye the Lord, etc.
21
O ye the euer-springing Wels,
bless ye the Lord, etc.
22
O ye the seas, and ye the floods,
bless ye the Lord, etc.
23
Whales and all that in the waters move
bless ye the Lord, etc.
24
O all ye flying Fowls of the air,
bless ye the Lord, etc.
25
O all ye beasts and cattle eke,
bless ye the Lord, etc.
26
O ye the children of mankind,
bless ye the Lord, etc.
27
Let Israel eke bless the Lord,
bless ye the Lord, etc.
28
O ye the Priests of God the Lord,
bless ye the Lord, etc.
29
O ye the servants of the Lord,
bless ye the Lord, etc.
30
Ye spirits and souls of righteous men,
bless ye the Lord, etc:
31
O ye holy and ye meek of heart,
bless ye the Lord, etc.
32
O Ananias bless the Lord,
bless ye the Lord, etc.
33
O Azarias bless the Lord,
bless ye the Lord, etc.
And Misael bless thou the Lord,
bless thou the Lord, etc.
Benedictus.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ THe only Lord of Isra-el be praised evermore: For through his ^ visitation
and mercy kept in store, his people now he has redeemd that long ^ has been
in thral^, and spread abroad his saving health upon his servants all.

MEDIVS.
^ THe only Lord of Is-rael be praised evermore: For through his ^ vi-
sitation and mercy kept in store, his people now he has redeemd that long ^
has been in thrall, and spread abroad his saving health upon his servants all.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ THe only Lord of Isra- el be praised evermore: For through his ^ visitation
and mercy kept in store, his people now he has redeemd that long ^ has been
in thrall, and spread abroad his saving health upon his servants all.

BASSVS.
^ THe only Lord of Israel be prai- sed evermore: For through his ^ visitation
and mercy kept in store, his people now he has redeemd that long ^ has been
in thrall, and spread abroad his saving health upon his servants all.

In David's house his servant true
According to his mind:
And also his anointed King,
As we in Scripture find.
As by his holy Prophets all
Often times he did declare.
The which were since the world began
His vvayes for to prepare:
That we might be delivered
From those that make debate:
Our enemies, and from the hands
Of all that do us hate.
The mercy which he promised
Our Fathers to fulfill:
And think upon his covenant made
According to his will.
And also to perform the ^ath
Which he before had sworn
To Abraham our father dear,
For us that were forlorn.
That he would give himself for us,
And us from bondage bring,
Out of the hands of all our foes
To serve our heavenly King.
And that without all manner fear,
And eke in righteousness
And also for to lead our lives
In steadfast holiness.
And thou O child which now art borne,
And of the Lord elect,
Shall be the Prophet of the highest,
His vvayes for to direct.
For thou shall go before his face,
For to prepare his vvayes:
And also for to teach his will,
And pleasure all thy days.
To give the knowledge how that their
Salvation is near:
And that remission of their sins
Is through his mercy mere.
Whereby the Day spring from on high,
Is come us for to visit:
And those for to illuminate,
Which do in darkness sit.
To lighten those that shadowed be
With death, and eke oppressed:
And also for to guide our feet
The way to peace and rest.
Magnificat.
I. Farmer.
CANTVS.
^ MY soul does magnify the Lord, my sprite eke evermore, reioy- ^ ceth in
the Lord my God, which is my Savior: And why? because he did ^ re- guard, and
gave respect un- to so base estate of his hand maid, ^ and let the mighty go.

MEDIVS.
^ MY soul does magnify the Lord, my sprite eke ever- more, reioy- ^ ceth in
the Lord my God, which is my Savior. And vvy? be- cause he ^ did re-gard,
and gave respect unto so base estate of his handmaid: ^ and let the mighty go.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ MY soul does magnify the Lord, my sprite eke evermore, reioy- ^ ceth in
the Lord my God, which is my Savior. And why? because he ^ did regard and
gave respect unto so base estate of his hand- maid, ^ and let the mighty go.

BASSVS.
^ MY soul does magnify the Lord, my sprite eke euermoere, reioy- ^ ceth in
the Lord my God, which is my Savior: And why? because he ^ did regard, and
gave respect unto so base essate of his handmaid: ^ and let the mighty go.

For now behold all nations,
And generations all,
From this time forth for evermore,
Shall me right blessed call.
Because he has me magnified,
Which is the Lord of might:
Whose name be ever sanctified
And praised day and night.
For with his mercy and his grace,
All men he does in^ame:
Throughout all generations,
^o such as fear his name.
He shevved strength with his great arm
And made the proud to start
With all imaginations
That they bare in their heart.
He has put down the mighty ones
From their supernall seat:
And did exalt the m^eke in heart,
As he has thought it meet.
The hungry he replenished
With all things that were good:
And through his power he made the rich
Often times to want their food.
And calling to remembrance
His mercy every deal,
Has helped up assistantly,
His servant Israel.
According to his promise made
To Abraham before.
And to his seed successively,
To stand for evermore.
Nunc dimittis.
T. R. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ O Lord because my hearts desire has wished long to see, my only ^ Lord
and Savior, thy Son before I die: The joy and health of all mankind, desired ^
long before, which now is come into the world, of mercy bringing store*

MEDIVS.
^ O Lord because my hearts desire has wished long to see, my only ^ Lord
and savior, thy son before I die: The joy and health of all mankind, desired ^
long before: which now is come into the world, of mercy bringing store.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ O Lord because my hearts desire has wished long to see, my only ^ Lord
and Savior, thy Son before I die: The joy and health of all mankind, desired ^
long before: which now is come into the world, of mercy bringing store.

BASSVS.
^ O Lord because my hearts desire has wished long to see my only ^ Lord and
savior, thy son before I die: The joy and health of all mankind, desired ^
long before: which now is come into the world, of mercy bringing store.

Thou suffer thy servant now
In peace for to depart,
According to thy holy word,
Which lighteneth my heart.
Because mine eyes which thou have made
To give my body light,
Have now beheld thy saving health
Which is the Lord of might.
Whom thou mercifully have set
Of thine abundant grace:
In open sight and visible,
Before all peoples face.
The Gentiles to illuminate,
And satan over quell:
And eke to be the glory of
Thy people Israel.
Quicunque vult.
John Farmer.
CANTVS.
^ WHat man soever he be that salvation will attain: The Catho- ^ like
belief he must before all things retain: Which faith unless he ^ holy
keep, and vndefiledly, without all doubt eternally he shall be sure to die.

MEDIVS.
T. R. B. of M.
^ WHat man soever he be that salvation will attain: The Catho- ^ like
belief he must before all things re- taine. Which faith unless he holy ^
keep, and vnde- filedly, without all doubt eternally he shall be sure to die.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ WHat man soever he be that salvation will attain: The Catho- ^ like
belief he must before all things retain, Which faith unless he ^ holy
keep, and vndefiledly, without all doubt eternally he shall be sure to die.

BASSVS.
^ WHat man soever he be that salvation will attain: The Catho- ^ like
belief he must before all things retain. Which faith unless he holy ^
keep, and vndefiledly, without all doubt eternally he shall be sure to die.

The Catholic belief is this,
that God we worship one
In trinity, and Trinity
in Unity alone.
So as we neither do confound
the persons of the three:
Nor yet the substance whole of one
in sunder parted be.
One person of the Father is,
another of the Son,
Another person proper of
the holy Ghost alone.
Of Father, Son and holy Ghost,
but one the Godhead is:
Like glory, coeternall eke
the majesty likewise.
Such as the Father is, such is
the Son in each degree:
And such also we do believe
the holy Ghost to be.
Uncreate is the Father, and
uncreate is the Son:
The holy Ghost uncreate, so
uncreate is each one.
Incomprehensible Father is,
incomprehensible Son:
And comprehensible also is
the holy Ghost of none.
The Father is eternal and
the Son eternal so:
And in like sort eternal is
the holy Ghost also.
And yet though we believe that each
of these eternal be:
Yet there but one eternal is,
and not eternals three.
As ne incomprehensible we,
ne yet uncreate three:
But one incomprehensible one
uncreate hold to be.
Almighty so the Father is,
the Son almighty so:
And in like sort almighty is
the holy Ghost also.
And albeit that every one
of these Almighty be:
Yet there but one Almighty is,
and not almighties three.
The Father God is, God the Son,
God holy Ghost also:
Yet there are not three Gods at all,
but one God and no more.
So likewise Lord the Father is,
and Lord also the Son:
And Lord also the holy Ghost, yet are
there not three Lords but one.
For as we are compeld to grant
by Christian ve^itie:
Each of the persons by himself,
both God and man to be.
So Catholic religion
forbids us alvvay,
That either Gods be three, or that
there Lords be three to say.
Of none the Father is, ne made,
ne create, nor begot:
The son is of the Father, not
create ne made, but got.
The holy Ghost is of them both,
the Father and the Son:
Ne made, ne create, not begot,
but does proceed alone.
So we one Father hold, not three,
one Son also not three:
One holy Ghost alone, and not
three holy Ghosts to be.
None in this Trinity before
nor after other is:
Ne greater any then the rest,
ne lesser be likewise.
But every one among themselves,
of all the persons three:
Together coeternall all,
and all coequall be.
So Unity in Trinity,
as said it is before:
And Trinity in Unity
in all things we adore.
Therefore what man soever that
salvation will attain:
This faith touching the Trinity,
of force he must retain.
And needful to eternal life
it is that every vvight
Of the incarnation of Christ,
our Lord believe aright.
For this the ^ight faith is, that we
believe and eke do know,
That Christ our Lord the Son of God
is God and man also.
God of his Fathers substance, got
before the world began,
And of his mothers substance borne
in world a very man.
Both perfect God and perfect man,
in one, one Jesus Christ:
That does of reasonable soul
and humane flesh subsist
Touching his Godhead, equal with
his father God is he:
Touching his manhood lovver then
his Father in degree.
Who though he be both very God,
and very man also*
Yet is he but one Christ alone,
and is not persons two.
One not by turning of Godhead
into the flesh of man:
But by taking manhood to God,
this being one began.
All one, not by confounding of
the substance into one:
But only by the unity
that is of one person.
For as the reasonable soul
and flesh but one man is:
So in one person God and man,
is but one Christ likewise.
Who suffered for to save as all,
to hell he did descend:
The third day rose again from death,
to heaven he did ascend,
He sits at the right hand of God,
the Almighty Father there:
From thence to judge the quick and dead,
again he shall retire.
At whose return all men shall rise
with bodies new restorde:
And of their own works they shall give
account unto the Lord.
And they into eternal life
shall go that have done well:
Who have done ill, shall go into
eternal fire to dvvell.
This is the Catholic belief,
who does not faithfully
Believe the same, without all doubt
he saved cannot be.
To Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
all glory be therefore:
As in beginning was is now,
and shall be evermore.
The Lamentation.
Will. Parsons.
CANTVS.
^ O Lord turn not away thy face from him that lies prostrate: ^ Lamenting
sore his sinful life before thy mercy gate, Which gate thou ^ openest vvide
to those that do lament their sin: Shut not that gate ^ against me Lord, but
let me enter in.

MEDIVS.
^ O Lord turn not away thy face from him that lies prostrate: ^ Lamenting
sore his sinful life before thy mercy gate, Which gate thou ^ openest vvide
to those that do lament their sin: Shut not that gate ^ against me Lord,
but let me en- ter in.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ O Lord turn not away thy face from him that lies prostrate: ^ Lamenting
sore his sinful life before thy mercy gate, Which gate thou ^ openest vvide
to those that do lament their sin: Shut not that gate ^ against me Lord, but
let me enter in.

BASSVS.
^ O Lord turn not away thy face from him that lies prostrate: ^ Lamenting
sore his sinful life before thy mercy gate, Which gate thou ^ openest vvide
to those that do lament their sin: Shut not that gate ^ against me Lord, but
let me enter in.

And call me not to mi^e account,
How I have lived here,
For then I know right well O Lord,
How vile I shall appear.
I need not to confess my life,
I am sure thou can tell;
What I have been, and what I am,
I know thou know it well.
O Lord thou knovvst what things be past
And eke the things that be:
Thou know also what is to come,
Nothing is hid from thee.
Before the heavens and earth were made
Thou know what things were then,
As all things else that have been since,
Among the sons of men.
And can the things that I have done,
Be hidden from thee then*
Nay, nay thou know them all O Lord,
Where they were done and when.
Wherefore with tears I come to thee
To beg and to entreat.
Even as the child that has done ill,
And fears to be beat.
So come I to thy mercy gate,
Where mercy does abound:
Requiring mercy for my sin,
To heal my deadly vvound.
O Lord, I need not to repeat
What I do beg or crave:
Thou know O Lord before I ask,
The thing that I would have.
Mercy good Lord, mercy I ask,
This is the total sum:
For mercy Lord is all my suit,
Lord let thy mercy come.
The Lords Prayer.
John Farmer.
CANTVS.
^ Our Father which in heaven art, Lord hallowed be thy name, Thy ^ kingdom
come. Thy will be done in earth, even as the same in heaven is. ^ Give us (O
Lord) our daily bread this day. As we forgive our debtors, so for- ^ give our
debts we pray. In- to temptation lead us not. From evil make us ^ free. For
kingdom, power and glory thine, both now and ever be.

MEDIVS.
^ Our Father which in heaven art Lord hallowed be thy name. Thy ^ kingdom
come. Thy will be done in earth, even as the same in heaven is, ^ Give us (O
Lord) our daily bread this day. As we forgive our debtors so for- ^ give our
debts we pray. Into temptation lead us not. From evil make us ^ free. For
kingdom, power, and glory thine both now and ever be.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ Our Father which in heaven art, Lord hallowed be thy name. Thy ^ kingdom
come. Thy will be done in earth, even as the same in heaven is. ^ Give us (O
Lord) our daily bread this day. As we forgive our debtors, so for- ^ give our
debts we pray. Into temptation lead us not. From evil make us ^ free. For
kingdom, power and glory thine both now and ever be.

BASSVS.
^ Our Father which in heaven art, Lord hallowed be thy name. Thy ^ kingdom
come. Thy will be done in earth, even as the same in heaven is, ^ Give us (O
Lord) our daily bread this day. As we forgive our debtors so for- ^ give our
debts we pray. Into temptation lead us not. From evil make us ^ free: For
kingdom, power, and glory thine, both now and ever be.

The X. Commandments.
I. Farmer.
CANTVS.
^ Hark Israel and what I say, give heed to un- derstand* I am the ^ Lord thy
God that brought thee out of Egypt land. Even from the house vvher- ^ in thou
did in thraldom live a slave: None other Gods at all before ^ my presence
shall thou have.

MEDIVS.
T. R. B. M.
^ Hark Israel, and what I say give heed to understand. I am the ^ Lord thy
God that brought thee out of Egypt land. Even from the house vvher- ^ in thou
did in thraldom live a slave: None other gods at all be- fore ^ my presence
shall thou have.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ HArk Israel, and what I say, give heed to understand: I am the ^ Lord thy
God that brought thee out of Egypt land. Even from the house where- ^ in thou
did in thraldom live a slave: None other Gods at all before ^ my presence
shall thou have.

BASSVS.
^ Hark Israel, and what I say, give heed to understand: I am the ^ Lord thy
God that brought thee out of Egypt land. Even from the house vvher- ^ in thou
did in thraldom live a slave: None other gods at all before ^ my presence
shall thou have.

No manner graven Image shait
thou make at all to thee:
Nor any figure like to thee
shall counterfeited be.
Or any thing in heaven above,
nor in the earth below:
Nor in the waters beneath the earth,
to them thou shall not bovv.
Nor shall them serve the Lord thy God
a jealous God am I,
That punish parents faults unto
the third and fourth degree
Upon their children that me hate:
and mercy do display
To thousands of such as me love,
and my precepts obey.
The name thou of the Lord thy God
in vain shall never use:
For him that takes his name in vain,
the Lord will not excuse.
Remember that thou holy keep
the sacred Sabbath day:
Six days thou labor shall, and do
thy needful works alvvay.
The seventh day is set by the Lord
thy God to rest upon:
No work then shall thou do in it,
ne thou, nor yet thy son.
Thy daughter, servant, nor handmaid,
thine Ox, nor yet thine Ass:
Nor stranger that within thy gates
has his abiding place.
For in six days God heaven and earth,
and all therein did make:
And after those his rest he did
upon the seventh day take.
Wherefore he blessed the day that he
for resting did ordain:
And sacred to himself alone,
appointed to remain.
Yield honor to thy parents, that
prolongde thy days may be
Upon the land, the which the Lord
thy God has given thee.
Thou shall not murder. Thou shall not
commit adultery.
Thou shall not steal. Nor witness false
against thy neighbor be.
Thou shall not covet house that to
thy neighbor does belong:
Ne covet shall in having of
his wife to do him vvrong.
Nor his man servant, nor his maid,
nor Ox nor Ass of his,
Nor any other thing that to
thy neighbor proper is.
The Complaint of a sinner.
T. R B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ Where righteousness does say, Lord for my sinful part, ^ In wrath thou
should me pay vengeance for my desert. I ^ can it not deny, but needs I must
confess, how that continual- ly ^ Thy laws I do transgress.

MEDIVS.
^ WHere righteousness does say, Lord for my sinful part, ^ In wrath thou
should me pay vengeance for my desert. I ^ can it not deny, but needs I must
confess, how that continually ^ Thy laws I do transgress.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ Where righteousness does say, Lord for my sinful part, ^ In wrath thou
should me pay vengeance for my desert. I ^ can it not deny, but needs I must
confess, how that continually ^ Thy laws I do transgress.

BASSVS.
^ WHere righteousness does say, Lord for my sinful part, ^ In wrath thou
should me pay vengeance for my desert. I ^ can it not deny, but needs I must
confess, how that continually ^ Thy laws I do transgress.

But if it be thy will
With sinners to contend:
Then all thy flock shall spill,
And be lost without end.
For who lives here so right,
That rightly he can say,
He sins not in thy sight
Full often and every day?
The Scripture plain tells me,
The righteous man offends
Seven times a day to thee,
VVhereon thy wrath depends:
So that the righteous man
Does walk in no such path,
But he falls now and than
In danger of thy wrath.
Then since the case so stands,
That even the man right wise
Falls often in sinful bands,
Whereby thy wrath may rise.
Lord I that am unjust,
And righteousness none have,
VVhereto then shall I trust
My sinful soul to save?
But truly to that post,
VVhereto I cleave and shall,
Which is thy mercy most,
Lord let thy mercy fall.
And mitigate thy mood,
Or else we perish all
The price of this thy blood,
Wherein mercy I call.
The Scripture does declare,
No drop of blood in thee:
But that thou did not spare
To shedeach drop for me.
Now set those drops most svveet,
So moist my heart so dry:
That I with sin repleat.
May live, but sin may dye.
That being mortified
This sin of mine in me:
I may be sanctified
By grace of thine in thee.
So that I never fall
Into such mortal sin,
That my foes infernal
Rejoice my death therein.
But vouchsafe me to keep
From those infernal foes:
And from the lake so deep,
Whereas no mercy grows,
And I shall sing the songs,
Confirmed with the just:
That unto thee belongs.
Which art mine only trust,
FINIS.
Here begins the Psalms of David.
Psalm 1.
T. Morley B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ THe man is blessed that has not bent, to wicked read his ear: ^ nor led his
life as sinners do, not sat in scorners chair: But in the law of ^ God the
Lord does set his whole delight: and in that law does exercise ^ himself
both day and night.

MEDIVS.
^ THe man is blessed that has not bent, to wicked read his ear: ^ nor led his
life as sinners do, nor sat in scorners chair: But in the law of ^ God the
Lord, does set his whole delight: and in that law does exercise ^ himself
both day and night.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ THe man is blessed that has not bent, to wicked read his ear: ^ nor led his
life as sinners do, nor sat in scorners chair: But in the law of ^ God the
Lord does set his whole delight, and in that law does exercise ^ himself
both day and night.

BASSVS.
^ THe man is blessed that has not bent, to wicked read his ear: ^ nor led his
life as sinners do, nor sat in scorners chair: But in the law of ^ God the
Lord does set his whole delight: and in that law does exercise ^ himself
both day and night.

2
He shall be like the tree that grows
fast by the rivers side,
Which brings forth most pleasant fruit
in her due time and tide.
3
Whose leaf shall never fade nor fall,
but flourish still and stand:
Even so all things shall prosper well,
that this man takes in hand.
6
So shall not the ungodly m^n,
they shall be nothing so:
But as the dust which from the earth
the vvindes drive too and fro.
5
Therefore shall not the wicked men
in judgment stand upright:
Nor yet the sinners with the just
shall come in place or sight.
4
For why? the way of godly men
unto the Lord is known,
And eke the way of wicked men
shall quite be overthrown.
Psalm 2.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ WHy did the Gentiles tumults raise? what rage was in their ^ brain? why
did the Jewish people muse, see- ing all is but vain?

MEDIVS.
^ Why did the Gentiles tumults raise? what rage was in their ^ brain? why
did the Jewish people muse, see- ing all is but vain?

TENOR, or Playnsong.
Cambridge Tune.
^ Why did the Gentiles tumults raise? what rage was in their ^ brain? why
did the Jewish people muse, see- ing all is but vain?

BASSVS.
^ Why did the Gentiles tumults raise? what rage was in their ^ brain? why
did the Jewish people muse, see- ing all is but vain?

2
The Kings and Rulers of the earth
conspire, and all are bent
Against the Lord, and Christ his Son,
whom he among us sent.
3
Shall we be bound to them, say they?
let all their bonds be broke:
And of their doctrine and their law,
let us reject the yoke.
4
But he that in the heavens dvvels,
their doings will deride:
And make them all as laughing flocks
throughout the world so vvide.
5
For in his wrath the Lord will say
to them upon a day:
And in his fury trouble them,
and then the Lord will say:
6
I have anointed him by King,
upon my holy hill,
I will therefore Lord preach thy laws,
and eke declare thy will.
7
For in this wise the Lord himself
did say to me I vvot:
Thou art my dear and only Son,
to day I thee begot.
8
All people I will give to thee,
as heirs at thy request:
The ends and coasts of all the earth
by thee shall be possessed.
9
Thou shall them bruise even with a mace
as men under foot trod:
And as the potters sheards shall break
them with an iron rod.
10
Now ye O Kings and Rulers all,
be wise therefore and learn:
By whom the matters of the world
be judged and discernd.
11
See that ye serve the Lord above,
in trembling and in fear:
See that with reverence ye rejoice
to him in like manner.
12
See that ye kiss and eke embrace
his blessed Son I say:
Lest in his wrath ye suddenly
perish in the mid way.
13
If once his wrath never so small,
shall kindle in his breast:
O then all they that trust in Christ,
shall happy be and blessed.
Psalm 3
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ O Lord how are my foes increast, which vex me more and more? ^ they kill
my heart, when as they say, God can him not restore. But thou O ^ Lord art my
defense, when I am hard bested, my worship and mine honor ^ both, and thou
holdst up my head.

MEDIVS.
^ O Lord how are my foes increast, which vex me more and more? ^ they kill
my heart when as they say, God can him not restore. But thou O ^ Lord art my
defense, when I am hard bested, my worship and mine honor ^ both, and thou
holdst up my head.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ O Lord how are my foes increast, which vex me more and more? ^ they kill
my heart when as they say, God can him not restore. But thou O ^ Lord art my
defense, when I am hard bested, my worship and mine honor ^ both, and thou
holdst up my head.

BASSVS.
^ O Lord how are my foes increast, which vex me more and more? ^ they kill
my heart when as they say, God can him not restore. But thou O ^ Lord art my
defense, when I am hard bested, my worship and mine honor ^ both, and thou
holdst up my head.

4
Then with my voice unto the Lord
I did both call and cry:
And he out of his holy hill,
did hear me by and by*
5
I laid me down, and quietly
I slept and rose again:
For why? I know assuredly,
the Lord will me sustain.
5
If ten thousand had hemmed me in,
I could not be afraid:
For thou art still my Lord my God,
my Savior and my aid.
7
Rise up therefore, save me my God,
for now to thee I call:
Yet thou have broke the cheeks and teeth
of these wicked men all.
8
Salvation only does belong
to thee O Lord above*
Thou do bestovv upon thy folk,
thy blessing and thy love.
Psalm 4.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ O God that art my righteousness, Lord hear me when I call:
^ thou have set me at liberty when I was bound and thrall.
MEDIVS.
^ O God that art my righteousness, Lord hear me when I call:
^ Thou have set me at liberty, when I was bound and thrall.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Oxford Tune.
^ O God that art my righteousness, Lord hear me when I call:
^ thou have set me at liberty when I was bound and thrall.
BASSVS.
^ O God that art my righteousness, Lord hear me when I call:
^ Thou have set me at liberty when I was bound and thrall.
2
Have mercy Lord therefore on me,
and grant me my request:
For unto thee incessantly
to cry I will not rest.
3
O mortal men how long will ye
my glory thus despise?
Why wander ye in vaniti^,
and follovv after lies?
4
Know ye that good and godly men,
the Lord does take and choose,
And when to him I make my plaint,
he does me not refuse.
5
Sin not but stand in awe therefore,
examine well your heart:
And in your chamber quietly
see you your selves convert.
6
Offer to God the sacrifice
of righteousness I say,
And look that in the living Lord
ye put your trust alvvay.
7
The greater sort crave vvorldly goods
and riches do embrace:
But Lord grant us thy countenance,
thy favor and thy grace.
For thou thereby shall make my heart
more joyful and more glad:
Then they that of their corn and wine
full great increase have had.
9
In peace therefore lie down will I,
taking my rest and sleep:
For thou only vvilt me O Lord,
alone in safety keep.
Psalm 5.
John Milton.
CANTVS.
^ INcline thine ears unto my words, O Lord my plaint consider: And ^ hear
my voice, my King my God, to thee I make my prayer.

MEDIVS.
^ INcline thine ear unto my words, O Lord my plaint consider: And ^ hear my
voice, my King my God, to thee I make my prayer.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
Norwich Tune.
^ INcline thine ears unto my words, O Lord my plaint consider: And ^ hear
my voice, my King my God, to thee I make my prayer.

BASSVS.
^ INcline thine ear unto my words, O Lord my plaint consider: And ^ hear my
voice, my King my God. to thee I make my prayer.

2
Hear me betime, Lord tarry not,
for I will have respect:
3
My prayer early in the morn
to thee for to direct.
4
And I will trust through patience
in thee my God alone:
That art not pleased with wickedness,
and ill with thee dvvels none.
5
And in thy sight shall never stand
those furious fools O Lord:
Vain workers of iniquity,
thou have alvvayes abhord.
6
The liars and the flatterers
thou shall destroy them than:
And thou vvilt hate the bloud-thirstie,
and the deceitful man.
7
Therefore will I come to thy house,
trusting upon thy grace:
And reverently will worship thee
tovvard thine holy place.
8
Lord lead me in thy righteousness,
for to confound my foes:
And eke the vvayes that I shall walk,
before my foes disclose*
9
For in their mouths there is no truth,
their hearts are foul and vain;
10
Their throat an open sepulcher,
their tongues do gloss and feign.
11
Destroy their false conspiracies,
that they may come to naught:
12
Subvert them in their heaps of sin,
which have rebellion wrought.
13
But those that put their trust in thee,
let them be glad alvvayes:
And render thanks for thy defense,
and give thy name the praise.
14
For thou with favor vvilt increase
the just and righteous still:
And with thy grace as with a shield,
defend him from all ill.
Psalm 6.
G Kirby.
CANTVS.
^ LOrd in thy wrath reprove me not, though I deserve thine ire: ^ Ne yet
correct me in thy rage, O Lord I thee de- sire. For I am vveake, ^ therefore O
Lord of mercy me forbear: And heal me Lord, for why? ^ thou know, my
bones do quake for fear.

MEDIVS.
^ LOrd in thy wrath reprove me not, though I deserve thine ire: ^ Ne yet
correct me in thy rage, O Lord I thee de- sire. For I am vveake, ^ therefore O
Lord, of mercy me forbear: And heal me Lord, for why? ^ thou know, my
bones do quake for fear.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ LOrd in thy wrath reprove me not, though I deserve thine ire: ^ Ne yet
correct me in thy rage, O Lord I thee desire. For I am vveake, ^ therefore O
Lord of mercy me forbear: And heal me Lord, for why? ^ thou know, my
bones do quake for fear.

BASSVS.
^ LOrd in thy wrath reprove me not, though I deserve thine ire: ^ Ne yet
correct me in thy rage, O Lord I thee desire. For I am vveake, ^ therefore O
Lord of mercy me forbear: And heal me Lord, for why? ^ thou know, my
bones do quake for fear.

3
My soul is troubled very sore,
and vexed vehemently:
But Lord how long vvilt thon* delay
to cure my misery*
5
Lord turn thee to thy wonted grace,
my silly soul up take?
O save me not for my deserts,
but for thy mercies sake.
5
For why? no man among the dead
remembers thee one whit:
Or who shall worship thee O Lord
in the infernal pit?
6
So grievous is my plaint and moan,
that I wax vvondrous faint:
All the night long I vvash my bed
with tears of my complaint.
7
My sight is dim and ^vaxeth old
with anguish of my heart:
For fear of those that be my foes,
and would my soul subvert.
8
But now away from me all ye
that work iniquity:
For why* the Lord has heard the voice
of my complaint and cry.
9
He heard not only the request,
and prayer of my heart:
But it received at my hands,
and took it in good part.
10
And now my foes that vexed me,
the Lord will soon defame:
And suddenly consound them all,
to their rebuke and shame.
Psalm 7.
William Harison.
CANTVS.
^ O Lord my God I put my trust, and confidence in thee:
^ Save me from them that me pursue, and eke deli- uer me.
MEDIVS.
^ O Lord my God I put my trust* and confidence in thee:
^ Save me from them that me pursue, and eke deliver me.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Lincoln Tune.
^ O Lord my God I put my trust, and confidence in thee:
^ Save me from them that me pursue, and eke deliver me.
BASSVS.
^ O Lord my God I put my trust* and confidence in thee:
^ Save me from them that me pursue, and eke deliver me.
2
Lest like a Lion he me tear,
and rend in pieces small:
Whilst there is none to succor me,
and rid me out of thrall.
3
O Lord my God if I have done
the thing that is not right:
Or else if I be found in fault,
or guilty in thy sight.
4
Or to my friend revvarded ill,
or left him in distress:
Which me pursude most cruelly,
and hated me causeless.
5
Then let my foes pursue my soul,
and eke my life down thrust
Unto the earth, and also lay
mine honor in the dust.
6
Start up O Lord now in thy wrath,
and put my foes to pain:
Perform the kingdom promised
to me, which vvrong sustain.
7
Then shall great nations come to thee
and know thee by this thing:
If thou declare for love of them
thy self as Lord and King.
8
And thou that art of all men Judge,
O Lord now judge thou me:
According to thy righteousness,
and mine integrity.
9
Lord cease the hate of wicked men,
and be the just man's guide:
10
By whom the secrets of all hearts
are searched and descride.
11
I take my help to come of God
in all my grief and smart:
That does preserve all those that be
of pure and perfect heart.
12
The just man and the wicked both,
God judges by his power:
So that he feels his mighty hand
even every day and hour.
13
Except he change his mind I dye,
for even as he should smite:
He vvhets his svvord his bovv he bends,
aiming where he may hit.
14
And does prepare his mortal darts,
his arrows keen and sharp:
For them that do me persecute,
whilst he does mischief vvarp.
15
But lo though he in travel be
of his devilish forecast:
And of his mischief once conceived,
yet brings forth naught at last.
16
He digs a ditch and delues it deep,
in hope to hurt his brother;
But he shall fall into the pit
that he digd up for other.
17
Thus vvrong returns to the hurt
of him in whom it bred:
And all the mischief that he wrought,
shall fall upon his head.
18
I will give thanks to God therefore,
that judges righteously:
And with my song will praise the name
of him that is most hie.
Psalm 8.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M:
CANTVS.
^ O God our Lord how vvonderfull are thy works every where, ^ whose fame
surmounts in dignity, above the heavens clear?

MEDIVS.
^ O God our Lord how vvonderfull are thy works every where, ^ whose fame
surmounts in dignity above the heavens clear?

TENOR, or Playnsong.
Peterborough Tune.
^ O God our Lord how vvonderfull are thy works every where, ^ whose fame
surmounts in dignity, above the heavens clear?

BASSVS.
^ O God our Lord how vvonderfull are thy works every where, ^ whose fame
surmounts in dignity above the heavens clear?

2
Even by the mouths of sucking babes
thou vvilt confound thy foes:
For in these babes thy might is seen*
thy graces they disclose.
3
And when I see the heavens hie,
the works of thine own hands:
The Sun, the Moon, and all the Stars
in order as they stand.
4
What thing is man (Lord) think I then,
that thou do him remember?
Or what is man's posterity,
that thou do it consider?
5
For thou have made him little less
then Angels in degree:
And thou have crowned him also
with glory and dignity.
6
Thou have preferred him to be Lord
of all thy works of vvonder,
And at his feet have set all things,
that he should keep them under.
7
As sheep and neat, and all beasts else,
that in the fields do^ seed.
8
Fowls of the air, fish in the sea,
and all that therein breed.
9
Therefore I must say once again,
O God that ar^ our Lord.
How famous and how vvonderfull
are thy works through the world?
Psalm 9.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ WIth heart and mouth unto the Lord, will I sing laud and praise:
^ And speak of all his vvondrous works, and them declare al- vvayes.
MEDIVS.
^ WIth heart and mouth unto the Lord will I sing laid and praise:
^ And speak of all his vvondrous works, and them declare alvvayes.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Lichfield Tune.
^ WIth heart and mouth unto the Lord will I sing laud and praise:
^ And speak of all his vvondrous works, and them declare alvvayes.
BASSVS.
^ WIth heart and mouth unto the Lord will I sing laud and praise:
^ And speak of all his vvondrons works, and them declare alvvayes.
2
I will be glad and much rejoice*
in thee O Lord most hye:
And make my songs extol thy name
above the ^^arry sky.
3
For that my foes are driven back,
and turned unto flight:
They fall down flat and are destroyde
by thy great force and might.
4
Thou have revenged all my vvrong,
my grief, and all my grudge:
Thou do with justice hear my cause
most like a righteous Judge.
5
Thou do rebuke the Heathen folk,
and wicked so confound:
That afterward the memory
of them cannot be found.
6
My foes thou have made good disp^tch,
and all their towns destroyed:
Thou have their fame with the defacde
through all the world so vvide.
7
Know thou that he which is above
for evermore shall reign:
And in the seat of equity
true judgment will maintain.
8
With justice he will keep and guide
the world and every wight:
And so will yield with equity,
to every man his right.
9
He is protector of the poor*
what time they be oppressed:
He is in all adversity,
their refuge and their rest.
10
All they that know thy holy name,
therefore shall trust in thee:
For thou forsakest not their suit
in their necessity.
The second part.
11
Sing Psalms therefore unto the Lord
that dvvels in Sion hill:
Publish among all nations,
his noble acts and will.
12
For he is mindful of the blood
of those that be oppressed:
Forgetting not the afflicted heart,
that seeks to him for rest.
13
Have mercy Lord on me poor wretch,
whose enemies still remain:
which from the gates of death art vvo^t
to raise me up again.
14
In Sion that I might set forth
thy praise with heart and voice:
And that in thy salvation (Lord)
my soul might still rejoice.
15
The Heathen stick fast in the pit
that they themselves preparde:
And in the net that they did set,
their own feet fast are snarde.
^6
God shows his judgments which were good
for every man to mark:
When as you see the wicked man
lie trapt in his own vvarke.
17
The wicked and the ^infull men
go down to hell for ever:
And all the people of the world
that will not God remember.
18
But sure the Lord will not forget
the poor man's grief and pain:
The patient people never look
for help of God in vain.
19
O Lord arise le^t men prevail,
that be of vvorldly might:
And let the heathen folk receive
their judgment in thy sight.
20
Lord strike such terror, fear and dread
into the hearts of them:
That they may know assuredly,
they be but mortal men.
Psalm 10.
Ioh. Tomkins B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ WHat is the cause that thou O Lord, art now so far from thine?
^ And keep close thy countenance from us this troublous time?
MEDIVS.
^ What is the cause that thou O Lord, art now so far from thine?
^ And keep close thy countenance from us this troublous time?
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Gloucester Tune.
^ WHat is the cause that thou O Lord, art now so far from thine?
^ And keep close thy countenance from us this troublous time?
BASSVS.
^ What is the cause that thou O Lord art now so far from thine?
^ And keep close thy countenance from us this troublous time?
2
The poor do perish by the proud,
and wicked men's desire:
Let them be taken in the craft
that they themselves conspire.
3
For in the lust of his own heart,
the ungodly does delight:
So that the wicked praise himself,
and does the Lord despite.
4
He is so proud that right and vvrong
he sets all apart:
Nay, nay, there is no God says be,
for thus he thinks in heart.
5
Because his ways do prosper well,
he does thy laws neglect:
And with a blast does puff against
such as would him correct.
6
Tush, tush (says he) I have no dread,
lest mine estate should change:
And why? for all adversity
to him is very strange.
7
His mouth is full of cursednesse,
of fraud, deceit and guile:
Under his tongue does mischief sit,
and travail all the while.
8
He lies hid in vvayes and holes,
to s^ay the innocent:
Against the poor that pass him by
his cruel eyes are bent.
9
And like a Lion privily
lies lurking in his den:
If he may snare them in his net,
to spoil poor simple men.
10
And for the no^ce full craftily
he coucheth down I say:
11
So are great heaps of poor men made
by his strong power his prey:
The second part.
12
Tush, God forgets this (says he)
therefore I may be bold:
His countenance is cast aside,
he does it not behold:
13
Arise O Lord, O God, in whom
the poor man's hope does rest:
Lift up thy hand, forget not Lord
the poor that be oppressed.
14
What blasphemy is this to thee,
Lord do thou not abhor it?
To hear the wicked in their hearts
say, tush, thou car'st not for it?
15
But thou see all this wickedness,
and well do understand:
16
That friendlesse and poor fatherless
are left into thy hand.
17
Of wicked and malicious men,
then break the power for ever:
That they with their iniquity
may perish altogether.
18
The Lord shall reign for evermore,
as King and God alone:
And he will chase the Heathen folk
out of his land each one.
19
Thou hear'st O Lord the poor men's plaints*
their prayers and request:
Their hearts thou vvilt confirm until
thine ears to hear be pressed.
20
To judge the poor and fatherless,
and help them in their right:
That they may be no more oppressed
with men of vvorldly might.
Psalm 11.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ I Trust in God, how da^e you then say thus my soul until,
^ Fly hence as fast as any foul, and hide you in your hill*
MEDIVS.
^ I Trust in God, how dare you then say thus my soul until.
^ Fly hence as fast as any foul, and hide you in your hill?
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Hereford Tune.
^ I Trust in God* how dare you then say thus my soul until,
^ Fly hence as fast as any foul, and hide you in your hill?
BASSVS.
^ I Trust in God how dare ye then say thus my soul until,
^ Fly hence as fast as any foul, and hide you in your hill?
2
Behold the wicked bend their bovves,
and make their arrows pressed
To shoot in secret, and to hurt
the sound and harmless breast.
3
Of vvorldly hope al stays were shrun^
and clearly brought to naught:
Alas the just and righteous man,
what evil has he wrought:
4
But he that in his temple is
most holy and most hie:
And in the heavens has set his seat
of royal majesty,
The poor and simple man's estate
considers in his mind*
And searches out full narrovvly
the manners of mankind.
5
And with a cheerful countenance
the righteous man will use,
But in his heart he does abhor
all such as mischief muse.
6
And on the sinners casts snares
as thick as any rain:
Fire and brimstone and vvhirlvvindes thick,
appointed for their pain.
7
Ye see then how a righteous God
does righteousness embrace:
And to the just and upright men
shows forth his pleasant face.
Psalm 12.
Ed. Blancks.
CANTVS.
^ Help Lord for good and godly men do perish and decay: And ^ faith and
truth from vvorldly men is parted clean away.

MEDIVS.
^ Help Lord for good and godly men do perish and decay: And ^ faith and
truth from vvorldly men is parted clean away.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
Dutch Tune.
^ Help Lord for good and godly men do perish and decay: And ^ faith and
truth from vvorl^ly men is parted clean away.

BASSVS.
^ Help Lord for good and godly men do perish and decay: And ^ faith and
truth from vvorl^ly men is parted clean away.

2
Who so does with his neighbor talk,
his talk is all but vain:
For every man bethinketh how
to flatter, lie and feign.
3
But flattering and deceitful lips.
and tongues that be so ^^out,
To speak proud words and make great brags,
the Lord soon cuts them out.
4
For they say still we will prevail,
our tongues shall us extol:
Our tongues be ours, we ought to speak,
what Lord shall us control?
5
But for the great complaint and cry
of poor and men oppressed:
Arise will I now says the Lord,
and them restore to rest.
6
Gods word is like to silver pure,
that from the earth is tried:
And has no less then seven times
in fire been pu^ified.
7
Now since thy promise is to help,
Lord keep thy promise then:
And save us now and evermore
from this ill kind of men.
4
For now this wicked world is full
of mischiefs manifold
When vanity with vvorldly men
so highly is extold*
Psalm 13
Tho. Tomkins B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ How long vvilt thou forget me Lord, shall I never be remembered?
^ How long vvilt thou thy visage hide, as though thou were offended?
MEDIVS.
^ How long vvilt thou forget me Lord, shall I never be remembered?
^ How long vvilt thou thy visage hide, as though thou were offended?
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Worcester Tune.
^ How long vvilt thou forget me Lord, shall I never be remembered?
^ How long vvilt thou thy visage hide, as though thou were offended?
BASSVS.
^ How long vvilt thou forget me Lord, shall I never be remembered?
^ How long vvilt thou thy visage hide, as though thou were offended?
In heart and mind how long shall I
with care tormented be?
How long eke shall my deadly foes
thus triumph over me?
3
Behold me now (my Lord my God)
and hear me fore oppressed:
Lighten mine eyes lest that I sleep
as one by death possessed.
4
Lest that mine enemy say to me,
behold I do prevail:
Lest they also that hate my foul,
rejoice to see me quail.
5
But for thy mercies and goodness,
my hope shall never start:
In thy relief and saving health,
right glad shall be my heart.
6
I will give thanks unto the Lord,
and praises to him sing:
Because he has heard my request.
and granted my vvishing.
Psalm 14.
Tho. Morley B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ THere is no God as foolish men affirm in their mad mood: Their ^ drifts are
all corrupt and vain, not one of them does good. The Lord beheld ^ from heaven
high the whole race of mankind: and savv not one that sought ^ indeed the
living God to find.

MEDIVS.
^ THere is no God as foolish men affirm in their mad mood: Their ^ drifts are
all corrupt and vain, not one of them does good. The Lord beheld ^ from heaven
high the whole race of mankind: and savv not one that sought ^ indeed the
living God to find.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ THere is no God as foolish men affirm in their mad mood: Their ^ drifts are
all corrupt and vain, not one of them does good. The Lord beheld ^ from heaven
high the whole race of mankind: and savv not one that sought ^ indeed the
living God to find.

BASSVS.
^ THere is no God as foolish men affirm in their mad mood: Their ^ drifs are
all corrupt and vain, not one of them does good. The Lord beheld ^ from heaven
high the whole race of mankind: and savv not one that sought ^ indeed the
living God to find.

3
They went all vvide and were corrupt
and truly there was none,
That in the world did any good,
I sa^ there was not one.
4
Is all their judgments so far lost,
that all work mischief still?
Eating my people even as bread,
not one to seek Gods will?
5
When they thus rage, then suddenly
great fear on them shall fall:
For God does love the righteous men*
and will maintain them all.
6
Ye mock the doings of the poor,
to their reproach and shame:
Because they put their trust in God,
and call upon his name.
7
But who shall give thy people health,
and when vvilt thou fulfill
Thy promise made to Israel
from out of Sion hill?
8
Even when thou shall restore again
such as were captive lad:
Then Jacob shall therein rejoice,
and Israel shall be glad.
Psalm 15.
The Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ O Lord within thy taber^acle, who shall inhabit still? Or whom ^ vvilt
thou receive to dvvell in thy most holy hill?

MEDIVS.
^ O Lord within thy tabernacle, who shall inhabit still? Or whom ^ vvilt
thou receive to dvvell in thy most holy hill?

TENOR, or Playnsong.
Excester Tune.
^ O Lord within thy tabernacle, who shall inhabit still? Or whom ^ vvilt
thou receive to dvvell in thy most holy hill?

BASSVS.
^ O Lord within thy tabernacle, who shall inhabit still? Or whom ^ vvilt
thou receive to dvvell in thy most holy hill?

2
The man whose life is vncorrupt,
whose works are just and straight:
Whose heart does think the very truth,
whose tongue speaks no deceit.
3
No^ to his neighbor does none ill,
in body, goods, or name:
Nor willingly does move false tales,
which might impair the same.
4
That in his heart regards not
malicious vvickedmen:
But those that love and fear the Lord,
he makes much of them.
9
His oath and all his promi^es
that keeps faithfully:
Although he make his covenant so,
that he does lose thereby.
6
That puts not to usury
his money and his coin:
Ne for to hurt the innocent
does bribe or else purloyne.
7
Who so does all things as you see
that here is to be done:
Shall never perish in this world,
nor in the world to come.
Psalm 16
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ LOrd keep me, for I trust in thee, and do confess indeed: Thou ^ art my
God, and of my good, O Lord thou have no need.

MEDIVS.
^ LOrd keep me, for I trust in thee, and do confess indeed: Thou ^ art my
God, and of my good, O Lord thou have no need.

TENOR, or Playnsong,
Bristoll Tune.
^ LOrd keep me, for I trust in thee, and do confess indeed: Thou ^ art my
God, and of my good, O Lord thou have no need:

BASSVS.
^ LOrd keep me, for I trust in thee, and do confess indeed: Thou ^ art my
God, and of my good, O Lord thou have no need.

2
I give my goods unto the Saints,
that in the world do dvvell:
And namely to the faithful flock,
in virtue that excel.
3
They shall heap sorrovvs on their heads
which run as they were mad:
To offer to the Idol Gods,
alas it is too bad.
4
As for the bloody sacrifice,
and offerings of that sort,
I will not touch, nor yet thereof
my lips shall make report.
5
For why the Lord the portion is
of mine inheritance:
And thou art he that do maintain
my rent, my lot, my chance.
6
The place wherein the lot did fall,
in beauty did excel:
Mine heritage assignde to me,
does please me very well.
7
I thank the Lord that caused me
to understand the right:
For by his means my secret thoughts
do teach me every night.
8
I set the Lord still in my sight
and trust him over all:
For he does stand on my right hand,
therefore I shall not fall.
9
Wherefore my heart my tongue also
do both rejoice together:
My flesh and body rest in hope,
when I this thing consider.
10
Thou vvilt not leave my soul in grave,
for Lord thou love me:
Nor yet vvilt give thine holy one
corruption for to see.
11
But vvilt teach me the way of life,
for all treasure and store
Of perfect joy are in thy face,
and power for evermore.
Psalm 17
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ O Lord give ear to my just cause, attend when I complain:
^ And hear the prayer that I put forth with lips that do not feign.
MEDIVS.
^ O Lord give ear to my just cause, attend when I complain:
^ And hear the prayer that I put forth with lips that do not feign.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Salisbury Tune.
^ O Lord give ear to my just cause, attend when I complain:
^ And hear the prayer that I put forth with lips that do not feign.
BASSVS.
^ O Lord give ear to my just cause, attend when I complain:
^ And hear the prayer that I put forth with lips that do not feign.
2
And let the judgment of my cause
proceed alvvaies from thee:
And let thine eyes behold and clear
this my simplicity.
3
Thou have well tried me in the night,
and yet could nothing find:
That I have spoken with my tongue,
that was not in my mind.
4
and from the works of wicked men,
and path^s perverse and ill
For love of thy most holy word,
I have refrained still.
5
Then in my paths that be most pure,
stay me (Lord) and preserve:
That from the way wherein I walk,
my steps may never svverue.
6
For I do call to thee O Lord,
surely thou vvilt me aid:
Then hear my prayer* and weigh right well
the words that I have s^id*
7
O thou the Savior of all them
that put their trust in thee:
Declare thy strength on them that spurn
against thy majesty.
8
O keep me Lord as thou would keep
the apple of thine eye:
And under covert of thy vvings,
defend me secretly.
The second part.
9
From wicked men that trouble me,
and daily me annoy:
And from my foes that go about
my soul for to destroy.
10
Which vvallovv in their vvorldly
so full and eke so fat:
That in their pride they do not spare wealth
to speak they care not what.
11
They lie in vvait where I should pass
with craft me to confound:
And musing mischief in their minds,
to cast me to the ground.
12
Much like a Lion greedily
that would his prey embrace:
Or lurking like a Lions vvhelpe,
within some secret place.
13
Up Lord, with haste prevent my foes,
and cast them at thy feet:
Save thou my soul from the evil man,
and with thy svvord him smite.
14
Deliver me Lord by thy power
out of these tyrants hands:
Which now so long time reigned have,
and kept us in their bands.
15
I mean from vvorldly men to whom
all vvorldly gifts are rife:
That have no hope or part of joy,
but in this present life.
16
Thou of thy store their bel^ies filst
with pleasure to their mind:
Their children have enough, and leave
to theirs the rest behind.
17
But I shall with pure conscience
behold thy gracious face
So when I wake, I shall be full
with thy image and grace.
Psalm 18.
W. Cobbold.
CANTVS.
^ O God my strength and fortitude, of for^e I must love thee: ^ Thou art my
castle and defense in my necessity. My God, my rock in ^ whom I trust, the
worker of my wealth: My refuge, buckler and my ^ shield, the horn of all my
health.

MEDIVS.
^ O God my strength and fortitude, of force I must love thee: ^ Thou art my
castle and defense in my necessity. My God, my rock in ^ whom I trust, the
worker of my wealth: My refuge, buckler and my ^ shield, the horn of all my
health.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ O God my strength and fortitude, of force I must lone thee: ^ Thou art my
castle and defense in my necessity. My God, my rock in ^ whom I trust, the
worker of my wealth* My refuge, buckler and my ^ shield, the horn of all my
health.

BASSVS.
^ O God my strength and fortitude, of force I must love thee* ^ Thou art my
castle and defense in my necessity. My God, my rock in ^ whom I trust, the
worker of my wealth: My refuge, buckler and my ^ shield, the horn of all my
health.

3
When I sing laud unto the Lord,
most worthy to be served:
Then from my foes I am right sure
that I shall be preserved.
4
The pangs of death did compass me,
and bound me every where:
The flowing waves of wickedness
did put me in great fear
5
The fly and subtle snares of hell
were round about me set:
And for my death there was preparde
a deadly trapping net.
6
I thus beset with pain and grief,
did pray to God for grace:
And he forth-vvith did hear my plaint
out of his holy place.
7
Such is his power that in his wrath,
he made the earth to quake:
Yea, the foundation of the mount
of Basan for to shake.
8
And from his nostrils came a smoke,
when kindled was his ire:
And from his mouth came kindled coals
of hot consuming fire.
9
The Lord descended from above,
and bov^ed the heavens hie:
And underneath his feet he cast
the darke^esse of the sky.
10
On Cherubs and on Cherubin^
full royally he road:
And on the vvings of all the vvindes,
came flying all abroad.
The second part.
11
And like a den most dark he made
his hid and secret place:
With waters black and ayrie clouds,
environed he was.
12
But when the presence of his face
in brightness shall appear:
The clouds consume, and in their stead
came hayle and coals of fire.
13
These fiery darts and thunderbolts
disperse them here and there:
And with his often lightenings,
he puts them in great fear.
14
Lord at thy wrath and threatenings,
and at thy chiding cheer:
The springs and the foundations
of all the world appear.
15
And from above the Lord sent down
to fetch me from below:
And plucked me out of waters great,
that would me ouerflovv.
16
And me delivered from my foes
that would have made me thrall.
Yea, from such foes as were too strong
for me to deal vvithall.
17
They did prevent me to oppress
in time of my great grief:
But yet the Lord was my defense,
my succor and relief.
18
He brought me forth in open place,
whereas I might be free:
And kept me safe because he had
a favor unto me.
19
And as I was an innocent,
so did he me regard:
And to the cleanness of my hands,
he gave me my revvard.
20
For that I vvalked in his vvayes,
and in his paths have trod:
And have not vvauered wickedly
against my Lord and God.
The third part.
21
But evermore I have respect
to his law and decree
His statutes and commandments
I cast not out from me.
22
But pure, and clean, and vncorrupt,
appearde before his face:
And did refrain from wickedness*
and sin in any case.
23
The Lord therefore will me revvard
as I have done aright:
And to the cleanness of my hands
appearing in his sight.
24
For Lord with him that holy is,
vvilt thou be holy too:
And with the good and virtuous men,
right virtuously vvilt do.
25
And to the loving and elect,
thy love thou vvilt reserve:
And thou vvilt use the wicked men,
as wicked men deserve.
26
For thou do save the simple folk,
in trouble when they lie:
And do bring down the countenance
of them that look full hie.
27
The Lord will light my candle so,
that it shall shine full bright:
The Lord my God will make also
my darkness to be light:
28
For by thy help an hoa^^ of men
discomfit Lord I shall:
By thee I scale and ouer-leape
the strength of any wall.
29
Unspotted are the vvayes of God:
his word is purely tried:
He is a sure defense to such,
as in his faith abide.
30
For who is God except the Lord?
for other there is none:
Or else who is omnipotent,
saving our God alone?
The fourth part.
31
The God that girdeth me with strength
is he that I do mean:
That all the vvayes wherein I walk
did evermore keep clean.
32
That made my feet like to the Hearts
in svviftnesse of my pace:
And for my surety brought me forth
into an open place.
33
He did in order put my hands,
to battle and to fight:
To break in sunder bars of brass,
he gave mine arms the might.
34
Thou teach me thy saving health,
thy right hand is my tovver*
Thy love and familiarity
does still increase my power.
35
And under me thou make plain
the way where I should walk:
So that my feet shall never slip,
nor stumble at a balke:
36
And fiercely I pursue and take
my foes that me anoyd:
And from the field do not return
till they be clean destroyed.
37
So I suppress and vvound my foes,
that they can rise no more:
For at my feet they fall down flat,
I strike them all so sore.
38
For thou do gird me with thy strength,
to war in such a wise:
That they be all scattred abroad
that up against me rise.
39
Lord thou have put into my hands
my mortal enemies yoke:
And all my foes thou do divide,
in sunder with thy stroke.
40
They called for help, but none gave ear
nor help them with relief:
Yea, to the Lord they called for help,
yet heard he not their grief.
The fifth part.
41
And still like dust before the vvinde,
I drive them under feet:
And svveepe them out like filthy clay,
that stinketh in the street.
42
Thou keepst me from seditious folk,
that still in strife be led:
And thou do of the heathen folk
appoint me to be head.
43
A people strange to me unknown,
and yet they shall me serve:
And at the first obey my word,
whereas mine own will svverue.
44
I shall be irksome to mine own,
they shall not see my light.
But wander vvide out of their vvayes*
and hide them out of sight.
45
But blessed be the living Lord,
most worthy of all praise:
That is my rock and saving health,
praised be he alvvayes.
46
For God it is that gave me power,
revenged for to be:
And with his holy word subdude
the people unto me.
47
And from my foes me delivered,
and set me higher then those,
That cruel and ungodly were,
and up against me rose.
48
And for this cause O Lord my God,
to thee give thanks I shall:
And sing out praises to thy name,
among the Gentiles all.
49
That gave great prosperity
unto the king I say:
To David thine anointed king,
and to his seed for aye.
Psalm 19.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ THe heavens and the firmament do vvondrously declare ^ The glory of God
omnipotent, his works and what they are.

MEDIVS.
^ THe heavens and the firmament do vvondrously declare
^ The glory of God omnipotent, his works and what they are.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Wels or Glasenbury Tune.
^ THe heavens and the firmament do vvondrously declare
^ The glory of God omnipotent, his works and what they are.
BASSVS.
Wells Tune.
^ THe heavens and the firmament do vvondrously declare
^ The glory of God omnipotent, his works and what they are.
2
The vvondrous works of God appear
by every days success:
The nights which likewise their race run
the self same things express.
3
There is no language, tongue or speech
where their sound is not heard:
In all the earth and coasts thereof,
their knowledge is conferd.
4
In them the Lord made for the Sun
a place of great renown:
Who like a bridegroom ready trimde,
does from his chamber come.
5
And as a valiant champion*
who for to get a prize:
With joy does haste to take in hand
some noble enterprise.
6
And all the Sky from end to end,
he compasses about:
Nothing can hide it from his heat,
but he will find it out.
7
How perfect is the Law of God,
how is his covenant sure?
Converting souls, and making wise
the simple and obscure.
8
Just are the Lords Commandments,
and glad both heart and mind:
His precepts pure, and gives light
to eyes that be full blind.
9
The fear of God is excellent,
and does endure for ever:
The judgments of the Lord are true,
and righteous altogether.
10
And more to be imbrac'de alvvayes,
then fined gold I say*
The honey and the honey comb
are not so svveet as they.
11
By them thy servant is forevvarnd
to have God in regard:
And in performance of the same.
there shall be great revvard,
13
But Lord what earthly man does know
the errors of his life?
Then cleanse my soul from secret sins,
which are in me most rife.
13
And keep me that presumptuous sins
prevail not over me:
And so shall I be innocent,
and great offenses fly.
14
Accept my mouth and eke my heart.
my words and thoughts each one:
For my Redeemer and my strength
O Lord thou art alone.
Psalm 46.
William Cranfield.
CANTVS.
^ IN trouble and adversity, the Lord God hear thee still:
^ The majesty of Ia- cobs God de- fend thee from all ill.
Psalm 20.
MEDIVS.
^ IN trouble and adversity, the Lord God hear thee still:
^ The majesty of Jacobs God, defend thee from all ill.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Ely Tune.
^ IN trouble and adversity, the Lord God hear thee still:
^ The majesty of Jacobs God defend thee from all ill.
BASSVS.
^ IN trouble and adversity, the Lord God hear thee still:
^ The majesty of Ia- cobs God, defend thee from all ill.
2
And send thee from his holy place,
his help at every need:
And so in Sion stablish thee,
and make thee strong indeed.
3
Remembering well the sacrifice
that now to him is done:
And so receive right thankfully,
thy burnt offerings each one.
4
According to thy hearts desire,
the Lord grant unto thee:
And all thy counsel and device
full well perform may he.
5
We shall rejoice when thou us sauest,
and our banners display:
Unto the Lord which thy requests,
fulfilled has alvvay.
6
The Lord will his anointed save
I know well by his grace:
And send him health by his right hand,
out of his holy place.
7
In chariots some put confidence,
and some in horses trust:
But we remember God our Lord,
that keeps promise just.
8
They fall down flat, but we do rise
and stand up steadfastly:
Now save and help us Lord and King,
on thee when we do cry.
Psalm 21.
John Bennet.
CANTVS.
^ O Lord how joyful is the king in thy strength and thy power? How ^
vehemently does he rejoice in thee his Savior? For thou have given unto him ^
his godly hearts desire: to him nothing have thou denide, of that he did
require.

MEDIVS.
^ O Lord how joyful is the King in thy strength and thy power? How ^
vehemently does he rejoice in thee his Savior? For thou have given unto him ^
his godly hearts desire, to him nothing have thou denide, of that he did
require.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ O Lord how joyful is the King in thy strength and thy power? How ^
vehemently does he rejoice in thee his Savior? For thou have given unto him ^
his godly hearts desire: to him nothing have thou denide, of that he did
require.

BASSVS.
^ O Lord how joyful is the King in my strength and thy power? How ^
vehemently does he rejoice in thee his Savior? For thou have given unto him ^
his godly hearts desire: to him nothing have thou denide, of that he did
require.

3
Thou did prevent him with thy gifts
and blessings manifold:
And thou have set upon his head
a crown of perfect gold.
4
And when he asked life of thee,
thereof thou made him sure
To have long life, yea such a life
as ever should endure.
5
Great is his glory by thy help
thy benefits and aid:
Great worship and great honor both
thou have upon him laid.
6
Thou vvilt give him felicity
that never shall decay:
And with thy cheerful countenance
vvilt comfort him alvvay.
7
For why? the King does strongly trust
in God for to prevail:
Therefore his goodness and his grace
will not that he shall quail.
8
But let thine enemies feel thy force,
aed those that thee vvithstand:
Find out thy foes, and let them feel
the power of thy right hand.
9
And like an Oven burn them Lord
in fiery flame and fume:
Thine anger shall destroy them all,
and fire shall them consume.
10
And thou vvilt root out of the earth,
their fruit that should increase:
And from the number of thy flock,
their seed shall end and cease.
11
For why? much mischief did they muse
against thy holy name:
Yet did they fail, and had no power
for to perform the same*
12
But as a mark thou shall them set
in a more open place:
And charge thy bovv-strings readily
against thine enemies face.
13
Be thou exalted Lord therefore,
in thy strength every hour:
So shall we sing right solemnly,
praising thy might and power.
Psalm 22.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ O God my God wherefore do thou forsake me utterly? And helpest ^ not
when I do make my great complaint and cry?

MEDIVS.
^ O God my God, wherefore do thou forsake me utterly? And helpest ^ not
when I do make my great complaint and cry?

TENOR, or Playnsong.
Chichester Tune.
^ O God my God, wherefore do thou forsake me utterly? And helpest ^ not
when I do make my great complaint and cry?

BASSVS.
^ O God my God, wherefore do thou forsake me utterly? And helpest ^ not
when I do make my great complaint and cry?

2
To thee my God even all day long,
I do both cry and call:
I cease not all the night, and yet
thou hear not at all.
3
Even thou that in thy Sanctuary,
and holy place do dvvell:
Thou art the comfort and the joy,
and glory of Israel.
4
And he in whom our fathers old,
had all their hope for ever:
And when they put their trust in thee,
so do thou them deliver,
5
They were delivered ever when
they called on thy name:
And for the faith they had in thee,
they were not put to shame.
6
But I am now become a worm
more like then any man:
An outcast whom the people scorn,
with all the spite they can.
7
And me despise as they behold
me vvalking on the way:
They grin, they movv, they nod their heads
and in this wise they say.
8
This man did glory in the Lord,
his favor and his love:
Let him redeem and help him now,
his power if he will prove.
9
But Lord out of my mothers womb,
I came by thy request:
Thou did preserve me still in hope,
while I did suck her breast.
10
I was committed from my birth,
with thee to have abode:
Since I was in my mothers womb,
thou have been ever my God.
The second part.
11
Then Lord depart not now from me
in this my present grief:
Since I have none to be my help,
my succor and relief.
12
So many Bulls do compass me,
that be full strong of head:
Yea, Bulls so fat as though they had
in Basan field been fed.
13
They gape upon me greedily,
as though they would me stay:
Much like a Lion roaring out,
and ramping for his prey.
14
But I drop down like water shed,
my joints in sunder break:
My heart does in my body melt,
like wax against the heat.
15
And like a potsheard dryth my strength,
my tongue it cleaves fast
Unto my jaws, and I am brought
to dust of death at last.
16
And many dogs do compass me,
and wicked counsel eke
Conspire against me cursedly,
they pierce my hands and feet.
17
I was tormented, so that I
might all my bones have told:
Yet still upon me they do look,
and still they me behold.
18
My garments they divided eke
in parts among them all:
And for my coat they did c^st lots,
to whom it might befall.
19
Therefore I pray thee be not far
from me at my great need:
But rather since thou art my strength,
to help me Lord make speed.
20
And from the svvord Lord save my soul
by thy might and thy power:
And keep my soul thy darling dear*
from dogs that would devour.
21
And from the Lions mouth that would
me all in sunder shiuer*
And from the homes of Vnicomes,
Lord safely me deliver.
22
and I shall to my brethren all
thy majesty record:
And in thy Church shall praise the name
of thee the living Lord.
The third part.
23
All ye that fear him* praise the Lord,
thou Jacob honor him:
And all ye seed of Israel,
with reverence worship him.
24
For he despises not the poor,
he turns not away
His countenance when they do call,
but grants to their cry.
25
Among the folk that fear the Lord,
I will therefore proclaim
Thy praise, and keep my promise made
for setting forth thy name.
^6
The poor shall ea^e and be suffi^de,
and those that do their deuer
To know the Lord, shall praise his name,
their hearts shall live for ever.
27
All coasts of earth shall praise the Lord
and turn to him for grace:
The heathen folk shall worship him
before his blessed face.
28
The kingdom of the heathen folk,
the Lord shall have therefore:
And he shall be their governor,
and king for evermore.
29
The rich man of his goodly gifts,
shall feed and taste also:
And in his presence worship him,
and bovv their knees full lovv.
30
And all that shall go down to dust,
of life by him must taste*
My seed shall live and praise the Lord,
while any world shall last.
31
My seed shall plainly show to them
that shall be borne hereafter:
His justice and his righteousness,
and all his works of vvonder.
Psalm 23.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ THE Lord is only my support, and he that does me feed: How ^ can I then
lack any thing, whereof I stand in need?

MEDIVS.
^ THE Lord is only my support, and he that does me feed: How ^ can I then
lack any thing, whereof I stand in need?

TENOR, or Playnsong.
Winchester Tune.
^ THE Lord is only my support, and he that does me feed: How ^ can I then
lack any thing, whereof I stand in need.

BASSVS.
^ THE Lord is only my support, and he that does me feed: How ^ can I then
lack any thing, whereof I stand in need.

2
He does me fold in coats most safe,
the tender grass fast by:
And after drives me to the streams
which run most pleasantly.
3
And when I feel my self near lost,
then does he me home take:
Conducting me in his right paths.
even for his own names sake.
4
And though I were even at deaths door
yet would I fear none ill:
For with thy rod and shepherds crook
I am comforted still.
5
Thou have my table richly decked,
in despite of my foe:
Thou have my head with balm refresht,
my cup does ouerflovv.
6
And finally while breath does last,
thy grace shall me defend:
And in the house of God will I
my life for ever spend.
Another of the same.
T. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ MY Shepherd is the living Lord, nothing therefore I need: ^ In pastures
fair with waters calm, he set me for to feed.

MEDIVS.
^ MY Shepherd is the living Lord, nothing therefore I need: ^ In pastures
fair with waters calm, he set me for to feed.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
Winchester Tune.
^ MY Shepherd is the living Lord, nothing therefore I need: ^ In pastures
fair with waters calm, he set me for to feed.

BASSVS.
^ MY Shepherd is the living Lord, nothing therefore I need: ^ In pastures
fair with waters calm, he set me for to feed.

2
He did convert and glad my soul,
and brought my mind in frame:
To walk in paths of righteousness,
for his most holy name.
3
Yea, though I walk in vale of death*
yet would I fear none ill:
Thy rod, thy staff does comfort me,
and thou art with me still.
4
And in the presence of my foes,
my table thou shall spread:
Thou shall (O Lord) fill full my cup,
and eke anoint my head.
5
Through all my life thy favor is
so frankely shevved to me?
That in thy house for evermore
my dwelling place shall be.
Psalm 24.
Richard Allison.
CANTVS.
^ THe earth is all the Lords, with all her store and furniture:
^ Yea, his is all the world, and all that therein does endure.
MEDIVS.
^ THE earth is all the Lords, with all her store and furniture:
^ Yea, his is all the world, and all that therein does endure.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Rochester Tune.
^ THe earth is all the Lords with all her store and furniture:
^ Yea, his is all the world, and all that therein does endure.
BASSVS.
^ THE earth is all the Lords, with all her store and furniture:
^ Yea, his is all the world, and all that therein does endure.
2
For he has fastly founded it
above the sea to stand:
And laid alovv the liquide floods
to flow beneath the land.
3
For who is he (O Lord that shall
ascend unto thy hill?
Or pass into thy holy place,
there to continue still?
4
whose hands are barmles, and vvhosehart
no spot there does defile:
His soul not set on vanity,
who has not sworn to guile.
5
Him that is such a one, the Lord
shall place in blissful plight:
And God his God and Savior
shall yield to him his right.
6
This is the brood of travelers*
in seeking of his grace:
As Jacob did the Israelites
in that time of his race.
7
Ye Princes open your gates, stand open
the everlasting gate:
For there shall enter in thereby
the Prince of glorious state.
8
What is the king of glorious state?
the strong and mighty Lord:
The mighty Lord in battles stout,
and trial of the svvord.
9
Ye Princes open your gates stand open
the everlasting gate:
For there shall enter in thereby,
the King of glorious state.
10
What is the King of glorious state?
the Lord of hosts it is,
The kingdom and the royalty
of glorious state is his.
Psalm 25.
John Ward.
Canterbury Tune.
CANTVS.
^ I Lift my heart to thee, my God and guide most lust: Now suffer me ^ to
take no shame, for in thee do I trust.

MEDIVS.
^ I Lift my heart to thee, my God and guide most just: Now suffer me ^ to
take no shame, for in thee do I trust.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ I Lift my heart to thee, my God and guide most just: Now suffer me ^ to
take no shame, for in thee do I trust.

BASSVS.
^ I Lift my heart to thee, my God and guide most just: Now suffer me ^ to
take no shame, for in thee do I trust.

2
Let not my foes rejoice,
nor make a scorn of me:
And let them not be overthrown,
that put their trust in thee*
3
But shame shall them befall.
which harm them wrongfully*
Therefore thy paths and thy right vvayes,
unto me Lord descrie.
4
Direct me in thy truth,
and teach me I thee pray:
Thou art my God and Savior,
on thee I vvait alvvay.
5
Thy mercies manifold,
I pray thee Lord remember:
And eke thy pity plentiful,
for they have been for ever.
6
Remember not the faults
and frailty of my youth:
Remember not how ignorant
I have been of thy truth.
Nor after my deserts,
let me thy mercy find:
But of thine own benignity,
Lord have me in thy mind.
7
His mercy is full svveet,
his truth a perfect guide:
Therefore the Lord will sinners teach,
and such as go aside.
8
The humble he will teach,
his precepes for to keep:
He will direct in all his vvayes,
the lowly and the meek.
9
For all the vvayes of God
are truth and mercy both:
To them that keep his testament,
the witness of his troth.
The second part.
10
Now for thy holy name,
O Lord I thee entreat
To grant me pardon for my sin,
for it is vvondrous great.
11
Who so does fear the Lord,
the Lord will him direct:
To lead his life in such a way,
as he does best accept.
12
His soul shall evermore
in goodness dvvell and stand:
His seed and his posterity
inherit shall the land.
13
All those that fear the Lord,
know his secret intent:
And unto them he does declare
his will and testament.
14
Mine eyes and eke my heart,
to him I will advance,
That plucked my feet out of the snare
of sin and ignorance.
15
With mercy me behold,
to thee I make my moan:
For I am poor and desolate,
and comfortless alone.
16
The troubles of my heart
are multiplide indeed:
Bring me out of this misery,
necessity and need.
17
Behold my poverty,
my anguish, and my pain:
Remit my sin and mine offense,
and make me clean again.
18
O Lord behold my foes
how they do still increase:
Pursuing me with deadly hate,
that feign would live in peace*
19
Preserve and keep my soul*
and eke deliver me:
And let me not be overthrown,
because I trust in thee.
20
Let my simple pureness,
me from mine enemies shend:
Because I look as one of thine,
that thou should me defend.
21
Deliver Lord thy folk,
and send them some relief:
I mean thy chosen Israel,
from all their pain and grief.
Psalm 26.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ LOrd be my Judge, and thou shall see my paths are right and plain:
^ I trust in God, and hope that he will strength me to remain.
MEDIVS.
^ LOrd be my Judge, and thou shall see my paths are right and plain:
^ I trust in God, and hope that he will strength me to remain.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Woluer-hampton Tune.
^ LOrd be my Judge, and thou shall see my paths are right and plain:
^ I trust in God, and hope that he will strength me to remain.
BASSVS.
^ LOrd be my judge, and thou shall see my paths are right and plain,
^ I trust in God, and hope that he will strength me to remain.
2
Prove me my God I thee desire,
my vvayes to search and try,
As men do prove their gold with fire,
my reins and heart epsy.
3
Thy goodness laid before my face,
I durst behold alvvayes:
For of thy truth I tread the trace,
and will do all my days*
4
I do not lust to haunt or use
with men whose deeds are vain:
To come in house I do refuse
with the deceitful train.
5
I much abhor the wicked sort,
their deeds I do despise:
I do not once to them resort,
that hurtful things devise.
6
My hands I vvash, and do proceed
in works to walk upright:
Then to thine altar I make speed
to offer there in sight.
7
That I may speak and preach the praise
that does belong to thee:
And so declare how vvondrous vvayes
thou have been good to me.
8
O Lord thy house I love most dear,
to me it does excel:
I have delight and would dravv near,
whereas thy grace does dvvell.
9
O shut not up my soul with them
in sin that take their fill:
Nor yet my soul among those men
that seek much blood to spill.
10
Whose hands are heapt with craft and guile
their life thereof is full:
And their right hand with vvrench and vvile
for bribes does pluck and pull.
11
But I in righteousness intend,
my time and days to serve:
Have mercy Lord, and me defend,
so that I do not svverue.
12
My foot is staid for all assayes,
it stands well and right:
Wherefore to God will I give prais^,
in all the peoples sight.
Here begins the Northern Tunes.
Psalm 27.
John Milton.
CANTVS.
^ THe Lord is both my he^lth and light, shall man make me dismayed?
^ Since God does give me strength and might why should I be afraid?
MEDIVS.
^ THe Lord is both my health and light, shall man make me dismayed?
^ Since God does give me strength and might, why should I be afraid?
TENOR, or Playnsong.
York Tune.
^ THe Lord is both my health and light, shall man make me dismayed?
^ Since God does give me strength and might, why should I be afraid?
BASSVS.
^ THe Lord is both my health and light, shall man make me dismayed?
^ Since God does give me strength and might, why should I be afraid?
2
While that my foes with all their strength
begin with me to braule:
And think to eat me up at length,
themselves have caught the fall.
3
Though they in camp against me lie,
my heart is not afraid:
In battle pight if they will try,
I trust in God for aid
4
One thing of God I do require,
that he will not deny:
For which I pray, and will desire,
till he to me apply.
5
That I within his holy place,
my life throughout my dvvell:
To see the beauty of his face,
and view his temple well.
6
In time of dread he shall me hide
within his place most pure:
And keep me secret by his side,
as on a rock most sure.
7
At length I know the Lords good grace
shall make me strong and stout:
My foes to spoil and clean deface,
that compass me about.
8
Therefore within his house will I
give sacrifice of praise*
With Psalms and songs I will apply
to laud the Lord alvvayes.
The second part.
9
Lord hear the voice of my request,
for which to thee I call:
Have mercy Lord on me oppressed,
and send me help vvithall.
10
My heart does knowledge unto thee,
I sue to have thy grace:
Then seek my face (say thou to me)
Lord I will seek thy face.
11
In wrath turn not thy self away,
nor suffer me to slide:
Thou art my help still to this day,
be still my God and guide.
12
My parents both their son forsook
and cast me off at large:
And then the Lord himself yet took
of me the care and charge.
13
Teach me O God the way to thee,
and lead me on forth right:
For fear of such as vvatch for me*
to trap me if they might.
14
Do not betake me to the will
of them that be my foes:
For they surmise against me still,
false witness to depose.
15
My heart would faint, but that in me
this hope is fixed fast:
The Lord Gods good grace shall I see,
in life that aye shall last.
16
^rust still in God, whose whole thou art
his will abide thou must:
And he shall ease and strength thy heart,
if thou in him do trust.
Psalm 28.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ THou art O Lord, my strength and stay, the succor which I crave: ^ Neglect
me not, lest I be like to them that go to grave.

MEDIVS.
^ THou art O Lord, my strength and stay, the succor which I crave: ^ Neglect
me not, lest I be like to them that go to grave.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
Durham Tune.
^ THou art O Lord, my strength and stay, the succor which I crave: ^ Neglect
me not, lest I be like to them that go to grave.

BASSVS.
^ THou art O Lord, my strength and stay, the succor which I crave: ^ Neglect
me not, left I be like to them that go to grave.

2
The voice of thy suppliant hear,
that unto thee does cry:
When I lift up my hands unto
thy holy Arc most hie.
3
Repute me not among the sort
of wicked and pervert:
That speak right fair unto their friends
and think full ill in heart.
4
According to their handy work,
as they deserve indeed:
And after their inventions,
let them receive their meed.
5
For they regard nothing Gods word,
his law ne yet his lore:
Therefore will he them and their seed
destroy for evermore.
6
To render thanks unto the Lord,
how great a cause have I?
My voice, my prayer, and my complaint
that heard so willingly.
7
He is my shield and fortitude,
my buckler in distress:
My hope, my help, my hearts relief,
my song shall him confess.
8
He is our strength and our defense,
our enemies to resist:
The health and the salvation
of his elect by Christ.
9
Thy people and thy heritage,
Lord, bless, guide, and preserve:
Increase them Lord, and rule their heart,
that they do never svverue.
Psalm 29.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ Give to the Lord ye Potentates, ye Rulers of the world:
^ Give ye all praise, honor and strength unto the living Lord.
MEDIVS.
^ Give to the Lord ye Potentates, ye Rulers of the world:
^ Give ye all praise, honor and strength unto the living Lord.
TENOR* or Playnsong.
Carleyl Tune.
^ Give to the Lord ye Potentates, ye Rulers of the world:
^ Give ye all praise, honor and strength unto the living Lord.
BASSVS.
^ Give to the Lord ye Potentates, ye Rul^rs of the world:
^ Give ye all praise, honor and strength unto the living Lord.
2
Give glory to his ^oly name,
and honor him alone:
Worship him in his majesty,
within his holy throne.
3
His voice does rule the waters all*
even as himself does please:
He does prepare the thunderclaps,
and gouerns all the Seas.
4
The voice of God is of great force,
and vvondrous excellent:
It is most mighty in effect,
and most magnificent.
5
The voice of God does rend and break
the Cedar trees so long:
The Cedar trees of Libanus,
which are most hie and strong.
6
And makes them leap like as a calfe,
or else an Unicorn:
Not only trees, but mountains great
vvhereon the trees are borne.
7
His voice diuides the flames of fire,
and shakes the wilderness:
8
It makes the desert quake for fear,
that called is Cades.
9
It makes the Hinds for fear to calue,
and makes the covert plain:
Then in his Temple every man
his glory does proclaim.
10
The Lord was set above the ^ouds,
ruling the raging sea:
So shall he reign as Lord and King,
for ever and for aye.
11
The Lord will give his people power
in virtue to increase:
The Lord will bless his chosen folk
with everlasting peace.
Psalm 30
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ ALl laud and praise with heart and voice, O Lord I give to thee: ^ which
did not make my foes rejoice, but have exalted me. O Lord ^ my God to thee I
cride in all my pain and grief, thou gave an ear, ^ and did provide, to
ease me with relief.

MEDIVS.
^ ALl laud and praise with heart and voice, O Lord I give to thee: ^ which
did not make my foes rejoice, but have exalted me. O Lord my ^ God to thee I
cride in all my pain and grief, thou gave an ear ^ and did provide, to
ease me with relief.

TENOR. or Playnsong.
^ ALl laud and praise with heart and voice, O Lord I give to thee: ^ which
did not make my foes rejoice, but have exalted me. O Lord ^ my God to thee I
cride in all my pain and grief, thou gave an ear, ^ and did provide, to
ease me with relief.

BASSVS.
^ ALl laud and praise with heart and voice, O Lord I give to thee: ^ which
did not make my foes rejoice, but have exalted me. O Lord ^ my God to thee I
cryde in all my pain and grief, thou gave an ear, ^ and did provide to
ease me with relief:

3
Of thy good will thou haste calde back
my soul from hell to save:
Thou did revive when strength did lack
and keptst me from the grave.
4
Sing praise ye Saints that prove and see
the goodness of the Lord:
In memory of his majesty.
rejoice with one accord.
5
For why his anger but a space
does last and slake again:
But in his favor and his grace,
alvvayes does life remain.
Though gripes of grief, and pangs full sore
shall lodge with us all night:
The Lord to joy shall us restore,
before the day be light.
6
When I inioyde the world at will,
thus would I boast and say:
Tush I am sure to feel none ill,
this wealth shall not decay:
7
For thou O God of thy good grace
have sent me strength and aid.
But when thou turndst away thy face,
my mind was sore dismayed.
8
Wherefore again yet did I cry
to thee O Lord of might:
My God with plaints I did apply,
and praide both day and night.
9
What gain is in my blood said I,
if death destroy my days?
Does dust declare thy majesty,
or yet thy truth does praise?
10
Wherefore my God some pity take,
O Lord I thee desire:
Do not this simple soul forsake,
of help I thee require.
11
Then did thou turn my grief and vvoe
unto a cheerful voice:
The mourning weed thou tookst me fro,
and made me to rejoice.
22
Wherefore my soul incessantly
shall sing unto thy praise:
My Lord, my God, to thee will I
give laud and thanks alvvayes.
Psalm 31.
John Bennet.
CANTVS.
^ O Lord I put my trust in thee, let nothing work me shame:
^ As thou art just deliver me, and set me quite from blame.
MEDIVS.
^ O Lord I put my trust in thee, let nothing work me shame:
^ As thou art just, deliver me, and set me quite from blame.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Cheshire Tune.
^ O Lord I put my trust in thee, let nothing work me shame:
^ As thou art just, deliver me, and set me quite from blame.
BASSVS.
^ O Lord I put my trust in thee, let nothing work me shame:
^ As thou art just, deliver me, and set me quite from blame.
2
Hear me O Lord and that anon,
to help me make good speed:
Be thou my rock and house of stone,
my fence in time of need.
3
For why? as stones by strength is tried,
thou art my fort and tovver:
For thy names sake be thou my guide,
and lead me in thy power.
Pluck forth my feet out of the snare
which they for me have laid:
Thou art my strength, and all my care
is for thy might and aid.
5
Into thy hands Lord I commit
my spirit which is thy due:
For why? thou have redeemed it,
O Lord my God most true.
6
I hate such folk as will not part
from things to be abhord:
When they on trifles set their heart,
my trust is in the Lord.
7
For I will in thy mercy joy*
I see it does excel:
Thou see when ought would me annoy
and know my soul full well:
Thou have not left me in their hand,
that would me ouercharge:
But thou have set me out of band,
to walk abroad at large.
The second part.
9
Great grief O Lord does me assail,
some pity on me take:
Mine eyes wax dim, my fight does fail,
my womb for vvoe does ache.
10
My life is worn with grief and pain
my years in vvoe are past:
My strength is gone, and through disdain
my bones corrupt and waste.
11
Among my foes I am a scorn,
my friends are all dismayed:
My neighbors and my kinsmen borne,
to see me are afraid.
12
As men once dead are out of mind,
so am I now forgot:
As small effect in me they find,
as in a broken pot.
13
I heard the brags of all the rout,
their threats my mind did fray:
How they conspired and went about
to take my life away.
14
But Lord I trust in thee for aid,
not to be ouertrod:
For I confess and still have said,
thou art my Lord and God.
15
The length of all my life and age,
O Lord is in thy hand:
Defend me from the wrath and rage
of them that thee vvithstand.
16
To me thy feruant Lord express,
and show thy joyful face:
And save me Lord for thy goodness,
thy mercy and thy grace.
The third part.
17
Lord let me not be put to blame,
for that on thee I call:
But let the wicked bear the shame,
and in the grave to fall.
18
Oh how great good have thou in store
laid up full safe for them:
That fear and trust in thee therefore
before the sons of men?
19
Thy presence shall them fence and guide
from all proud brags and wrongs:
Within thy place thou shall them hide
from all the strife of tongues.
20
Thanks to the Lord that has declared
on me his grace so far:
Me to defend with vvatch and ward,
as in a town of war
21
Thus did I say both day and night,
when I was sore oppressed:
Lo I was clean cast out of sight,
yet heardst thou my request.
22
Ye Saints love ye the Lord I say,
the faithful he does guide:
And to the proud he will repay
according to their pride.
23
Be strong, and God shall stay your heart,
be bold and have a lust:
For sure the Lord will take your part,
since ye on him do trust.
Here begins me Scottish Tunes.
Psalm 32.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M:
CANTVS.
^ THe man is blessed whose wickedness the Lord has clean remitted:
^ And he whose sin and vvretchednesse is hid and also covered.
MEDIVS.
^ THE man is blessed whose wickedness the Lord has clean remitted:
^ And he whose sin and vvretchednesse, is hid and also covered.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
The Kings Tune.
^ THe man is bles^ whose wickedness the Lord has clean remitted:
^ And he whose sin and vvretchednesse is hid and al- so covered.
BASSVS.
^ THE man is blessed whose wickedness the Lord has clean remitted:
^ And he whose sin and vvretchednesse, is hid and also covered.
2
And blessed is he to whom the Lord
imputes not his sin:
Which in his heart has hid no guile,
not fraud is found therein.
3
For whilst that I kept close my sin,
in silence and constraint:
My bones did wear and waste away
with daily mo^e and plaint.
4
For night and day thy hand on me
so grievous was and smart:
That all my blood and humors moist,
to dryness did convert.
5
I did therefore confess my fault,
and all my sins discover:
Then thou O Lord did me forgive,
and all my sins pass over.
6
The humble man shall pray therefo^^
and seek thee in due time:
So that the floods of water great
shall have no power on him.
7
When trouble and adversity
do compass me about:
Thou art my refuge and my joy,
and thou do rid me out.
8
Come hither and I shall thee teach,
how thou shall walk upright:
And will thee guide, as I my self
have learnd by proof and sight.
9
Be not so rude and ignorant,
as is the Horse or Mule,
Whose mouth without a reign or bit,
from harm thou can not rule.
10
The wicked man shall manifold
sorrovves and grief sustain:
But unto him that trusts in God,
his goodness shall remain.
11
Be merry therefore in the Lord,
ye just lift up your voice:
And ye of pure and perfect heart,
(...) glad and eke rejoice,
Psalm 33.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ YE righteous in the Lord rejoice: it is a seemly sight:
^ that upright men with thankful voice should praise the God of might.
MEDIVS.
^ YE righteous in the Lord rejoice: it is a seemly sight,
^ that upright men with thankful voice should praise the God of might:
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Dukes Tune.
^ YE righteous in the Lord rejoice: it is a seemly sight,
^ that upright men with thankful voice should praise the God of might.
BASSVS.
^ YE righteous in the Lord rejoice: it is a seemly sight,
^ that upright men with thankful voice should praise the God of might.
2
Praise ye the Lord with Harp and song,
in Psalms and pleasant things:
With Lute and Instruments among,
that sounds with ten strings.
3
Sing to the Lord a song most new,
with courage give him praise:
4
For why, his word is ever true,
his works and all his vvayes.
5
To judgment, equity, and right,
he has a great good will:
And with his gifts he does delight
the earth throughout to fill.
6
For by the word of God alone,
the heavens all were wrought:
Their hoasts and powers every one,
his breath to pass has brought.
7
The waters great gathered has he
on heaps within the shore:
And hid them in the depth to be
as in a house of store.
8
All men on earth both least and most,
fear God and keep his law:
Ye that inhabit in each coast,
dread him and stand in awe.
9
What he commanded, wrought it was
at once with present speed:
What he does will is brought to pass
with full effect indeed.
10
The counsels of the nations rude,
the Lord does bring to naught:
He does defend the multitude
of their device and thought.
11
But his decrees continue still,
they never slake or svvage:
The motions of his mind and will,
take place in every age.
The second part.
12
And blessed are they to whom the Lord
as God and guide is known:
Whom he does choose of mere accord
to take them as his own.
13
The Lord from heaven cast his sight
on men mortal by birth:
Considering from his seat of might,
the dvvellers on the earth.
14
The Lord (I say) whose hand has wrought
man's heart and does it frame:
15
For he alone does know the thought,
and vvorking of the same.
16
A King that trusts in his host,
shall naught prevail at length:
The man that of his might does boast,
shall fall for all his strength.
17
The troops of horsemen eke shall fail
their sturdy Steeds shall sterue:
The strength of horse shall not prevail
the rider to preserve*
18
But lo the eyes of God intend,
and vvatch to aid the just*
With such as fear him to offend,
and on his goodness trust.
19
That he of death and all distress,
may set their souls from dread:
And if that death their land oppress,
in hunger them to feed.
Wherefore our souls do still depend
on Godour strength and stay:
He is the shield us to defend,
and drive all darts away.
21
Our soul in God has joy and game,
rejoicing in his might:
For why? in his most holy name
we hope and have delight.
22
Therefore let thy goodness O Lord,
still present with us be:
As we alvvayes with one accord,
do only trust in thee.
Psalm 34.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ I Will give laud and honor both unto the Lord alvvayes:
^ And eke my mouth for evermore shall speak unto his praise.
MEDIVS.
^ I Will give laud and honor both unto the Lord alvvayes:
^ And eke my mouth for evermore shall speak unto his praise.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Abbey Tune.
^ I Will give laud and honor both unto the Lord alvvayes:
^ And eke my mouth for evermore shall speak: unto his praise,
BASSVS.
^ I Will give laud and honor both unto the Lord alvvayes:
^ And eke my mouth for evermore shall speak unto his praise.
2
I do delight to laud the Lord
in soul and eke in voice:
That humble men and mortified
may hear and so rejoice.
3
Therefore see that ye magnify
with me the living Lord:
And let us now exalt his name,
together with one accord.
4
For I myself besought the Lord,
he ansvvered me again:
And me delivered incontinent
from all my fear and pain:
5
Who so they be that him behold,
shall see his light most clear:
Their countenance shall not be dashed,
they need it not to fear:
6
This silly soul for some relief,
unto the Lord did call:
Who did him hear without delay,
and rid him out of thrall.
7
The Angel of the Lord does pitch
his tents in every place:
To save all such as fear the Lord.
that nothing them deface.
8
Taste and consider well therefore,
that God is good and just:
O happy man that makes him
his only stay and trust.
9
Fear ye the Lord ye holy ones,
above all earthly thing:
For they that fear the living Lord*
are sure to lack nothing.
10
The Lions shall be hungerbit,
and pinde with famine much:
But as for them that fear the Lord,
no lack shall be to such.
The second part.
11
Come near therefore my children dear
and to my words give ear:
I shall you teach the perfect way,
how you the Lord shall fear.
12
Who is the man that would live long
and lead a blessed life?
13
See thou refrain thy tongue and lips
from all deceit and strife.
14
Turn back thy face from doing ill,
and do the godly deed:
Inquire for peace and quietness,
and follovv it with speed.
15
For why? the eyes of God above,
upon the just are bent?
His ears likewise does hear the plaint
of the poor innocent.
16
But he does frovvn and bend his brovvs
upon the wicked train:
And cuts away the memory,
that should of them remain.
17
But when the just do call and cry,
the Lord does hear them so:
That out of pain and misery,
forthwith he lets them go.
18
The Lord is kind and merciful
to such as be contrite:
He saues also the sorrovvfull,
the meek, and poor in sprite.
19
Full many be the miseries,
that righteous men do suffer:
But out of all adversities,
the Lord will them deli^er.
20
The Lord does so preserve and keep
his very bo^es alvvay:
That not so much as one of them
does perish or decay.
21
The sin shall slay the wicked man,
which he himself has wrought:
And such as hate the righteous man,
shall soon be brought to naught.
22
But they that serve the living Lord,
the Lord does save them sound:
And who that put their trust in him,
nothing shall them confound.
Psalm 35.
Tho. Tomkins B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ LOrd plead my cause against my foes, confound their force and might:
^ Fight on my part against all those that seek with me to fight.
MEDIVS.
^ LOrd plead my cause against my foes, confound their force and might:
^ Fight on my part against all those that seek with me to fight.
TENOR, or Playnsong:
Dumfermeling Tune.
^ LOrd plead my cause against my foes confound their force and might:
^ Fight on my part against all those that seek with me to fight.
BASSVS.
^ LOrd plead my cause against my foes, confound their force and might:
^ Fight on my part against all those that seek with me to fight.
^
Lay hand upon thy spear and shield,
thy self in armor dress:
Stand up for me, and fight the field,
to help me from distress.
^
Gi^d on thy svvord, and stop the way,
mine enemies to vvithstand:
That thou unto my soul m^ist say,
Lo I thy help at hand.
Con^ound them with rebuke and blame,
that seek my soul to spill:
Let them turn back, and flee with shame,
that seek to work me ill.
5
Let them disperse and fly abroad,
as vvinde does drive the dust:
And that the Angel of our God,
their might away may thrust.
6
Let all their vvayes be void of light,
and slipperie like to fall:
And send thine Angel with thy might
to persecute them all.
7
For why without my fault they have
in secret set their grin:
And for no cause have dug a cave,
to take my soul therein.
8
When they think least, and have no care
O Lord destroy them all:
Let them be trapt in their own snare,
and in their mischief fall.
9
And let my soul my he^rt, my voice,
in God have joy and wealth:
That in the Lord I may rejoice,
and in his saving health.
10
And then my bones shall speak and say,
my parts shall all agree:
O Lord, though they do seem full gay,
what man is like to thee?
The second part.
11
Thou do defend the vveak from them
that are both stout and strong*
And rid the poor from wicked men,
that spoil and do them vvrong.
12
My cruel foes against me rise,
to witness things untrue:
And to accuse me they devise,
of that I never knevv.
13
Where I to them do owe good will,
they quite me with disdain:
That they should pay my good with ill,
my soul does sore complain.
14
When they were sick, I mournd therefore,
and clad my self in sack:
With fasting I did faintfull sore,
to pray I was not slack.
15
As they had been my brethren dear,
I did my self behave:
As one that makes woeful cheer
about his mothers grave.
16
But they a^my disease did joy,
and gather on a rout:
Yea, abject slaves at me did toy
with mocks and checks full ^^out.
17
The belly-gods and flattering train,
that all good things deride:
At me do grin with great disdain,
and pluck their mouth aside.
18
Lord, when vvilt thou amend this gear
why do thou stay and pause?
Oh rid my soul, mine only dear,
out of these Lions clavves.
19
And then will I give thanks to thee
before the Church alvvayes:
And whereas most of people be,
there will I show thy praise.
20
Let not my foes prevail on me,
which hate me for no fault:
Not yet to vvinck ot turn their eye,
that causeless me assault.
The second part.
21
Of peace no word they think or say,
their talk is all untrue:
They still co^sult, and would betray
all those that peace ensue.
22
With open mouth they run at me,
they gape, they laugh they fleere:
Well well, say they, our eye does see
the thing that we desire.
23
But Lord thou see what ways they take
cease not this gear to mend:
Be not far off, nor me forsake,
as men that fail their friend.
24
Awake, arise, and stir abroad,
defend me in my right:
Revenge my cause, my Lord, my God,
and aid me with thy might.
25
According to thy righteousness,
my Lord God set me free:
And let not them their pride express,
nor triumph over me.
26
Let not their hearts rejoice and cry,
there, there, this gear goes trim:
Nor give them cause to say, on hye,
we have our will on him.
27
Confound them with rebuke and shame
that joy when I do mourn:
And pay them homevvith spite and blame,
that brag at me with scorn.
28
Let them be glad and eke rejoice,
which love mine upright way:
And they all times with heart and voice
shall praise the Lord, and say,
29
Great is the Lord, and does excel,
for why? he does delight
To see his servants prosper well,
that is his pleasant sight.
30
Wherefore my tongue I will apply,
thy righteousness to praise:
Unto thee Lord my God will I
sing laud and thanks alvvayes.
Psalm 36.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ THe wicked with his works unjust, does thus persuade his heart:
^ That of the Lord he has no trust, his fear is set apart.
MEDIVS.
^ THE wicked with his works unjust, does thus persuade his heart:
^ That of the Lord he has no trust, his fear is set apart.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Dundy Tune.
^ THe wicked with his works unjust, does thus persuade his heart:
^ That of the Lord he has no trust, his fear is set apart.
BASSVS.
^ THE wicked with his works unjust, does thus persuade his heart:
^ That of the Lord he has no trust, his fear is set apart.
2
Yet does he joy in his estate,
to walk as he began:
So long till be deserve the hate
of God and eke of man.
3
His works are wicked, vile and naught,
his tongue no truth does tell:
Yet at no hand will he be taught,
which way he may do well.
4
when he should sleep, then does he muse
his mischiefs to fulfill:
No wicked vvayes does he refuse,
no^ nothing that is ill.
But Lord thy goodness does ascend
above the heavens hie:
So does thy truth it self extend,
unto the cloudy sky.
6
Much more then hills so high and steep,
thy justice is expressed:
Thy judgments like to seas most deep,
thou ^auest both man and beast.
7
Thy mercy is above all things,
O God it does excel
In trust whereof as in thy vvings,
the sons of men shall dvvell.
8
Within thy house they shall be fed
with plenty at their will:
Of all delights they shall be sped,
and take thereof their fill.
9
For why? the well of life so pure,
does ouerflovv from thee:
And in thy light we are full sure,
the lasting light to see.
10
From such as thee desire to know*
let not thy grace depart:
Thy righteousness declare, and show
to men of upright heart.
11
Let not the proud on me prevail,
O Lord of thy good grace:
Nor let the wicked me assail,
to throvv me out of place.
12
But they in their device shall fall,
that wicked works maintain:
They shall be overthrown vvithall,
and never rise again.
Psalm 37.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ GRudge not to see the wicked men, in wealth to flourish still
^ Nor yet envy such as to ill, have bent and set their will.
MEDIVS.
^ GRudge not to see the wicked men, in wealth to flourish still:
^ Nor yet envy such as to ill, have bent and set their will.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Glasco^^ Tune.
^ GRudge not to see the wicked men, in wealth to flourish still:
^ Nor yet envy such as to ill, have bent and set their will.
BASSVS.
^ GRudge not to see the wicked men, in wealth to flourish still:
^ Nor yet envy such as to ill, have bent and set their will.
2
For as green grass and flourishing herbs
are cut and vvith^ravvay:
So shall their great prosperity,
soon pa^^ fa^e and decay.
3
Trust thou therefore in God alone,
to do well give thy mind*
So shall thou have the land as thine,
and there sure food shall find.
4
In God set all thy hearts delight,
and look what thou would have:
Or else can vvish in all the world*
thou needst it not to crave.
5
Cast both thy self and thine affairs,
on God with perfect trust:
And thou shall see with patience:
the effect both sure and just.
6
Thy perfect life and godly name,
he will clear as the light:
So that the sun even as noone days,
shall not shine half so bright.
7
Be still therefore and steadfastly,
on God see thou wait then:
Not shrinking for the prosperous state
of lewd and wicked men.
8
Shake off despite, envy and hate,
at least in my wise:
Their wicked steps avoid and fly,
and follovv not their gui^e:
9
For every wicked man will God
destroy both more and less:
But such as trust in him are sure
the land for to possess.
10
Watch but a while and thou shall see
no more the wicked train:
No not so much as house or place,
where once he did remain.
The second part.
11
But merciful and humble men,
enjoy shall sea and land:
In rest and peace they shall rejoice,
for sought shall them vvithstand.
12
The lewd men and malitions,
against the just conspire:
They gnash their teeth at him, as men
which do his bane desire.
13
But while that lewd men thus do think
the Lord laughes them to scorn:
For why he sees their term approach,
when they shall sigh and mourn.
14
The wicked have their svvord out drawn,
their bovv eke have they bent
To overthrow and kill the poor,
as they the right way went.
15
But the same svvord shall pierce their hearts,
which was to kill the just:
Likewise the bovv shall break to shiuers
wherein they put their trust.
16
Doubtless the just man's poor estate
is better a great deal more:
Then all these lewd and vvorldly men's
rich pomp and heaped store.
17
For be their power never so strong,
God will it overthrow:
Where contrary he does preserve
the humble men and lovv.
18
He sees by his great providence,
the good men's trade and way:
And will give them inheritance,
which never shall decay.
19
They shall not be discouraged,
when some are hard bestead:
When other shall be hunger-bit,
they shall be clad and fed.
20
For whosoever wicked is,
and enemy to the Lord:
Shall quail, yea melt even as lambs grese
or smoke that flies abroad.
The third part.
21
Behold the wicked borrovveth much,
and never pays again:
Whereas the just by liberal gifts,
makes many glad and feign.
22
For they whom God does bless shall have
the land for heritage:
And they whom he does curse likewise,
shall perish in his rage.
23
The Lord the just man's vvayes does guide,
and gives him good success:
To every thing he takes in hand,
he sends good address.
24
Though that he fall, yet is he sure
not utterly to quail:
Because the Lord stretches out his hand
at need, and does not quail.
25
I have been young, and now am'old,
yet did I never see
The just man left, nor yet his seed
to beg for misery.
26
But gives alvvayes most liberally,
and lends whereas is need:
His children and posterity,
receive of God their meede.
27
Fly vice therefore and wickedness,
and virtue do embrace:
So God shall grant thee long to have
on earth a dwelling place.
28
For God so loves equity,
and shows to his such grace:
That he pres^rues them evermore,
destroying the wicked race.
29
Whereas the good and godly men,
inherit shall the land:
Having as Lords all things therein,
in their own power and hand.
30
The just man's mouth does euerspeake
of matters wise and hie:
His tongue does talk to edify,
with truth and equity.
31
For in his heart the law of God
the Lord does still abide:
So that where ever he go or walk,
his foot can never slide.
32
The wicked like a raueuing wolf,
the just man does beset:
By all means seeking him to kill,
if he fall in his net.
The fourth part.
33
Though he should fall into his hands,
yet God would succor send:
Though men against him sentence give,
God would him yet defend.
34
VVait thou on God, and keep his way,
he shall preserve thee then:
The earth to rule, and thou shall see
destroyed these wicked men.
35
The wicked have I seen most strong,
and placed in hie degree:
Flourishing in all wealth and store,
as does the Laurel tree.
36
But suddenly he passes away,
and lo he was quite gone:
Then I him sought but could scarce find
the place where dwelled such one.
37
Mark and behold the perfect man,
bovv God does him increase:
For the just man shall have at length,
great joy with rest and peace.
38
As for transgressors, vvoe to them,
destroyde they shall all be:
God will cut off their budding race,
and rich posterity:
But the salvation of the just,
does come from God above:
Who in their trouble sends them aid,
of his mere grace and love.
40
God does them help, save and deliver,
from lewd men and unjust:
And still will save them whilst that they
in him do put their trust.
Psalm 38.
Tho. Morley B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ PVt me not to rebuke O Lord, in thy provoked ire: Ne in thy heavy ^ wrath
O Lord, correct me I desire. Thine arrows do stick fast in me, thy ^ hand
does press me sore: And in my flesh no health at all appears any more.

MEDIVS.
^ PVt me not to rebuke O Lord, in thy provoked ire: Ne in thy heavy ^ wrath
O Lord, correct me I desire. Thine arrows do stick fast in me, thy ^ hand
does press me sore: And in my flesh no health at all appears any more.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ PVt me not to rebuke O Lord, in thy provoked ire: Ne in thy heavy ^ wrath
O Lord, correct me I desire. Thine arrows do stick fast in me, thy ^ hand
does press me sore: And in my flesh no health at all appears any more.

BASSVS.
^ PVt me not to rebuke O Lord, in thy provoked ire: Ne in thy heavy ^ wrath
O Lord, correct me I desire. Thine arrows do stick fast in me, thy ^ hand
does press me sore: And in my flesh no health at all appears any more.

3
And all this is by reason of
thy wrath that I am in:
Nor any rest is in my bones,
by reason of my sin.
4
For lo my wicked doings Lord,
above my head are gone:
A greater load then I can bear,
they lie me sore upon.
5
My vvounds stink and are festred so,
and loathsome are to see:
Which all through mine own foolishness:
betideth unto me.
6
And I in careful wise am brought,
in trouble and distress:
That I go vvayling all the day
in doleful heaviness.
7
My loins are filled with sore disease,
my flesh has no whole part:
8
I feeble am and broken sore,
I roar for grief of heart.
9
Thou know Lord my desire, my groans
are open in thy sight:
10
My heart does pant, my strength has faild
mine eyes have lost their light.
11
My lovers and my vvouted friends,
stand looking on my vvoe:
And eke my kinsmen far away,
are me departed fro.
12
They that did seek my life, laid snares
and they that sought the way,
To do me hurt, speak lies, and thought
on treason all the day.
The second part.
13
But as a deaf man I became,
that cannot hear at all:
14
And as one dumb that opens not
his mouth to speak at all:
15
For all my confidence (O Lord)
is wholy set on thee:
16
O Lord, thou Lord, that art my God,
thou shall give ear to me.
17
This did I crave that they my foes
triumph not over me:
For when my foot did slip, then they
did joy my fall to see.
And truly I poor wretch am set
in plague a woeful vvight:
And eke my grievous heaviness,
is ever in my sight.
18
For while that I my wickedness,
in humble wise confess:
And while I for my sinful deeds,
my sorrovves do express.
19
My foes do still remain alive,
and mighty are also:
And they that hate me wrongfully.
in number hugely grow,
20
They stand against me that my good
with evil did repay:
Because that good and honest things
I do ensue alvvay.
21
Forsake me not (O Lord my God)
be thou not far away:
22
Haste thee to help (my Lord my God)
my safety and my stay.
Psalm 39.
Simon Stubbs.
CANTVS.
^ I Said I will look to my vvayes, for fear I should go vvrong: ^ I will
take heed all times that I offend not in my tongue.

MEDIVS.
^ I Said I will look to my vvayes, for fear I should got vvrong: ^ I will
take heed all times that I offend not in my tongue.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
Martyrs Tune
I Said I will look to my vvayes, for fear I should go vvrong: ^ I will
take heed all times that I offend not in my tongue.

BASSVS.
^ I Said I will look to my vvayes, for fear I should go vvrong: ^ I will
take heed all times that I offend not in my tongue.

^
As with a bit I will keep fast
my mouth with force and might:
Not once to whisper all the while
the wicked are in sight.
5
I held my tongue and spoke no word*
but kept me close and still:
Yea, from good talk I did refrain,
but so^e against my will.
4
My heart vv^xt hot within my breast,
with musing* thought and doubt:
Which did increase and stir the fire,
at last these words burst out:
5
Lord number out my life and days,
which yet I have not past:
So that I may be certified
how long my life shall last:
6
Lord thou have pointed out my life
in length much like a span:
Mine age is nothing unto thee,
so vain is every man.
7
Man walks like a shade, and does
in vain himself annoy:
In getting goods, and cannot tell
who shall the same enjoy.
8
Now Lord since things this wise do frame,
what help do I desire?
Of truth my help does hang on thee,
I nothing else require.
The second part.
9
From all the sins that I have done,
Lord quite me out of hand:
And make me not a scorn to fools,
that nothing understand.
10
I was as dumb, and to complain,
no trouble might me move:
Because I know it was thy work,
my patience for to prove.
11
Lord take from me thy scourge and plague,
I can them not vvithstand:
I faint and pine away for fear
of thy most heavy hand.
12
When thou for sin do man rebuke,
he waxes vvoe and won:
As does a cloth that Mothes have fret,
so vain a thing is man.
13
Lord hear my suit and give good heed
regard my tears that fall:
I soiourne like a stranger here,
as did my fathers all.
14
O spare a little, give me space,
my strength for to restore:
Before I go away from hence,
and shall be seen no more.
Here begins the Welsh ^unes.
Psalm 40*
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ I VVaited long and sought the Lord, and patiently did bear:
^ At length to me he did accord, my voice and cry to hear.
MEDIVS.
^ I VVaited long and sought the Lord, and patiently did bear:
^ At length to me he did accord, my voice and cry to hear.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Landaffe Ture.
^ I VVaited long and sought the Lord, and patiently did bear:
^ At length to me he did accord, my voice and cry to hear.
BASSVS*
^ I VVaited long and sought the Lord, and patiently did bear:
^ At length to me he did accord, my voice and cry to hear.
2
He plucked me from the lake so deep,
out of the mire and clay:
And on a rock he set my feet,
and he did guide my way.
3
To me he taught a Psalm of praise,
which I must show abroad:
And sing new songs of thanks alvvayes,
unto the Lord our God.
4
When all the folk these things shall see
as people much afraid:
Then they unto the Lord will ^lee,
and trust upon his aid,
5
O blessed is he whose hope and heart
does in the Lord remain:
That with the proud does take no part,
nor such as lie and feign.
6
For Lord my God, thy vvondrous deeds,
in greatness far do pass:
Thy favor toward us exceeds
all things that ever was.
7
When I entend and do devise
thy works abroad to show:
To such a reckoning they do rise,
thereof no end I know.
8
But offerings thou delightest not in,
I know thy whole desire?
With sacrifice to purge his sin,
thou do no man require.
9
Meat offerings and sacrifice,
thou would not have at all:
But thou O Lord have open made
mine ears to hear vvithall.
10
But then shall I behold and look,
I come a mean to be:
For in the volume of thy Book,
thus it is said of me.
11
That I O God should do thy mind,
which thing does like me well:
For in my heart thy Law I find,
fast placed there to dvvell.
12
Thy justice and thy righteousness,
in great resort I tell:
Behold my tongue no time does cease,
O Lord thou know full well.
The second part.
13
I have not hid within my breast.
thy goodness as by stealth:
But I declare and have expressed
thy truth and saving health*
14
I kept not close thy loving mind,
that no man should it know:
The trust that in thy truth I find,
to all the world I shovv.
For I with mischiefs many one,
am sore beset about:
My sins increase, and so come on,
I cannot s^ye them out.
15
For why? in number they exceed
the hairs upon my head:
My heart does faint for very dread,
that I am almost dead.
16
With speed send help and set me free,
O Lord I thee require:
Make haste with aid to succor me,
O Lord IN thee desire.
17
Let them sustain rebuke and shame,
that seek my soul to spill:
Drive back my foes and them defame,
that vvish and would me ill.
18
For their ill feats do them descry.
that would deface thy name:
Alvvayes on me they rail and cry,
^ie on him, fie for shame.
16
Let them in thee have joy and wealth,
that seek to thee alvvayes:
That those that love thy f^uing health*
may say, to God be praise.
20
But as for me I am but poor,
oppressed and brought full lovv:
Yet thou O Lord vvilt me restore
to health full well I know.
21
For why? thou art my hope and trust,
my refuge, help and stay:
Wherefore my God as thou art just,
with me no time delay.
Psalm 41.
Edward Blancks.
CANTVS.
^ THE man is blessed, that careful is, the needy to consider: For ^ in the
season perilous. the Lord will him deliver. The Lord will make ^ him safe and
sound, and happy in the Land, and he will not deli- uer him ^ into his enemies
hand.

MEDIVS.
^ THe man is blessed, that careful is, the needy to consider: For ^ in the
season perilous, the Lord will him deliver. The Lord will make ^ him safe and
sound, and happy in the Land, and he will not deliver him ^ into his enemies
hand.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ THE man is blessed, that careful is, the needy to consider: For ^ in the
season perilous, the Lord will him deliver. The Lord will make ^ him safe and
sound, and happy in the Land, and he will not deliver him ^ into his enemies
hand.

BASSVS.
^ THe man is blessed that careful is, the needy to consider: For ^ in the
season perilous, the Lord will him deliver. The Lord will make ^ him safe and
sound, and happy in the Land, and he will not deliver him ^ into his enemies
hand.

3
And in his bed when he lies sick,
the Lord will him restore:
And thou O Lord vvilt turn to health
his sickness and his sore.
4
Then in my sickness thus say I,
have mercy Lord on me:
And heal my soul, which is full vvoe
that I offended thee.
5
Mine enemies vvish me ill in heart,
and thus of me do say:
When shall he dye, that all his name
may vanish quite away?
6
And when they come to visit me,
they ask if I do well:
But in their hearts they mischief hatch,
and to their mates it tell.
They bi^e their lips and whisper so,
as though they would me charm:
And cast their fetches how to trap
me with some mortal harm.
8
Some grievous sin has brought him to
this sickness say they plain:
He is so lovv, that without doubt,
rise can he not again.
9
The man also that I did trust,
with me did use deceit:
Who at my table eat my bread,
the same for me laid vvait.
10
Have mercy Lord on me therefore,
and let me be preserved:
That I may render unto them,
the things they have deserved.
11
By this I know assuredly,
to be beloved of thee:
When that mine enemies have no cause
to triumph over me.
12
But in my right thou have me kept,
and maintained alvvay:
And in thy presence place a^^ignde,
where I shall dvvell for aye.
13
The Lord the God of Israel
be praised be evermore:
Even so be it Lord will I say,
even so be it therefore.
Psalm 42.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M*
CANTVS.
^ LIke as the Heart does breath and bray, the vvel-spring to obtain, ^ so does
my soul desire alvvay, with the Lord to re- maine.

MEDIVS.
^ LIke as the Heart does breath and bray, the vvel-spring to obtain, ^ so does
my soul desire alvvay with the Lord to remain.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
Bangor Tune.
^ LIke as the Heart does breath and bray, the vvel-spring to obtain, ^ so does
my soul desire alvvay, with the Lord to remain.

BASSVS.
^ LIke as the Heart does breath and bray, the vvel-spring to obtain, ^ so does
my soul desire alvvay with the Lord to remain.

2
My soul does thirst, and would dravv near
the living Lord of might
Oh, when shall I come and appear
in presence of his sight?
3
The tears all times are my repast,
which from mine eyes do slide:
When wicked men cry out so fast,
where now is God thy guide?
4
Alas what grief is this to think,
what freedom once I had?
Therefore my soul as at pits brinck,
is most heavy and sad.
When I did march in good array,
furnished with my train:
Unto the Temple was our way,
with songs and hearts most feign.
5
My soul why art thou sad alvvayes,
and fretst thus in my breast?
Trust still in God, for him to praise
I hold it ever best.
By him I have succor at need,
against all pain and grief:
He is my God which with all speed,
will haste to send relief.
6
And thus my soul within me (Lord)
does faint to think upon
The Land of Jordan, and record
the little hill Hermon:
The second part.
7
One grief another in does call,
as clouds burst out their voice:
The ^ouds of evil that do fall,
run over me with noise.
8
Yet I by day felt thy goodness
and help at all assayes:
Likewise by night I do not cease
the living Lord to praise.
9
I am persuaded thus to say
to him with pure pretense:
O Lord thou art my guide and stay,
my rock and my defense.
Why do I then in pensiveness,
hanging the head thus walk*
While that mine enemies me oppress,
and vex me with their talk?
10
For why? they pierce the inward parts
with pangs to be abhorred:
When they cry out with stubborn hearts
where is thy God thy Lord?
11
So soon why do thou faint and quail,
my soul with pains oppressed:
With thoughts why do thy self assail
so sore within my breast?
12
Trust in the Lord thy God alvvayes,
and thou the time shall see:
To give him thanks with laud and praise,
for health restord to thee.
Psalm 43
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ IVdge and revenge my cause O Lord, from them that evil be:
^ From wicked and deceitful men, O Lord de- liver me.
MEDIVS.
^ IVdge and revenge my cause O Lord, from them that evil be:
^ From wicked and deceitful men, O Lord deliver me.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
St. David's Tune.
^ IVdge and revenge my cause O Lord, from them that evil be:
^ From wicked and deceitful men O Lord deliver me.
BASSVS.
^ IVdge and revenge my cause O Lord, from them that evil be:
^ From wicked and deceitful men, O Lord deliver me.
2
For of my strength thou art the God,
why putst thou me thee fro:
And why walk I so heavily,
oppressed with my foe?
3
Send out thy light and eke thy truth,
and lead me with thy grace:
Which may conduct me to thy hill,
and to thy dwelling place.
4
Then shall I to the altar go
of God my joy and cheer:
And on my Harp give thanks to thee
O God, my God most dear.
5
Why art thou then so sad my soul,
and fretst thus in my breast?
Still trust in God, for him to praise
I hold it alvvayes best.
6
By him I have deliverance,
against all pain and grief:
He is my God which does alvvayes
at need send me relief.
Psalm 44.
Edward Blanks.
CANTVS.
^ OUR ears have heard our fathers tell, and reverently record ^ the vvondrous
works that thou have done in alder time O Lord. How ^ thou did cast the
Gentiles out, and stroydst them with strong hand, planting ^ our Fathers in
their place, and gave to them their Land.

MEDIVS.
^ OUR ears have heard our Fathers tell, and reverently record ^ the vvondrous
works that thou have done in alder time O Lord. How ^ thou did cast the
Gentiles out, and stroyd them with strong hand, planting ^ our Fathers in
their place, and gave to them their Land.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ OUR ears have heard our Fathers tell, and reverently record ^ the vvondrous
works that thou have done in alder time O Lord. How ^ thou did cast the
Gentiles out, and stroydst them with strong hand, planting ^ our Fathers in
their place, and gave to them their Land.

BASSVS.
^ OUR ears have heard our Fathers tell, and reverently record ^ the vvondrous
works that thou have done in alder time O Lord. How ^ thou did cast the
Gentiles out, and stroydst them with strong hand, planting ^ our Fathers in
their place, and gave to them their Land.

3
They conquered not by svvord nor strength
the Land of thy behest:
But by thy hand, thine arm and grace,
because thou louedst them best.
4
Thou art my King, O God that ^olp
Jacob in sundry wise:
5
Led with thy power we threvv down such
as did against us rise.
6
I trusted not in b^vv ne svvord,
they could not save me sound:
7
Thou keptst us from our enemies rage
thou did our foes confound,
8
And still we boast of thee our God,
and praise thy holy Name:
9
Yet now thou go not with our h^st,
but leauest us to shame.
10
Thou made us fly before our foes,
and so were ouer-trod:
Our enemies spoild and robbed our goods
when we were spearst abroad:
11
Thou have us given to our foes,
as sheep for to be slain:
Among the Heathen every where
scattred we do remain.
12
Thy people thou have fold like (...),
and as a thing of naught:
For profit none thou have thereby,
no gain at all was sought.
13
And to our neighbors thou have made
of us a laughing ^^ocke:
And those that do about us dvvell,
at us do grin and mock.
The second part.
14
Thus we serve for none other use,
but for a common talk:
They mock, they scorn, they nod their heads
where ever they go or walk.
15
I am ashamed continually*
to hear these wicked men:
Yea, so I blush, that all my face
with red is covered then.
16
For why* we heard such slanderous words,
such false reports and lies:
That death it is to see their wrongs,
their threatenings and their cries.
17
For all this we forgot not thee,
nor yet thy covenant brake:
18
We turn not back our heart from thee
nor yet thy paths forsake.
19
Yet thou have trod us down to dust,
where dens of Dragons be:
And covered us with shade of death,
and great adversity.
20
If that we had our God forgot*
and help of Idols sought:
21
Would not God have tried this out?
for he does know our thought.
22
Nay, nay, for thy names sake O Lord,
alvvayes are we slain thus:
As sheep unto the shambles sent,
right so they deal with us:
23
Up Lord, why s^eepest thou? awake,
and leave us not for all.
24
Why hidest thou thy countenance,
and do forget our thrall?
25
For down to dust our soul is brought
and we now at last cast:
Our belly like as it were glude
unto the ground, cleaues fast.
26
Rise up therefore for our defense,
and help us Lord at need:
We thee beseech of thy goodness,
to rescue us with speed.
Psalm 45.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ MY heart does take in hand, some godly song to sing: The praise ^ that I
shall show therein, pertains to the King.

MEDIVS.
^ MY heart does take in hand, some godly song to sing: The praise ^ that I
shall show therein, pertai- neth to the King.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
Ludlow Tune.
^ MY heart does take in hand, some godly song to sing: The praise ^ that I
shall show therein, pertains to the King.

BASSVS.
^ MY heart does take in hand, some godly song to sing: The praise ^ that I
shall show therein, pertains to the King.

2
My tongue shall be as quick
his honor to indite:
As is the pen of any Scribe,
that uses fast to write.
3
O fairest of all men,
thy speech is perfect pure:
For God has blessed thee with gifts,
for ever to endure.
4
About thee gird thy svvord,
O Prince of might elect:
With honor* glory and renown,
thy person pure is decked.
5
Go forth with goodly speed,
in meekness truth and right:
And thy right hand shall thee instruct,
in works of dreadful might.
6
Thine arrows sharp and keen.
their hearts so sore shall ^^ing:
That folk shall fall and kneel to thee,
yea, all thy foes O King.
7
Thy royal seat O Lord,
for ever shall remain:
Because the Scepter of thy realm,
does righteousness maintain.
8
Because thou ^ou'st the right,
and do the ill detest:
God, even thy God has nointed thee
with joy above the rest.
9
With myrrh and savors svveet,
thy clothes are all bespread:
When thou do from thy palace pass,
therein to make thee glad.
10
Kings daughters do attend,
in fine and rich array.
At thy right hand the Queen does stand,
in gold and garments gay.
The second part.
11
O daughter take go^d heed,
incline and give good ear:
Thou must forget thy kindred all,
and fathers house most dear.
12
Then shall the King desire
thy beauty fair and trim:
For why? he is the Lord thy God,
and thou must worship him.
13
The daughters then of Tire,
with gifts full rich to see:
And all the vvealthy of the land,
shall make their suit to thee.
14
The daughter of the King
is glorious to behold:
With in her clo^e^ she does sit,
all decked in beaten gold.
15
In robes well wrought with needle,
and many a pleasant thing:
With Virgins fair on her to wait,
she comes to the King.
16
Thus are they brought with joy
and mirth on every side,
Into the palace of the King,
and there they do abide.
17
In stead of Parents left,
O Queen the chance so stands:
Thou shall have sons whom thou may set
as Princes in all lands.
18
Wherefore thy holy name,
all ages shall record:
Thy people shall give thanks to thee,
for evermore O Lord.
Psalm 46.
Tho. Morly B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ THe Lord is our defense and aid, the strength whereby we stand: ^ When
we with vvoe are much dismayed, he is our help at hand. Though ^ the earth
remove we will not fear, though hills so high and steep, be thrust ^ and
hurled here and there within the Sea so deep.

MEDIVS.
^ THe Lord is our defense and aid, the strength whereby we stand: ^ When
we with vvoe are much dismayed, he is our help at hand. Though ^ th earth
remove we will not fear, though hills so hie and steep, be thrust ^ and
hurled here and there within the Sea so deep.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ THe Lord is our defense and aid, the strength whereby we stand: ^ When
we with vvoe are much dismayed, he is our help at hand. Though ^ the earth
remove we will not fear, though hills so hie and steep, be thrust ^ and
hurled here and there within the Sea so deep.

BASSVS.
^ THe Lord is our defense and aid, the strength whereby we stand: ^ When
we with vvoe are much dismayed, he is our help at hand. Though ^ the earth
remove we will not fear: though hills so hie and steep, be thrust ^ and
hurled here and there within the Sea so deep.

3
No though the waves do rage so sore,
that all the bank^ it spils:
And though it ouerflovv the shore
and bear down mighty hills.
4
For one fair flood does send abroad
his pleasant streams apace:
To fresh the City of our God,
and vvash his holy place.
5
In midst of her the Lord does dvvell,
she can no whit decay:
All things against it that rebel,
the Lord will truly stay.
6
The heathen folk, the kingdoms fear
the people make a noise:
The earth does melt and not appear,
when God puts forth his voice.
7
The Lord of hosts does take our part.
to us he has an eye:
Our hope of health with all our heart
on Jacobs God does lie.
8
Come hear, and see with mind and thought
the vvorking of our God:
What wonders he himself has wrought
throughout the earth ab^oad.
9
By him all wars are hushed and gone,
which countries did conspire:
Their bovves he brake, and spears each one
their Chariots burnt with fire.
10
Leave off therefore (says he) and know
I am a God most stout:
Among the heathen hie and lovv,
and all the earth throughout.
11
The Lord of hosts does us defend,
he is ou^ strength and tovver:
On Jacobs God we do depend,
and on his mighty power.
Psalm 47.
Tho. Tomkins B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ YE people all with one accord, clap hands and eke re- joyce:
^ Be glad and sing unto the Lord with svveet and pleasant voice.
MEDIVS.
^ YE people all with one accord, clap hands and eke re- joyce:
^ Be glad and sing unto the Lord with svveet and pleasant voice.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Worcester Tune.
^ YE people all with one accord, clap hands and eke rejoice:
^ Be glad and sing unto the Lord, with svveet and pleasant voice,
BASSVS.
^ YE people all with one accord, clap hands and eke rejoice:
^ Be glad and sing unto the Lord with svveet and pleasant voice,
2
For high the Lord and dreadful is,
with wonders manifold:
A mighty King he is truly,
in all the earth extold.
3
The people shall he make to be,
unto our bondage ^hrall:
And underneath our feet he shall
the nations make to fall.
4
For us the heritage he chose,
which we possess alone:
The flouring worship of Jacob,
his well-beloved one.
5
Our God ascends up on hye,
with joy and pleasant noise:
The Lord goes up above the sky,
with trumpets royal voice.
6
Sing praise unto our God, sing praise,
sing praises to our King:
For God is King of all the earth,
all skillful praises sing.
7
God on the heathen reigns and sits,
upon his holy throne:
8
The Princes of the people have
them joined every one
To Abraham's people: for our God,
which is exalted hye.
As with a buckler does defend
the earth coutinually.
Psalm 48.
John Tomkins B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ GReat is the Lord, and with great praise to be advanced still.
^ With in the City of our Lord, upon his holy hill.
MEDIVS.
^ GReat is the Lord, and with great praise to be advanced still:
^ Within the City of our Lord, upon his holy hill.
TENOR or Playnsong.
Gloucester Tune.
^ GReat is the Lord, and with great praise to be advanced still:
^ Within the City of our Lord, upon his holy hill.
BASSVS.
^ GReat is the Lord, and with great praise to be advanced still:
^ Within the City of our Lord, upon his holy hill.
2
Mount Sion is a pleasant place,
it gladdeth all the Land:
The City of the mighty King,
on her North-side does stand.
3
Within the palaces thereof,
God is a refuge known:
For ^oe the kings were gathered, and
together eke were gone.
4
But when they did behold it so,
(...) vvondred, and they were
Asto^^ed much and suddenly
were driven back with fear:
5
Great terror there on them did fall,
for very vvoe they cry:
As does a woman when she shall
go travel by and by.
6
As thou with Eastern vvind the ship^
upon the sea do break:
So were they staide* and even as
we heard our fathers speak.
7
So in the City of our God,
we savv, it was so told:
Yea, in the City which our God,
for ever will uphold.
8
O Lord we vvait and do attend
on thy good help and grace:
For which I do all times attend
within thy holy place.
9
O Lord according to thy name,
for ever is thy praise:
And thy right hand O Lord is full
of righteousness alvvayes.
10
Let for thy judgments Sion mount,
fulfilled be with joys:
And eke of Judah grant (O Lord)
the daughter to rejoice.
11
Go walk about all Sion hill,
yea, round about her go:
And tell the towers that thereupon
are builded on a row.
12
And mark you well her bulvvarks all,
behold her towers there:
That ye may tell thereof to them,
that after shall be here:
13
For this God is our God, our God
for evermore is he:
Yea, and unto the death also,
our guider shall he be.
Psalm 49.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ ALL people hearken and give ear to that that I shall tell: Both ^ high and
lovv, both rich and poor, that in the world do dvvell.

MEDIVS.
^ ALL people hearken and give ear to that that I shall tell: Both ^ high and
lovv, both rich and poor, that in the world do dvvell.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
Hereford Tune.
^ ALL people hearken and give ear to that that I shall tell Both ^ high and
lovv, both rich and poor, that in the world do dvvell.

BASSVS.
^ ALL people hearken and give ear to that that I shall tell Both ^ high and
lovv, both rich and poor, that in the world do dvvell.

3
For why my mouth shall make discourse
of many things right wise:
In understanding shall my heart
his study exercise.
4
I will incline mine ears to know
thy parables so dark:
And open all my doubtful speech,
in meeter on my Harp.
5
Why should I fear afflictions,
or any careful toil:
Or else my foes which at my heels,
are pressed my life to spolye?
6
For as for such as riches have,
wherein their trust is most:
And they which of their treasures great
themselves do brag and boast.
7
There is not one of them that can
his brothers death redeem:
Or that can give a price to God,
sufficient for him.
8
It is too great a price to pay,
none can thereto attain:
9
Or that he might his life prolong,
or not in grave remain:
10
They see wise men as well as fools,
subject unto deaths hands:
And being dead, strangers possess
their goods, their rents, their lands.
11
Their care is to build houses fair,
and to determine sure:
To make their name right great on earth
for ever to endure.
12
Yet shall no man alvvay enjoy
his honor, wealth, and rest:
But shall at length taste of deaths cup*
as well as the brute beast.
The second part.
13
And though they try their foolish thoughts
to be most lewd and vain:
Their children eke approve their talk,
and in like sin remain.
14
As sheep unto the fold are brought,
so shall they into grave:
Death shall them eat, and in that day
the just shall Lordship have.
15
Their image and their royal port,
shall fade and quite decay?
When as from house to pit they pass,
with vvoe and weal away.
16
But surely God will preserve me
from death and endless pain:
Because he will of his good grace,
my soul receive again.
17
If any man wax vvondrous rich,
fear not I say therefore:
Although the glory of his house
increases more and more.
18
For when he dies, of all these things
nothing shall he receive:
His glory will not follovv him,
his pomp will take her leave.
19
Yet in this life he takes himself
the happiest under Sun:
And others likewise flatter him,
saying all is well done.
20
And presuppose he live as long
as did his fathers old:
Yet must he needs at length give place,
and be brought to deaths fold.
21
Thus man to honor God has calde,
yet does he not consider:
But like brute beasts so does he live,
which turn to dust or powder.
Here begins the French Tunes.
Psalm 50.
Edward Blanks.
CANTVS.
^ THE mighty God The Eternal has thus spoke, and all the world ^ he will
call and provoke, even from the East, and so forth to the West: ^ From tovvard
Sion, which place him likes best: God will appear in beauty ^ most ex-
cellent, Our God will come before that long time be spent.

MEDIVS.
^ THE mighty God The Eternal has thus spoke, and all the world ^ he will
call and provoke, even from the East, and so forth to the West: ^ From tovvard
Sion which place him likes best: God will appear in beauty ^ most
excellent. Our God will come before that long time be spent.

TENOR, or Faburden.
1 French Tune.
^ THE mighty God The Eternal has thus spoke and all the world ^ he will
call and provoke, even from the East, and so forth to the West. ^ From tovvard
Sion, which place him likes best: God will appear in beauty ^ most excel-
lent, Our God will come before that long time be spent.

BASSVS.
^ THE mighty God The Eternal has thus spoke, and all the world ^ he will
call and provoke, even from the East, and so forth to the West: ^ From tovvard
Sion which place him likes best. God will appear in beauty ^ most
excellent. Our God will come before that long time be spent.

Devouring fire
s^all go^ before his face,
A great tempest
shall round about him trace.
4
Then shall he call
the (...) and heavens bright,
To judge his folk
with equity and right.
5
Saving go to
and now my Saints assemble*
My he^s they keep,
their gifts do not dissemble.
6
The heavens shall
declare his righteousness:
For God is Judge
of all things more and less:
7
Hear my people,
for I will now reveal:
List Israel,
I will thee naught conceal.
8
Thy God thy God
am I, and will not blame thee:
For giving not
all manner offerings to me.
9
I have not need
to take of thee at all,
Goats of thy fold,
or calfe out of thy stall.
10
For all the beasts
are mine within the vvoods,
On thousand hills
cattle are mine own goods,
11
I know for mine
all birds that are on mountains:
All beasts are mine
which haunt the fields and fountains*
12
Hungry if I were,
I would not thee it tell:
For all is mine
that in the world do dvvell.
13
Eat I the flesh
of great Bulls or Bullocks?
Or drink the blood
of Goats, or of the flocks?
14
Offer to God
praise and hearty thanksgiving:
And pay thy vows
unto God everliving.
15
Call upon me,
when troubled thou shall be,
Then will I help,
and thou shall honor me.
16
To the wicked,
thus says the eternal God:
Why do thou preach
my laws and hests abroad,
Seeing thou have
them with thy mouth abused.
17
And hat'st to be
by discipline reformed?
My words I say,
thou do reject and hate:
18
If that thou see
a thief, as with thy mate,
Thou runst with him*
and so your prey do seek:
And art all one
with bauds and ruffians eke:
10
Thou give thy self
to backbite and to slander,
And how thy tongue
deceives, it is a vvonder.
20
Thou sit musing
thy brother how to blame:
And how to put
thy mothers son to shame:
21
These things thou did,
and whilst I held my tongue,
Thou did me judge
(because I staid so long)
Like to thy self,
yet though I keep long silence,
Once shall thou feel
of thy wrongs just recompense.
22
Consider this
ye that forget the Lord*
And fear not when
he threatens with his word:
Lest without help
I spoil you as a prey.
23
But he that thanks
offreth, praises me aye,
Says the Lord God,
and he that walks this trace,
I will him teach
Gods saving health to embrace.
Another of the same.
M. Peirson B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ THE God of Gods, the Lord has calde the earth by name:
^ From where the Sun does rise, unto the setting of the same.
MEDIVS.
^ THE God of Gods, the Lord has calde the earth by name:
^ From where the Sun does rise, unto the setting of the same.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Southwell Tune.
^ THE God of Gods, the Lord has calde the earth by name:
^ From where the Sun does rise, unto the setting of the same.
BASSVS.
^ THE God of Gods, the Lord has calde the earth by name:
^ From where the Sun does rise, unto the setting of the same.
2
From Sion his fair place,
his glory bright and clear:
The perfect beauty of his grace,
from thence it did appear.
3
Our God shall come in haste,
to speak he shall not doubt:
Before him shall the fire waste,
and tempest round about.
4
The heavens from on hie,
the earth below likewise:
He will call forth to judge and try,
his folk he does devise.
5
Bring forth my Saints, says he,
my faithful ^ock^ to dear:
Which are in bond and league with me
my law to love and fear.
6
And when these things are tried,
the heavens shall record:
That God is just, and all must bide
the judgments of the Lord.
7
My people O give heed,
Israel to thee I cry:
I am thy God, thy help at need,
thou can it not deny.
8
I do not say to thee,
thy sacrifice is ^lack?
Thou offerest daily unto me,
much more then I do lack.
9
Think thou that I do need
thy cattle young or old?
Or else so much desire to feed,
on Goats out of thy fold?
10
Nay, all the beasts are mine,
in vvoods that eat their fills:
And thousands more of neat and kine,
that run vvilde on the hills.
The second part.
11
The birds that build on hie,
in hills and out of sight:
And beasts that in the fields do lie.
are subject to my might.
12
Then though I hunger sore,
what need I ought of thine:
Since that the earth with her great store,
and all therein is mine?
13
To bulls flesh have I mind,
to eat it do thou think?
Or such a sweetness do I find,
the blood of Goats to drink*
14
Give to the Lord his praise,
with thanks to him apply:
And see thou pay thy vows a lvvayes
unto the Lord most hye.
15
Then seek and call to me.
when ought would work thee blame:
And I will sure deliver thee,
that thou may praise my name.
16
But to the wicked train,
which talk of God each day:
And yet their works are foul and vain,
to them the Lord will say,
17
With what a face dare thou,
my word once speak or name?
Why does thy talk my law allow,
thy deeds deny the same?
18
Whereas for to amend
thy life thou art so slack:
My word, the which thou do pretend,
is cast behind thy back.
The third part.
19
When thou a thief do see,
by theft to live in wealth:
With him thou runst, and do agree
likewise to thrive by stealth.
20
When thou do them behold,
that vviues and maids defile:
Thou likest it well, and vvaxest bold
to use that life most vile.
21
Thy lips thou do apply,
to slander and defame:
Thy tongue is ^aught to craft and lie,
and still does use the same.
22
Thou studiest to revile
thy friends to thee so near:
With slander thou would needs defile
thy mothers son most dear.
23
Hereat while I do vvinke,
as though I did not see:
Thou go on still, and so do think
that I am like to thee.
24
But sure I will not let
to strike when I begin:
Thy faults in order I will set,
and open all thy sin.
25
Mark this I you require,
that have not God in mind:
Le^t when I plague you in my ire,
your help be far to find.
20
He that does give to me
the sacrifice of praise:
Does please me well, and he shall see
to walk in godly vvayes.
Psalm 51.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ O Lord consider my distress, and now with speed some pity ^ take: My
sins deface, my faults redress: good Lord for thy great mercies ^ sake.
VVash me O Lord, and make me clean from this unjust and sinful ^ act: and
purify yet once again, my heinous crime and bloody fact.

MEDIVS.
^ O Lord consider my distress, and now with speed some pity ^ take: My
sins deface, my faults redress, good Lord for thy great mercies ^ sake.
VVash me O Lord, and make me clean from this unjust and sinful ^ act: and
purify yet once again, my heinous crime and bloody fact.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ O Lord consider my distress, and now with speed some pity ^ take: My
sins deface, my faults redress, good Lord for thy great mercies ^ sake.
VVash me O Lord, and make me clean from this unjust and sinful ^ act: and
purify yet once again, my heinous crime and bloody fact.

BASSVS.
^ O Lord consider my distress, and now with speed some pity ^ take: My
sins deface, my faults redress, good Lord for thy great mercies ^ sake,
VVash me O Lord, and make me clean from this unjust and sinful ^ act: and
puri- fie yet once again, my heinous crime and bloody fact.

3
Remorse and sorrovv do constrain
Me to acknovvledge mine excess:
My sins alas do still remain
Before my face without release.
4
For thee alone I have often led,
Committing evil in thy sight.
And if I were therefore condemned.
Yet were thy judgments just and right,
5
It is too manifest alas,
That first I was conceived in sin,
Yea, of my mother so borne was,
And yet vile wretch remain therein*
6
Also behold Lord thou do love
The inward truth of a pure heart:
Therefore thy wisdom from above,
Thou have revealed me to convert.
7
If thou with Hysop purge this blot,
I shall be cleaner then the glass:
And if thou vvash away my spot,
The snow in vvhitenesse shall I pass.
8
Therefore O Lord such joy me send,
that inwardly I may find grace:
And that my strength may now amend.
Which thou have svvag'd for my trespass.
9
Turn back thy face and frovvning ire,
For I have felt enough thy hand:
And purge my sins I thee desire,
Which do in number pass the sand.
10
Make new my heart within my breast,
And frame it to thy holy will:
Thy constant spirit in me let rest,
Which may these raging enemies kill:
The second part.
11
Cast me not Lord out from thy face,
But speedily my torments end:
Take not from me thy spirit and grace,
Which may from danger me defend.
12
Restore me to those joys again,
Which I was wont in the to find:
And let me thy free spirit retain,
Which unto thee may stir my mind.
13
Thus when I shall thy mercies know
I shall instruct others therein:
And men likewise that are brought lovv
By mine ensample shall fly sin.
14
O God that of my health art Lord,
Forgive me this my bloody vice:
My heart and tongue shall then accord,
To sing thy mercies and justice.
15
Touch thou my lips, my tongue untie,
O Lord which only art the key:
And then my mouth shall testify
Thy vvondro^s works and praise alvvay*
16
And as for outvvard sacrifice,
I would have offered many a one:
But thou esteemest them of no price,
And therein pleasure take none.
17
The heavy heart, the mind oppressed,
O Lord thou never do reject:
And to speak truth it is the best,
And of all sacrifice the effect.
18
Lord unto Sion turn thy face.
Pour out thy mercies on thy hill
And on Jerusalem thy grace,
Build up the walls and love it still.
19
Thou shall accept then our offerings*
Of peace and righteousness I say:
Yea, Calves and many other things
Upon thine Altar will we lay.
Another of the same.
William Cranford.
CANTVS.
^ Have mercy on me God af- ter thy great abundant grace:
^ After thy mercies multi- tude, do thou my sins de- face.
MEDIVS.
^ Have mercy on me God after thy great abundant grace:
^ After thy mercies multitude, do thou my sins deface.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Ely Tune.
^ Have mercy on me God after thy great abundant grace:
^ After thy mercies multitude, do thou my sins deface.
BASSVS.
^ Have mercy on me God after thy great abundant grace:
^ After thy mercies multi- tude, do thou my sins deface.
2
Yea, vvash me more from mine offense,
and cleanse me from my sin:
For I do know my faults and still
my sins are in mine eyne.
3
Against thee, thee alone I have
offended in this case:
And evil have I done before
the presence of thy face.
4
That in the things that thou do say,
upright thou may be tried:
And eke in judging that the doom*
may pass upon thy side.
5
Behold, in wickedness my kind
and shape I did receive:
And lo my sinful mother eke,
in sin did me conceive.
6
But lo the truth of inward parts
is pleasant unto thee:
And secrets of thy wisdom thou
revealed have to me.
7
With Hysop Lord besprinkle me,
I shall be cleansed so:
Yea, vvash thou me, and so I shall
be vvhiter then the snow.
8
Of joy and gladness make thou me
to hear the pleasing voice:
That so the bruised bones which thou
have broken may rejoice.
9
From the beholding of my sins,
Lord turn away thy face:
And all my deeds of wickedness,
do utterly deface.
10
O God create in me a heart
unspotted in thy sight.
And eke within my bowels Lord*
renu^ a stabled spirit.
11
Ne cast me from thy sight, nor ta^e
thy holy spirit away:
The comfort of thy saving grace,
give me again I pray.
12
With thy free spirit establish me,
and I will teach therefore,
Sinners thy vvayes, and wicked shall
be turned to thy lore.
The second part.
13
O God that art my God of health,
from blood deliver me:
That praises of thy righteousness,
my tongue may sing to thee.
14
My lips that yet fast closed be,
do thou O Lord unloose:
The praises of thy majesty,
my mouth shall so disclose.
15
I would have offered sacrifice,
if that had pleased thee:
But pleased with burnt offerings,
I know thou vvilt not be.
16
A troubled spirit is sacrifice,
delightful in Gods eyes:
A broken and an humble heart,
God thou vvilt not despise.
17
In thy good will deal gently Lord
to Sion, and vvithall
Grant that of thy Jerusalem,
vpreard may be the wall.
18
Burnt offerings, gifts, and sacrifice,
of justice in that day:
Thou shall accept, and Calves they shall
upon thine Altar lay.
Psalm 52.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ WHY do thou tyrant boast abroad, thy wicked works to ^ praise? do
thou not know there is a God, whose mercies last alvvayes? ^ Why does thy
mind yet still devise such wicked vviles to vvarp? Thy ^ tongue untrue in
forging lies, is like a rasor sharp.

MEDIVS.
^ WHY do thou tyrant boast abroad thy wicked works to ^ praise? do thou
not know there is a God, whose mercies last alvvayes? ^ Why does thy mind
yet still devise such wicked vviles to vvarp? Thy ^ tongue untrue in forging
lies, is like a rasor sharp.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ WHY do thou tyrant boast abroad, thy wicked works to ^ praise* do
thou not know there is a God, whose mercies last alvvayes? ^ Why does thy
mind yet still devise such wicked vviles to vvarp? Thy ^ tongue untrue in
forging lies is like a rasor sharp.

BASSVS.
^ WHY do thou tyrant boast abroad, thy wicked works to ^ praise? do
thou not know there is a God, whose mercies last alvvayes? ^ Why does thy
mind yet still devise such wicked vviles to vvarp? Thy ^ tongue untrue in
forging lies, is like a rasor sharp.

3
On mischief why sets^ thou thy mind,
and vvilt not walk upright?
Thou have more lust false tales to find*
then bring the truth to light.
4
Thou do delight in fraud and guile,
in mischief, blood, and vvrong:
Thy lips have learnd the flattering style,
O thou deceitful tongue.
5
Therefore God shall for ever confound
and pluck thee from thy place:
Thy seed root out from off the ground,
and so shall thee deface:
6
The just when they behold thy fall,
with fear shall praise the Lord:
And in reproach of thee vvithall,
cry out with one accord.
7
Behold the man which would not take
the Lord for his defense:
But of his goods his God did make,
and trust his corrupt sense.
8
But I an Olive fresh and green,
will spring and spread abroad:
For why? my trust all times has been
upon the living God.
9
For this therefore will I give praise
to thee with heart and voice:
I will set forth thy name alvvayes
wherein thy Saints rejoice.
Psalm 53
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ THe foolish man in that which he within his heart has said:
^ That there is any God at all, has utterly de- naid.
MEDIVS.
^ THe foolish man in that which he within his heart has said:
^ That there is any God at all, has utterly de- naid.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Chichester Tune.
^ THe foolish man in that which he within his heart has said:
^ That there is any God at all, has utterly denaid.
BASSVS.
^ THe foolish man in that which he within his heart has said:
^ That there is any God at all, has utterly denaid.
2
They are corrupt, and they also
a heinous work have vv^ought:
Among them all there is not one,
of good that works ought:
3
The Lord looked down on sons on men
from heaven all abroad:
To see if any were that would
be wise, and seek for God.
4
They are all gone out of the way,
they are corrupted all:
There is not one does any good,
there is not one at all.
5
Do not all wicked workers know
that they do feed upon
My people as they feed on bread?
the Lord they call not on.
6
Even there they were afraid, and stood
with trembling all dismayed:
Whereas there was no cause at all
why they should be afraid.
7
For God his bones that thee besiegde
has scattered all abroad:
Thou have confounded them, for they
rejected are of God.
8
O Lord give thou thy people health,
and thou O Lord fulfill
Thy promise made to Israel*
from out of Sion hill.
9
When God his people shall restore*
that erst was captive led:
Then Jacob shall therein rejoice,
and Israel shall be glad.
Psalm 54.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ GOD save me for thy holy name, and for thy goodness sake:
^ Unto the strength (Lord) of the same, I do my cause betake.
MEDIVS.
^ GOd save me for thy holy name, and for thy goodness sake:
^ Unto the strength (Lord) of the same, I do my cause betake.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Salisbury Tune.
^ GOD save me for thy ho- ly name, and for thy goodness sake:
^ Unto the strength (Lord) of the same, I do my cause betake.
BASSVS.
^ GOd save me for thy ho- ly name, and for thy goodness sake:
^ Unto the strength (Lord) of the same, I do my cause betake.
2
Regard O Lord and give an ear
to me when I do pray.
Bovv down thy self to me, and hear
the words that I do say.
For strange^s up against me rise,
and tyrants vex me still:
Which have not God before their eyes,
they seek my soul to spill.
4
But lo my God does give me aid,
the Lord is straight at hand
With them by whom my soul is staid,
the Lord does ever stand.
5
With plagues repay again all those
for me that lie in wait:
And in thy truth destroy my foes
with their own, sna^e and bait.
6
An offering of free heart and will,
then I to thee shall make:
And praise thy name, for therein still
great comfort do I take.
7
O Lord at length do set me free
from them that craft conspire:
And now mine eyes with joy do see
of them my hearts desire.
Psalm 55.
John Milton.
CANTVS.
^ O God give ear, and do apply to hear me when I pray:
^ And when to thee I call and cry, hide not thy face a- way.
MEDIVS.
^ O God give ear, and do apply to hear me when I pray:
^ And when to thee I call and cry, hide not thy face away.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Norwich Tune.
^ O God give ear, and do apply to hear me when I pray:
^ And when to thee I call and cry, hide not thy face a-vvay.
BASSVS.
^ O God give ear, and do apply to hear when I do pray:
^ And when to thee I call and cry, hide not thy face away.
2
Take heed to me, grant my request,
and answer me again:
With plaints I pray, full sore oppressed,
great grief does me constrain.
2
Because my foes with threats and cries,
oppress me through despite:
And so the wicked sort likewise,
to vex me have delight.
4
For they in counsel do conspire
to charge me with some ill:
So in their hasty wrath and ire,
they do pursue me still.
5
My heart does faint for want of breath
it pants in my breast:
The terrors and the dread of death
do work me much unrest.
6
Such dreadful fear on me does fall,
that I therevvith do quake:
Such horror vvhelmeth me vvithall,
that I no shift can make.
7
But I do say, who will give me
the swift and pleasant vvings
Of some fair Dove, that I may fly,
and tell the from these things.
8
(...) then I would go far away
to fly I would not cease:
And I would hide my self, and stay
in some great wilderness.
9
I would be gone in all the haste,
and not abide behind:
That I were quite and ouer-past
these blasts of boystrous vvinde.
10
Divide them Lord, and from them pull
their devilish double tongue:
For I have spied their City full
of ^apine, strife, and vvrong.
11
Which things both night and day throughout
do close her as a wall
In midst of her is mischief stout,
and sorrovv eke vvithall.
14
Her privy parts are wicked plain,
her deeds are much too vile:
And in her streets there does remain
all crasty fraud, and guile.
The second part.
13
If that my foes did seek my shame,
I might it well abide:
From open enemies check and blame,
some where I could me hide.
14
But thou it was my fellovv dear,
which friendship did pretend*
And did my secret counsel hear,
as my familiar friend.
15
With whom I had desire to talk
in secret and abroad:
And we together often did walk,
within the house of God.
16
Let death in haste upon them fall,
and send them quick to hell:
For mischief reigns in their hall
and parlour where they dvvell.
17
But I unto my God do cry,
to him for help I fly:
The Lord does hear me by and by,
and he does succor me.
18
At morning noone, and evening tide
unto the Lord I pray:
When I so instantly have cride,
he does not say me nay.
19
To peace he shall restore me yet,
though war be now at hand:
Although the number be full great,
that would against me stand.
20
^he Lord that first and last does reign,
both now and evermore:
Will hear when I to him complain,
and punish them full sore.
21
For sure there is no hope that they
to turn will once accord:
For why* they will not once obey,
nor do not fear the Lord.
22
Upon their friends they lay their hands
which were in covenant knit:
Of friendship to neglect the bands,
they pass or care no whit.
23
While they have war within their hearts,
as butter are their words*
Although their words were smooth as oil,
they cut as sharp as svvords:
24
Cast thou thy care vpou the Lord,
and he shall nourish thee:
For in no wise he will accord
the just in thrall to see.
25
But God shall cast them deep in pit,
that thirst for blood alvvayes:
He will no guilefull man permit
to live out half his days.
26
Though such be quite destroyed and gone
in thee O Lord I trust,
I shall depend thy grace upon,
with all my heart and lust,
Psalm 56.
William Harison.
CANTVS.
^ Have mercy Lord on me I pray, for man would me devour:
^ He fights with me night and day, and troubles me each hour.
MEDIVS.
^ Have mercy Lord on me I pray, for man would me devour:
^ He fights with me night and day, and troubles me each hour.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Lincoln Tune.
^ Have mercy Lord on me I pray, for man would me devour:
^ He fights with me night and day, and troubles me each hour.
BASSVS.
^ Have mercy Lord on me I pray, for man would me devour:
^ He fights with me night and day, and troubles me each hour.
2
Mine enemies daily enterprise,
to swallow me outright:
To fight against me many rise,
O thou most high of might.
3
When they would make me most afraid
with boasts and brags of pride:
I trust in thee alone for aid,
by thee I will abide.
4
Gods promise I do mind and praise,
O Lord I trust to thee:
I do not care at all assaies,
what flesh can do to me.
5
What things I either did or spoke,
they wrest them at their will:
And all their counsel that they take,
is how to work me ill.
6
They all consent, themselves to hide,
close vvatch for me to lay:
To spy my paths, and snares have laid
to take my life away.
7
Shall they thus escape on mischief set:
thou God on them vvilt frovvne:
For in his wrath he does not let
to throvv whole kingdoms down.
8
Thou see how often they make me flee,
and on my tears does look:
Reserve them in a glass by thee,
and write them in thy book.
9
When I do call upon thy name,
my foes away do start:
I well perceive it by the same,
that God does take my part.
10
I glory in the word of God,
to praise it I accord:
With joy I shall declare abroad,
the promise of the Lord.
11
I trust in God, and yet I say
as I before began:
The Lord he is my help and stay,
I do not care for man.
12
I will perform with heart so free,
to God my vows alvvayes:
And I O Lord all times to thee
will offer thanks and praise.
13
My soul from death thou do defend,
and keep my feet upright:
That I before thee may ascend
with such as live in light.
Psalm 57
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ TAke pity for thy promise sake, have mercy Lord on me: For ^ why* my
soul does her betake unto the help of thee.

MEDIVS.
^ TAke pity for thy promise sake, have mercy Lord on me: For ^ why? my
soul does her betake unto the help of thee.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
Peterborough Tune.
^ TAke pity for thy promise sake, have mercy Lord on me: For ^ why? my
soul does her betake, unto the help of thee.

BASSVS.
^ TAke pity for thy promise sake, have mercy Lord on me: For ^ why? my
soul does her betake unto the help of thee.

2
Within the shadovv of thy vvings,
I set my self full fast,
Till mischief, malice, and like things
be gone and ou^rpast.
3
I call upon the God most hye,
to whom I stick and stand:
I mean the God that will stand by
the cause I have in hand.
4
From heaven he has sent his aid,
to save me from their spite:
That to devour me have assaid
his mercy, truth, and might.
5
I lead my life with Lyors fell,
all set on wrath and ire:
And with such wicked men I dvvell,
that fret like flames of fire.
6
Their teeth are spears and arrows long,
as sharp as I have seen:
They vvound and cut with their quick tongue
like svvords and weapons keen.
7
Set up and show thy self O God,
above the heavens bright:
Exalt thy praise on earth abroad,
thy majesty and might.
8
They lay their nets, and do prepare
a privy cause and pit:
Wherein they think my soul to snare,
but they are fallen in it.
9
My heart is set to laud the Lord,
in him I joy alvvayes:
My heart I say does well accord
to sing his laud and praise.
10
Awake my joy, awake I say,
my Lute, my Harp and string:
For I my self before the day,
will rise, rejoice, and sing.
11
Among the people I will tell
the goodness of my God:
And show his praise that does excel
in heathen Lands abroad.
12
His mercy does extend as far
as heavens all are hye:
His truth as high as any Star
that stands in the sky.
13
Set forth and show thy self O God,
above the heavens bright:
Extol thy praise on earth abroad,
thy majesty and might.
Psalm 58.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ YE Rulers which are put in trust to judge of vvrong and right:
^ Be all your judgments true and just, not knovving meede or might?
MEDIVS.
^ YE Rulers which are put in trust to judge of vvrong and right:
^ Be all your judgments true and just, not knovving meede or might?
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Lichfield Tune.
^ YE Rulers which are put in trust to judge of vvrong and right:
^ Be all your judgments true and just, not knovving meede or might?
BASSVS.
^ YE Rulers which are put in trust to judge of vvrong and right:
^ Be all your judgments true and just, not knovving meede or might?
2
Nay in your hearts you mark and muse
in mischief to consent
And where you should true justice use,
your hands to bribes are bent.
3
The wicked sort from their birth day,
have erred on this wise:
And from their mothers womb alvvay,
have used craft and lies.
4
In them the poison and the breath
of Serpents did appear:
Yea, like the Adder that is deaf,
and fast does stop his ear.
5
Because he will not hear the voice
of one that charmeth well:
No though he were the chief of choice
and did therein excel.
6
O God break thou their teeth at once
within their mouths throughout:
The tusks that in their great iavv-bones
like Lions vvhelps hang out.
7
Let them consume away and waste,
as water run'th throughout.
The shafts that they do shoot in haste,
let them be broke in ^ight.
8
As Snailes do waste within the shell,
and unto ^^ime do run:
As one before his time that fell,
and never savv the Sun.
9
Before the thorns that now are young
to bushes big shall grow:
The storms of anger vvaxing strong,
shall take them ere they know.
10
The just shall joy, it does them good
that God does vengeance take*
And they shall vvash their feet in blood
of them that him forsake.
11
Then shall the earth show forth and tell
that good men have revvard:
And that a God on earth does dvvell.
that justice does regard.
Psalm 59.
I. Farmer.
CANTVS.
^ SEnd aid and save me from my foes, O Lord I pray to thee: ^ Defend and
keep me from all those that rise and strive with me, O Lord pre- ^ serve me
from those men, whose doings are not good: and set me sure and ^ safe from
them, that still thirst after blood.

MEDIVS.
^ SEnd aid and save me from my foes. O Lord I pray to thee: ^ Defend and
keep me from all those that rise and strive with me. O Lord pre- ^ serve me
from those men, whose doings are not good: and set me sure and ^ safe from
them, that still thirst after blood.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ SEnd aid and save me from my foes, O Lord I pray to thee: ^ Defend and
keep me from all those that rise and strive with me. O Lord pre- ^ serve me
from those men, whose doings are not good: and set me sure and ^ safe from
them, that still thirst after blood.

BASSVS.
^ SEnd aid and save me from my foes, O Lord I pray to thee: ^ Defend and keep
me from all those that rise and strive with me. O Lord pre- ^ serve me from
those men, whose doings are not good: and set me sure and ^ safe from them,
that still thirst after blood.

3
For lo they vvait my soul to take,
they rage against me still:
Yea for no fault that I did make,
I never did them ill.
4
They run, and do themselves prepare,
when I no whit offend:
Arise, and save me from their snare,
and see what they intend.
5
O Lord of hosts of Israel,
rise up and strike all lands:
And pity none that do rebel,
and in their mischief stands.
6
At night they stir and seek about,
as hounds they houle and grin:
And all the City clean throughout,
from place to place they ren.
7
They spoke of me with mouth alvvay,
but in their lips were svvords:
They greed my death* and then would say
what, none can hear our words.
8
But Lord thou have their vvayes espide,
and laughed thereat apace:
The heathen folk thou shall deride,
and mock them to their face.
9
The strength that does my foes vvithstand,
O Lord does come of thee:
My God he is my help at hand,
a fort of fence to me.
10
The Lord to me does show his grace
in great abundance still:
That I may see my foes in case,
such as my heart does will.
11
Destroy them not at once O God,
lest it from mind do fall:
But with thy strength drive them abroad
and so consume them all.
12
For their ill words and truthles tongue,
confound them in their pride:
Their wicked oaths with lies and vvrong
let all the world deride.
13
Consume them in thy wrath O Lord,
that naught of them remain:
That men may know throughout the world
that Jacobs God does reign.
14
At evening they return apace,
as dogs they grin and cry:
Throughout the streets in every place,
they run about and spy.
15
They seek about for meat I say.
but let them not be fed:
Nor find a house wherein they may
be bold to put their head.
16
But I will show thy strength abroad
thy goodness I will praise:
For thou art my defense and aid
at need in all assayes.
17
Thou art my strength, thou have me staid
O Lord I sing to thee:
Thou art my fort my strength and aid,
a loving God to me.
Psalm 60.
Edward Blanks.
CANTVS.
^ O Lord thou did us clean forsake, and scatteredst us abroad: ^ Such great
displeasure thou did take, return to us O God.

MEDIVS.
^ O Lord thou did us clean forsake, and scatteredst us abroad: ^ Such great
displeasure thou did take, return to us O God.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
Dutch Tune.
^ O Lord thou did us clean forsake, and scatteredst us abroad: ^ Such great
displeasure thou did take, return to us O God.

BASSVS.
^ O Lord thou did us clean forsake, and scatteredst us abroad: ^ Such great
displeasure thou did take, return to us O God.

2
Thy might did move the land so sore,
that it in sunder brake:
The hurt thereof O Lord restore,
for it does bovv and quake.
3
With heavy chance thou plaguest thus
the people that are thine:
And thou have given unto us
a drink of deadly wine.
4
But yet to such as fear thy name,
a token shall ensue:
That they may triumph in the ^ame,
because thy word is true.
5
So that thy might may keep and save
thy flock that favor thee:
That they thy help at hand may have,
O Lord grant this to me.
6
The Lord did speak from his own place,
this was his joyful tale:
I will divide Sichem by space,
and mete out Succoths vale.
7
Gilead is given to my hand,
Manasses mine beside:
Eph^^im the strength of all my Land,
my Law does Judah guide.
3
In Moab will I vvash my feet,
over Edom throvv my shoe:
And thou Palestine ought to seek
for favor me unto.
9
But who will bring me at this tide,
unto the City strong?
Or who to Edom vvil me guide,
so that I go not vvrong:
10
VVilt thou O God which did forsake
thy folk, their land and coasts?
Our wars in hand thou would not take
not walk among our hoasts.
11
Give aid O Lord, and us relieve
from them that us disdain:
The help that hoasts of men cau give,
it is but all in vain.
12
But through our God we shall have might
to take great things in hand:
He will tread down and put to flight,
all those that thee vvithstand.
Psalm 61.
Richard Allison.
CANTVS.
^ REgard (O Lord) for I complain, and make my suit to thee: Let ^ not my
words return in vain, but give an ear to me. From off the ^ coasts and
utmost parts of all the earth abroad: in grief and anguish of ^ my heart, I
cry to thee O God.

MEDIVS.
^ REgard (O Lord) for I complain, and make my suit to thee: Let ^ not my
words return invaine, but give an ear to me. From off the ^ coasts and
utmost parts of all the earth abroad: in grief and anguish of ^ my heart, I
cry to thee O God.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ REgard (O Lord) for I complain, and make my suit to thee: Let ^ not my
words return in vain, but give an ear to me. From off the ^ coasts and
utmost parts of all the earth abroad: in grief and anguish of ^ my heart, I
cry to thee O God.

BASSVS.
^ REgard (O Lord) for I complain, and make my suit to thee: Let ^ not my
words return in vain, but give an ear to me. From off the ^ coasts and
utmost parts of all the earth abroad: in grief and anguish of ^ my heart, I
cry to thee O God.

3
Upon the rock of thy great power,
my woeful mind repose:
Thou art my hope my fort, and tovver,
my ^ence against my foes.
4
Within thy tents I lust to dvvell,
for ever to endure.
Under thy vvings I know right well
I shall be safe and sure.
5
The Lord does my desire regard,
and does fulfill the same:
With godly gifts does the revvard
all them that fear his name.
and so prolong his days:
That he from age to age shall reign,
for evermore alvvayes.
7
That he may have a dwelling place
before the Lord for aye:
O let thy mercy, truth and grace
defend him from decay.
8
Then shall I sing for ever still,
with praise unto thy name:
That all my vows I may fulfill,
and daily pay the same.
Psalm 62.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ MY soul to God shall give good heed, and him alone intend:
^ For why? my health and hope to speed, does whole on him depend.
MEDIVS.
^ MY soul to God shall give good heed, and him alone intend:
^ For why? my health, and hope to speed, does whole on him depend.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Windsor or Eaton Tune.
^ MY soul to God shall give good heed, and him alone intend:
^ For why? my health and hope to speed, does whole on him depend.
BASSVS.
^ MY soul to God shall give good heed, and him alone intend:
^ For why? my health and hope to speed, does whole on him depend.
2
For he alone is my defense,
my rock of health, my aid:
He is my stay, that no pretense
shall make me much dismayed.
3
O wicked folk, how long will ye
use crafts? sure you must fall:
For as a rotten hedge ye be,
and like a tottering wall.
4
Whom God does love, ye seek alvvaies
to put him to the worse:
Ye love tolye, with mouth ye praise,
and yet your heart does curse.
5
Yet still my soul does whole depend
on God my chief desire:
From all false fears me to defend,
none but him I require.
6
He is my rock, my strength, my tovver,
my health is of his grace:
He does support me, that no power
can move me out of place.
7
God is my glory and my health,
my souls desire and lust:
My fort, my strength, my stay, my wealth,
God is my only trust.
8
O have your hope in him alvvay,
ye folk with one accord:
Pour out your hearts to him and say,
our trust is in the Lord.
9
The sons of men deceitful are,
on balance but a slight:
With things most vain do them compare
for they can keep no weight.
10
Trust not in vvrong, robry or stealth,
let vain delights be gone:
Though goods well got flow in with wealth,
set not your hearts thereon.
11
The Lord long since one thing did tell,
which here to mind I call:
He spoke it often, I heard it well,
that God alone does all.
12
And thou O Lord art good and kind,
thy mercy does exceed:
So that all sorts with thee shall find
according to their meed.
Psalm 63.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ O God my God I vvatch betime, to come to thee in haste:
^ For why? my soul and body both, do thirst of thee to taste.
MEDIVS.
^ O God my God I vvatch betime, to come to thee in haste:
^ For why? my soul and body both do thirst of thee to taste.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Wels or Glasenbury Tune.
^ O God my God I vvatch betime, to come to thee in haste:
^ For why? my soul and body both does thirst of thee to taste.
BASSVS.
^ O God my God I vvatch betime, to come to thee in haste:
^ For why? my soul and body both do thirst of thee to taste.
2
And in this barren wilderness,
where waters there are none:
My flesh is parcht for thought of thee,
for thee I vvish alone.
That I might see yet once again,
thy glory, strength and might:
As I was wont it to behold,
within thy Temple bright.
3
For why thy mercies far furmount
this life and vvretched days:
My lips therefore shall give to thee
due honor, land and praise,
4
And whilst I live I will not fail
to worship thee alvvay.
And in thy name I shall lift up
my hands when I do pray.
5
My soul is filled as with marrow,
which is both fat and svveet:
My mouth therefore shall sing such songs
as are for thee most meet.
6
When as in bed I think on thee,
and eke all the night tide:
7
For under covert of thy vvings,
thou art my joyful guide.
8
My soul does surely stick to thee,
thy right hand is my power.
9
And those that seek my soul to stroy,
them death shall soon devour.
10
The svvord shall them devour each one,
their carcasses shall feed
The hungry Foxes which do run
their prey to seek at need.
11
The King and all men shall rejoice,
that do profess Gods word:
For liars mouths shall then be stopped,
which have the truth disturbed.
Psalm 64.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ O Lord unto my voice give ear, with plaints when I do pray:
^ And rid my life and soul from fear of foes that threat to slay.
MEDIVS.
^ O Lord unto my voice give ear, with plaints when I do pray:
^ And rid my life and soul from fear of foes that threat to slay.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Bristoll Tune.
^ O Lord unto my voice give ear, with plaints when I do pray:
^ And rid my life and soul from fear of foes that threat to slay.
BASSVS.
^ O Lord unto my voice give ear, with pains when I do pray:
^ And rid my life and soul from fear of foes that threat to stay.
2
Defend me from that fort of men*
which in deceits do lurk:
And from the frovvning face of them
that all ill feats do work.
3
Who whet their tongues as we have seen
men whet and sharp their svvords
They (...) abroad their arrows keen,
I mean most bitter words.
4
With privy slights shoot they their shaft
the upright man to hit:
The just vnvvares to strike by craft,
they care or fear no whit.
5
A wicked work they have decreed*
in counsel thus they cry:
To use deceit let us not dread,
what, who can it epsy?
What ways to hurt, they talk and muse
all times within their heart:
They all consult what feats to use,
each does invent his part.
7
But yet all this shall not avail
when they think least upon:
God with his darts shall sure assail,
and vvound them every one.
8
Their crafts and their ill tongues vvithal
shall work themselves such blame:
That they which then behold their fall,
shall vvonder at the same.
9
Then all that see shall know right well
that God this thing has wrought:
And praise his witty works, and tell
what he to pass has brought.
10
Yet shall the just in God rejoice,
still trusting in his might:
So shall they joy with mind and voice,
whose heart is pure and right.
Psalm 65.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ THY praise alone (O Lord) does reign in Sion thine own hill:
^ Their vows to thee they do maintain, and their behests fulfill:
MEDIVS.
^ THy praise alone (O Lord) does reign in Sion thine own hill:
^ their vows to thee they do maintain, and thy behests fulfill.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Excester Tune.
^ THY praise alone (O Lord) does reign in Sion thine own hill:
^ Their vows to thee they do maintain, and their behests fulfill:
BASSVS.
^ THy praise alone (O Lord) does reign in Sion thine own hill:
^ Their vows to thee they do maintain, and thy behests fulfill.
2
For that thou do their prayers hear,
and do there to agree:
Thy people all both far and near,
with trust shall come to thee.
3
Our wicked life so far exceeds,
that we should fall therein:
But Lord forgive our great misdeeds,
and purge us from our sin.
4
The man is blessed whom thou do choose,
within thy courts to dvvell:
Thy house and temple they do use,
with pleasures that excel.
5
Of thy great justice hear us God,
our health of thee does rise:
The hope of all the earth abroad,
and the sea coasts likewise.
6
With strength thou art beset about,
and compast with thy power:
Thou makst the mountains strong and stout
to stand in every shovver.
7
The swelling seas thou do assuage,
and make their streams full still:
Thou do restrain the peoples rage,
and rule them at thy will.
8
The folk that dvvell full far on earth,
shall dread the same to see:
Which morn and evening in great mirth
do pass with praise to thee.
9
When that the earth is chopped and dry,
and thirsts more and more:
Then with thy drops thou do apply,
and much increase her store.
10
The flood of God does ouerflovv,
and so does cause to spring:
The seed and corn which men do sovv,
for he does guide the thing.
11
With wet thou do her furrovves fill,
whereby her clods do fall:
Thy drops to her thou do distill,
and bless her fruit vvithall.
12
Thou deckst the earth of thy good grace
with fair and pleasant crop:
Thy clouds distill their dew apace,
great plenty they do drop.
13
Whereby the desert shall begin
full great increase to bring:
The little hills do joy therein.
much fruit in them shall spring.
14
In places plain the flocks shall feed
and cover all the earth:
The vallyes with corn shall so exceed,
that men shall sing for mirth.
Psalm 66.
John Milton.
CANTVS.
^ Ye men on earth in God rejoice, with praise set forth his name:
^ Extol his might with heart and voice, give glory to the same.
MEDIVS.
^ Ye men on earth in God rejoice, with praise set forth his name:
^ Extol his might with heart and voice, give glory to the same.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
York Tune.
^ Ye men on earth in God rejoice, with praise set forth his name:
^ Extol his might with heart and voice, give glory to the same.
BASSVS.
^ Ye men on earth in God rejoice, with praise set forth his name:
^ Extol his might with heart and voice, give glory to the same.
2
How vvonderfull O Lord, say ye,
in all thy works thou art*
Thy foes for fear do seek to thee,
full sore against their heart.
3
All men that dvvell the earth throughout
do praise the name of God:
The laud thereof the world about,
is shevved and set abroad.
4
All folk come forth, behold and see
what things the Lord has wrought:
Mark well the vvondrous works that he
for man to pass has brought.
5
He laid the sea like heaps on hye,
therein a way they had:
On foot to pass both fair and dry,
whereof their hearts were glad.
6
His might does rule the world alvvay,
his eyes all things behold:
All such as would him disobay,
by him shall be controld.
7
Ye people give unto your God
due laud and thanks alvvayes:
With joyful voice declare abroad,
and sing unto his praise.
8
Which does indue our souls with life
and it preserues vvithall;
He stays our feet, so that no strife
can make us slip or fall.
9
The Lord does prove our deeds with fire,
if that they will abide:
As vvork-men do when they desire
to have their metals tried.
10
Although thou suffer us so long
in prison to be cast:
And there with chains and fetters strong,
to lie in bondage fast.
The second part.
11
Although I say thou suffer men,
on us to ride and reign:
Though we through fire and water run
of very grief and pain,
12
Yet sure thou do of thy good grace
dispose it to the best.
And bringst us out into a place,
to live in wealth and rest.
13
Unto thy house resort will I,
to offer and to pray:
And there I will my self apply
my vows to thee to pay.
14
The vows that with my mouth I spoke,
in all my grief and smart:
The vows I say which I did make
in dolor of my heart.
15
Burnt offerings I will give to thee,
of Oxen fat and Rams,
None other sacrifice shall be,
of Bullocks, Goats, or Lambs.
16
Come forth and ^earken here full soon,
all ye that fear the Lord:
What he for his poor flock has done,
to you I will record.
17
Full often I call upon his grace,
this mouth to him does cry:
And tho^ my tongue make speed apace
to praise him by and by.
^8
But if I feel my heart within,
invvicked works rejoice:
Or if I have delight in sin,
God will not hear my voice.
19
But surely God my voice has heard,
and what I do require:
My prayer he does well regard,
and grants my desire.
20
All praise to him that has not put
nor cast me out of mind:
Nor yet his mercy from me shut,
which I did ever find.
Psalm 67.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ Have mercy on us Lord, and gr^nt to us thy grace: To show ^ to us do thou
ac- cord, the brightness of thy face.

MEDIVS.
^ Have mercy on us Lord, and grant to us thy grace: To show ^ to us do thou
ac- cord, the brightness of thy face.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
London Tune.
^ Have mercy on us Lord, and grant to us thy grace: To show ^ to us do thou
accord, the brightness of thy face.

BASSVS.
^ Have mercy on us Lord, and grant to us thy grace: To show ^ to us do thou
accord, the brightness of thy face.

2
That all the earth may know
the way to godly wealth:
And all the nations on a row,
may see thy saving health.
3
Let all the world O God,
give praise unto thy name:
O let the people all abroad,
extol and la^d the same.
4
Throughout the world so vvide,
let all rejoice with mirth:
For thou with truth and right do guide
the nations of the earth.
5
Let all the world O God,
give praise unto thy name:
O let the people all abroad,
extol and laud the same.
6
Then shall the earth increase,
great store of fr^it shall fall:
And then our God, the God of peace,
shall bless us eke vvithall.
7
God shall us bless I say,
aed then both far and near.
The folk throughout the world alvvay
of him shall stand in fear.
Psalm 68.
Richard Al^ison.
CANTVS.
^ LEt God ari^e, and then his foes will turn themselves to flight: ^ his
enemies then will run abroad, and scatter out of sight. And as the ^ fire does
melt the wax, and vvinde blovv smoke away: So in the ^ presence of the
Lord, the wicked shall decay.

MEDIVS.
^ LEt God arise, and then his foes will turn themselves to flight: ^ his
enemies then will run abroad, and scatter out of sight. And as the ^ fire does
melt the wax, and vvinde blovv smoke away: So in the ^ presence of the
Lord, the wicked shall decay.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ LEt God ari^e, and then his foes will turn themselves to flight: ^ his
enemies then will run abroad, and scatter out of sight, And as the ^ fire does
melt the wax, and vvinde blovv smoke away: So in the ^ presence of the
Lord, the wicked shall decay.

BASSVS.
^ LEt God arise, and then his foes will turn themselves to flight: ^ his
enemies then will run abroad, and scatterout of sight. And as the ^ fire does
melt the wax, and vvinde blovv smoke away: So in the ^ presence of the
Lord, the wicked shall decay.

3
But righteous men before the Lord,
shall heartily re^oyce*
They shall be glad and merry all,
and cheerful in their voice.
4
Sing praise, sing praise unto the Lord,
who rides on the sky:
Extol the name of Iah our God,
and him do magnify.
5
The same is he that is above
within his holy place:
That father is of fatherless,
and judge of vviddovves case.
6
Houses he gives, and issue both,
unto the comfortless:
He brings bondmen out of thrall,
and rebels to distress.
7
When thou did march before thy folk,
the Egyptians from among:
And broughtst the^ through the wilderness down,
which was both vvide and long.
8
The earth did quake, the rain pourde
heard were great claps of thunder:
The mount Sinai shook in such sort,
as it would cleave asunder.
9
Thine heritage with drops of rain,
abundantly (...)
And if so be it barren vvaxt*
by thee it was refresht.
10
Thy chosen flock does there remain,
thou have preparde that place:
And for the poor thou do provide
of thine especial grace.
The second part.
11
God will give women causes just
to magnify his name:
When as all people triumphs make,
and purchase brute and fame.
12
For puissant kings for all their power
shall fly and take the foil:
And women which remain at home.
shall help to part the spoil.
13
And though ye were as black as pots
your hevv shall pass the Dove:
Whose vvings and feathers seem to have
^iluer and gold above.
14
When in this land God shall triumph
ore Kings both hie and lovv:
Then shall it be like Salmon hill,
as white as any snow.
14
Though Basan be a fruitful hill,
and is height others pass:
Yet Sion, Gods most holy hill,
does ^arre excel in grace*
16
Why brag ye thus ye hills most hye,
and leap for pride together?
This hill of Sion God does love,
and there will dvvell for ever.
17
Gods army is two millions
of vvarriours good and strong:
The Lord also in Sinai
is present them among.
18
Thou did O Lord ascend on hye,
and captive ledst them all:
Which in times past thy chosen flock,
in prison kept and thrall.
19
Thou made them tribute for to pay,
and such as did repine.
Thou did subdue, that they might dwell
in thy Temple divine.
20
Now praised be the Lord, for that
he poures on us such grace:
From day to day he is the God
of our health and solace.
The third part.
21
He is the God from whom alone
salvation comes plain:
He is the God by whom we escape
all dangers, death, and pain.
22
Thus God will vvound his enemies head,
and break the hairy scalpe
Of those that in their wickedness
continually do walk.
23
From Basan I will bring, says he,
my people and my sheep:
And all mine own as I have done,
from danger of the deep.
24
And make them ^ip their feet in blood
of those that hate my name,
And dogs shall have their tongues imbrude
with licking of the same.
25
All men may see how thou O God,
thy enemies do deface:
And how thou go as God and King
into thy holy place.
26
The Singers go before with joy,
the Minstrels follovv after:
And in the midst the Damsels play,
with Timbrell and with Taber.
27
Now in the congregation,
O Israel praise the Lord:
And Jacobs whole posterity,
give thanks with one accord.
28
Their chief was little Benjamin,
but Judah made their host:
With Zabulon and Neptalim,
which dvvell about their coast.
29
As God has given power to thee,
so Lord make firm and sure
The thing that thou have wrought in us
for ever to endure.
30
And in thy temple gifts will we
give unto thee (O Lord)
For thine unto Jerusalem
sure promise made by word.
The fourth part.
Yea, and strange Kings to us subdude*
shall do like in those days:
I mean to thee they shall present
their gifts of laud and praise.
31
He shall destroy the spearemens ranks
their Calves and Bulls of might:
And cause them tribute pay and daunt
all such as love to fight.
32
Then shall the Lord of Egypt come,
and presents to him bring:
The Moors most black shall stretch their hands
unto their Lord and king:
33
Therefore the kingdoms of the earth
give praise unto the Lord:
Sing Psalms to God with one consent,
thereto let all accord.
34
Who though he ride, and ever has,
above the heavens bright:
Yet by his fearful thunderclaps,
men may well know his might.
35
Therefore the strength of Israel
ascribe to God on hie:
Whose might and power does far extend
above the cloudy sky.
36
O Lord thy holiness and power
is dread for evermore:
The God of Israel gives us strength,
praised be God therefore.
Psalm 69.
Richard Allison.
CANTVS.
^ Save me O God, and that with speed, the waters flow full fast: ^ So nie
my soul do they proceed, that I am sore aghast. I stick full ^ deep in filth
and clay, whereas I feel no ground: I fall into such floods ^ I say, that I
am like be drovvn'd*

MEDIVS.
^ Save me O God, and that with speed, the waters flow full fast: ^ So nie
my soul do they proceed, that I am sore aghast. I stick full ^ deep in filth
and clay, whereas I feel no ground: I fall into such floods ^ I say, that I
am like be drovvn'd*

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ Save me O God, and that with speed, the waters flow full fast: ^ So nie
my soul do they proceed, that I am sore aghast. I flicke full ^ deep in filth
and clay, whereas I feel no ground: I fall into such floods ^ I say that I am
like be drovvn'd.

BASSVS.
^ Save me O God, and that with speed, the waters flow full Fast: ^ So nie
my soul do they proceed, that I am sore aghast. I stick full ^ deep in filth
and clay, whereas I feel no ground: I fall into such floods I say, that I am
like be drovvn'd.

3
With crying often I faint and quail,
my throat is hoarse and dry:
With looking up my sight does fail
for help of God on hie.
4
My foes that guiltless do oppress
my soul with hate are led;
In number sure they are no less
then hayres are on my head,
5
Though for no cause they vex me sore*
they prosper, and are glad:
They do compel me to restore
the things I never had.
6
What I have done for want of wit,
thou Lord all times can tell*
And all the faults that I commit,
to thee are known full well,
7
O God of hosts, defend and stay
all those that trust in thee:
Let no man doubt or shrink away
for ought that chances me.
8
It is for thee, and for thy sake
that I do bear this blame:
In spite of thee they would me make
to hide my face for shame.
9
My mothers sons, my brethren all
forsake me on a row:
And as a stranger they me call,
my face they will not know
10
Unto thy house such zeal I bear,
that it does pine me much:
Their checks and taunts at thee to hear*
my very heart does grutch.
The second part.
11
Though I do fast my flesh to chaste,
yea if I weep and moan:
Yet in my teeth this gear is cast,
they pass not thereupon.
12
If I for grief and paint of heart,
in sackecloth use to walk:
Then they anon will it pervert,
thereof they jest and talk.
^3
Both hie and lovv, and all the throng
that sit within the gate:
They have me ever in their tongue,
of me they talk and prate.
14
The drunkards which in wine delight
it is their chief pastime
To seek which way to work me spite,
of me they sing and ^ime.
15
But thee the while O Lord I pray,
that when it pleases thee:
For thy great truth thou ^vilt alvvay
send down thine aid to me.
16
Pluck thou my feet out of the mire,
from drowning do me keep:
From such as owe me wrath and ire,
and from the waters deep.
17
Lest with the waves I should be drovvnd,
and depth my soul devour
And that the pit should me confound,
and shut me in her power.
18
O Lord of hosts to me give ear,
as thou art good and kind:
And as thy mercy is most dear,
Lord have me in thy mind.
19
And do not from thy servant hide,
nor turn thy face away:
I am oppressed on every side,
with haste give ear I say.
20
O Lord unto my soul dravv nigh,
the same with aid repose:
Because of their great tyranny,
acquit me from my foes.
The third part.
21
That I abide rebuke and shame,
thou know, and thou can tell:
For those that seek and work the same,
thou see them all full well.
22
When they with brags do break my heart,
I seek for help anon*
But find no friends to ease my smart,
to comfort me not one.
23
But in my meat they gave me gall,
too cruel for to think*
And gave me in my thirst vvithall,
strong vinegar to drink*
24
Lord turn their table to a share,
to take themselves therein:
And when they think full well to fare,
then trap them in the grin.
25
And let their eyes be dark and blind,
that they may nothing see?
Bovv down their back, and do them bend
in thraldom for to be.
26
Pour out thy wrath as hot as fire,
that it on them may fall:
Let thy displeasure in thine ire,
take hold upon them all.
27
As desert dry their house disgrace,
their offspring eke expel:
That none thereof possess their place,
nor in their tents do dvvell.
28
If thou do strike the man to tame,
on him they lie full sore:
And if that thou do vvound the same,
they seek to hurt him more.
29
Then let them heap up mischief still
since they are all pervert:
That of thy favor and goodvvill,
they never have no part.
30
And dash them clean out of the Book
of life, of hope, of trust:
That for their names they never look
in number of the just.
The fourth part.
31
Though I O Lord, with vvoe and grief
have been full sore oppressed:
Thy help shall give me such relief,
that all shall be redrest.
32
That I may give thy name the praise*
and show it with a song:
I will extol the same alvvayes,
with hearty thanks among.
33
Which is more pleasant unto thee,
such mind thy grace has borne,
Than either Ox or Calfe can be,
that has both hoof and horn.
34
When simple folk do this behold,
it shall rejoice them sure:
All ye that seek the Lord, behold,
your life for aye shall dure.
35
For why? the Lord of hosts does hear
the poor when they complain:
His prisoners are to him full dear,
he does them not disdain.
36
Wherefore the sky and earth below
the sea with flood and stream:
His praise they shall declare and show,
with all that live in them.
37
For sure our God will Sion save,
and Iudaes City build:
Much folk possession there shall have,
her streets shall all be filled.
38
Her servants seed shall keep the same
all ages out of mind:
39
And there all they that love his name,
a dwelling place shall find,
Psalm 70.
M. Peirson B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ O God to me take heed, of help I thee require: O Lord of ^ hosts with
haste make speed, help, help, I thee desire.

MEDIVS.
^ O God to me teke heed, of help I thee require: O Lord of ^ hosts with haste
make speed, help, help, I thee desire.

TENOR, or Planysong.
Southvvell Tune.
^ O God to me take heed, of help I thee require: O Lord of ^ hosts with
haste make speed, help help I thee desire.

BASSVS.
^ O God to me take heed, of help I thee require: O Lord of ^ hosts with
haste make speed, help, help, I thee desire.

^
With shame confound them all
that seek my soul to spill:
Rebuke them back with blame to fall,
that think and vvish me ill.
3
Confound them that apply
and seek to work me shame:
And at my harm do laugh and cry,
so so, there goes the game.
4
But let them joyful be
in th^^ wi^h joy and wealth*
Which only trust and seek to thee,
and to thy saving health.
5
That they may say alvvayes,
in mirth and one accord,
All glory, honor, laud and praise,
be given to thee O Lord.
6
But I am vveake and poor,
come Lord, thine aid I lack:
Thou art my stay and help, therefore
make speed and be not ^lacke.
Psalm 71.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ MY Lord my God in all distress, my hope is whole in thee: ^ Then let no
shame my soul oppress, nor once take hold on me. ^ As thou art just, defend
me Lord, and rid me out of dread: Give ear, ^ and to my suit accord, and send
me help at need.

MEDIVS.
^ MY Lord my God in all distress, my hope is whole in thee: ^ Then let no
shame my soul oppress, nor once take hold on me: ^ As thou art just defend
me Lord, and rid me out of dread: Give ear, ^ and to my suit accord, and send
me help at need.

TENOR or Playnsong.
^ MY Lord my God in all distress, my hope is whole in thee: ^ Then let no
shame my soul oppress, nor once take hold on me ^ As thou art just, defend
me Lord, and rid me out of dread: Give ear, ^ and to my suit accord, and send
me help at need.

BASSVS.
^ MY Lord my God in all distress, my hope is whole in thee: ^ Then let no
shame my soul oppress, nor once take hold on me. ^ As thou art just, defend
me Lord, and rid me out of dread: Give ear, ^ and to my suit accord, and send
me help at need.

3
Be thou my rock, to whom I may
for aid all times resort:
Thy promise is to help alvvay,
thou art my fence and fort.
4
Save me my God from wicked men,
and from their strength and power:
From folk unjust, and eke from them
that cruelly devour.
5
Thou art my stay wherein I trust,
thou Lord of hosts are he:
Yea, from my youth I had a lust,
still to depend o^ thee.
6
Thou have me kept even from my birth
and I through thee was borne:
Wherefore I will thee praise with mirth
both evening and at morn.
7
As to a monster seldom s^ene,
much folk about me throng:
But thou art now and still have been
my fence and aid most strong.
8
Wherefore my mouth no time shall lack
thy glory and thy praise:
And eke my tongue shall not be slack
to honor thee alvvayes
Refuse me not O Lord I say,
when age my limbs does take:
And when my strength does waste away,
do not my soul forsake.
10
Among themselves my foes inquire
to take me through deceit:
And they against me do conspire,
that for my soul laid vvait.
The second part.
11
Lay hand, and take him now, they said,
for God from him is gone:
Dispatch him quite, for to his aid*
ivvis there comes none.
12
Do not absent thy self away,
(O Lord) when need shall be:
But that in time of grief thou may
with haste give help to me.
13
With shame confound and overthrow
all those that seek my life:
Oppress them with rebuke also*
that feign would work me strife,
14
But I will patiently abide
thy help at all assayes:
Still more and more each time and tide,
I will set forth thy praise.
15
My mouth thy justice shall record,
thy daily help does send:
But of thy benefits* O Lord,
I know no count nor end.
16
Yet will go and seek forth one,
with thy good help O God,
The saving health of thee alone
to show and set abroad.
17
For of my youth thou tookst the ^are,
and do instruct me still:
Therefore thy wonders to declare,
I have great mind and will.
18
And as in youth from vvanton rage,
thou did me keep and stay:
Forsake me not unto mine age,
and till my head be gray,
The third part.
19
That I thy strength and might may show
to them that now be here:
And that our seed thy power may know
hereafter many a year.
20
O Lord thy justice does exceed,
thy doings all shall see:
Thy works are vvonderfull indeed,
oh, who is like to thee?
21
Thou made me feel affliction sore,
and yet thou did me save:
Yea, thou did make all ^trife to cease,
and tookst me from the grave.
22
And thou mine honor do increase,
my dignity maintain:
Yea thou do make all strife to ce^se,
and comfortst me again.
23
Therefore thy faithfulness to praise,
I will with Viol sing:
My Harp shall sound thy laud alvvaies,
O Isreal's holy King.
24
My mouth will joy with pleasant voice,
when I shall sing to thee:
And eke my soul will much rejoice,
for thou have made me free.
23
My tongue thy vprightnes shall sound,
and speak it daily still:
For grief and shame do them confound,
that sought to work me ill.
Psalm 72
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ LOrd give thy judgments to the King, therein instruct him well:
^ And with his son that Princely thing, Lord let thy justice dvvell.
MEDIVS.
^ LOrd give thy judgments to the King, therein instruct him well:
^ And with his Son that Princely thing, Lord let thy justice dvvell.
TENOR, or Playnsong*
Christ Hospital Tune.
^ LOrd give thy judgments to the King, therein instruct him well:
^ And with his son that Princely thing, Lord let thy justice dvvell.
BASSVS.
^ LOrd give thy judgments to the King, therein instruct him well:
^ And with his Son that Princely thing, Lord let thy justice dvvell.
2
That he may govern uprightly,
and rule thy folk aright:
And so defend through equity,
the poor that have no might.
3
And let the mountains that are hie*
unto their folk give peace:
And eke let little hills apply,
in justice to increase.
4
That he may help and ease the poor
with aid, and make them strong:
And eke destroy for evermore,
^ all those that do them vvrong.
5
And then from age to age shall they
regard and fear thy might:
So long as Sun does shine by day,
or else the Moon by night.
6
Lord make the King unto the just,
like rain to fields new movvne:
And like to drops that lay the dust,
and fresh the land new sovvne.
7
The just shall flourish in his time,
and all shall be at peace:
Until the Moon shall cease to prime,
waste, change, and to increase.
8
He shall be Lord of sea and land,
from shore to shore throughout:
And from the floods within the land,
through all the earth about.
9
The people that in deserts dvvell,
shall kneel to him full thick:
And all his enemies that rebel,
the earth and dust shall lick.
10
The Lords of all the Isles thereby,
great gifts to him shall bring:
The King of Saby and Araby,
give many a costly thing.
The second part.
11
All Kings shall seek with one accord,
in his good grace to stand:
And all the people of the world,
shall serve him at his hand.
12
For he the needy sort does save,
that unto him do call:
And eke the simple folk that have
no help of man at all.
13
He takes pity on the poor,
that are with need oppressed:
He does preserve them evermore,
and bring their souls to rest.
14
He shall redeem their life from dread,
from fraud, from vvrong, from might:
And eke the blood that they shall bleed,
is precious in his sight.
15
But he shall live, and they shall bring
to him of Sabaes gold:
He shall be honored as a King,
and daily be extold.
16
The mighty mountains of his land,
of corn shall bear such throng:
That it like Cedar trees shall stand
in Libanus full strong.
17
Their cities eke full well shall speed
the fruits thereof shall pass:
In plenty it shall far exceed,
and spring as green as grass.
18
For ever they shall praise his name,
while that the Sun is light:
And think them happy through the same,
all folk shall bless his might.
19
Praise ye the Lord of hosts and sing
to Isreal's God each one:
For he does every vvondrous thing,
yea, he himself alone.
20
And blessed be his holy name
all times eternally:
That all the earth may praise the same,
Amen, Amen, say I.
Psalm 73.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ How ever it be, yet God is good, and kind to Isra- el: ^ And to all such
as safely keep their conscience pure and well.

MEDIVS.
^ How ever it be, yet God is good, and kind to Isra- el: ^ And to all such
as safely keep their conscience pure and well.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
Cambridge Tune.
^ How ever it be, yet God is good, and kind to Isra- el: ^ And to all such
as safely keep their conscience pure and well.

BASSVS.
^ How ever it be, yet God is good, and kind to Isra- el: ^ And to all such
as safely keep their conscience pure and well.

2
Yet like a fool I almost slipped,
my feet began to slide:
And eke I wist even at a pinch
my steps began to glide.
3
For when I savv such foolish men,
I grudged and did disdain:
That wicked men all things should have
vvitho^t turmoyle or pain.
4
They never suffer plagues nor grief,
as if death should them smite:
Their bodies are both stout and strong,
and ever in good plight*
5
And free from all adversity,
when other men be shent:
And with the rest they take no part
of plague or punishment.
6
Therefore presumption does embrace
their necks as does a chain:
And are even vvrapt as in a robe,
with rapine and disdain.
7
They are so fed, that even for fat,
their eyes often times out start:
And as for vvorldly goods, they have
more then can vvish their heart.
8
Their life is most licentious,
boasting much of the vvrong
Which they have done to simple men,
and ever pride among.
9
The heavens and the living Lord,
they spare not to blaspheme:
And prate they do of vvorldly things,
no vvight they do esteem.
10
The people of God often times turn back
to see their prosperous state:
And almost drink the self same cup,
and follovv the same rate.
The second part.
11
How can it be that God, say they*
should know and understand
These vvorldly things, since wicked men
be Lords of Sea and Land*
12
For we may see how wicked men
in riches still increase:
Revvarded well with vvorldly goods,
and live in rest and peace.
13
Then why do I from wickedness,
my fantasy refrain?
And vvash my hands with innocents,
and cleanse my heart in vain?
14
And suffer scourges every day,
as subject to all blame.
And every morning from my youth,
sustain rebuke and shame?
15
And I had almost said as they
misliking mine estate:
But that I should thy children judge,
as folk unfortunate.
16
Then I bethought me how I might
this matter understand:
But yet the matter was too great
for me to take in hand.
17
Until the time I went unto
thy holy place, and then
I understood right perfectly
the end of all these men.
18
And namely, how thou set them
upon a slippery place:
And at thy pleasure and thy will,
thou do them all deface.
19
Then shall men muse at this strange sight,
to see how suddenly
They are destroid dispatched, consumde,
and dead so horribly.
20
Much like a dream when one avvakes
so shall their wealth decay:
Their famous names in all men's sight
shall ebb and pass away.
The third part.
21
Yet thus my heart was grieved then,
my mind was much oppressed:
22
So fond was I and ignorant,
and in this point a beast.
23
Yet nevertheless by my right hand
thou hold'st me alvvayes fast:
24
And with thy counsel do me guide
to glory at the last.
25
What thing is there that I can vvish
but thee in heaven above?
And in the earth there is nothing
like thee that I can love.
26
My flesh and eke my heart does fail,
but God does fail me never:
For of my heart God is the strength,
my portion eke for ever.
27
And lo all such as thee forsake,
thou shall destroy each one:
And those that trust in any thing
saving in thee alone.
28
Therefore I will dravv near to God,
and ever with him dvvell:
In God alone I put my trust,
thy wonders will I tell.
Psalm 74.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ WHy art thou Lord so long from us in all this danger deep:
^ Why does thine anger kindle thus at thine own pasture sheep?
MEDIVS.
^ WHy art thou Lord so long from us in all this danger deep:
^ Why does thine anger kindle thus at thine own pasture sheep?
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Oxford Tune.
^ WHy art thou Lord so long from us in all this danger deep:
^ Why does thine anger kindle thus at thine own pasture sheep?
BASSVS.
^ WHy art thou Lord so long from us in all this danger deep:
^ Why does thine anger kindle thus at thine own pasture sheep?
2
Lord call the people to thy thought,
which have been thine so long:
The which thou have redeemd and brought
from bondage sore and strong.
3
Have mind I say, and think upon,
remember it full well:
Thy pleasant place, thy mount Sion,
where thou vvast wont to dvvell.
4
Lift up thy foot and come in haste,
and all thy foes deface:
Which now at pleasure rob and waste,
within thy holy place.
5
Amid the congregations all
thine enemies roar O God:
They set as signs on every wall,
their banners splaid abroad.
6
As men with axes hevv the trees,
that on the hills do grow:
so shine the bills and svvords of these
within thy Temple now.
7
The seeling savvde, the carved bords,
the goodly graven stones,
With axes, hammers, bills and svvords,
they beat them down at once.
8
Thy places they consume with flame,
and eke in all this toil,
The house appointed for thy name,
they raze down to the soil.
9
And thus they say within their heart,
dispatch them out of hand:
Then burn they up in every place,
Gods houses through the land.
10
Yea, thou no sign of help do send.
our Prophets all are gone:
To tell when this our plague shall end,
among us there is none.
11
When vvilt thou Lord once end this shame
and cease thine enemies strong
Shall they alvvay blaspheme thy name,
and rail on thee so long?
12
Why do vvith-dravv thy hand aback,
and hide it in thy lap?
O pluck it out and be not slack
to give thy foes a rap.
The second part.
13
O God that art my King and Lord,
and evermore have been:
Yea, thy good grace throughout the world
for our good help has seen.
14
The seas that are so deep and dead,
thy might did make them dry:
And thou did break the Serpents head,
and he therein did dye.
15
Yea, thou did break the heads so great,
of Whales that are so fell:
And gau^st them to the folk to eat,
that in the desert dvvell.
16
^hou made a spring of streams to rise
from rocks both hard and hye:
And eke thy hand has made likewise
deep rivers to be dry.
17
Both day and eke the night are thine,
by thee they were begun:
Thou setst to serve us with their shine,
the light and eke the Sun.
18
Thou do appoint the ends and coasts
of all the world about:
Both Summer heats, and VVinters frosts,
thy hand has found them out.
19
Think on O Lord, no time forget
thy foes that thee defame:
And how the foolish folk are set
to rail upon thy name.
20
O let no cruel beasts devour
thy Turtle that is true:
Forget not alvvaies in thy power,
the poor that much do rue.
21
Regard thy covenant, and behold
thy foes possess the land:
All sad and d^rke, forvvorne and old,
our realm as now does stand.
22
Let not the simple go away
with disappointed shame:
But let the poor and needy aye
give praise unto thy name.
23
Rise Lord, let be by thee maintainde
the cause that is thine own:
Remember how that thou blasphemde
art by the foolish one.
24
The voice forget not of thy foes,
for the presuming hye
Is more and more increast of those
that hate thee spitefully.
Psalm 75.
Simon Stubbs.
CANTVS.
^ UN- to thee God will we give thanks, we will give thanks to thee:
^ Since thy name is so near, declare thy vvondrous works will we.
MEDIVS.
^ UN- to thee God will we give thanks, we will give thanks to thee:
^ Since thy name is so near, de- clare thy vvondrous works will we*
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Martyrs Tune.
^ UN- to thee God will we give thanks, we will give thanks to thee:
^ Since thy name is so near, declare thy vvondrous works will we.
BASSVS.
^ UN- to thee God will we give thanks, we will give thanks to thee:
^ Since thy name is so near, declare thy vvondrous works will we.
2
I will uprightly judge when get
convenient time I may:
The earth is vveake, and all therein,
but I her pillars stay.
3
I did to the mad people say,
deal not so furiously:
And (...) to the ungodly one^,
set not your horns on hye.
4
I said unto them, set not up
your raised horns on hie:
And see that you do with stiff neck
not speak presumptuously.
5
For neither from the Eastern part*
nor from the Western side.
Nor from forsaken wilderness,
protection does proceed:
6
For vvhy^ the Lord our God he is
the righteous Judge alone:
He puts down the one, and sets
another in the throne.
7
For why? a cup of mighty wine
is in the hand of God:
And all the mighty wine therein*
himself does pour abroad.
8
As for the lees and filthy dregs
that do remain of it:
The wicked of the earth shall drink
and suck them every whit*
9
But I will talk of God I say
of Jacobs God therefore:
And will not cease to celebrate
his praise for evermore.
10
In sunder break the horn of all
ungodly men will I:
But then the horns of righteous men
shall be exalted hye.
Gloria Patri.
To Father, Son and holy Ghost,
all glory be therefore:
As in beginning was, is now,
and shall be evermore.
Psalm 76.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ TO all that now in Jury dvvell, the Lord is clearly known:
^ His Name is great in Israel, a peo- ple of his own.
MEDIVS.
^ TO all that now in Jury dvvell, the Lord is clearly known:
^ His name is great in Isra- el,
a people of his own.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Durham Tune*
^ TO all that now in Jury dvvell, the Lord is clearly known:
^ His Name is great in Israel, a people of his ov^ne.
BASSVS.
^ TO all that now in Jury dvvell, the Lord is clearly known:
^ His name is great in Isra- el, a people of his own.
2
At Salem he his tents has pight,
to tarry there a space:
In Sion eke he does delight
to make his dwelling place.
3
And there he brake both shaft and bovv,
the svvord, the spear, the shield:
And brake the ray to overthrow,
in battle on the field.
4
Thou art more worthy honor (Lord)
more might in thee does lie:
Then in the strongest in the world*
that rob on mountains hie.
5
But now the proud are spoyld through thee,
and they are fallne on sleep:
Through men of war no help can be,
themselves they could not keep.
6
At thy rebuke O Jacobs God.
when thou did them reprove:
As half asleep their chariots stood,
no horsemen once did move.
7
For thou art fearful, Lord, indeed,
what man the courage has
To bide thy sight, and does not dread,
when thou art in thy wrath?
8
When thou do make thy judgments heard
from heaven through the ground:
Then all the earth full sore afraid,
in silence shall be found.
9
And that when thou O God do stand
in judgment for to speak:
To save the afflicted of the Land.
on earth that are full vveake.
10
The fury that in them does reign,
shall turn unto thy praise:
Hereafter Lord do thou restrain
their wrath and threats alvvayes:
11
Make vows and pay them to your God
ye folk that nigh him be:
Bring gifts all ye that dvvell abroad,
for dreadful sure is he.
12
For he does take both life and might
from Princes great of birth:
And full of terror is his sight
to all the Kings on earth.
Psalm 77.
Richard Allison.
CANTVS.
^ I With my voice to God did cry, with heart and hearty cheer:^ My voice to
God I lift on high, and he my suit does hear, In time of ^ grief I sought to
God, by night no rest I took: but stretched my hands ^ to him abroad, my soul
comfort forsook.

MEDIVS.
^ I With my voice to God do cry, with heart and hearty cheer:^ My voice to
God I lift on high, and he my suit does hear. In time of ^ grief I sought to
God, by night no rest I took: but stretched my hands ^ to him abroad, my soul
comfort forsook.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ I With my voice to God do cry, with heart and hearty cheer:^ My voice to
God I lift on high and he my suit does hear. In time of ^ grief I sought to
God, by night no rest I took: but stretched my hands ^ to him abroad, my soul
comfort forsook.

BASSVS.
^ I With my voice to God do cry, with heart and hearty cheer:^ My voice to
God I lift on high, and he my suit does hear. In time of ^ grief I sought to
God, by night no rest I took: but stretched my hands ^ to him abroad, my soul
comfort forsook.

3
When I to think on God intend,
my trouble then is more
I spoke, but could not make an end,
my breath was stopped so sore.
4
Thou holdst mine eyes alvvayes from rest
that I alvvayes awake*
With fear I am so sore oppressed,
my speech does me forsake.
5
The days of old in mind I cast,
and often did think upon
The times and ages that are past
full many years agone.
6
By night my songs I call to mind,
once made thy praise to show:
And with my heart much talk I find,
my spirits do search to know.
7
Will God (said I) at once for all,
cast off his people thus?
So that henceforth no time he shall
be friendly unto us?
8
What, is his goodness clean decai^
for ever and a day?
Or is his promise now delaid,
or does his truth decay*
9
And will the Lord our God forget
his mercies manifold?
Or shall his wrath increase so hot,
his mercy to vvith-hold?
10
At last I said my weakness is
the cause of my distrust:
Gods mighty hand can help all this,
and change it when he list.
The second part.
11
I will regard and think upon
the vvorki^g of the Lord:
Of all his wonders past and gone,
I gladly will record.
12
Yea, all his works I will declare,
and what he did devise:
To tell his facts I will not spare,
and eke his counsel wise.
13
Thy works O Lord are all upright,
and holy all abroad
What one has strength to match the might
of thee O Lord our God?
14
Thou art a God that often do show
thy wonders every hour:
And so do make thy people know
thy virtue and thy power.
15
And thine own folk thou do defend
with strength and stretched arm:
The sons of Jacob that descend,
and Joseph's seed from harm:
16
The waters Lord perceived thee,
the waters savv thee well:
And they for fear aside did flee,
the depths on trembling fell.
17
The clouds that were both thick and black,
did rain full plenteously:
The thunder in the air did crack,
thy shafts abroad did fly.
18
Thy thunder in the earth was heard,
thy lightning from above,
With flashes great made men afraid,
the earth did quake and move.
19
Thy vvayes within the sea does lie,
thy paths in waters deep:
Yet none can there thy steps espy,
nor know thy paths to keep.
20
Thou leadst thy folk upon the land,
as sheep on every side:
Through Moses and through Aarons hand,
thou did them safely guide.
Psalm 78.
M. Cauendish.
CANTVS.
^ ATtend my people to my Law, and to my words incline: My ^ mouth shall
speak strange parables, and sentences divine, which we ^ our selves have
heard and learned, even of our fathers old, and which ^ for our instruction,
our fathers have us told.

MEDIVS.
^ ATtend my people to my Law, and to my words incline: My ^ mouth shall
speak strange parables, and sentences divine, which we ^ our selves have
heard and learned, even of our fathers old, and which ^ for our instruction,
our fathers have us told.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ ATtend my people to my Law, and to my words incline* My ^ mouth shall
speak strange parables, and sentences divine, which we ^ our selves have
heard and learned, even of our fathers old, and which ^ for our instruction,
our fathers have us told.

BASSVS.
^ ATtend my people to my Law, and to my words incline: My ^ mouth shall
speak strange parables, and sentences divine, which we ^ our selves have
heard and learned, even of our fathers old, and vv^ich ^ for our instruction,
our fathers have us told.

4
Because we should not keep it close
from them that should come after:
Who should Gods power to their race praise,
and all his works of vvonder.
5
To Jacob he commandment gave,
how Israel should live:
VVilling our fathers should the same
unto their children give.
6
That they and their posterity,
that were not sprung up tho,
Should have the knowledge of the law,
and teach their seed also
7
That they may have the better hope
in God that is above:
And not forget to keep his laws,
and his precepts in love.
8
Not being as their fathers were,
rebelling in Gods sight:
And would not frame their wicked hearts
to know their God aright.
9
How went the people of Ephraim,
their neighbors for to spoil:
Shooting their darts the day of war,
and yet they took the foil?
10
For why? they did not keep with God
the covenant that was made:
Nor yet would walk or lead their lives
according to his trade.
11
But put into oblivion,
his counsel and his will:
And all his works most magnifique,
which he declared still.
The second part.
12
What wonders to our forefathers
did he himself disclose:
In Egypt land within the field
that called is ^haneos?
13
He did divide and cut the sea,
that they might pass at once.
And made the waters stand as still
as does an heap of stones.
14
He led them secret in a cloud
by day when it was bright*
And in the night when dark it was,
with fire he gave them light.
15
He brake the rocks in wilderness,
and gave the people drink:
As plentiful, as when the deeps
do flow up to the brinck.
16
He drevv out rivers out of rocks,
that were both dry and hard:
Of such abundance* that no floods
to them might be compared.
17
Yet for all this against the Lord
their sin they did increase:
And stirred him that is most high,
to wrath in wilderness.
18
They tempted him within their hearts,
like people of mistrust:
Requiring such a kind of meat
as served to their lust.
19
Saying with murmuration,
in their unfaithfulness:
What? can this God prepare for us
a feast in wilderness?
20
Behold, he struck the stony rock,
and floods forthwith did flow:
But can he now give to his folk
both bread and flesh also*
21
When God heard this, he waxed wroth
with Jacob and his seed:
So did his indignation
on Israel proceed.
The third part.
22
Because they did not faithfully
believe, and hope that he
Could alvvaies help and succor them
in their necessity.
23
Wherefore he did command the clouds
forthwith they brake in sunder.
24
And raind down Manna for them to eat*
a food of mickle vvonder.
25
When earthly men with Angels food
were fed at their request:
26
He bad the East winds blovv away,
and brought in the Southvvest.
27
And raind down flesh as thick as dust,
and Foul as thick as sand:
28
Which he did cast amid the place
where all their tents did stand.
29
Then did they eat exceedingly,
and all men had the^^ fills:
Yet more and more they did desire
to serve their lusts and wills.
30
But as the meat was in their mouths,
his wrath upon them fell,
31
And slew the flovver of all their youth
and choice of Israel.
32
Yet fell they to their wonted sin,
and still they did him grieve:
For all the wonders that be wrought,
they would not him believe.
33
Their days therefore he shortened,
and made their honor vain:
Their years did waste and pass away
with terror and with pain.
34
But ever when he plagued them,
they sought him by and by:
Remembering that he was their strength,
their help, and God most hie.
35
Though in their mouths they did but gloss
and flatter with the Lord:
And with their tongues, and in their hearts
dissembled every word.
The fourth part.
36
For why? their hearts were nothing bent
to him, not to his trade:
Nor yet to keep, or to perform
the covenant that was made.
37
Yet was he still so merciful,
when they deserved to dye:
That he forgave them their misdeeds,
and would not them destroy*
38
Yea many a time he turned his wrath,
and did himself advise:
And would not suffer all his whole
displeasure to arise.
39
Considering that they were but flesh,
and even as a vvinde
That passes away, and cannot well
return by his own kind.
40
How often times in wilderness,
did they the Lord provoke?
How did they stir and move the Lord
to plague them with his stroke?
41
Yet did they turn again to sin,
and tempted God eftsoone,
Prescribing to the holy Lord
what things they would have done.
42
Not thinking of his hand and power,
no^ of the day when he
Delivered them out of the hands
of the fierce enemy.
43
Nor ^ovv he wrought his miracles,
as they themselves beh^ld
In Egypt, and the wonders that
he did in Zoan field.
44
Nor how he turned by his power,
their waters into blood:
That no man might receive his drink
at river or at flood.
45
Nor how he sent them svvarmes of Flies
which did them fore annoy:
And filled their country full of Frogs,
which did their land destroy.
The fifth part.
46
Nor how he did commit their fruits
unto the Caterpiller:
And all the labor of their hands
he gave to the Grasshopper.
47
With hailstones he destroid their vines
so that they were all lost:
And not so much as vvilde Fig Trees*
but he consumed with frost.
48
And yet with hailstones once again
the Lord their cattle smo^e:
And all their flocks and herds likewise,
with thunderbolts full hot.
49
He cast upon them in his ire,
and in his fury strong
Displeasure, wrath and evil spirits
to trouble them among.
50
Then to his wrath he made a way,
and spared not the least:
But gave unto the pestilence,
the man and eke the beast.
51
He struck also the first borne all
that up in Egypt came:
And all the chief of men and beasts
within the tents of Ham.
52
But as for all his own dear folk,
he did preserve and keep,
And carried them through wilderness*
even like a flock of sheep.
53
Without all fear both safe and sound
he brought them out of thrall:
Whereas these foes with rage of sea
were overwhelmed all.
54
And brought them out into the coasts
of his own holy land:
Even to the mount which he had got
by his strong arm and hand.
55
And there cast out the heathen folk,
and did their land divide:
And in their tents he set the tribes
of Israel to abide.
56
Yet for all this, their God most hye
they stird and tempted still:
And would not keep his testament,
nor yet obey his will.
57
But as their fathers turned back,
even so they went astray:
Much like a bovv that would not bend,
but slip and start away.
The sixth part.
58
And grieved him with their hill altars,
with offerings and with fire,
And with their Idols vehemently
provoked him to ire.
59
Therevvith his wrath began again
to kindle in his breast:
The naughtiness of Israel
he did so much detest.
60
Then he forsook the Tabernacle
of Silo, where he was
Right conversant with earthly men,
even as his dwelling place.
61
Then suffered he his might and power
in bondage for to stand:
And gave the honor of his Arc
into his enemies hand.
62
And did commit them to the svvord,
wroth with his heritage:
63
The young men were deuourde with fire
Maids had no marriage.
64
And with the svvord the Priests also
did perish eueryone*
And not a vviddovv left alive
their death for to bemone.
65
And then the Lord began to wake
like one that slept a time:
And as a valiant man of war,
refreshed after wine,
66
With Emrods in their hinder parts,
he struck his enemies all:
And put them then unto a shame
that was perpetual.
67
Then he the tent and tabernacle
of Joseph did refuse:
As for the tribe of Ephraim,
he would in no wise choose.
68
But chose the tribe of Iehuda,
whereas he meant to dvvell:
Even the noble Mount Sion,
which he did love so well.
69
Whereas he did his Temple build,
both sumptuously and sure:
Like as the earth which he has made
for ever to endure.
70
Then chose he David him to serve,
his people for to keep:
Which he took up and brought away,
even from the folds of sheep.
71
As he did follovv the Evves with young*
the Lord did him advance:
To feed his people Israel,
and his inheritance.
72
Thus David with a faithful heart,
his flock and charge did feed:
And prudently with all his power
did govern them indeed.
Psalm 79.
Tho Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ O Lord the Gentiles do invade thine heritage to spoil: ^ Jerusalem an
heap is made, thy temple they defile.

MEDIVS.
^ O Lord the Gentiles do invade thine heritage of spoil: ^ Jerusalem an
heap is made, thy temple they defile.

TENOR* or Playnsong.
Carleyl Tune.
^ O Lord the Gentiles do invade thine heritage to spoil* ^ Jerusalem an
heap is made, thy temple they defile.

BASSVS.
^ O Lord the Gentiles do invade thine heritage of spoil: ^ Jerusalem an
heap is made, thy temple they defile.

2
The bodies of thy Saints so dear,
abroad to birds they cast:
The flesh of them that do thee fear,
the beasts devour and waste.
3
Their blood throughout Jerusalem,
as water spilt they have:
So that there is not one of them
to lay their dead in grave.
4
Thus are we made a laughing stock
almost the world throughout:
The enemies at us jest and mock,
which dwell our coasts about.
5
VVilt thou O Lord thus in thine ire
against us ever fume?
And show thy wrath as hot as fire,
thy folk for to consume?
6
Upon those people pour the same
which did thee never know:
All realms which call not on thy name,
consume and overthrow.
7
For they have got the upper hand,
and Jacobs seed destroyed:
His habitation and his land,
they have left waste and void.
8
Bear not in mind our former faults,
with speed some pity show:
And aid us Lord in all assaults,
for we are vveake and lovv.
The second part.
9
O God that give all health and grace,
on us declare the same:
Weigh not out works, our sins deface,
for honor of thy name.
10
Why shall the wicked still alvvay
to us as people dumb:
In thy reproach rejoice and ^ay,
vvhereis their God become?
11
Require O Lord as thou see good,
before our eyes and sight,
Of all those folk thy servants blood,
which they spilt in despite.
12
Receive into thy sight in haste,
the clamor, grief, and vvrong
Of such as are in prison cast,
sustaining irons strong.
Thy force and strength to celebrate,
Lord set them out of band:
Which unto death are destinate,
and in their enemies hand.
13
The nations which have been so bold
as to blaspheme thy name:
Into their laps with seven fold,
repay again the same.
14
So we thy folk and pasture sheep,
will praise thee evermore:
And teach all ages for to keep
for thee like praise in store.
Psalm 80.
John Bennet.
CANTVS.
^ THou Heard that Israel do keep, give ear and take good heed: ^ which
leadest Joseph like a sheep, and do him vvatch and feed.

MEDIVS.
^ THou Heard that Israel do keep, give ear and take good heed ^ which
leadest Joseph like a sheep, and do him vvatch and feed.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
Cheshire Tune.
^ THou Heard that Israel do keep, give ear and take good heed, ^ which
leadest Joseph like a sheep, and do him vvatch and feed.

BASSVS.
^ THou Heard that Israel do keep, give ear and take good heed* ^ which
leadest Joseph like a sheep, and do him vvatch and feed.

2
Thou Lord I say whose seat is set
on Cherubins most bright,
Show forth thy self, and do not let
send down thy beams of light,
3
Before Ephraim and Benjamin,
Manasses eke likewise,
To show thy power do thou begin,
come help us Lord, arise.
4
Direct our hearts unto thy grace,
convert us Lord to thee:
Show us the brightness of thy face,
and then full safe are we.
5
Lord God of hosts of Israel,
how long vvilt thou (I say)
Against thy folk in anger swell,
and vvilt not hear them pray.
6
Thou do them feed with sorrovves deep*
their bread with tears they eat:
And drink the tears that they do vvee^
in measure full and great.
7
Thou have us made a very strife
to those that dvvell about:
And that our foes do love of life,
they laugh and jest it out.
8
O take us Lord unto thy grace,
convert our minds to thee:
Show forth to us thy joyful face,
and we full safe shall be.
9
From Egypt where it grevv not well,
thou broughtst a Vine full dear:
The heathen folk thou did expel,
and thou did plant it there.
10
Thou did prepare for it a place,
and set her roots full fast,
That it did grow and spring apace,
and filled the land at last.
The second part.
11
The hills were covered round about
with shade that from it came:
And eke the Cedars hie and stout,
with branches of the same.
12
Why then did thou her wall destroy?
her hedge plucked up thou have,
That all the folk that pass thereby,
thy Vine may spoil and vvast.
13
The Bore out of the vvood so vvilde,
does dig and root it out:
The furious beasts out of the fields,
devour it all about.
14
O Lord of hosts return again,
from heaven look betime
Behold, and with thy help sustain
this poor vineyard of thine.
15
Thy plant I say, thine Israel,
whom thy right hand has set:
The same which thou did love so well
O Lord do not forget.
16
They lop and cut it down apace,
they burn it eke with fire:
And through the frovvning of thy face,
we perish in thine ire.
17
Let thy right hand be with them now
whom thou have kept so long:
And with the son of man, whom thou
to thee have made so strong.
18
And so when thou have set us free,
and saved us from shame,
Then will we never fall from thee,
but call upon thy name.
19
O Lord of hosts of thy good grace,
convert us unto thee:
Behold us with a pleasant face,
and then full safe are we.
Psalm 81.
Richard Allison.
CANTVS.
^ BE light and glad in God rejoice, which is our strength and stay: ^ Be
joyful and lift up your voice to Jacobs God I say. Prepare your ^ instruments
most meet, some joyful Psalm to sing: Strike up with ^ Harp and Lute so
svveet, on every pleasant string.

MEDIVS.
^ BE light and glad, in God rejoice, which is our strength and stay: ^ Be
joyful and lift up your voice to Jacobs God I say. Prepare your ^ instruments
most meet, some joyful Psalm to sing. Strike up with ^ Harp and Lute so
svveet, on every pleasant string.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ BE light and glad, in God rejoice, which is our strength and stay: ^ Be
joyful and lift up your voice to Jacobs God I say. Prepare your ^ instruments
most meet, some joyful Psalm to sing: Strike up with ^ Harp and Lute so
svveet, on every pleasant string.

BASSVS.
^ BE light and glad, in God rejoice, which is our strength and stay: ^ Be
joyful and lift up your voice to Jacobs God I say. Prepare your ^ instruments
most meet, some joyful Psalm to sing. Strike up with ^ Harp and Lute so
svveet, on every pleasant string.

3
Blovv as it were in the new Moon,
with Trumpets of the best;
As it is used to be done
at any solemn feast.
4
For this is unto Israel
a statute and a trade,
A law that must be kept full well,
which Jacobs God has made.
5
This law with Joseph was decreed
when he from Egypt came:
That as a witness, all his seed
should still observe the same.
6
When God I say had thus prepared,
to bring him from the land,
Whereas the speech which he had heard,
he did not understand.
7
I from his shoulders took, says he,
the burden clean away:
And from the furnace set him free
from burning brick of clay.
8
When thou in grief did cry and call
I help thee by and by:
And I did answer thee vvithall,
in thunder secretly.
9
Yea, at the waters of discord
I did thee tempt and prove:
Whereas the goodness of the Lord
with muttering thou did move.
10
Hear O my folk, O Israel,
and I assure it thee,
Regard and mark my words full well,
if thou vvilt cleave to me.
The second part.
11
Thou shall no God in thee reserve,
of any land abroad:
Nor in no wise to bovv or serve
a strange or foreign God.
12
I am the Lord thy God, and I
from Egypt set thee free:
Then ask of me abundantly,
and I shall give it thee.
13
And yet my people would not hear
my voice when that I spoke:
Nor Israel would not obey,
but did me quite forsake.
14
Then did I leave them to their will,
in hardness of their heart:
To walk in their own counsel still,
themselves they might pervert.
15
O that my people would have heard
the words that I did say:
And eke that Israel would regard
to walk within my way.
16
How soon would I confound their foes,
and bring them down full lovv:
And turn my hand upon all those
that would them overthrow?
17
And they that at the Lord do rage,
as slaves should seek him till*
But of his folk the time and age
should flourish ever still.
18
I would have fed them with the crop
and finest of the wheat:
And made the rock with honey drop.
that they their fills should ea^e.
Psalm 82.
Richard Allison.
CANTVS.
^ AMid the prease with men of might, the Lord himself did stand:
^ To plead the cause of truth and right, with Judges of the land.
MEDIVS.
AMid the prease with men of might, the Lord himself did stand:
^ To plead the cause of truth and right, with Judges of the land.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Rochester Tune.
^ AMid the prease with men of might, the Lord himself did stand:
^ To plead the cause of truth and right, with Judges of the land.
BASSVS.
^ AMid the prease with men of might, the Lord himself did stand:
^ To plead the cause of truth and right, with Judges of the land.
2
How long (says he) will ye proceed,
false Judgment to avvard?
And have respect for love of meede,
the wicked to regard?
3
Whereas of due you should defend
the father less and vveake:
And when the poor man does contend,
in judgment justly speak.
4
If ye be wise, defend the cause
of poor men in their right:
And rid the needy from the clavves
of tyrants force and might.
5
But nothing will they know or learn,
in vain to them I talk:
They will not see or ought discern,
but still in darkness walk.
For lo, even now the time is come
that all things fall to naught:
And likewise laws both all and some,
for gain are sold and bought.
6
I had decreed it in my sight,
as Gods to take you all:
And children of the most of might,
for love I did you call.
7
But notvvithstanding ye shall dye
as men, and so decay:
O Tyrants I shall you destroy,
and pluck you quite away.
8
Up Lord, and let thy strength be known,
and judge the world with might:
For why? all nations are thine own,
to take them as thy right.
Psalm 83.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ Do not O God refrain thy tongue, in silence do not stay:
^ VVith-hold not Lord thy self so long, nor make no more delay.
MEDIVS.
^ Do not O God refrain thy tongue, in silence do not stay:
^ VVith-hold not Lord thy self so long, nor make no more delay.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Woluer-hampton Tune.
^ Do not O God refrain thy tongue, in silence do not stay:
^ VVith-hold not Lord thy self so long, nor make no more delay.
BASSVS.
^ Do not O God refrain thy tongue, in silence do not stay:
^ VVith-hold not Lord thy self so long, nor make no more delay.
2
For why, behold thy foes, and see
how they do rage and cry:
And those that bear an hate to thee,
hold up their heads on hie.
3
Against thy folk they use decoit,
and craftily they enquire:
For thine elect to lie in vvait,
their counsel does conspire.
4
Come on, say they, let us expel,
and pluck these folk away:
So that the name of Israel
may utterly decay.
5
They all conspire within their hearts,
how they may thee vvithstand:
Against the Lord to take a part
they are in league and hand
6
The tents of all the Edomites,
the Israelites also:
The Haggarens and Moabites,
with diverse other more.
7
G^bal with Ammon, and likewise,
does Amalock conspire:
The Philistines against thee rise,
with them that dvvell at Tire.
8
And Assure eke is well apaid
with them in league to be:
And does become a fence and aid
to Lots posterity.
9
As thou did to the Midiani^es,
so serve them Lord each one:
As to Siser and to Iabin
beside the brook K^son.
10
Whom thou in Endor did destroy,
and waste them through thy might:
That they like doung on earth did lie,
and that in open sight.
The second part.
11
Make them now and their Lords appear
like Zeb and Oreb then:
As Zeba and Zalmana were
the Kings of Madian:
12
Which said, let us throughout the land
in all the coasts abroad
Possess, and take into our hand
the fair houses of God.
13
Turn them O God with storms as fast
as wheels that have no stay:
Or like as chafe which men do cast
with vvindes to fly away.
14
Like as the fire with rage and fume,
the mighty forests spils:
And as the flame does quite consume
the mountains and the hills.
15
So let the tempest of thy wrath
upon their necks be laid:
And of the stormy wind and shower,
Lord make them all afraid.
16
Lord bring them all I thee desire
to such rebuke and shame:
That it may cause them to enquire,
and learn to seek thy name,
17
And let them evermore daily
to shame and slander fall:
And in rebuke and obloquie
to perish eke withal
18
That they may know and feel full well,
that thou art called Lord:
And that alone thou do excel,
and reign throughout the world.
Psalm 84
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ How pleasant is thy dwelling place O Lord of hosts to me?
^ The tabernacles of thy grace, how pleasant Lord they be?
MEDIVS.
^ HOw pleasant is thy dwelling place, O Lord of hosts to me?
^ The tabernacles of thy grace, how pleasant Lord they be?
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Winchester Tune.
^ How pleasant is thy dwelling place, O Lord of hosts to me?
^ The tabernacles of thy grace, how pleasant Lord they be.
BASSVS.
^ HOw pleasant is thy dwelling place, O Lord of hosts to me?
^ The tabernacles of thy grace, how pleasant Lord they be:
2
My soul does long full sore to go
into thy courts abroad*
My heart does lust, my flesh also
in thee the living God.
3
The Sparrovves find a room to rest,
and save themselves from vvrong:
And eke the Swallow has a nest
wherein to keep her young.
4
These birds full night thine altar may
have place to set and sing:
O Lord of hosts thou art (I say)
my God and eke my King.
5
Oh they be blessed that may dvvell
within thy house alvvayes:
For they all times thy facts do tell,
and give thy name the praise.
6
Yea happy sure likewise are they,
whose stay and strength thou art:
Which to thy house do mind the way,
and seek it in their heart.
7
As they go through the vale of tears,
they dig up fountains still.
That as a spring it all appears,
and thou their pits do fill.
8
From strength to strength they walk full fast
no faintnes there shall be:
And so the God of Gods at last
in Sion they do see.
9
O Lord of hosts to me give heed,
and hear when I do pray:
And let it through thine ears proc^ed,
O Jacobs God I say.
10
O Lord our shield, of thy good grace
regard and so draw near:
Regard I say, behold the face
of thine anointed dear.
11
For why? within thy courts one day
is better so abide,
Then other where to keep or stay
a thousand days beside,
12
Much rather would I keep a door
within the house of God:
Then in the tents of wickedness
to settle mine abode.
13
For God the Lord, light and defense,
will grace and worship give:
And no good thing will he withold
from them that purely live.
14
O Lord of hosts that man is blessed,
and happy sure is he:
That is persuaded in his breast
to trust all tunes in thee.
Psalm 85.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ THou have been merciful indeed, O Lord unto thy land: For ^ thou
restoredst Jacobs seed from thraldom out of band.

MEDIVS.
^ THou have been merciful indeed, O Lord unto thy land: For ^ thou
restoredst Jacobs seed from thraldom out of band,

TENOR, or Playnsong.
Windsor or Eaton Tune.
^ THou have been merciful indeed, O Lord unto thy land: For ^ thou
restoredst Jacobs seed from thraldom out of band.

BASSVS.
^ THou have been merciful indeed, O Lord unto thy land: For ^ thou
restoredst Jacobs seed from thraldom out of band.

2
The wicked ways that they were in
thou did them clean remit:
And thou did hide thy peoples sin,
full close thou coueredst it.
3
Thine anger eke thou did as^wage,
that all thy wrath was gone:
And so did turn thee from thy ^age,
with them to be at one.
4
O God our health, do now convert
thy people unto thee:
Put all thy wrath from us apart,
and angry cease to be.
5
Why shall thine anger never end,
but still proceed on us?
And shall thy wrath it self extend
upon all ages thus?
6
Will thou not rather turn therefore
and quicken us, that we
And all thy folk may evermore
be glad and joy in thee.
5
O Lord on us do thou declare
thy goodness to our wealth:
Show forth to us and do not spare,
thine aid and saving health.
8
I will hark what God says, for he
speaks to his people peace:
And to his Saints that never they
return to foolishness.
9
For why? his help is still at hand
to such as do him fear
Whereby great glory in the land
shall dwell and flourish there.
10
For truth and mercy there shall meet
in one to take their place*
And peace shall justice with kiss greet,
and there they shall embrace.
11
As truth from earth shall spring apace
and flourish pleasantly*
So righteousness shall show her face*
and look from heaven hie.
12
Yea, God himself shall take in hand
to give us each good thing:
And through the coasts of all our Land
the earth (...) fruits shall ^^ing.
13
Before his face shall justice go
(...) like a guide or stay:
He shall direct his steps also,
and keep them in the way.
Psalm 86.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ LOrd bow thine ear to my request, and hear me by and by: ^ with grievous
pain and grief oppressed full poor and weak am I.

MEDIVS.
^ LLord bow thine ear to my request and hear me by and by* ^ with grievous
pain and grief oppressed full poor and weak am I.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
The Kings Tune.
^ LOrd bow thine ear to my request, and hear me by and by: ^ with grievous
pain and grief oppressed full poor and weak am I.

BASSVS.
^ LOrd bow thine ear to my request, and hear me by and by: ^ with grievous
pain and grief oppressed full poor and weak am I.

2
Preserve my soul because my ways
and doings holy be:
And save thy servant O my Lord,
that puts his (...) in thee.
3
Thy mercy Lord on me express,
defend me eke withal*
For through the day I do not cease
on thee to cry and call.
4
Comfort O Lord thy servants soul,
that now with pain is pinde:
For unto thee Lord I extol
and ^ift my soul and mind.
5
For thou art good and ^ount^full,
thy gifts of grace are free:
And eke thy mercy plentiful*
to all that call on thee.
6
O Lord likewise when I do pray
regard and give an ear:
Mark well the words that I do say
and all my prayers hear.
7
In tune when trouble does me move,
to thee I do complain:
For why I know and well do prove,
thou answerest me again.
8
Among the Gods, Lord there is none
with thee to be compared:
And none can do as thou alone,
the like has not been heard.
The second part.
9
The Gentiles and the people all,
which thou did make and frame:
Before thy face on knees shall fall
and glorify thy name.
10
For why? thou art so much of might,
all power is thine own:
Thou workest wonders still in sight,
for thou art God alone.
11
O teach me Lord thy way, and I
shall in thy truth proceed:
O join my heart to thee so ^e,
that i^ thy Name may dread
12
To the^ my God will I give praise,
with all my heart (O Lord)
And glorify thy Name always,
for ever through the world.
13
For why? thy mercy showed to me
^s great and does excel:
Thou ^erst my soul at liberty
out from the lowe^ hell*
14
O Lord the proud against me (...)*
and heaps of men of might*
They se^ke my soul and in no wise
will have thee in their sight.
15
Thou Lord art merciful and meele^
full slack and slow to wrath:
Thy goodness is full great, and eke
thy truth no measure has.
16
O turn to me and mercy grant.
thy strength to me apply:
O help and save thine own servant,
thine handmaids son am I.
17
On me some sign off^uou^ show,
that all my foes may see,
And be ashamed because Lord thou
do help and comfort me.
Psalm 87.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ THat City shall full well endure, her groundwork still does stay:
^ Upon thy holy hill full sure it can no time decay.
MEDIVS.
^ THat City shall full well endure, her groundwork still does stay:
^ Upon thy holy hill full sure, it can no time decay.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Dukes Tune.
^ THat City shall full well endure, her groundwork still does stay:
^ Upon the holy hill full sure it can no time decay.
BASSVS.
^ THat City shall full well endure, her groundwork still does stay
^ Upon thy holy hill full s^^e, it can no time decay.
2
God loves the (...) of (...) best,
his grace does there abide:
He loves them more then all the rest
of Jacobs tents beside
3
For glorious things reported be
in Sion and abroad:
Great things I say are said of thee
thou city of our God*
4
On Rahab I will cast an eye,
and bear in mind the same:
And Babylon shall eke apply
and learn to know thy nam^.
5
Lo ^alestine and Tire also,
with I ^hiope likewise.
A people old full long ago
were borne, and there did rise.
6
Of Sion they shall say abroad
that diverse men of ^ame:
Have there sprung up, and the high God
has founded fast the same.
7
In their records to them it shall
through Gods devise appear,
Of Siou that the chief of all
had his beginning there.
8
The trumpetters with such as sing
therein great plenty be:
My fountains and my pleasant springs
are compast all in thee.
Psalm 88.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ LOrd God of health the hope and stay thou art alone to me:
^ I call and cry throughout the day and all the night to thee.
MEDIVS.
^ LOrd God of health the hope and stay thou art alone to me
^ I call and cry throughout the day and all the night to thee.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Abbey Tune.
^ LOrd God of health the hope and stay thou art alone to me:
^ I call and cry throughout the day and all the night to thee.
BASSVS.
^ LOrd God of health the hope and stay thou art alone to me:
^ I call and cry throughout the day and all the night to thee.
2
O let my prayers soon ascend
unto thy sight on h^e:
Incline thine ear (O Lord) intend
and hearken to my cry,
3
For why my soul with woe is filled,
and does in trouble dwell:
My life and breath almost does yield
and draws (...) to he^l*
4
I am esteemed as one of them
that in the pit do fall:
And made as one among those men
that have no strength at all.
5
As one among the dead, and free
from things that here remain:
It were more ease for me to be
with them the which are slain,
6
As those that lie in grave I say.
whom thou have clean forgot:
The which th^e hand has cut away
and thou regardst them not.
7
Yea, like to one shut up full sure
within the lower put:
In places dark and all obscure,
and in the depth of it.
8
Thine anger and thy wrath likewise
full sore on me does lie:
And all thy storms against me rise
my soul to vex and tr^e.
9
Thou puts my friends far off from me,
and mak^st them hate me sore:
I am shut up in prison fast,
and can come forth no more.
10
My sight does fa^le through grief and woe
I call to thee O God:
Throughout the day, my hands also
to thee I stretch abroad.
The second part.
11
Do thou unto the dead decl^re
thy wondrous works of fame?
Shall dead to l^fe again ^estore
and praise thee for the same?
12
Or shall thy l^uing kindness, Lord,
be preached in the grave?
Or shall with them that are destroyed
thy truth her honor have?
13
Shall they that lie in dark full low
of all thy wonders wot?
Or there shall they thy justice know
where all things are forgot?
14
But I O Lord to thee always
do cry and call apace:
My prayer eke ere it be day
shall come before thy face.
15
Why do thou Lord abhor my soul,
in grief that seeks thee:
And now O lord why do thou hide
thy face away from me*
16
I am afflict as dying still,
from youth this many a year:
Thy terrors which do vex me still
with troubled mind I bear.
17
The furies of thy wrathful rage,
full sore upon me fall*
Thy terrors eke do not assuage,
but me oppress withal.
18
All day they compass me about,
as water at the tide:
And all at once with streams full stout
beset me on each side.
19
Thou set far from me my friends,
and lovers every one:
Yea, and mine old acquaintance all
out of my sight are gone.
Psalm 89.
Tho. Tomkins B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ TO sing the mercies of the Lord my tongue shall never spare:
^ And with my mouth from age to age thy truth I will declare.
MEDIVS.
^ TO sing the mercies of the Lord my tongue shall never spare:
^ And with my mouth from age to age thy truth I will declare.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Dumfermeling Tune.
^ TO sing the mercies of the Lord my tongue shall never spare:
^ And with my mouth from age to age thy truth I will declare.
BASSVS.
^ TO sing the mercies of the Lord my tongue shall never spare.
^ And with my mouth from age to age thy truth I will declare.
2
For I have said that mercy shall
for evermore remain:
In that thou do the heavens stay
thy truth appears plain*
3
To mine elect ^s^ith God) I made
a covenant and behest:
My servant David to persuade,
I swore and did protest.
4
Thy seed for ever I will stay,
and stabli^h it full fast:
And (...) uphold thy throne always,
from age to age to last.
5
The heavens show with (...) and mi^th
thy wond^ous works O lord:
Thy Sa^nts within thy Church on earth
thy faith and truth ^ecord.
6
Who with the Lord is equal then
in a^l the clouds ab^o^d?
Among the sons of all the Gods
what one is like our God?
7
God in assembly of his Saints
is greatly to be dread:
And over all that dwell about,
in terror to be had.
8
Lord God of hosts, in all the world
what one is like to thee?
On every side most mighty Lord,
thy truth is seen to be.
9
The raging sea by thine advice,
thou rulest at thy will:
And when the waves thereof arise
thou make them calm and still.
10
And Egypt Lord thou have subdude*
and thou have it destroyed:
Yea, thou thy foes with mighty a^me
have scattered all abroad.
The second part.
11
The heavens are thine and still have bin,
likewise the earth and Land:
The world and all that is therein
thou foundedst with thy hand.
12
Both North and South, with East and West
thy self did make and frame:
Both Tabor Mount and eke Hermon
rejoice and praise thy Name.
13
Thine arm is strong and full of power,
all might therein does lie:
The strength of thy right hand each hour
thou liftest up on hie.
14
In righteousness and equity
thou have thy seat and place:
Mercy and truth is still with thee,
and go before thy face.
15
That folk is blessed that know'th aright
thy present power O God,
For in the favor of thy sight*
they walk full safe abroad.
16
For in thy name throughout the day
they joy and much rejoice:
And through thy righteousness have they
a pleasant fame and noise.
17
For why? their glory, strength and aid,
in thee alone does ^e:
Thy goodness eke that has us staid
shall lift our horns on hie.
18
Our strength that does defend us well,
the Lord to us does bring:
The holy one of Israel,
he is our strength and King,
19
Sometime thy will unto thy Saints,
in vision thou do show:
And thus then did thou say to them,
thy mind to make them know.
20
A man of might I have erect
your King and guide to be:
And set up him whom I elect
among the folk to me.
The third part.
21
My servant David I appoint,
whom I have searched out:
And with my holy oil anoint
him King of all the rout.
22
For why? my hand is ready still
with him for to remain:
And with mine arm also I will
him strengthen and sustain.
23
The enemies shall not him oppress,
they shall him not devour:
Ne yet the sons of wickedness
on him shall have no power.
24
His foes likewise I will destroy
before his face in sight:
And those that hate him I will plague,
and strike them with my might.
25
My truth and mercy eke withal
Shall still upon him lie:
And in my name his borne eke shall
be lifted up on hie.
26
His Kingdom I will set to be
upon the sea and land:
And eke the running floods shall be
embrace with his right hand.
27
He shall depend with all his heart
on me, and thus shall say:
My father and my God thou art,
my rock of health and stay.
28
As one first borne I will him take
of all on earth that springs:
His might and honor I shall mak^
above all worldly Kings.
29
My mercy shall be with him still,
as I my self have told:
My faithful covenant to fulfill,
my mercy I will hold.
30
And eke his seed I will sustain
for ever strong and sure:
So that his seat shall still remain
while heaven and earth endure.
The fourth part.
31
If that his sons forsake my law,
and so begin to swerue.
And of my judgments have no awe,
nor will not them observe:
32
Or if they do not use aright
my statutes to them made:
And set all my commandments light,
and will not keep my trade.
33
Then with the rod will I begin
their doings to amend:
And so with scourging for their sin
when that they do offend.
34
My mercy yet and my goodness
I will not take him fro:
Nor handle him with craftiness,
and so my truth forgo.
35
But sure my covenant I will hold
with all that I have spoke:
No word the which my lips have told
shall alter or be broke.
36
Once swear I by my hol^nesse,
and that pe^forme will I,
With David I will keep promise
to him I will not lie.
37
His seed for evermore shall reign
and eke his throne of might
As does the Sun it shall remain
for ever in my sight.
38
And as the Moon within the sky
for ever stands fast:
A faithful witness from on hie,
so shall his kingdom last.
39
But now (O Lord) thou do reject,
and now thou changest cheer:
Yea, thou art wroth with thine elect,
thine own anointed dea^e.
40
The covenant with thy servant made
Lord thou have quite undone:
And down upon the ground also
have cast his royal crown.
The fifth part.
41
Thou pluckst his hedges up with might,
his walls thou do con^ound.
Thou beat^st eke his bulwarks down,
and breakst them to the ground,
42
That he is sore destroide and torn
of comers by throughout:
And so is made a mock and scorn
to all that dwell about.
43
Thou their right hand have lifted up
that him so sore annoy*
And all his foes that him devour,
lo* thou have made to joy.
44
His sword edge thou did take away
that should his foes withstand:
To him in war^e no victory
thou give, no^ upper hand.
45
His glory thou do also wast*
his throne, his joy and mirth:
By thee is overthrown and cast
full low upon the earth
46
Thou have cut off, and made full short
his youth and lusty days:
And raised of him an ill report,
with shame and great dispraise.
47
How long away from me, O Lord,
for ever will thou turn?
And shall thine anger still always
as fire consume and burn?
48
O call to mind, remember then
my time consumes fast:
Why have thou made the sons of men
as things in vain to wast?
49
What man is he that lives here
and death shall never see
Or from the hand of hell his soul
shall he deliver free:
50
Where is O Lord, thine old goodness,
so often declard'd beforne
Which by thy truth and uprightness
to David thou have sworn?
51
The great rebukes to mind I call
that on thy servants lie:
The railing of thy people all
borne in my b^est ^aue I.
52
Wherewith O Lord thine enemies
blasphemed have thy name:
The steps of thine anointed one
they cease not to defame.
53
All praise to thee O Lord of hosts,
both now and eke for aye:
Through sky and earth and all the coasts,
Amen, Amen, I say.
Psalm 90.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ THou Lord have been our sure defense, our place of ease and rest:
^ In all times past, yea, so long since as cannot be expressed.
MEDIVS.
^ THou Lord have been our sure defense, our place of ease and rest:
^ In all times past, yea, so long since as cannot be expressed.
TENOR, or Plainsong.
Dundy Tune.
^ THou Lord have been our sure defense, our place of ease and rest
^ In all times past, yea, so long since as cannot be expressed.
BASSVS.
^ THou Lord have been our sure defense, our place of ease and rest
^ In all times past, yea, so long since as cannot be expressed.
2
Ere there was made mountain or hill,
the earth and all abroad:
From age to age and always still
for ever thou art God.
3
Thou grindest man through grief and pain
to dust or clay, and then,
And then thou say again, return
again ye sons of men,
4
The lasting of a thousand year,
what is it in thy sight?
As yesterday it does appear,
or as a watch by night.
5
So soon as thou do scatter them,
then is their life and trade
All as a sleep, and like the grass,
whose beauty soon does fade.
6
which in the morning shines full bright
but fades by and by:
And is cut down ere it be night,
all w^thered, dead and dry.
7
For through thine anger we consume,
our might is much decaid*
And of thy fervent wrath and fume
we are full sore afraid.
8
The wicked works that we have wrought
thou setst before thine eye*
Our p^iuy faults, yea, eke our thoughts
thy countenance does spy.
9
For through thy wrath our days do waste,
thereof does naught remain:
Our years consume as words or blasts,
and are not called again.
10
Our time is threescore years and ten
that we do live on mould*
If one see fourscore, surely then
we count him wondrous old.
The second part.
11
Yet of this time the strength and age
the which we count upon:
Is nothing else but painful grief,
and we as blasts are gone.
12
Who once does know what strength is there,
what might thine anger has?
Or in his heart who does thee fear
according to thy wrath?
13
Instruct us Lord to know and try
how long our days remain:
That then we may our hearts apply
true wisdom to attain.
14
Return O Lord, how long will thou
^o^th on in wrath proceed?
Show favor to thy se^uants now,
and help them at their need.
15
Refresh us with thy mercy soon*
and then our joy shall be*
All times so long as life does last
in heart rejoice shall we.
16
As thou have plagued us before,
now also make us glad*
And for the years wherein full sore
affliction we have had.
17
O let thy work and power appear
and on thy servants light:
And show unto thy children d^ere
thy glory and thy might.
18
Lord let thy grace and glory stand
on us thy servants thus:
Confirm the works we take in hand,
Lord prosper them to us.
Psalm 91.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ HE that within the secret place of God most hye does dwell:
^ In shadow of the mightiest grace, at rest will keep him well.
MEDIVS.
^ HE that within the secret place of God most hie does dwell:
^ In shadow of the mightiest grace at rest will keep him well.
TENOR or Playnsong.
Glascow Tune.
^ HE that within the secret place of God most hie does dwell:
^ In shadow of the mightiest grace, at rest will keep him well.
BASSVS.
^ HE that within the secret place of God most hye does dwell:
^ In shadow of the mightiest grace at rest will keep him well
2
Thou art my hope and my strong hold,
I to the Lord will say:
My God he is, in him will I,
my whole affiance stay.
3
He shall defend thee from the snare,
the which the hunter laid:
And from the deadly plague and care,
whereof thou art afraid.
4
And with his wings shall cover thee,
and k^epe thee safely there*
His faith and truth thy fence shall be,
as sure as shield and spear.
5
So that thou shall not need I say
to fear or be affright:
Of all the shafts that fly by day,
nor terrors of the night.
6
Nor of the plague that privily
does walk in dark to fast*
Nor yet of that which does destroy
and at noone days does waste.
7
Yea at thy side as thou do stand,
a thousand dead shall be*
Ten thousand eke at thy right hand,
and yet thou shall be free.
8
But thou shall see it for thy part,
thine eyes shall well regard:
That even like to their desert,
the wi^ked have reward.
6
For why? O Lord I only (...),
to stay my hope on thee:
And in the highest I put my trust,
my su^e defense is he.
10
Thou shall not need none ill to fear,
with thee it shall not mell:
Nor yet the plague shall once come near
the house where thou do dwell.
11
For why? unto his Angels all,
with charge commanded he,
That still in all thy ways they shall
preserve and prosper thee.
12
And in their hands shall thee bear up,
still waiting thee upon:
So that thy foot shall never chance
^o spurn at any stone.
3
Upon the Lion thou shall go,
the Adder fell and long:
And tread upon the Lions young,
with Dragons stout and strong.
14
For he that trusts unto me,
I will dispatch him quite:
And him defend, because that he
does know my name a^ight.
15
When he for health on me does cry,
an answer I will give*
And from his grief take him will I,
in glory for to live.
16
With length of years, and days of wealth
I will fulfill his time*
The goodness of my saving health
I will declare to him.
Psalm 92.
Simon Stubbs.
MEDIVS.
^ IT is a thing both good and meet to praise the highest Lord:
^ And to thy name, O thou most high to sing with one accord.
MEDIVS.
^ IT is a thing both good and meet to praise the highest Lord
^ And to thy name, O thou most high to sing with one accord.
TENOR or Playnsong.
Martyrs Tune.
^ IT is a thing both good and meet to praise the highest Lord:
^ And to thy name, O thou most high to sing with one accord.
BASSVS.
^ IT is a thing both good and meet to praise the highest Lord:
^ And to thy name, O thou most high to sing with one accord.
2
To show the kindness of the Lord
betime, ere day be light:
And eke declare his truth abroad
when it does draw to night.
3
Upon ten stringed instruments,
on Lu^e and Harp so sweet:
With all the mirth you can invent
on instruments most meet.
4
For thou have made me to rejoice
in things so wrought by thee:
And I have joy in heart and voice
thy handle work to see.
5
O Lord how glorious and how great
are all thy works so stout:
So deeply are thy counsels set
that noue can try them out.
6
The man unwise has not the wit
this gear to pass to bring:
And all such fools are nothing fit
to understand this thing,
7
When so the wicked at their will
as grass do spring full fast*
They, when they flourish in their ill,
for ever shall be wast.
8
But thou art mighty Lord most high,
yea, thou do reign therefore:
In every time etenally,
both now and evermore.
9
For why O Lord behold and (...),
behold my foes I say:
How all that work iniquity
shall perish and decay.
10
But thou like as an Unicorn
shall lift mine horn on hie,
With fresh and new prepared oil
thine ointed King am I.
11
And of my foes before mine eyes
shall see the fall and shame:
Of all that up against me rise
mine ears shall hear the same.
12
The ^ust shall flourish up on hie,
as Date trees bud and blow:
And as the Cedars multiply
in Libanus that grow.
13
For the^ are planted in the place
and dwelling of our God:
Within his courts they spring apace
and flourish all abroad.
14
And in their age much fruits shall spring,
both fat and well be seen:
And pleasantly both bud and spring
with boughs and branches green.
15
To show that God is good and just,
and upright in his will:
He is my rock, my hope and trust,
in him there is no ill*
Psalm 93.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ THe Lord as king, aloft does reign in glory goodly dight: And ^ he to show
his strength and maine has girt himself with might.

MEDIVS.
^ THe Lord as king aloft does reign in glory goodly dight: And ^ he to show
his strength and maine has girt himself with might.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
Landaffe Tune.
^ THe Lord as king aloft does reign in glory goodly dight* And ^ he to show
his strength and maine has girt himself with might.

BASSVS.
^ THe Lord as king aloft does reign in glory goodly dight* And ^ he to show
his strength and maine has girt himself with might.

2
The Lord likewise the earth has made
and shaped it full sure:
No might can make it move o^ fade,
at stay it does endure.
3
Ere that the world was made or wrought,
thy seat was set before:
Beyond all time that can be thought,
thou have been evermore.
6
The floods O Lord the floods do rise,
they (...) and make a noise:
The floods I say did enterprise
and lifted up their voice.
5
Yea, though the storms arise in sight
though sea do rage and swell:
The Lord is strong and more of might*
for he on hie does dwell.
6
And look what promise he does make
his household to defend
For just and true they shall it take
all times without an end.
Psalm 94.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ O Lord thou do revenge all wrong, that office longs to thee*
^ Since vengeance does belong to thee declare that all may see.
MEDIVS.
^ O Lord thou do revenge all wrong, that office longs to thee:
^ Since vengeance does belong to thee declare that all may see.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Bangor Tune.
^ O Lord thou do revenge all wrong, that office longs to thee:
^ Since vengeance does belong to thee, declare that all may see.
BASSVS.
^ O Lord thou do revenge all wrong, that office longs to thee:
^ Since vengeance does belong to thee declare that all may see.
2
Set forth thy self, for thou of right*
the earth do judge and guide:
Re^ard the proud and men of might,
according to their pride,
3
How long shall wicked men bear s^ay
with l^fting up their voice?
How long shall wicked men I say,
thus (...) and rejoice?
4
How long shall they with brags bu^st out
and proudly prate their fill?
Shall they rejoice that be so stout,
whose works are ever ill?
5
Thy flock O Lord, thine heritage
they spoil and vex full so^e.
Against thy people they do ^age
still daily more and more.
6
The widows which are comfortless,
and strangers they destroy,
They s^^y the children f^therlesse,
and none do put them by.
7
And when they take these things in hand
this talk they have of thee:
Can Jacobs God this understand?
(...), no he cannot see.
8
O folk unwise and people rude,
some knowledge now discern*
Ye fools among the multitude
at length begin to learn.
9
The Lord which made the ear of man
he needs of ^ight must hear:
He made the eyes, (...) things must then
before his sight appear.
10
The Lord does all the world correct,
and make them understand*
Sh^^l he not then your deeds detect?
how can you (...) his h^nd?
The second part.
11
The Lord does know the thoughts of man
his heart he sees full plain:
The Lord I say men's thoughts does scan
and finds them but vain:
12
But Lord that man is happy sure,
whom thou do keep in awe:
And through correction do procure
to teach him in thy Law.
13
Whereby he shall in quiet rest
in time of trouble sit:
When wicked men shall be suppressed,
and fall into the pit.
14
For sure the Lord will not refuse
his people for to take:
His heritage whom he did choose,
he will no time forsake.
Until that judgment be decreed
to justice to conue^t*
That all may follow her with speed,
that are of upright heart.
16
But who upon my part shall stand
against the wicked train?
Or who shall ^id me from their hands
that wicked works maintain.
17
Except the Lord had been mine aid
mine enemies to repel:
My life and soul had now been laid
almost as low as hell.
18
When I did say my foot does slide,
and I am like to fall:
Thy goodness Lord did so provide
to stay me up withal.
19
When with my self I mused much,
and could no comfort find:
Then Lord thy goodness did me touch,
and that did ease my mind,
20
Will thou inhaunt thy self, and draw
with wicked men to sit?
Which with pretense in stead of Law
much mischief do commit.
21
For they consult against the life
of righteous men and good:
And in their counsel they are rise
to shed the guiltless blood.
22
But yet the Lord he is to me
a strong defense or lock:
He is my God to him I fly,
he is my strength and rock.
23
And he shall cause their mischiefs all
themselves for to annoy:
And in their malice they shall fall,
our God shall them destroy.
Psalm 95.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ O Come, let us lift up our voice and sing unto the Lord: In him ^ our rock
of health, rejoice let us with one accord.

MEDIVS.
^ O Come, let us lift up our voice, and sing unto the Lord, In him ^ our rock
of health, rejoice let us with one accord.

TENOR, or Plainsong.
S. David's Tune.
^ O Come, let us lift up our voice, and sing unto the Lord* In him ^ our rock
of health, rejoice let us with one accord.

BASSVS.
^ O Come, let us lift up our voice, and sing unto the Lord: In him ^ our rock
of health, rejoice let us with one accord.

2
Yea, let us come before his face,
to give him thanks and praise
In singing Psalms unto his grace,
let us be glad always.
3
For why^ the Lord he is no doubt
a great and mighty God:
A King above all Gods throughout
in all the world abroad.
4
The secrets of the earth so deep^*
and corners of the Land*
The tops of hills that are so sleep
he has them in his hand.
6
The sea and waters all are his
for he the same has wrought:
The earth, and all that therein is
his hand has made of naught.
6
Come, let us bow and praise the Lord,
before him let us fall:
And kneel to him with one accord,
the which has made us all.
7
For why? he is the Lord our God,
for us he does provide:
We a^e his flock, he does us feed,
his sheep, and he our guide.
8
To day if ye his voice will hear,
then harden not your heart:
As ye with giudging many a year
prouokt me in desa^t.
9
Whereas you^ fathers tempted me,
my power for to prove:
My wondrous works when they did see,
yet still they would me move.
10
Twice twenty years they did me grieve,
and I to them did say.
They err in heart and not believe,
they have not known my way.
11
Wherefore I swear when that my wrath
was kindled in my breast:
That they should never tread the path,
nor enter in my rest.
Psalm 96.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ SIng ye with praise unto the Lord new songs of joy and mirth:
^ Sing unto him with one ac- cord all people on the earth.
MEDIVS.
^ SIng ye with praise unto the Lord new songs of joy and mirth:
^ Sing unto him with one accord all people on the earth.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ SIng ye with praise unto the Lord new songs of joy and mirth:
^ Sing unto him with one accord all people on the earth.
BASSVS.
^ SIng ye with praise unto the Lord new songs of joy and mirth
^ Sing unto him with one accord all people on the earth.
2
Yea, sing unto the Lord I say,
praise ye his holy name:
Declare and show from day to day
salvation by the same.
3
Among the heathen eke declare
his honor round about:
To show his wonders do^ not spare
in all the world throughout.
4
For why? the Lord is much of might,
and worthy praise always:
And he is to be dread of right
above all Gods I say.
5
For all the Gods of heathen fol^^,
are I do^^ that will ^ade:
But yet our God, he is the Lord
that has the heavens made.
6
All praise and honor eke do dwell
for aye before his face:
Both power and might likewise excel
within his holy place.
7
Ascribe unto the Lord always,
ye people of the world,
All might and worship eke, I say
ascribe unto the Lord.
8
Ascribe unto the Lord also,
the glory of his name:
And eke unto his courts do go
with gifts unto the some.
The second part.
9
Fall down and worship ye the Lord,
within his Temple bright:
Let all the people of the world
be fearful at his sight.
10
Tell all the World, be not aghast,
the Lord does reign above:
Yea, he has set the earth so fast,
that it can never move.
11
And that it is the Lord alone
that rules with Princely might:
To judge the nations every one*
with equity and right:
12
The heavens shall great joy begin,
the earth shall eke rejoice:
The Sea with all that is therein,
shall shout and make a noise.
13
The field shall joy and eu^ry thing
that springs on the earth:
The wood and every tree shall sing
with gladness and with mirth.
14
Before the presence of the Lord
and coming of his might:
When he shall justly judge the world,
and rule his folk aright.
Psalm 97.
Tho. Tomkins B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ THe Lord does reign, whereat the earth may joy with pleasant voice:
^ And eke the Isles with joyful mirth may triumph and rejoice.
MEDIVS.
^ THe Lord does reign, whereat the earth may joy with pleasant voice:
^ And eke the Isles with joyful mirth may triumph and rejoice.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Worcester Tune.
^ THe Lord does reign, whereat the earth may joy with pleasant voice:
^ And eke the Isles with joyful mirth may triumph and rejoice.
BASSVS.
^ THe Lord does reign, whereat the earth may joy with pleasant voice.
^ And eke the Isles with joyful mirth may triumph and rejoice.
2
Both clouds and darkness eke do swell
and round about him beat:
Yea, ^ight and justice ever dwell,
and bide about his seat.
3
Yea, fire and heat at once do run
and go before his face:
Which shall his foes and enemies burn
abroad in every place.
4
His lightnings eke full bright did blaze,
and to the world appear:
Whereat the earth did look and gaze,
with dread and deadly fear.
5
The ^^ls like wax did melt in sight,
and presence of the Lord:
They f^ed before the rulers might
which guides all the world,
6
The heavens eke declare and show
his justice all abroad:
That all the world may see and know
the glory of our God.
7
Confusion sure shall come to such
as worship Idols vain:
And eke to those that glory much,
d^mbe pictures to maintain.
8
For all the Idols of the world,
which they as Gods do call
Shall feel the power of the Lord
and down to him shall fall.
9
With joy shall Sion hear this thing,
and Judah shall rejoice:
For at thy judgments they shall sing,
and make a pleasant noise.
10
That thou O Lord art set on hie
in all the earth abroad:
And art exalted wondrously,
above each other God,
11
All ye that love the Lord do this,
hate all things that are ill*
For he does keep the souls of his
from such as would them spill.
12
And light does spring up to the just
with pleasure for his part:
Great joy with gladness, mirth and ^ust,
to them of upright heart.
13
Ye righteous in the Lord rejoice,
his holiness proclaim*
Be thankful eke with heart and voice,
and mindful of the same.
Psalm 98.
Tho. R^uens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ O Sing ye now unto the Lord a new and pleasant song: For ^ he has wrought
throughout the world his wonders great and strong.

MEDIVS.
^ O Sing ye now unto the Lord a new and pleasant song: For ^ he has wrought
throughout the world his wonders great and strong.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
Winchester Tune.
^ O Sing ye now unto the Lord a new and pleasant song: For ^ he has wrought
throughout the world his wonders great and strong.

BASSVS.
^ O Sing ye now unto the Lord a new and pleasant song: For ^ he has wrought
throughout the world his wonders great and strong.

2
With his right hand full worthily
he does his foes devour:
And get himself the victory
with his own arm and power*
3
The Lord does make the people know
his saving health and might:
The Lord doeh eke his justice show,
in all the heathens sight.
4
His grace and truth to Israel
in mind he does record:
That all the earth may see right well
the goodness of the Lord.
5
Be glad in him with joyful voice,
all people on the earth:
Give thanks to God, sing and rejoice
to (...) with joy and mirth.
6
Upon the Harp unto him sing,
give thanks to him with Psalms:
Rejoice before the Lord our King,
with Trumpets and with Shalmes.
7
Yea, let the Sea with all therein,
with joy both roar and swell:
The earth likewise let it begin.
with all that therein dwell.
8
And let the floods rejoice their fills
and clap their hands apace:
And eke the mountains and the hills
before the Lord his face.
9
For he shall come to judge and try
the world and every wight:
And rule the people mightily
with justice and with right.
Psalm 99.
Simon Stubbs.
CANTVS.
^ THE Lord does reign although at it, the people rage full sore:
^ Yea, he on Cherubins does sit, though all the world do roar.
MEDIVS.
^ THe Lord does reign although at it the people rage full sore:
^ Yea, he on Cherubins does sit, though all the world do roar.
TENOR or Playnsong.
Mar^yrs Tune.
^ THE Lord does reign although at it, the people rage full sore
^ Yea, he on Cherubins does sit, though all the world do roar.
BASSVS.
^ THe Lord does reign although at it the people rage full sore:
^ Yea, he on Cherubins does sit, though all the world do roar.
2
The Lord that does in Sion dwell,
is high and wondrous great:
Above all folk he does excel,
and he aloft is set.
3
Let all men praise thy holy Name,
for it is fearful sure:
And let them magnify the same
that holy is and pure.
4
The princely power of our King
does love judgment and right:
Thou rightly rulest every thing
in Jacob, through thy might.
5
To praise the Lord our God devise,
all honor to him do:
Before his footstool do likewise,
for he is holy too.
6
Moses, Aaron and Samuel*
as Priests on him did call:
When they did pray he heard them well
and gave them answer all.
7
Within the cloud to them he spoke,
then did they labor still:
To keep such Laws as he did make
and pointed them until
8
O Lord our God thou did them hear,
and answeredst them again:
9
Thy mercy did on them appear,
their deeds did not maintain.
10
O laud and praise our God and Lord
within his hol^ hill:
For why? our God throughout the world
is holy ever still.
Psalm 100.
I. Dowland Doct. of M.
CANTVS.
^ AL people that on earth do dwell sing to the Lord with cheerful voice
^ Him serve with fear, his praise forth tell, come ye before him and rejoice.
MEDIVS.
^ AL people that on earth do dwell sing to the Lord with cheerful voice:
^ Him serve with fear, his praise forth tell, come ye be-fore him and rejoice.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
2. French Tune.
^ AL people that on earth do dwell, sing to the Lord with cheerful voice
^ Him serve with fear, his praise forth tell, come ye before him and rejoice*
BASSVS.
^ AL people that on earth do dwell sing to the Lord with cheerful voice
^ Him serve with fear, his praise forth tell, come ye be- fore him and
re-ioyce.
3
The lord ye know is God indeed:
without our aid he did us make:
We are his flock he does us feed,
and for his sheep de does us take.
4
O enter then his gates with praise,
approach with joy his (...) unto:
Praise, laud and bless his name always
for it is seemly so to do.
For why? the Lord our God is good,
his mercy is for ever sure.
His truth at all times firmly stood,
and shall from age to age endure.
Another of the same.
Simon Stubbs.
CANTVS.
^ IN God the Lord be glad and light, praise him throughout the earth:
^ Serve him and come before his fight with singing and with mirth.
MEDIVS.
^ IN God the Lord be glad and light, praise him, throughout the earth:
^ Serve him and come before his sight with singing and with mirth.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
York Tune.
^ IN God the Lord be glad and light, praise him throughout the earth
^ Serve him and come before his sight, with singing and with mirth
BASSVS.
^ IN God the Lord be glad and light, praise him throughout the earth:
^ Serve him and come before his sight with sin^ing and with mirth,
2
Know that the Lord our God he is,
he did us make and keep:
Not we our selves: for we are his
own folk and pasture sheep,
3
O go into his gates always,
give thanks within the same.
Within his Courts set forth his praise,
and laud his holy name.
4
For why? the goodness of the Lord
for evermore does reign:
From age to age throughout the world
his truth does still remain.
Psalm 101.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ I Mercy will and judgment sing, O Lord God unto thee: And ^ wisely do in
perfect way until thou come to me.

MEDIVS.
^ I Mercy will and judgment sing, O Lord God unto thee: And ^ wisely do in
perfect way until thou come to me:

TENOR, or Playnsong.
Winchester Tune.
^ I Mercy will and judgment sing, O Lord God unto thee: And ^ wisely do in
perfect way until thou come to me.

BASSVS.
^ I Mercy will and judgment sing O Lord God unto thee: And, ^ wisely do in
perfect way until thou come to me.

And in the midst of thy house walk
in pureness of my spirit:
3
And I no kind of wicked thing
will set before my sight.
4
I hare their works that fall away,
it shall not clea^e to me.
From me shall part the froward heart,
none evil will I see,
5
Him will I slay that slandereth
^us neighbor priu^ly:
The lofty heart I cannot bear,
nor him that looks hie.
6
Mine eyes shall be on them within
the land that faithful be:
In perfect way who walks shall
be servant unto me.
7
I will no guilefull person have
within my house to dwell:
And in my presence he shall not
remain that lies does tell.
8
Betimes I will destroy even all
the wicked of the land:
That I may from Gods city cut
the wicked workers hand.
Psalm 102.
John Milton,
CANTVS.
^ O Hear my prayer Lord, and let my cry come unto thee: ^ In time of trouble
do not hide thy face away from me.

MEDIVS.
^ O Hear my prayer Lord, and let my cry come vn-to thee: ^ In time of trouble
do not hide thy face away from me.

TENOR, or Palynsong.
Norwitch Tune.
^ O Hear my prayer Lord, and let my cry come unto thee: ^ In time of trouble
do not hide thy face away from me.

BASSVS.
^ O Hear my prayer Lord, and let my cry come unto thee: ^ In time of trouble
do not hide thy face away from me.

3
Incline thine ears to me, make have
to hear me when I call:
For as the smoke does fade, so do
my days consume and fall.
4
And as a harth my bones are burnt,
my heart is smitten dead:
And withers as the grass, that I
forget to eat my bread.
5
By reason of my groaning voice
my bones cleave to my skin:
6
As Pelican in wilderness
such case now am I in.
And as an Owl in desert is,
lo I am such a one:
7
I watch and as a Spa^row on
the house top am alone.
8
Lo daily in reproachful wise
mine enemies do me scorn:
And they that do against me rage,
against me they have sworn.
9
Surely with ashes as with bread
my hunger I have filled:
And mingled have my drink with tears
that from mine e^es have stild,
10
Because of thy displeasure Lord,
thy wrath and thy disdain:
For thou have lifted me aloft,
and cast me down again.
11
The days wherein I pass my life
are like the fleeting shade:
And I am withered like the grass,
that soon away does fade.
12
But thou O Lord for ever do
remain in steady place:
And thy remembrance ever does,
abide from race to race.
The second part.
13
Thou will a^ise, and mercy thou
to Sion wilt extend:
The time of mercy, now the time
foreset is come to end.
14
For even in the stones thereof
thy servants do delight:
And on the dust thereof they h^^e
compassion in their sprite.
15
Then shall the heathen people fear
the Lords most holy Name:
And all the Kings on earth shall dread
thy glory and thy fame.
16
Then when the Lord, the mighty God
again shall Sion rear:
And then when he most nobly in
his glory shall appear.
17
To prayer of the desolate,
when he himself shall bend:
When he shall not disdain unto
their prayers to attend.
18
This shall be written for the age
that after shall succeed:
The people yet uncreated,
the Lords renown shall spread.
^0
For he from his high Sanctuary
has looked down below:
And out of heaven has the Lord
beheld the earth also.
20
That of the mourning captive he
might hear the woeful cry:
And that he might deliver those
that damned are to die.
21
That they in Sion may declare
the Lords most holy Name:
And in Jerusalem set forth
the praises of the same.
22
Then when the people of the Land,
and Kingdoms with accord
Shall be assembled for to do
their service to the Lord.
The third part.
23
My former force and strength he has
abated in the way*
And shorter he has cut my days,
thus I therefore did say.
24
My God, in midst of all my days,
now take me not away:
Thy years endure eternally,
from age to age for aye.
25
Thou the foundation of the earth
before all times have laid:
And Lord the heavens are the work
which thine own hand^ have made.
26
Yea, they shall perish and decay,
but thou shall tarry still:
And they shall all in time wax old,
even as a garment will.
27
Thou as a garment shall them change*
and changed shall they be:
But thou do still abide the same,
thy years do never flee.
28
The children of thy servants shall
continually endure:
And in thy sight their happy seed
for ever shall stand sure.
Psalm 103.
E. Johnson.
CANTVS.
^ MY soul give laud unto the Lord, my sprite shall do the same: ^ And all
the secrets of my heart praise ye his holy name. Give thanks ^ to God for all
his gifts, show not thy self un- kind: And suffer not his ^ benefits to slip
out of thy mind.

MEDIVS.
^ MY soul give laud unto the Lord, my sprite shall do the same: ^ And all
the secrets of my heart praise ye his holy name. Give thanks ^ to God for all
his gifts, show not thy self unkind: And suffer not his ^ benefits to slip
out of thy mind.

TENOR or Playnsong.
^ MY soul give laud unto the Lord, my sprite shall do the same: ^ And all
the secrets of my heart praise ye his holy name. Give thanks ^ to God for all
his gifts, show not thy self unkind: And suffer not his ^ benefits to slip out
of thy mind.

BASSVS.
^ MY soul give laud unto the Lord, my sprite shall do the same: ^ And all
the secrets of my heart praise ye his holy name, Give thanks ^ to God for all
his gifts, show not thy self unkind: And suffer not his ^ benefits to slip
out of thy mind.

3
That gave thee pardon for thy faults,
and thee restorde again:
For all thy weak and frail disease,
and healed thee of thy pain.
4
That did redeem thy life from death,
from which thou could not flee:
His mercy and compassion both
he did extend to thee.
5
That filled with goodness thy desire,
and did prolong thy youth:
Like as the Eagle casts her bill:
whereby her age renewth.
6
The Lord with justice does repay
all such as be oppressed:
So that their sufferings and their wrongs
are turned to the best.
7
His ways and his commandments
to Moses he did show:
His counsels and his valiant acts
the Israelites did know.
8
The Lord is kind and merciful,
when sinners do him grieu^
The slowest to conceive a wrath,
and readiest to forgive.
9
He chides us not continually,
though we be full of strife:
Nor keeps our faults in memory
for all our sinful life.
10
Nor yet according to our sins
the Lord does us regard:
Nor after our iniquities
he does not us reward.
11
But as the space is wondrous great
twixt earth and heaven above:
So is his goodness much more large
to them that do him love,
12
God does remove our sins from us
and our offenses all:
As far as is the Sun rising
full distant from his fall.
The second part.
13
And look what pity parents deer
unto their children bear:
Like pity bears the Lord to such,
as worship him in fear*
14
The Lord that made us knows our shape,
our mould and fashion just:
How weak and frail our nature is,
and how we be but dust.
15
And how the time of mortal men
is like the withering hay*
Or like the flower right fair in field,
that fades soon away.
16
Whose gloss and beauty stormy winds
do utterly disgrace:
And make that after their assaults,
such blossoms have no place.
17
But yet the goodness of the Lord
with his shall ever stand:
Their childrens children do receive
his righteou snesse at hand.
18
I mean, which keep his covenant
with all their whole desire:
And not forget to do the thing
that he does them require.
19
The heavens hie are made the seat
and footstool of the Lord:
And by his power imperial
he gouernes all the world.
20
Ye angels which are great in power*
praise ye and bless the Lord:
Which to obey and do his will
immediately accord.
21
Ye noble hosts and ministers
cease not to laud him still:
Which ready are to execute
his pleasure and his will.
22
Yea, all his works in every place,
praise ye his holy name:
My heart, my mind, and eke my soul,
p^^yse ye also the same*
Psalm 104.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ MY soul praise the Lord, speak good of his name* O Lord our ^ great God
how do thou appear? So passing in glory, that great is thy ^ fame: honor
and majesty in thee shine most clear.

MEDIVS.
^ MY soul praise the Lord, speak good of his name. O Lord our ^ great God,
how do thou appear? So passing in glory, that great is thy ^ fame: honor
and majesty in thee shine most clear.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ MY soul praise the Lord, speak good of his name. O Lord our ^ great God,
how do thou appear? So passing in glory, that great is thy ^ fame honor and
majesty in thee shine most clear.

BASSVS.
^ MY soul praise the Lord, speak good of his name* O Lord our ^ great God,
how do thou appear? So passing in glory, that great is thy ^ fame: honor
and majesty in thee shine most clear.

2
With light as a robe
thou have thee beclad
Whereby all the earth
thy greatness may see,
The heaven in such sort
thou also have spread:
That it to a curtain
compared may be.
3
His chamber beams lie
in the clouds full ^ure:
Which as his chariot
are made him to bear.
And there with much swiftness
his course does endure.
Upon the wings riding
of wind in the air.
4
He makes his spirits
as Heralds to go:
And lightnings to serve,
We see also pressed:
His will to accomplish,
they run too and fro:
To save and consume things,
as seems him best.
5
He groundeth the earth,
so firmly and fast:
That it once to move
none shall have such power.
6
The deep a fair covering,
for it made thou have:
Which by his own nature
the hills would devour.
7
But at thy rebuke
the waters do ^^ee
And so give due place,
thy word to obey:
At thy voice of thunder
so fearful they be:
That in their great raging
they have soon away.
8
The mountains full hie
they then up ascend:
If thou do but speak
thy word they fulfill:
So likewise the wa^es
most quickly descend,
Where thou them appointest*
remain they do still.
9
Their bounds thou have set,
how far they shall run,
So as in their rage
not that pass they can:
For God has appointed
they shall not return,
The earth to destroy more
which made was for man*
The second part.
10
He sends the springs
to strong streams and lakes,
Which run do full swift
among the huge hills.
11
Where both the wild Asses
their thirst often times slakes,
And beasts of the mountains
thereof drink their fil^.
10
By these pleasant springs,
of fountains full fair
The fowls of the air
abide shall and dwell:
When moved by nature
to hop here and there,
Among the green branches
their songs shall excel.
13
The mountains to moist
the clouds he does vs^:
The earth with his works
is wholly repleat:
14
So as the brute cartell
he does not refuse:
But grass does provide them,
and herb for man's meat*
15
Yea, bread, wine and oil
he made for man's sake,
His face to refresh
and heart to make strong:
16
The Cedars of Lyban
this great Lord did make:
Which trees he does nourish
that grow up so long.
17
In these may birds build,
and make there their nest*
In fine trees the Storkes
remain and abide:
18
The high hills are succou^
for wild Goats to rest:
And eke the rocks stony
for Conies to hide*
19
The Moon then is set
her seasons to run,
The days from the nights
thereby to discern:
And by the ascending
also of the Sun.
The cold from heat ^^way*
thereby we do learn.
20
When darkness does come
by Gods will and power,
Then creep forth do all
the beasts of the wood.
21
The Lions range roaring,
their prey to devour:
But yet it is thou Lord,
which give them food.
22
As soon as the Sun
is up, they retire,
To (...) their dens,
then are they full feign.
23
That man to his work may,
as right does require:
Till night come and call him
to take rest again.
The third part.
24
How sundry, O Lord,
are all thy works found?
With wisdom full great
they are indeed wrought.
25
So that the whole world
of thy praise does sound,
And as for thy riches
they pass all men's thought.
So in the great Sea,
which large is and broad:
Where things that creep swarm*
and beasts of each sort.
26
There both mighty ships sail,
and some lie at road:
The Whales huge and monstrous
there also do sport.
27
All things on thee wait,
thou do them relieve.
And thou in due time*
full well do them feed.
28
Now when it does please thee,
the same so to give:
They gather full gladly
those things which they need.
Thou openest thy hand
and they find such grace:
That they with good things
are filled we see:
29
But sore are they troubled
if thou turn thy face:
For if thou their breath take,
vile dust then they be.
30
Again when thy spirit
from thee does Proceed:
All things to appoint,
and what shall ensue.
31
Then are they created,
as thou have decreed:
And do by thy goodness
the dry earth renew.
32
The praise of the Lord
for ever shall last:
Who may in his works,
by right well rejoice.
His look can the earth make
to tremble full fast:
And likewise the mountains,
to smoke at his voice.
33
To this Lord and God
sing will I always:
So long as I live
my God praise will I:
34
Then am I most certain
my words shall him please:
I will rejoice in him,
to call him will I cry.
35
The sinners, O Lord,
consume in thine ire:
And eke the perverse
them root out with shame.
But as for my soul now,
let it still desire,
And say with the faithful,
praise ye the Lords name.
Psalm 105.
Richard Allison.
CANTVS.
^ Give praises unto God the Lord, and call upon his name: ^ Among the people
eke declare his works to spread his fame. Sing ^ ye unto the Lord I say, and
sing, unto him praise: And talk of all the ^ wondrous works that he has
wrought always.

MEDIVS.
^ Give praises unto God the Lord and call upon his name: ^ Among the people
eke declare his works to spread his fame. Sing ^ ye unto the Lord I say, and
sing unto him praise: And talk of all the ^ wondrous works, that he has
wrought always.

TENOR, or Plainsong.
^ Give prays unto God the Lord, and call upon his name: ^ Among the people
eke declare his works to spread his fame. Sing ^ ye unto the Lord I say, and
sing unto him praise* And talk of all the ^ wondrous works, that he has
wrought always.

BASSVS.
^ Give praises unto God the Lord, and call upon his name: ^ Among the people
eke declare his works to spread his fame* Sing ^ ye unto the Lord I say, and
sing unto him praise: And talk of all the ^ wondrous works, that he has
wrought always.

3
Inhonour of his holy name,
rejoice with one accord:
(...) let the he^^ts also rejoice
of them that seek the Lord:
4
Seek ye the Lord and seek the strength
of his eternal might:
And seek his face continually
and presence of his sight.
5
The wondrous works that he has done
keep still in mindful heart:
N^ let the iud^ements of his mouth
out of your mind depart.
6
Ye that of faithful Abraham.
his servant are the seed:
Ye his elect, the children that
of Jacob do proceed.
7
For he, he only is I say,
the mighty Lord our God:
And his most rightful judgments are
through all the earth abroad.
8
His promise and his covenant,
which he has made to his:
He has remembered evermore,
to thousands of degrees.
The second part.
9
The covenant which he has made
with Abraham long ago:
And faithful oath which he has sworn
to Isaac also.
10
And did confirm the same for law,
that Jacob should obey:
And for eternal covenant
to Israel for aye.
11
When he thus said, lo I to you
all Canaan land will give:
The lot of your inheritance,
wherein your seed shall live.
12
Although their number at that time
did very small appear:
Yea, very small, and in the land
they then but strangers were.
13
While yet they walked from land to land,
without a sure abode:
And while from sundry kingdoms they
did wander all abroad.
14
And wrong at no oppressors hand
he suffered them to take:
But even the great and mighty Kings
reproved for their sake.
15
And thus he said, touch ye not those
that mine anointed be:
Ne do the Prophets any harm
that do pertain to me.
16
He calde a dea^th upon the land,
of bread he stroy'd the store:
But he against their time of need,
had sent a man before.
The third part.
17
Even Joseph which had once been sol^,
to live a slave in woe:
18
Whose feet they hurt in stocks, whose soul
the iron pierced also.
19
Until the time came when his cause
was known apparently:
The mighty word of God the Lord
his faultlesse truth did try.
20
The King sent and delivered him
from prison where he was:
The ruler of the people then
did freely let him pass.
21
And over all his house he made
him Lord to bear the sway:
And of his substance made him have
the rule and all the stay.
22
That he might to his will instruct
the Princes of the land:
And wisdoms love his ancient men
might teach to understand:
23
Then into the Egyptian land
came Israel also.
And Jacob in the land of Ham,
did live a stranger tho.
24
His people he exc^edingly
in number made to flow:
And over all their enemies
in strength he made them grow.
25
Whose heart he turned that they with hate
his people did entreat:
And did his servants wrongfully
abuse, with false deceit.
The fourth part.
26
His faithful servant Moses then,
and Aaron whom he chose:
He did command to go to them,
his message to disclose.
27
The wondrous message of hi^ signs
amongst them they did show:
And wonders in the land of Ham
then did they work also.
28
Darkness he sent, and made it dark,
in stead of brighter day:
29
And unto his commission
they did not disobey.
30
He turned their waters into blood,
he did their fishes slay:
Their land brought frogs, even in the place
where their King Pharaoh lay.
31
He sp^ke, and at his voice there came
great swannes of noisome flies:
And all the quarters of their land
were filled with crawling lice.
32
He gave them cold and stony hail
in stead of milder rain:
And fiery flames within their land,
he sent unto their pain.
33
He smote the vines and all the trees
whereon their figs did grow:
And all the trees within their coasts
down did he overthrow.
34
He snake, then Caterpillars did
and Grasshoppers abound:
35
Which eat the grass in all their land
and fruit of all their ground.
The fifth part.
36
The first begotten in the land
eke daily did he ^inite:
Yea, the beginning and first fruit
of all their strength and might.
37
With gold and silver he them brought
from Egypt land to pass:
And in the number of the Tribes
no feeble one there was.
38
Egypt was glad and joyful then,
when they did thence depart:
For terror and the fear of them
was fallen upon their heart.
39
To shroude them from the parching heat
a cloud he did display:
And fire he sent to give them light,
when night had hid the day.
40
They asked and he caused Quails
to rain at their request:
And fully with the bread of heaven
their hunger he represt.
41
He opened then the stony rocks
and water gushed out*
And in the dry and parched ground^
like rivers ran about.
42
For of his holy covenant
aye mindful was he tho:
Which to his servant Abraham
he plighted long ago.
43
He brought his people forth with mi^th
and his elect with joy:
Out of the cruel land where they
had lived in great annoy.
44
And of the heathen men he gave
to them the fruitful land:
The labors of the people eke
they took into theer hand.
45
That they his holy statutes might
observe for evermore:
And faithfully obey his laws,
praise ye the Lord therefore.
Psalm 106.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ Praise ye the Lord, for he is good, his mercy dures for aye: ^ Who can
express his noble acts, or all his praise display?

MEDIVS.
^ Praise ye the Lord, for he is good, his mercy dures for aye* ^ Who can
express his noble acts, or all his praise display?

TENOR, or Playnsong.
Cambridge Tune.
^ Praise ye the Lord, for he is good, his mercy dures for aye: ^ Who can
express his noble acts, or all his praise display?

BASSVS.
^ Praise ye the Lord, for he is good, his mercy dures for aye: ^ Who can
express his noble acts, or all his praise display?

3
They blessed are that judgment keep,
and justly do always:
With favor of thy people Lord,
remember me I pray,
4
And with thy saving health, O Lord,
vouchsafe to visit me:
That I the great felicity
of thine elect may see.
5
And with thy peoples joy I may
a joyful mind possess:
And may with thine inheritance
a glorying heart express.
6
Both we and eke our fathers all
have sinned every one*
We have committed wickedness,
and lewdly we have done.
7
The wonders great which thou O Lord,
have done in Egypt land:
Our fathers though they saw them all
yet did not understand.
Nor yet thy mercies multieude
did keep in thankful mind:
But at the sea* yea, the red sea,
rehelled most unkind.
8
Nevertheless he saved them
for honor of his name:
That he might make his power known
and spread abroad his fame.
9
The red sea he did then rebuke,
and forthwith it was dride:
And as in wilderness, so through
the deep he did them guide.
10
He saved them from the cruel hand
of their despitefull foe:
And from the enemies hand he did
de^^uer them also.
The second part.
11
The Waters their oppressous whelmd,
not one was left alive:
12
Then they believed his words and praise
in song they did him give.
13
But by and by unthankfully
his words they clean forgot:
And for his counsel and his la^^
they did neglect to wait.
14
But ^usted in the wilderness
with fond and greedy lust:
And in the desert tempted God,
the stay of all their trust.
15
And then their wanton minds defire
he suffered them to have:
But wasting leannes^e therewithal
into their souls he gave.
16
Then when they lodged in their tent,
at Moses they did g^utch:
Aaron the holy of the Lord
so did they envy much.
17
Therefore the earth did open wide,
and Dathan did devour:
And all Abirams company
did cover in that hour.
18
In their assemblies kindled was
the hot consuming fire:
And wasting flame did the^ burn up
the wicked in his ire.
19
Upon the hill of Horeb they
an Idol ca^fe did frame:
And there the molten Image they
did worship of the same.
20
Into the likeness of a calfe
that feeds on the grass:
Thus they their glory turnde, and all
their honor did deface.
21
And God their only Savior
unkindly they forgot:
Which many great and mighty things
in Egypr land had wrought.
The third part.
22
And in the land of Ham for them
most wondrous things had done:
And by the red sea dreadful things
performed long agone.
23
Therefore for their so showing them
forgetful and unkind,
To bring destruction on them all
he purposde in his mind.
Had not his chosen Moses stood
before him in the break,
To turn his wrath lest he on them
with slaughter should him wreake.
24
They did despise the pleasant land
that he behight to give:
Yea, and the words that he had spoke
they did no whit believe.
25
But in their tents with grudging heart,
they wickediy repinde:
Nor to the voice of God the Lord
they gave an hearkening mind,
26
Therefore against them lifted he
his strong revenging hand
Them to destroy in wilderness,
ere they should see the land.
27
And to destroy their seed among
the Nations with his rod:
And through the countries of the world
to scatter them abroad.
28
To Baal Peor then they did
adioyne themselves also:
And ate the offerings of the dead,
so they forsook him tho.
29
Thus with their own inventions
his wrath they did provoke:
And in his so inkindled wrath,
the plague upon them broke,
30
But Phine^s stood up with zeal
the sinners vile to slay:
And judgment he did execute,
and then the plague did stay.
The fourth part.
31
It was imputed unto him
for righteousness that day:
And from thence forth so counted is
from race to race for aye.
32
At wate^s' eke of Meribah
they did him a^gry make:
Yea, so farie forth that Moses was
then punished for their sake.
33
Because they vexed his spirit so sore,
that in impatient heat.
His lips spoke unadvisedly,
his fervor was so great.
34
Nor as the Lord commanded them
they ^lue the people tho.
But were among the heathen mixed,
and learned their works also.
36
And did their Idols serve, which were
their ruin and decay:
37
To fiends their sons and daughters they
did offer up and slay:
38
Yea, with unkindly murdering knife
the guiltless blood they spilt:
Yea, their own sons and daughters blood
without all cause of guilt.
Whom they to Canaan Idols then
offered with wicked hand:
And so with blood of innocents
defiled was their land.
39
Thus were they stained with the work*
of their own filthy way:
And with their own inventions
a whoring they did stray.
40
Therefore against his people was
the Lords wrath kindled sore:
And even his own inheritance
therefore he did abhor*
41
Into the hands of heathen men
he gave them for a pray:
And made their foes their Lords, whom they
w^r^ forced to obey.
The fifth part.
42
Yea, and their hateful enemy
oppressed them in the la^d:
And they were humbly made to stoop
as subject to their hand:
43
Full oftentimes from thrall had he
d^liuered them before:
(...) with their counsels they to wrath
prouokt him evermore.
Therefore they by their wickedness
were brought full low to he:
44
Yet when he saw them in distress,
he hea^kned to their cry.
45
He called to mind his covenant,
which he them had swore:
And by his mercies multitude,
repented him therefore.
46
And favor he them made to find
before the sight of those
That led them captive from their land,
when erst they were their foes.
47
Save us O Lord that art our God,
save us O Lord we pray:
And from among the heathen folk
Lord gather us away.
48
That we may spread the noble praise
of thy most holy name:
That we may glory in rhy praise,
and sounding of rhy fame.
49
The Lord the God of Israel
be blessed for evermore:
Let all the people say, Amen:
praise ye the Lord therefore.
Psalm 107.
Tho. Rave* B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ Give thanks unto the Lord our God, for gracious is he: And ^ that his mercy
has no end all mortal men may see.

MEDIVS.
^ Give thanks unto the Lord our God, for gracious is he: And ^ that his mercy
has no end all mortal men may see.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
Christ's Hospital Tune.
^ Give thanks unto the Lord our God, for gracious is he: And ^ that his mercy
has no end all mortal men may see.

BASSVS.
^ Give thanks unto the Lord our God, for gracious is he: And ^ that his mercy
has no end all mortal men may see.

2
Such as the Lord redeemed has,
with thanks should praise his name:
And show how they from foes were freed
and how he wrought the same.
3
He gathered them forth of land^
that lay so far about:
From East to West, from North to South,
his hand did find them out.
4
They wandered in the wilderness,
and strayed from the way:
And found no C^tie where to dwell,
that serve might for their stay.
5
Whose thirst and hunger was so great
in those deserts so void:
That faintness did them sore assault*
and eke their soul annoid.
6
Then did they cry in their distress
unto the Lord for aid:
Who did remove their troublous state
according as they prayed.
7
And by that way that was most right
he led them like a guide:
That they might to a city go,
and there also abide.
8
Let men therefore before the Lord
confess his kindness then:
And show his wonders that he does
before the sons of men.
9
For he the empty soul sustaind,
whom thirst had made to fa^nt:
The hungry soul with goodness fed,
and did them eke acquaint.
10
Such as do dwell in darkness deep,
where they of death do wa^te:
Fast bound to taste such troublous storms
as iron chains do threat.
The second part.
11
For they against the Lords own words,
they sought for to rebel:
Esteeming light his counsels hie,
which do so far excel.
12
But when he humbled them full low,
then they fell down with grief:
And none was found so much to help,
whereby to get relief.
13
Then did they cry in their distress,
unto the Lord for aid:
Who did remove their troublous state,
according as they praide.
14
For he from darkness out them brought
and from deaths dreadful shade:
Bursting with force the iron bands,
which did before them lade.
15
Let men therefore before the Lord
confess his kindness then:
And show his wonders that he does
before the sons of men.
16
For he threw down the gates of brass
and brake them with strong hand:
The iron bars he smote in two,
nothing could him withstand.
17
The foolish folk great plagues do feel,
and cannot from them wend:
But heap up more to those they have,
because they do offend.
18
Their souls so much did loath all meat
that none they could abide
Whereby death had them almost caught,
as they full truly tried,
19
Then d^d they cry in their distress
unto the Lord for aid:
Who did remove their troublous state,
according as they praide.
20
For he then sent to them his word,
which health did soon restore:
And brought them from those dangers deep
wherein they were before.
The third part.
21
Let men therefore before the Lord,
confess his kindness then:
And show the wonders that he does
before the sons of men.
22
And let them offer sacrifice
with thanks and also fear:
And speak of all his wondrous works,
with glad and joyful cheer.
23
Such as in ships or brittle Barks,
into the Seas descend:
Their merchandise through fearful flood;
to compass and to end.
24
These men are forced to behold
the Lords works what they be:
And in the dangerous deep the same
most marvelous they see.
25
For at his word the stormy wind
arises in a rage:
And stirs up the singes so
as naught can them assuage.
26
Then are they lifted up so hie,
the clouds they seem to gain:
And plunging down the depth until
their souls consume with pain.
27
And like a drunkard to and fro,
now here, now there they reele:
As men with fear, of wit bereft,
or had of sense no feel.
21
Then did they cry in their distress
unto the Lord for aid:
Who did remove their troublous state
according as they prayed.
29
For with his wrath the Lord does make
the sturdie storms to cease:
So that the great waves from their ^age
are brought to rest and peace.
30
Then are men glad when rest is come,
which they so much do crave:
And are by him in haven brought*
which they so feign would have.
The fourth part.
31
Let men therefore before the Lord
confess his kindness then:
And show the wonders that he does
before the sons of men.
32
Let them in presence of the folk
with praise extol his name:
And where the Elders do convent,
let them there do the same.
33
For running floods to dry desert,
he does often change and turn:
And dries up as it were dust
the springing well and bourne.
34
A fruitful land with ple^sure decked
full barraine he does make:
When on their sins which dwell therein
he does just vengeance take.
35
Again the wilderness full rude,
he makes fruit to bear:
With pleasant springs of waters clear
though none before were.
36
Wherein such hungry souls are set,
as he does freely choose:
That they a City may them build,
to dwell in for their use.
37
That they may sow their pleasant land,
and Vineyards also plant:
To yield them fruit of such increase,
as none may seem to want.
38
They multiply exceedingly,
the Lord does bless them so:
Who does also their brute beasts make,
by numbers great to grow.
39
But when the faithful are low brought
by the oppressors stout:
And minish do through many plagues,
that compass them about.
40
Then does he Princes bring to shame
which did them sore oppress:
And likewise caused them to er^e,
within the wilderness.
41
But yet the poor he raises up,
out of his troubles deep:
And often times does his train augment,
much like a flock of sheep.
42
The righteous shall behold this sight,
and also much rejoice*
Whereas the wicked and perverse,
with grief shall stop their voice.
53
But who is wise that now full well
he may these things record?
For certainly such shall perceive
the kindness of the Lord.
Psalm 108.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ O God my heart prepared is, and eke my tongue is so:
^ I will advance my voice in song, and giving praise al- so.
MEDIVS.
^ O God my heart prepared is, and eke my tongue is so,
^ I will advance my voice in song, and giving praise also.
TENOR or Playnsong.
Windsor, or Eaton Tune.
^ O God my heart prepared is, and eke my tongue is so:
^ I will advance my voice in song, and giving praise al-so.
BASSVS.
^ O God my heart prepared is and eke my tongue is so
^ I will advance my voice in song, and giving praise also.
2
Awake my Violl and my Harp,
sweet melody to make:
And in the morning I my self
right early will awake.
3
By me among the people Lord,
still praised shall thou be:
And I among the heathen folk
will sing O Lord to thee.
4
Because thy mercy Lord is great
above the heavens hie:
And eke thy truth does ^each the clouds
within the lofty sky.
5
Above the starry heavens hiet
exalt thy self O God:
And Lord display upon the earth
thy glory all abroad.
6
That thy dearly beloved may
be set at liberty:
Help O my God with thy right hand,
and hearken unto me.
7
God in his holiness has spoke,
wherefore my joys abound:
S^chem I will divide, and mete
the vale of Succoth ground.
8
And Gilead shall be mine own,
Manasses mine shall be:
My head strength Ephraim, and law
shall Judah give for me.
9
Moab my wash-pot, and my shoe
on Edom will I throw:
Upon the land of Palestine,
in triumph will I go.
10
Who shall into the City strong
be guide to conduct me:
Or how by whom to Egypt land,
conveyed shall I be?
11
Is it not thou O God which late
have us forgotten quite?
And thou O Lord which with our host
did not go forth to fight?
12
Give us O Lord thy saving aid,
when troubles do assail:
For all the help of men is vain,
and can no whit avail.
13
Through God we shall do valiant acts*
and worthy of renown:
He shall subdue our enemies,
yea, he shall tread them down.
Psalm 109.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ IN speechless silence do not hold, O God, thy tongue always:
^ O God, even thou (I say, that art the God of all my praise*
MEDIVS.
^ IN speechless silence do not hold, O God, thy tongue always:
^ O God, even thou (I say) that art the God of all my praise.
TENOR or Playnsong.
Oxford Tune.
^ IN speechless silence do not hold, O God* thy tongue always
^ O God, even thou (I say) that art the God of all my praise.
BASSVS.
^ IN speechless silence do not hold, O God, thy tongue always:
^ O God, even thou (I say) that art the God of all my praise.
2
The wicked tongue and guilefull mouth,
on me disclosed be:
And they with false and lying tongue
have spoken unto me.
3
They did beset me round about
with words of hateful spite:
Without all cause of my desert
against me they did fight.
4
For my good will they were my foe^,
but then began I to pray:
My good with ill, my f^iendlinesse
with hate they did repay.
5
Set thou the wicked over him,
to have the upper hand:
At his right hand eke suffer thou
his hateful ^oe to stand.
6
When he is judged, let hi^ then
condemned be therein*
7
And let the prayer that he make,
be turned into sin.
8
Few be his days his charge also
let thou another take:
9
His children let be f^therlesse,
his wife a widow make.
10
Let his offspring be vagabond^,
to beg and seek their bread:
Wandering out of the wasted place
where erst they have been fed.
21
Let covetous extortioners
catch all his goods and store:
And let the strangers spoil the (...)
of (...) his toil before.
12
Let there be none to pity him*
let there be none at all
That on his children fathe^less^
will let their mercy fall.
The second part.
13
And so let his posterity
for ever be destroyed:
Their name ou^ blotted in the age
that after shall succ^ed.
14
Let not his fathers wickedness
from Gods remembrance fall
And let thou not his ^others sin
be done away at all.
15
But in the p^esence of the Lord
let them remain for aye
That from the earth their memory
he may cut clean away.
16
Since mercy he forgot to show,
but did pursue with spite:
The troubled man, and thought to stay
the woeful hearted wight.
17
As he did cursing love, it shall
betide unto him so:
And as he did not blessing love,
it shall be farie him f^o.
18
As he with cursing clad himself,
so it like water shall
Into his bowels, and like o^le
into his bones befall.
19
As garments let it be to him,
to cover him for aye.
And as a girdle wherewith he
shall girded be always.
20
Lo, let this some be from the Lord
the gu^^don of my foe:
Yea, and of those that evil speak^
against my soul also.
21
But thou O Lord that art my God,
deal thou I say with me*
After thy name deliver me,
for good thy mercies be.
22
Because in depth of great distress,
I needy am and poor:
And eke within my pained breast
my heart is wounded sore.
The third part.
23
Even so do I depart away,
as does declining shade:
And as the Grasshopper, so I
am shaken off and fade*
24
With fasting long from needful food
enfeebled are my knees:
And all her fatness has my (...)
enforced been to leese.
25
And I also a vi^e reproach,
to them was made to be:
And they that did upon me look,
did shake their heads at me.
26
But thou O Lord that a^t my God
mine aid and succor be:
According to thy mercy Lord
save and deliver me.
27
And they shall know there by that this.
Lord is thy mighty hand:
And that thou, thou have done (...) Lord,
so shall they understand.
28
Although they curse with spite, yet thou.
shall bless with loving voice:
They shall arise and come to shame,
thy servant shall rejoice.
29
Let them be clothed all with shame*
that enemies are to me:
And with confusion as a cloak
eke covered let them be.
30
But greatly I will with my mouth
giu^ thanks unto the Lord:
And I among the multitude
his praises will record.
31
For he with help at his right hand.
will stand the poor man by:
To save him from the man that would
^ondemne his soul to die
Psalm. 110
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ THE Lord did say unto my Lord; sit thou on my right hand:
^ Till I have made thy foes a stool, whereon thy feet may stand.
CANTVS.
^ THE Lord did say unto my Lord, sit thou on my right hand:
^ Till I have made thy foes a stool, whereon thy feet shall stand.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Chichester Tune.
^ THE Lord did say unto my Lord, sit thou on my right hand:
^ Till I have made thy foes a stool, whereon thy feet may stand.
BASSVS.
^ THE Lord did say unto my Lord, sit thou on my right hand:
^ Till I have made thy foes a stool, whereon thy feet shall stand.
2
The Lord shall out of Sion send
the scepter of thy might:
Amid thy mortal foes be thou,
the ruler in their sight.
3
And in the day on which thy reign
and power they shall see:
Then hereby free will offerings shall
the pople offer thee.
Yea, with an holy worshipping
then shall they offer all:
Thy birth dew is the dew that does
from womb of morning fall.
4
The Lord has sworn and never will
repent what he does say:
By the order of Melchisedech,
thou art a Priest for aye.
5
The Lord thy God on thy right hand
that standth for thy stay:
Shall wound for thee the stately Kings,
upon his wrathful day.
6
The heathen he shall judge and fill
the place with bodies dead:
And over diverse countries shall
in sunder smite the head.
7
And he shall drink out of the brook,
that runs in the way:
Therefore he shall lift up on hie
his royal head that day.
Psalm 111.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ WIth heart I do accord to praise and laud the Lord, in pre- ^ sense of the
just: For great his works are found, to search them such ^ are bound, as do
him love and trust* His works are glorious, also his ^ righteousness it does
endure for e- uer. His wondrous works he would ^ we still remember should, his
mercy fails ne- uer.

MEDIVS.
^ WIth heart I do accord to praise and laud the Lord, in pre- ^ sense of the
just: For great his works are found, to search them such ^ are bound, as do
him love and trust. His works are glorious also his ^ righteousness it does
endure for ever. His wondrous works he^ would ^ we still remember should, his
mercy fails ne- uer.

TENOR, or Faburden.
3. French Tune.
^ WIth heart I do accord to praise and laud the Lord* in pre- ^ sense of the
just: For great his works are found, to search them such ^ are bound, as do
him love and trust, His works are glorious, also his ^ righteousness it does
endure for ever. His wondrous works he would ^ we still remember should, his
mercy fails never.

BASSVS.
^ WIth heart I do accord, to praise and laud the Lord, in pre- ^ sense of the
just: For great his works are found, to search them such ^ are bound, as do
him love and trust, His works are glorious, also his righteousness it does
endure for ever. His wondrous works he would ^ we still remember should, his
mer- cy fails never.

5
Such as to him love bear
A portion full fair
He has up for them laid*
For this they shall well find
He will them have in mind*
And keep them as he said.
6
For he did not disdain
His works to show them plain
By lightnings and by thunders:
When he the heathens land
Did give into their hand
Where they beheld his wonders.
7
Of all his works ensu^th
Both judgment* right and truth*
whereto his statutes tend.
8
They are decreed sure,
For ever to endure,
Which equity does end:
Redemption he gave
His people for to save.
9
And has also required
His promise not to fail,
But always to preu^le:
His holy name be feared.
10
Who so with, heart full feign
True wisdom would attain,
The Lord fear and obey:
Such as his laws do keep
Shall knowledge have full deep:
His praise shall last for aye.
Psalm 112.
G. Kirby
CANTVS.
^ THe man is blessed that God does fear, And that his law; does ^ love indeed:
His seed on earth God will vpreare, And bless such as from him ^ proceed: His
house with good he will fulfill: His righteousness endure shall still.

Psalm 103.
MEDIVS.
^ THe man is blessed that God does fear, And that his laws does ^ love indeed:
His seed on earth God will vpreare, And bless such as from him ^ proceed: His
house with good he will fulfill: His righteousness endure shall still.

TENOR, or Farburden.
1. High Dutch Tune.
^ THe man is blessed that God does fear, And that his laws does ^ love indeed:
His seed on earth God will vpreare, And bless such as from him ^ proceed: His
house with good he will fulfill: His righteousness endure shall still.

BASSVS.
^ THe man is blessed that God does fear. And that his laws does ^ love indeed:
His seed on earth God will vpreare, And bless such as from him ^ proceed: His
house with good he will fulfill: His righteousness endure shall still.

4
Unto the righteous does arise
In trouble joy, in darkness light:
Compassion is in his eyes:
And mercy always in his sight.
5
Yea, pity moves such to ^end.
He does by judgment things expend,
6
And surely such shall never fail,
For in remembrance had is he,
7
No tidings ill can make him quail.
Who in the Lord sure hope does see.
8
His heart is firm, his fear is past,
For he shall see his foes down cast.
9
He did well for the poor provide,
His righteousness shall still remain:
And his estate with praise abide,
Though that the wicked man disdain.
10
Yea, gnash his teeth thereat shall he
And so consume his state to see.
Psalm 113.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
MEDIVS.
^ YE children which do serve the Lord, praise ye his name with one ac- ^ cord:
Yea, blessed be always his name, who from the rising of the Sun, ^ till it
return where it begun, is to be praised with great fame, The Lord ^ all people
does surmount, as for his glory we may count, above the hea- ^ uens hie to be,
with God the Lord who may compare, whose dwellings ^ in the heavens are? of
such great power and force is he.

CANTVS.
^ YE children which do serve the Lord, praise ye his name with one ac- ^ cord:
Yea, blessed, be always his name, who from the rising of the Sun, ^ till it
return where it begun, is to be praised with great fame. The Lord ^ all people
does surmount, as for his glory we may count, above the hea- ^ uens hie to be,
with God the Lord, who may compare, whose dwellings ^ in the heavens are? of
such great power and force is he.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ YE children which do serve the Lord, praise ye his name with one ac- ^
cord: Yea, blessed be always his name, who from the rising of the Sun ^ till
it return where it begun, is to be praised with great fame. The Lord ^ all
people does surmount, as for his glory we may count, above the hea- ^ uens hie
to be, with God the Lord who may compare, whose dwellings in ^ the heavens are?
of such great power and force is he?

BASSVS.
^ YE children which do serve the Lord, praise ye his name with one ac- ^ cord,
Yea, blessed be always his name, who from the rising of the Sun, ^ till it
return where it begun, is to be praised with great fame. The Lord ^ all people
does surmount, as for his glory we may count, a-boue the ^ heavens hie to be,
with God the Lord who may compare, whose dwellings ^ in the heavens are? of
such great power and force is he.

6
He does abase himself we know,
Things to behold both here below,
And also in heaven above,
7
The needy out of dust to draw,
And eke the poor which help none sa^
His only marcie did him ^ous
8
And so him s^t in high degree,
With Princes of great dignity,
That rule his people with great fame.
9
The barren he does make to bear,
And with great joy her fruit to rear,
Therefore praise ye his holy Name.
Psalm 114.
Edward Blancks.
CANTVS.
^ WHen Israel by Gods address, from Pharaohs land was bent:
^ And Jacobs house the strangers left, and in the same train went.
MEDIVS.
^ WHen Israel by Gods address, from Pharaohs land was bent:
^ And Jacobs house the strangers left, and in the same train went.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Low Dutch Tune.
^ WHen Israel by Gods address, from Pharaohs land was bent:
^ And Jacobs house the strangers left, and in the same train went.
BASSVS.
^ WHen Israel by Gods address, from Pharaohs land was bent:
^ And Jacobs house the strangers left, and in the same train went.
2
In Iud^ God his glory showed,
his holiness most bright:
So did the Israetites declare
his kingdom, power, and might.
3
The sea i^ saw, and suddenly
as all amazed did ^^ie
The roa^ing st^eames of Iordans ffoud
reculed backwardly.
4
As Rams afraid the mountains skipt,
their strength did them forsake:
And as the silly trembling Lambs
their tops did beat and shake.
5
What aild thee sea as all amazed,
so sudunly to fly:
Ye rolling waves of Iordans flood,
why ran ye backwardly?
6
Why shook ye hills as Rams afraid?
why did your strength so shake?
Why did your tops as trembling Lambs
for fear quiver and quake (...)
7
O earth confess thy sovereign Lord,
and dread his mighty hand:
Before the face of Jacobs God
fear ye both sea and land
8
I mean the God which from hard rocks
does cause maine floods appear:
And from the stony flint did make
gush out the fountains clear.
Psalm 115.
Simon Stubbs.
CANTVS.
^ NOt vn-to us Lord, not to us, but to thy name give praise:
^ Both for thy mercy and thy truth, that are in thee always.
MEDIVS.
^ NOt unto us Lord, not to us, but to thy name give praise:
^ Both for thy mercy and thy truth, that are in thee always.
TENOR or Playnsong.
York Tune.
^ NOt unto us Lord, not to us, but to thy name give praise,
^ Both for thy mercy and thy truth, that are in thee always.
BASSVS.
^ NOt unto us Lord, not to us, but to thy name give praise,
^ Both for thy mercy and thy truth, that are in thee always.
2
Why shall the heathen scorners say,
where is their God become?
3
Our God in heaven is, and what
he will, that has he done.
4
Their Idols silver are and gold,
works of men's hands they be:
5
They have a mouth, and do not speak,
and eyes and do not see
6
An^ they have ears ^oyn'd to their heads,
and do not hear at all:
And noses eke they formed have,
and do not smell withal.
7
And hands they have and handle not*
and feet and do not go:
A throat they have, yet through the same,
they make no sound to blow.
8
Those that make them, are like to th^n
and those whose trust they be:
9
O Israel trust in the Lord,
their help and shield is he.
10
O Aarons house trust in the Lord
their help and shield is he:
11
Trust ye the Lord that fear the Lord
their help and shield is he:
12
The Lord has mindful been of us,
and will us bless also:
Oh Isreal's and on Aarons house
his blessing he will show.
13
Them that be fearers of the Lord,
the Lord will save them all:
Even he will bless them every one,
the great and eke the small.
14
To you (I say) the hung Lord,
will multiply his grace:
To you, and to the children that
shall follow of your race,
15
Ye are the blessed of the Lord,
even of the Lord I say,
Which both the heaven and the earth
has made and set in stay.
16
The heavens, yea, the heavens hie,
belong unto the Lord:
The earth unto the sons of men
he gave of free accord.
17
They that be dead, do not with praise
set forth the Lords renown,
Nor any that into the place
of silence do go down.
18
But we will praise the Lord our God
from henceforth and for aye:
Sound ye the praises of the Lord,
praise ye the Lord I say.
Psalm 116.
Tho. Raven. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ I Love the Lord, because my voice and prayer heard has he.
^ When in my days I called on him, he bow'd' his ear to me.
MEDIVS.
^ I Love the Lord, because my voice and prayer heard has he
^ When in my days I called on him, he bowed his ear to me.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Winchester Tune.
^ I Love the Lord because my voice and prayer heard has he:
^ When in my days I called on him, he bowed his ear to me.
BASSVS.
^ I Love the Lord because my voice and prayer heard has he:
^ When in my days I called on him, he bowed his ear to me.
3
Even when the snares of cruel death
about beset me round:
When pains of hell me caught, and when
I woe and sorrow found.
4
Upon the name of God the Lord,
then did I call and say:
Deliver thou my soul O Lord,
I do thee humbly pray.
5
The Lord is very merciful,
and just he is also:
And in our God compassion,
does plentifully flow.
6
The Lord in safety does preserve,
all those that simple be:
I was in woeful misery,
and he relieved me.
7
And now my soul since thou art saf^,
return unto thy rest:
For largely lo the Lord to thee,
his bounty has expressed.
8
Because thou have delivered,
my soul from deadly thrall:
My moistened eyne from mournful tears
my sliding feet from fall.
9
Before the Lord I in the land
of life will walk therefore:
10
I did believe therefore I spoke,
for I was troubled sore.
The second part.
11
I said in my distress and fear,
that all men liars be:
12
What shall I pay the Lord for all
his benefits to me?
13
The wholesome cup of saving health
I thankefully will take:
And on the Lords name I will call,
when I my prayer make.
14
I to the Lord will pay the vows,
that I have him behight:
Yea, even at this present time,
in all the peoples sight.
15
Right dear and precious in his sight,
the Lord does aye esteem
The death of all his holy ones,
what ever men do deem.
16
Thy servant Lord thy servant lo,
I do my self confess:
Son of thy handmaid, thou have broke
the bonds of my d^stresse.
17
And I will offer up to thee
a sacrifice of praise:
And I will call upon the name
of God the Lord always.
18
I to the Lord will pay the vows,
that I have him behight:
Yea, even at this present time,
in all the peoples sight.
19
Yea, in the courts of Gods own house,
and in the midst of thee,
O thou Jerusalem I say,
wherefore the Lord praise ye.
Psalm 117.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ O All ye nations of the world, praise ye the Lord always: And ^ all ye
people every where set forth his noble praise.

MEDIVS.
^ O All ye nations of the world, praise ye the Lord always: And ^ all ye
people every where, set forth his noble praise.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
Cambridge Tune.
^ O All ye nations of the world, praise ye the Lord always: And ^ all ye
people every where set forth his noble praise.

BASSVS.
^ O All ye nations of the world, praise ye the Lord always: And ^ all ye
people every where set forth his noble praise.

2
For great his kindness is to us, his truth endures for aye:
Psalm 118.
Simon Stubbs.
CANTVS.
^ O Give ye thanks unto the Lord, for gracious is he: Because ^ his mercy
does endure for ever toward thee.

MEDIVS.
^ O Give ye thanks unto the Lord, for gracious is he: Because ^ his mercy does
en- dure for ever toward thee.

TENOR or Playnsong.
Martyrs Tune.
^ O Give ye thanks unto the Lord, for gracious is he: Because ^ his mercy
does endure for ever toward thee.

BASSVS.
^ O Give ye thanks unto the Lord, for gracious is he: Because ^ his mercy
does endure for ever toward thee.

2
Let Israel confess and say,
his mercy dures for aye
3
Now let the house of Aaron say
his mercy dures for aye.
4
Let all that fear the Lord our God,
even now confess and say,
The mercy of the Lord our God
endures still for aye.
5
In trouble and in heaviness
unto the Lord I cried:
Which lovingly heard me at large,
my suit was not divide.
6
The Lord himself is on my side,
I will not stand in doubt,
Nor fear what man can do to me,
when God stands me about.
7
The Lord does take my part with them
that help to succor me:
Therefore I shall see my desire,
upon mine enemy.
8
Better it is to trust in God,
then in man's mortal seed:
9
Or to put confidence in Kings,
or Princes in their need:
10
All nations have enclosed me
and compassed me round:
But in the name of God will I
mine enemies confound.
11
They kept me in on every side,
they kept me in I say:
But through the Lords most mighty name
I shall work their decay.
12
They came about me all like Bees,
but yet in the Lords name
I quenched their thorns that were on fire
and will destroy the same.
The second part.
^3
Thou have with force thrust sore at me,
that I indeed might fall:
But through the Lord I found such help,
that they were vanquished all:
14
The Lord is my defense and strength,
my joy, my m^^th and song:
He is become for me indeed,
a Savior most strong.
15
The right hand of the Lord our God
does bright to pass great things:
He causes voice of joy and health
in righteous men's dwellings.
16
The right hand of the Lord does bring
most mighty things to pass:
His hand has the pre-eminence,
his force is as it was.
17
I will not dye but ever live
to utter and declare
The Lord his might and wondrous power
his works and what they are.
18
The Lord himself has chastened,
and has corrected me:
But has not given me over yet
to death as ye may see.
19
Set open unto me the gates
of truth and righteousness:
That I may enter into them
the Lords praise to confess.
20
This is the gate even of the Lord,
which shall not so be shut:
But good and righteous men always
shall enter into it.
The third part.
21
I will give thanks to thee O Lord,
because thou have heard me:
And art become most lovingly
a Savior unto me.
22
The stone which ere this time among
the builders was refused.
Is now become the corner stone
and chiefly to be used.
23
This was the mighty work of God,
this was the Lords own fact:
And it is merueilous to behold
with eyes that noble act.
24
This is the joyful day indeed,
which God himself has wrought,
Let us be glad and joy therein,
in heart, in mind and thought.
25
Now help us Lord, and prosper us
we wish with one accord:
26
Blessed be he that comes to us,
in the name of the Lord.
27
God is the Lord that shew'th us light
^inde ye therefore with cord
Your sacrifice to the altar,
and give thanks to the Lord.
28
Thou art my God I will confess,
and render thanks to thee:
Thou art my God and I will praise
thy mercies toward me.
29
O give ye thanks unto the Lord
for gracious is he:
Because his mercy does endure,
for ever toward me.
Psalm 119.
G. Farnaby. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ BLessed are they that perfect are, and pure in mind and heart: ^ Whose
lives and conuersa- tion from Gods laws never start. Blessed are ^ they that
give themselves his statutes to observe: Seeking the Lord with ^ all their
heart, and never from him swerue.

MEDIVS.
^ BLessed are they that perfect are, and pure in mind and heart: ^ Whose
lives and conuer- sa- ti- on from Gods laws never start. Blessed are ^ they
that give themselves his sta- tutes to observe: Seeking the Lord with ^ all
their heart, and never from him swerue.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ BLessed are they that perfect are, and pure in mind and heart, ^ Whose
lives and conversation from Gods laws never start. Blessed are ^ they that
give themselves his statutes to observe: Seeking the Lord with ^ all their
heart, and never from him swerue.

BASSVS.
^ BLessed are they that perfect are, and pure in mind and heart: ^ Whose
lives and conversation from Gods laws never start. Blessed are ^ they that
give themselves his statutes to observe: Seeking the Lord with ^ all their
heart, and never from his swerue.

3
Doubtless such men go not astray,
nor do no wicked thing:
Which steadfastly walk in his paths,
without any wandering.
4
It is thy will and commandment,
that with attentive heed:
Thy noble and divine precepts,
we learn and keep indeed.
5
Oh would no God it might thee please
my ways so to address:
That I might both in heart and voice,
thy laws keep and confess.
6
So should no shame my life attaint,
whilst I thus set nine eyes:
And bend my mind always to muse
on thy sacred decrees.
7
Then will I praise with upright heart
and magnify thy name:
When I shall learn thy judgments just,
and likewise prove the same.
8
And wholly will I give my self,
to keep thy laws most right:
Forsake me not for ever Lord,
but show thy graee and might.
BETH. The second Part.
9
By what means may a young man best
his life learn to amend?
If that he mark and keep thy word,
and therein his time spend.
10
Unfeignedly I have thee sought,
and thus seeking abide:
O never suffer me O Lord,
from thy precepts to slide.
11
Within my heart and secret thoughts,
thy word I have hid still:
That I might uot at any time,
offend thy godly will.
12
We magnify thy name O Lord,
and praise thee evermore:
Thy statutes of most worthy fame
O Lord teach me therefore.
13
My lips have never ceast to preach,
and publish day and night:
Thy judgments all which did proceed
from thy mouth full of might.
14
Thy testimonies and thy ways,
please me no less indeed.
Then all the treasures of the earth,
which worldlings make their meede.
15
Of thy precepts I will still muse,
and thereto frame my talk:
As at a mark so will I aim,
thy wa^es how I may walk
16
My only joy shall be so fixed,
and on thy laws so set:
That nothing can me so far blind,
that I thy word forget.
GIMEL. The III. Part.
17
Grant to thy servant now such grace
as may my life prolong:
Thy holy word then will I keep
both in my heart and tongue.
18
Mine eyes which were d^m and shut up
so open and make bright:
That of thy law and marvelous works
I may have the clear fight.
19
I am a stranger in this earth,
wandering now here now there:
Thy word therefore to me disclose,
my footsteps for to clear.
20
My soul is ravished with desire,
and never is at rest:
But seeks to know thy judgments hie,
and what may please thee best.
21
The proud men and malicious,
thou have destroyde each one:
And cursed are such as do not
thy hests attend upon.
22
Lord turn from me rebuke and shame,
which wicked men conspire:
For I have kept thy covenants,
with zeal as hot as fire.
23
The princes great in counsel sat,
and did against me speak:
But then thy servant thought how he
thy statutes might not break.
24
For why? thy covenants are my joy,
and my great hearts solace:
They serve instead of counselors,
my matters for to pass.
DALETH. The IIII. Part.
25
I am alas as brought to grave,
and almost turned to dust:
Restore therefore my life again,
as thy promise is just.
26
My ways when I acknowledged,
with mercy thou did hear:
Hear now eftsoone and me instruct
thy laws to love and fear.
27
Teach me once thoroughly for to know
thy precepts and thy lore.
Thy works then will I meditate,
and lay them up in store.
28
My soul I feel so sore oppressed,
that it melts for grief:
According to thy word therefore
have Lord to send relief.
29
From lying and dece^tfull lips,
set thy grace me defend:
And that I may learn thee to love
thy holy law me send.
30
The way of truth both strait and sure
I have chosen and found:
I set thy judgments me before
which keep me safe and sound.
31
Since then (O Lord) I forced my self
thy covenants to embrace:
Let me therefore have no rebuke,
nor check in any case.
32
Then will I run with joyful cheer
where thy word does me call:
When thou have set my heart at large,
and rid me out of thrall.
HE. The V. Part.
33
Instruct me Lord in the right trade
of thy statutes divine:
And it to keep even to the end
my heart I will incline.
34
Grant me the knowledge of thy law
and I shall it obey:
With heart and mind and all my might,
I will it keep I say.
35
In the right path of thy precepts,
guide me Lord I require:
None other pleasure do I wish,
nor greater thing desire.
36
Incline mine heart thy laws to keep
and covenants to embrace:
And from all filthy avarice,
Lord shield me with thy grace,
37
From vain desires and worldly lusts
turn back mine eyes and sight:
Give me the spirit of life and power
to walk thy ways aright.
38
Confirm thy gracious promise Lord
which thou have made to me:
Which am thy servant and do love
and fear nothing but thee.
39
Reproach and shame which I do fear
from me O Lord expel:
For thou do judge with equity,
and therein do excel.
40
Behold my hearts desire is bent
thy laws to keep for aye:
Lord strengthen me so with thy grace,
that it perform I may.
VAV. The VI. Part.
41
Thy mercies great and manifold
let me obtain O Lord:
Thy saving health let me enjoy,
according to thy word.
42
So shall I stop the slandrous mouths
of lewd men and unjust:
For in thy faithful promises
stands my comfort and trust.
43
The word of truth within my mouth
let ever still be pressed:
For in thy judgments wonderful
my hope does stand and rest.
44
And whilst that breath within my breast
does natural life preserve:
Yea* till this world shall be dissolved,
thy law will I observe.
45
So walk will I as set at large,
and made free from all dread:
Because I sought how for to keep
thy precepts and thy reed.
46
Thy noble acts I will describe,
as things of most great fame:
Even before Kings I will them blaze,
and shrink no whit for shame.
47
I will rejoice then to obey
thy worthy hests and will:
Which evermore I have loved best,
and so will love them still.
48
My hand will lift I to thy laws,
which I have dearly sought:
And practice thy commandments,
in will, in deed, and thought.
ZAIN. The VII. Part.
49
Thy promise which thou madst to me
thy servant Lord remember:
For therein have I put my trust,
and confidence for ever.
50
It is my comfort and my joy,
when troubles me assail:
For were my life not by thy word,
my life would soon me fail.
51
The proud and such as God contemn,
still made of me a scorn.
Yet would I not thy law forsake,
as he that were forlorn.
52
But call to mind Lord thy great works
showed to our fathers old:
Whereby I felt my joy surmount,
my grief an hundredth fold.
53
But yet alas for fear I quake.
seeing how wicked men
Thy law forsook and did procure
thy judgments who knows when?
54
And as for me I framed my songs,
thy statutes to exalt:
When I among the strangers dwelt,
and thoughts began me assault.
55
I thought upon thy name O Lord,
by night when others sleep:
As for thy law I also kept,
and ever will it keep.
56
This grace I did obtain because
thy covenants sweet and dear
I did embrace, and also keep
with reverence and with fear.
HETH. The VIII. Part.
57
O God, which art my part and lot,
my comfort and my stay:
I have decreed and promised,
thy law to keep always.
58
Mine earnest heart did humbly sue
in presence of thy face:
As thou therefore have promised,
Lord grant me of thy grace.
59
My life I have examined,
and tried my secret heart:
Which to thy statutes caused me
my feet straight to convert.
60
I did not stay nor linger long,
as they that sloathfull are:
But hastily thy laws to keep,
I did my self prepare.
61
The cruel bands of wicked men,
have made of me their pray:
Yet would I not thy law forget,
nor from thee go astray.
92
Thy righteous judgments toward me
so great is and so hie:
That even at midnight I will rise,
thy name to magnify.
63
Companion am I to all them;
which fear thee in their heart:
And neither will for love nor dread,
from thy commandments start.
94
Thy mercies Lord most plentiful
do all the world fulfill:
Oh teach me how I may obey
thy statutes and thy will.
TETH. The IX. Part.
65
According to thy promise Lord,
so have thou with me dealt:
For of thy grace in sundry sorts,
have I thy servant felt.
66
Teach me to judge always aright,
and give me knowledge sure:
For certainly believe I do,
that thy precepts are pure.
67
Ere thou did touch me with thy rod,
I erred and went astray:
But now I keep thy holy word,
and make it all my stay.
68
Thou art both good and gracious,
and give most liberally:
Thine ordinances how to keep,
therefore O Lord teach me.
69
The proud and wicked men have forged
against me many a lie,
Yet thy commandments still observe,
with all my heart will I.
70
Their hearts are swollen with worldly wealth
as grease so are they fat:
But in thy law do I delight,
and nothing seek but that.
71
O happy time may I well say,
when thou did me correct:
For as a guide to learue thy laws,
thy rod did me direct:
72
So that to me thy word and law,
is dearer manifold:
Then thousands great of silver and gold
or ought that can be told.
10D. The X. Part.
73
Seeing thy hands hane made me Lord,
to be thy creature:
Grant knowledge likewise how to learn
to put thy laws in ure.
74
So they that fear thee shall rejoice,
when ever they me see:
Because I have learned by thy word,
to put my trust in thee.
75
When with thy rod the world is plagued,
I know the cause is ink:
So when thou do orrect me Lord,
the cause just needs be must.
76
Now of thy goodness I thee pray,
some comfort to me send:
As thou to me thy servant have,
so from all ill me shend.
77
Thy tender mercies pour on me,
and I shall surely live:
For joy and consolation both,
thy sawes to me do give.
78
Confound the proud whose false pretense,
is me for to destroy.
But as for me thy hests to know,
I will my self employ.
79
Who so with reverence do thee fear
to me let them retire:
And such as do thy conenants know,
and them alone desire.
80
My heart without all wavering,
let on thy laws be bent:
That no confusion come to me,
whereby I should be shent.
CAPH. The XI. Part.
81
My soul does faint and cease not
thy saving health to ^aue:
And for thy words sake still I trust,
my hearts desire to have.
82
Mine eyes do fail with looking for
thy word, and thus I say:
O when will thou me comfort Lord?
why do thou thus delay?
83
As a skin bottle in the smoke,
so am I pa^cht and dride:
Yet will I not out of my heart
let thy commandments slide.
85
Alas how long shall I yet live,
before I see the hour:
That on my foes which me torment,
thy vengeance thou will pour?
85
Presumptuous men have dug pits
thinking to make me sure:
Thus contrary against thy law,
my hurt they do procure.
86
But thy commandments are all true,
and causeless they me grieve:
To thee therefore I do complain,
that thou might me relieve.
87
Almost they had me clean destroyed,
and brought me quite to ground*
Yet by thy statutes I abode,
and therein succor found.
88
Restore me Lord again to life,
for thy mercies excel:
And so shall I thy covenants keep,
till death my life expel.
LAMED. The XII. Part.
89
In heaven Lord where thou do dwell
thy word is stablisht sure,
And shall for all eternity,
fast graven there endure.
90
From age to age thy truth abides,
as does the earth witness:
Whose ground work thou have laid so sure,
as no tongue can express.
91
Even to this day we may well see,
how all things persevere:
According to thy ordinance,
for all things thee reuere.
92
Had it not been that in thy law,
my soul had comfort sought:
Long time ere now in my distress,
I had been brought to naught.
93
Therefore I will thy precepts aye,
in memory keep fast:
By them thou have my life restord,
when I was at last cast.
94
No wight to me can title make,
for I am only thine:
Save me therefore for to thy laws
mine ears and heart incline.
95
The wicked men do seek my bane,
and therefore lie in wait:
But I the while considered
thy noble acts and great.
96
I see nothing in this wide world,
at length which has not end:
But thy commandments and thy word,
beyond all end extend.
MEM. The XIII. Part.
97
What great desire, and fervent love
do I bear to thy law?
All the day long my whole devise
is only on thy law.
98
Thy word has taught me far to pass,
my foes in policy:
For still I keep it as a thing
of most excellency.
99
My teachers which did me instruct,
in knowledge I excel:
Because I do thy covenants keep,
and them to others tell.
100
In wisdom I do pass also,
the ancient men in deed:
And all because to keep thy laws,
I held it aye best reed.
101
My feet I have refrained eke
from every evil way:
Because that I continually
thy word might keep I say.
102
I have not swe^^'d from thy judgments,
nor vet shronke any dell:
For why? thou have me taught thereby
to live godly and well.
103
O Lord how sweet unto my taste
find I thy words always:
Doubtless no honey in my mouth,
feel ought so sweet I may.
104
Thy laws have me such wisdom learned,
that utterly I hate
All wicked and ungodly ways,
in every kind of ^ate.
NVN. The XIIII. Part.
105
Even as a lantern to my feet,
so does thy word shine bright:
And to my paths where ever I go,
it is a flaming light.
106
I have both sworn and will perform
most certainly doubtless:
That I will keep thy judgments just,
and them in life express.
107
Affliction has me sore oppressed,
and brought me to deaths door:
O Lord as thou have promised,
so me to life restore.
108
The offerings which with heart and voice
most franckly I thee give,
Accept, and teach me how I may
after thy judgments live.
109
My soul is aye so in my hand,
that dangers me assail:
Yet do I not thy law forget,
nor it to keep will fail.
110
Although the wicked lay their net^
to catch me at a bay:
Yet did I not from thy precepts
once swe^ue or go astray.
111
Thy laws I have so claimed always
as mine own heritage:
And why? for therein I delight,
and set my whole courage.
112
For evermore I have been bent,
thy statutes to fulfill:
Even so likewise unto the end
I will continue still.
SAMECH. The XV. Part.
113
The crafty thoughts and double hearts
I do always detest:
But as for thy law and precepts,
I count them ever best.
114
Thou art my hid and secret place,
my shield of strong defense:
Therefore I have thy promises,
looked for with patience.
115
Go to therefore ye wicked men,
depart from me anon:
For the commandments will I keep,
of God my Lord alone.
116
As thou promised so perform,
that death me not assail:
Nor let my hope abuse me so,
that through distrust I quail.
117
Uphold me and I shall be safe,
for ought they do or say:
And in thy statutes pleasure ^^ke
will I both night and day.
118
Thou have trod such under thy feet,
as do thy statutes break:
For naught auailes their subtilty
their counsel is but weak.
119
Like dross thou casts the wicked out
where ever they ^oe or dwell.
Therefore can I as the statutes,
love nothing half so well.
120
My flesh alas is taken with fear,
as though it were benumbd*
For when I see thy judgments, straight
I am as one astond.
AIN. The XVI. Part.
121
I do the thing that lawful is,
and give to all men right:
Resign me not to them that would
oppress me with their might,
122
But for thy servant surety be,
in that thing that is good:
That proud men give me not the foil,
which rage as they were wood.
123
Mine eyes with waiting are now blind,
thy health so much I crave:
And eke thy righteous promise Lord,
whereby thou will me save.
124
Entreat thy servant lovingly,
and favor to him show:
Thy statutes of most excellency,
teach me also to know.
125
Thy humble servant Lord I am,
grant me to understand
How by thy statutes I may know,
best what to take in hand.
126
It is now time Lord to begin,
for truth is quite decayed:
Thy law likewise they have transgrest,
and none against them said.
127
This is the cause wherefore I love
thy laws better then gold:
Or jewels fine which are esteemed
most costly to be sold.
128
I thought thy precepts all most just
and so them laid in store:
All crafty and malicious ways
I do abhor therefore.
PE. The XVII. Part.
129
Thy covenants are most wonderful,
and full of things profound:
My soul therefore does keep them s^^e,
when they are tried and found.
130
When men first enter into thy word
they find a light most clear:
And very idiots understand.
when they it read or hear.
131
For joy I have both gapt and breathed
to know thy commandment:
That I might guide my life thereby
I sought what thing it meant.
132
With mercy and compassion both,
behold me from above:
As thou art wont to behold suth
as thy name fear and love.
133
Direct my footsteps by thy word,
that I thy will may know:
And never let iniquity,
thy servant overthrow.
134
From slanderous tongues and deadly hate
preserve and keep me sure:
Thy precepts then will I observe,
and put them eke in ure.
135
Thy countenance which does surmount
the Sun in his bright hew:
Let shine on me and by thy law,
teach me what to eschew.
136
Out of mine eyes great floods gush out
of dreary tears and fell:
When I behold how wicked men
thy laws keep never a dell.
ZADE. The XVIII. Part.
137
In every point Lord thou art just,
the wicked though they grudge:
And when thou do sentence pronounce
thou art a righteous judge.
138
To (...) right and flee from guile,
are two chief points most hye:
And such as thou have in thy law,
commanded us straightly.
139
With zeal and wrath I am confirmed
and even pinde away:
To see my foes thy word forget,
for ought that I do may.
140
So pure and perfect is thy word,
as any heart can deem:
And I thy servant nothing more
do love or yet esteem.
141
And though I be nothing set by,
as one of base degree:
Yet do I not thy hests forget,
nor shrink away from thee.
142
Thy righteousness Lord is most just
for ever to endure:
Also thy law is truth it self,
most constant and most pure.
143
Trouble and grief have seas'd on me
and brought me wondrous low:
Yet do I still of thy precepts
delight to hear and know.
144
The righteousness of thy judgments
does last for evermore:
Then teach them me for ever in them
my life lies up in store.
KOPH. The XIX. Part.
145
With fervent heart I called and cride,
now answer me O Lord:
That thy commandments to observe,
I may fully accord.
146
To thee my God I make my suit,
with most humble request:
Save me therefore and I will keep,
thy precepts and thy hest.
147
To thee cry I even in the morn,
before the day wax light:
Because that I have in thy word,
my confidence whole plight.
148
Mine eyes prevent the watch by night
and ere they call I wake,
That by devising on thy word
I might some comfort take.
149
Incline thine ear to hear my voice,
and pity on me take:
As thou was wont so judge me Lord,
lest life should me forsake.
150
My foes draw near and do procure,
my death maliciously:
Which from thy law are far gone back
and straid from it lewdly.
151
Therefore O Lord approach thou near
for need does so desire:
And all thy precepts true they are,
then help I thee require.
152
By thy commandments I have learnd
not now but long ago:
That they remain for evermore,
thou have them grounded so.
RESH. The XX. Part.
153
My trouble and affliction,
consider and behold:
Deliver me for of thy law
I ever take fast hold.
154
Defend my good and righteous cause
with speed me succor send:
From death as thou have promised,
Lord keep me and defend.
155
As for the wicked far they are
from having health and grace:
Whereby they might thy statutes know
they enter not the trace.
156
Great are thy mercies Lord I grant,
what tongue can them attain?
And as thou have me judged ere now,
so let me life obtain.
157
Though many men did trouble me,
and persecute me sore:
Yet from thy laws I never shrunk.
nor went awry therefore.
158
And truth it is for grief I die,
when I these traitors see:
Because they keep no whit thy word,
nor yet seek to know thee.
159
Behold for I do love thy laws,
with heart most glad and feign:
As thou art good and gracious Lord,
restore my life again.
160
What thy word does decree, must be
and so it has been ever:
Thy righteous judgments are also
most true, and decay never.
SCHIN. The XXI. Part.
161
Princes have sought by cruelty
causeless to make me couch:
But all in vain, for of thy word,
the fear did my heart touch.
162
And certainly even of thy word,
I was more merry and glad:
Then he that of rich spoils and prays
great store and plenty had.
163
As for all lives and fa^sity,
I hate, most and detest:
For why? thy holy laws do I,
above all things love best.
146
Seven times a day I praise the Lord
singing with heart and voice:
Thy righteous acts and wonderful,
so cause me to rejoice.
165
Great peace and rest shall all such have,
which do thy statutes love,
No danger shall their quiet state,
empaire or once remove.
166
Mine only health and comfort Lord,
I look for at thy hand:
And therefore have I done those things,
which thou did me command.
167
Thy laws have been my exercise
which my soul much desired:
So much my love to them was bent,
that naught else I required.
168
Thy statutes and commandments,
I kept thou know aright:
For all the things that I have done,
are present in thy sight.
TAV. The XXII. Part.
169
O Lord let my complaint and cry
before thy face appear:
And as thou have me promise made.
so teach me thee to fear,
170
My humble supplication,
toward thee let find access:
And grant me Lord deliverance,
for so is thy promise.
171
Then shall my lips thy praises speak
after most ample sort:
When thou thy statutes have me taught
wherein stands my comfort:
172
My tongue shall sing and preach thy word
and on this wise say shall.
Gods famous acts and noble laws,
are just and perfect all.
173
Streach out thy hand I thee beseech,
and speedily me save:
For thy commandments to observe,
chosen O Lord I have.
174
Of thee alone Lord I crave health
for other I know none:
And in thy law and nothing else
I do delight alone.
175
Grant me therefore long days to live
thy name to magnify:
And of thy judgments merciful,
let me thy favor try.
176
For I was lost and went astray,
much like a wandering sheep:
Oh seek me for I have not faild
thy commandments to keep.
Psalm 120.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ IN trouble and in thrall unto the Lord I call, and he does me ^ comfort.
Deliver me, I say, from liars lips always, and tongues of false report.

MEDIVS.
^ IN trouble and in thrall unto the Lord I call, and he does me ^ comfort.
Deliver me I say, from liars lips always, and tongues of false report.

TENOR, or Faburden.
1. Italian Tune.
^ IN trouble and in thrall unto the Lord I call, and he does me ^ comfort.
Deliver me, I say, from liars lips always, and tongues of false report.

BASSVS.
^ IN trouble and in thrall unto the Lord I call, and he does me ^ comfort,
Deliver me I say, from liers lips away, and tongues of false report.

3
What vantage or what thing,
Gets thou thus for to sting,
Thou false and flattering lier?
4
Thy tongue does hurt I ween,
No less then arrows keen.
Of hot consuming fire.
6
Alas too long I slack,
Within these tents so black:
Which Kedars are by name.
By whom thy flock elect,
And all of Isaacks sect:
are put to open shame.
7
With them that place did hate,
I came a peace to make,
And set a quiet life.
But when my tale was told,
Causeless I was controld,
By them that would have strife.
Psalm 121
G. Farnaby B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ I Lift mine eyes to Si- on hil^, from whence I do attend, that succor God
me send. The mighty God me succor will, which ^ heaven and earth framed, and
all things therein na- med.

MEDIVS.
^ I Lift mine eyes to Si- on hill, from whence I do attend, ^ that succor
God me send. The mighty God me succor will, which ^ heaven and earth framed,
and all things therein named.

TENOR or Playnsong.
4. French Tune.
^ I Lift mine eyes to Si- on hill, from whence I do attend ^ that succor God
me send. The mighty God me succor will, which ^ heaven and earth framed, and
all things therein named.

BASSVS.
^ I Lift mine eyes to Si- on hill, from whence I do attend, ^ that succor
God me send. The mighty God me succor will, which ^ heaven and earth framed,
and all things therein named.

3
Thy foot from slip he will preserve,
And will thee safely keep:
For he will never sleep.
4
Lo, he that does Israel conserve,
No sleep at all can him catch.
But his eyes shall ever watch.
5
The Lord is thy warrant always,
The Lord eke does thee cover,
As at thy right hand ever.
6
The Sun shall not thee parch by day
Nor the Moon not half so bright,
Shall with cold thee hurt by night*
7
The Lord will keep thee from distress,
And will thy life sure save:
And thou also shall have.
8
In all thy business good success:
Where ever thou go in or out,
God will thy things bring out.
Psalm 122.
G. Farnaby. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ I Did in heart rejoice to hear the peoples voice, in of- fering so ^
willingly: For let us up say they, and in the Lords house pray, thus spoke the
folk ^ full lovingly, Our feet that wan- dred wide shall in thy gates abide ^
O thou Ie- rusalem full fair, which art so seemly set, much like a ^ City
neat, the like whereof is not else where.

MEDIVS.
^ I Did in heart rejoice to hear the peoples voice, in offering so will- ^
lingly: For let us up say they, and in the Lords house pray, thus spoke the ^
folk full lovingly, Our feet that wan- dred wide shall in thy gates abide, ^ O
thou Jerusalem full fair, which art so seemly set, much like a ^ City neat,
the like whereof is not else where.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
5. French Tune.
^ I Did in heart rejoice to hear the peoples voice, in offering so will- ^
lingly: For let us say they, and in the Lords house pray, thus spoke the ^
folk full lovingly, Our feet that wandered wide shall in thy gates abide* ^ O
thou Jerusalem full fair, which art so seemly set, much like a ^ City neat,
the like whereof is not else where.

BASSVS.
^ I Did in heart rejoice to hear the peoples voice, in offering so ^
willingly: For let us up say they, and in the Lords house pray, thus spoke the
^ folk full lovingly Our feet that wandered wide shall in thy gates abide, ^ O
thou Jerusalem full fair, which art so seem- ly set much like a ^ City neat,
the like whereof is not else where.

4
The Tribes with one accord,
The Tribes of God the Lord
Are thither bent their way to take:
So God before did tell,
That there his Israel
Their prayers should together make.
5
For there are Thrones erect,
And that for this respect,
To set forth justice orderly:
Which Thrones tight to maintain,
To David's house pertain,
His folk to judge accordingly.
6
To pray let us not cease,
For Ierusalems peace:
Thy friends God prosper mightily.
7
Peace be thy walls about,
And prosper thee throughout
thy places eke continually.
8
I wish thy prosperous state,
For my poor brethrens sake
That comfort have by means of thee,
9
Gods house does me allure,
Thy wealth for to procure,
So much always as lies in me.
Psalm 123.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ O Lord that heaven do possess, I lift mine eyes to thee: ^ Even as the
servant lifts his, his masters hands to see.

MEDIVS.
^ O Lord that heaven do possess, I lift mine eyes to thee:
^ Even as the servant lifts his, his masters hands to see.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Windsor, or Eaton Tune.
^ O Lord that heaven do possess, I lift mine eyes to thee:
^ Even as the servant lifts his, his masters hands to see.
BASSVS.
^ O Lord that heaven do possess, I lift mine eyes to thee:
^ Even as the servant lifts his, his masters hands to see.
2
As handmaids watch their mistress hands,
some grace for to atchieue:
So we behold the Lord our God,
till he (...) us forg^^^,
3
Lord grant us thy compassion.
and mercy in thy sight:
For we are filled and overcome
with hatred and despite.
4
Our minds be stuffed with great rebuke,
the ^ich and worldly wise
Do make us of their mocking stock,
the proud do us despise,
Psalm 124.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ NOw Israel may say, and that truly, if that the Lord had not ^ our cause
maintaind: If that the Lord had not our right sustaind, When all ^ the world
against us furi- ously made their vprores, and said we ^ should all dye.

MEDIVS.
^ NOw Israel may say, and that truly, if that the Lord had not ^ our cause
maintaind if that the Lord had not our right sustaind, When ^ all the world
against us furiously made their vprores, and said we ^ should all dye.

TENOR, or Faburden.
6. French Tune.
^ NOw Israel may say, and that tru^ly, if that the Lord had not ^ our cause
maintaind: If that the Lord had not our right sustaind When ^ all the world
against us furiously made their vprores, and said we ^ should all dye.

BASSVS.
^ NOw Israel may say, and that truly if that the Lord had not ^ our cause
maintaind: if that the Lord had not our right sustaind, When ^ all the world
against us furi- ously made their vprores, and said we ^ should all dye.

2
Now long ago,
they had devoured us all,
And swallowed quick,
for ought that we could deem,
Such was their rage,
as we might well esteem.
4
And as the floods,
with mighty force do fall:
So had they now,
our lives even brought to thrall.
5
The raging streams,
most proud in roaring noise:
Had long ago.
overwhelmed us in the deep.
6
But loved be God.
Which does us safely keep:
From bloody teeth,
and their most cruel voice:
Which as a pray,
to eat us would rejoice,
7
Even as a bird,
out of the fowiers gin:
Escapes away,
right so it fares with us:
Broke are their nets,
and we have escaped thus.
8
God that made heaven,
and earth as our help then
His name has s^ued us,
from these wicked (...).
Psalm 125.
G. Farnaby B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ SVch as in God the Lord do trust, as Mount Sion shall firmly stand: ^ And
be removed at no hand, the Lord will count them right and just, ^ so that they
shall be sure for ever to endure.

MEDIVS.
^ SVch as in God the Lord do^ ^ast, as Mount Sion shall firmly stand: ^ And
be removed at no hand, the Lord will count them right and just ^ so that they
shall be sure for ever to endure.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
2. High Dutch Tune.
^ SVch as in God the Lord do trust, as Mount Sion shall firmly stand: ^ And
be removed at no hand, the Lord will count them right and just, ^ so that they
shall be sure for ever to endure.

BASSVS.
^ SVch as in God the Lord do trust, as Mount Sion shall firmly stand: ^ And
be removed at no hand, the Lord will count them right and just, ^ so that they
shall be sure for ever to endure.

2
As mighty mountains huge and great,
Jerusalem about do close:
So will the Lord be unto those,
Who on his godly will do wait,
Such are to him so dear,
they never need to fear.
3
For though the righteous try does he,
By making wicked men his rod:
Lest they through grief forsake their God
It shall not as their lot still be.
4
Give Lord to those thy light,
Whose hearts are true and right:
5
But as for such as turn aside,
By crooked ways which they out sought
The Lord will surely bring to naught,
With works most vile they shall abide
But peace with Israel,
For evermore shall dwell.
Another of the same.
R. Allison.
CANTVS.
^ THose that do put their confidence upon the Lord our God only:
^ And fly to him for his de- fence in all their need and misery.
MEDIVS.
^ THose that do put their confidence upon the Lord our God only:
^ And fly to him for his defense in all their need and mise- ry.
TENOR, or Faburden.
7. French Tune.
^ THose that do put their confidence upon the Lord our God only:
^ And fly to him for his defense in all their need and misery.
BASSVS.
^ THose that do put their confidence upon the Lord our God only:
^ And fly to him for his defense in all their need and misery.
Their faith is sure firm to endure,
Grounded on Christ the corner stone:
Moved with none ill, but stands still
Steadfast like to Mount Sion.
And as about Jerusalem,
The mighty hills do it compass:
So that no enemies come to them,
To hurt the town in any case,
So God indeed in every need
His faithful people does defend
Standing them by assuredly,
From this time forth world without end,
Right wise and good is our Lord God
And will not suffer certainly
The sinners and vngodlies rod
To tarry upon his family.
Left they also from God should go,
Falling to sin and wickedness:
O Lord defend, world without end,
Thy Christian flock through thy goodness.
O Lord do good to Christians all,
That steadfast in thy word abide:
Such as willingly from God fall,
And to false doctrine daily slide.
Such will the Lord scatter abroad,
With hypocrites thrown down to hell
God will them send pains without end,
But Lord grant peace to Israel.
Glory to God the Father of might,
And to the Son our Savior:
And to the holy Ghost, whose light
Shine in our hearts and us succor.
That the right way from day to day
We may walk and him glorify:
With hearts desire, all that are here
Worship the Lord and say, Amen.
Psalm 126.
E. Johnson.
CANTVS.
^ WHen that the Lord again his Sion had forth brought from ^ bondage great
and also servitude extreme: His work was such as did ^ surmount man's heart
and thought. so that we were much like to them ^ that use to dream* Our
mouths were with laughter filled then, and ^ eke our tougues did show us
joyful men.

MEDIVS.
^ WHen that the Lord again his Sion had forth brought from ^ bondage great
and also servitude extreme: His work was such as did ^ surmount man's heart
and thought, so that we were much like to them ^ that use to dream: Our
mouths were with laughter filled then, and ^ eke our tongues did show us
joyful men.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ WHen that the Lord again his Sion had forth brought from ^ bondage great
and also servitude extreme: His work was such as did ^ surmount man's heart
and thought, so that we were much like to them ^ that use to dream: Our
mouths were with laughter filled then, and ^ eke our tongues did show us
joyful men.

BASSVS.
^ WHen that the Lord again his Sion had forth brought from ^ bondage great
and also servitude extreme: His work was such as did ^ surmount man's heart
and thought, so that we were much like to them ^ that use to dream: Our
mouths were with laughter filled then and ^ eke our tongues did show us
joyful men.

2
The heathen folk
were forced then this to confess,
How that the Lord*
for them also great things had done.
8
But much more we,
and therefore can confess no less,
Wherefore to joy
we have good cause as we begun.
4
O Lord go forth,
thou can our bondage end:
As to desa^ts,
the flowing rivers send,
5
Full true it is,
that they which sow in tears indeed,
A time will come,
when they shall reap with mirth and joy,
6
They went and wept,
in bearing of their precious seed,
For that their foes
full oftentimes did them annoy:
But their return,
with joy they shall surely see:
Their sheaues home bring,
and not impaired be.
Psalm 227.
G. Kirby.
CANTVS.
^ EXxept the Lord the house do make, And thereunto do set his hand: ^ What men
do build it cannot stand. Likewise in vain men undertake. ^ Cities and holds
to watch and ward, Except the Lord be their safeguard.

MEDIVS.
^ EXcept the Lord the house do make, And thereunto do set his hand: ^ What
men do build it cannot stand. Likewise in vain men undertake ^ Cities and
holds to watch and ward, Except the Lord be their safeguard.

TENOR, or Faburden.
1. High Dutch Tune.
^ EXcept the Lord the house do make, And thereunto do set his hand: ^ What
men do build it cannot stand, Likewise in vain men undertake ^ Cities and
holds to watch and ward, Except the Lord be their safeguard.

BASSVS.
^ EXcept the Lord the house do make, And thereunto do set his hand: ^ What
men do build it cannot stand. Likewise in vain men undertake ^ Cities and
holds to watch and ward, Except the Lord be their safeguard.

Though ye rise early in the morn,
And so at night go late to bed,
Feeding full hardly with brown bread,
Yet were your labor lost and worn*
But they whom God does love and keep,
Receive all things with quiet sleep.
3
Therefore mark well, when ever ye see
That men have heirs to enjoy their land,
It is the gift of Gods own hand:
For God himself does multiply,
Of his great liberality,
The blessing of posterity.
4
And when the children come to age,
they grow in strength and actiuenesse,
In person and in comeliness*
So that a shaft shot with courage
Of one that has a most strong arm,
Flies not so swift nor does like harm*
5
O well is him that has his quiu^^,
Furnished with such artillery:
For when in peril he shall be,
Such one shall neither shake nor shiuer,
When that he pleads before the Judge
Against his foes that bear him g^udge.
Psalm 128.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ BLessed art thou that fear God, and walk in his way: For ^ of thy
labor thou shall eat, happy art thou I say.

MEDIVS.
^ BBlessed art thou that fear God, and walk in his way: For ^ of thy
labor thou shall eat, happy art thou I say.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
Cambridge Tune:
^ BLessed art thou that fear God, and walk in his way: For ^ of thy
labor thou shall eat, hap- py art thou I say.

BASSVS.
^ BLessed art thou that fear God, and walk in his way: For ^ of thy
labor thou shall eat, happy art thou I say.

3
Like fruitful Vines on thy house side,
so does thy wife spring out:
Thy children stand like Olive plants,
thy table round about.
4
Thus art thou blessed that fe^^est God,
and he shall let thee see
5
The promised Jerusalem,
and his felicity*
6
Thou shall thy childrens children see,
to thy great joys increase:
And likewise grace on Israel,
prosperity and peace.
Psalm 129.
John Bennet.
CANTVS.
^ Often they, now Israel may say, me from my youth assaild: Often ^ they assaild
me from my youth, yet never they preuaild.

MEDIVS.
^ Often they, now Israel may say, me from my youth assaild: Often ^ they assaild
me from my youth yet never they preuaild.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
Cheshire Tune.
^ Often they, now Israel may say, me from my youth assaild: Often ^ they assaild
me from my youth, yet never they preuaild.

BASSVS.
^ Often they, now Israel may say, me from my youth assaild: Often ^ they assaild
me from my youth yet never they preuaild.

3
Upon my back the plowers plowed
and furrows long did cast:
4
The righteous Lord has cut the cords
of wicked foes at last.
5
They that hate me shall be ashamed
and turned back also:
6
And made as grass upon the house,
which withers e^e it grow.
7
Whereof the mower cannot find,
enough to fill his hand:
Nor he can fill his lap, that goes
to gleane upon the land.
8
Nor passers by pray God on them,
to let his blessing fall:
Nor say, we bless you in the name
of God the Lord at all.
Psalm. 130.
Th. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ LOrd to thee I make my moan when dangers me oppress: ^ I call, I sigh,
plain and groan, trusting to find release. Hear now ^ O Lord my request, for
it is full due time: And let thine ears aye be ^ pressed unto this pray- er mine.

MEDIVS.
^ LOrd to thee I make my moan when dangers me oppress: ^ I call, I sigh,
plain, and groan, trusting to find release. Hear now ^ O Lord my request,
for it is full due time: And let thine ears aye be ^ pressed unto this pray- er
mine.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
9. French Tune.
^ LOrd to thee I make my moan when dangers me oppress: ^ I call, I sigh,
plain and groan, trusting to find release. hear now ^ O Lord my request, for
it is full due time: And let thine ears aye be ^ pressed unto this prayer mine.

BASSVS.
^ LOrd to thee I make my moan when dangers me oppress: ^ I call, I sigh,
plain and groan, trusting to find release. Hear now ^ O Lord my request, for
it is full due time: And let thine ears aye be ^ pressed unto this prayer mine.

3
O Lord our God, if thou weigh
our sins and them pe^^se:
Who shall then escape o^ say,
I can my self excuse?
4
But Lord thou art merciful,
and turn'st to us thy grace:
That we with hearts most ^uefu^l*
should fear before thy face.
5
In God I put my whole trust,
my soul waits on his will:
For his promise is most just:
and I hope therein still,
6
My soul to God has regard,
wishing for him always:
More then they that watch and ward,
to see the dawning day.
7
Let Israel then boldly,
in the Lord put his trust:
He is that God of mercy,
that his deliver must.
8
For he it is that must save
Israel from his sin.
And all such as surely have
their confidence in him:
Psalm. 131.
Th. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ O Lord I am not puffed in mind, I have no scornful eye: I do ^ not
exercise my self in things that be too hie.

MEDIVS.
^ O Lord I am not puffed in mind, I have no scornful eye: I do ^ not
exercise my self in things that be too hye.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
Low Dutch Tune.
^ O Lord I am not puffed in mind, I have no scornful eye: I do ^ not
exercise my self in things that be too hye.

BASSVS.
^ O Lord I am not puffed in mind, I have no scornful eye; I do. ^ not
exercise my self in things that be too hye.

3
But as the child that wained is,
even from his mothers breast:
So have I Lord behau'd my self,
in silence and in rest.
4
O Israel t^^st in the Lord,
let him be all thy stay:
From this time forth for evermore,
from age to age for aye.
Psalm 132.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ RRemember David's troubles Lord, how to the Lord he swore, ^ and vowed a vow
to Jacobs God, to keep for evermore. I will not come ^ within my house, nor
climb up to my bed, nor let my temples take their ^ rest, or the eyes in my
head.

MEDIVS.
^ REmember David's troubles Lord, how to the Lord he swore, ^ and vowed a vow
to Jacobs God, to keep for evermore. I will not come ^ within my house, nor
climb up to my bed, nor let my temples take their ^ rest, or the eyes in my
head.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ REmember David's troubles Lord, how to the Lord he swore, ^ and vowed a vow
to Jacobs God, to keep for evermore, I will not come ^ within my house, nor
climb up to my bed, nor let my temples take their ^ rest, or the eyes in my
head.

BASSVS.
^ REmember David's troubles Lord, how to the Lord he swore, ^ and vowed a vow
to Jacobs God, to keep for evermore. I will not come ^ within my house, nor
climb up to my bed, nor let my temples take their ^ rest, or the eyes in my
head.

5
Till I have found out for the Lord,
a place to sit thereon:
An house for Jacobs God to be
an habitation*
6
We heard of it at Ephrata,
there did we hear this sound:
And in the fields and forests there,
these voices first we found.
7
We will assay and go in now,
his tabernacle there:
Before his footstool to fall down,
upon our knees in (...)
8
Arise O Lord, arise I say,
into thy resting place:
Both thou and the arc of thy strength
the presence of thy grace.
9
Let all thy Priests be clothed Lord,
with truth and righteousness:
Let all thy Saints and holy men,
sing all with ioyfulnesse.
10
And for thy servant David's sake,
refuse not Lord I say
The face of thine anointed, Lord,
nor turn thy face away.
The second part.
11
The Lord to David swore in truth,
and will not shrink from it:
Saving the fruit of thy body,
upon thy seat shall sit.
12
And if thy sons my covenant keep
that I shall learn each one:
Then shall their sons for ever sit
upon thy Princely throne.
13
The Lord himself has chose Sion,
and loves therein to dwell:
14
Saying this is my resting place,
I love and like it well.
15
And I will bless with great increase
her victuals every where:
And I will satisfy with bread,
the needy that be there.
16
Yea, I will deck and clothe her Priests
with my salvation:
And all her Saints shall sing for joy
of my protection.
17
There will I surely make the horn^
of David for to bud:
For I have there ordained for mine
a lantern bright and good.
11
As for his enemies I will cloth^
with shame for evermore:
But I will cause his crown to shin^
mo^e fresh then heretofore.
Psalm 133.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ O How happy a thing it is, and joyful for to see Brethren to- ^ gether fast
to hold the band of amity.

MEDIVS.
^ O How happy a thing it is and joyful for to see* Brethren to- ^ gether fast
to hold the band of amity.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
Winchester Tune.
^ O How happy a thing it is, and joyful for to see Brethren to- ^ gether fast
to hold the band of amity.

BASSVS.
^ O How happy a thing it is, and joyful for to see, Brethren to- ^ gether
fast to hold the band of amity.

2
It ealth to mind the sweet perfume,
and that costly ointment:
Which on the Sacrificers head,
by Gods precept was spent.
3
It wet not Aarons head alone,
but drencht his beard throughout:
And finally it did run down
his rich attire about.
4
And as the lower ground does drink,
the dew of Hermon hill:
And Sion with her silver drops,
the fie^ds with fruit does fill.
5
Even so the Lord does pour on them
his blessings manifold:
Whose hearts and minds without all guile
this knot do keep and hold.
Psalm 134.
M. Peirson B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ BEhold and have regard, ye servants of the Lord: which in his ^ house by
night do watch, praise him with one accord.

MEDIVS.
^ BEhold and have regard, ye servants of the Lord: Which in his ^ house by
night do watch, praise him with one accord.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
Southwell Tune.
^ BEhold and have regard ye servants of the Lord: Which in his ^ house by
night do watch, praise him with one accord.

BASSVS.
^ BEhold and have regard, ye servants of the Lord: Which in his ^ house by
night do watch, praise him with one accord.

2
^ift up your hands on hie,
unto his holy place:
And give the Lord his praises due,
his benefits embrace.
3
For why? the Lord who did,
both earth and heaven frame:
Does Sion bless, and will conserve
for evermore the same.
Psalm^ 135.
R. Allison.
CANTVS.
^ O Praise the Lord praise him, praise, him praise him with one ac- ^ cord^ O
praise him still all ye that be the servants of the Lord O praise ^ him ye that
stand and be in the house of the Lord: Ye of his court, and ^ of his house,
praise him with one accord.

MEDIVS.
^ O Praise the Lord, praise him, praise him, praise him, with one ac- ^ cord:
O praise him still all ye that be the servants of the Lord. O praise ^ him ye
that stand and be in the house of the Lord, Ye of his court and of ^ his house,
praise him with one accord.

TENOR, or ^. burden.
^ O Praise the Lord, praise him, praise him, praise him, with one ac- ^ cord:
O praise him still all ye that be the servants of the Lord O praise ^ him ye
that stand and be in the house of the Lord: Ye of his court, and ^ of his
house, praise him with one accord.

BASSVS.
^ O Praise the Lord, praise him, praise him, praise him, with one ac- ^ cord*
O praise him still all ye that be the seurants of the Lord O praise ^ him ye
that stand and be in the house of the Lord, Ye of his court, and of ^ his
house, praise him with one accord.

3
Praise ye the Lord for he is good,
sing praises to his name:
It is a ^^^ely and good thing
always to do the same.
4
For why? the Lord has chose Jacob,
his very own you see*
So has he chosen Israel,
his treasure for to be.
5
For this I know and am right sure,
the Lord is very great:
He is indeed above all Gods,
most easy to entreat.
6
For whatsoever pleased him,
all that full well he wrought:
In heaven, in earth and in the sea,
which he has framed of naught.
7
He lifts up clouds even from the earth
he makes lightnings and rain:
He brings forth the winds also,
he made nothing in vain.
8
He smote the first borne of each thing
in Egypt that took rest:
He spared there no living thing,
the man nor yet the beast.
9
He has in thee showed wonders great
O Egypt void of vaunts:
On Pharach thy cursed King,
and his severe servants.
10
He smote then many Nations,
and did great acts and things:
He slew the great and mightiest
and chiefest of their Kings.
11
Sehon King of the Amorites,
and Og King of Basan:
He slew also the Kingdoms all,
that were of Canaan.
12
And gave their land to Israel
an heritage we see:
To Israel his own people
an heritage to be.
The second part.
13
Thy name O Lord shall still endure,
and thy memorial
Throughout all generations,
that are or ever shall.
14
The Lord shall surely now avenge
his people all indeed:
And to his servants he will show
favor in time of need.
15
The Idols of the heathen are made,
in all their coasts and lands:
Of silver and of gold be they,
the work even of men's hands.
16
They have their mouths and cannot speak,
and eyes and have no sight:
17
They eke have ears, and hea^e nothing
their mouths be breathless quite.
18
Wherefore all they are like to them
that so do set them forth:
And likewise those that trust in them
or think they be ought worth.
19
O all ye house of Israel,
see that ye praise the Lord:
And ye that be of Aarons house,
praise him with one accord
20
And ye that be of Leuies house,
praise ye likewise the Lord:
And all that stand in awe of him,
praise him with one accord.
21
And out of Sion sound his praise,
the great praise of the Lord:
Which dwells ^n Jerusalem,
praise him with one accord,
Psalm 136.
G. Kirby.
CANTVS.
^ PRaise ye the Lord, for he is good for his mercy en- dureth for ^ ever.
Give praise unto the God of Gods; for his mercy endures for ever. ^ Give
praise unto the Lord of Lords for his mer- cy endures for ^ e- uer. Which
only does great wondrous works, for his mercy endures ^ for ever.

MEDIVS.
^ PRraise ye the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy endures for ^ ever. Give
praise unto the God of Gods, for his mercy endures for ever. ^ Give praise un-
to the Lord of Lords for his mercy endures for ^ e- uer, Which only does
great wondrous works, for his mercy endures ^ for e- uer.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ PRaise ye the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy endures for ^ ever. Give
praise unto the God of Gods, for his mercy endures for ever. ^ Give praise un-
to the Lord of Lords for his mer- cy endures for ^ e- uer. Which only does
great wondrous works, for his mercy endures ^ for ever.

BASSVS.
^ PRaise ye the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy endures for ^ ever. Give
praise unto the God of Gods, for his mercy endures for ever. ^ Give praise
unto the Lord of Lords for his mercy endures for ^ e- uer. which only does
great wondrous works, for his mercy endures ^ for e- uer.

5
Which by his wisdom made the heaven:
for his mercy endures for ever.
6
Which on the wa^ers st^etcht the earth
for his mercy endures for ever.
7
Which made great lights to (...) abroad
for his mercy endures for ever.
8
As Sun to ^ule the lightsome day:
for his mercy endures for ever.
9
The Moon and stars to guide the night
for his mercy endures for ever.
10
Which smote Egypt with their first born
for his mercy endures for ever.
11
And Israel brought out from them,
for his mercy endures for ever.
12
With mighty hand and stretched a^me,
for his mercy endures for ever.
13
Which cut the ^ed Sea in two parts
for his mercy endures for ever,
14
And Israel may pass there through
for his mercy endures for ever.
15
And drowned Pharaoh and his host,
for his mercy endures for ever.
16
Through wilderness his people led*
for his mercy endures for ever.
17
He which did smite great mighty Kings
for his mercy endures for ever.
18
And which has slain the mighty Kings
for his mercy endures for ever.
19
As Sehon King of Amorites,
for his mercy endures for ever.
20
And Og the King of Basan land,
for his mercy endures for ever.
21
And gave their land for heritage,
for his mercy endures for ever.
22
Even to his servant Israel,
for his mercy endures for ever.
23
Remembering us in base estate,
for his mercy endures for ever.
24
And from oppressors rescued us,
for his mercy endures for ever.
25
Which gives food unto all flesh,
for his mercy endures for ever.
26
Praise ye the God of heaven above,
for his mercy endures for ever.
27
Give thanks unto the Lord of Lords,
for his mercy endures for ever.
Another of the same.
G. Kirby.
CANTVS.
^ O Laud the Lord benign, whose mercies last for aye* Give ^ thanks and
praises sing To God of Gods I say: For certainly, His mer- ^ cies dure, Both
firm and sure, Eternal- ly.

MEDIVS
^ O Laud the Lord benign, whose mercies last for aye: Give ^ thanks and
praises sing To God of Gods I say: For certainly, His mer- ^ cies dure, Both
firm and sure, Eternal- ly.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ O Laud the Lord benign, whose mercies last for aye* Give ^ thanks and
praises sing To God of Gods I say: For certainly, His mer- ^ cies dure, Both
firm and sure, Eternal-ly.

BASSVS.
^ O Laud the Lord benign, whose mercies last for aye: Give ^ thanks and
praises sing To God of Gods I say: For certainly, His mer- ^ cies dure, both
firm and sure, Eternally*

3
The Lord of Lords praise ye,
Whose mercies aye do du^e:
4
Great wonders only he
Does work by his great power:
For certainly,
His mercies dure:
Both firm and sure,
Eternally.
5
Which God omnipotent,
By his great wisdom hie:
The heavenly firmament,
Did frame as we do see.
^or certainly,
His mercies dure:
Both firm and sure.
Eternally.
6
Yea, he the heavy change,
Of all the earth did (...):
And on the waters large,
The same he did out fetch:
For certainly, etc.
7
Great lights he made to us,
For why? his love is aye
8
Such as the Sun We see,
To rule the lightsome day:
For certainly, etc.
9
And eke the Moon so clear,
Which shines in our sight:
And Stars that do appear,
To guide the dark^ome night:
For certainly, etc.
10
With grievous plagues and sore,
All E^ypt smote he then:
The first borne less and more,
He slew of beasts and men:
For certainly, etc.
11
And from amidst their land,
His Israel forth brought*
12
Which he with mighty hand
And stretched a^me has wrought:
For certainly, etc.
13
The Sea he cut in two,
Which stood up like a wall:
14
And made through it to go
His chosen children all:
For certainly, etc.
15
But there he whelmed then,
The proud King Pharao:
With his huge host of men,
And Charrets eke also:
For certainly, etc.
16
Who led through wilderness,
His people safe and sound:
And for his love endless
17
Great Kings he brought to ground:
For certainly, etc.
18
And slew with puissant hand,
Kings mighty and of fame,
As of Amorites land,
19
Sehon the King by name:
For certainly, etc.
20
And Og the Giant large,
Of Basan King also:
21
Whose land and heritag^
He gave his people tho:
For certainly, etc.
22
Even unto Israel*
His servant dear I say:
He gave the same to dwell,
And there ^bide for aye:
For certainly, etc.
23
To mind he did us call,
In our most base degree:
24
And from oppressors all,
In safety set us free:
For certainly, etc.
25
All flesh on earth ab^oad,
With food he does fulfill:
26
Wherefore of heaven the God,
To laud be it your will:
For certainly, etc.
Psalm 137.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ WHen as we sat in Baby-lon, the Rivers round about: ^ and in remembrance
of Si- on, the tears for grief burst out. We ^ hanged our Harps and
instruments the Willow t^ees upon For in ^ that place men for their use had
planted ma- ny one.

MEDIVS.
^ WHen as we sat in Babylon, the Rivers round a- bout: ^ and in remembrance
of Si- on, the tears for grief burst out. We ^ hanged our Harps and
Instruments the Willow trees up- on: For in ^ that place men for their use had
planted many one.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ WHen as we sat in Babylon* the Rivers round about: ^ and in remembrance of
Sion, the tears for grief burst out. We ^ hanged our Harps and Instruments
the Willow trees upon* For in ^ that place men for their use had planted many
one

BASSVS.
^ WHen as we sat in Ba- by- lon, the Rivers round about* ^ and in remembrance
of Sion, the tears for grief burst out. We ^ hanged our Harps and
instruments the Willow trees upon: For in ^ that place men for their use had
planted many one.

3
Then they to whom we prisoners were
said to us tauntingly:
Now let us hear your Hebrew songs,
and pleasant melody.
4
Alas said we who can once frame,
his sorrowful heart to sing:
The praises of our living God,
thus under a strange King?
5
But yet if I Jerusalem,
out of my heart let slide:
Then let my fingers quite forget,
the warbling Harp to guide.
6
And let my tongue within my mouth,
be tide for ever fast:
If that I joy, before I see,
thy full deliverance past.
7
Therefore O Lord remember now,
the cursed noise and cry*
That Edoms sons against us made,
when they razed our city.
8
Remember Lord their cruel words,
when as with one accord:
They cried on, sack, and raze their walls,
in despite of the Lord.
9
Even so shall thou O Babylon,
at length to dust be brought:
And happy shall that man be called,
that our revenge has wrought.
10
Yea blessed shall that man be called,
that takes thy children ^ong:
To dash their bones against hard stones,
which lie the streets among.
Psalm 138.
John Milton.
CANTVS.
^ THee will I praise with my whole heart, my Lord my God always:
^ Even in the presence of the Gods, I will advance thy praise.
MEDIVS.
^ THee will I praise with my whole heart* my Lord my God always:
^ Even in the presence of the Gods I will advance thy praise:
TENOR, or Playnsong.
York Tune.
^ THee will I praise with my whole heart, my Lord my God always:
^ Even in the presence of the Gods I will advance thy praise.
BASSVS.
^ THee will I praise ^ith my whole heart, my Lord my God always:
^ Even in the presence of the Gods I will advance thy praise:
Toward thy holy temple I
will look and worship thee:
And praised with my thankful mouth
thy holy name shall be.
2
Even for thy loving kindness sake,
and for thy truth withal:
For thou thy name have by thy word
advanced over all.
3
When I did call thou heardest me,
and thou have made also
The power of increased strength
within my soul to grow.
4
Yea, all the Kings on earth they shall
give praise to thee O Lord:
For they of thy most holy mouth
have heard the mighty word.
5
They of the ways of God the Lord
in singing shall entreat:
Because the glory of the Lord,
it is exceeding great.
6
The Lord is hie and yet he does
behold the lowly spirit:
But he contemning knows afar
the proud and lofty wight.
7
Although in midst of trouble I
do walk, yet shall I stand:
Renewed by thee (O my Lord)
thou will stretch out thy hand.
8
Upon the wrath of all my foes
and saved shall I be:
By thy right hand, the Lord God will
perform his work to me.
9
Thy mercy Lord endures for aye,
Lord do me not forsake:
Forsake me not which am the work,
which thine own hand did make.
Psalm 139.
Richard Allison.
CANTVS.
^ O Lord thou have me tried and known, my sitting thou do know: ^ And
rising eke, my thoughts afar thou vnderstandst also.

MEDIVS.
^ O Lord thou have me tried and known, my sitting thou do know* ^ And
rising eke, my thoughts afar thou vnderstandst also.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
Rochester Tune.
^ O Lord thou have me tried and known, my sitting thou do know: ^ And
rising eke, my thoughts afar thou vnderstandst also.

BASSVS.
^ O Lord thou have me tried and known, my sitting thou do know: ^ And
rising eke, my thoughts afar thou vnderstandst also.

2
My paths, yea, and my lying down
thou compassest always:
3
And by familiar custom art,
acquainted with my ways.
4
No word is in my tongue (O Lord)
but known it is to thee:
5
Thou me behind holdst and before,
thou layest thy hand on me.
6
Too wonderful above my reach
(Lord) is thy cunning skill:
It is so hie that I the same
cannot attain until.
7
From sight of thy al-seeing sprite
Lord whither shall I go?
Or whither shall I fly away
thy presence to escape f^o?
8
To heaven if I mount aloft,
lo, thou art present there:
In hell if I lie down below,
even there thou do appear.
9
Yea, let me take the morning wings,
and let me go and hide
Even there where at the farthest parts,
where flowing sea does slide.
10
Yea, even thither also shall
thy re^ching hand me guide:
And thy right hand shall hold me fast,
and make me to abide.
11
Yea* if I say, the darkness shall
yet shroud me from thy sight:
Lo, even also the darkest night,
about me shall be light.
12
Yea, darkness hides not from the^
but night does shine as day:
To thee the darkness and the light
are both alike always.
The second part.
13
For thou possessed have my raines,
and thou have covered me:
When I within my mothers womb
enclosed was by thee.
14
Thee will I praise, made fearfully,
and wondrously I am:
Thy works are marvelous, right well
my soul does know the same.
15
My bones they are not hid from thee
although in secret place
I have been made, and in the earth
beneath I shaped was.
16
When I was formlesse then thine eye
saw me, for in thy book
Was written all, noug^t was before
that after fashion took.
17
The thoughts therefore of thee O God
how dear they are to me?
And of them all, how passing great
the endless numbers be?
18
If I should count them, lo their sum
more then the sand I see:
And whenever I awake
yet am I still with thee.
19
The wicked and the bloody men,
oh, that thou would slay:
Even those (O God) to whom depart,
depart from me I say.
20
Even those of thee O Lord my God,
that speak full wickedly*
Those that are lifted up in vain,
being enemies to thee.
21
Hate I not them that hate thee Lord,
and that in earnest wise:
Contend I not against them all,
against thee that arise?
22
I hate them with unfeigned hate,
even as my utter foes:
Try me (O God) and know my heart,
my thoughts prove and disclose,
23
Consider Lord if wickedness
in me there any be:
And in thy way (O Lord my guide)
for ever lead thou me
Psalm 140.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ LOrd save me from the evil man, and from the cruel wight
^ Deliver me, which e- uill do imagine in their sprite.
MEDIVS.
^ LOrd save me from the evil man, and from the cruel wight
^ Deliver me, which evil do imagine in their sprite.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Wels, or Glasenbury Tune.
^ LOrd save me from the e- uill man, and from the cruel wight
^ Deliver me, which evil do imagine in their sprite.
BASSVS.
^ LOrd save me from the evil man, and from the cruel wight
^ Deliver me, which evil do imagine in their sprite.
Which make on me continu^ll war,
their tongues ^oe they have whet.
3
Like Serpents, underneath their lips
is Adders poison set.
4
Keep me O Lord) from wicked hands
pres^rue me to abide:
Free from the cruel man that means
to cause my steps to slide.
5
The p^oud have laid a snare for me,
and they have spread a ne^:
With cords, in my path-wayes, and gins
for me eke have they set.
6
Therefore I said unto the Lord,
thou a^t my God alone:
Hear me O Lord, O hear my voice,
wherewith I pray and ^one
7
O Lord my God thou only art
the strength that saves me:
My head in day of battle has
been covered still by thee*
8
Let not O Lord the wicked have
the end of his desire:
Per^orme not his ill thought lest he
with pride be set on fire.
9
Of them that compass me about,
the chiefest of them all:
Lord let the mischief of their l^ps*
upon themselves befall.
10
Let coals fall on them, let him cast
them in consuming flame:
And in the deep pits, so as they may
not rise out of the same.
11
For no back-biters shall on earth,
be set in stable plight:
And evil to destruction still
shall haunt the cruel wight.
12
I know the Lord the afflicted will
revenge and judge the poor.
Tht just shall praise thy name, the just shall
dwell with thee evermore.
Psalm 141.
E. Hooper.
CANTVS.
^ O Lord upon thee do I call, Lord have thee unto me: And hearken ^ Lord unto
my voice, when I do cry to thee. As incense let my prayer ^ be directed in
thine eyes: and the up lifting of my hands as ^ evening sacrifice.

MEDIVS.
^ O Lord upon thee do I call, Lord have thee unto me: And hearken ^ Lord unto
my voice, when I do cry to thee, As incense let my prayer ^ be directed in
thine eyes: and the up lifting of my hands, as ^ evening sacrifice.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ O Lord upon thee do I call, Lord have thee unto me: And hearken ^ Lord unto
my voice, when I do cry to thee. As incense let my prayer: ^ be directed in
thine eyes: And the vplifting of my hands as ^ evening sacrifice.

BASSVS.
^ O Lord upon thee do I call, Lord have thee unto me* And hearken ^ Lord unto
my voice, when I do cry to the^. As incense let my prayer ^ be directed in
thine eyes: and the vplifting of my hands, as ^ evening sacrifice.

3
My Lord for guiding of my mouth
set thou a watch before:
And also of my moving lips
O Lord keep thou the door.
4
That I should wicked works commit:
incline thou not my heart:
With ill men of their delicates
Lord let me eat no part.
5
But let the righteous smite me Lord
for that is good for me:
Let him reprove me, and the same
a precious oil shall be.
Such smi^ing shall not break my head,
the time shall shortly fall:
When I shall in their misery
make prayers for them all.
6
Then when in stony places down^
their Judges shall be cast:
Then shall they hear my words, for then
they have a pleasant taste.
7
Our bones about the graves mouth,
^oe scattered are they found:
As he that heweth wood, or be
that diggeth in the ground.
8
But O my Lord my God* mine eyes
do look up unto thee:
In thee (...) all my trust, let not
my soul forsaken be.
9
Whith they have laid to catch me in,
Lord keep me from the snare:
And from the subtle gins of them,
that wicked workers are.
10
The wicked into their own nets
together let them fall:
While I do by thy help escape
the danger of them all.
Psalm 142.
William Harrison.
CANTVS.
^ BEfore the Lord God with my voice, I did send out my cry: And ^ with my
strained voice un- to the Lord God prayed I.

MEDIVS.
^ BEfore the Lord God with my voice, I did send out my cry: And ^ with my
strained voice unto the Lord God prayed I.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
(...).
^ BEfore the Lord God with my voice, I did send out my cry, And ^ with my
strained voice unto the Lord God prayed I.

BASSVS.
^ BEfore the Lord God with my voice, I did send out my cry: And ^ with my
strained voice unto the Lord God prayed I.

2
My meditations in his sight,
to pour I did not spare:
And in the presence of the Lord,
my trouble did declare.
3
Although perplexed was my spirit,
my path is known to thee:
In way where I did walk a snare
they s^ly laid for me.
4
I looked and viewed on my right hand,
but none there would me know:
All refuge failed me, and for
my soul none cared tho.
5
Then cried I Lord to thee, and said,
my hope thou only art:
Thou in the land of living art
my portion and my part.
6
Hark to my cry, for I am brought,
full low, deliver me
From them that do me persecute,
from the too strong they be.
7
That I may praise thy name my soul
from prison Lord bring out:
When thou a^t good to me the just
shall prea^e me round about.
Psalm 143.
John Tomkins B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ LOrd hear my prayer, hark the plaint, that I do^ make to thee: ^ Lord in
thy native truth, and in thy justice answer me.

MEDIVS.
^ LOrd hear my prayer, hark the plaint, that I do make to thee: ^ Lord in
thy native truth, and in thy justice answer me.

TENOR or Playnsong.
Gloucester Tune.
^ LOrd hear my prayer, hark the plaint, that I do make to thee: ^ Lord in
thy native truth, and in thy justice answer me.

BASSVS.
^ LOrd hear my prayer, hark the plaint, that I do make to thee: ^ Lord in
thy native truth, and in thy justice answer me.

2
In judgment with thy ^eruant Lord,
oh, enter not at all:
For justified be in thy sight,
not one that lives shall.
3
The enemy has pursued my soul*
my life to ground has thrown:
And laid me in the dark like them,
that dead are long agone.
4
Within me in perplexity,
was mine accombred spirit:
And in m^ was my troubled heart,
amazed, and af^right.
5
Yet I record time past, in all
thy works I meditate,
Yea, in thy works I meditate,
that thy hands have create.
6
To thee O Lord my God, ^oe I
do stretch my craving hands:
My soul^ desires after thee,
as does the (...) lands.
7
Hear me with speed my spirit does fail^
hide not thy face me from
Else shall I be like them that down
into the pit do go.
8
Let me thy loving kindness in
the morning hear and know:
For in thee is my t^ust, show me
the way that I shall go.
9
For I lift up my soul to thee,
O Lord deluer me:
From all mine enemies, for I
have hidden me with thee.
10
Teach me to do thy will, ^or thou,
thou art my God I say:
Let thy good spirit into the land
of mercy me convey.
11
For thy names sake with quickening grace
alive do thou me make:
And out of trouble bring my soul,
even for thy justice sake.
12
And for thy mercy slay my foes,
O Lord destroy them all
That do oppress my soul, for I
thy servant am and shall.
Psalm 144.
Tho. Ravens. B of M.
CANTVS.
^ Blessed be the Lord my strength that does instruct my hands to fight:
^ The Lord that does my fingers frame to battle by his might.
MEDIVS.
^ Blessed be the Lord my strength that does instruct my hands to fight:
^ The Lord that does my fingers frame to battle by his might.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Hereford Tune.
^ Blessed be the Lord my strength that does instruct my hands to fight:
^ The Lord that does my fingers frame to battle by his might.
BASSVS.
^ Blessed be the Lord my strength that does instr^ct my hands to fight:
^ The Lord that does my fingers frame to battle by his might.
2
He is my goodness, fort and tower,
deliverer and shield,
In him I trust, my people he
subdues to me to yield.
3
O Lord what thing is man that he
thou holdst so high in price?
Or son of man that upon him,
thou think in this wise?
4
Man is but like to vanity,
so (...) his days to end*
5
As fleeting shade, bow down O Lord
the heavens and descend.
6
The mountains touch and they shall smoke
cast forth thy lightning flame
And scatter them, thine arrows shoot,
consume them with the same.
7
Send down thy hand even from above
O Lord deliver me:
Take me from waters great, from hand
of strangers make me free.
8
Whose subtle mouth of vanity,
and fondness does entreat:
And their right hand, is a right hand,
of falsehood and deceit.
9
A new song I will sing O God,
and singing will I be,
On Violl and on Instrument,
ten stringed unto thee.
10
Even he it is that only gives
deliverance to Kings:
Unto his servant David help,
from hurtful sword he brings.
11
From strangers hand me save and shield
whose mouths talk vanity;
And their right hand, is a right hand
of guile and subtlety.
12
That our sons may be as the plant,
whom growing youth does rear:
Our daughters as carved corner stones,
like to a palace fair,
13
Our garners full and plenty may,
with sundry sorts be found:
Our sheep bring thousands in our streets,
ten thousands may abound.
14
Our Oxen be to labor strong,
that none do us invade:
There be no goings out, no cry^
within our streets be made:
15
The people blessed are that with
such blessings are so stored:
Yea, blessed all the people are
whose God is God the Lord.
Psalm 145.
E. Hooper.
CANTVS.
^ THee will I laud my God and King, and bless thy name for aye: ^ For ever
will I praise thy name, and bless thee day by day Great ^ is the Lord, most
worthy praise, his greatness none can ^each: From ^ race to race they shall
thy works praise, and thy power preach.

MEDIVS.
^ THee will I laud my God and King, and bless thy name for aye: ^ For ever
will I praise thy name, and bless thee day by day. Great ^ is the Lord, most
worthy praise his greatness none can ^each: From ^ race to race they shall thy
works praise, and thy power preach.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ THee will I laud my God and King, and bless thy name for aye: ^ For ever
will I praise thy name* and bless thee day by day. Great ^ is the Lord, most
worthy praise, his greatness none can reach: From ^ race to race they shall
thy works praise, and thy power preach.

BASSVS.
^ THee will I laud my God and King, and bless thy name for aye: ^ For ever
will I praise thy name, and bless thee day by day. Great ^ is the Lord, most
worthy praise, his greatness none can reach: From ^ race to race they shall
thy works praise and thy power preach.

5
I of thy glorious majesty
the beauty will record:
And meditate upon thy works,
most wonderful O Lord.
6
And they shall of thy power and of
thy fearful acts declare:
And I to publish all abroad
thy greatness will not spare.
7
And they into the mention shall
break of thy goodness great:
And I aloud thy righteousness
in singing shall repeat.
8
The Lord our God is gracious,
and merciful also:
Of great abounding mercy, and
to anger he is slow.
9
Yea, good to all, and all his works,
his mercy does exceed:
10
Lo, all thy works do praise thee Lord,
and do thy honor spread.
11
Thy Saints do bless thee, and they do
thy kingdoms glory show:
12
And blaze thy power to cause the sons
of men his power to know.
The second part.
13
And of his mighty Kingdom eke,
to spread the glorious praise:
Thy Kingdom Lord a Kingdom is
that does endure always*
14
And thy dominion through each age
endures without decay:
The Lord vpholdeth them that fall,
their sliding he does stay.
15
The eyes of all do wait on thee
thou do them all relieve:
And thou to each sufficing food
in season due do give,
16
Thou openest thy bounteous hand,
and bounteously do fill:
All things whatsoever do live,
with gifts of thy good will.
17
The Lord is just in all his ways,
his works are holy all:
18
Near all he is that call on him,
in truth that on him call.
19
He the desires which they require
that fear him will fulfill:
And he will hear them when they cry,
and save them all he will.
20
The (...) preserues all those to him
that bear a loving heart:
But he all them that wicked are
will utterly subvert.
21
My thankful mouth shall gladly speak
the praises of the Lord*
All flesh to praise his holy name
for ever shall accord.
Psalm 146.
John Bennet.
CANTVS.
^ MY soul praise thou the Lord always, my God I will confess:
^ While breath and life prolong my days, my tongue no time shall cease.
MEDIVS.
^ MY soul praise thou the Lord always, my God I will confess
^ While breath and life prolong my days, my tongue no time shall cease.
TENOR or Playnsong.
Cheshire Tune.
^ MY soul praise thou the Lord always, my God I will confess:
^ While breath and life prolong my days, my tongue no time shall cease.
BASSVS.
^ MY soul praise thou the Lord always my God I will confess:
^ While breath and life prolong my days, my tongue no time shall cease.
3
Trust not in worldly Princes then,
though they abound in wealth:
Nor in the sons of mortal men,
in whom there is no health.
4
For why? their breath does soon depart,
to earth anon they fall:
And then the counsels of their hea^ts
decay and perish all.
5
O happy is that man I say,
whom I cobs God does aid
And he whose hope does not decay,
but on the Lord is staid.
6
Which made the earth and waters deep,
the heavens high withal:
Which does his word and promise keep
in truth and ever shall.
7
With right always he does proceed,
for such as suffer wrong:
The poor and hungry he does feed,
and loose the fetters strong.
8
The Lord does send the blind their sight
the lame to limbs iestore:
The Lord (I say) does love the right,
and just man evermore.
9
He does defend the fatherless.
and strangers sad in heart:
And quit the widow from distress,
and ill men's ways subvert.
10
Thy Lord and God eternally,
O Sion still shall reign:
In time of all posterity,
for ever to remain.
Psalm 147.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ PRaise ye the Lord for it is good un- to our God to sing: for it is ^
pleasant, and to praise it is a comely thing.

MEDIVS.
^ PRaise ye the Lord, for it is good un- to our God to sing: for it is ^
pleasant, and to praise it is a comely thing.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
Manchester Tune.
^ PRaise ye the Lord, for it is good un- to our God to sing: for it is ^
pleasant, and to praise it is a comely thing.

BASSVS.
^ PRaise ye the Lord, for it is good un- to our God to sing: for it ^ is
pleasant, and to praise it is a comely thing.

2
The Lord his own Jerusalem,
he builds up alone:
And the dispersed of Israel
does ^ather into one.
3
He heal^s the broken in their hea^^
their sorts up does he bind:
4
He counts the number of the Stars,
and names them in their kind.
5
Great is the Lord, great is his power,
his wisdom infinite.
6
The Lord relieues the meek, and throws
to ground the wicked wight.
7
Sing unto God the Lord with praise,
unto the Lord rejoice:
And to our God upon the Harp,
advance your singing voice
8
He couers heaven with clouds, and for
the earth prepares rain:
And on the mountains he does make
the grass to grow again.
9
He gives to beasts their food, and to
young Ravens when they cry.
10
His pleasure not in strength of horse,
nor in man's legs does he.
11
But in all those that fear the Lord,
the Lord has his delight:
And such as do attend upon
his mercies shining light.
The second part.
12
O praise the Lord Jerusalem,
thy God O Sion praise:
13
For he the bars has forged strong,
wherewith thy gates he stays.
14
Thy children he has blessed in thee,
and in thy borders he*
Does settle peace, and with the flower
of wheat he fills thee.
15
And his commandment upon
the earth he sends out:
And eke his word with speedy course
does swiftly run about.
16
He gives snow like wool, hoare frost,
like ashes he does spread:
17
Like morsels casts his ice, thereof
the cold who can abide?
12
He sends forth his mighty Word,
and melts them again:
His wind he makes to blow, and then
the waters flow amain.
19
The doctrine of his holy word,
to Jacob does he show:
His statutes and his judgments he
gives Israel to know.
20
With every nation has he not
so dealt, nor have they known
His ^^cret counsels, ye therefore,
praise ye the Lord alone.
Psalm 148.
G. Kirby.
CANTVS.
^ Give laud unto the Lord, from heaven that is so hie: Praise him ^ in deed
and word, above the star- ry ^kye. And also ye, his Angels all, ^ armies
royal, praise him with glee.

MEDIVS.
^ Give laud unto the Lord, from heaven that is so hie: Praise him ^ in deed
and word, above the star-ry sky. And also ye, his Angels all ^ armies royal,
praise him with glee.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ Give laud unto the Lord, from heaven that is so hie: Praise him ^ in deed
and word, above the starry sky. And also ye, his Angels all, ^ armies royal,
praise him with glee.

BASSVS.
^ Give laud unto the Lord, from heaven that is so hie: Praise him ^ in deed
and word above the starry sky. And also ye, his Angels all, ^ armies royal,
praise him with glee.

3
Praise him both Moon and Sun,
which are so clear and bright*
The same of you be done*
Ye glisterings Stars of light.
4
And eke no less,
Ye heavens fair:
5
And clouds of the air,
His laud express.
6
For at his word they were
All formed as we see:
At his voice did appear
All things in their degree:
Which he se^ fast,
To them he made
A law and trade
For aye to last.
7
Extol and praise Gods name,
On earth ye Dragons fell,
All deepes do ye the same,
For it becomes you well*
8
Him magnify
Fire, Hail, Ice, Snow,
And storms that blow,
at his decree.
9
The hills and mountains all,
And trees that fruitful are,
The Cedars great and tall
His worthy praise declare:
10
Beasts and cattle,
Yea, Bi^ds flying,
And wo^mes creeping
that on earth dwell.
11
All Kings both more and less,
With all their pompous train,
Princes and all Judges
That in the wo^ld remain
Exalt his name.
12
Young men and maids,
Old men and babes
Do ye the same.
13
For his name shall we prove,
To be most excellent,
Whose praise is far above,
The earth and firmament.
14
For sure he shall,
Exalt with bliss:
The horn of his.
And help them all.
15
His Saints all shall forth tell,
His praise and worthiness:
The children of Israel,
Each one both more and less.
16
And also they,
That with good will:
His words fulfill,
and them obey.
Psalm 149.
Simon Stubbs.
CANTVS.
^ SIng ye unto the Lord our God, a new rejoicing song: And ^ let the praise
of him be heard his ho- ly Saints among.

MEDIVS.
^ SIng ye unto the Lord our God a new rejoicing song And ^ let the praise of
him be heard his holy Saints among.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
Ma^tyrs Tune.
^ SIng ye unto the Lord our God, a new rejoicing song: And ^ let the praise of
him be heard his holy Saints among.

BASSVS.
^ SIng ye unto the Lord our God, a new rejoicing song: And ^ let the praise
of him be heard his holy Saints among.

2
Let Israel re^^yce in him*
that made him of nothing:
And let the seed of S^on eke,
be joyful in their King.
3
Let them sound praise with voice of flute,
unto his holy name*
And with the Timbrell and the Harp
sing praises of the same.
4
For why? the Lord his pleasure all
has in his people set:
And by deliverance he will raife
the meek to glory great.
5
With glory and with honor now,
let all the Saints rejoice.
And now aloud upon their beds
advance their singing voice.
6
And in their mouths let be the acts
of God the mighty Lord,
And in their hands eke let them bear
a double edged sword.
7
To plague the heathen and correct
the people with their hands:
8
To bind their stately Kings in chains,
their Lords in iron bands.
9
To execute on them the doom,
that written is before:
This honor all his Saint^ shall have,
praise ye the Lord therefore.
Psalm 150.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ Yield unto God the mighty Lord praise in his Sanctuary:
^ And praise him in the firmament, that shows his power on hie.
MEDIVS.
^ Yield unto God the mighty Lord, praise in his Sanctuary:
^ And praise him in the firmament, that shows his power on hie.
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Winchester Tune.
^ Yield unto God the mighty Lord, praise in his Sanctuary:
^ And praise him in the firmament, that shows his power on hie.
BASSVS.
^ Yield un- to God the mighty Lord, praise in his Sanctuary
^ And praise him in the firmament* that shows his power on hie.
2
Advance his name and praise him in
his nughty acts always:
According to his excellency,
of greatness give him praise.
3
His praises with the Princely noise,
of sounding trumpets blow:
Praise him upon the Violl, and
upon the Harp also.
4.
Praise him with Timbrel and with Flute,
Organs and Virginals:
5
With sounding Simbals praise ye him,
praise him with loud Simbals.
6
What ever has the benefit
of breathing praise the Lord:
To praise the name of God the Lord
agree with one accord.
A Psalm before Morning Prayer.
T. Tallis.
CANTVS.
Cannon 2. parts in one.

^ PRaise the Lord O ye Gentiles all, which has brought you into his ^ light:
O praise him all people mortal, as it is most worthy and right.

MEDIVS.
^ PRaise the Lord O ye Gentiles all, which has brought you into his ^ light:
O praise him all people mortal, as it is most worthy and right.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ PRaise the Lord O ye Gentiles all which has brought you into his ^ light:
O praise him all people mortal, as it is most worthy and right.

BASSVS.
^ PRaise the Lord O ye Gentiles all, which has brought you into his ^ light:
O praise him all people mortal, as it is most worthy and right.

For he is full determined,
on us to pour out his mercy:
And the Lords truth be ye assured,
abides perpetually.
Glory be to God the Father,
And to Jesus Christ his true son:
With the holy Ghost in like manner,
Now and at every season.
A Psalm before Evening Prayer.
T. R.
CANTVS.
^ BEhold now give heed such as be the Lords servants faithful and ^ true:
Come praise the Lord every degree, with such songs as to him are due.

MEDIVS.
^ BEhold now give heed such as be the Lords servants faithful and ^ true:
Come praise the Lord eve- ry degree, with such songs as to him are due.

TENOR, or Faburden.
^ BEhold now give heed such as be the Lords servants faithful and ^ true:
Come praise the Lord every degree, with such songs as to him are due.

BASSVS.
^ BEhold now give heed such as be the Lords servants faith- full and ^ true:
Come praise the Lord every degree with such songs as to him are due.

O ye that stand in the Lords, house,
Even in our own Gods mansion:
Praise ye the Lord so bounteous,
Which works our salvation.
Lift up your hands in his holy place,
Yea, and that in the time of night:
Praise ye the Lord, which gives all grace
For he is a Lord of great might.
Then shall the Lord out of Sion,
Which made heaven and earth by his power.
Give to you and your nation,
His blessing, mercy, and favor.
Audi Israel.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ ATtend my people and give ear, of ferly things I will thee tell: ^ see that
my words in mind thou bear and to my precepts listen well.

MEDIVS.
^ ATtend my people and give ear, of ferly things I will thee tell: ^ See that
my words in mind thou bear, and to my precepts listen well.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ ATtend my people and give ear, of ferly things I will thee tell: ^ See that
my words in mind thou bear, and to my precepts listen well.

BASSVS.
^ ATtend my people and give ear, of ferly things I will thee tell: ^ See that
my words in mind thou bear, and to my precepts li- sten well,

1
I am thy sovereign Lord and God,
Which has thee brought from careful thrall
And eke (...) from Pharaos rod,
Make thee no Gods on them to call
2
Nor fa^^ioned form of any thing*
In heaven or earth to worship it:
For I thy God by reuen^ing*
with grievous plagues this sin will smite,
3
Take not in vain his holy name,
Abuse it not after thy will:
(...) blame
And in ^is wrath he would thee spill^
4
The Lord from work the seventh day ceast,
And brought all things to perfect end:
So thou and thine that day take rest,
That to^Gods hests ye may attend.
5
Unto thy parents honor give,
As Gods commandments d^e pretend*
That thou long days and good may live
In earth where God a place does lend.
6
Beware of murder and cruel hate.
7
All ^^thy fornication fear.
8
See thou steal not in any rate,
9
False witness against no man bear.
10
Thy neighbors house wish not to have
His wife, or ought that he calth mine:
His field, his Ox, his Ass, his Slave,
Or any thing which is not thine.
A Prayer.
The spirit of grace (...) us O Lord
To keep these laws our hearts restore:
And cause us all with one accord,
To magnify thy name therefore.
For of our selves no strength we have
To keep these laws after thy will:
Thy might therefore O Christ we crave
That we in thee may them fulfill.
Lord for thy names sake grant us this
Thou art our strength O Savior Christ
Of thee to speed how should we miss
In whom our treasure does consist?
To thee for evermore be praise,
With the father in each respect:
And with the holy spirit always,
The comforter of thine elect.
The Lords Prayer.
G. Kirby.
CANTVS.
^ Our Father which in heaven art, and make us all one brotherhood, ^ to call
upon thee with one heart, our heavenly Father and our God, grant ^ we pray not
with lips alone, but with the hearts deep sigh and groan.

MEDIVS.
^ Our father which in heaven art, and make us all one brotherhood, ^ to call
upon thee with one heart, our heavenly Father and our God, grant ^ we pray not
with lips alone, but with the hearts deep sigh and groan.

TENOR, or Faburden.
1. High Dutch Tune.
^ Our Father which in heaven art, and make us all one brotherhood, ^ to call
upon thee with one heart, our heavenly father and our God* grant ^ we pray not
with lips alone* but with the hearts deep sigh and groan.

BASSVS.
^ Our Father which in heaven art, and make us all one brotherhood, ^ to call
upon thee with one heart, our heavenly Father and our God* grant ^ we pray not
with lips alone but with the hearts deep sigh and groan.

Thy blessed name be sanctified,
Thy holy word might us inflame,
In holy life for to abide,
To magnify thy holy name:
From all errors defend and keep
The little flock of thy poor sheep*
Thy kingdom come even at this hour,
And henceforth everlastingly
Thy holy Ghost into us pour,
With all his gifts most plenteously:
From Satan's rage and filthy band
Defend us with thy mighty hand.
Thy will be done with diligence,
Like as in heaven in earth also:
In trouble grant us patience,
Thee to obey in wealth and woe:
Let not flesh, blood, or any ill
Prevail against thy holy will:
Give us this day our daily bread,
And all other good gfts of thine:
Keep us from war and from bloodshed
Also from sickness, dearth and pine:
That we may live in quietness,
Without all greedy carfulness.
Forgive us our offenses all,
Relieve our careful conscience*
As we forgive both great and small,
Which unto us have done offense:
Prepare us Lord for to serve thee,
In perfect love and unity.
O Lord into temptation
L^^d us not when the fiend does rage,
To withstand his invasion
Give power and strength to every age,
Arm and make strong thy feeble host,
With faith and with the holy Ghost.
O Lord from evil deliver us*
The days and times are dangero^us:
From everlasting death save us*
And in our last need comfort us*
A blessed end to us bequeath,
Into thy hands our souls receive.
For thou O Lord art King of Kings,
And thou have power over all:
Thy glory shines in all things,
In the wide world universal:
Amen, let ^t be done O Lord,
That we have prayed with one accord.
The Creed.
G. Kirby.
CANTVS.
^ ALl my be^^efe and confidence is in the Lord of might: The ^ Father which
all things has made, the day and eke the night. The ^ heavens and the
firmament, and also many a star: the earth and all that ^ is therein, which
pass man's reason far.

MEDIVS.
^ ALl my belief and confidence is in the Lord of might: The ^ Father which
all things has made, the day and eke the night. The ^ heavens and the
firmament, and also many a star: the earth and all ^ that is therein, which
pass man's reason far.

TENOR, or Plainsong.
^ ALl my belief and confidence is in the Lord of might: The ^ Father which
all things has made, the day and eke the night. The ^ heavens and the
firmament, and al- so many a star the earth and all that ^ is therein, which
pass man's reason far.

BASSVS.
^ ALl my belief and confidence is in the Lord of might* The ^ Father which
all things has made, the day and eke the night: The ^ heavens and the
firmament, and al- so many a star: the earth and all ^ that is therein, which
pass man's reason far.

And in like manner I believe,
In Christ our Lord his Son:
Coequall with the Deity,
And man in flesh and bone.
Conceived by the holy Ghost,
His holy word does me assure:
And of his mother Mary borne,
Yet she a Virgin pure.
Because mankind to Satan wa^,
For sin in bond and thrall,
He came and offered up himself
To death, to save us all.
And suffering most grievous pain,
Then Pilate being Judge:
Was crucified on the Cross^,
And thereat did not grudge*
And so he died in the flesh,
But quickened in the spirit:
His body then was buried,
As is our use and right*
His spirit after this descend
Into the lower parts:
To them that long in darkness were,
The true light of their hearts.
And in the third day of his death,
He rose to life again:
To the'nd he might be glorified,
Out of all grief and pain:
Ascending to the heavens hie,
To sit in glory still.
On Gods right hand his father deer^,
According to his will.
Until the day of judgment come,
When he shall come again:
with Angels, power, yet of that day
We all be uncertain.
To judge all people righteously,
Whom he has dearly bought:
The living and the dead also.
Which he has made of naught.
And in the holy spirit of God,
My faith to satisfy:
The third person in Trinity
Believe I steadfastly.
The holy and Catholic Church,
That Gods word does maintain?
And holy Scripture does allow,
Which Satan does disdain.
And also I do trust to have,
By Jesus Christ his death:
Release and pardon for my sins,
And that only by faith.
What time all flesh shall use again
Before the God of might:
And see him with their bodily eyes,
Which now does give them light.
And then shall Christ our Savior,
The Sheep and Goats divide:
And give life everlastingly
To those whom he has tried,
Within his realm celestial,
In glory for to rest:
With all the holy company,
Of Saints and Angels blessed.
Which serve the Lord omnipotent,
Obediently each hour:
To whom be all dominion,
And praise for evermore.
A Prayer to the holy Ghost.
John Milton.
CANTVS.
^ COme holy spirit the God of might, comforter of us all: Teach ^ us to know
thy word aright, that we do never fall.

MEDIVS.
^ CCome holy Spirit the God of might comforter of us all. Teach ^ us to know
thy word aright, that we do ne- uer fall.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
York Tune.
^ COme holy spirit the God of might, comforter of us all: Teach ^ us to know
thy word aright, that we do never fall.

BASSVS.
^ COme holy spirit the God of might, comforter of us all: Teach ^ us to know
thy word aright, that we do never fall.

O holy Ghost visit our coast,
defend us with thy shield:
Against all sin and wickedness,
Lord help us win the field.
Lord keep our King and his Counsel,
and give them will and might
To persevere in thy Gospel,
which can put sin to ^light:
O Lord which give thy hol^ word,
send Preachers plenteously:
That in the same we may accord,
and therein live and die.
O holy Spirit direct aright,
the preachers of thy word:
That thou by them may cut down sin
as it were with a sword.
Depart not from those pastors pure,
but aid them at all need:
Which break to us the bread of life,
whereon our souls do feed.
O Blessed Spirit of truth keep us
in peace and unity:
Keep us from sects and errors all,
and from all Papistry.
Convert all those that are our foes*
and bring them to thy light:
That they and we may well agree,
and praise thee day and night.
O Lord increase our faith in us,
and love so to abound:
That man and wife be void of strife,
and neighbors about us round.
In our time give thy peace (O Lord)
to nations far and me:
And teach them all thy holy word,
that we may sing to thee.
All glory to the Trinity,
that is of mighties most:
The living Father and the Son,
and eke the holy Ghost.
As it has been in all the time,
that has been heretofore:
As it is now, and so shall be,
henceforth for evermore.
Da pacem.
Tho. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ Give peace in these our days O Lord, great dangers are now at hand: ^ thine
enemies with one accord, Christ's name in eve- ry land. Seek to ^ deface, root
out and race, thy true right worship indeed: Be thou the ^ stay, Lord we thee
pray, thou helpst alone in all need.

MEDIVS.
^ Give peace in these our days O^ Lord, great dangers are now at hand: ^
thine enemies with one accord, Christ's name in every land. Seek to ^ de- face,
root out and race, thy true right worship in deed: Be thou the ^ stay, Lord we
thee pray, thou helpst a- lone in all need.

TENOR, or Faburden.
2. High Dutch Tune.
^ Give peace in these our days O Lord, great dangers are now at hand: ^ thine
enemies with one accord, Christ's name in every land. Seek to ^ deface, root
out and race, thy true right worship indeed: Be thou the ^ stay, Lord we thee
pray, thou helpst alone in all need.

BASSVS.
^ Give peace in these our days O Lord, great dangers are now at hand: ^ thine
enemies with one accord, Christ's name in every land: Seek to ^ deface, root
out and race, thy true right worship in deed: Be thou the ^ stay, Lord we thee
pray, thou helpst alone in all need.

Give us tha^ Peace which we do lack,
Through misbeliefe and (...) life:
Thy word to offer thou do not slack,
Which we unkindly gain strive:
with fi^e and sword,
Thy healthful word,
Some persecute and oppress:
Some with the mouth
Confess the truth,
Without sincere godliness.
Give peace, and us thy spirit down send,
With grief and repentance true
Do pierce our hearts our lives to amend,
And by faith Christ ren^e,
That fear and dread,
War and blood s^^ed.
Through thy sweet mercy and grace
May from us slide,
Thy truth may bide,
And shine in every place.
The Lamentation.
T. Ravens. B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ O Lord in thee is all my trust, give are unto my woeful cry: ^ Refuse me not
that am unjust, but bowing down thy heavenly eye. ^ Behold how I do still
lament my sins, wherein, I do offend ^ O Lord for them shall I be shent,
Since thee to please I do entend.

MEDIVS.
^ O Lord in thee is all my trust, give ear unto my woeful cry: ^ Refuse me
not that am unjust, but bowing down thy heavenly eye. ^ Behold how I do still
lament my sins wherein I do offend: ^ O Lord for them shall I be shent, Since
thee to please I do entend.

TENOR, or Playnsong.
^ O Lord in thee is all my trust, give ear unto my woeful cry: ^ Refuse me
not that am unjust, but bowing down thy heavenly eye, ^ Behold how I do still
lament my sins, wherein I do offend: ^ O Lord for them shall I be shent,
since thee to please I do entend.

BASSVS.
^ O Lord in thee is all my trust, give ear unto my woeful cry: ^ Refuse me
not that am unjust but bowing down thy heavenly eye. ^ Behold how I do still
lament, my sins wherein I do offend: ^ O Lord for them shall I be shent,
Since thee to please I do entend.

No no, not so, thy will is bent,
to deal with sinners in thine ire:
But when in heart they shall repent,
thou grantst with speed their just desire.
To thee therefore still shall I cry,
to wash away my sinful crime:
Thy blood O Lord is not yet dry,
but that it may help me in time.
Haste thee, O Lord, haste thee I say,
to pour on me the gifts of grace:
That when this life shall fleet away,
in heaven with thee I may have place.
Where thou do reign eternally,
with God* which once did down thee send
Where Angels sing continually,
to thee be praise world without end.
A Thanksgiving.
MEDIVS.
Simon Stubbs.
^ THe Lord be thanked for his gifts, and mercies evermore,
^ That he does show unto his Saints, to him be laud therefore.
MEDIVS.
^ THe Lord be thanked for his gifts, and mercies evermore:
^ That he does show unto his Saints, to him be laud therefore,
TENOR, or Playnsong.
Martyrs Tune.
^ THe Lord be thanked for his gifts, and mercies evermore,
^ That he does show unto his Saints, to him be laud therefore.
BASSVS.
^ THe Lord be thanked for his gifts and mercies evermore:
^ That he does show unto his Saints, to him be laud therefore.
Our tongues cannot so praise the Lord,
as he does right deserve:
Our hearts cannot of him so think,
as he does us preserve.
His benefits they be so great,
to us that be but sin:
That at our hands for recompense,
there is no hope to win,
O sinful flesh that should have,
such mercies of the Lord:
Thou do deserve most worthily,
of him to be abhord,
Naught else but sin and wretchedness
does rest within our hearts:
And stubbornly against the Lord,
we daily play our parts.
The Sun above in firmament,
that is to us a light.
Does show it self more clear and pure
then we be in his sight.
The heavens above and all therein,
more holy are then we:
They serve the Lord in their estate,
each one in his degree.
They do not strive for mastership,
nor slack their office set:
But fear the Lord and do his will,
hate is to them no let.
Also the earth and all therein,
of God it is in awe:
It does observe the Formers will,
by skillful natures law.
The Sea and all that is therein,
does bend when God does beck:
The spirits beneath do tremble all,
and fear his wrathful check.
But we (...) for whom all those
(...) made, them for to (...),
Do not so know or love the Lord,
as does the Ox or Mule.
A law he gave for us to know,
what was his holy will:
He would us good, but we would not
avoid the thing is ill.
(...) one of us that seeks out
the Lord of life to please:
No^ do the thing that might us join
to Christ and quiet ease,
Thus are we all his enem^^^,
we can it not deny:
And he again of his good will
would not that we should die.
Therefore when remedy was none
to bring us unto life:
The Son of God our flesh he took
to end our mortal strife,
And all the law of God the Lord,
he did it full obey:
And for our sins upon the cross,
his blood our debts did pay.
And that we should not yet forget
what good he to us wrought:
A sign he left our eyes to tell*
that he our bodies bought.
In Bread and Wine here visible
unto our eye and taste:
His mercies great thou ma^st record
if that his spirit thou have.
As once the corn did live and grow,
and was cut down with Sith:
And threshed out with many stripes,
out of the husk to drive.
And as the mill with violence
did tear it out so small:
And make it like to earthly dust
not sparing it at all.
And as the Oven with fire hot,
did close it up in heat:
And all this done that I have said
that it should be our meat.
So was the Lord in his ripe age
cut down by cruel death:
His soul he gave to torments great,
and yielded up his breath.
Because that he to us might be
an everlasting bread:
With much reproach and troubles great
his life on earth he led.
And as the grapes in pleasant time
are pressed very sore:
And plucked down when they be ripe,
and let to grow no more.
Because the juice that in them is
as comfortable drink:
We should receive and joyful be,
when sorrows make us shrink.
So Christ his blood out pressed was
with nails, and eke with spear:
The juice whereof does save all those
that rightly do him fear.
And as the corns by unity
into one loaf are knit:
So is the Lord and his whole Chu^rch,
though he in heaven sit.
As many grapes make but one wine,
so should we be but one,
In faith and love in Christ above,
and unto Christ alone.
Leading a life without all strife,
in quiet rest and peace:
From envy and from malice both
our hearts and tongues to cease.
Which if we do then shall we show
that we his chosen be:
By faith in him to lead a life
as always willed he.
And that we may so do indeed,
God send us all his grace:
Then after death we shall be (...)
with him to have a place.
A Prayer
Tho. Rauenscroft B. of M.
CANTVS.
^ Preserve us Lord by thy dear word, from Turk and Pope defend us Lord: ^
which both would thrust out of his throne, Our Lord Jesus Christ thy dear son.

MEDIVS.
^ Preserve us Lord by thy dear word, from Turk and Pope defend us Lord: ^
which both would thrust out of his throne, our Lord Jesus Christ thy dear Sun*

TENOR, or Faburden.
3. High Dutch Tune.
^ Preserve us Lord by thy dear word, from Turk and Pope defend us Lord ^
which both would thrust out of his throne, our Lord Jesus Christ thy dear son.

BASSVS.
^ Preserve us Lord by thy dear word, from Turk and Pope defend us Lord: ^
which both would thrust out of his throne, our Lord Jesus Christ thy dear Sun,

Lord Jesus Christ show forth thy might,
that thou art Lord of Lords by right:
Thy poor afflicted flock defend,
that they may praise thee without end*
God holy Ghost our comforter,
be our patron help and succor:
Give us one mind and perfect peace,
all gifts of grace in us increase*
Thou living God in persons three*
thy name be praised in unity:
In all our need so us defend,
that we may praise thee world without end*
Errata.
Psalm 120.
CANTVS.
^ And tongues of false re- port.

What other faults are escaped in the first Repetition of the English, Scottish
and wealch Tunes of the psalms, look into the second Repetition of them, and
you shall find it amended.

A general Confession of sins, with other Prayers for the Morning and
Evening, to be used in Families, and public Assemblies.
O Most merciful and loving Father, whose love is infinite, and whose mercy
endures for ever. We sinful creatures, trusting in thine unspeakable
goodness and love toward us, do appear this morning before thy divine
majesty, most humbly confessing our manifold sins and innumerable
transgressions of thy Commandments and fatherly w^l: against thee only,
against thee (O Lord) have we sinned, we acknowledge our offenses, we accuse
our selves unto thee (O merciful Lord) and will not hide our unrighteousness.
We f^nd in our selves nothing but ignorance of thy will, disobedience,
mistrust, doubtfulnesse in thy goodness, and incredulit^^* hatred and contempt
of spiritual things, self-love, confidence in our selves, and fervent lusting
after carnal things of this world: and this tree of our corrupt nature
brings forth continu^lly in us none other fruits, but rotten and v^sauoury
works of the flesh, in thoughts, words and doings, unto condemnation. Wherefore
we humbly beseech thy fatherly goodness, even for thy Son Jesus Christ's sake,
whom thou have set forth for a purchase of mercy to us, through faith in his
blood, make our hearts clean, take away our stony hea^ts, and give us true and
lively faith, working in us unfeigned repentance and amendment of our sinful
life Have mercy upon us, and forgive us our sins for thy Sons sake*
certify our conscience of the remission of the same by thy holy Spirit, by
whose operation so mortify in us our old man, the whole body of sin, that we
continually dying unto sin, may walk in newness of life, to the glory of thy
holy Name, through Jesus Christ our Savior, Amen.

A Prayer for the Morning.
O Eternal God and heavenly Father, seeing that by thy great mercy, we have
quietly passed this night, grant we beseech thee that we may bestow this day
wholly in thy service, so that all our thoughts, words and deeds may redownd to
the glory of thy Name, and good example of our brethren. And as it has ple^sed
thee to make the Sun to shine upon the earth to give us bodily light: even so
vouchsafe to illuminate our understanding with the brightness of thy spirit,
to direct us in the way of righteousness, so that what thing soever we shall
apply our selves unto, our special care and purpose may be to walk in thy
fear, and to serve and honor thee, looking for all our wealth and prosperity
to come from thy only blessing, that we may take nothing in hand, which shall
not be agreeable to thy most blessed will. Furthermore, that we may in such sort
travel for our bodies and for this present life, that we may have always a
further regard, that is, to the heavenly life, which thou have promised to thy
children: and in the mean season, that it may please thee to preserve and
defend us both in body and soul, to strengthen us against all the temptations
of the Devil, and to deliver us from all perils and dangers that may happen
unto us, if we be not defended with thy godly power. And for as much, as to
begin well, and not to continue, is nothing: we beseech thee to receive us not
only this day into thy holy protection: but also for the time of our whole
life, continuing and increasing in us daily thy good grace and gifts thereof,
until thou shall bring us to that happy state, where we shall fully and for
ever be joined unto thy Son Jesus Christ our Savior which is the true light
of our souls, shining day and night perpetually: and to the end that we may
obtain such grace at thy hand, vouchsafe (most merciful father) to forgive
and forget all our sins, which we (have heretofore committed against thee,
and for thine infinite mercies sake to pardon the same, as thou have promised
to those that ask of thee with unfeigned hearts, for whom as for our selves,
we make our humble petitions unto thee, in the name of thy Son, our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, in such sort as he has taught us, saying: Our Father
which art, etc.

An Evening Prayer.
O Lord God. Father everlasting and full of pity, we acknowledge and confess,
that we be not worthy to lift up our eyes to heaven, much less to present our
selves before thy divine majesty, with confidence that thou will hear our
prayers and grant our requests, if we consider our own wretched deseruings.
For our consciences do accuse us, and our sins witness against us, and we
know that thou art and upright Judge, which do not justify the sinners and
wicked men, but punishest the faults of such as transgress thy Commandments.
Yet most merciful Father, since it has pleased thee to command us to call
upon thee in all our troubles and adversities, promising even then to help us
when we feel our selves, as it were swallowed up of death and desperation, we
utterly renounce all worldly confidence and trust, and fly to thy sovereign
goodness as our only stay and refuge, beseeching thee not to call to
remembrance our manifold sins, and wickedness, whereby we continually
provoke thy wrath and indignation against us, neither our negligence, nor our
unkindness, which have neither worthily esteemed, nor in our lives
sufficiently expressed the sweet comfort of thy Gospel revealed unto us, but
rather to accept the obedience and death of thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord,
who by offering up his body in sacrifice once for all, has made a sufficient
recompense for all our sins. Have mercy therefore upon us (O Lord) and forgive
us our offenses, teach us by thy holy Spirit that we may rightly weigh them and
earnestly repent us for the same: And so much the rather (O Lord our God)
because that the reprobate, and such as thou have forsaken cannot praise thee
nor call upon thy name: but the repenting heart, the sorrowful mind, the
conscience oppressed, hungring and thirsting for thy grace, shall ever set
forth thy praise and glory. And albeit w^^ be but worms and dust, yet thou art
our Creator, and we be the work of thy hands, yea thou art our Father, and
we thy children, thou art our shepherd and we thy flock, thou art our
Redeemer and we thy people, whom thou have deerly bought, thou art our God,
and we are thine inheritance. Correct us not therefore in thine anger (O Lord
our God) neither according to our deserts do thou punish us, but mercifully
chastise us with a fatherly affection, that all the world may know, that at
what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sin from the bottom of his
heart, thou will put away all his wickedness out of thy remembrance, as thou
have promised by thy holy Prophet. Finally, forasmuch, as it has pleased thee
to make the night for man to rest in, as thou have ordained him the day to
travel, grant O dear Father, that we may so take our bodily rest, that our
souls may continually watch for the time that our Lord Jesus Christ shall
appear for our full deliverance out of this mortal l^fe, and in the mean
season, that we be not overcome by any fantasies, dreams, or other
temptations, but may fully set our minds upon thee, love thee, fear thee, and
rest in thee, in such sort that our very sleep also may be to the glory of thy
holy Name. Furthermore, that our sleep be not excessive or overmuch, after the
insatiable desire of the flesh, but only sufficient to content our weak
nature, that we may the better be disposed to live in all godly conversation,
to the glory of thy holy Name, and profit of our brethren, through Jesus Christ
our Lord, in whose Name we make our humble petitions unto thee, as he has
taught us, saying: Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for true repentance.
MOst gracious God, and merciful Father of our Savior Jesus Christ, because I
have sinned and done wickedly* and through thy goodness have received a desire
of Repentance, whereunto this thy long-suffering does draw my hard heart, I
beseech thee for thy great mercies sake in Christ, to work the same Repentance
in me, and by thy Spirit, power and grace, so to humble, mortify, and fear my
conscience for my sins to salvation, that in thy good time thou may comfort
and quicken me again, through Jesus Christ thy dearly beloved Son. So be it.

A Prayer before the receiving of the holy Communion.
O Father of mercy and God of all consolation, seeing all creatures do
acknowledge and confess thee to be their Governor and Lord, it becomes us,
the workmanship of thine own hands, at all times to reverence and magnify thy
godly Majesty: first, for that thou have created us to thine own Image and
similitude, but chiefly because thou have delivered us from that everlasting
death and damnation, into which Satan drew mankind by the means of sin, from
the bondage whereof, neither man nor Angel was able to make us free: but thou
(O Lord) rich in mercy and infinite in goodness, have provided our redemption
to stand in thine only and well-beloved Son, whom of very love thou did give
to be made man like unto us in all things, sin excepted, that in his body he
might receive the punishment of our transgression, by his death to make
satisfaction to thy justice, and by his resurrection to destroy him that was
the author of death, and so to bring again life to the world, from which the
whole offspring of Adam was most justly exiled. O Lord we acknowledge that no
creature was able to comprehend the length, breadth, depth, and height of thy
most excellent love which moved thee to show mercy where none was deserved, to
p^omise and give life where death had gotten victory, to receive us into thy
grace when we could do nothing but rebel against thy majesty.

The blind dullness of our corrupt nature will not suffer us sufficiently to
weigh these thy most ample benefits. Yet never th^lesse at the commandment of
Jesus Christ our Lord, we present our selves to this thy Table, which he has
left to be used in remembrance of his death until his coming again, to
decla^e and witness before the world, that by him alone we have received
liberty and life: that by him alone thou do acknowledge us to be thy
children and heirs: that by him alone we have entrance to the throne of thy
grace, that by him alone we are possessed into our spiritual kingdom to eat
and drink at his Table, and with whom we have our conversation presently in
heaven, and by whom our bodies shall be raised up again from the dust, and
shall be placed with him in that endless joy which thou O Father of mercy have
prepared for thine elect before the foundation of the world was laid. And these
most inestimable benefits we acknowledge and confess to have received of thy
f^^e mercy and grace, by thine only beloved Son Jesus Christ. For the which
therefore we thy Congregation, moved by thy holy Spirit, do render to thee all
thanks, praise and glory for ever and ever.

A thanskgiuing after the receiving of the holy Communion.
MOst merciful Father, we render unto thee all praise, thanks, honor, and
glory, for that it has pleased thee of thy great mercy to grant unto us
miserable sinners, so excellent a gift and treasure, as to receive us into the
fellowship and company of thy dear Son Jesus Christ our Lord, whom thou have
delivered to death for us, and have given him unto us a necessary food and
nourishment unto everlasting life. And now we beseech thee also (O heavenly
Father) to grant us this request, that thou never suffer us to become so unkind
as to forget so worthy benefits, but rather imprint and fasten them sure in our
hearts, that we may grow and increase daily more and more in true faith, which
continually i^ exercised in all manner of good works: and so much the rather
(O Lord) confirm us in these perilous days and rage of Satan, that we may
constantly stand and continue in the nonfession of the same, to the advancement
of thy glory which (...) ^od over all things, and blessed for ever* Amen.

FINIS.
A Table for the number of the whole Psalms, and also in what leaf you may
find every of them.
Psalm Folio A 30 ALl laud and praise, 64 49 All people hearken: 92 78 Attend
my people to, 130 82 Amid the prease with. 150 100 All people that. 172 B 81 BE
light and glad. 118 119 Blessed are they. 206 128 Blessed art thou that. 226
134 Behold and have. 234 142 Before the Lord. 248 144 Blessed be the Lord my. 250
D 83 Do not O god refrain. 150 E 127 EXcept the Lord. 226 G 29 Give to the
Lord. 64 37 Grudge not to see. 76 48 Great is the Lord. 92 54 God save me for.
104 105 Give praises unto. 182 107 Give thanks unto. 18^ 148 Give laud unto the
Lord. 256 H 12 Help Lord for good and 40 13 How long will thou 40 51 Have
mercy on me. 100 56 Have mercy Lord. 108 67 Have mercy on. 122 73 How ever it
be. 132 84 How pleasant is thy. 152 91 He that within the secret. 162 I 5
INcline thine ear unto, 30 11 I trust in God, how. 38 20 In trouble and
adversity. 52 25 I lift mine heart to thee. 58 34 I will give laud. 70 93 I
said I will look to. 78 4^ I waited long and sought. 80 43 Judge and revenge.
84 77 I with my voice to. 138 92 It is a thing both. 164 100 In God the Lord*
174 10^ I mercy will and 174 109 In speechless silence do* 192 116 I love the
Lord 202 120 In trouble and. 214 121 I lift mine eyes. 214 122 I did in heart
216 L 6 LOrd in thy wrath. 3^ 16 Lord keep me. 44 26 Lord be my judge. ^0 35
Lord plead my. 72 42 Like as the Heart. 64 68 Let God arise. 122 72 Lord give
thy. 130 86 Lord bow thine. 154 88 Lord God of. 156 130 Lord to thee I. 228 140
Lord save me. 246 143 Lord hear my. 248 M 23 MY shepherd. 56 45 My heart
does. 88 62 My soul to God. 116 71 My Lord my God 130 103 My soul give laud.
276 104 My soul praise the. 180 146 My soul praise thou. 254 N 115 NOt unto
us Lord. 200 124 Now Israel may say. 220 O 3 O Lord how are my foes. 28 4 O God
that art my. 30 7 O Lord my god I put. 34 8 O God our Lord how. 34 15 O Lord
within thy. 42 17 O Lord give ear to my. 46 18 O God my strength. 46 21 O Lord
how joyful. 52 22 O god my god wherefore. 54 31 O Lord I put my. 66 44 Our
ears have heard. 86 51 O Lord consider. 9^ 55 O God give ear. 106 60 O Lord
thou did us. 112 63 O God my god I watch 118 64 O Lord unto my voice. 118 70
O God to me take 128 79 O Lord the Genesis 144 94 O Lord thou do. 166 95 O come
let us. 166 98 O sing ye now unto. 170 102 O hear my prayer Lord. 174 108 O
God my heart prepared. 190 117 O all ye nations. 202 118 O give ye thanks. 204
123 O Lord that heaven do. 218 128 Often they now Israel. 228 131 O Lord I am
not puffed. 230 133 O how happy. 232 135 O praise the Lord. 234 136 O laud the
Lord. 236 136 O lord thou have. 244 142 O Lord upon thee do, 246 P ^ PVt me
not to rebuke. 78 (...) Praise ye the Lord. 184 13^ Praise ye the Lord. 236 147
Praise ye the Lord. 254 R (...) REgard O Lord. 114 132 Remember David's
troubles. 230 S 59 SEnd aid and save me. 110 69 Save me O God and that. 126 96
Sing ye with praise. 168 125 Such as in God the Lord. 2^0 149 Sing ye unto the
Lord. 238 T 1 THe man is blessed. 24 14 There is no God. 42 19 The heavens and
the. 50 23 The Lord is only. ^^ 24 The earth is. 5^ 27 The Lord is both my
health. 62 28 Thou art O Lord. 61 32 The man is blessed. 68 36 The wicked with.
74 41 The man is blessed that. 82 46 The Lord is our. 88 50 The mighty God. 94
53 The foolish man. 104 57 Take pity for thy promise. 108 65 Thy praise alone
O lord. 136 76 To all that now in. 138 80 Thou heard that. 116 85 Thou have
been. 152 87 That City shall. 156 89 To sing the mercies. 158 90 Thou Lord
have. 160 93 The Lord as King aloft. 164 97 The Lord does reign. 170 99 The
Lord does reign although. 172 110 The Lord did say. 194 112 The man is blessed
that. 196 125 Those that do put. 222 138 Thee will I praise. 242 145 Thee will
I laud. 252 V 75 Unto thee God we will. 136 W 2 WHy did the Genesis 26 9 With
heart and. 36 10 What is the cause. 38 52 Why do thou tyrant. 102 74 Why art
thou Lord. 134 111 With heart I do. 194 114 When Israel by Gods. 100 12^ When
that the Lord again. 2^4 137 When as we sat. 240 Y 33 YE righteous in the. 70
47 Ye people all with. 90 58 Ye rulers that are. 110 66 Ye men on earth. 130
113 Ye children which do. 19^ 150 Yield unto God. 258 These ye shall have in
the beginning of the book. Come holy Ghost* 2 O Lord of whom I do depend. 4 O
Come and let us now rejoice. 6 We praise thee God. 6 O all ye works of God the
Lord. 8 The only Lord of Israel. 10 My soul does magnify the Lord* 12 O Lord
because my hearts desire. 14 What man soever he be that. 14 O Lord turn not
away thy face. 18 Our Father which in heaven art. 20 Hark Israel, and what I
say. 20 Where righteousness does say. 22 These follo^ after the Psalms.
Praise the Lord O ye Gentiles. 60 Behold now give heed. 60 Attend my people and
give ear. 260 Our Father which in heaven art. 62 All my belief and
confidence. 64 Come holy Spirit the God of. 266 Give peace in these our days.
266 O Lord in thee is all my trust. 268 The Lord be thanked for his. 270
Preserve us Lord by thy dear. 272 Also certain godly Prayers. 274

FINIS.

