THREE PARTS of Solomon his Song of Songs, expounded. The first Part printed
before: but now reprinted and enlarged. The SECOND and THIRD Parts Never
printed before. All which Parts are here expounded and applied for the Readers
good. By Henoch Clapham.

Ephesians. 5 32. This is a great Mystery: I speak of Christ and his Church.

Printed at London by Valentine Sims for Edmund Mutton dwelling in
Paternoster Row at the sign of the Huntes-man. 1603.

To the Thrise-excellent, The High and Mighty Prince, JAMES: By the Grace of
God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith.
etc.
DRead Sovereign, these my labors being in the Press, behold Fames Heraulde
double trumpeted (the first as Sables, the second as Argent) does in our Cities
streets sound out a twofold Accent. The blacke-one drew out Basse-larg notes,
declaring the Sunset of our late great Empress (whose Memorial be blessed
amongst Women.) And this was right sad and doleful.

From the Siluerie-one, twirled Tones variable of much glee and solace. The
first humbled my soul: the second lift it up. Between them both, I was as
divided: weeping, and rejoicing: rejoicing, and weeping. Whereupon I remembered,
how men (of my vocation specially) are called to be Doves: whose note is
glad-sadnes and sad-gladnes.

Habel is vanished without seed. Seth is set in Habels room: in whom we hope a
direct continuance of Seed vn^ll Christ's last Access; even as S. Luke
manifests Adams seed until Christ's first Aduent. The Lion passant, so
turned into the Lion sedent: and sit he last for ever, a Defendour of the
Gospel and an Extirper of Romanisme: countenauncing good, and correcting
evil, according to the Hieroglyphike Scepter and Sword, the true Insignes of
Iehouahs qualification.

Henry the eight (like a sacramental eight-day) did cut off the foreskin of
our Corruption. Edward succeeding, reformed much. Then (the fir^e Paren-thesis
o^ Mary past over) our late Deborah Eli-shebet, added to the Father and
Brothers blessing. It remains, that your Highness double our Happiness, as
the great GOD o^ Heaven and Earth has doubled your King-ship. To whom more is
concredited, more is required of such by natural Proportion. And herein your
Royal care will tender:

1 That no one possess a Pastorall-place, to whom Christ has not first said,
Ephphata. 2 That no Leuj may sit at any Receipt of Custom, reaping where he
sowes not. 3 That Anah may find-out no Mules in our Episcopal fields. 4 That
Dionysius Atheos may not pill any part of the Commonwealth: much less, powle
the Church. 5 That Merchants may not buy and sell in the Temple: much less,
set the Temple it self to ^ale. 6 That these may not be Censurers of Sin,
that live only by Sin. 7 That none be set in Eminent-places, who are known
to be Rhomishly addicted. 8 That Great-flyes may be held in Nets, so well as
the small-one^ in Cobwebs. 9 That none may be a Mono-polist, which bringes not
that gain to the Monarch. 10 That Poore-men may have their Causes tried,
without damnable Demurres. 11 That Roscius may not make a standing-occupation
of Stage-mumpings and mowings. 12 Ac, vt quid lepidius dicam; That the
Feminine-gend^r may no longer (against all Rule) be in state more worthy then
the Masculine^ by carrying all the Cases ( Singular, Duall and Plural,
Greeklike) on her back; whilst the Masculine is contented with the Singular,
Accusatiuo carens.
Iisque constitutis, sufficit mihi quod haectenus vixi. Plura (minimeque baec
priuata) non quaero: Dixi. And in this doing, your Highness shall be rewarded of
the Highest.

Petrus Nannius Alcmarianus thought he fitted the Time well, in dedicat^ng his
Paraphrasis and Scholia on Salomons So^g, to Spaines Philip and our English
Mary, upon their time of Marriage. A better marriage now; when in Englands union
with Scotland, we may behold (as it were) a new Coniuction of the White and
Red-roses, for making one Nose gay. This natural union, does strongly call for
our Churches union mo^e with Christ: For, what by Atheism and Romanisme,
overmuch spreading of late years, out Job was brought welny to the Ash-heape:
his Maladies being man^, and the synewes-state dissolution, and distraction of
members.

Great Alexander upon his Conquest, is said, to enjoin Iudahs Levites to
circumcise their Sons by the name of Alexander, as a memorial of his
H^gh^esse. Your Ma. will not (neither shall it need) that your Levites be so
enjoined. The Sons of our studies, we voluntarily deuoue to your Gr.
protection: as who both can and will defend the truth of sacred Learning. I
pr^e (Deoque volente) sequemur.

My Book being in the Pres^e, before great Isreal's first-name was proclaimed
Head of our Tribes, the several pattes thereof had so their several
Dedications: All which Particulars, I now reduce to be Marshalled under your
Highness, as the Integrall. For where the King is Genus, the Subjects be but
Species.

Unto this attempt I have been made the bolder, for that it pleased God in Anno
D^i. 1595. to lend unto m^e your Majesty's royal hand, for authorizing
certain Bibles Brief. Sommon to Domes day. Sinners sleep and Resurrection.
Tables of Household government.
my poor Writings in Scotland to the Priest. From that time, much duty: but
henceforth, all duty (as of creature to creature) is owing to your sacred
Self (and Seed) as unto GOD his Great and Gracious Liuetenant over us. Whom
God bless for ever.

Your Majesty's humble Subject, (a Preacher of the Lords word) Henoch Clapham.

To the Gracious and Reverend Fathers and Brethren, Ministers of the Church of
England, Henoch Clapham wishes all saving gifts of the Spirit.
TRue it is (Gra: and Reverend) I may say with Bar^^rd, Bern. sermon. 30. in
Cantic.
Quod Animarum susceperim curam, quimeam non sufficerem custodire: I took
upon me the cure of Souls, before I was sufficient to watch over mine own.
And with Ambrose may further say, Ambr. offic. lib. 1. cap. 1
Factum est vt pri^^ docere inciperem quam discere. It is come to pass, that I
begun to teach, before I had been taught. For howsoever I had some general
knowledge of Divinity (as sometimes Moses had of Canaan, from the top of Mount
Nebo;) yet far enough was I from that particular distinct knowledge, whereby
I should have seated my self and others ecclesiastically in our land of Rest.

And whereas in my first view of Religion, much stir arose about
Ecclesiastike form of ministry and ministration: and the present established
form being of many (otherwise zealous) proclaimed by word and writing for
Antichristian, and several parts thereof to be direct marks of the Beast,
whereas indeed that Reuelation-beast has rather his character, than
Characters, mark than marks: I hereupon (believing such conclusions) departed
the land in the year of our Lord one thousand five hundred ninety three, as
willing to put in practice that which others had taught me. And so I wandered
to and fro with Salomons bird removed from her nest, till the year 1598.
wherein it pleased God to let me see the falsehood of doctrine, which others
had taught, and I (in my sin) had swallowed.

Hereupon I returned from beyond sea, purposing (by reason of my former
oversight) to betake my self to some other so^t of study. By my Lord Andersons
suite to his Grace of Canterbury.
But then receiving from some of chief place some means of incoragement in my
Ministerial function. I since that, have labored as I might, and as my gifts
could a^foo^de, in repairing the walls of Ierushalem, the praise of the whole
earth. But, as never yet I could want a cross, so (not Angustines tria cappa
ca^^sta, Aug. de grammatica libr. (...).
three wicked Speaking of Kornelius S^lla Korne^ius Cinna, and Kornelius
Lentulus.
Kaes, but) Pipure tumens, some proud swelling Pees, they have labored to make
me, my Sermons, and writings, nothing amongst their fantastic and bewitched
disciples. For they have judged, that if I were held for somewhat, then their
overmuch sparsed copp^r would be called in, and their fancies made plain unto
all men. Indeed, for a man to speak of experience, it wounds right deep:
but let the truth cut me, and cut them; forwards it must, fantastic Dagons
must fall: and disciples must be brought from man to God, from John Baptist to
Jesus: for, Behold, he is the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the
world. Some part of my latter labors I here present, the substance of
certain Sermons upon Solomon his Song of Songs, preached in our honorable
city of London. A Scripture extremely flowted of Machles-villaines (I might
say, Machiuillaines) blind Heretics and fleshly Humorists, that savor not
the things of God: and therefore the rather have I handled it, and now offer to
publish it: that so any one running by (specially staying by, and surueying it)
he may (as in great capital Letters) see, and read the s^d wisdom of God.
The very light that enters here through my little casemen^s, will put to chase
the creking Bats, and staring Owls that abhor day light: how much more
should they be chased and crushed, if some of you (to whom God has concredited
much variety of learning) should open the eie-lids of this morning, set this
Temples great doors patent, and fill every chinke with Iehouahs glory.

Censura est magistra vitae and modestiae. Pomponius Laetus de legib.
Correction (says Pomponius) is the Mistress of life and modesty; and lack of
due censure, is cause of many an immodest life, of the life of Atheism.
Licinius is said to have held learning the commonwealths rats-bane: and were
not many amongst us so minded, they would not labor the overthrow of
Universities, the impouerishing of the Ministry, for the lifting up of Jack
Straw. It remains that all of us do use our strengths severally and jointly,
for the uphold of good literature, literature the sinowes of our commonwealth,
the lamp of our Church, the life of our soul. Solomon so judged, when he begd
Wisdom before Wealth, before long life, before power to avenge. From them I
turn my quill, and unto him let us tune and turn our ears, who ravished in
spirit, does first entitle, and then sing forth his Song of Songs. But to the
learned I must first insert a Praeface.

Valete.
A Praeface for directing the simple Reader, touching this form of Writing and
Teaching.
AS a number do please themselves with so little divine knowledge as may be: so
can they not but oftentimes maledict good things they understand not, Jude 10.
as having too necre affinity with the Spirits which Saint Jude condemns. It
is sufficient (say they) that we know Christ Jesus, and him crucified: and that
(say they further) we have learned, seeing we understand the Rudiments of
Faith. I answer, there is no Book in the whole Bible, that teaches not Christ
Jesus and him crucified. Nay more, there is no one Chapter or open head of
Scripture but it sets forth Christ, if not directly also his sufferings. The
first and second of Genesis sets out Christ, seeing he was that John 1.1
and hebr. 1.3
Word whereby all was created: as also that Word which bears up all the
creature. The 3. Chap. in his 15. verse. does teach the stooping down of that
Word for assuming woman's seed: and the Genealogy of Adam by Sheth does teach
that, till he came that was promised. Else Matthew and Luke had drawn the
Genealogy to no purpose. For the doctrine of Chrono-logie, it is no more but
Speach-of-time, treating of this divine business. And without
Speach-of-generation and Speach-of-time, there can be no Story, no Bible. As
for the Genealogies spoke against in 1. Tim. 1.4. and 2.2.16.23. and Tit. 3.9.
they be none of these which be divine, for the holy ghost must not be brought
against himself: but (as the Apostle there testifies) they be Profane, Their
Talmud l^ckes no such stu^fe.
foolish, and fabulous-ones: which without blasphemy cannot be affirmed of any
Scripture: but well enough of diverse Jewish Traditions, tending rather to the
subversion than edification of Belieuers.

This doctrine of Christ and his Cross was pressed, not only to the ear by
voice, but also to the eye by sensible signs. Before the Law given by Moses,
they had oblations, and lastly Circumcision and the Paschal Lamb: but under
the Law, they had more oblations with more frequencie. In all which they were
to see Christ, and in many of them, his crucifixion and effusion of blood also.
And who could with knowledge behold the Priesthood, and therein not see
Christ? Or who could contemplate the Tabernacle and Temple, and therein not
first see Jesus in whom the Godhead should dwell essentially, and then in a
secondarie sense, his mystical members. In all these the Church was led to
Christ, even as we by baptism and the Lords Supper.

But because Christ could never have been crucified, but for sin (and
therefore in himself and in his mem^^rs to suffer by the hands of sinners) as
indeed he did finally by the hands of Jews and Romans, a Genealogy therefore
of such sinners are set down and a Chronology uttering the times of Christ
and his Cross, whether before, in, or since his Incarnation: the finishment of
all which, is unsealed in the book of Revelation. The enemies to Christ and
his Cross, they are oftentimes branded out by names of wild beasts,
serpents, unclean birds etc. that so in them may be expected but brutish
affections and actions: as also termed thorns, brambles and what not vile? The
friends to Christ and his Crucifixion, are on the other side represented by
creatures also Vegetative and Sensitive, but in respect of some commendable
qualification: and in no Scripture so much, as in this Song of Songs. So that
for understanding some excellent things in this good people, we are appointed
first, to consider some other creatures, whereby (as by steps and stairs)
we may ascend to the di^ine qualifications of the Church. Said I, of the
Church? Yea of Christ himself also; who here (as also often in the
New Testament) has vouchsafed to be sacramentally set forth under names of
inferior creatures.

This remembered, I further make answer to our Nouices, which delight
themselves in I know not what measure of knowledge and supposed principles:
Romans 15.4
First, whatsoever things are written afore-time, are written for our
learning. Otherwise, to think, were to conceive groslie of God, as having
written somewhat that is unnecessary. Far from such a mind it seems these
were not, that contented themselves with knowing. Hebr. 6.1. etc.
First, Repentance from dead works. Secondly, Faith toward God: Thirdly,
Doctrine of Baptismes: Fourthly, Imposition of hands: Firstly, Resurrection
from the dead: and Sixthly, Eternal judgment: Notwithstanding all which, the
Apostle calls them forward toward perfection, as they would avoid the
unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost. For when people begin to please
themselves in a little Catechism doctrine, they begin to enter into a
defection and back sliding from the little which they have already received.
Secondly, there is no piece of GOD his Book, but it has direct, Collateral,
or an Antitheticall relation to CHRIST, if not also to his sufferings: insomuch
as all that is more largely and variably said, it does finally return to
that one foundation, Jesus: whereon we are ever to be building, until we
have attained perfection and the fulness of our age, that is laid up in him.

The Family-of-Loue do overthrow all the Genealogy and Crono-logie of
Scripture, by turning really all the As their spiritual lan^ of peace and
Interlude of Minds do show.
History into an Allegory: entertaining (and good enough for that purpose) the
Apocripha-writings also. By the which I cannot easily be otherwise persuaded;
but as first: they shut up God and Devil, Christ and Antichrist, Heaven and
Hell, Wilderness and Canaan, good and badde Angel, within man's soul, as being
all of them but Se^ses or Affections: and as secondly, they hold an outward
uniformity with all other religions whatsoever ( For this, see somewhat in
Lect. xv.
not to speak of their bawdy perfection in nakedness) so cannot I easily be
otherwise persuaded, but that they be indeed Atheists, or at the best, but
Saduces. Their dotage is never countenanced in the truth of Scriptures
Allegory: Seeing this truth lies in establishing the History, the Genealogy
and Chronology: but their fanatike form of Allegorizing ouerturnes it. The
first being practiced of the Prophets and Apostles: but the latter only
pursued of Here^iques. Which latter form, as Origin was sometimes attainted
with it, so it has not only raised this Proverb of him; Vbi ma^e ne^o peius.
Where evil, no man worse, but also, brought him to be next neighbor to an
Atheist in his Universal Salvation: and finally, to be held an Author of that
Heresy (witness the Origenists) as HN (it may be it stands for
Haue-No-Religion) is now the head of our Nicolaitans or Familists.

As I would have thee to avoid this Familists error on the left hand, in making
Religion an Allegory: so, to fly the error on the right hand, whereby some
would have Religion without all Allegory. It is of Christians generally
granted; that the Subject of this Song is Love: namely, that which is to be
considered between Christ and his Church. Which, how can it be, but by
understanding Christ in Solomon: and the Church of the Gentiles in Pharaohs
Daughter? So that ^^ here (as the Apostle G^l^t. 4 24.
elsewhere) must be glad to say, By which things an other thing is meant: or, as
it is in the original, (...), which things are to be allegorized. The
Holy Ghost could have spoken always properly and in a single-sence: but so the
doctrine should have been beyond created-conceipt: or have less showen the
bounty and v^rietie of his wisdom. Eccles 12.9
The more wise (says God) the Preacher was, the more he taught the people
knowledge, and caused them to hear, and searched forth, and prepared many
parables. And the more wise (Gentle Reader) thou c^^ets to be, do the more
hunger after every form of divine knowledge, embracing Moses and Christ,
History and Mystery, Shadow and Substance, Sign and Thing signified.

To further thy knowledge in such differing kind of doctrine (and yet at
unity in Christ) I have taken some pains, in discoursing upon this
Scripture, wherein (as I take it) the Holy Ghost has called us to see all the
things of Christ and his Church, much ^uidently; but yet by allusion and in a
mystery. The Hebrew Rabbines do ordinarily apply the things h^ere spoken, to
their Synagogue and People: Christians, ordinarily to their mystical King and
People. And indeed the second Since was sealed in the former, Hebr. 11 40.
that so they without us might not be perfect. For some few in the church of
Rome that have in the She-beloued, understood only the Virgin-Mary, they were
too Dominike-like, and might, by such a rule (almost) as well have made another
Lady-Psalter.

For knowing Christ, and the things of Christ, the Church, and the things of
the Church, prepare thee to hear of sundry creatures under man, wherein the
former divine things are sealed: in one speech, two things being so uttered: as
if in terrestrials, there were some notable image of celestials: the things
that are here below and visible, being but as Letters or Characters, which
being put-together will spell out matters superior and invisible. Being so
prepared to conceive, I doubt not thou will read the sequence to thy souls
comfort. If not so prepared, the spider can but turn honie-iuyce into poison;
except God with a preuenting-grace do fore-stall thee.

Farewell. London. At my house in Red-crosse-street. April. 1603. Who has
labored for thy good. He: Cl.

The Text. The Song of Songs which ( is) Salomons.
1 LEt him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth: for thy loves are good,
better then wine.
2 For the savor of thy good ointments, thy name is as an ointment powered out:
therefore the virgins love thee.
3 Draw me, we will run after thee: the King has brought me into his
chambers: we will exult and be glad in thee: we will remember thy loves more
then wine: Righteousnesses do love thee.
4 I am black (o ye daughters of Ierushalem) and to be desired as the tents of
Kedar, as the curtains of Solomon.
5 Do not respect me because I am black, for the Sun has lo^ked upon me.
The sons of my Mother have fumed against me. They put me for a keeper of the
vines. My vine which was to me, I have not kept.
6 O thou whom my soul loves, show me where thou feedest, where thou causest
to lie at noone: for why should I be as she that covers her self to the
flocks of thy companions?
7 Seeing thou know not (o thou fairest of weomen) get thee forth in the
steps of the Flocks, and feed thy Kids above the tents of the Shepherds.
8 My Pastoral love, I have compared thee to my horses in the Chariots of
Pharaoh.
9 Thy cheeks are comely with rewes of stones, and thy neck with chains.
10 We will make for thee borders of gold with studs of silver.
11 Whilst the King was at his repast, my Spikenard gave the smell thereof.
12 My well-beloved is a bundle of Myrhe unto me: he shall lie between my
breasts.
13 My well-beloved is as a cluster of Copher in the vines of Engadi.
14 My love, behold, thou art fair, behold, thou art fair, thine eyes (are
like) the Doves.
15 My Beloved, behold thou art fair and pleasant: yea, our bed is Green.
16 The beams of our houses be Cedars, our galleries of Fyrre.
THE Song of Songs, which ( is) Salomons.
The Argument of this first Part.
The Church very fervently suiteth after the presence of Messiah: specially for
his appearance in our Nature. Whereto she receives a comfortable answer,
bringing with it appearing-wise, the presence of Messiah. Which two so
conucned, they fall into mutual praises, finishing the same with mutual
applausion.

Lect. I.
THis Title stands as a glorious Eulogie or Porch to the ensuing Scripture.
And herein obseruable first (for method sake) the Holie-ghost his pen man
of this Scripture, and that is Solomon: Secondly, the matter itself, and that
is a Song.

Touching Solomon, we are to understand that he was son of David, King also
of Israel: and both of them notable tipes or shadowers forth of our Lord and
Savior Christ Jesus. But this Tipeship stood in this difference: David a
figure of Jesus, in respect of the continual wary he had with the Churches
adversaries: Solomon a figure of Christ, in respect of his continuing plenty
and peace in the midst of Israel his church: David the Churches Captain:
Solomon the Churches amiable spouse and passionate Lover.

The argument of this Song.
Under Solomon in this scripture, we are to understand him, who (in Math.
12.42.) is wiser and greater then Solomon, even Jesus himself: sometimes sued
unto Of his Church: sometimes suing To his Church, according as variable times
bring with them va^iable accidents. And under Salomons spousesse and Love, we
are to consider the Church (specially of the new Testament (sometimes praying,
sometimes straying, sometimes in a Loue-traunce, sometimes revived, and in this
life (by reason of sin) changing some part, and in some respect as the Moon.

In One word, Two things are sealed, So that of this scripture the
wise-spirited may say with the R. Sal. Iarchi hereon.
Rabbine (according to that in psalm. 62.11. ( God has spoken once, and I have
heard it twice: which Cabalistically is, In one speech of God I observe two
things, as Letter and Spirit.

When Solomon penned this sacred Writ, the time of too many has been said to
be, what time he took to himself Pharaohs daughter: and so have concluded it
to be a nuptial song. But this judgment is not only opposite to this
scripture, but also has brought with it some other inconvenience: namely it
has caused sundry impure Spirits to stumble, affirming it to be a vain
amorous ballad, penned at the pleasure of Salomons wantons: an assertion in the
highest degree blasphemous. The Jew (who best knew the old Canon) can say,
that R. Abr. Abben-ezra on this chapter.
It is abominable to think that the Song of Songs should treat of venereall
matters. But the Natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of God,
(for they are foolishness unto him) neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually disce^ned.

That it is against this scripture also, do consider that speech in Cha. 7, 4:
[ Thy Nose is like to the Tower of Lebanon.] Lebanon could not stand for a
comparison, The time when this Song was penned.
till that Tower of Lebanon was: and it was not built, till he was aged, and
his lives years well-nie spent. This appears thus: Solomon reigned but forty
years. Toward the beginning of his reign he then matcheth with Pharaohs
daughter: about his fourth year he begins to build the Temple: and that
continued seven years. After that, his own house continued building
thirteen years: so are spent about four and twenty years of his reign:
and after all this, the Tower of Lebanon was built. How long after ere he
begun it, appears not: nor yet how long that work continued. But if it
should be begun presently after the other, it was a long piece of work, if so
the greatness and st^telinesse thereof be considered. And after this
finishment of that also, must this holy Writ be penned, seeing in the former
verse, he has in his comparison introduced the Tower of Lebanon.

That this glorious Lamp of Israel for a season was darkened by Idolatry, his
history expresses: yea his history being shut up with the mention of that
evil Bellarm. de verbo Dei lib. 1. cap. 5.
Romanistes conclude, that Solomon died unrepentant, and so by consequent, an
Abject. But seeing other scripture will necessarily convince that, they should
rather think, that his history was shut up obscurely, that so therein he might
shadow forth our Jesus, who in his death also was numbered amidst
transgressors, making his grave so with the wicked. That he died not an abject,
these reasons euince.

First, the consideration of his Tipeship: for seeing God selected him for the
sole figure of Messiahs love, spiritual peace, and plenty toward his
spousesse the Church: it shall be more then rash ignorance to conclude him an
Abject.

Secondly, 2. Sa. 7.14, 15.
the promise which God makes to David (namely, that if his son Solomon should
sin, he would chasten him with the rod of man, but not take his mercy from
him as he did from Saul) it concludes repentance: seeing chastenings with
mercy are ( Heb. 12.) signs of children (not bastards) and the means to bring
them to repentance.

Thirdly, he was not a Prophet, sent in mercy to the church, but an holy
Prophet and Scribe of the Holy Ghost. Saint Peter in his 2. Epistle 1. Chap.
verse 20.21. so speaks of all these holy Teachers: First know this, that no
Prophecy in the scripture is of any private motion: for the prophecy came not
in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God (a term never given to the
reprobate) they spoke as they were moved by the holy ghost. Now Solomon being
one of these Holy men of God, he must needs depart hence in the state of
grace.

2. Chro. 11.^17
Fourtthly, the Holy ghost commending Rehoboam and his people for their first
three years government, saying: Three years long they walked in the way of
David and Solomon, it plainly urges that Solomon died in Gods favor, or else
he should never so have been coupled with David his father. Yea, it also
argues that Salomons final government was in and for the Lord (howsoever the
Mount of Corruption not taken away) seeing first Rehoboams government is said
to be like that way, wherein his father and grandfather had walked.

Lastly, his own three books euince his repentance: first the book of
Proverbs specially the Preface lying in the first nine chapters: wherein he
specially admonishes his people to beware of the strange woman: urging the sea
of iniquity (bodily and spiritual) which accompanies that evil, as speaking
from experience. In which book he laboreth therefore to settle his Puple (of
what degree or calling soever) in the rudiments and grounds of religion.

Secondly, his book termed Preacher, wherein (specially in Cha. 2.) he
preaches worldly vanity from self same experience, admonishing others to
beware by his evil. In which book he takes his disciple (as into an hie
mountain) that so from thence looking downe-warde, he may spy the flitting
and vanishing estate of all things here under the Sun.

Thirdly, this most divine Song penned (as before is proved) in his old age:
vain lusts then turned to contemplative loves passing between Messiah and his
Church.

(As if herein he had lifted his Hearer higher then the Sun, for
speculating matters solely celestial) it further proves the verity of his
repentance. Left he was for a season, left flesh should rejoice in Gods sight:
but recovered again by repentance through God his free mercy, whereof these
three books are three infallible testimonies: even as Peter's threefold
confession, Ioh. 20 15. etc.
( Lord, thou know that I love thee: Lord, thou know that I love thee:
Lord, thou know all things, thou know that I love thee.) It gave forth a
plain evidence to his fellow Disciples, that he had unfeignedly repented his
threefold denial. This briefly touching the Penman, Solomon. Touching the
scripture it self, it is a Song. A Song has diverse names according to the
manner and matters diversity. If they contain matter of Gods praise, they are
termed Isidor. de eccles. lib. 1. ea. 6. and 7 Bruno in Ephesians. 5
Hymns: if it be soong by turns of two Chorusses it is called Antiphona: the
Italique Responsories being much of like form. A Psalm contains any sort of
matter indifferently, and is thought of some to derive that name from the
instrument termed Psaltery, whereon they play with handes-motion: as also
specially to contain moral doctrine. For the title Ephesians. 5.19.
Spiritual song, it is either the general to all divine songs; or rather A
Song of exultation and spiritual rejoicing, Tho. Aquin. on Ephesians. 5.
specially respecting Hope of eternal blessedness. Touching this Song of
Solomon, it contains matter of divine laud, for the which it may be called an
Hymn: it contains matter of Exultation in the hope of a better life, for the
which it may be called a Spiritual Song: it contains moral doctrine, and
doctrine of all natures, for the which it may be hight a Psalm. As for the
form, we find sundry parties singing, and the one side answering to the other:
for which it may be nominated an Antiphonie or Responsorie. And for these (and
like) considerations, it is of the holy ghost called A Song (or, the Song of
Songs, as not only the most excellent song, of all the 1005. which Solomon
penned, and therefore for Churches use only reserved, but also in respect of
any other Song contained in divine Canon: others tending to some one particular
end, or few: but this enwrapping in it, doctrine of all sorts, and that in a
most sweet and deep kind of eloquence, respecting the matter: as also of
elegancie, respecting the syllables, words and phrases.

And I take, because that none should compare it only with his own Songs, nor
yet only with the other Songs of the Scripture, the Holy Ghost has lest the
Hebrew phrase indefinited: for, as the word Which with us is indifferent for
gender and number, (masculine or feminine, singular or plural) so is the
Hebrew word Asher, which as also the Verb is altogether understood. And hereof
it is that some read, a Song of Songs, which [ is] some, which [ are]
Salomons: but indeed for the former respects, it can neither be tied to is or
are, was or were. Yet I take the present tense more proper then the preterim
perfect, because we say: This is Paul's Epistle, this is John's Revelation,
these are Moses Books, etc. rather then, these were Moses books, this was
Paul's Epistle, etc.

Thus we see Solomon the peaceable and exceeding rich King of Israel to be the
Holy-ghosts Poet: and the thing that is penned, to be Poesy of passing divine
nature, both in respect of Manner and Matter, and therefore in an Hebraisme
termed, A Song of Songs: that is, A most excellent Song. Now from the Title, I
pass to the Song.

Lect. II.
Verse. 1.

Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth; for thy love is better than
wine: or, So does Tremelius turn it and the hebrew is, Cj tobim dodejca
mijaijn.
thy loves are good, better than Wine.


IN this Verse the church expresses her affection toward her beloved: first,
by offering up prayer: secondly, by setting forth the excellency of her
beloueds Love; which may serve for a reason of her prayer.

Her prayer lying in the first clause, it contains her seruent desire after
Messiahs presence: wherein I observe, first, the form of her petition,
secondly, the matter she does petitionate. The form is Imperative, or
Optatiue. If Imperative, then she speaks to some Riuals of her happiness,
commanding them to let her beloved come unto her: If Optatiue (which I rather
incline to) then she offers up properly Prayer: and this must be, either to
Messiah himself (which I less conceive) or unto his Father (wherein I rather
rest) seeing the Father is said Galat. 4.4
to send him forth after the fullness of time, and he the Son mean time
John 1.18 compared with cha. 17.5
in the glorious bosom of the Father. And so her prayer [ Let him kiss mee]
it is as if she said in more words, O Father of heaven, vouchsafe to hasten the
sending forth of Messiah, who * have appointed him to be a light to the
Gentiles, and a Glory to thy people Israel.

The Father so prayed unto of the church, it rests to consider if this Church
be only the faithful of Ethnicks. So many have understood it. That
principally that people is intended here, it may appear by her form of
preoccupating the exceptions which Ierusalems Daughters might make, in the
fourth and fifth verses next after: but seeing Abraham and many of Iaacobs Kings
and Prophets, did long to see Messiahs day of appearance in the fles^,
hungring for that which they saw a far off: we so cannot exclude the
faithful of Zions Sinagogue, no, nor debar any belieuer from the beginning
of the world; I so understand the whole body of Belieuers from the first Adam,
unto Christ Jesus the second Adam: all sending up their prayers (as multitude
of sweet odours) unto God the Father.

The faithful in holy Scripture do pray for Christ's coming, but in a
twofold sense, respecting two sundry times. Before his Incarnation, they desire
his appearance in our flesh, for killing sin in our flesh, and so quickening
it to unfeigned sanctity: after his appearance they do with John desire he may
come quickly, namely in his glory, for the glorification of his Saints: and for
this appeerance do the souls under the Altar thirst and hunger. But in this
place, is specially and properly intended, the churches fervent desire for his
appearance in the flesh: which union of his divine nature, with our humane
nature, I take to be signified (at least, in part) by the term Kiss. And
principally also, I here understand (as before) the chosen of the Nations,
desiring after union with him, as no doubt the Gentile Queen, Pharaohs
daughter had no slender affection after communion with Solomon, the glorious
tipe of our Messiah.

A kiss unfeigned (such a Kiss as the Apostle calls Holy, and wherewith the
Saints did sometimes salute one another) it is as a sacrament of Souls unity
and oneness, such as was in Ierushalems church, touching which it is affirmed,
that al were of one accord in the Lord. But here the term is in the second
place plural ( Kisses) as thereby intimating (besides other things) an union of
Messiah with her in soul and body, sense, affection, and all active powers, a
full union of God and Man. This she desires, and fervently desires: and this
in the appointed time he fully performs. That which she then breathed after,
Heb. 11.40.
we are possessed of: God providing a better thing for us (namely) that they
without us should not be perfect.

Touching the reason of her Petition, For thy love is (or, Loves are good) and
better than wine, it is as if she said: O heavenly Father, I have prayed that
thou would send thy Son to his poor Church, that he might unite himself
corporally with her (the Godhead inhabiting the Manhood essentially) Now
after this my petition, vouchsafe I may debate the matter with my beloved. Then
by an Apostrophe she turns aside, and after such sort reasons with him:
Sweet Messiah, Shiloh Zecharies Branch, and Iaa^obs Star: I long after thy
presence: yea, thou have set my soul on fire after thee: for thy Loves are
beauteous and far more effectual then wine. Beauties there are many, but all
inferior to thine. There is pleasure and strength in wine: but thy love and
pleasant amors do more inflame and ravish the senses. O heavenly Father, if I
be bold, thy Sons love has constrained me; oh glorious Messiah, if I call
for thee, thy Fathers promise in Paradise, it causes me: and the beginnings
of Love which by thy spirit thou have given me feeling of, as wine in the
first taste they comfort me: as wine in the second place they delight me: as
wine in the third place they embolden me: as wine in the last place they cause
me be ready to fall in a Loue-trance. Oh therefore come speedily and embrace
me, and by the spirit of thy mouth ouershadowe the Virgin, and make us members
of thy body, of thy flesh, and of thy bones.

Besides other ordinary notes, I observe hence, first how Time in Paradise (
Genesis 3.15.) conceived of the promised seed: that time grew (as it were) more
big-bellied in the renuall of the promise to Abraham, David and others: and
that in the fullness of time, That blessed seed was to be brought forth for
the exceeding comfort of mankind. The faithful conceiving this doctrine, they
are therefore here introduced, sighing after the performance of the promise. If
they but tasting the promise, and seeing it but a far off (for the time of
this Songs penning was about 900. years before Shiloh came) how ardent and
earnest should our affections be in the possession thereof? The taste and
possession of wines are of more value, than the bare sight and taste thereof:
and such should our love be in the real enjoying of Messiah. Examine therefore
we ourselves, and look into our souls, for if Christ Jesus live in us, we
cannot but with feruencie embrace him and love all the fruits of his spirit.

Secondly, her manner of speech, [ Kiss me, etc.] it implies the means
whereby the Virgin should conceive, namely by the spirit of Christ ouershadowing
her: that spirit being as Agent to her seed Patient. Heb. ruach Gr. pneuma.
Lat. Spiritus
Spirit and Breath is one and the same (both in Hebrewe, Greek, and Latin)
which is cause, that sometimes our men in the Prophets do turn it, by the
spirit of his mouth, otherwhiles, by the breath of his mouth, etc. This
Conception and Generation is so exempted from that ordinary encreasement of
mankind. And therefore, though Leui paid tithes in Abraham's loins, to
Melchizedek, and all we have sinned in the loins of Adam: yet this second
Adam can be said to do neither. Woman sinned first, but no speech of spiritual
nakedness, till Man also sinned: Then (it is said) their eyes were opened and
they saw themselves naked: as if sin were imperfect and unable to bring forth
death on the seed of their loins, till Man (in whom lay the Active power of
generation) he had sinned. Though blessed Mary sinned, and had sin in her
nature, yet it could act nothing to Conception.

As all Naturians will grant woman's seed only passive, (and for because not
Active, some have concluded women to be seedelesse) so neither is sin any
creature, or any substance, but an action transgressing, causing God his curse
upon mankind by mortality and corruption. And because the Virgins seed
patient, was by the spirit of God quickened (even as the clayish nature of man
viuified by the breathing of god) her betrothed Joseph is taught by Gabriel,
how that Matthew. 1.20
which was conceived in her, it was of the holy spirit. This one doctrine so
ouerturneth the doctrine and objections of our ages Anabaptists. Who think of
sin as of a Substance: it being indeed an Accident, and severed in Christ's
conception, by the Active power of the holy ghost.

Thirdly, by speech [ Kisses of his mouth] is further (although in a second
sense) intimated the operation of God his word and spirit for incorporating us
into Christ. By his word, the World was created, and by the breath of his
mouth the foundation thereof was laid. That natural world was to lead us to
consider a spi^ituall world (which Philosophers have termed Micro-cosmos, a
little world, namely man) which second and new creature is begot by the
immortal seed of God his word, the holy spirit quickn^ng that word in the
womb of their conscience: for by the ministry of his word and sacraments he
kisseth his creature, breathing (by that his ordinance) his own good spirit
into them. And because no heretical doctrine can do this, the Church (in her
prayer) desires the kisses of His mouth to whom she prays. Nay, for
her^ticall doctrine, it is so far from effecting a new world in us, as it is
(indeed) the seed of the serpent, whereby he begets a damned body of infidels
and false believers to himself.

For the reason of her prayer in this verse, whereby she would insinuate her
petition into the Lord his cares, as craving nothing but Promise, and that
whereof she had a pleasant foretaste, to the kindling in her such prayer:
besides other things, I note these:

First, that the saving promises of God (who in Christ are Yea and Amen) they
are with all holy boldness to he called for. For as he is faithful that has
promised, so he expects we pray for the speedy performance thereof: seeing the
promises are the churches life and glory.

Secondly, her speech [ Thy loues] it argues the love of God in Christ to be
infinite and of a growing nature Election before all time, begets an
effectual Vocation in time: that Vocation brings with it, in the one hand,
assurance of Justification, in the other hand, real Sanctification. These
beget other divine Loves: causing in us a fountain springing up unto Eternal
life. If the church in her pedagogie and nonage could have such deep feeling
of divine Loves, what should we feel, who are come to inherit that Canaan?
Ephesians. 3.14, 15 16, 17.18.
We should be able (as the Apostle prays) to comprehend with all Saints,
what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height of the Fathers Love in
Christ Jesus. If Merchants finding a Commodity sweet, they sue for more: let
us in the least sense of God his love pray for more; seeing this is a
commodity of eternal nature.

Thirdly, the Church expressing her feeling of Christ's love, to be unto her
more excellent and efficatious then wine (wine being that which delights the
heart of man) we thereby are taught, that every member of this mystical body,
does not only live to Christ, but also die to the world and the temporaries
thereof. The love of God in the use of his word, which is one principal
particular of his love, it was unto David more sweet, Psalm. 19.10.
then the honey and hony-combe: and of more acceptance then tho^sands of gold
and of silver. And the love of God in Christ, it was of such value unto the
Apostle Paul, as (in comparison thereof) he counts Tribe, Birth, and al
temporary and natural things, but dross and dung. How the Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, Martires, and Confessors have deemed Christ's love, their
continual sufferings and patient vndergoings of the cross for his sake, they
plainly do witness. Balaam, Judas Iscariot, Demas, and many in this age
(sauouring earth, not spirit) they are by this doctrine laid open for such as
are not of the Church, howsoever within the church: for all these Moonish
fleeting temporaries, the church treades under her feet; the union, and
sensible feeling of Christ his several loves being unto her, all in all.

Lect. III.
Verse 2.

Because of the savor of thy good ointments, thy name is an ointment powered
out: therefore the virgins love thee. Or, Ler^iach
unto the savor of etc. Or, at the savor etc.


AS in the last clause of the former verse, she gave a reason of her petition,
(and that was drawn from the excellency of his love) so here she renders a
reason of her so loving his Love: namely, because she found in him (as a box
of aromatique ointments) all redolent savors, and precious spiritual smells.
Which precious odors were unto her his Church, and unto every particular member
thereof* most sauorie and delightful. In which comparison, she seems, not
only to cast her eye unto ordinary confections in the Apothecaries shop, but
also (and that more specially) unto the sacred Ointment and Perfume in Exodus
30.23. etc. effected by Moses, directed by Jehovah for anointing and perfuming
his Tabernacle and Priesthood. The counterfeit whereof none other (upon pain
of death) might make: nor (upon like penalty) might any other person annoint
his flesh with this ointment, nor perfume himself with this composition: for
the one and the other were set apart from common use and so dedicate to a
sacred ecclesiastical purpose. All which, let us draw into some particular
information and profit.

First, in that the Church seeks out the most excellent ointment and perfume
for declaration of Messiahs sweet name, it teaches us: that all excellent
things in nature, they are but as tipes and shadows of spiritual graces: not
much unlike to the Cabalists position, which concludes all inferior things to
be but shapes of superior things: and the pattern which Moses saw in the
Mount, to be a certain proportion in the heavens, whereunto the earthly
tabernacle was resemblanced. And in very troth, all excellent things in nature
they are but as steps, degrees, and greeces for us to climb up by unto
heavenly respects.

Secondly, her reference to the former ceremonial ointment wherewithal the
Jewish sanctuary and priesthood were anointed, it leads us to these
considerations: First, that the new testaments Church (figured by that
tabernacle) and the new testaments Priest (even Christ Jesus, figured by the
former) they are interessed with the inward spiritual ointment, which was
shadowed forth by the former outward material Oil. That the Church has it,
Saint John records it in his first Epist. 2. Chap. 20. and 27. verses. That
Jesus Christ has it, Aelohim Aeloh^ka.
the spirit of Prophecy plainly foresaw, saying. The God thy God has
anointed thee with the gladsome Oil above thy fellows, Psa. 45.8. Above all
his fellow members, because they receive it by measure, but he beyond measure,
John 3.34. he is the fountain full of grace and truth: as for his members,
they receive of his fullness* grace upon grace, John. 1.16. The sacred oil was
powered upon Aaron our head, and from him the head, that sovereign ointment
comes down his mystical body, even to the hemme of his garment: the most
inferior member not exempted of real sanctification. Besides, seeing the
former sacred oil (a figure of the spirit sanctifying) it was only with
profit applied to the Priest and his Tabernacle: it puts us in mind, how
Christ and his members only can have this spirit, in the work of
sanctification. Nor can any have received this real sanctification in any true
measure, but it is unto them a real pledge of eternal salvation: and a
demonstration of their holy Election before all worlds, Ephesians. 1.3. etc.
Furthermore, where it was death unto him that should apply this oil of grace
to Procul a phano
Profane persons, it teaches us that which our Savior teaches, namely, That
holy things are not to be given to Dogs, in pain of God his high
displeasure: the saving promises of the Gospel are not to be applied to the
open unpenitent. The ointment of saving Grace offered in the Word and
Sacraments, it appertains only to such persons, as first have become a
spiritual house or Tabernacle to God: and secondly, as true Priests and
Sacrificers, do offer up a reasonable oblation out of the Sanctum or
Holy-place built in their conscience. For howsoever in Christ is the
Sanctum-sanctorum Holy-of-holies, yet in every of his members is a Sanctum or
sanctified conscience. Lastly, whereas the like penalty hanged over his head
that should counterfeit that precious oil, it puts us in mind, what
fearful judgment hangs over the heads of counterfeit hypocrites and
heretics, who by painted doctrine and sheepish conversation do make outward
shows of the spirit, and holiness, but in very deed are hollow hearted, and
destitute of the power of true godliness.

Thirdly, that she terms her Beloueds Name to be as Shemen is indifferently
Oil or Ointment.
Oil powered out, she would allude to the full and perfect odor of such
precious confections: who (howsoever they be sauory in themselves,) yet are not
felt sauorie, until they be powered out, and as it were pownded: even as Mary's
pound of Spikenard ointment is then said to fill the house with the savor,
when as she had broken up the box, and powered it out. And herein she would
teach; first, that the very name of her Beloved was preciously sweet, being
powered out. Sweet in it self it must be from all eternity: but then
manifested sweet when it was uttered to mankind. Adam lying plunged in
diabolical stench, how sweet unto him was it to hear of the blessed Seeds of
woman. Abram having beene-singed in The heb. Vr, is in English, Fire.
Vr (that is, in the Fire) of Chaldea (horrible Idolatrers causing their
children to pass through the fire) sweet unto him must the name be of Seed,
wherein he and all nations should receive a blessing. Swe^te was the name
Shiloh in the mouth of Iaakob and in the nostrels of Judah: and no less
redolent, were these sauory names unto David, and all the ensuing Prophets and
tipicall Kings, who longed aft^r the appeerance of him that was so to be a
Seed and Shiloh. As for Isaiah, he saw his name to be Immanuel, that is,
God-with-vs, because God so should be one with us, and we so at union with
God; Godhead and Manhood, in him making up one Person. Unto Daniel, what name
could be so sweet as Messiah, the term which Gabriel gave unto him. In a
word, the ve^ie sweet consideration of him did lead the holy Prophets to use
diverse Names for expressing the infinite store of spiritual odours, couched
up in this, Beloved, the very fullness and treasury of our heavenly Father. If
we come to his Name Jesus (Savior, because he saves his people from their
sins) how delectable is that Name? Besides these Names, he has terms of
King, Priest, Prophet: King for government, Priest for sacrifice and
intercession, Prophet for teaching and revealing the Fathers secrets to his
people: a Trinity of names in an Unity of superexcelling sweetness. Lastly,
in this one Mediator is a twofold Nature, according whereto he has two other
names, God and Man: but seeing unto miserable mankind it should be no great
comfort, (nay, rather a discomfort) to hear of either of these names
disioyned: our heavenly Father therefore has conjoined them, and made them
two, one: that is, has given him unto us for God-Man, or Man-God: a Name
beyond all ^easureable sweetness: for it propounds unto us an eternal union
of God and Man. No marvel then though the Church hold her Beloueds name to be
redolent: as also do grieve to hear it taken in vain and unhallowed.
Furthermo^e, if the Name of Christ be so sweet, how precious should the enjoy
of Christ and his spirit be unto us, seeing with him we enjoy all other good
things also?

Therefore the Virgins love thee.] Having laid down the cause, she subioyneth
the effect: the sweetness of M^ssiah caused in her Love: even as before, the
Love of Christ, it caused in her prayer. Thus one good gift begets an other:
even as one evil engenders an other evil. Secondly, she changing her speech
from the Whole to the Parts (instead of I, saying the Virgins) she would first
teach, that the whole, and every member of Christ Jesus in his Church, it is
endued with sense of his grac^s, as also with unfeigned love of his name:
insomuch as they exult to hear the name Jesus. Secondly, she would inform us,
how every true lover of Christ Jesus is a Virgin, according to that of the
Apostle, 2. Corin. 11.2: which may serve for a faithful exposition of Revel.
14.4. As a sober virgin abstaineth from all things that might be offensive to
her beloved: so is it our duty (neither if we be of Christ can we be herein
careless) to eschew all such misdemenors as might bring agrieuance to the
spirit of Jesus.

Lect. IIII.
Verse 3.

Draw me; we will run after thee: the King has brought me into his
chambers: we will exult and be glad in thee: we will remember Dod^ica, as
before.
thy Loves more then wine: Meisharim.
Righteousnesses do^ love thee.


IN this verse considerable: first a Petition under Protestation: secondly, the
Petitions effect. The petition under Protestation lies in these words, Draw
me; we will run after thee: the Petitions effect lies in the residue of the
verse. Draw me; (herein the Petition) we will run after thee: and therein the
protestation. In more words it may be uttered thus: Oh my beloved Messiah, I
find in my self all inabilitie to follow thee, therefore vouchsafe to draw
me: but though the power of following thee, be lacking in me, and my several
members, I find yet a ready will: a will which will run after thee, if first
tho^ wilt draw me.

In the Petition I observe, first the Churches confession of her insufficiency
for following Christ: secondly, her desire unfeigned to be made partaker of his
sufficiency. That the Church (or body of faithful ones) is insufficient of
themselves to follow Christ, it not only appears by this her prayer, but
also by other speeches in holy Writ touching the already faithful. John 15.5
Without me (says our Savior to his Disciples) ye can do nothing: that is,
no good thing. And for this cause is it, that blessed Saint Paul testifies
thus of his spiritual life: Gal 2, 20. (...).
Thus I live, not I any more, but Christ lives in me: referring so all his
spiritual motion in goodness, to Christ living in him by his spirit. If that
hold in the unregenerate, namely, that Actcs 17.28
in him they live, move, and are, according to the natural life, motion, and
being: it must also follow touching spiritual life, motion, and being, that it
is fully of God: so that of our selves we are utterly insufficient to follow
our beloved Jesus. Which doctrine of our insufficiency may serve as a hammer
for knocking down the surging pride of Pelagius doctrine.

The Church finding and feeling her own insuffiencie, she therefore prays
unto her beloved, desiring him to draw her. Herein she teaches us; first, not
to rest contented with knowledge of our inabilitie, but in the next place, to
seek unto Christ for supply of such defect. He that knows himself to be
sick, seeks to the physician: he that feels famine, does labor to have
nature relieved. And hereupon it grew, that diseased-ones in the Gospel did
seek for help of Messiah: and others that were hungry, did follow him for the
loaves and fishes. All that but leading spiritual Impotents (as by the hand)
for seeking releasement at the hands of Messiah. Wherein may be observed, how
the high way unto God is spiritual misery and beggerie. If this be true in the
regenerate, in whom there is some holy thing: how much more in the
unregenerate, who yet is void of all true holiness? Secondly, from her form
of prayer, [ Draw me,] she would teach, that the faithful see themselves
plunged in some sin (as in a pit) out of which they cannot depart without
Christ his Spirit draw them. Or to be in the case of the cripple, which
howsoever he sat at the beautiful gate of the Temple ( Act. 3.2.) yet he
cannot praise God leaping and walking, till the precious name of Jesus have
pulled him out of his lamenesse. Some lie plunged in uncleanness, some in
idleness, some wallow in the dungeon of worldlines, some in other evils; not
only possessed of evil, but also dispossessed of good. What kind of Prayers
are these like to make? Verily, unclean, idle, worldly, and evil Prayers.

And Prou. 21.27
the sacrifice of the wicked (^aith Solomon) is abomination to the Lord, how
much more (^aith he) when he brings it with a wicked mind. As for the
faithful themselves, their prayers are ever in this world lame and impotent,
by reason of spiritual defects: insomuch as their prayers finished, they see
they had need to pray for the forgiveness of their prayers defects: like unto
the poor man in the Gospel. ( Mark. 9.24.) who having said, I believe, does
with tears subioyne, Lord, help (...).
that my unbelief. Yet howsoever their prayers be lame, they be true; as a
l^me man, though imperfect, yet is a true man and therefore no cause of
desperation. Nay, because they are true prayer, true sacrifice, therefore with
all faithful boldness they may offer them up: for were it not there is
imperfection at all times in our actions, there should not be occasion of
always praying, Forgive us our trespasses, etc. The truth of holiness is
begun in us, but the perfection thereof is laid up in Christ: and therefore
still occasioned to desire the perpetual presence of Christ, in whom our
perfect happiness abides. These little beginnings in us, must draw unto
Christ: yea, we must fervently beg of him to Draw us unto him: because our
happiness lies not so much in our apprehending, of him, as in his comprehending
of us. And if the Regenerate have occasion to cry, Draw me: the unregenerate
have ten thousand times more cause to cry and roar, Drag me, pull me, etc. for
none (as our Savior testifies in John 6.44.) can come to Messiah, except the
Father draw him. So much of the Petition.

The condition adjoined to the Petition is this, We will run after thee.
Wherein we may observe, first the Persons in the condition; secondly, the thing
it self. The persons are two, and lie in these two words, We and The. The thing
it self is A willingness to run. Touching the persons, the smiter of the
covenant is the Church: the party with whom the covenant is smit, is Christ:
as if she should say: Oh sweet Messiah, vouchsafe to draw me nearer unto thee
by the draught of thy spirit, and I thy poor Church will follow thee. Yea,
she^ changes the number (though not the person) saying, We will, insteede of,
I will: teaching hereby, that the whole and every particular member of the
Church is to smite this covenant of obedience. A thing usual with David,
specially in the 119 Psalm. insomuch as he cannot sometimes be contented with
this simple protestation, I will: but he must add an oath and swear, (verse.
106.) the keeping of God his righteous judgments. In this form of speech she
seems to allude unto the legal form of stipulation (or covenant smiting)
where the chief of Tribes and ^amiles, did seal (or subscribe) unto the
covenant writing, not only for themselves and their Families, but also, for,
and in, the behoof of every particular subject ( Nehem. 9.38. and 10.1.) the
principal of Church and Commonwealth (as is the laudable custom of our
Parliament) so standing for the whole. Which further teaches, that in all
actions of obedience, the heads of the people are to go before, and inferiors
are to follow. Nay, if the heads of the people lead as captains, the feet
are not like to stay behind. When Hamor and Shechem his son were contented
to be circumcised, the citizens subscribe, Genesis 34. When Ierushalem (the
mother City) went out to John's baptism, then all Judea and the region round
about Jorden did follow. And this is as God would have it. But if Jeroboam
apostate and run into evil, the multitude of Israel is like to fall after,
as the devil would have it.

In the next place therefore, the Church teaches, that all covenant ought be
smit with Christ Jesus. The Church and Jesus are Relatiues: yea (as it is said
of Hippocrates twins) the one suffering, both suffers: the one rejoicing, both
rejoice. The Church and Christ are man and woman betrothed: and therefore whom
will he eye but her: and whom can she follow, but him? The Church and Christ
are as King and Subject. Upon whom will the Kings heart be cast, but upon his
Subject: and whom can the Subject follow, but his liege Sovereign? These two
are as sheph^ard and sheep: and whom will the shepherd look after, if not
after his flock? and whose voice will the sheep acknowledge but their
Shepherds? This couple is as Vine and Branch: the first respects the second,
the second the first. In a word, Christ and his Church are as Head, and Body:
and for whom lives the Head, but for the Bodies good? And to whom can or will
the Body live, but to their own proper head? This covenant is of heaven, and
has eternal life thereto entailed: al other covenants are of hell, and draw at
their tail, condemnation and the second death.

Touching the covenant it self, it is, a willing running. Wherein I now
observe, first, that the regenerate have a will to follow Christ: or, that their
Will is free to good: secondly, that the life of a Christian is a running race.
That the will of the Regenerate is freed to good (even then, when the power to
perform good is lacking) the apostle (speaking in the person of the
regenerate, he testifies thus: To will is present with me, but I find not
(the means) Romans 7.18. (...).
to perfect that good: that is, to work good as I would. And presently after
he adds how this freedom comes: for the law of the spirit of life in
Christ Jesus has freed me from the law of sin and death: as if in more words
he had said thus: In former time I was wholly captiued by the law of the
members, but now by a better law, e^^n by the law of that spirit which lives
in Christ (yea, and now also in me being ingraffed into Christ) I am freed from
the tyranny, or reigning power of sin and death. So that, as the regenerate
and true faithf^ll ones are in their will and affections freed (for to that end
appeared Christ, namely to loose the works of the devil, 1 John. 3.8.) so this
freedom from evil unto good, it is only in these that so have received the
spirit of Jesus. The Infidel, the unregenerate have Will, and that Will ever
works Freely; but as it can only act evil (for, whatsoever is not of faith,
is sin) so it is not only evil which it works freely, L^mb. did. 25 lib.
2. Q. Libertas ergo a peccato and ^ miseria per gratiam est: libertas vera a
^ecessita^e per naturam.
The freedom therefore from sin and misery, it is by grace: but the freedom
that arises from necessiti^, (that is, which it necessarily has as it is
will) it is by Nature.

For the better understanding hereof do consider, that this motion of the mind
( Will, under which the Affections are contained) it is diversely considered
according to diverse times. The first time, is the state of man's Innocence in
paradise before his transgression: then Good and Bad was propounded to Man's
will, and the Will stood inclinable to that which the Mind (or Senses) first
assented unto. (For the Mind conceiueth and determines of things, before the
Will subscribe freely.) And the Mind (or Senses) then were enabled to judge
and determine rightly. So that there was in Man, Adiutorium in bonum, non
infirmitas in malum.
Help unto Good, not Infirmity to Evil. In the second place, mankind sinning
freely, and vnconstrain^dly, first in neglecting their place and calling;
secondly, in opening ear freely unto lewd counsel; thirdly in eating of the
forbidden fruit: hereby they captiued their Will unto Evil; even as in the
former place they suffered their Mind to be hood-winked of the Devil. At this
time, the Will has Infirmity unto Evil, not grace unto Good: being pressed
and overcome of evil. The third time is reparation of Will; and that is done by
the free grace of God in Christ Jesus: for these must needs be free, that
Christ makes free. But as the work of regeneration (howsoever true) is ever in
this life imperfect, so the wills freedom unto Good, it is not in this estate
perfect. Hereof insueth the battle internal between the Flesh and Spirit,
the regenerate and unregenerate part. And hereof it is that Schoolmen well
say, Lomb. lib. 2. distinct. 25. G.
It has infirmity to evil, but grace unto good, insomuch as it can sin
because of the liberty and infirmity it has: and it cannot sin unto death,
because of the liberty and helping grace it has. The fourth and last time, it
is the state of incorruption hereafter, wherein the former Infirmity and
weakness is swallowed up and consumed: and the former grace confirmed, made
absolute and perfect. Then (not before) it cannot at all be overcome, or
pressed down: and then it shall be so qualified, as it can no more sin.

But though the will of the regenerate is set free unto good, it must be
conceived that the regenerate cannot thenceforth of him self operate good. And
that is the cause that the Church here has desired Christ still to draw her,
howsoever borne anew, and howsoever willing unto Good: for in willing well, and
doing Good, there is still some pull-backe, some rebellion, which causes the
Apostle to say, when I would do good, evil is present with me, etc. Roma^es
the seventh chapter 21. verse etc. But in this state of will repaired by
grace, we consider, first the same grace drawing, secondly our will following.
Not following as a logge or stone does him that draws it, but as a child
having legs to move, does move after the Nurse, holding and leading it by
the hand, which yet without the Nurses help could move to no such purpose.
And because of this Cooperation (or Synergoi 1. cor. 3.9. Synergountes 2. cor.
6.1. Prosper. in sentent. 172. Nemo inuitus bonum facit, etc.
together working with God) it has in the Church anciently been said: No man
unwillingly does good, although that he does be good: because the spirit of
fear profits not, where the spirit of love is not: For when God wills that
we shall do good as good, he makes our will willing so to do good. So that he
which made us without us, he now leads us not in the way of salvation without
us. He uses our senses: for judging, and our affections for willing, and
willing accordingly as his spirit instincteth. The heart is not now created
anewe for the substance, but for the quality. Affections turned out of the way
by the old Adam, are now set into the way by the second Adam: and so it is with
the senses: not to the end they should act nothing, but that they may cooperate
with their Leader and Instincter, the saving Spirit. Not hereby meriting any
thing of God (for it is his grace and work that they so work) but hereby
declaring the truth of their dwelling in Christ, and Christ in them. By which
declaration such a regenerate person, first gains thereby an assurance of
eternal life, and secondly does thereby occasionate others to glorify the
Father of Heaven for his free mercy.

Lect. V.
WE will run after thee.] A christians life is termed here a running, and by
Paul, a Race, 1. Cor. 9.2.4. Who also exhorts every one so to run as they may
obtain: for so one may run as they shall not obtain. That we may
effectually run, the Author to the Hebrews (Chap. 12.1) wills us, first to
cast off the sin that presses down and hangs fa^t on: secondly* to run
a^med with patience. For, sin is compared a burden for pressing down, as
also to some pitchie or flimie matter that cleaves to the flesh, from all which
spiritual lets we are to abstain, if we mean to strive in this maisterie.
He that runs with sin reigning in his mortal members, he runs on the
loosing side. The sin we have must be cast away: the sin that offers it
self by alluring pr^fits and pleasures after we are on running, that must be
abstained from: else as good fit still as rise and fall. Some never leave off to
be servants, of whom it may be said as of the devil, * he sins from the
beginning* Some begin to run (as did Iscariot, Demas and others) but the poets
golden apples trundled in the way, they stoop to gather them, while others
take away the crown Revel. 2.1.1. Secondly, much patience is required, and
why? because howrs of tentation come upon all the world to try them that dwell
one the earth. Revel. 3.10. that is, many persecutions and afflictions. When
painted alluring delights cannot draw a soul out of the Christian race, then
terrors and therats of earthly power labor to beat the soul back. When
Peter could not be pulled out of the way by worlds delights, he was tripped by
terrors, and fear of earthly power. But as the righteous man falls seven
times a day, so he rises again by the staff of repentance: where the
hollow-harted, not only fall, but fall backward at last, and no more rise
again, rushing into evil as the bard horse into the battle.

The phrase [ RVNNE] it not only teaches a Race, but also the Speedines we are
to use in this Race. S. James exhorts vs^to be slow to speak (so were
Pythagoras scholars for their first five years, during which time they were
enjoined silence) as also to be slow to wrath, but yet to be swift to hear;
how much more need we learn to be swift in our obedience? Our ordinary speech,
Delay breeds danger, teaches us what inconvenience does commonly fall in our
ordinary affairs, by foreslowing the time: greater loss in spiritual cases
does accompany spiritual negligence. Satan's industrious compassing the earth,
it caused Job to send spee dily for his Children, and with speed to sacrifice.
Abraham made no less speed about sacrificing his Isaac. And the Prophet
proclaims him accursed, that does the work of the Lord negligently. Every
minute of delay may breed a mountain of danger: for by such negligence, first
Satan trumpeth more impediments in our way: and secondly, we our selves thereby
become more sleepie, infirm, and unapt to run the way of Messiahs
commandments. And hereupon it is, that not Seekers, but Striuers enter, and
the Violent by force take his kingdom, Luke 13.24. Math. 11.12 Let us
therefore, not only unto God pray Draw me; but let us with all our mind and
might add, We will run after thee. So much for the Petition and his
Condition.

Now follows the Petitions effect in the residue of the verse: and that is to
be considered, first, in Messiahs Grant in these words. That King has brought
me into his chambers: secondly in the churches protestation, We will rejoice
etc. Touching Messiahs Grant, first we are to observe the title is given to
him: and that is King, enlarged by an Article of Demonstration, Hammelec.
That King: secondly the Thing it self granted, and is an introduction into
Messiahs neere-roomes, He has brought me, etc. Saying Hammelec (as Matthew in
his 22. chapter and 7. verse. (...).
H^ Basileus, That King.) The Church so teaches first, that he to whom she
prays is of supreme place, ( He is a King) and therefore the duty of all
to Fear before him: But secondly, that King, even that particular one, who
before by his spirits breathing had assured her of his love, and therefore her
fear not slavish. When this Messiah teaches his Disciples to pray, Our Father
which art in heaven, etc. he teaches the same thing. By the word Father, he
would have them assured of his Fathers Love: and by the word Heaven, he would
have them take Knowledge of his Majesty occasionating Fear. The Knowledge of
his Fear, it is for leading us from Presumption: the consideration of his
Love, it is for driving away black Desperation: two extreme Rocks, between
which the faithful must sail uprightly: neither enclyning toward sin
presumptuous, by presuming of mercy sinning (which indeed is the vinuersall
sin of our age) nor yet bend the sails toward desperate infidelity,
because of sin already committed. The knowledge of his Love must cause us like
and love, only Holiness and Righteousness, because that only enters, and is
glorified in heaven: the notice had of his Fear, it must force us to the
hatred of iniquity and impiety. As he is our Savior, so let us love: but as he
is our King* so let us fear. Not fear as slaves who stand in no awe without
respect of stripes) but fear as children fear, to offend a loving father: and
so Ashres Adam m^phached tamidh.
Blessedness to the man that fears always. Pro. 18.14.

Touching the thing granted (namely, an introduction into Messiahs chambers) I
observe, first the manner ( he has brought me;) secondly, the matter, into his
chambers. The manner of this conduction is this: the loving Messiah, that
special King, he conuayes her, he leads her, yea (indeed) he sweetly
draws her. Comes in via pro vehiculo est, A companion in our voyage stands
us instead of a chariot. But no fellow to Jesus, no companion to Messiah. Ask
the two Emmauites whom Jesus accompanied, what they got thereby. Oh, they will
tell thee (and Saint Luke will join with them, Chap. 24.25. etc.) that first
he will snub souls for ignorance and infedility touching holy scripture:
secondly, that he is ready to expound Law and Prophets to such as he trauells
with: thirdly, that he will, not only avoid the dawbing up of souls with
untempered mortar, but also will apply the scriptures so faithfully unto his
willing hearers, as it shall cause their frozen affections to burn again
within them: fourthly, that he will, not leave the willing soul till he have
opened the eyes, and enabled it to know Jesus from an ordinary passenger. And
no marvel of these glorious effects, for he is the Savior, that kingly
conductor of the faithful.

What does the Church here testify of his Conduct? Hebianj of Bo ^.
He has brought me into his chambers. Some not seeing how this preterit time
can be apt, they turn it, when he shall have brought me, etc. we will
rejoice, etc. But as I see not that the word Hebiani is so to be translated, so
that preterite time may two ways be made apt. For if she should speak of the
cause of her prayer, Draw me, it is as if she said, I cannot but pray for power
to further obedience, because I am introduced into so Kinglike chambers: Or if
(as I rather take it) she make it an effect of her prayer, it is aptly to be
paraphrazed thus: I have prayed to my Kingly Beloved, for further sense of his
Love, and further means of holy obedience, and lo what follows: He has
brought me into his chambers. At first I stood upon the threshold of his
house, and that was a It is in Hithpagnel.
degree of happiness highly extolled of David, Psalm. 84.10. but since he has
(as Mary speaks, Luke, 1.52.) exalted me from low degree, for he has brought
me into his Inner rooms. This state of exaltation follows my prayers, my
fervent incessant prayers. And thus, let this degree of exaltation, be either a
cause, or an effect of prayer, the ordinary translation is apt.

But what are these Chambers? Greg. in ^antic. 1. Quid per huius sponsi (qui
Rex est) cellari^ intellegimus, nisi sanct. scriptur. archana quae rimamur?
nisi sanctae contemplationis mysteriaiquorum delicijs^i refic. mur, m.x
conualescimur?
Gregorius Magnus (a most corrupt Pope of any before him, but better then any
of them after him) he asks the Question (as his usual form of expounding
mysteries is) and answers thus: By the Cellars of this spouse, who also is a
King, what understand we, saving the hid things of holy-Writ which we are
diligently to search after? saving the mysteries of holy contemplation; with
whose delights if we be refected, forthwith we become through well? without
doubt, whosoever is brought into these Cellers, he forthwith contemns
temporary things, for that he is enriched with things of eternal nature. Then
the which, what can be better spoken; first in respect of the things figured by
chambers: In illa proculdubio quisque introducitur, omnia temporalia mox
con^emnit, quia aeternis ditatur.
secondly, in respect of the good effect these things bring forth in the
parties so possessed.

Touching the Chambers, Cellars or Inner-roomes, they import a sight and
possession of Kingly blessings more then ordinary. Kings have excellent things
in the outward parts of their buildings, but the more excellent and sovereign
Monuments are laid up in their treasuries and curiously couched in their
chambers. The Church is the house of God, 1. Tim. 3.15.1. Pet. 2.5.1. Cor.
3.16. and the Temple of the Holy Ghost. Many beauties are in the visible or
outward parts of this house, but precious gemmes laid up in the invisible and
internal rooms thereof. In this spiritual house (as in the sides of the
Tabernacles arc) is the book of God kept (for which she is called the pillar
and ground of truth, 1. Tim. 3.16.) and in that Book is Letter and Spirit (the
first killing, the second quickening, 2. Cor. 3.6, 7, 8.) but all vayled to the
unbeliever and abominable. In these scriptures (as in waters issuing the
Temple, Ezekiel. 47.) there are diverse depths and heights. In some places one may
wade by the anckles, in some by the knees, in othersome the waters rise so
high, as through them a man is not able to wade; insomuch as Saint Paul setting
foot into such mystery, he is forced to cry out, Oh the deepenesse of the
riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out! In such a chamber and height of
mystery was the Apostle (2. Cor. 12.3, 4. when he heard secret things not to
be spoken of man.) In which rapt-state, the Church after in this Song
acknowledges herself to be sometimes in. None truly hear or see these
vnwadeable things saving the Son, and to whom the Son reueales them. And
nee^e unto Christ they come (even as it were into his secret chambers) to whom
these mysteries are uttered. That the faithful are not to sit down upon the
enjoy of meaner gifts, but thus pray and practice after the best; they are not
only taught of the worldlings, but also of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 12.31. and
chap. 14.1. etc. Yea, all are by the Queen of Sheba stirred up to spare,
neither labor, nor charges; for seeing and hearing the wisdom of Him that is
greater then Solomon, 2. Chron. 9.1. Math. 12.42. For if they were happy that
stood before Solomon the shadow, ten thousand times more happy must they be
that stand in the presence of Messiah the Substance. And if we desire to enter
into this Rest, to stand in the chambers of this great King, let us with Moses
and Ioshuah loose and put off our shoes (I mean carnal and beastly sense and
affection thereby figured, Exodus 3.5. Josh. 5.15.) If with * Bathsheba (the
daughter of seven) we will in the seven ages of the Church have assurance to
sit on our Salomons right hand, on the seat of his appointment; then let us
spiritually travail of Him, and bring him forth absolute in all our works. If
with the Levites we would lodge with Aaron our high priest in the chambers of
the Temple, then let us mount by Ezekiels seven and eight steps, singing our
seven and eight Psalms of degrees, as stepping up from Babylon for ascending
to Ierushalem, the seat of the great King. In a world, let us pray, draw us,
and draw us from the Devil, World, and Flesh after thee, that so we may,
together with thee enter into the Bride-chamber, there to hear and see these
things that natural ear and eye can neither hear nor see. So much of the
fruit ensuing her fervent prayer.

Touching her protestation lying in these words: [We will exult and be glad in
thee: we will remember thy Loves more then wine: Righteousnesses do love thee:
or Ah^buk^.
have loved thee] It^ contains an enumeration of her Faculties disposition
toward her beloved. And this is done first, by setting down particulars: then
secondly, by putting down the whole. The particulars are two, lying in the
first two branches: the first expressing her Will or affections, We will
rejoice and be glad in thee: the second marking out the sincerity of her Mind
or Senses: one Sense, namely the Memory, put for all, We will remember etc.
The Whole where-vnder the parts are contained, it lies in the last words
Righteousnesses, that is ^ whatsoever is right, or rectified in us, it has,
and does love thee: for so thy Love constrains us.

For the better understanding hereof, it is to be remembered, that the soul of
Man is distinguished into three faculties, which for learning sake (otherwise a
simple essence or substance admits no parts) may be termed 3. parts. The first
is termed Mind, under which are contained all the interior senses; as
Imagination, Memory, etc. and this is seated properly in the bodies head. The
second is termed Will, under the which is contained the affections single and
mixed; as Love, Hatred, Zeal, etc. And this is seated properly in the heart.
From both these proceed an active power, or working property; which we term
mind and wills Agent, or Factor.

The Church in this her protestation begins with the second Faculty (namely
Will) when as she says We will rejoice etc. even as the holy ghost in the
Prophets (as also the Apostle in bidding the Ephesians put on Righteousness and
true Holiness) do place the duties of the second Table, before them of the
first. As it is an easier thing to find Religion, without fruits of
righteousness, faith without works: so is it an easier thing to find the mind
illuminated, then the will sanctified to Do according to the minds light. For
this cause she begins with the will, and signifies how her affections stand
devoted to her beloved, saying, We will exult and rejoice in thee: hereby
teaching us, first, to prefer sanctification before illumination; because
illumination may be without sanctification (as in Balaam, Judas Iscariot etc)
but Sanctification not without illumination: seeing none are realy sanctified
(for we must distinguish betwixt holiness real and that which is but by
imputation) but so soon at least their minds are lightened with the Gospel of
Christ Jesus; secondly, we are hereby taught, to dedicate all our affections (
Love, Hatred, Zeal, etc.) unto the glory of our Beloved, even unto him that
brings us to his House-threshold, yea into his Cellers, Galleries and
chambers of secret presence. And as other affections, so specially our merry and
rejoicing affections. This the Apostle remembers saying, Rejoice in the Lord
always, and again I say, rejoice, Philip 4.4. And the Psalmist protests in this
elegant phrase Omnes fontes mei in te. Psalm. 87.7
All my springs are in thee: as if he should say, what speak I of singers and
players of instruments? in a word, all the affections that flow from me,
manifested in pronunciation and action, they are all in thee, and for thee:
Such were the affections of David, causing him to spring before the Arc but
coming home, and such were affections springing upon the gospels coming home
by the ministry of our Elisha. But as it befell Israel after the continuance
of Manna, so us after the Gospe's coutinuaunce; the multitude loathe, wish them
in the Romish Egypt by their fleshpots again: stinking onions and garlike
relice better with them than milk and honey of Canaan. The trumperies of
Iebusiticall and Secular popery: the iugling tricks ( alias Aequiuocations) of
the two frogs Iannes and Iambres (Secular-priest and Jesuit) are unto a
number of base Atheists, of fa^re more excellent repute, then the naked
sincerity of the Gospel.

Well; If we turn our reioycements from Messiah, his Euangell and sweet word
will turn from us. If we will rejoice and be glad in him, he will never
loathe us. But seeing our reioycement in evil increases, and our exultation
in the ways of Messiah decreaseth, I know not what to expect, but that the
Lord by some notable judgment should declare to all nations, he loathes us as
much as ever he loved us.

Touching the next clause [ we will remember thy Loves more than wine] the
faithful of the Church declare therein, that as the affections, so the Senses
are consecrated to Jesus, yea more consecrate to his love, then unto wine that
delighter of Nature: as if she should say, Look how the Mind of a wordling is
ready to remember wine (or any delight of this body) even so, and much more
then so will we remember thy loves. From whence we are taught, first, to
dedicate all our senses. (more specially the memory) for excogitating and
recordating the Love of Christ Jesus. His Love, yea his Loves that is, his
particular Loves, not committing any of them unto Oblivion. As for example, we
should remember that he has, First, given us Being of no being: Secondly,
created us reasonable creatures: Thirdly, given us to be borne under the light
of the Gospel: Fourthly, given us many gifts of Nature beyond some others:
fifthly, called us, sanctified us, assured us of a better state. Not one
particular love but we should remember, for whetting up our loves again
toward him, who first loved us. As the recordating of oil, wheat, wine, is
not only solatious to the Merchant, but also causes him to labor thereafter:
so would the remembrance of God his several loves stir us up with David much
more to delight. Psalm. 4.6. and to labor the more for possessing thereof; as
the worldling for the enioyment of gold and silver, Pro. 2.3.4.5. But alas, we
receive many loves, and forget them all: from which arises our cold affection
and untoward devotion. Remember we therefore from whence we are fallen, and do
we our first works, before the golden candlestick be taken away by captivity
(as sometimes was Judah) or at best be turned vpside down, and the light of
God his word out out.

Secondly, we may see whence it springs that peoples memories are so apt to
evil, but very slippery for retaining good: namely, because they do not with
the faithful here dedicate them unto good, but rather unto things evil: evil
simply, or at best, evil in some respect. For as a man's hand is readiest in
that work it ordinarily exercises, even so is the memory fittest to receive
and recordate such stuff as it has been enured with, be it good or bad. Woe
therefore to such as make their memory a table-booke of the devils reckonings
(for he must pay such their wages) whereas it was created for the finger of God
to write in, as sometimes he did in stony tables.

Now follows the whole [ Righteousnesses do love thee] as if she should say,
whatsoever is righteous in my Mind, righteous in my will: Yea whatsoever
fl^weth from both as an action of Righteousness, all loves thee, and thou art
beloved of all that. Whence follows first, that there is no Righteous sense,
no righteous affection, no righteous action, but it is a lover of GOD, and Gods
friend. For as Christ testifies himself to be Truth (because man is
enlightened with no truth, that is not from Christ, who lightens every man that
comes into the world. John. 1.9.) so the Apostle S. John. is bold to say,
Every spirit confessing that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, is of God. Now
we know that reprobates, yea, that men really infested with the devil, they can
in such fearful estate say, That Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh: therefore
the devil, or reprobate, in such an estate, is ouer-ruled and acted by the
spirit of Christ Jesus, the causer of such truth. For if in God we live,
move, and have our being, Acts. 17.28. then no tongue for speaking, nor hand
for working does move, but it moves in God: and in moving rightly, it moves
in Gods mercy: but moving otherwise it moves in judgment. Boldly therefore
may all faithfull-ones conclude, that all Righteousness is of God, and
therefore all Right things must love him. Nay, they cannot but love him, seeing
they are al sparkles of that infinite light, and effects of that most blessed
Cause of Causes, which is Himself.

Secondly, it follows, that all Vnrighteousnesses, even every particular
branch thereof, it is an Enemy to God. And no marvel, because it is not of
God, but of the devil, ( John. 8.44.1. John. 3.8.) who was a lier from the
beginning and an opposer unto Justice. Whatsoever therefore is an error in
sense, an error in affection, an error in action, it is of the devil, and an
enemy to God. The consideration whereof should move all, first to nourish
every part of Justice, because it is our Kings friend: but secondly, to
mortify and kill every particular unrighteousness, because it is a Traitor to
our King; yea a snake in our bosom, bred otherwise for our own destruction:
calling for fire and brimstone, as sometimes upon the Pentapole-citties, Genesis
1^.20
Sodom, Gomorrha, Zeboim, Admah and Zoar: bleating in the ears of our
righteous Judge, as Saul's fatlings in the ^ares of Samuel: calling for fire
upon the new world, as of erst it cried for waters to the drowning of the old
world. Howsoever we cannot choose but Iniquity will, (as an inseparable accident
in this life) dwell in us, yet let us labor, that sin ( Romans 6.12.) do not
reign in us: yea, let us endeavor with all our soul, with all our mind, and
with all our might, that the spirit of righteousness may sit in the chair of
our conscience, who quickly shall enable us to tread Satan under.

Lect. VI.
Verse. 4.

I (am) black V^nauah.
and to be desired, O daughters of Ierushalem: as the Tents of Kedar, as the
curtains of Solomon.

Verse. 5.

Do not respect me, etc.


NOw we see an Apostrophe, or auersion of speech from the beloved: and an
heedelesse care of preoccupating a notable objection which the Daughters of
Ierushalem might frame here, thus: how dare thou being but a black hued
Virgin: to suite and supplicate to such a beauteous sweet King as is Messiah?
etc. Hereto she answers, first by Concession ( I am black) secondly, by
Refutation: but to be desired, etc. For the better understanding whereof, it
must be ay remembered, that (as under the person Solomon, Christ is intended) so
under the person of Pharaohs daughter matched with Solomon, is the Church of
Gentiles figured. And so the controversy here to be between the Sinagogue of
the Jews, and the faithful of the Gentiles: alluding unto that which the
Inhabitants of Ierushalem might sometimes object against the Egyptian Lady,
brought out of that hot Clime unto Iudeah and Salomons court.

I am not ignorant that some (otherwise worthy much reverence) have herein
contradicted the Ancients, and peremptorily affirm, that that marriage of
Solomon with Pharaohs daughter, it could not be a figure; and why? Because (say
they) Solomon sinned in so marrying, and to this end they allege Exodus 34.16.
I answer; first, it follows not, that because it is evil, therefore no
figure. Hagar and her Ismael were but an evil couple, yet saint Paul makes
them a figure in their generation, Galat. 4.22. etc. Reu. 11.8. and 14.8.
Sodom, Aegipt, Babylon accursed places, yet figures. Object. Evil things may
be figure of evil things, but not of good. Answer. Yes, of good. Hagar figured
the old Testament and his works* and both good, Galat. 4.24. Romans 7.7.12. See
this at large in part. 3 Lect. 19.
Cyrus was an uncircumcised Governor, and yet Meshicho, his (even Iebouahs)
anointed, and a figure of Messiah in conquering the adversary, and freeing his
people, Isa. 44.18. and 45.1. etc. Secondly, the Jews were not forbidden
simply all marriage with the Gentiles: but to beware of al such marriage as
might draw them to Idolatry. Idolatry prevented (and this was done when any
were contented to make themselves Israelites or Jews, Exodus 12.28. Deuteronomy.
21.12.13. Hester. 8.17. And like enough that Pharaohs Daughter learned that
lesson, Psalm. 45.10.11.) then marriage might lawfully be attempted. Thirdly,
they were forbid marriage with no other Gentiles so much, as with these that
Canaan euomited. And unto them the Inhibition specially tends, as is apparent
in Exodus 34.12. etc. Deuteronomy. 7.1.2. etc. Lastly, even that which they think
hinders, that very same helps it to be a figure. For, had not Solomon gone
beyond the partition wall (even unto the Gentiles) for his wife, it could not
so aptly have figured the Gentiles people, to whom Messiah was to join
himself, but not till first he forsook the Sinagogue of the Jews. And thus
they that are ouerprecise for admitting Allegories, shall sometimes cast out a
censure unworthy their places.

In this her confession [ I am blacke] the Church of Gentiles labors to
satisfy the Sinagogue of the Jews, and that by an acknowledgem^t of her swart
hue and complexion. Whence we may observe, first, how ready the Jew is to
except at imperfections in the Gentile* yea sometimes to shut the door of
mercy up against the Gentile, himself notwithstanding unwilling to enter in.
The cross nature of which people, our Savior detecteth in the Scribes and
Pharisees, Math. 23.13. The same does S. Paul in 1 Thessalonians. 2.14.15.16. And S.
Luke registring the Apostles Acts, does Acts 13.45.50 and 14.2. and 17.5.13.
etc.
diverse times note it: yea, that the Lord had no small ado to set Peter
forwards for preaching to the Gentiles: and S. Peter not a little ado to
satisfy his people for that action. Act. 11.1. unto verse. 19. In a word, that
people at this day stand hardly conceited toward us: yea, (as appears in
their confession of faith) they daily curse us: and as some of their words have
bin uttered here in our Land of late, they judge us utterly unworthy of GOD
his love: making our spiritual blackenesse one maine reason, why they cannot
be well persuaded of our faith.

To spy and except at our imperfections, it is in them (poor souls) a thing
ordinary and natural. But in the second place what learn we? Namely, with all
readiness and faithfulness to confess our sins before them: yea, our great
unworthiness of so worthy a Messiah, saying, indeed I am black: that is (as
the Apostle speaks in Romans 7.18.) I know that in me, namely, in my flesh
dwells no good thing. And where no good thing dwells, there must needs
dwell blackenesse, darkness, and horror of nature. But alas, we are so
far from giving a reverent account of our faith and standing unto Ierusalems
people, as rather we will curse them, and spit our gall upon them, as upon
dogs. Indeed their pulling of Messiahs blood upon their heads, it has
brought them into a fearful estate: yet seeing their fall was our rising,
their cutting off our ingraffing, we should compassionate them. Nay, seeing
To. 11.25, 26.
obstinacy is come upon them, in part till the Gentiles number be fulfilled,
and then all Israel shall be saved, (because God his covenant is to take away
their sins, and to regraffe them in his favor) we should pray for them, and
every way practice the remoouall of such offenses, as we know do hinder them
from joining with us. The Elder brother as yet stands for the most part
without, angry and grieved at the prodigal Gentile come within ( Luke 15.28.
Iaphets people in Shems tent, Genesis 9.27.) But seeing the Father will come forth
and entreat him to enter and be reconciled, what are we to stand on our
start-vps, and not rather to humble our selves to our elder brother (as Iaakob
sometimes did to Esau) that so happily we may become one sheepefold, and no
longer to be divided? We can readily accuse others of blackness and spiritual
deformities, saying: Thou art wicked, he is wicked, they are Antichristian,
etc. But very few smite themselves on the thigh saving, O what have I done?
Whereas every true member of the Church must and will (for glorifiing God and
remoouall of offense) particularly confess, I am black, herein I am wicked:
as David said to Nathan, I have sinned.

And to be desired, etc.] After the Confession she enters into Confutation.
The Synagogue would reason thus: What person soever is black, such a one is
not of Solomon to be desired: but (by thine own confession) thou art black,
therefore not to be desired.

The first propositions consequent she denies, saying. Notwithstanding my
blackenesse, I am to be desired. And this desirable state of hers, she
enlarges by comparison, and drawn first from Kedars tents, secondly from
Salomons curtains: q. d. I am (notwithstanding my blackenesse) to be desired
as Kedars tents. Yea (which more is) as Salomons curtains: so far am I
(because of blackenesse) from being not to be desired. From whence we may
observe, first how Prejudice and Envy hinders Judgment and true form of
Reasoning: for the Synagogue thinks she reasons passing firmly, in saying,
Thou art black, therefore not to be desired: whenas the Holy Ghost by the
church of the Gentiles does deny such consequence, affirming and concluding
rather the contrary. Such prejudice and envy caused the Donatists in Affrike to
conclude all Churches (saving their own) to be false Churches, because of some
general evils. August. tells them that it follows not [ Because of many
evils, therefore no true Church] seeing Tares will be in the Lords Catholic
wheat field, and chafe in the Lords barn floor* after it has been a while
threshed. The Brownists (about some 20. years since begun, and yet persist)
they furbish the Donatists canker-fret arguments: but indeed with some
advantage. For whereas Donatus granted other Churches once to have been true
Churches, the Brownists affirm the English Church never to have been a true
Church. As herein more uncharitable (seeing themselves never received faith
elsewhere) so more subtle in their business, (for the subtle beast of the
field has inspired them with more craft, won by more experience) and this
manifested by denying plantation of a true Church here. In more ancient
history, though they use them and admit them in some other cases, yet not in
this, and why? Men are subject to error: and though a hundred ancient Writers
do testify this, yet (forsooth) they know not, but they may lie. Where first
it was no Church, Because it was black, now it is no Church, because it never
was one. Thus Donatus one spirit has taken to himself seven stronger
devils. For never is an old heresy reassumed and renouated, but with
advantage of evil, that so it may not again be easily dispossessed. Their
frenzy I have In my Antidoton, and new Ierushalem.
elsewhere largely confuted. Only, let this form of the Synagogues blind
reason, teach us to avoid prejudice and envious conceit, left, in stead of
reasoning For, we reason Against the truth. Envy is blind, and frames but
blind arguments: Whereas Charity sees reasons rightly, and gives to every
soul the due.

Secondly, we learn from the Church of Gentiles to be careful in
distinguishing between good and evil, and to give to either the due. For as
we are not to call evil good, so neither to term Good Evil, under pain of
Gods curse, and as he would not be held abominable before the Lord: Isa.
5.20. Prou. 17.15. Yea, to hold fast (with Job) our innocence to the very
death ( Job 27.3, 4, 5, 6.) howsoever in some other things and respects, our
own mouth shall condemn us, and our own garments make us filthy, Job
9.20.30, 31. For to make evil good, and good evil, it is the work of the
devil, and the building of Babel, a Tower of confusion.

Touching the comparison drawn from Kedars tents, and Salomons curtains, it
may well be conceived that she understands both of them to be amiable and
loue-some. For Salomons curtains none doubts it, but else for Kedars tents
diverse take them to be a demonstration of her blackenesse, as the other of her
comeliness: and this is their reason: the Kedarites dwelt in tents and open
fields, where all was exposed to the parching Sun, therefore more like to
set forth her blackenesse. True it is that they dwelt in tents pitched in the
desert, Abbenezra in his Dramatique expos.
exposed to Sun and all other weather. Yet take this withal, it was Arabiaes
desert, and they were very rich and glorious. For this do consider these
places, Ezekiel. 27.21. Ier. 49.28.29. Isa. 21.13.16.17. besides humane histories
who largely treat of the excellent precious things of Arabia deserta: and of
the plenty thereof, Sol. Polyh. in cap. 46.
Solinus Polyhistor fears not to say [ Aliena non emunt, vendunt sua] They
buy not of others, but sell to others. All which weighed, I rather think, that
besides blackenesse, matter of desire is also understood: q.d. True, I am
black as Kedars tents, yet is there in me precious things, for the which I am
to be desired; even as Kedars tents have been desired, not for their outward
hue, but for the precious gemmes, gold, and pleasant odours that be couched in
them. Arabia looked rudely, yet by searching it regularly, there was to be
found precious stones, excellent odours, etc. Yea, in it was the They write
that this bird is ever but one, and only resiant in Arabia: And that in her
fullness of years, she ^lickers in her dry neast against the sun, and so is
fired into ashes: that out of these ashes arises a little worm, which
afterward becomes the Phoenix.
Phoenix (If so God created such a creature, as is only Male, or only Female,
or else an Hermaphrodite) who because she is ever but One, might also well
resemble, Messiahs Church, who after in this Song is said to be Alone. Who may
with the Phoenix be burned, when she has finished her testimony: but else out
of her ashes arises a new seed (like unto David and Christ at first, A Worm
and no Man) which holds out the former testimony through the worlds-desart,
worse then that of Arabia. But to pass by that, let us here learn, not to
judge peremptorily upon outward appearance. For if the Naturian could say
truly, Wisdom oftentimes is covered with a base garment: we may much more
say by spiritual Canon, that as Christ in outward appeerance had neither form
nor beauty, Isa. 53.2. and yet were couched in him all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge ( Coloss. 2.3.) even so it befalls his Church and
members thereof, namely, to be oftentimes lacking in the external appearance,
Saepe est sub palliolo sordido sapientia.
and yet otherwise all glorious within, for which our Solomon takes pleasure
in her, Psalm. 45.11.13.

And indeed, this Kings daughter is rather glorious within then without,
howsoever Papist and Brownist would have us to measure it rather by outward
appearance: the first by player-like paintings: the second by supposed
Saintings.

Besides her egreging the same by allusion to Salomons curtains (which in all
probability must be passing worthy, answereable to the rest of his glory) she
teaches, that the graces of Christ Jesus in his Church, they exceed all
ordinary glory. Yea, that the gifts of Messiahs spirit, they are the
Tabernacles curtains, the deckings of the Church: the Covert over
Salomon-Messiah, represented by the Douish wings covering Jesus at his
baptism, Luke 3.22.

Lastly, seeing neither the glory of Kedars tent, nor Salomons Whereof in cap.
3.7.
Bed could be discerned otherwise then darkely, till the curtains and vailes
were removed, it may put us in mind of Messiah, and the excellent things of
his spirit, which under sacramental signs and shadows lie couched darkely:
yet nevertheless, by the eye of the soul (a believing mind) are truly
discerned. And from hence grows this divine axiom, The law a shadow, the
Gospel an Image, the substance in heaven. For as Ambrose could well say,
Ambros. on Coloss. 2. Imperatore absente, Imago habet authoritatem, absente
autem Non.
The Emperor being absent, his Image has authority, but being present, it
has none.

Lect. VII.
Verse 5.

Respect me not because I am black for the Sun has looked upon me. The
Sons of my mother have fumed against me. They put me for a keeper of the
Vines. My Vine which was to me, I have not kept.


THe Church of the Gentiles (unto the Synagogue of the Jews) does herein offer
up first, a Petition: and then, secondly a reason of her Petition. The Petition
is this, Regard me not because I am black: q.d. Let not my black hew be so
much in your eye, let not my swart color be a cause why therefore ye should
condemn me wholly, and conclude me utterly unfit for Messiah. Where we may
observe, not only her adversaries form of Argumentation (which was from a
part to the whole, from the Accident to the Subject: and so reason our
adversaries: The Part is evil, therefore the Whole is evil: The Accident is
discommendable, therefore also the Subject) but also we may note the Churches
humility, even in her innocence. She knows her cause to be good, and her
adversaries to be bad; yet she fretteth not, railes not: but in all holy
meekness does petitionate, and humbly entreat her adverse Sister, to judge
rightly of her Such humility was in Job being falsely charged by his kinsfolks:
such humility was in Abraham toward Lot, when Lot should rather have
supplicated to his uncle, his Elder, the great father of the promise sealed up
to the Gentiles. As Love will cover a multitude of transgressious (specialy in
zealous Brethren) so the Soul that is humbled in the own eyes, it will not
stand upon these terms, I am Elder, I am Better, I have the better cause
etc.) but, for edification sake (where hope of edification is not barred up, it
will cause a soul to use soft words, to desire reconciliation. Yea, for
maintaining and procuring peace, it will cause good Iaakob to present gifts,
and sweetly to salute Esau. Follow Peace we ought (not it to follow us,) and
that with all men, specially with the household of Faith. Nor can this be
followed, if we follow not the means. Fly from meek and soft terms, fly
from entreaties, fly from humble gestures: and then Peace will fly, Unity
will not be: Anger will rise, Envy will enter, Wrath and Fury will set all the
house on fire. Thus we see how Pride is enemy to Peace, but Humility an
appeaser of Wrath, a quencher of Envy, a mother to peace and sacred union.

The reason of her Petition lies in the other part of the Verse: and that is
drawn from the cause of her Blackenesse. And that cause is two-folde: the
first is external, the second internal. The external cause of her
blackenesse, is first the Sun: secondly, her mothers sons enforcing her to
foreign works. The internal cause is, her own negligence, in not keeping
her own Vine.

As before I understood literally Pharaohs daughter, so here by the Sun, I
understand the So does Ra^. Selomeh and Abben-ezra* but then apply it to their
own churches estate, spoken of in Ezech. 20.5. etc.
hot Clime of Aegipt, where sh^e was borne and brought up: q.d. True, I am
black, and that not so much to be faulted, seeing it befalls me naturally
through the Suns hot piercing rays in Aegipt. Further (by the same
proportion) I understand the Priests and Prophets of Aegipt under the term,
Mother-sonnes: q.d. Besides that, my native country is a scorching soil, I
have bin drawn many times abroad into the heat (from one vineyard to an
other, from one green tree and grove to another, and this by the Prophets of
mine own native soil, by the Sacrificers of Osiris (Mitzraims Bacchus) whose
spiritual menaces drew me to pilgrimage in the sultring seasons. This double
consideration she propounds for mitigation of the Jewish censure. From whence
we learn, first, that foreign and external lettes and hindrances they excuse
man to man many times a toto wholly: and they excuse us before God, though
sometimes not a atoto wholly yet a tanto in part, the sin being so much the
less. Secondly, seeing cases here are shadows of spiritual cases we are to
observe, first, that natural light and heat (represented by the Sun) in
themselves the good creatures of God, they are by reason of the Souls disease,
means of making us more black. The heat of concupiscence spotteth our
thoughts, words, and works: and the light of our mind (termed Conscience) it
bewraieth our blackenesse: the first acts our blot, the second declareeth it:
but the light of Jerusalem (the pure law of God) it more reveals it, for the
testimony of God is greater then the witness of our hearts 1. John. 3.20.

Secondly, these that are brethren (borne and nourished in the same Church with
us) they many times that should be leaders of the people, shall prove such as
cause people to go astray (a general complaint of the Prophets) and I wish
that our Churches stomach had not cause to abhor many, for teaching people
Machiauels policies and Romish traditions, rather then doctrine, which is
according to godliness, and many times shall thrust poor souls out of
living, out of calling, yea out of the Synagogues: and sometimes (which is Romes
Catholic practice) out of their lives, thinking (such shall be their blind
zeal, as our Savior ^aith) that in so doing, they do to God an acceptable
service. And all this shall betide them, if their Hearers, Proselites,
Disciples, will not keep the vines of their Pastors lewd plantation, of the
devil and the false prophets devising: whereas every vine our heavenly father
has not planted, shall be pulld up by the roots.

Thirdly, that her pastoral brethren cracked in the nose against her (for the
word Nicharu.
Nicharu so signifies) it puts us in mind, not only of false teachers
their impetuositie (snuffing and cracking in the nose as Prouender-prickt
Stallions) but also how the elect of God are oftentimes not so ready to
satisfy imperious bad commands, as be the reprobate. For as God has chosen
them before the worlds foundation unto holiness, so that seed of Election is
not always so on sleep, but it somewhat feels, disliketh, and opposes to
actions of reprobation: insomuch as thereby their idolatrous Chemarims are
forced (such stirs in Romes Church do argue a remnant of holy seed) to
threaten* thunder, curse with Bell, Book, and Candlelight.

The second part of her petitions reason, it is gathered from an internal
cause of her blackenesse, and that is, her own inherent negligence in looking
to her own vine, her own particular calling and proper duty; wherein we see
an opposition between that she omitted and committed. She omitteth her own
task, and undergoes an other: that is, leaves good, and takes evil.

And this was the lot of I^phets people, to leave their fathers house, as did
the prodigal: and to consume their beauty and str^ngth in the house of a
stranger: even in the vineyards of Sodom and Gomorrha, Zeboim and Admah:
sometimes haled thereunto by Sin and Sinners forcings and violent courses:
sometimes voluntarily and freely without all remorse and feeling. Secondly,
(which was Barnards meditation) we are many times ready to undergo the keeping
of other men's vines, when we are unfitted to watch over our own: busied about
great things, when we cannot discharge the less. Barn. sermon. 30 in Cantic.
Ego loci huius occasion meipsum reprehender^ soleo, quod animarum susceperim
curam, qui meam non sufficerem custodire: by the occ^sion of this scripture
(says Bernard I have usually repr^hended my self, because I have undergone the
charge of others, before I was ^nabled to ke^pe mine own. An holy reprehension
and that whereof we all (more or less) stand indicted in our conscience. If
the Apostle could say (in 1. Tim. 3.5.) If any cannot rule his own house, how
shall (...).
he undergo the cure of God his Church? We may well say, If we be not
faithful keepers of our own soul, how shall we keep others? Oh Lord be
merciful unto us, and make us more faithful toward our selves and others.

Lect. VIII.
Verse 6.

O thou whom my Soul loves show me where thou feedest, where thou Tarebits.
causest to lie down at No one. For why should I be Cegnotjah, so expounded
of Rab. Selom. Iarchi.
as she that covers her self to the flocks of thy companions.


THE Church of the Gentiles having finished her by speech with the Jewish
Sinagogue, she now returns to her Beloved, and shuts up her former
Supplication: First, by adding a new Petition (Show me, etc.) Secondly giving a
reason thereof thus: For why should I be etc.

In the Petition, I observe, First, the amiable form she uses: Secondly, the
matter it self. The form is this: O thou whom my Soul loves: a form
passing amiable, amorous, piercing: for by it she expresses the Character or
print of her Souls affection toward Messiah. And hereby she teaches, first
how God in Christ Jesus is beloved of the whole Church: namely, with the very
Soul. External ceremonies are (without this) but a dead carcass, a stinking
and abominable sacrifice. This love of the soul is the General of these
particulars in Deuteronomy. 6.5. Luke. 10, 27. Soul being put for all the faculties
and powers of nature. Secondly, every member of this church is enabled of GOD
in due time, particularly to say, Thou whom my soul loves. As Thomas by way
of application, My Lord and my God ( John. 20.28.) and David, Oh Lord my
portion, Psalm. 119.57. For all knowledge (without ability to apply Christ and
his benefits to this poor soul, it is but Speculation, not Practice: a
general Surueyance, no particular Possession. The first in Devils and
Reprobate, but this peculiar to God his chosen.

For the matter of this Petition, it is Refection or Comfort: and this laid
down in two branches: first, in desiring, to know of Christ the place of his
feeding: secondly, the place of lying down in the days heat, even then when
the Sun was come to the Meridional point. To desire Repast, and to desire Rest
after repast, it is natural (irrational creatures desire both these: for by
the^ they labor the conservation of Nature) but to covet so to eat, and so to
rest after meat, as the Church does here, it is not natural, but spiritual:
not an act of Nature, but of Grace: from above, not from the earth. For the
first, she coueteth to know where Christ feeds. What, where he feeds himself
alone? Nay, where he feeds with his little flock (opposed to his companions
flocks after) yet she speaks of him so singularly, as if he were alone,
because HE, and the sheep of his Pasture are One: to be distinguished, not
severed. (For God and Man in Christ are united and made one:) and therefore
every member of this body, desirous to feed with this Head: where this carcass
(Christ-crucified is) thither these Eagles resort, Math. 24.28. Yea, to the
end they may find this food for themselves and their yoong-ones, they make
their abode, upon the top of the Rock (though in the earth, their cogitation
is above) and from high discern, and thence repair for souls nuriture, Job.
39.30.31, etc. Besides, (by introducing him as a shepherd, and her self as a
sheep (an allusion ancient, and in scripture frequent, psalm. 23.1, and 95, 7.
Ezekiel. 34.31, etc.) she thereby would testify, not only her place of
subjection, but also, her readiness, even every souls readiness to aberre, to
wander out of the way, without this great shepherds direction. Moses was no
sooner in the mount for a few days resiant, but Israel stayed in the
Wilderness. Christ was no sooner brought before the Rulers, but Peter loses
him himself: and had not the Lord by his vnder-shepheard Nathan sought up
David, David had starued in the pit. O Lord (for thy Sons sake) leave not the
sheep of thy English pasture to their own hearts (for then we should wander
and loose ourselves for ever) But let thy saving grace prevent us in our evils,
and glorify thy mercies upon us.

For Rest after souls repast, she utters that in the next branch, coveting
to know where he caused his flock to couch in the heat of the day. Teaching
hereby, first, that after the soul has been well fed (specially in the
blessed word and sacraments) it coueteth a place of rest, wherein it may
ruminate and chaw the cud, by spiritual meditation. Such Animals as under the
Law did chaw the Cudde, and did part the hoose, Leuiticus 11.3. etc. they were
counted clean: but if they only chawed the cudde, not parting the hoof: or
parting the hoof, chawed not the cudde, these were accounted pollution and
unholy. As for the she^pe, he lacked neither. This was a resemblance of the
Gentiles soule-pollution till Messiah took away the partition wall, and
cleansed them by the faith of the Gospel. Act. 11.4, 5, 6, etc. with 15.7, 8,
9. And such is the state of every soul, as first ruminates not on spiritual
gifts: or ruminating thereon, do not after that part the foot, that is, put
a difference between spirit and spirit, doctrine and doctrine, one action and
another. For, not to part the things which God has parted, is but to mingle
and confound Christ with Belial: to join iron and clay together, which can
never be made one: and yet (vaine-men) how many now be there among us, that
sweat and fret for concluding such mongrell religion, bastardly devotion!

As the Lords minister would be well accepted of GOD, he must take the
precious from the vile. Ierem. 5.19. and as every soul would be taken for a
sheep of Christ's Pasture, he must try the Spirits: and trying al things by
the touchstone of judgment divine, he must retain that is good, and fly that
is evil, 1. John, 4.1.1. These. 5.21, 22. Such meditation, such partition, is,
in some measure, in every true Christian. By the first, there is a partaking
with the nature divine: by the second, a declaration of divine discretion: and
in both (for the one can no more be without the other, then faith without
works) there is pictured forth, God sitting in that Conscience, as a Pilote at
the ships helm, steering all to the haven of Heaven.

And that she couets this ruminating place in the time of days heat, it
teaches us, not only to expect affliction and persecution as an inseperable
companion with the Gospel (2. Tim. 3.12. Reave. 7.14. figured by the Suns
heat in Math. 13.6, 21.) but also to deal with God before hand by prayer,
that we may in such day of tentation in peace and patience possess our
souls, howsoever the body be conuayed through fire to heaven, as Elias by the
burning Chariot. Such rest of soul we must in the days of peace and plenty
labor for, pray for fervently: and then no doubt, our eyes shall see rest, and
our souls find comfort under the shadow of the Highest. But that she says,
where thou It is in the conjugation Hiphil, which signifies, a double action
causest to lie down, it puts us in mind of our Natures backewardnes for
couching under Gods wing in the day of fiery trial. Shadows of our own, seem
best and safest unto us, (as it was with Demas, yea, with Peter) but such a
shadow shelters only the body, not the soul: and therefore Peter can in that
find no true rest: out he must of that place, and weep bitterly, for having
not couched in the right place. Unwilling we are to lie down with Christ:
pray we therefore that he may cause us to go where he would have us to go:
that he may cause us to lie down where he himself lies down: that as a
shepherd he would direct us with his eye, make us subject to his voice:
specially, in the day of tentation to feed and comfort us: for I think a day
of tentation is not far off.

The Reason of this Petition follows.] For why should I be as she that
covertly turns her self to the flocks of thy companions? as if she should
say, There is no reason why. Where she might have affirmed plainly that there
was no cause why she should turn from her Beloved to other Riuals, she
rather chooses to speak by Interrogation, for the more patheticall
expressement, first, of her Beloueds desert (for he deserved all her love:)
secondly, of her own souls sincerity toward him, in that she concludes it
an unreasonable thing to divert from the Substance and Truth, to shadows and
falshoode. From whence we may further observe, first, what the nature of a
Schismatic soul is: secondly, what larues and unjust titles all false
Christ's and pseudo-prophets do assume to themselves, for procuring them flocks.

For Schismatikes their nature, it is this, not to forsake Catholic unity,
without some pretext and color, as the Church speaks here, Covering
themselves. As they were before but hypocrites in the churches bosom, so in
their departure (or as John calls it, going out) they strive to hypocrise more:
that is, to mask their faces, to cover themselves with some such attire, as
they may not be deemed rending wolves, but simple hearted sheep. Our Savior
(in Matthew. 7.15.) he plainly terms these (...).
Induments of sheep, that is, all external simplicity, humility, sincere
behauior: that (were it not for particular fruit whereby they are
distinguished from other believers, namely, their false faith, false prophecy)
the Elect themselves should be seduced by them.

And as they will mask in the skins which in right appertain to Christ's
sheep, so they will say they go out from us, only because we are wolves,
unclean birds, etc. that is in truth, because their devil has silched away
some of our garments while we have slept, and therewithal has put his
servants induments upon us: that so wolves may seem sheep, and sheep may
seem wolves. A fruit well beseeming Satan, who transformes himself into an
Angel of light, 2. Cori. 11.14. and a fruit well enough beseeming his
Ministers and people, who must conform themselves to him that was a murderer
and lier from the beginning.

What titles false-Christs and false-Prophets assume to themselves, it appears
in this, that they term themselves, Christ's companions. If they were his
Companions indeed, she would not abhor Communion with them: but having the
name, and not the thing, (painted Sepulchers, the inside corruption) she
therefore loathes them, and by an holy derision disgraceth them. Such a
Companion is Mahomet, (a term stole from Daniel, who of Gabriel indeed was
pronounced Chamudoth and Machomed of Chamad.
Chamudoth the Concupiscences of God) who makes himself a fellow with Jesus:
yea, to whom Jesus shall send his people at last. Such a companion is the body
of Apostatical Popes, who make themselves to be openers of heaven, shutters of
hell, etc. (the flat contrary is rather true) and of this stamp be all
Ministers, who term themselves Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors,
Doctors, Elders, Deacons: but being examined by the Angel of Ephesu^ ( Revel.
2.2.) they are found only to have the Name, not the Thing. As to have a
sheepish conversation, it nothing helps a wolf: so, to have Christ his
shepherds names, it nothing helps hypocritical Ministers.

Lastly, mark how all these paintings tend to the winning of Flocks, that is,
of many Congregations: but in very troth, to make them only Sinagogues of
Satan: hunting by Sea and Land to make Proselites, and lo, they make them
twofold more the children of hell: Revel. 2.9. Math. 23.15. Christ's Church but
a flock: as for these they be many (for it is a broad way that leads to
destruction) and their flocks are many: not so much as they be found all of one
Religion, as for that they be divided by the head, howsoever joined by the
tails, in carrying firebrarnds for consuming the Lords wheate-field, like
Samsons foxes. And hereupon it is, that one Faction is of Rome, another of
Arrius, an other of Donatus, etc. all agreeing in one (as the factious in
Jerusalem did against Christ, and the seditious afterward against Titus
Vespatian) but then divided amongst themselves (as the sundry Schisms amongst
Brownists and Anabaptists, and between Romish schoolmen, not to speak of the
late division between Seculars and Iebusites) and that in some head-points (at
least, so imagined of their heads) as therefore they will not join one with
another in any spiritual service: specially, not in the sacrament of holy
communion.

These evils considered, what marvel is it, that the faithful, not only
desire to attain the presence of Christ and his flock more and more; but also
conclude peremptorily (by God his help) not to turn aside to such deceiptfull
companions? Thus far her Supplication. Now her Beloved returns his answer.

Lect. IX.
Verse 7

Im does so signify when the matter requir^th it.
Seeing thou know not, O thou fairest of women, get thee forth in the steps
of the Flock, and feed thy Kids above the tents of the Shepherds.


Herein observe Messiahs Assumption, [ Seeing thou know not, etc.] then his
Direction. [ Get thee forth, etc.] The Assumption is a taking of the Church at
her word. She before pleaded Ignorance, he assumeth her Grant: and therefore
in the next place grants her Petition. Hence I observe, first, the Churches
Ignorance in this life, although come (as before) into Messiahs chambers of
presence. Which not only is plain from that practice of Mother Zion in Leuit.
4. Where Priest, Magistrate, People, The whole Congregation have sacrifices
peculiar, appointed for their Ignorances: but also from the Apostles express
testimony, saying, We but know in part, etc. Yea, if any were so wise as Agur,
(who for his prudencie had his sayings joined unto Salomons proverbs) yet if he
compare the knowledge that is in him, with that which ought to be in him, he
may say to Ithiell and Vcall: Prou. 30.1, 2
For I am brutish in comparison of a man, and there is not the understanding of
Adam in me: and I have not learned wisdom, nor know the knowledge of holy
things. Which base estimate David had of himself, or else he would not in
every other verse of the 119. Psalm. desired direction, begged knowledge and
understanding.

Secondly, where with us it is a proverb, Confess and be hanged: we may learn
how confession of our wants before God in humility, it is so far from
condemning us, as in troth it is our beautification, and brings with it
justification. For mark Messiahs speech, O fairest of women! The Synagogue
said she was black, she confessed herself to be black and ignorant: and lo,
unto her beloved she is most beauteous. How comes this about? By confession
of wants, the old Adam was put off; and by desire of graces supply, the new man
is put on. The condemning and killing of the first, is the justifying and
quickening of the new. In ourselves we Ezech. 16, 6. etc.
lie sprawling in our own wombs-blood: but by God his grace we are washed: and
by bracelets and beauty put upon us, we become the fairest amongst the Heathen.

Thirdly, by making his Church a Woman amongst women, he would teach us, that
as Wife to her Husband, Ephesians. 5.25. etc
even such we should be to Christ, who gave himself for his Church, that he
might sanctify it, and cleanse it by the washing of water through the word:
that he might make it unto Himself a glorious Church, not having spot, or
wrinckle, or any such thing: but that it should be holy and blameless. And to
this purpose, see how the Church is in Revel. 12. brought in as a woman,
crowned with twelve stars, clothed with the Sun, standing on the Moon.

The false Church is also compared to a woman in Revel. 17. but an Harlot,
drunken and beastly: and the several parts thereof to Aholah and Aholibah in
Ezekiel. 23. whose breasts are pressed, and the teats of whose virginity are
bruised. No marvel then, though he pronounce his Church, the fairest of women:
nor marvel (considering this fairness is from him) that he expects our holy
love and constant faithfulness toward him.

Direction] it is laid down in two parts: first, in that he directs his
Elect of the Gentiles into the high way of the Saints: Secondly, appoints
this Gentile Church the place, where she was to feed her Kids. The way she is
to walk in, it is the old tract, padded forth by his Flock before her. The
place she is directed to, for feeding her young Goats, it is Gnal.
Above, or Ouer-against the Shepherds tents.

For the way she is to follow, it is the steps of the Flock, or (observing the
Article) of that Flock. The old Latin and others: but our Tremelius and the
Romists Arrias Montanus, do read it singular.
Some read, Flocks (which sometimes my self did follow) and indeed the word
Tson it lacks the plural number in form of declension, though not in sense
or signification: by reason whereof the number is taken for sense singularly,
or plurally, even as Interpreters understand of the holy-ghosts meaning. But
seeing the new Testaments Church is here directed to the way of the old
Testaments Church, which Church, as One is opposed to the Many Churches of
Heretics and false Companions, I rather condescend to the singular number:
although (but here not so necessarily) the plural Flocks it may also intend
that one church, considered according to her sundry times, and variable outward
estate: or (which here I take not to be so proper) if this direction should be
given, not so much to the whole body of Gentiles, as to any one particular
distressed soul, then the plural number implies sundry particular Churches,
as of Rome, Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus, etc. whose uniform steps are the way
which here is propounded. And so the difference of Numbers may cause a
Diversity, but not Contradictorie doctrine. The faithful of the Gentiles
entreated to know the place of Christ's feeding, and couching of his flock at
midday, here she is told how she may come to that place: and that is, first,
by Getting forth: secondly, by walking in the steps of his flock.

Getting forth, it implies, either a Motion from one place to another: (like
as Isreal's going out of Aegipt into the Wilderness: and out of that into
Canaan) or a Motion from one quality to another: as when one goes out of
Evil unto Good (so did the prodigal, leaving his by ways, and betaking
himself homeward: so did the Apostle, when he left his persecuting Christ, and
fell to preach Christ) or else it imports a going from one good quality to
another: not by leaving the first, but by addition thereto. And so Israel went
from strength to strength, Psalm. 48. and the first Romans from faith to faith,
Romans 1. The first Motion so is Local; the second qualificatine: and this
latter, either by Desertion, or Addition. The first motion is natural, the
second is spiritual. Motion from place to place (as the Jews going out of
Babylon with their faces toward Zion) that was a figure: but for the Elect to
go out of the confusion of Nature, into the orderly way of God his spirit
leading unto heavens rest, that was figured thereby. And for this cause
Babylon, Egypt, and Sodom are of Saint John spiritually propounded in Reuela.
11.8. and 18.2.4.21. Which conuinceth our Factious of notable blindness, who
more call people from Place then from Quality, from the figure, rather then
that was figured. For if the Church be no more one sort of people (as Israel in
Egypt, the Jews in Babylon) but a catholic people consisting of all tongues,
and stretched forth from sea to sea, how shall the Church go out of Local
Babylon, seeing the Antidoton proves that at large.
wheate-field is the whole earth or world: and the Tares of Babylon are sparsed
over the whole field? How can we make a Local departure out of Babylon, except
we go out of the world, that is, transgress the limits of the earth?

Spiritual motion (figured by the former) we can here in this world make, God
his spirit assisting. And that is it which here the Church of the Gentiles is
taught, when she is bid to get her forth: and this also in both the spiritual
senses: first for going out of her former evil unto good (that is, from her
former confessed blacknes and ignorance, unto purity and saving knowledge.)
Secondly, from the already confessed measure of grace, unto a greater measure.
The first is taught in such scripture Heb. 12.12.13. Romans 12.9. The second in
such, John 1.16.1. These. 3.10. Ephesians. 2.21. And this conuinceth our age
notably of evil, where we find most of the better sort contented with the
bare beginnings of Christ, with a slender portion of knowledge, and less
holiness: although it is an argument only of a sound soul, ever to hunger
and thirst after more righteousness, more holiness, more knowledge, more
faith, more obedience: darkely represented by going up to the Temple, and by *
Ezekiels seven and eight steps, and the fifteen Psalms of degrees: Act. 3.1.
Luke 17.10. Ezekiel. 40.22.26.31.34.37. Psalm. 120. etc. Whereas a declining from
good to evil, is tiped by Isreal's going down into Egypt: the Man's going
down from Ierushalem to Jericho, with such like. As for standing at one stay,
there is no figure of that: because no soul can live at one stay of good or
evil: for he that goes not toward God, he goes toward the devil. For
such respect (where the wicked often are called the sons of Belial in the old
Testament) some take the word Belial (in English wicked) to be derived of Beli
(in English Not) and Iagnal (in English He ascends) because the seed of Satan
Ascend not, but contrariwise, Descend, and go down from the living God; as he
that went down from Ierushalem to Jericho.

Lect. X.
THe Good she is to go into, is, the steps of the Flock. The Flock (as
before) is the people and sheep of his pasture, the ancient Church, so termed
in Psalm. 95.7. and 100.3. So that the paths or steps of this flock, they are
nothing else but the ways of his faithful people, the holy examples they left
for direction to successors, Ephesians. 2.10.
For we are his workmanship, says the Apostle, created in Christ Jesus unto
good works, which God has ordained, that we should walk in them. To which
purpose he says to the Corinths, ^. Cor. 11.1.
Be ye the followers of me, even as I am of Christ: Giving further to
understand, by the word he there uses Mimetaj, that they were to shape and
fashion themselves every way to him, as he did to Christ: for the word Mimos
signifies such a person as can ^iuely express the Gesture and Action of an
other. Whence we learn, that the holy words, and holy works they are left
behind (as sheep leave their straight padde behind) first, for directing
right steps to our feet: secondly, for leaving to our successors, an example
of good, as others have to us.

It is a mighty Question at this day, To what Christian Church ^ soul should
add it self? To such as are agnominized Protestants, or to Romanists, or to
Anabaptists, or to Arrians, or to Brownists, etc.? Answer from this text is
made, Get thee forth into the steps of the Flock, into the way of the
Faithful gone before thee. But here the doubt is renewed, for which is that
way, the narrow way that leads unto true rest? The Protestants say, Ours is
the way: the Romanists say, theirs is the way, etc. Indeed our Savior
foreseeing the straits of these last times, by reason of false prophets crying,
Here is Christ, there is Christ, he says, that if it were possible, the very
Elect should be seduced. What is then to be done? The Synagogue of the Jews by
ministry of their Prophet Jeremy, Ierem. 6.16
advises thus: So says the Lord, stand in the ways (alluding to a Passenger,
who having set forward his journey, does come to sundry ways: and not knowing
which way to take, he stands there doubting, considering, enquiring: and
therefore follows) and ask for the old way (which is the good way) and walk
therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls. All Christians, by baptism,
have set on this way (for Baptism into the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, is the very first sacramental mark of this
Christian voyage) but after a while, they meet with many ways (not out of the
Catholic Church, for all baptized ones are in the external face thereof: but)
within the limits of the Lords wheate-field: of all which ways, only one is
the right way, the other seducing ways, fitter for Tares, then Wheat, for
savage beasts of Idol- Ephesus, to sculke in with Demetrius, then for Peter's
Lambs to walk in. The case thus standing, what is to be done? Shall we with
giddy heads rush of our own head into any of these ways? Prou. 14.12
There is away (says Solomon) that seems right to a man, but the issues
thereof are the ways of death. Consideration, yea and Consultation is herein
highly needful: Ibid. 15.
For as the foolish will believe every thing, so the prudent will consider his
steps. The Prophet tells us, we must enquire, not for the newest way (as
vain folks enquire for the newest cut) but for the Old way. And of whom
must we enquire that? Ask any heretic or schismatique, of the old way, and
each of them will say, their way is the old way: of whom then must we
demand? with whom then must we consult? First I will tell thee what Solomon
did in a particular strait: Secondly, I will tell thee what we are to do in
this.

1 Kings 3.
Two The word Zo^oth signifies women setting to sale: But whether victualles,
or their bodies, or both, it is a question. In Latin therefore it is well
turned Meritoriae.
Sale-women came before Solomon with a living child, the one saying, it was
hers, the other saying no, it was hers. The Wiseman here upon calls for a
sword, commands his servants to divide the living child in twain, and
then to give the one half to the one, and the other half to the other. The
true Mother hearing this, cries out, Oh my Lord, give her the living child and
slay him not: but the other said, Let it be neither mine nor thine, but divide
it. Then Solomon easily saw that the merciless woman was not the Mother, and
therefore commanded it to be given to the other. By this Child, in mystery,
may be intended the living babe Jesus, about which true and false Christians
contend for (Jesus came of Matthew. 1.5.
Rahab a Sale-woman in the worst sense, respecting the first state of her life,
but holy and faithful in her leaving Jericho and joining to Israel) one Church
cries, O King divide: an other cries, rather take him whole, for this
seamelesse coat is not to be schismed: whether of these Churches is like to be
the true Rahab, the right mother? even she that shows mercy, she that had
rather with Moses be blotted out of the life-booke, then to see the first
fruits of Israel torn asunder. For though all error be condemnable, yet the
safest error is that of the right hand in the abundance (or ouer-aboundance)
of love and mercy unto all. Whereas these that instead of praying for their
enemy, do blodily entreat them: insteap of ministering to their necessity, do
bereave them of necessaries: instead of preserving life, do (even for
difference about the babe) curse with bell, book and candlelight, hang, burn,
barbarian-wise torment, they not only declare themselves to be of a bad
spirit, but also to draw Fathers in the same corporation (though not of so
unmerciful conversation) to be the worse judged of. But seeing such
Dichotomizers, diuiders, renders, may also fall within the Church of Israel
(but one people) and much more within the Catholic Church of the Gentiles,
consisting of al sorts of people; we therefore can not so easily nor safely
judge hereby of the church, as of bastardly members therein. In the next place
let us search out a more certain rule to walk by.

We are to enquire after this Old way, but of whom? Tertullian, Cyprian,
Ambrose. Angustine Hierome, Barnard, etc.. Letvs consider that Tertullian now
is a found Catholic, and by and by he preaches against all second marriage,
not to touch him with much Montanisme. Cyprian walks by Catholic
one-baptisme, by and by he falls (and a whole counsel of Bishops) into
Rebaptization, and ere long after this is revoked of many. Ambrose sometimes
knew no sacramental washing, save Baptism, but afterward he twits Rome for
not washing of the feet, from John 13. Augustine one while says there is no
third place after this life, anon he will not deny but there may be some
purifying place. Hierom now writes like a Catholic, anon he falls into the
haeresie of Origin, touching the salvation of all, after some fulness of
torment. Barnard one while says, there be but bare three places, Heaven,
Earth, Hell: anon he fretteth upon a place of this Song, at some which then
denied Purgatory. In a word, the Romanists themselves, in a book set forth by
them (termed Index expurgatorius) and that by the decree of their Trident
Counsel, have so commuted, changed, blotted antiquities, (writers Theologike,
Lawyers, Physicians, Philosophers, Mathematicians, Humanitians) as all the
world may see their inconstant direction. Concerning which, I will add
Franciscus Iunius his speech prefacing the same Index printed, Anno Domini.
1586. Occlamant illi, attendite ad vias, videte and interrogate, etc.
They ball against us, saying, attend to the ways, see and demand which is
the good way of the ancient ways, and walk in that. They cry out, remove not
the bounds of your Elders (Prou. 22.28.) for it is wickedness, infidelity,
impiety. And (lo) themselves do obstinately refuse to undergo the Law which
they constantly urge on others. When it seems good to them, they add,
detract, change, surrogate words, members, sentences, pages: yea, they feign
and refaine Fathers at their pleasure. Presently after which words, he further
manifests himself to be an ear and eyewitness of such their falsification
at the press. In so much as we have as great cause (at least in any equal
judgment) to prohibit their Romish Books to be read of any our Nouices
(Scholars or others) yea, to forbid our people the giving much credit to the
Ancient Fathers, as they be by them published: as their Pope Im-pius the
fourth, in their long Trident-councell, to prohibit (in his blind Called
Index librorum prohibitorum cum regulis, etc.
Alphabet) a great number of books, whereof (not a few of them) were written
by men in their Romish Sinagogue, though not fully of it. As for their
Counsels, how have they by themselves been rescided, and Canons added, taken
away, altered? For their Popes voice, read their Platina and other their own
writers, and it shall appear to be the voice, sometimes of an heretic, many
times of an Atheist, the Dragons mouth of blasphemy opened against the
heavenly places and the Saints therein. To seek for the old way at the mouths
of these who frame new devises every day, it should prove but folly and
frenzy.

Some here will demand, if so the old way be not to be found amongst the
ancient fathers, Greek and Latin? I answer, yes: the old way (at least for
the substance thereof) it is by GOD his watchful providence preserved amongst
them. For as we were to believe that they were holy lamps in their age, so we
are to believe (and these which are conversant in their writings can prove)
that howsoever with themselves, sometimes one with another they dissented, yet
in the Foundation and Substance of Religion, they consented. But seeing this
substantial truth (as the lilly among the thorns) it is not only too
uneasy of many Christians to be selected, but is also known to be truth by
some other example and pattern before them; it remains we examine which is
the old and perfect way. In one word, it is the very Word of God contained in
the Canonical scriptures. A word and will so perfect, as John seals it up in
Revel. 22. with a curse to him that adds to it, or takes from it. Yea, it is
so perfect a word, as Perfection was in it before Christ's Incarnation: 2. Pet.
1.10.
which causes Peter to say We have a most sure word of the Prophets, to the
which ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a Light that shines in a dark
place, until the day dawne and arise in your hearts. Nor was it other
scripture then the So understood of The. Aquinas. 2. Tim. 3.16, 17.
Old Testament, which is commended to Tim^thie for able to make the man of God
absolute and perfect unto all good works. Nay, which more is, it was so
perfect in Salomons time, as nothing was to be put unto it, Prou. 30.6. But
which does more magnify the scriptures sufficiency, it was perfect in Moses
his time: that is, the perfect rule of faith is contained in the five books of
Moses, Deuteronomy. 12.32. This word of God so perfect in Moses, perfect in Solomon,
perfect in the Prophets: as I may say* by way of resemblance, perfect in
Father, perfect in Son, perfect in Holy Ghost: sacred Trinity in Unity.

It then will be demanded, what use is there so of the new testament? I
answer, unspeakable much. As Solomon did comment on Moses, and the Prophets on
both: so the new Testament is a commentary on all. Such pains the holy ghost
has taken for causing the way of truth to be easy, as indeed it is easy
Pro9. 8.9. to such as will understand. That causes Isaiah to send his people
To the law and testimony, Chap. 8.20: and this caused Christ to send the
people to the old Testament, which says, Search the scriptures, in John 5.39.
and this for their further conviction, Tertull. aduers. haeret. de praescript.
cap. 8. Origin. in lib. 7. ad Romans Chrysostom. hom. Aug. in Ioh. tract. 33. Gers.
de laud^ script. See the rest, and all on Io: 5. and 2. Tim. 1.
for he knew that they had not the will to come unto him. Some late Romanists
urge the word Indicatiuely thus: You do search, etc. because they would
debar lay people from reading the Scriptures: and for the Indicative sense
they produce Cyrill. Against which one, I oppose Tertullian, Origin,
Chrysostom, Augustine, etc. Rupertus, Aquinas, Gerson, Albertus Magnus, and
who not? Christ (says Chrysostom) sent not the Jews back to the simple and
bare reading of the scriptures, but to the very diligent search thereof. He
said not, Read the scriptures, but Search. He commands to dig more
deeply, that so we may find the things which are hid in profunditie. And
for such profound search, it is that S. Luke so highly praises the Beraeans.
To leave Gods Rule, for Man's Rule, it is, to forsake triple perfection for more
imperfection: and (to use Ieremies speech) it is a forsaking of him that is the
fountain of living waters, for digging to men's selves, pits, broken pits that
can hold no water, Chap. 2.13.

When Aug. de vnitat. ecel. Non audiamus, haec dico, haec dicis, etc.
Augustine deals with the Donatists he says* Let us not hear; I say this,
thou say that, but let us hear, haec dicit dominus, this says the Lord. The
Lords books are certain, to, the authority whereof we both consent. Ibi
quaeramus ecclesiam, therein let us seek the Church, by them let us examine
our cause: I will not that the Church be shown by humane documents, In^ert.
Author on Math. homil. 49.
but by the divine oracles. Hereupon it was, that Chrysostomes Riual
considering the church, all in confusion from Mat. 24. he cries, These that be
in Iudaea, Let them fly to the mountains; namely, such as are in
Christianity, Conferant se ad scripturas, let them betake themselves to the
Scriptures. Because, from the time that Heresy inuadeth the churches, there
can be no probation of true Christianity, nor (for such as are willing to
know the truth of faith) can there be any other refuge, but the sacred
scriptures. Before such time, by many means it might have been manifested,
which was the Church of Christ, and which was Gentilisme: but now (to such as
are willing to know which is the true Church of Christ) there is no way, but [
tantummodo per scripturas] only by the Scriptures. Thus, together with the
ancient Church of God I conclude from Scripture, that in the word of God is
contained the Old way, wherein the faithful are to walk. Of the Prophets and
Apostles therefore we are to learn, with them to consult.

But here the Romanists do object thus: the Lindanus in Tilmanno de verbo Dei:
error 5.
Scriptures are a a waxen Nose, a shipmans Hose, which every heretic can
turn to his purpose: the Scriptures therefore, how perfect soever to
salvation, yet not sufficient for Instruction. I answer: first, let them
grant us salvation, and let them take the destruction to themselves. Secondly,
how it is possible they should be sufficient for salvation* but not for
instruction: seeing, howsoever instruction may be without salvation, yet
salvation cannot be without instruction. Thirdly, if the word of the Creator be
insufficient, what Devil is that dare say the word of any creature can be
sufficient* Fourthly, no Heretic can turn the scripture to his heretical
purpose. He may labor so to turn it, he may contend to make it a Pandor: but
such it never can be: for (as an Ancient well says) it is not the Scripture,
but their collection or sense of scripture that makes the heresy. Fifthly, I
answer: that though the Old way be manifest in the scriptures, yet only seen
of these that have the eyes of the scriptures. Colors cease not to be colors,
though the blind cannot judge of them. Men are Men, though the half blind in
the Gospel saw them a far off to be but as trees. The insufficiency is not
in the word, but in our understandings: and therefore stand need with the
Emmauites in Luke. 24. to have our understandings and cies opened of Jesus.

When we are come to the scriptures, we are come to a sufficient rule, but
then we must have in us the inward ointment (as John terms it, 1. Ep. 2.27.)
that is, his Spirit, for leading us into all truth, or else, in seeing, we
perceive not, and hearing, we understand not. To this purpose, excellent is
that saying of Barnard: Barn. ad fratres de mont de vita solit.
With what spirit the scriptures were writ, they covet to be read, and with the
same spirit to be understood. For thou shall never enter the sense of Paul,
till (by use of good intention in reading of him, and by study of continual
meditation) thou have drunk in his spirit. Thou shall never understand David,
till by experience it self, thou have put upon thee the very affections of the
Psalms. Whereto I will add that of Chrysostomes Rival: Incert. author on
Math. homil. 4.
As all men see this corporal heaven, but yet behold not God inhabiting
therein: so, al men read the scriptures divine, but notwithstanding, all
understand not, that the God of truth is placed in the scriptures, but only
such a one as has been baptized to the receiving of the holy ghost.Nor does
this condemn, but commend the scriptures heauenlinesse, who will not be
understood, but of such as have received the spirit that is of heaven, nor any
vision had from thence, till the Lamb Christ Jesus have unsealed it, Reu. 5.
for no other is worthy so much as to touch the letter, ceremony or outside.
Natural Wit will serve for natural Writ: but the divine writings of God will
not stoop to the natural spirit of Man. 1. Cor. 2.14
The natural man (says Paul) perceives not the things of the spirit of God
(for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned) but he that is spiritual, discerns all things. Thus
from scripture and ancient Churches consent, it plainly appears, that for
seeing the Old way (the Good-way, wherein the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles
have walked) it is absolutely necessary, that every soul do unto the
scriptures bring the spirit of the scriptures: that is, for understanding the
word of God, they are to bring the holy spirit of God. For Math. 11.19 Dan.
12.10.
wisdom will be justified of her children. None of the wicked shall have
understanding, but the wise shall understand.

Lect. XI.
And feed thy Kids above the tents of the Shepherds.


THe Direction so given unto her, for the way she is to walk in, now follows
the Direction, she has for feeding of her yong-ones. The yong-ones are here
termed Gedijoth of Gedj, usually turned, a Kidde, or a young Goat. Rabbj David
Kimchi says (as Pagnine notes in the root Gadah) that it signifies also a
Lamb. I take it to be indifferently any yong-one of the flocks, as Pullus in
Latin is any young one of Beasts or Birds. So I conceive from the adiunct it
has in Genes. 28.20. where it is Gedj Of Gniz.
Hagnizijm a Kid of the goats, that is, a young one of the goats: the
distinction so made by Gniz a Goat, left any should doubt what kind of young
one it was. And this distinction is also well observed of Abben-ezra hereon.
Even as the Latins join the word sheep, or Goat, etc. with pullus, when
they would have us to understand the particular kind they speak of.

Now, in this place it must be considered what flock he speaks of, and then it
may be known whether Lambs or Kids be intended. The word flocks [ Gnederei]
in the sixth verse, it is a general word. The word flock [ Tson] in this
verse, it is also a general word for Cattle: and so neither of them
particulate any one kind. Afterward in this Song, the Church has In chap.
6.5.
once some assimilation with sheep, but sundry times with goats. I see not so
how to tie it in this place to the one rather then the other: but if it may, I
would rather take the word Kidde. Yet seeing it seems indifferent, we will
make use of both.

Abben-ezra understands it of Yong-ones in the faith.
First, we may hence observe the Lord his tender care over yong-ones: who
would, not only have the Parents to come, but also would have the young tender
sucklings to be brought unto him. The Catabaptists herein are hard-hearted,
debarring Infants a place in the Church, denying them the entring-sacrament of
the Church, why? because they are Kiddes, because they are unclean till they
be cleansed by actual faith in the sight of the Church. True, if they be
considered in themselves, they are young Goats conceived and borne in sin
(and so were all the Male-children circumcised under the law) but what then,
therefore not to be baptized? It follows as well, therefore Abraham's Males
not to be circumcised. Objection, There was a commandment for that, so not for
this. Answer, It being once commanded that they should be sealed, that seal
remains theirs, t^ll a commandment be given to the contrary. If once they
had that mercy, then always that mercy: except Christ came to lessen former
mercy, which to affirm were blasphemy. Objection, But Circumcision that seal
is abolished. Answer, It is abolished for the outward sign (the foreskinnes
cutting) but the matter of that sacrament (Christ's blood purging us from sin,
mortifying the old man, living in the new man) that is still abiding, having an
easier sign (namely Water) adjoined thereto: even as the Paschall supper has
the Lords supper come in his place: the sign changed, but the matter (our
food and strength in Christ) continued. We can show that children are once
received in, let them show when they can, that children were cast out.
Objection, Baptism is the seal of that righteousness that is by faith:
therefore child^en vnpossessed of actual faith, not to be baptized. Answer,
So Circumcision ( Romans 4.11.) was the seal of that righteousness which was by
faith; does it also follow, Children therefore not to be circumcised? Foolish
spirits, Children had circumcision, not in respect of actual faith in them,
but in respect of actual faith in the Church, of whom they were borne, or (for
some were strangers) in respect they were under the Churches government: as
Abraham's males ( Genesis 17.13 23.
freeborne and strangers in his house under him) were circumcised: not by
virtue of their actual faith in the promise: but rather, for that they were
counted branches of his tree: Iam. 2 23.
for he believed God and it was counted to him for Righteousness. Which
equity once established, it continues much more under the Gospel. And to put
it out of all doubt, our Savior in Mark 10.14. affirms of Infants, that
such were of the kingdom of God, and therefore an error in his Disciples to
keep them back from the blessing which appertains to the seed of the
Church, seeing all such to us are borne within the Covenant of grace: for so
the Lord said, I am thy God, and the God of thy seed. If (as the Apostle
speaks in Romans 11.16.) the first fruits be holy, so is the lump: if the
root be holy, so are the branches: that is, to us holy in respect of the
Covenant, as also in 1. Cor. 7.14. Where the Child of the Belieuer (be Father
or Mother the belieuer) is termed Holy: not actually holy (for David was borne
and conceived in iniquity. Psalm. 51.5.) but by imputation i^ respect of our
birth upon the Churches lap: for as Ambr. on 3. Cor. 7.14.
whatsoever is dedicated to Idols, is unclean: even so, whatsoever is under
the profession of God, is holy. And that grace this way has rather abounded
then diminished, mark that Females also are in this new Church, so well as
Males baptized. Before they were received in and by the Males (seeing woman was
builded out of man) but now also in themselves. Which augmentation of grace I
take here to be intended, seeing the word here is not Gedaym (He-yong-ones) but
Gedijoth, She-yong-ones.

Iaakob returning home, he takes all his Animals with him, young and old: so
Israel coming out of Egypt, brings every Hoof away. The chosen of the
Gentiles coming out of Labans Idolatrous house, and Pharaohs mansion of
bondage, must leave nothing in the house of the stranger. Old and young, all
must come. The old must bring the young (Kids by the first Adam, but Lambs by
the second Adam: unclean by nature, cleansed by grace, and to be held holy in
respect of God his promise rather then for actual holiness in themselves) these
yong-ones, Isaiah foreseeth in his 49. Chapter, Verse 22. to be brought under
the standart and colors of Jesus: the sons brought in the arms, and the
daughters carried upon the shoulders of their Elders: arguing not only the
tender love of Messiah in calling them, but also the holy care and endeavor of
parents in bringing them.

Secondly, they are commanded (having so brought them) to feed them. Having
bodies and souls under their charge, they must feed both. To feed the body
they oftentimes care, saying, otherwise they were worse then Infidels, and
should deny the faith: but no care, or very small for the soul: as though in
not feeding of this, they should not also be Infidels, and deniers of the
faith. Yes, and I say more, as much as in them lies, makers of Infidels, and
murderers of the faith. Abraham believing this, he taught his family the fear
of God. So did the Emperor Joshua, so did David, so did Captain Cornelius. So
did the faithful Women, Queen Hester, Lois, Eunike, 2. John 1.
Lady Electa. For if there be a conscience for feeding the earthly part of man
(his body) with bodily food, how much more a conscience for feeding of the
Heavenly part of man (his soul) with celestial food? If the Magistrate which
made neither, will punish thy abuse of the body: how much more will the King of
Kings which made both, plague thee for abuzing the body: but specially torment
thee, for murdering of both. He that is not minded to teach a Child, must not
presume to use the place of a father. He that will not teach a servant, must
be master and man himself, and not presume to sit in a Masters chair.
Otherwise, it shall be just with God to leave their children, to leave their
Servants to such notorious evils, as may be the undoing and killing of parents
and masters. For if thou have no care to bring them up for God, how can thou
exspect that God should bring them up for thee? Grieve God with them, and see
if he will not grieve thee in them. 1. Sam^. 4
The fall of Hophni and Phineas, may in just judgment be the breake-ne^ke of
Eli.

Thirdly, this feeding of the yong-ones, is enlarged from the place where they
were to be fed. The word Gnal signifying sometimes Against, sometimes Near
sometimes Oppositiuely, sometimes With, it causes sundry here to understand
diversely. I understand it, as properly, and at first hand it ordinarily
imports, namely for Above. As if in plain speech the Holy Ghost had s^id,
thou Church of Gentiles must pitch thy Tent Above the Tents of the Sinagogue:
by my appearance grace has abounded, and therefore greater things required at
thy hands. Upon this ground, our Savior, says John Baptist, was greater then
any Prophet before him: but then touching the state of such as should minister
in the new Kingdom or Church, he says, that the least of them is greater than
John, Matthew. 11.11. The Sinagogue lived under shadows, John saw the day
breaking, and the Apostles with their successors have seen the abolishing of
these dark tipes, and the brightness of the day of grace. The Patriarchs and
Prophets saw, but it was a far off. Moses veil now to us is removed, and we
behold the glory of the Law present, and (as it were) face to face. In the
rudiments of the sinagogue we are not to stick, but to ascend and clime higher
toward perfection. As grace is enlarged, so obedience must be enlarged. Our
Kids by nature, but Lambs by grace, they are to be fed above, they are to be
taught the mystery of this Kingdom: A mystery, kept secret from the worlds
beginning, but now is opened and published among all Nations by the scriptures
of the Prophets, at the commandment of the everlasting God for the obedience
of faith, Romans 16.25.26.

Fourthly, by the phrase Tents, we are taught (which Hezekiah had learned in
Isa. 28.12.) that our life and continuance here, is but a Shepherds Tent: now
pitched down, by and by raised up. Now spread forth abroad, anon rould up in a
bundle. Now fair and strong, soon after wether-beaten, rent, rotten, cast
aside into a co^ner, Abraham's Tent on his back taught him this. Isreal's Tents
pitched and pulled up in the Wilderness for forty years together, that also
taught them that here was no continuing city. And all this also, for causing
us to die to these transit^ries: for under the Sun nothing but vanity of
vanities.

Lect. XII.
Verse. 8 Ragnejathi of Ragnah to feed, or to pastorize.
My Pastorall-loue, I have compared thee to my horses in the Chariots of
Pharaoh.

9 Thy Cheeks are comely, with rewes of stones, and thy Neck with chains.

10 We will make for thee, Borders of gold, with Studdes of silver.


CHrist measuring the Churches temptation, he herein labors her comfort.
The temptation has been twofold: first, in that she was possessed with
blackenesse: secondly, in that she lacked his saving presence. The first he
cures in the two first verses, which contain a narration of the beauteous
good she was already possessed of: the second he cures in the last verse,
which vtters the good she shall afterward be possessed of. And all these
excellent gifts and graces, present, and to come, they are laid down by
comparison with Chariot Horses, furnished with all complements beseeming King
Solomon in the midst of his Royalty. First, to the Epithete he gives the
Church, then to the Comparison.

The Epithete is, My Pastoral love, or, Shepheardesse-companion. A sweet
term: not only to make her his Love, or Fellow, but also his friendly
Associate in friendly office, that is, in the function of spiritual feeding.
He feeds us, we feed each other. He is the Arch-Shepheard of our souls, we
are Shepherds subordinate, tied to walk by his Table-rules, and written
commandments: we are his friends, if we do whatsoever he commands us, John.
15.14. And his commandment to the ministry, in the person of S. Peter is,
Feed my lambs, and twice, feed my sheep, John. 21.15.16.17. And to the
whole body he commands the duty of edifying communication, Ephesians. 4.29. of
ministering the holy gift one to another, as good disposers of the manifold
grace of God, exhort and watch one over an other continualy. 1. Pet. 4.10, 11
He. 3.13 mat. 18.15, 16, 17.
So doing, we receive the commendation not only of friends, but of
felow-friends, in the pas^orall work of salvation.

Touching the Comparison, and first with that which doo^h touch her present
estate: wherein she is compared to Chariot horses, in. 2. Kin. 2. Elisha seeing
his Master Elijah assumed and rapt in a whirle-winde of a fiery chariot, and
fiery horses, he cries out, my father, my father, the Chariot of Israel, and
the horsemen thereof: as if he should say, In loosing of thee (Oh fatherly
Prophet) we loose the Chariot and Horsemen of Israel, the very strength of the
battle. This term, it seems, was in that age so commonly given to true
Prophets, 2. Kin. 13.14.
as Ioash King of Israel affords it to Elisha on his deathbed. And Zechariah
long after in a vision chap. 1.8.10. sees them to be Horsemen: even as John
afterward, in Reuelat. 6.2. compared with Psalm. 45.4.5. does see Messiah their
Leader mounted upon the word of truth: which Messiah he afterward in chap.
19.14. does see accompanied with all the warriors in heaven (that is, the
faithful in the church) and all mounted upon horses. From which places we may
perceive the strength and speediness of Ministers, and their faithful Hearers.
The true Ministers of God, they are the strength of the Church, as Elijah and
Elisha the strength of Israel. As for the faithful people, they are the
strength of the world.

Where Vision fails, the people do perish: as when Moses was in the Mount,
Israel fell to Idolatry in the valleys. When the Church is removed, the world
is adjudged: even as when the eight souls were closed in the dark, and Lot
with his Three got forth of the City: the world was drowned, and Sodom
burned. As the Prophets of God are the strength of the Church, so the Church it
self is as Ailas shoulders, the very pillars of the world, The first must
teach the Church to make much of her Teachers: the second must inform Sodom
to leave grieuing of Lot: I mean, it must teach the world to make much of the
Church. Otherwise, they shall at last learn, that the departure of Iaakob, is
the loss of Labans thrift. Besides, the faithful (Preachers and Hearers) must
learn, that as they are called to be strong, yea pillars for strength (the
first Epistle of S. Paul to the Corinthians the sixteenth Chap. and thirteenth
verse, Galat. the second Chapter and ninth verse,) so to be speedy, (1. Cor.
Chapter nine, verse four and twenty) for cursed (says Jeremy) are they that
do the work of the Lord negligently.

Secondly, mark the speech of our Solomon, My horses in the Chariots of
Pharaoh: the Palfries His, the Chariot Pharaohs. What is this, but that the
spirit of Strength and Speed it is Christ's; and the untoward flesh (which is
to be drawn by the same druine Spirit) it is of the world and the very Chariot
of Satan. Soul and body (as wheels and axeltree) do run which way the devil
drives: till the stronger man (Jesus) have freed our Chariot-nature from that
power of Hell; and so with all does join himself by his own spirit unto our
nature: Ezech. 1.
that so (with Ezekiels Chariot) it may go forth and return as his divine
Spirit instincteth. Then Pharaohs Chariot (Satan's throne) it goes a new way,
and serves a new master. As Simon the Pharise (though cleansed) is called
Leper, because once a Leper: so our degenerate Nature (because once the captive
of hellish Pharaoh, sl^uish Sin) it may be termed Sins Coach. Yea, so much
the rather, as here in the strongest draught of Christ's spirit (Sin is still
a troubler of our Israel, sin still pulls back and is pursuing us, as
Pharaoh with his Chariots pursued Israel) for leading us captive back again
to the ten times plagued Egypt. But ten times happy we, who even here have
the holy spirit of strength and celeritie to draw us toward Canaan the Land of
Rest, Pharaoh and his horses shall drown in the red sea, when the Pillar and
Cloud shall bring the Elect into the land of promise.

The Churches strength and celeritie so laid down, now follows her beauty:
first in respect of her cheeks: secondly, of her neck. The Cheeks are
compared with his palfries reins, stretched down^ the jaws, rainged with
precious stones: her neck is assimilated to the collers (or chains) of his
steeds (and such had Midians Cammels on their necks, Judge. 8.26.)

Touching the first, if thereby were intended only her cheeks, I would
conclude, that chiefly thereby were meant her spiritual complexion amiable in
the eyes of Messiah: but seeing the word Lechajaik is properly Thy Jaws, I
take it, he rather intends the mouth bridled and kept back from riotous
speech. A lesson taught by Saint James in Chapter 1.19. when he says, Be slow to
speak. And the person that can bridle his tongue, is by him in Chapter 3.2. called
Teleios aner a consummate or perfect man. A lesson learned of David in Ps.
39.1. when he writes: I have said, I will keep my ways from sinning in my
tongue: I will keep my mouth bridled, whiles the wicked is with me. And this
was the lesson that Socrat. Scholastic. lib. 4. ca. 23.
Pambo (a simple unlearned man) desired to learn: and to that end meditated on
this speech of David whole nineteen years, as Socrates the Schooleman
records. Nor marvel at it: for if he that can bridle his speech be a Perfect
man: and if the gift and grace of so guiding the Jaws, be compared to rainges
of precious stones, it must necessarily be an hard thing to obtain: seeing
excellent things are not easily attained. And this grace lacking, mark what
the Apostle James says: Tou tou mataios he threskeia, This Man's Religion (or
worship) is in vain.

For the second part of her comlines, it is her neck chained. These Chains I
take to be only the sacred laws of God, legal and Evangelical. It was but one
Chain to the furnishing of Israel, in Ezekiel. 16.11: but here unto the new
testaments church it is chains. The Sinagogues chain is expressed by the word
Rabid simply a Chain or ornament: but this churches Chain is expressed by the
word Charus, which signifies rather a Chain of pearl or precious stone.
Look how one lincke is wreathed in another, so is one law clasped with the
other: and as many pearls are drawn upon one thread for making of one Chain,
so are many precious promises (compared by our Savior to Pearl) continued in
one, by the draught of one and the same divine spirit. All which, unity of law
and Gospel should teach us to be at unity therewith, as also one with an
other. At unity with the commandments of God, we are taught in Deuteronomy. 6.6.
etc. where we are commanded to have them in our heart, to bind them for a
sign on our hand, and as frontlets between our eyes. Not to write them in a
scrole, as Romanists do John's gospel, tying it about their neck for external
preseruations: and as the Pharisees did the Decalogue betwixt their brows: and
the Babylonians (if not now, yet in Raban in Deuteronomy. l: 1. c. 12
Rabanus time) for external sign of holiness, but as the same learned father
well expounds: precepta mea sint in manu tua, vt opere compleantur: sint ante
oculostuos, vt die ac nocle mediteris in eis: Let my precepts be in thine hand,
that is, be fulfilled in action: and be placed before thine cies, that is, Day
and night let them be thy meditation. Which lesson learned, what shall the holy
Doctrines be unto us? Solomon thus answers, They shall be a comely ornament
on thine head, and as chains for thy neck, proverbs 1.9. and we, in the
unity we have therewith, shall be assured of our unity with God, whose word
it is. As also, being at one with another, as God is one with his word, and his
word with it self) we farther increase that Oneness with God and Christ,
which Jesus prays so much for in 17. of John's Gospel. Which Unity had and
held, what marvel though we be beauteous in Messiahs eyes, for his own
beauty is so upon us, Ezech. 16.14. So much for her present happiness, for
strength and comeliness.

Her future happiness consists in this, that golden borders studded (or as
some turn it, embrodered) with silver, they should be made for her. Where
first observe the Maker, secondly the Work made. The Maker is laid down in
these words, We will make. What we? Even Father, Son, and Holyghost: that
sacred Trinity, who in the sixth day of Creation said; Let us make man in our
Image. In personal respect, three, but for essence and substance, One, and
therefore affording but one Image, not sundry Images Messiah thus introducing
Father and Holighost together with himself; for making this new work, he
would the^by, no^ only intimate, that there is no work of Grace that is not
derived from the whole Trinity, termed throughout Genesis. 1. Chap. by the
plural word Aelohim: but also, he would hereby signify the excellency of the
work that was to be acted by such Actors.

The work is considered in two degrees: first, in borders of Gold: secondly in
embroyderie of silver. For the borders (made excellent from their matter, Gold)
it implies an addition and enlargement of Grace through the observance of his
word: a word refined seven times in the fire, and more to be desired then
gold, yea then much fine gold, psalm. 19.10. For by this golden word the
Laodiceans were to be made Rich: and by the repreaching of this word, the
Apostle would add unto the Thessalonians faith, Reuelat. 3.18.1. These. 3.10.
Nor marvel at such enlargement of one and the same divine grace, more hammered
by the same spirit: for Gold (the shadow of such substantial grace) by the
mallet will be woonderfully enlarged. Scrib. phys. lib. 2
Experience (says One) teaches, that the third part of one grain will
circumuest a thread of 134. feet long. A fit mettle for denoting the
multiplication of grace, which in the faithful is as a fountain springing up
unto eternal life. The second degree of this work is, the studding or
embrodering of the borders with silver. It may be, that Solomon alludeth to
that his proverb: Prou. 25.11.
A word spoken in his place, is like apples of gold, with pictures of silver:
and the rather if we respect the Greek translation, (...)
which reads: We will make likenesses (or Images) for thee, with prints of
silver. Once we are sure, that hereby is meant the garnishing and polishing of
the former borders: for Messiah is not contented only with this, that there be
a golden groundwork, but also will have it embroydered, and so grow up unto
perfection of knowledge, whereto the Apostle exhorts the Hebrews in chap. 6.
ve. 1. who before had laid the foundation of Christianity. And worthily is
the foundation compared unto gold, and the building there upon, compared but
to silver: because we are to be saved by the foundation, not by that is edified
thereon, 1. Cor. 3.10. etc. The first is our Justification, the second is but
as fruits growing from thence, that is, actions of sanctification. Thus out of
her natural imperfection, God (that called light out of darkness) does work
upon, and in, his church, perfection. Forget we therefore (as did the Apostle)
the way we have already run, and press we forward to the mark of perfection
placed before us.

Her disease of blackenesse he thus has cured, by putting his beauty upon
her. Her languishment in lack of his presence, this he promises to cure, in
after season. Thus he Praises, and thus he Promises, to what end? Vt
laudando, and promittendo virtus crescat. That by such praise and promise,
virtue in her may be enlarged.

Lect. XIII.
Verse 11.

Whiles the King was at his Repast, my Spikenard gave the smell thereof.

12. My Well-beloved is as a bundle of Mirrhe unto me: he shall lie between my
breasts.

13. My Well-beloved is as a cluster of R. Sal. larchi does out of their Agada
note that this tree brings forth fruit four or five times yearly.
Copher, in the vines of Gnengedj.


IN the three verses last handled, Christ set forth his Churches excellency,
in respect of time present and to come: In these three verses the church again
on the other hand sets forth Christ's excellency, first in respect of time
past, in the first verse: then in respect of time present, in the other two
verses.

His excellency for time past, it propounds unto us Messiah feeding at table
like a King, having the rowme perfumed with Spikenarde. Wherein observe, first
his Kingly feeding: secondly, the rooms aromatique savor. His repast or
feeding is not expressed in the text, but necessarily understood: for word to
word it is thus to be turned: Bimesibbe, of Sahah to circuit.
Whiles the King was in his circle, or, in his compass: alluding to the Jewish
form of sitting at Table, which was round about. Now seeing this sitting
round, it cannot entend the Kings sitting alone, but a session with others, it
is to be gathered, Prou. 14.18.
That as the glory of a King consists in the multi^xde of people, so this
King-like Session is the rather, because of the faithful, and many faithful
guests, that together with this King do enuirone this Table. The King is
Messiah, Christ Jesus, the head of the Church: they that associate him, are the
faithful gathered from East and West to sit down with Abraham: Matthew 8.11.
the chamber wherein they be gathered, is the kingdom of heaven. The table they
sit at, is to be considered according to the place. The kingdom of heaven is
two-folde: the kingdom of Grace, and the kingdom of Glory. If this table be
considered in the latter, then it denotes only that Catholic Unity and
One-nesse in perfection, which our Messiah prays for in the 17. of Saints
John's Gospel. Which thing beheld of Paul in a rapt or spiritual trance, made
him unable thereof to speak any thing, 2. Cor. 12.2. etc. except with Peter
(upon a little taste of his glorious Unity, Math. 17.4. Luke 9.33.) he should
have said he wist not what. If we consider this table here in the Kingdom of
grace (and the circumstance of time does properly teach that) then it is that
Chatholike Unity begun here: somewhat represented by our feasts of love
termed Agapai wherein the open wicked are of Saint Jude verse 12. compared to
spots. Which feasts of Love, the Corinths did keep before the Lords supper,
but with horrible schism: contrary, not only to the end of that feast, but
also of the Lords supper ensuing: for in that sacramental supper, the unity
of Christ and his members is notably signified and sealed. For as the circled
unity begins and ends in Christ, who is our Alpha and Omega, first and last:
so besides, he gives unto these faithful ones himself for food: that so in
a spiritual sort He, the King, and they the people may become one, as in a
Natural sort the bread and wine becomes one with our natures. Upon that
ground Irenaeus thus writ: Iren. lib. 4. cap. 34.
The Eucharist consists on two things, an earthly, and an heavenly. And so in
truth does every exhibitiue sacrament, because by that which is earthly we
should ascend to the apprehension of that is heavenly. The reprobate may eat
the sign, but not the thing signified. For if he could eat Christ his flesh
signified by the bread, then he should live for ever. John 6.50.51. Let old
Barnard teach the Romanists: he writes thus: Barn. ad frat. de ^ont.
The thing of the Sacrament, none partake, but the worthy and fit. As for the
Sacrament without the thing of the Sacrament, it is death: whereas the thing of
the Sacrament without the Sacrament (that is, Christ without the signs) it is
life eternal to the receiver. And no marvel, for the Bread and Wine do but
signify union: as for the Body and Blood, they are our union and life
signified, and to the faithful together with the Signs exhibited.

In this union, the King sits with his people, and the people with their
King. These that but stood in Salomons presence, are (of Shebahs Queen)
pronounced blessed: how much more happy they that stand, yea, that sit in the
presence of this King: yea, which more is, do live in him, and by him, feeding
upon him, as Eagles tire on flesh, and suck up the blood of the slain.
Matthew. chap. 24.38. Job chap. 39, 30. etc. These that bring not true faith unto
this Table, they swallow the Signs and Death withal (as Judas swallowed the
Paschall soppe, and the devil withal) and therefore, if known of the Church,
they should be debarred of the Church; specially if they may be debarred,
without pulling up wheat, without rending Churches communion.

Some here will object, Christ knew Judas to have an evil heart, yet he
admitted him to this sacred communion. I answer: first, admit he was admitted:
that yet is nothing to us, seeing he was secretly wicked, that is, a maskt
hipocrite, and unseen of the church. Seen he was of God, but not of Man. For
Christ, in respect of his manhood, no more knew that Judas was to be the
traitor, then thereby he knew the latter day, whether the term latter day,
have relation to the day of Ierushalems or the worlds downe-fall.

His manhood knew by David's Prophecy, that one of his familiars should betray
him, but who was the person, he knew not, except by Communication of the other
nature, his Godhead. Whereas, not the things of the Godhead, but the
peculiars of the manhood, are for our imitation. Secondly, though from the
first three Evangelists it hardly appears otherwise but that he was present
(because of the Histories mixture, and mixture of Times) yet from Saint John in
his 13. chap. and 30. verse, it is plain he was absent. For there it is said:
As Soon then as he had received the soppe, he went immediately out. Now the
soppe was of the Passover, not of the Lords supper which was in the last place
instituted. Going forth so with the soppe of the first, he stayed not the
celebration of the second. Nor is this my judgment alone. Beza hereon writes
thus: Beza in his large Annot.
Hence their judgment appears certain, who think that Judas was not
present at the institution of the Lords supper. Nor is it a late judgment, for
Theophilus has this: Alleged by Tho Aquin. in his Continuum.
Diverse say, that Judas was not partaker of the mysteries* but that he went
out unto the mount of Olives. Before him, Hilarious gives in this testimony: It
may be perceived he (so) departed, by this: that he is sh^wne to be returned
with the Company. And for stopping of the Romanists mouths, let them hear what
Clemens says, in the person of the Apostles: who (as some of them say)
succeeded S. Peter in the Popedom: Cle^. of institut. book 5 chap. 6.
When he (that is, Jesus) had delivered unto us the Anti-tipicall mysteries of
his precious body and blood (wherein together with us, Judas was not present,
he went out into the Mount of Olives.

Into this circled-session the hypocrite (without his wedding garment) may
come: but the Lord of the feast will finally find him out. The Open-wiched
tares ( Shimei, Ioab, Diotrephes) may occupy a place amidst the wheat and
children of the kingdom, the ministers of the kingdom not knowing how to pull
up these burry cliuing foes, but finally the Angel reapers shall collect them,
bind them, and commit them to the fiery furnace. According to secret grace and
Election, M^ssiah has a holy communion here (for he knows who are his, and
they have his spirit) but so the visible and external communion* it is here
imperfect (scarce seven without a Nicholas, twelve without a Judas, a
Congregation without a Diotrephes, Hil-altars in midst of the Temple) but in
the harvest, in the worlds end, a separation shall be made, and the external
communion be perfect.

He that expects a full purgation of the visible-church in this world, he
altogether erreth from scripture, as In my Antidoton.
elsewhere I have largely enough proved. But yet, no one in his place must be
negligent to purge it of evil, so far as their calling reaches, when it may
be done without harming the Lords wheat-field, that is, his Church.

It follows: My Spikenard gave his smell: Christ has his communion, and she
has her odor. Like unto that in the gospel, where our Savior with others sit
at supper, together in Bethania, John 12.2.
what time as Mary ( Lazarus his sister) did annoint Jesus with Nard-pistike
(of (...) Pistis, Faith: for it was not only a faithful unguent, vncorrupt
ointment, but also by Faith applied to Christ's death) whose sweet savor
filled there the house.

Spike-nard (or Nard of India) a kind of sweet plant, whereof is prepared a
most precious sweet oil, having the nature of warming, piercing, digesting.
The Herb it self is hot in the first degree, and dry in the second: whereby it
falls out that it is an excellent Comforting nature, and also repercussiue.
Under this odoriferous Nard, I mystically understand, first, the sacrifice of a
faithful penitent heart (whose sighs and confessions, petitions and praises
are as Noah's oblations in Gen 8.21. called the odours of the Saints, Reave.
8.4.) and secondly, they be these sauourie alms which the faithful minister
to the Saints, termed by the Apostle an odor that smells sweet, a sacrifice
acceptable and pleasant unto God, Philip. 4.18. The first of these do
specially respect God, the second our Neighbor. For as in Church Communion;
God and Man are considered at one, and in Christ made one: so, no soul can
manifest it self to be of this fellowship, that first, persumeth not Christ's
head: then secondly his members with this aromatike odor. Christ's head is the
Father, and his body is the church, 1. Cor. 11.2. and. 12.27. To the Father of
heaven are all devotions of the heart to be offered upon the golden altar of
Messiahs obedience: for only this Angel of the East ( Revel. 8.1. etc.) whose
star appeared in the East, has a golden censor, for censing the prayers of
the Saints. As for the oblations of the hand, (the contribution of the
faithful) they appertain to the faithful needy-ones. Do good we must unto
all, but specially to the household of faith, Galat. 6.10. And this specialtie
appears, when as the special alms (termed the Collection for the saints, 1.
Cor. 16.1. and sundry times called a Grace in 2. Corinthi. 8. and 9.) they be
appropriated to the use of the sanctified, of the Gracious. Not that we are to
contribute only to the visible Gracious (for as God without respect to man's
work does good to the very wicked: so, are we) but specially we are to
tender the gracious: as God by a Special grace has regarded them beyond
others. In both we are to be like unto God: and both of them be unto him, as
the Morning and Euenings incense.

Thus Christ as a King feasteth with his church and the church again feasteth
with him in sauourie words and works, but made sauourie only by his spirit.
Judas Iscariot will find fault with the effusion of this oil, not because he
loves the poor, but for that he has the bag, and studieth how to rob the
poor. Let not Mary cease to offer her Devotions to God, and her Alms to
Messiahs members: for howsoever Judas think all, but oil spilt upon the
ground, our Jesus will say, No, let her alone, against the day of burying she
kept it. There be a number of Dogs now, that neither will themselves do good
to the poor, nor can be contented that others do them Good. With Judas they
think all lost that is spent upon Christ and his members (and hereupon it is,
that our Ages Atheists do rob the Church) intending with Iscariot the
paunching of themselves. Let them in time repent, and in time make restitution,
lest God in his justice do leave them with thief- Judas to the halter: or at
least, to have their portion with Hypocrites and Foxes. The Brownist, which now
teaches them to rob the Church, will then be far enough from defending the
play, or helping Sacri-legists out of Hels-mouth, that gapeth to receive them,
as they gape to swallowe up the Churches inheritance.

Let Jesus and his members feast together while they may: for after the feast
there will be a fast, a day of Crucifixion, a dark and gloomie day. While the
Bridegroom is with us, let us publicly bestow our odours on God and Man: when
the gospels sun shall be eclipsed and Christ have yielded up the ghost, then
with the Centurion, let us knock our breast, moorne, and lament, for that
darkness is over all our Earth.

Lect. XIIII.
Having thus praised her Love for that was past, she now comes to that
praise which touches the present time: whereas she first compares him to a
bundle of Myrrh: secondly, of Copher. For Myrrh it is an Indian tree, and in
taste very bitter, and of the second degree hot and dry, and of preserving
nature: for which cause Nicodemus in John 19.39. does mix Myrrh with Aloes,
for embalming the body of Jesus.

That Christ is to the church, a nosegay of Myrrh, what means it, but that
he does by his Spirits heat, exiccate, or dry up the superfluity of our
degenerate nature, whereby body and soul is preserved to eternal life. For, as
it is the office of Messiahs spirit, to kill, or mortify sin in us, so
likewise to viuifie and quicken up in us, the spirit of true life. The first is
done by the bitterness of the Law, the second is done by the redolent doctrine
of Faith or Gospel.

And as the church has in the present, a sense thereof, so she couenanteth
for future time, that this Messiah shall (as a bundle of Myrrh) be couched
between her breasts; and that, no doubt for these purposes: first, for
manifesting how dear Christ crucified is unto her, with all his bitter
agonies: secondly, for keeping her rebellious sprowting lusts under all her
life.

That the bitter cross of Christ is of great esteem in the hearts of the
faithful, consider not only in this, that they desire with Paul, only to
know Christ, and him crucified, 1. Cor. 2.2. but also are baptized into his
death, and so with the Apostle do die daily, 1. Cor. 17.29, 30. For such as
walk on in wickedness, l^bouring their own particular, these are not
common-weal^s-men, but common-illes-men: and as Paul terms them, Enemies unto
the Cross of Christ, Philip. 3.18. so far are they from exulting with the
Apostles in bitter sufferings and sharp temptations. This bundle is no Nosegay
for their bosoms.

That the church places it between her breasts, for the subduing of
deceitful lusts, which are ever ready to spring out of the heart, it also
appears in this, that the faithful m^ditating the death and agonies of
Jesus, they thereby are drawn to remember their own sins, which lashed him,
goared him, killed him: the remembrance whereof will easily prove a cooling
card for Philautus, in English, a lover of himself.
Philautus, able to kill self-loue, and to cause a loathing of fleeting
deceiuable pleasures. To which purpose our Lords Supper (setting forth his
death till he come) it is a sovereign medicine. For as the meditation of the
world causes Demas to run back and embrace the world: even so the
meditation of Christ crucified, it causes Mary Magdalen to leave carnal
couch, arise early to repair unto his sepulcher. And upon this ground was
builded (but through a blind zeal) the ancient Monasticke solitary life,
estranged from the communion of the church, fitter for a Timon of Athens, an
hater of Mankind, then for a commonwealths man, or one of christian
fraternity: seeing we are not called, to seek only our selves, but the common
utility of his church in a mortified conversation. Ieron. aduers. Vigil.
It was prettily, but unfitly said of Hierome to Vigilantius, Ego cumfugero,
non vinco in ^o quod fugio: sed fugio ne vincar: I, in flying the society of
mankind, do not overcome, in that I fly: but therefore I fly, lest I
should be overcome. Vigilantius reproved his Monasticke life, saying, it
rather behooued such a Scholar to stand in the forefront of the battle, and
to minister a good example to others by public battle against sin. Hierome
answers, that he fled lest he should be overcome. Herein the good man
answers Vigilantius with as good reason, as when he proves to the same
Vigilantius (unworthily of him called Dormitantius) that the religious were to
light Tapers at midday in their Devotions, because the virgins in the five and
twentieth chapter of Matthew. had lamps: because in the twelfth chapter of Luke,
the faithful are exhorted to have their loins girded, and burning lights in
their hands: and because it is said of John Baptist in the fifth chapter of the
Gospel after Saint John he was a burning Light, etc. The very rehearsal of
which error is unto this lightsome age, a plain proof, Quod aliquando
dormitat bonus Homerus, that a wise man sometimes is taken nodding.

Our Romanists make Elias and John Baptist founders of this Heremetical life:
whereas Elias and John Baptist were public preachers to the death. Sometimes
(as our Savior also) they gave place to the fury of persecutors, not to the
end to live mued up in a Cabin or Cloister (for as Christ would not please
himself, Romans 1.5.3. so the Apostle says, Let no man seek his own, but every
man another wealth. 1. Cor. 10.24.) but for a while they gave place with the
politic soldier, to the end they might with more strength return for
ouercomming of the adversary. And yet our Monastic persons are so far from
being Moni, our solitary persons so far from being, Soli, Alone, as in troth
they are not in the wilderness, but in the Cities: not living upon Hippes,
Hawes, Roots, but feeding on Dainties: not lodging on the ground, but couched
on soft beds: not mortified to the world, but living to the pleasures
thereof. So that in comparison of the ancient monks ( Paulus, Antonius,
Macarius etc.) these are but Lies without the Life, the very Name without the
Thing. If Jerome himself were alive and beheld our Romish monks, he would say
(as sometimes he writ to Heliodore) Hieron. ad Heliod. de lau^^ vit. solit.
Interpretare v^cabulum Monachi, hoc est, nomen tuum. Quid facis in turba, qui
solus es, etc. Look to the interpretation of the Monch which is the name of
your profession. And then, what do thou in peoples company, who professes
thy self alone, etc; Yet, he would tell them, that their popular life is no
more answerable to his Monastic rules given unto the Monk Rusticus, then an
Ape is like a man: who instead of reasonable speech can do nothing but mumpe
and mow. We are all to smell unto Christ crucified, and to mort^fie sin; but
not only in our selves, but also in others: not by living as an Owl in the
desert, but by keeping the Churches society, and frequentation of Sacraments:
seeing Christ is specially present, where the faithful in his name be gathered
together.

For the second part of Praise, touching her present sense of Christ, it is
borrowed from a kind of growth termed in the original, Copher: The old verse is
Camphora per nares, etc.
which some turn Campher, some Cyper. Campher smelled unto, does naturally
keep under or weaken carnal lust. If that should be here intended, how fitly
is it then here planted amongst the vines of Engadidi; that is, a mendecine for
bridling lust, ouersoone stirred up by drinking the fruit of the vine.
Worthy the noting is that of a certain Ancient Clem. Alex. in paedagog. l.
2. c. 2
Vino efferuescente, luxuriant ac intumescunt vbera and pudenda, fornicationis
imaginem iam praenunciantia: Wine once boiling in mankind, the breasts and
bashful parts do thereupon luxuriate and pass ordinary limits,
fore-shewing so the image of unchastity. Will we use the delightful meats
and drinks of nature, and not be thereby provoked to unbridled lust, let us
then smell to Christ, as to Campher. Let us have the eye of our soul fastened
on his sufferings, and labor amidst our delights to savor his bloody agonies:
and Camphora to the body shall not have so strong effect, as the meditation of
Jesus to the soul. If Cyper be here intended ( Copher is plainly according to
Greek and Latin Dialect turned Cyper: the letter As Cores into Cyrus.
vaf into ypsilon, and As Iapho into Ioppe.
ph into p vnaspirat) we are to consider, first what it is: secondly, what
thereby may be meant. Ciper is different from Cipres, as Cyprus from Cyporus:
which too ignorantly of some have been taken for the same. Cyper of Cyprus, it
says Nannius in his Scholia hereon.
Nannius the Papist, is not mentioned of Dioscarides nor Pliny. But if he look
better into Dioscorides and Pliny ( Lib. 12. cap. 24.) he shall, not only
find in Dioscorides, that it is of a glewing nature: but also in Pliny (that
which he rehearses out of Hermolaus Barbarus) that Cyprus has leaves like to
the Olive tree, but more gre^ne and fatty, with white seed sweet smelling.
Though Egesippus say, that there is growing hereof about the fountain which
Helizeus cured in Ierichoes fields: and Hermolaus, in Ascalone of Judea: yet
Solomon propounds unto us such Cyprus as is growing in the vines of Engaddi.
This place Engaddi, is a City in the coasts of Judea ( Ios. 15.62.) where
David sometimes safeguarded himself from the fury of Saul: as in 1. Sa. ^4. a
place full of rocks and wild goats adjoining to Mare mortuum the Dead sea.
First, that this sauoury Cypres grows in the wilderness: secondly, in Quo
nomine vrbs Sippori appellatur: Rabbinus innominatus.
Engaddi: thirdly, by the dead sea.

That the sauoury things of Christ's Kingdom are lodged rather in the
Wilderness then City, in the field rather than in the Town: consider, not
only John's being carried forth into the Wilderness, when he would understand
the mysteries of Antichrist, ( Revel. 17.) but also the saving treasure to be
found in the field, Matt. 13.44. Not in glorious Ierushalem, but in Bethleem,
the least of a thousand, Micah. 5.2. Which teaches us, not to seek for the
great things of heaven amongst the great things of the earth, for God has
chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the mighty: and vile things
of the world, and things which are despised has God chosen, and things which
are not, to bring to naught things that are, 1. Cor. 1.27.17.28.

For Engaddi or Gnen-gedi, it is a compounded word: the first part whereof
signifies an Eye or Fountain: the latter part of the word signifies a Kid,
Genesis 30.11.
or (whereof Leahs adopted son Gad took his name) it may be turned, A company.
So that the whole word may be Englished, The Eye of my Kid, or the Fountain
of my Kid: the eye of my company, or, fountain of my company. Considering the
rocks and wild Goats in the bounds of Engedi, here may be an allusion to
the young goats, who from the Rocks, not only cast their Eye upon the
fountains below which were their watring plots (for the high minded must come
down, or they drink the Fountain which in the faithful springs up into
eternal life) but also would from above cast an eye to vineyards below,
wherein grew this Copher, as the tree of life amidst Paradise, which mystically
is Jesus in the midst of his church. But as the owners of the vines would wall
the Orchard from the Goats, not only from the old, but also from the young) so
that howsoever they see, and bleated after the pleasant plants, yet they could
not come to spoil them: even so the wicked of the world, they may see and cry
after Jesus, as also hunger for the destruction of his people: but the owner of
this church has set such a hedge about Job, as Satan cannot touch his soul:
and he is (as Zechar. 2.5
Zechary saw) a wall of fire about his church. In safety such people must
needs be, notwithstanding all the attempts of the wicked. Besides, whosoever
enter into covenant with Christ (the best flower of their garden) they must
know that the Eye of their company is upon them: not only the eye of the
Cananite (for Cananites will still be in Abraham's land: which must teach
professors to walk the more warily) but also the eye of their own company
(that is of the faithful) it will be upon them. Unto which little ones, who so
shall administer offense, they thereby shall heap upon themselves a woe: and
cause their holy angels that stand still in the presence of God, continually to
list after, and speedily to execute the heavenly Fathers indignation upon such
Scandalizers. Who, otherwise letting their good works shine out, they thereby
shall rejoice the hearts of these little ones: and also occasion them, for
such good works, to glorify the heavenly Father.

That these vines and Cyper amidst them, were so near bordering the In Latin,
mare mortuum.
Dead sea, (so called because nothing would live in it) it may represent unto
us Baptism, wherein we profess a dying from sin: even as in the Red sea,
Israel is said to be baptized to Christ.

Which Baptism should ever be in our eyes, for causing us to remember the
covenant we there smitte for mortifying the flesh and his deceiuable lusts.
Which dead-sea (called also Solin. Polyh. in cap. 48.
Lacus Asphalti) may further preach to us the neerenesse of GODS judgment to
the wicked, seeing it is so near to the faithful. For if judgment (says
Peter) begin at us, 1. Pet. 4 18.
what shall be the end of them which obey not the Gospel of God?

Thus the Trumpet of Christ has caused his church to Echo back praise. If
first he praise us, we then can praise him. For except he draw, we shall not
follow: so that to him may fittely be said, I prae, sequar; Go thou, sweet
Jesus, before, and we (by thy grace) shall follow. To the end therefore we may
ever be able and ready to praise him according to his own desert: let us
always have an ear to the praise which he gives the church beyond her own
desert. It follows:

Lect. XV.
Verse 14.

My Love, behold thou art fair, behold thou art fair, thine eyes (are like)
the Doves.

15 My Beloved, Behold thou art fair and pleasant: yea, our Bed is green.

16 The Beams of our houses be Cedars, our Galleries of Fyrre.


CHrist and his church have once mutually commended each other: now again they
do that, yet more succinctly: adding withal, a conclusion of praise jointly.
For the Commendations, Christ again begins, then the Church follows. His
Eulogie is laid down, first, in an assertion simple, but repeated ( Thou art
fair, thou art fair) prefaced first with his Loue-title ( My Love) then by
this word of attention, Behold: secondly, it is laid down in a comparison,
where the churches eyes are likened to Doves.

First, to the preface My love, Behold: the first word manifests his vndying
sweet affection, by the which he is one and the same to his church for ever:
the second argues his care for her serious attention.

The first teaches us never to doubt of his love, whose gifts and calling are
without repentance ( Rom 11.29.) for whom once he loves, he loves for ever. The
second teaches how dull we are at the best, for harkening as we ought: and
therefore always need, that (with Timothy) we stir up the gift of God
that is in us, (...) of ana again, zao to vivifie, and pur fire.
2. Tim. 16. where the word Anazopurein signifying to stir up fire, or to
give life to fire (namely, by stirring up) does put us in mind of the
spiritual ashes in our nature, which are ready to cover and choke the zeal
of godliness in us, without stirring and casting off deceivable affection.

For the proposition, Thou art fair, or good, or gracious: it teaches what
the church is in Gods sight: namely, most amiable unto him, when first she has
passed all praise from her self unto Christ, 1. Cor. 1 30
who of God the father is made to her, wisdom, righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption. Wisdom for covering her ignorance;
Righteousness, for hiding her iniquity; Sanctification, for making her holy;
Redemption for her full and absolute salvation. The doubling of the assertion,
it declares how the word of God is not Yea and Nay (that is, an unconstant
word as profane men would make it) but yea, and in him Amen, unto the glory of
God through us, 2. Cor. 1.18, etc. And so the ancient Scriptures are termed of
Saint Peter, 2. Pet. 1.19.
a most sure prophetical word, to which we do well to take heed, as unto a
light that shines in a dark place.

Touching the comparison between the Churches eyes and Doves, it offers to
our consideration, first, to enquire, what th^se eyes be; secondly, wherein
they be compared to Doves. Eyes of the faithful, they be Corporeal, or
Mental, or Personal. Corporeal or bodily eyes be external instruments
seated in the head (as the windows of nature) having liddes (as Port-cluses)
for drawing up, or letting down, according as inward sense instincteth. The
sense of unbridled conceit in Lot, it caused him, ( Genesis 13.10.) to draw his
Port-cluse up, for better discerning what grounds might make for his most
advantage. The inward sense of holy conceit or chaste thought in Job (cap.
30.1.) it caused him to let his eye-casements down, lest he should first see
a maid (as David saw Bathsheba) and so consequently, his thought should
adulterate: for eyes unbridled, are said of Peter (in 2. Ep. 2.14.) to be eyes
filled with adultery.

The Family of Love do take themselves to become unto such perfection, as (with
the Heretical Adamites) they not only can, but also must, in their
Paradise-assemblie behold, not only the face, but all the body bared: as their
* H.N teaches, not to touch the consequent. Job, David, Paul could never
attain here such perfection, which if they had, yet never would they have
turned such grace into wantonness, but have fled (as the Apostle teaches in
1 Thessalonians. 5.) the very appearance or show of evil, much more the evil it
self. But these Atheists are perfecter and wiser then any Patriarch or
Apostle. I doubt not but these fellows are perfecter and wiser then Christ in
our nature, who neither before others, nor yet his disciples, did ever walk
naked. But let these Mach-les-villaines go: for though they seem to be of an
Allegorical Religion (for they destroy all divine history) yet in their
outward carriage to others, they will be of any religion. And so while they
talk of bearing the cross* they will never suffer for any devotion. For the
cross they talk of, it is only allegorical and inward: and that also they
only bear, till they be come to their Land of peace: that is, the perfect
understanding of their church.

For Mental eyes, they be the inward senses of nature (as Imagination,
Fantasy, Conceit, etc.) who have chiefly their seat in the head;
commanding the external senses, as Kings command their subjects. All which
senses are included in the word, Mind. Which mind, as it naturally minds
damnable earthly things ( Phillip. 3.19.) so the Apostle enioyneth all the
faithful to be renewed in the spirit of their mind ( Ep^es. 4.23.) according
to the creation that is in righteousness and truth of holiness. For Personal
eyes, they be such Persons, as who for their office sake are reputed eyes. And
these be of two kinds: Civil and Ecclesiastical. Civil are such as direct
the commonwealth: Ecclesiastical are such as direct the church: both of them
called to be unto their charges, the same that the eye is to the body, the
mind unto the soul. And that they be personally to be understood here, I take
it to be most proper (as in 1. Cor. 12.12.17.) because here is an assimilation
of ecclesiastike members with them of the Dove. But if the Light that is in the
church and commonwealth be darkness, how great is that darkness? The Eye
considered, it rests we now examine what Doves be, to whom these ^ies be
resembled. They be tame Birds, well known amongst us, and therefore need no
personal description. A Bird of right simple carriage, a feeder of the best
grain, whose Song is mourning, very fertile, and (as Ambrose reports) used
in Syria and Aegipt, for carrying Letters betwixt party and party. For as the
Birds nature is (be she never so far from her native and natural home) to
return unto her accustomed place: so when A.B. shall have committed some of
his doves to C.D. and C.D. have committed some of his unto A.B. whether of
these soever shall tie his Letter under the Doves wing committed unto him, and
so set her free, she will fly homewardes with this Letter: where observed of
her first Master, the Letter is taken and viewed. But sometimes it falls out
(Spies suspecting such form of intelligence) they do aim at al Doves roming
alone (for otherwise they fly ordinarily together) and so such a poor Dove
shot through and slain for Letters sake. These things considered, let us come
to apply them.

The corporeal eye must labor to be like the Dove for simplicity and
chastity. Otherwise it is no Do^es eye, but a Buckegoates eye; who is said to
be termed of the Isidori lib. etimol. 12. cap. 1. Hirci sunt oculorum anguli
secundum Suetonium.
Latins, Hircus, of the corners of the eye called Hirci, because his eyes look
thwarte over unto carnalitie. Such a continent eye David prays for, Psa.
119.37. and such a stayed eye had Abram, who would not let his eye look up
after external things, but as the Lord should bid him lift up his eye,
Genes. 13.14. And so much the more must these eyes be watched over, by how much
the more all sorts of vanity enter often in by them (as thieues in at the
windows) for polluting the heart, and sacking the conscience.

The Mind, which is the souls eye, it must labor to assimilate the dove in
all simplicity (not simplicity ignorant, but simplicity subtle) according
to that in Matthew the tenth chapter, and sixteenth verse, Be wise as Serpents,
but simple as Doves: and so much the rather must the mind be simple, innocent,
chaste, because it sits at the Souls helm, stering all the outward senses,
according as it self conceiteth.

Let the eye of the body shut up it self within her casements; yea, let the
natural eye be quite pulled out, and the mind will still show it self to be
as an unruly King in his palace: who (it being unregenerate and so his
imaginations and thoughts only evil continually, Genesis 6.5.) will set all the
Family, all the affections in a flame of unlawful desires. This eye therefore is
then like the Dove, when so it is washed, purged, made chaste, and shall mind
celestial things: for where the treasure is, there will the heart be also.

The personal eyes (Magistrate and Minister) they are appointed of God for
means of good to both the former eyes. The Magistrate his corporal sword
regards the bodies eye: The Minister his spiritual sword respects the
spiritual eye. Moses and Aaron must herein join together for causing
continency in the whole man. If the Magistrates sword cannot fear from
outward act of uncleanness, then it must be drawn out, and cut adultery
from the Land. All uncleanness is to be punished, but adultery and the
degrees of uncleanness beyond that, Moses condemns to the death, Deuteronomy.
22.13, etc. Leuit. 20. Laws ceremonial they were not, and therefore not
abolished, but have their equity continuing for ever. As the Ministers prepare
the Church, 2. Cor. 11.2. for one husband, even to present it as a pure Virgin
unto Christ: so, it is the Magistrates duty, to join his Sword with Gods
word, for keeping the Church chaste in body and mind.

Question. But what if the Law put not the adulterating party to death (not to
frame any question of other sorts of uncleanness) shall it not be lawful
for the Innocent party, to live with the Nocent?

Answer. That it is lawful (provided the offender show due penitence) it has
been the August. ad Pollent. lib. 2. Tindall on Matthew. 6. Pet. Mart. in com.
locis. Zanchius in operibus Dei. Szeged. in com. locis, etc.
Churche^ judgment in all ages. Some have thought that Jerome and Chrysostom
were other w^se minded, but Peter Martyr in his common places the seventh
class. 2. sect. 41. does answer, that they spoke of an Adultresse, Quae
poenitentiam non egerit, which had not satisfied by repentance: and indeed,
for a man to join with such a woman, it is (as the Apostle affirms, 1. Cor.
6.16. to make himself one body with an harlot. But if she be washed by
repentance (as no doubt Michal was before David would become one body with her,
who before was Concubine to Phalti,) then holy men of God have still concluded
the lawfulness of retaining her.. An tu pollutam existimas (says August.)
quam Baptismus and poenitentia purgauit? quam deus emendauit? Ea tibi non debet
vider^ polluta Et si clauibus ecclesiae iam est reconciliata and admissa in
regnum coelorum, quo iure tupotes a te repellere? That is, do thou esteem
her polluted, whom baptism and repentance has purged? whom God has amended?
She ought not of thee to be esteemed polluted. And if by the churches keys she
be now reconciled and admitted into the Kingdom of heaven, by what right can
thou turn her away from thee? And to this end, the Church has used such
scriptures as do exhort to tenderness, to compassion, and readiness of
forgiving one another: propounding also the Lords practice in Ier. 3.1. where
the Lord propounds the state of his people generally to be no better then
hers, who has played the harlot with many lovers: and yet notwithstanding, he
offers a renuall of his husbandlike love, upon their penitencie and returning
And what better president can we have of our love and tenderness one toward
another, then of God his love and tende^nesse toward us? For Apoluo used in
Math. 5.32. and 19.8. signifies at least so much as the simple Luo in 1. Cor.
7.27. which is to loose or unbind. So that it is to be turned properly thus:
Who so vnlooseth his Wife, except etc: even as in the other place, art thou
loosed from a Wife? The Latin word, Soluo (not Dimitto) does express it
aptly. That Apolu^ does signify an absolute loosing or untying of a thing, see
further in Luke 2.29. Nun apolueis ton doulon, Now thou loosest thy servant:
namely by death: and the use of Luo in Math. 21.2. Mark. 11.2.4. Luke. 19.30,
31, 33: where the Disciples loose the colt. As also in John. 11.44: where
Lazarus is loosed: not to point to other places.

Touching absolute Divorce, it is not deemed here: expedient to discourse.] For
the Ministers of the Church, they may be assimilated to Doves, not only for
the simplicity and continency of natural and spiritual eyes wherein they
are called to go between others: as also, because they should be freer from
gall and fretting bitterness, as Doves be rather then other birds: but
further, for that with the Syrian and Egyptian doves, they be called to hold
out and carry forth the letters of God, (his written word, all being as the
Epistles which Christ by S. John did send to the churches of Asia-minor.)
between church and church, for premonishing dangers, for directing the Saints
in all businesses, during the conflict they have here with the Devil, the
world, and Flesh. But as it befalls the poor Dove in her flight, that
sometimes for the letters sake is aimed at of the enemy, and sometimes shot
through: even so it bends these church-doues which Christ sends forth with
his word. Not only be they continually aimed at, but also by the darts of
wicked men smitte through: not so much, because they hate the men, as their
m^n^stration, the message of God committed unto them. Bu^ this must not be
wondered at, seeing so they dealt with the Lord of life before us. So much for
the commendations given by Christ. Now follows the praise which the church
returns.

Lect. XVI.
My well-beloved, behold, thou art fair and pleasant.


THE Church herein labors to express the conceit she has of her Messiahs
feature. And this she does, first, by returning back the word Iapheh fair,
unto him: as if she should say, I am Iaphah, but that falls out, because
thou first art Iapheh, my fairness springs out of thee, who art indeed the
fountain of spiritual beauty. Thus Christ commends his grace in her, and
she praises him for the cause of that grace. Such are the amiable speeches
that intervene betwixt Christ and the faithful. But here the church stays
not, for she adds another Epithete of love saying, Thou art Nagnim, turned of
the Greeks (...), of hora time, because the Spring is the time of times for
manifesting flouresbeauty.
horaios which implies the very Spring or flower of beauty, a term far
beyond the former. Whereby appears, that there is in him a greater measure of
beauty, then is powered upon the church. And this falls out, because he has
receued the spirit beyond measure, we in measure; he is God infinite, we
mankind finite. And all in Him must be considered for surpassing beauteous: as
a flower in the spring, or budding, is of more repute, then in the full
ripe-time. For in the first, is an expectation of beauties-growth: but in the
second, of beauties consumption or Autumn. But because we should be so nearly
covered with his beauteous shine as may be, his Godhead has assumed our
Manhood, and to it he has wedded himself for ever. Whether our vessel
receive more or less of his divine beams, of his budding beauty, springing
feature, 1. Cori. 3.22, 23.
we are Christ's and Christ is Gods; things present, and things to come they
are all ours. God make us thankful.

Either of them having praised each other in several speeches, in the next
place, they join heart and hand, and with one voice, jointly they thus shut
up the first section of their divine Song, singing: Yea, our Bedis green:
The beams of our houses be Cedars, our Galleries of Fyrre.


GRegorius Magnus does so distinguish the sentences, and, respecting the
matter, I cannot disallowe it. This ioynt-speach contains a glorious report,
first of the place of spiritual conception: secondly, of spiritual education.
The place of conception lies in these words, Our Bed is green: wherein, by Bed
(the place of conception) affirmed to be Green is intended the churches
fruitfulnes by conuersing with the spirit of Jesus, by whose ouer-shadowing a
spiritual seed is begotten. Alluding herein to a green flourishing tree, which
either has fruit upon it, or at least, ministers hope of fruit in due season;
because such greenenesse is a testimony of a vegetati^e spirit or life within
it. In the first Psalm, a blessed man is therefore compared to a tree whose
lease is green, and whose fruit appears in due season: but here the fruit
is not so much the liuelines of faith for bringing forth good works, as the
fertility of children (that is, of spiritual sons and daughters) arising from
the womb of the Church: specially, of the Gentiles. The Isa. 54.1, 2.
Evangelical prophet seeing this, it causes him to cry out: The desolate
has more children then the married wife: adding because of the multitude:
Enlarge the place of thy tents, let them spread out the curtains of thy
habitations. And in Chap. 66.8.
another place after he cries by way of admiration, who has heard such a
thing? who has seen such things? Shall the earth be brought forth in one day?
Or shall a nation be borne at once? For so soon as Zion travailed, she
brought forth her children: that is, the Sinagogue brought forth the Church.
For this lump follows the natural birth of the first fruits Jesus upon the
blessed virgin, whereof the Prophet spoke in the next verse before, saying:
Before she travailed, she brought forth: and before her pain came, she was
delivered of a man child. This spiritual increase of faithful, it is not in
the virgin-church, without the holy ghost ouershadow: and for that it is here
said, not My Bed, but Our Bed: that is, the union of Christ and his Church is
cause of such perpetual greenenesse and f^uitefulnesse. Christ by his Spirit
is Agent, the Church in her senses and affections is Patient: he sows the 1.
Pet. 1.23.
Seed of his word: she, as ground, receives the word into the midst of her
heart. Thus between them both spiritual sons and daughters are begotten.
Insteede of fathers, children be, whom Messiah makes Princes through the
earth, Psa. 45.16. And this royal fertility both of them mutually ioyeth and
sings for joy, teaches us to rejoice in the Churches enlargement; as also to
know, that God cannot be our Father, except (as Cyprian speaks) the Church be
our Mother.

For the place of spiritual education, Hebr. Batteina the houses of us.
it is here plural. [ Houses] because the Catholic body is distinguished into
sundry particular congregations or churches, in every of which (as in sund^y
Nurceries) the Tenderlings of Jesus are brought up and nurced. Which houses
of God are set out by their Adiunct, Beams, and Galleries. Beams for the
sustentation thereof, and these are such as feed upon strong meat: being (as
it were James, Cephas, and John) pillars of the Church. And these Beams are
set out by the matter they were of: they were Cedar. Cedar is a tree very
common in mount Lebanon, like unto Juniper, or rather to According to Isidore
17.7.
Cypres for leaf, but for tree, it is tall and strong, and the wood of
permanent nature, not rotting, nor admitting any worm: and as a late writer
affirms, [ Scribonius in phys. lib. 2.
Viuentes res putrifacit and perdit, putridas autem restituit and consornat.]
Living things it putrifieth and kills, but rotten things it restores and
conserueth. All which properties do rightly appertain to strong Believers,
specially to the Ministers. They are placed over their brethren, and therefore
in spiritual gifts they should be taller then the people by the shoulders, as
one well alludeth to Saules tallnesse. They should not admit of any worm
(worm of conscience) for that was it that consumed Balaam, Iscariot, Demas:
specially the worm Covetousness, whose nature is, to 1. Tim. 6.10.
bore through: but fast they must stand in the faith, and being strong, sustain
the infirmities of others. Yea, their ministry is of nature to kill the
quick, and to quicken the dead. That is, by the power of the law, to mortify
the proud Pharise, who in his conceit lives, and is righteous: but with the
doctrine of faith (or Gospel) to quicken the poor Publican that sees and
confesses himself to be dead in sins and trespasses. The Beams of the
pari^ular churches being such, no marvel though their prais^ bes^ng out upon
the C^^ball.

The Gaieries (a^ the word borrowed from R^^^it of Racha^ to ^unne, ^s Pa^nin^
notes from the use in Thargum.
Running intends) they were certain wal^es builded on the top of houses:
the railing in of whose sides (lest any should fall down) was by the Deuteronomy 22.8.
law commanded. Which Galleries are here set down with respect of the matter
they were made of. Our translation s^ith, Fur: some othe^s, Cypress: some
other turn the hebrew word Brothim (whose sing^lar, for form of character,
may be Brut) by the Latin word Bruta: which was a tree (as Plini) records
Plin. iu lib. 12 cap. 17. Petunt in Helimaeos arb^rem Brutam, Cupresso fuso
similem, etc.
like to a broad C^pres tree, with whitish boughs, of excellent sweet savor
being kindled, of savor most like unto Cedar. From these likenesses (it seems
the diversity of translation, has grown. For Fur it is well known to us
for a tall straight tree, very airie, and fiery natured, and well sauouring.
Let it be what it shall be, that is here intended, it is specially to teach us
the excellency of these Galleries, which mystically I understand to be settled
contemplations, whereto the faithful, by steps ascend (as the Priests by
Ezekiels Temple stairs) far beyond themselves: as also did Paul when he was
rapt up into the third Heaven, there to hear (...) in 2. Cor. 12.4
things vn-vtterable. The means of ascending to these Galleries is to walk by
the sight of every visible creature. For throghout the Scriptures, the
Holy Ghost takes us by the hand, leadeing us by and through Visibles, that
thereby we may ascend unto things Invisible. Yet so to mount beyond Nature we
cannot, but by the line of Gods open directions: for without the word we see
the heavens and earth as Beasts see them, without al mounting upward. But when
we are come to the highest degree of our contemplation, that further we cannot
Romans 12.3.
understand with sobriety, (for God deals to every man the measure of that
faith:) in that Galerie stay we, therein let our senses walk and rest, being
bounded on the one hand, and on the other with the canonical scriptures: lest
otherwise we fall from an high: for such a fall must be fearful. Yea, and as
we are to take heed of such a sudden slip, so likewise are we to beware we
do not with David cast our eye from heaven to the earth, lest there we spy
carnal things unworthy our sight: for such a sight, some, and some, pull, our
mind down, and teaches it to mind earthly things. Another danger no less
is to be avoided, and that is, to beware we bring not women (fleshly
affections) with us, as did Absalom into his Gallerie: for if we do, all
Israel below, and God above, will censure our going in, and our coming out, to
be but carnal speculation. An Heathen could in this case say, Mercurius
Tresmagistus in Pimandri cap. 11.
Stretch out thy self in magnitude boundless, rise from out of thy body,
ouer-retch all time, become Eternity, and so thou shall come to know God. By
the word of faith it is, that we must so ascend, on the same rest, and in the
same walk, lifting our senses up to Heaven, and the God of Abraham will let us
see the day which is far off; but see it we shall, and rejoice. Here let us
sleep with Iaakob, and we shall have a vision of Angels ascending and
descending upon the Son of man. Into this Mount let us go with Moses, and
God will let us see all Canaan before we come at it. Up hither let us ascend
with Jesus, and we shall see him transfigured, his face as bright as the Sun.
But when we have seen such sights, let us stay our speech, (for Contemplation
is rather Actio animi quam oris, an action of the Mind, then of the Mouth) lest
with Peter we wish our Tabernacle there, and think there is no other heaven.
Yea, after any great measure of glory manifested unto our contemplating souls,
let us fear a (...), 2. Cori. 12.7. a splint or spell of wood.
splint in the flesh, some Satan ready to buffet us, because of our overmuch
readiness to rejoice above that we should. For after S. Paul had been in
some such notable rapt of Mind, he found Satan breaking a pale (or
speares-splinture in his nature) galling him much-more, then if a sp^ll of wood
had bin in side or other member.

Christ and his Church had before, their Chamber of mutual delights, but here,
they are come to the Battlements, to glorious contemplation. Before they were
climing and praising each other: but here, they are come to the height of
Grace, casting their eyes up after the height of Glory. Amiddest which
contemplation, they jointly sing out the praise of their Bed, the praise of
their Hou^es: preaching to all, the fertility of their Bed, the complements of
their Building. And there, with praise unto God, for that I have heard and
seen in them, I leave them in the first part of their Dilections, singing (as
it were) with loud tuned Cimballs.

The end of the first part.
THE SECOND PART of Solomon his Song of Songs, Expounded and Applied By Henoch
Clapham

Esaiah 5.1. I will now sing to my Beloved, the Song of my Beloved touching his
Vineyard.

Printed at London by Valentine Sims for Edmund Mutton dwelling in
Paternoster Row at the sign of the Huntes-man. 1603.

Reuerendissimis, Magistro ac Socijs Immanuel. Colleg. in celeberrima
Cantabrigiae Academia, Henoch Claphamus Salutem.
DOctissimi Viri, nimis forsan audaculus, ista nobis qualiacunque offerre,
videar. Mouet autem officium, quo Collegio nostro (ego nam olim illius Arboris
surculus, imo (...)) ac in-primis Tutori mihi charissimo, Doctori Guliel.
Ionesio, lubens obstringor.

Pro particulari, primam istius Operis, Ministri nostrae Ecclesiae, secundum
autem and vos habitote partem. Non est quidem quod volo (velle enim mihi
largum, pene infinitum) sed quod quidem possum. Hoc siteneatis, habeo quod
opto: and vos mihi calcar reliqua percurrendi dabitis:

Valete.
Post-scriptum
DIxi, Valete? Hac Epistola finita, venit mihi in visum Dicitur An
Advertisement etc. and praefigitur libro titulato, A Trea^tise of Vocations.
Libellus famosus, per nostrae Academiae Typographum excusus: in quo, non solum
public mentitur de Epistola quadam, quam nunquam scripsi, sed etiam (vt omnino
me ignorans) de Vita and Professione mea in genere conquestus est, Fere dixeram
Kn^uiter, ac fortasse restius.
grauiter. Qualis vita, iudicet Ecclesia. Professio autem nulla est mihi, nisi
publica diuini Verbi praedicatio. Sed vt ne Calumniatori respondeam:
Ecclesiastica hic authoritaes, illius Libellationem condemnauit, ac e libris
legitime rasit. Hoc and vos intelligatis, ac and vos de Albo scriptorum
Perkinsicorum remoueatis, humiliter flagito. Et sic iterum valete.

The Text.
1 I Am the Rose of Sharon, the lilly of the vallyes.
2 As a Lilly amongst the thorns, so is my Love amongst the Daughters.
3 As the apple tree amongst the trees of the Forest, so is my Well-beloved
among the Sons of men. In his shadow had I delight and sat down, and his
fruit was pleasant to my palate.
4 He brought me into the house of Wine; and Love was his banner over me.
5 Stay me with Fiagous, comfort me with Apples, for I am sick of Love.
6 His left hand is under mine head, and his right hand does embrace me.
7 I adjure ye (o Daughters of Jerusalem) amongst the Roes and Hindes of the
Field, that ye stir not up nor waken Ad verbum, my Love till it please.
my Beloved till HE please.
THE Second Part.
The Argument of this second Part.
Messiah provoke his Spousesse (the Church) to due thankfulness. And this
she does, by speaking glorious things of him: with due charge, that He of none
be molested.

Lect. I.
Verse 1

I am the Chabatseleth, it may happily be compounded of Chaba^ to love: and
Tsel a shadow: because the Rose loves or lurketh in the shade. It loves
neither scorching heat, nor pining cold, but temperate places, such as
shadowing plottes in Sharons feeding-soile, prepared for cattle to chaw the cud
in, when Suns heat was parching.
Rose of the Field, the Lilly of the Valleys.

Verse 2

As a Lilly amongst the Thorns, so is my Love amongst the Daughters.


IN the last Act of divine dilections, we left Christ and his Church in the
Galeries of Contemplation. In that part, the Church begun the Song, and both
Christ and she jointly conclude it. In this chapter are two parts: the first
uttered in the first seven verses: the other in the residue. This next part is
begun by Christ, but finished by his Church. In the two first verses,
Messiahs speech lies: who in the first verse sings his own state; and in
the second, the condition of the faithful and his members.

The speech of himself, is a declaration of his lotte in his first coming,
namely, his humiliation in the flesh. And this is done by way of comparison: by
setting forth his condition under the the Rose of a certain peculiar Field,
which from the original appears to be Sharon: secondly, he does assimilate
himself to the precious Lilly of the vallyes. And both of these applied to his
own praise. To his own praiset Yea. But how can one with praise, praise
himself?

It is lawful for a man to commend his own things, when the praise thereof is
given to God: specially, being forced thereto by way of Justification, through
the calumniations of wicked people. And so the Apostle Paul commended his
guiftes and work (the false Apostles laboring to disgrace the same) when
otherwise himself acknowledges it to be but the fashion of a fool. But for
Messiah to praise himself, it is without question ever lawful and good:
first, for that he is God, and therefore cannot sin: secondly, for that he is
Man filled with the holy Ghost beyond all measure: and therefore his actions
holy, and all of them infinitely praiseworthy.

His commendations are conveyed under natural resemblance: and this first, to
a certain kind of So Rab. Shelomol^ and Aben-ezra read it. So R.D. Kimch^ in
Rabb. innominat.
Rose, and as here it is turned, the Rose of the field. The Hebrews express
the word Field by Shadeh (as in Genesis 3.1) with his compound: as also in the
word Bara (as in Dan. 4.9.) an ordinary and usual proceeding in the
scriptures. But here is the word Sharon, which expresses not any field, but
one particular field so called. Of which field Sharon we read in 1. Chron.
^.16. confining at least on Gods inheritance. The fertility of this field
(specially for grazing of cattle) it may appear in 1. Chron. 27.29. Isa.
35.2. And B^^-gorion in his b. of Herodians.
B^n-Gorion repeating the bounty of the first great Herod, for augmenting the
Jewish temple, does remember withal, that to the works dedication, he sent for
300. young Bullocks and too-too many sheep out of Sharons fields. A fat field,
and therefore employed in fatting of cattle. Unto the Rose growing in this
Pasture, our Savior compares himself. The term of Rose, exal^s him: but the
place of groth obscures him. First, to the Rose: secondly, to Sharon.

A Rose delights in shadowy places, orient of hew, cold of complexion, but
passing redolent, and of comfortable condition. Such a flower is Jesus; most
delighted in temperate places, for hew, the chiefest of ten thousand: a
cooler to the conscience, but passing sauory and comfortable to the distressed
Patient.

That he delights in temperate places, no marvel: for as ouer-aboundance Let
this cup pass away from me. The withdrawing of the Godhead, did so freeze and
nippe the Manhood, as it caused him on the other side to cry, My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? Heat burnt him, cold starued him: nor marvel. For
howsoever in himself he was worthy of a temperate place in the earth, yet
because of us his members (even for our redemption) he was to pass through hot
fire and cold water: even through the extremes of his fathers indignation. And
as the Prophet foresawe it, so he did it. But otherwise (seeing no affliction
is pleasant for the season) he coueted the temperate shade, a mean between
both, most suitable to nature.

Orient of hew, the church does preach him in this Song,when Chap. 5.10
He is white and ruddy, the chiefest of ten thousand. White and read meeting
in a rose (and that in a principal manner) it is a beauty of beauties: and such
is the beauty of Jesus. No marvel then though the Psalmist thus say to him,
Psalm. 45.2
Thou art fairer than the children of Men. Here I might introduce the
Physiognomie of Jesus according to ancient Record, but that I leave to the fifth
Chapter. Mean time, an Objection seems to arise from Isaiah, who affirms
of him, that Isa. 53.2.
He has neither form nor beauty: yea that when we should see him, there
should be no form for which we should desire him. Hereto I answer: the
corporeal sight of Jesus, it specially appertained to the Jews, who indeed
would take no knowledge of him (notwithstanding Natures beauty) because as an
earthly King he came not to them with earthly pomp. And the rather, for that
the Scribes and Pharisees had taught them, that not only Messiah would come,
none should know from whence: but also, should gather all the Jews together,
and stablish amongst them an earthly Kingdom. Such a painted form, he
brought Messiah be in it self considered, it must needs be beauteous. Why?
Because there was no sin in him. Sin brought in death: and death spreads
through nature corruption: corruption labors deformity: so that without sin
nature cannot admit deformity. Acts 2.31
And hereupon it was, that his flesh in the grave, did feel no corruption.
Nay, where the Manhood was not only free from sin, but also fully assumed
and wedde unto the Godhead, there cannot be deemed only want of deformity,
but also a perfection of lineaments and beauty. But for the beauty which he
here propounds to his church, it is not corporeal (because Mary Magdalen
must not cleave to that) but rather spiritual.: Like as when the Psalmist
having said, Thou art fayrer than the children of Men, does add (as a reason)
Grace is powered in thy lips: giving to understand, that the Grace of the
lips (namely Wisdom, Eccles. 8.1
which causes a man's face to shine) that was Messiahs beauty. Steeuens face
beheld of his foes, they saw it as the face of an Angel: how much more shined
it after his golden Oration? And if a little portion of divine Wisdom cause a
sinful man's face to be beauteous, how much more must Messiahs lips be
ruddie and his face orient, who is the Fathers Rose is a cooler, it appears
by the shield of Faith, wherewith his members being armed, they quench the fiery
darts of Satan, Ephesians. 6.16. For which respect also, he prefaceth the gift of his
spirit in Act. 2. by filling the churches house with an airy blast. And for
like cause diverse times the operation of his Spirit is compared to Water: and
in the fourth Chapter hereafter, unto the cold Northern wind.

But that herewithall he is redolent and comfortable to Man, Noah's Beasts and
Birds ( Genesis 8.21.) but the savor of Messiahs sacrifice, which caused the
heavenly father to smell a sweet savor of rest with the earth.

And comfort must this Odor bring to the soul, far beyond Paul forget whether
he had his vision in the body or not, 2. Cor. 12.2, 3. Yea, the smell of this,
with the comfort annexed, caused him (for the winning thereof) to count all
other things loss, and to judge them for dung. And strong was this savor, and
no weaker the comfort in our Martyrs senses and affections, when one thought no
otherwise of the fire he was lodged in, then of a pleasant bed of Roses.
Euse^. hist. ^. 4. cap. 15.
When Polycarpus (Bishop of Smyrna) was burned, instead of stench, the
Christians are reported to have felt a fragrant sweet odor, as of incense or
some precious perfume. Which miracle (no doubt) our Lord effected, not so much
for signifying how sauourie the Saints their death be, as to cause them
consider the sweetness of Christ that lives in his members: the comfortable
effect of this Rose, when he is the Alpha and Omega, the first and last of our
Nose-gay.

Now to Sharon. It is (as before) a field of pasture for Bulls and Oxen
contiguate to Bashan. Being a field for feeding of Cattle, it must not only
be fertile, but also admit shadowing plottes for the Beasts shelter in the
days heat. So that the Roses of Sharon must ^ereby be flowers of a singular
kind. But seeing unreasonable Beasts did graze there* these Roses were
subject to all spoil and lewd trampling under foot. From the places fertility
and shadow, whereby the Rose was super-excellent, we lea^ne, the singular
prerogative of Jesus, (borne of the Virgin Marie, ouer-shadowed by the
Holy Ghost,) made altogether sufficient Sharons beasts (yea of Basans bulls,
ps. 22.12.) we learn, the perilous estate and manifold molestures accompanying
our Jesus from the very Womb, by reason of such unreasonable beasts as Paul
contended with at Ephesus: that is, unreasonable men ( Jew and Gentile) who as
Bulls should encompasse him, snuffing at his growth, trampling his beauteous
Nature under foot. Who (as Aesops morall-cocke valued one grain of barley
before all precious stones in the world* so these) do more highly estimate one
chyue of grass, then all the fragrant Roses of Sharon. Nay, beastly minded
people can no more brook the orient complexion of Messiah in his sacred
ordinances (Word and Sacraments) then stomaked Bulls can abide the color of
read. But let them frette and push their fill: from Isa. 63.1, 2, 3
Edom and Bozra, with read garments stained with the blood of his adversaries,
he shall come alone triumphing. Nay, where he said, I will tread them in mine
anger, and trample them under foot in my wrath, and their blood shall be
sprinkled upon my garments, and I will stain all my raiment: he has already
done it by shedding his own blood, laying down his own life, taking up his
life again, arising, ascending, and leading up with him captivity captive.
Revel. 12.3, 5
Let the Beasts of Sharon push their horns against heaven, (as the red
Dragon their parent watched in his birth to devour him) they can prevail no
more then Dogs that yelp against the Moon: for this white and ruddy Rose is
taken up unto God his throne. Where he sittes at Psalm. 110.1
right hand of Majesty, till his father have fought the second battle, causing
the enemies to become a footstool. So far the flower of Sharon, the Rose of
the worlds-field.

The Lilly is a flower of hot quality, of excellent clear color, (whatsoever
his color be) furnished with beauteous accomplements: namely, with the form
of a Bell, leaued with the number of six, furnished within with 7. grains and
all within of the color of gold, hanging down the head the lower, by how
much the stalk is higher: of savor so sweetly strong as man's senses will
easily be ouerturned with the strength thereof. This is the lilliy whereto our
Sa^ior assimilates himself.

That Messiah before, was compared with the cold quality, a Math. 3.11 Acts
2.3 Cant. 4. vl^.
so, for the second, he is compared to fire and the Southern wind. By the
first estate he humbles, by the second he lifts up: the first effected by the
law and his curse, the second brought to pass by the Gospel and his bl^ssing.

For his royal accoutrements, they superexcel. Of the Lillies furniture Math.
6.28, 29.) that Solomon in all his glory was not araied like one of them. But
touching Jesus his clothing, it surpasses the Lilly. The coat of Jesus is
said to be without seame: and the spiritual deckings of him are without all
schisms: nothing of his spirit, that is not at unity in it self. Wherewith
was his humanity invested? himself shall answer: The spirit of the Lord is
upon me, Isa 61.1. If the spirit be his garment, then no creature, nor all
creatures can compare with him in glory. No marvel then though himself say,
Behold a greater than Solomon is here, Math. 12.42. for he was the Lilly of the
valleys, which far surmounted Solomon.

The Lillies bell-like form, it may put us in mind of Exodus 28.33. etc.
Aarons Ephods robe: which by their sound informed the people of his going in
and coming out of the Sanctum or Holy-place: signifying thereby the powerful
watchword he would minister to all people, sounding forth his voice in the
audience of all: whereby notice might be taken of his sacrifice stain here,
and presented in the holy heavens, or heavenly places.

The Lilly is called of the Hebrews Soshan (the flower of six) because of
Observed of Aben-ezra in Shir hash.
his six leaves. God creating all in measure and Number, Messiahs appearance:
This I have laid down in my book of New Ierushalem.
that is, a new state ecclesiastical and civil, for the new Testaments Church
to walk in. For neither natural nor spiritual Creation, but all is in him,
for him and by him. Which further appears by Psa. 45. dedicated to him that
excels on Soshannim.

Col. 2.16, 17
the Substance of the former. After he established this rest by sacrificing
himself once for all, he distinguishes his new Churches state into seven
Sections of Seals, of Vialls, of Thunders, of Trumpets, teaching by Saint
John, that the Seventh trumpets sound should finish the mystery of God, Reu.
10.7.



David) might sing the 131. Psalm: Lord, mine heart is not hauty, neither are
mine eyes lofty:

Philip. 2.6. etc.
For he thinking it no robbery to be equal with God his Father, did
notwithstanding make himself of no reputation, humbling himself to the very
death. Yea upon the very cross he bowed down the head, as if he would
kiss his Church on the earth, for drawing it after him into heaven.

Aben-ezra observes this strength.
Daniel fell down at the sight of Gabriel, unable to sustain his sight, Dan.
8.1^, 18.
but when the soul shall have a full savor of glory sealed up in Messiah, he
shall become appalled, stand as speechles, and be ready to sink under through
the strong verdure of such an object.

Valleys, it teaches not orlie the glorious humble estate of Jesus, during his
whole pilgrimage as the vallies-lilly, is, first fre^r from harm by tempests,
as also capable of more moisture then is the Lilly of the Mountains: even so
our Savior Jesus by his humble and low carriage was freer from his fathers
indignation (yea, hereby did undermine the building of damned Principalities
and powers) as also by such estate became fully fitted to receive all the
sacred dew of Heaven: for the proud and hautie shall be sent empty away, but
the humble and meek shall be filled with every good thing. As pride goes before
destruction, so Humility goes before glory and true receipt of graces? So
much of Messiahs speech touching himself, having so compared himself to the
Rose of Sharon and the Lilly of the Valleys. In the Churches garden I have
gathered this Nosegay, and (by the gift God has given) have knitte it
together: it remains that hereafter we ^auour it, and smell to it, for
keeping us from the worlds pestilence. Now to Messiahs speech of his church.

Lect. II
AS the Lilly amongst the Thorns, so my Love amongst the Daughters.] Two
senses (and both analogicall) may herein be observed. First, an assimilation of
the churches state with Christ's: secondly, a si^ile of her state with some
natural Lilly. The first Luke. 21.12, 17. John. 15.18, 19. and 16.3^. at large
depainted in the Apocalypse visions, and found of the churches part true by
daily experience. And this is it which causes a Sympathy or f^llow-like
feeling betwixt Christ the head, and his Church the members. Nor is there any
reason that the green branch should be beaten, and the dry spared: that the
scholar should be above the Master, and the saved better than the Savior.
This doctrine may seem here to be directly concluded: but because I remember
no writers (specially ancient) thatso understands of this place, I leave it
to the churches judgment, and will come unto the second sense.

Tho. Aquin. in 1. Cor. 11. lect. 4.
Bonj inter malos, accompanying the good inhabiting amongst the evil. Latter
writers, some of them do too confidently conclude only an extol^ing of the
Churches beauty; as if the Lilly here were only praised for beauty, before
the Thorn. To me it seems that both their doctrines flow vnconstraynedly
from hence, and therefore, not to be restrained to one of them alone. For the
better declaration whereof, le^ us consider, first what and who is this Lilly:
secondly, the Thorn: thirdly, the Love: fourthly, the Daughters.

John. 1.7.8. Christ is called the Light; in Matthew. 5.14. the church her self
is so called. Christ throughout the new Testament is proclaimed the Messiah in
hebrew, the Christos in greek, the Vncted in latine-english: and in the old
Testament, Kings over the church have the same title: as also the Judges called
Saviors. But all this with a difference, they as shadows, he as the
substance: they as instruments under him for some temporary good: he in
himself the cause from and for all ^ternitie. So the n^me of God is given to
some man: not for essence sake, as was Christ: but for office sake, as were the
Judges of Judah. Thus the same names in common between God and man, Christ and
his Church: but for a diverse regard and a secondarie consideration. So, in
the former verse, Messiah is termed a Lilly: which for a new consideration may
be here given to his Church: yea, for a like respect and like consideration,
whether we respect savor or beauty. But he then as of himself, she by
communion with him and his spirit.

What, and who this thorn is, is easily decided. The natural David in his
last words (and last words be most authenticke) let him declare that: 2. Sam.
23.6
The wicked (says he) be every one thorns. Where the word Wicked is in the
original expressed by the word Belial, which well declares the nature of the
wicked, for that they be (as Jerome expounds it) Beli-gnol without yoke, that
is, such as will not come under the yoke of obedience: crying out (as in the
second Psalm) let us break their bands and cast their coards from us. Kimchi
deriues it of Beli Observed of Peter Martyr 1. King. 21.10.
and Gnalah [not-ascending] because their matters prospered not. But me
thinks the latter might be applied to them for not-ascending to the templ^,
not ascending to mount Zion, the Tabernacle of the saved. Such base earthly
spirits, such beastly rude Libertines, they be these thorns: whose laughter
and merriment is compared by Solomon to the Eccles. 7.8
crackling of thorns under a pot: saying a thousand times more then they will
or can do: and making a thousand times more show of joy, then there is cause
why. A happiness no sooner in then out: like the beast Ephemeron that dies
the day it is borne.

The Love here spoken of, it is the Church (as ever before) Ioh. 4.19. whose
love is but patient in respect of his love agent: for otherwise we follow not,
then as the first draws us. The love of Christ, is as a Lilly among the
Thorns. why?

The daughters amongst whom she conuerseth, they be but as

Venus never appeared so beauteous as when she sat by black Vulcanes side;
so, this Lilly the faithful never shine more clear, then when they be bes^tte
with persecuting people, black conditioned mankind. Stephens face never shind
so Angel-like in the church where all were virtuous, as it did before the
council, whereall (to speak of) were vicious, tyrannous. Light a candle at
noonday, and it shines little because of other light: but in the darkest
place, that light is glorious. Some faithful shine not so amongst other
faithful, as amongst faithless: but when a mean Belieuer is compared with a
Barbarian, then we behold white and black, light and darkness. And this puts
me in mind of Pet. Farland and Edward Graves.
two men, strong Brownists while they continued in our Christian parts: but
comparing people with people, their consciences accused them for charging our
English Church to be no true Church. The one to the other showed their minds
change, praised God for that mean, and returned again to the unity they before
despised. No other arguments ever so prevailed, as the consideration of English
faith and foreign idolatry. Beauteous is the whole visible Church in
comparison of the thornie world: and surpassing beauteous be the wheat-children
of this kingdom, in comparison of the visible tares, the troublers of Israel.

David shall be afflicted in Israel, and Christ bored on the Cross in Judea.
Enemies without, and false brethren within, they shall do but their nature,
that is, prick, s^ing and nettle the faithful. The Lilly gives no cause of
vexation to the thorn (for it was a flower of Gods making, Genesis 3.18
before the other was borne) but the thorn (a creature that came but in by the
curse) it vexes the Lillies soul. Well, for some good cause it is now
necessary that offenses be: but woe unto them by whom the offenses be. It were
better for them that a mil-stone first had been hanged about their necks and
they thrown into the s^^, 2. Sam. 23.7.
rather then they should grow to offend these little ones. In the mean time,
seeing it will be no better, let us (as David speaks) be defensed with iron
(for hedging mittens) and with the shaft of a spear, as with an hedging bill
(an heroical and patient spirit) and so we may touch them, till God burn
them. So far Messiahs speech, first touching himself, secondly his Church.
Now to the Churches Speech.

Lect. III.
Verse 3

As the Apple Tree among the trees of the Forest, so is my Well-beloved among
the sons of men. In his shadow had I delight and sat down: and his fruit
was pleasant to my palate.


NOw begins the Church her speech in this second Act of our divine Song.
Much she speaks ere she cease, whereof in his place. In this verse she
sets Christ out as an apple tree in the Forest pleasantly shadowed and
fruited: even beyond all the trees of the Forest. For the better understanding
whereof, I consider first, what the tree is which is here spoken of: secondly,
the place it grows in: thirdly, the person resembled by this tree: fourthly,
the persons resembled to the place of this trees growth. Which comparison first
laid open* then in the second place I consider the comfortable adjuncts which
the Church deriueth from this tree so planted in the Forest.

The tree so compared is Tappuach, expounded in Greek by Melea, (...). Malus
the tree malum the fruit: yet Greg. Mag. uses malum in this text: except it
were the printe^s f^ult: for m^lus is in the Expos^^^on.
in the Latin Malus. I do not think of Malum Evil (though evil came into
the world by eating of Malum an apple) but of Mal^ (quasimagis volo) in
English, I had leiuer, or, I more will or desire: because it is passing
pleasing to nature, and of many fruits, nature more wills and desires it. For
as the Latin tongue was, before Latins were acquainted with Adams manner of
fall, so it ^ather seems to have the term Malum, for that it is a fruit
which mankind much desires and delights in. Here by the way, it may be
demanded (nay some do demand it) how any one knows that the fruit which Adam
did eat, was an Apple, rather then a Pear, a Lymon, or a Pomegranate, a Fig,
or such like: s^eing the scripture only terms it by the general term,
Fruit? I answer: if any one, by the term Apple, do understand only that
one fruit which our English language so calls, he speaks very uncertainly
and not sufficiently probable: seeing there be some other fruits, far more
pleasing to the eye (and Heuahs eye was notably delighted with the sight of
that forbidden fruit. This is manifested by Isidore in etymol. l. 17. cap. 7.
and in P^inies use, much.
) But the Ancients have used the term indifferently for any trees fruit that
was pleasing to sight and taste, specially such fruits as be of Bartholom.
Angl. lib. 17. ex Isid. etymol.
round fashion, as Malum Hespericum an Orainge: Malum Punicum a Pomegranate:
Malum limonium a Lymon, etc. And if the Hebrew word should happily be
compounded of Or for Tau, put Toph a timpany, because it sounded ashes, as by
preaching ma^s fall.
Tau and Piach (nor see I but it may) then I would think that Adams forbid
fruit-tree was this kind of Apple Tree. Tau is a Sign, ^iach is Ashes:
because the sight of the tree should put man in mind of becoming Ashes by
eating of it. Nor lets it but Jesus may undergo the name of that particular
apple tree, so well as he undergoes the name of the Serpent. But of the serpent
lift up, not put down: with sting, but he without sting. So he For there was
no evil in the tree, s^eing each creature was good, ^s Be^a well notes.
may be termed the tree of knowing good and evil, as by his good he has
cured our evil: knowing and feeling our evil upon him, that so by his
goodness he mightfully abolish evil. Though indeed first of all, he was
rather figured by the tree of life, then growing in midst of the Garden. This
of that apple tree, but as by the way: for the apple tree here mentioned, it
appears by some after-circumstances, that it is a tree of spreading nature,
bringing forth fruit, not only pleasant in taste, but so strong unto the
sense of smelling, as thereby a quickening power is conuaid into a feeble
weakened body. This of the tree.

trees, trees that bring not forth meat for men, but maste for hogs.

For the person assimilated to the apple tree, it is Christ Jesus,

The persons resembled by the Forrest-trees, they are here termed Sons, not
Sons of men. Yet the matter well heeded, that adiunct [ of men] is well added
in a distinct letter. She considers her Well-beloved Jesus here, not exalted,
but humbled: not sitting in the heavens, but pitching his tabernacle amongst
men. And therefore past all doubt, that here he i^ not compared with the Angels
(to whom in this state he was somewhat inferior, Heb. 2.7.) but with the
sons of men: even as the Church before was conferred with the daughters of
men. These things remembered, let us see what is inferred.

As an Apple Tree amidst the Forest trees, so is Christ amidst the sons of
men. Wherein like? first, for being oppressed, though not suppressed: secondly,
for being comfortable to the poor passenger. For the first: it was expressed
in his comparison Sharon and the Lilly of the valleys. Thereto the Church
subscribeth, plainly affirming, that it comes to pass by the sons of men.
Ioh. 1.5, 10, 11
He came to his own and his own received him not. He was in the world, and
the world knew him not. The light shone in darkness, but the darkness
comprehended it not. Nay (as much as in them was) they labored to quench the
light. The trees of the Forest ( Iothams bramble and all) do inuiron him. The
canker-fret sons of Adam flock about him. These that brought forth fruits
beseeming hogs that wallow in their own filth, they despise him for his good
works, and take up stones to cast at him, Ioh. 5.59. whose daily fury was
such, as it caused him at another time to cry out, Many good works have I
showed you from my Father, for which of these do ye stone me? Nor would they
be quiet, till they had pulled this tree under foot: but it rose again the
third day, and so their second error (in not yet believing, but slandering his
resurrection) it was worse then the former.

The second thing is, the comfort which an apple tree brings to a person
voyaging through a grove: and which Christ Jesus administreth, unto a wearied
soul travailing amidst these sorry sons of Adam, the wicked world. And this
comfort is laid down in two particulars: first, in shadowing such a soul:
secondly, in feeding it.

Barth. de prop^rt. lib. 11. c. 6.
Naturians have borne the world in hand, that by certain dark shadows
collected in the air, (resembling men's words and works) Pithagoras (yea Abbot
Tritemius and Bartholomeus Glanduile) could declare what was done a far off,
so the same word and deed were not aged above 24. hours. But if knowledge be
held miraculous in the Prophet Eliseus bewraying the King of Aram his council
(2. King. 6.8, etc.) then cannot I but believe, there is no such natural
knowledge. That Friar Bartholmew teaches, how by certain artificial glasses,
there might be caused abroad very shapes of bodies, which simple beholders
would imagine to be ghostes or spirits: I will easily believe the Friar in
that, for it may be he had learned it of his Church-priests, who, by such
deceiuable shows made people believe, that men's souls walked: who well paid
for their pains, could conjure these shadows at their pleasure. Let Edmonds
the Jesuit with his Priests make that clear: who have caused people to
believe themselves to be possessed with Devils; specially, after they had
given them Potions and Brimstony fumigations, able to trance an horse. Which
Brimstony-Diuel they could dispossess, by ceasing to possess their bodies any
longer with such Hors-drinkes and Helhsh smoakings. But let al such sorts of
shadows (very effects of Egyptian darkness) go by, and let us come to the
shadow of our Appletree: and what is that in mystery? The Psalmist thus
answers: Psalm. 91.1, and 36.7.
He that dwells in the secret of the most high, shall abide in the shadow of
the Almighty: which at large after is expounded by terms of protection, even
as an Hen under her wings protecteth her yong-ones. This comfortable shadow,
this shield of protection in the times of Suns heat and Sins heat (in the time
of bodies persecution and souls persecution) this shadow the faithful desire,
crying: Ps^. 64.2.
Hide ^ee from the conspiracy of the wicked, and from the rage of the workers
of iniquity. Hither they fly, as doves unto their culuer-house, as the Child
into Mothers lap. To Idols, to the shadow of Iothams bramble, or any other
creature they fly not, and why? All power in heaven and in earth is given to
Christ, and he will not give his Glory to another. Call upon him in the day
of affliction, and he will hear thee: come unto him, and he will ease thee.
And because he would have thee find him, even when thou do not seek him,
lo he cast himself into the forest, where the site most fit for him, is
paradise. Though he be removed in his body, he is present in the spirit,
Totus Christus, non totum Christi est v^ique. Lomb. in li. 3. did. 22.
present in his word, present in his sacraments. Whole Christ though not the
whole of Christ) is every where. Rudely though he be handled in his ordinance,
yet present he is. If his word, if his disciple be hardly entreated, he counts
himself persecuted: and when Satan would dart them through with fiery darts
of sin, he takes the shot into his own wings, his protection as a shadow
reviues and comforts them. There is no salvation (says Peter, Act. 4.12) in
any other, for amongst men there is given none other name under heaven, whereby
we must be saved. Hic ergo requiescamus and ruminemus, let us therefore solely
repose our comfort in his shadow for ever.

The second comfort derived from him to all that rest under his fruit was
pleasant to my palate. What fruits be these? In one word, words and works.
Psalm. 119 103. John ^.46 John 6.68.
For his words, David thus pathetically cries out: How sweet are thy speeches
to my palate, beyond honey unto my mouth! Let the Jews pursiuants deliver their
judgment herein: Never (say they) Did man speak after this manner. As for
Simon Peter, he cries out, Thou have the words of eternal life, to whom
should we go? As if he should say, it is not for any man to seek for words
that bring eternal life, in any one but thee: therefore we will not depart
from thee, Greg. Mag. hereon.
for running after any other. This caused Gregory to conclude well: Ipse est
quippe lignum vitae, etc. For he is the tree of that life which he gives to
us. If in other men's words we find any refreshment, we receive it not as
theirs, but as that which is Christ's: because, whatsoever is in them besides
God, without doubt we find to be poison for us. Over against which words, the
Ancient Annotatour puts in the Margin, Salutis verbum in solo Christo
inuenitur, the word of salvation, is only to be found in Christ. Then of the
other side follows, for a soul to build his faith on the mere word of man
(howsoever it carry with it a name of the Churches decree) it is to build, not
on the Rock, but on a sandy foundation.

works, what one action can be remembered that is not delectable? His work of
incarnation, taking our nature upon him: his work of warfare in our nature,
to the killing of sin upon the cross, and his conquest of death by an happy
resurrection: his glorious ascension in our nature, leading captivity captive,
and giving spiritual gifts unto men: his sitting at the right hand of majesty
in our nature, making continual intercession for his people: and from thence
sending forth the Angels for ministering unto the good of the heirs of
salvation. His affoording word and sacraments for our daily instruction: his
gift of natural life, with all necessary temporaries accompanying his people.
His protections in time of calamity: his spirits delightful presence amiddest
persecution: his sweet care of us in life and in death. No one particular
action can be remembered, that is not pleasant and pleasure it self. Eat of
these apples in Faith, digest them with Meditation, and thou finds in them
another manner of delight, then carnal Israel did in Manna. That quickly did
rot, this never felt corruption. Tagnamu vreau kj tobh Jehovah* Taste ye, and
see ye, how good the Lord is, psalm. 34.8. Every action an apple of life; and
not a leaf of this tree, but it serves to heal the nations with, Revel. 22.2.

Lect. IIII.
Verse. 4.

He brought me into the B^^th haja^jn. Aug. in Psalm. 8. has domum vinj.

For the other half of the verse, Tremel^^s, (...), and Arrias Monta^^s they
thus turn it.

The Greek and old Latin are so far wide here, and too-too many places, as
any Linguist may know the first not to be the true Septuaginta: and the second
not to be Jerome.

Except they should be more ignorant, or more conscienc^lesse than can be
imagined.

John 7.38.


house of wine, and Love was his banner over me.

Verse. 5.

Stay me with Flagons and comfort me with apples: for I am sick of Love.


THE Church continues her speech, and in these two verses she v^ters two
things: first, a Narration of Messiahs love unto her: secondly, a petition
offered up unto her souls Physician. For the Narration, it vtt^reth Christ's
love in two glorious favors: first, in conuaying his spousesse into a
banqueting house, termed (by reason of a special adiunct) the house of wine:
secondly, in spreading his banner over her, termed from the effect, Dilection
or Love. First, of this narration, then after to her Petition.

In the verse before, she sat in Messiahs comfortable shadow and ate of his
pleasant fruit. Now the well-beloved b^ingeth her into his house of wine, that
there she might be further cheared and quickened up unto spiritual duties.
Wine (as I observed in the first chapter) brings a delight to God and man: to
God as it be comes a Sacrament, that is, as it is taken spritually of the
faithful, in the Lords supper: or mere naturally, as it is in common vsuages.
The shadow of Christ coming upon her soul (as the natural shadow in the
Gospel upon the diseased) it was unto her a great comfort; but under that shade
to be fed with delectable fruit, that caused a greater comfort: but now to be
brought into her Salomons banqueting house (standing in Baal-hamon, as a Lord
over the multitude) this must bring a comfort far more great to the
faithful. Whence we may learn, the nature of Messiahs love, namely, that it
is a continual grower, rising like Nylus and Iordans waters over their banks:
a well of water springing up to eternal life, John 4.14. He that belieueth in
me (says Jesus) out of his belly shall, flow rivers of water of life: and unto
his Israel it is appropriate, that they go from strength to strength till they
appear in Zion, Ps. 84.7. Contrary to the nature of carnal Love, which ever
decays and lessneth with the time, even as beauty, health, wealth, strength
abateth. But as Christ loves us not first, by reason of any goodness in us at
first, so his love begun without any cause in us, does still enlarge it self
in and upon us. Why? Because whom once he loves he cannot but love for ever.
That crannell must grow to a tall tree, that drop become an Ocean, that spark
be converted into such a flame, as shall consume all as stuble before it.

patience, (James 1.3.) to patience, Experience: to experience, Hope: to hope,
Boldness: Romans 5.3, 4, 5. The fruits of that good spirit by whom he adopteth
us, are not only these abouesaide, but also, Love, Joy, Peace, long-suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Meekness, Temperancie, Galat. 5.22, 23. In a word,
Messiah communicates of all his sweet favors to his church, by faith betrothed
unto him. As the Churl in the Gospel would never cry, Heart be at rest, till
all his barnes were filled: so the faithful, in their holy couetings should
much more never be at rest, till their souls with divine graces be filled. But
as this fullness is not, till we have attained our perfection in Christ, which
is after this life: so these that hunger and thirst after righteous giuings,
they are in mean time blessed, because they are of the growing hand in this
life.

The Gentiles represented by the Prodigal, as the Jews by the elder brother,
Luke 15.
Zion the church of Israel, mother church to the Gentiles, who sometimes fed
hogs in the forest with the Prodigal. But there in the solitarines of spirit
lighting under the tree of life, she entered into consideration of her present
state, after fell unto holy resolution, and lastly came home to the lambs
supper: entertained of the heavenly Father in all melodious and comfortable
manner. Our elder brother the Jew stands without murmuring at our good lot: our
heavenly Father at last will entreat him so to enter, as he shall enter into
Christian unity with us: and then all Israel shall be saved. In mean time while
he is without, and we banqueting within, let us not forget him (as the Butler
forgot Joseph) but sometimes amidst our spiritual banquet (in holy word and
sacraments) let us remember to pray for them. For as they the first are now
become the last: so they the last shall once again become the First. The Lord
hasten this unity, for making our corporation the greater, that so the Lords
banqueting house may be filled.

She so introduced into her Beloueds house of spiritual delites: Isaiah in
chap. 49.22. where the end thereof is noted to be, for drawing the remnant of
the Gentiles unto her young and old, people and princes to the same unity of
faith. Which Banner has allusion to the manner of Captains, who having
conquered some city, do upon the walls thereof display their colors of
conquest: first for calling together all friends to that standert, together
with a memorial of their subjection: secondly, for terrifying all adversaries
by these colors. Friends are to repair unto their colors, by reason of their
sacramental oath: for Stringi Sacramento, to be bound by a sacrament, is of
the church borrowed from that Sacred mind which soldiers declared to their
captain by oath; and now is applied to that sacred sign whereby the faithful
do tie them selves to their Captain Christ. The Israelites did tie themselves
to God by many sacred signs or sacraments: but specially, by Circumcision, and
the Paschall supper: and in the room of these two, the Church of Gentiles
binds her self to Christ by Baptism and the Lords supper. By the first we
vow to march under his banner, and do fight against the Devil, the world and
deceiptfull flesh: by the second we swear to solemnize his bodies breaking and
blodsheding till his appearance in glory. The standart of his word he liftes
up amidst his people, calling them by the display thereof, to return by
repentance unto their colors, Exodus 14.13
if so they be out of the way. If they be not out of the way, yet to remember
they stand fast (as Moses charged Israel) lest otherwise they be drawn out of
the way. Of joining to this divine corporation, Act. 247. Luke 17.37.
S. Luke speaks thus: And the Lord added to the Church from day to day, such
as should be saved. Nor marvel, for whersoever the body, of Jesus is, thither
the eagles will resort. Thamar shakes off her incest, Rahab her uncleanness, Ruth
her Idolatry, and so have their names entered into the Catalogue of the ancient
Church, Math. 1. The Eunuch of Aethiopia, the Roman Centurion, Publicans and
sinners confess their sins, believe in Jesus, are baptized, and so march
under the New Testaments colors. In a word, Saint John sees thous^ndes, of
Israel sealed to the Synagogue: but of the Gentiles he sees an innumerable
company of people, of all tongues and kinreds standing before Messiahs throne,
observing this captains pleasure. The standart of his word displayed amongst
these Citizens, it puts them still in mind of the homage due to their Lord;
like as the Jews by Ben-Gorion in his book of the Jews war^es.
placing a flag with the Romans arms, upon Ierusalems walls, on their three
several great Feast-dayes, did thereby declare themselves subjects to Romes
Caesar.

Berke, to have liberty to depart their town with Auntients displa^ed, with
armor on their backs, with their bullets in their mouths. But Michaels
adversaries were deprived of all glory. For he entered into the house and bound
Satan: he cast him and his Angels out of the Churches heavenly places: he
ascends leading captivity captive, and gives gifts unto men: even to all his
faithful followers. No ma^uell now* though the behold of these victorious
colors do smite a cold^feare into them, as Isreal's ancients did appall the
Kings of the Nations. Nor marvel though Spains Balak fret, though Romes B^laam
be willing to curse: for if the colors of Christ (his bloodshed) be ever
displaid for a sufficient ransom; their Euphrates dries up, their Pardons may
go pack, their purgatories fire is quenched, and all their trumperies
ouer-turned.

Secondly, whereas she says that his banner over her, was Love, it is for
that in his word preached his several loves are displayed: even as in flags
often times are painted the Conquerou^s several triumphs, or instruments of
victory. Daniel draws in the Persians arms a Bear with three ribs in his
mouth, because of his conquest in three coasts. Judas Macabeus is said to have
in his standart these four lines Mj Ca^oka Belim (...). verbatim who as-thou,
Amongst-the gods, Jehovah.
M.C.B.I. representing four Hebrew words, which are in English: O Jehovah, who
is like to thee among the Gods? Exodus 15.11. signifying thereby, that none but
Jehovah could deliver in the day of battle. London has in Arms a Dagger, for
putting in mind that by the stab of a dagger, Will. Walworth Mayor, 1381.
Richard the second then King. Revel. ^.14.
a Mayor of this city arrested the Traitor Iacke-Straw, wherewith that
disordred troop of his was dissolved. For Messiahs banner it is Love, that is,
in it (namely his word) is expressed, the signs of his Love. For in his fl^g
thou may see a red-crosse in a white field: that is, the blood of Christ
Jesus m^king the garments (of our conscience) white. There thou may see a
crown of thorn piercing his head, for curing our senses: nails boring his
hands, for saluing our actions: his feet smit through, for sanctifying our
affections: water and blood issuing out of his side, for washing us wholly: his
body full of lashings for our sin: his face spit upon, for making us
glorious. Lo his Love, the ensign of his love displaid over us for provoking
us to praise, and faithful obedience. So far the Narration.

Lect. V.
THe Petition follows in the next verse. A petition I call it, not because it
contains only matter of request (for Petitions to Princes seldom do that)
but because her principal act in it is prayer: for otherwise, as the Lords
prayer is concluded with a reason of prayer to God ( For thine is the Kingdom,
etc.) so this verse contains first matter of Request, then a Reason of that
request. The matter supplicatorie is uttered in two branches (first, in saying:
Stay ye me with flagons: then in these words, Comfort me with Solin. Polyh.
cap. 65. affirms that those that dwell by the Fountain of Ganges need no
meat; for they live odore pomorum syluestrium, by the smell of forest apples.
apples) the Reason of herso earnest prayer is this: For I am sick of Love.
The thing she requesteth is spiritual sustentation and strength, compared with
Flagons of wine and the savor of apples. How comfortable wine is to the heart,
and the savor of pleasant apples to the sense, such is the sense of Messiahs
louesome graces to his Church. The false church has her wine of fornication
and apples of idle inventions whereafter her idolatrons soul lufteth. Unto
that idolatrous wine and windy puffing fruit, this of the faithful is
opposed, for as the other deriues their adulterate stuff from Antichrists
ministers (termed spiritually, Reu. 18.3.14 Ibid. verse. 13.
Merchants: for selling of men's souls) so the true Church has her banquet
from the ministers of Christ, who propine such spiritual graces, for the
comfortable strengthening of her soul. To them she cries Stay ye me, comfort
me (for she speaks in the plural number) because the ministers of the
church are called to be Noted in the last verse of the former chapter.
pillars for supporting the weak. And with the Lords spiritual delicacies are
they chiefly trusted, to the end they may be faithful dispensators thereof. As
the wise-hearted will call for comfort at no ministers hand that is not of
Christ, and a Seruitour in this Banquet-house: so neither will desire any other
word or sacrament, then her B^loued Messiah has incommended unto them. And
these Ministers must also see that they deliver no other thing to the people,
as did that great Steward of Jesus, 1. Cor. 11.23
who thus to the Co. in the says: That which I have received of the Lord,
Genes. 49.11
I also have delivered unto you. No wine will truly comfort the heart, that is
not of Iudahs elect vine: nor any fruit revive the fainting soul, that is not
(as before) of this tree of life.

But if my judgment may of the learned be well taken, I would with Arias
Montanus turn the Hebrew according to the letter thus: Underprop me in the
Flagons, comfort me in the apples that is, amidst the flagons, amidst the
fruit: for the text has not the particle [ eth] with: but the letter Beth
which fignifieth in, among, amidst, sooner then with. The sense so should be
this: O my Well-beloved, Vouchsafe that thy ministers may cheer and strength me,
who am ready to faint and sound amidst this divine banquet; my senses being
over weak to sustain the strong odor of thy graces. For as a weak person
will be ready to sound in feeling the savor of Musk and strong spicerie:
even so a Neophyt, or one of small experience in divine contemplations, will be
quickly cast into a muse and a maze, unable to stand in their spiritual place,
without the assistance of Christ's ministers. But the sense I leave to the
Churches censure.

The Reason of her petition is drawn from her present sickness, Love. This
sickness growing from Love, let us consider first what Love is. It is an
Affection or Motion whereby the heart is instincted with desire of some good
thing, after the fruition whereof it does (as it were) lift up it self and
open the gates for receipt of that Good, which to the Sonle is first
propounded. Of right love I speak. As for false love (more rightly lust) it is
in like sort stirred, but by the consideration of a thing supposed good. The
cause of so stirring the heart is some Object propounded to the Sense, and by
the sense presented to the heart. The Object which here so smites sense and
delights her heart, it is first the sight of his Loves, portraicted in his
Banner: secondly, the feeling or tasting of his banquet, the variety of his
sweet graces. And because her souls eye (the mind) could no more sustain
the glittering shine of his love, then Leahs natural eye were enabled with
stedfastnes to behold the Sunshine in his strength: as also for that the
Churches heart was no more able to entertain the fullness of his sweet Grace,
Job 38.8 Prou. 30.4
th^n Job could shut up the sea with doors, or Agur close up the winds in his
fist: hereof it comes, that she sounds, as surcharged with a burden. Like
the Queen of Sheba (by the Egyptian Cronicle term^d Makedah) who coming to
Salomons court, and there seeing and hearing excellent things far beyond her
expectation, she presently thereupon (as the Hebrews read it) had no spirit
more in her: that is, she became astonished, as one that had no life nor motion
in her.

Such form of speech, may well allude to a strong amorous passion surprising
an honest virgin, unawares meeting her love, and enjoying him in the fullness
of joy. I speak not of the Comedians Wanton, who cries to others Plautu^^:
Mittite istanc for as, quae mihi misero amanti ebibit sanguinem. Psalm. 84.2.
convey this woman away, for she sucketh out the very blood of me her miserable
Lover: but of such an amourous loue-qualme, as it seems Mary was in, when
she claue fast to the feet of Jesus her best Beloved, unawares and much so
dainely met with. There is also a loue-sickenesse after the good thing lacking
(so David's soul longed and fainted after the Courts of the Lord: I would we
could be sick of that disease) but I see not how that can well be here
concluded, seeing she was already in the court, yea in the house of wine,
banqueting with her Beloved. Her trance here I take to grow (as before) from
the fullness of divine dilections presented unto her, the greatness and
infinity whereof ouerwhelmeth her comprehension. A disease too far from us:
who, hear we, and see we daily, never so many loves of God accruing and
growing upon us, do never stir more then stocks. Why? because (as Isaiah
well notes) our hearts are fatted: insomuch as in hearing, we understand not,
and in seeing, we perceive not. Like to fishes for deafness, and to moles for
blindness. Shebahs Queen could astonish at Salomons natural wisdom, but
let Christ Jesus (a greater then Solomon) speak to us by his own word, and
our spirits moo^e not, stir not: specially by way of holy admiration. Could
our spirits be thus rapt, our souls thus ravished with the ^acred infinite
loves of our Savior: O, how he would delight in us, and joy in our love.

Insteade of sickendsse growing from sacred love, most of us sooner a^e sick
of the spleen, sick of envy, sick for anger our lusts are crossed. This
sickness is from hell, as the other from heaven. And therefore leaving that
to the devil, termed the Envious man: M^t. 13.28,39
I turn me to the faithful in their holy loue-sickenes: and now will hearken
what ensues her reasonable petition.

Lect. VI.
Verse 6

His left hand is under mine head, and his right hand does embrace me.

7 I adjure ye, etc.


THis follows her petition: first, a declaration of Messiahs love toward
her, in the time of her louetraunce: secondly, an Adiuration, or an Oath taken
by the Church of Ierushalems daughters, for not disturbing her Beloved. For
Messiahs love, it appears in one general act of favor, namely in his amorous
embracement. That embracements argued love, consider it not only in the
practice of all nations, but also in the solemn observance thereof in
scripture. By such embracement, old Israel prefaced his blessing powered forth
on Ephraim and Manasses, Genesis 48.10. and by such embracement, the old father
entertaines his repentant prodigal, in Luke 15.20. Not to Ioabs embracing of
Amasa with the one hand till he stab him with the other: nor to Iscariots
embracing of Jesus, does the holy ghost here allude, but to the sacred
embracement that passes between friend and friend: yea, between such a
couple as (by passing of troth) have made themselves one flesh: having that
sympathy of affection as is said of Hippocrates his Twins, who both laughed,
or both wept, both lived, or both died. Yet no such embracement is unto this
any nearer, Matthew. 22.^0
then the shadow is to the substance. For as in heaven there shall be no
marrying nor being married: so there all these corporeal embracements shall be
removed. The shadow then cease, because the substance is come. Which
substance is, our full unity in body and soul, first with Christ, then
secondly one with another, which spiritual embracement is here begun in the
so^le, and represented by our amiable honest embracings: even as the unity of
the reprobate is here begun (first with Satan, secondly with themselves)
whose black perfection is in their resurrection to be substantially revealed.

For this holy embracement, it is laid down in two particulars: First, in his
left hand, conuaide under her head: Secondly, in his right hand, amiably
embracing her. Seeing these things are spiritu^ll, what may these hands and
these their actions be? For the resolution of this mystery, it is unapt to
bring in the consideration of his left and right hand in Matthew. 25: seeing
there the left hand is turned to the wicked; but both hands here do circle the
godly. Both hands here considered with the church, we are to collect only two
such instruments, as whereby two notable actions are effected for benefiting
the faithful. For any thing I yet see otherwise, I can by these two hands most
properly understand, the two natures of Christ. Under his Left Hand, I conceive
his Manhood: by his Right hand I understand his Godhead. Isa. 53.5. Secondly,
as the left hand is patient and suffers, when the right hand in all business is
agent and works: so the Manhood of Messiah was to suffer, whereas the Godhead
was impassible, cold and did work, but was not wrought upon. For Hebr. 4.15.
and 5.2.
such an high Priest it beseemed us to have, as in our nature might feel our
misery, that so in our nature he might with more feeling offer up his
sacrifice. And this feeling is declared by putting his arm under the churches
crazie head, bearing the burden of her infirmity: yea, bearing the punishment
on that his humane arm that was due for our sins. Iaakobs love is registered
to be very great, who vnder-propped or vnder-bare Rahel (Genesis 48.7.) till she
dyed gnala^
upon him: and as we have it well turned, died on his hand. But Messiahs love
was greater; for he, to sustain and procure life to his Church, has put under
his hand, laid down his own life. Thus every way his humane weak nature went
unto the worst, til he had advanced his Church to the best.

His divine Nature may well be likened to the right hand of a David prays for
in this one speech: Show thy maruailous mercies, who art the Savior of them
that trust in thee, from such as resist thy right hand, Ps. 17.7. wherein he
prays, first, for staying him from falling (spoken of before) secondly, for
guarding of him from the adversaries resistance. At his right hand are
pleasures eternal ( Ps. 16.11.) wherewith he cheareth the languishing soul:
and with his right hand he brings mighty things to pass, for deliverance
and safety of his beloved, Ps. 108.6.13. When he looked about to see if any
creature would help him in the work of our redemption, lo there was none: for
only this Isa. 63.3, 5
His own arm sustained him: the arm of his manhood was made sufficient to
vnderbeare the burden of our sin and the punishment due thereto, by this his
right hand, his all-sufficient divine nature.

The Church thus resting between the arms of Jesus, it was gloriously figured
out by the temples situation between the hills of Benjamin, Deuter. 33.12.
which temple is of Moses there called, The beloved of Jehovah (because (...)
figured out this his Beloved) and the Mountains a^e there called Shoulders, as
if Salomons spirit casting his eye thither, should here more plainly speak
Hands: The one and the other speech implying Arms. And that place is called
Ben-jamins, that is, The Son of the right hand, because he figured the Son
of God, who sits at his fathers right hand, til his enemies be made his
footstool: there also making continual intercession for his Beloved.

Is this Temple of God (his beloved Church) so seated? is she of this Benjamin
(the son of the right hand) so embraced? Then ^et all the world run on
wheels, her ship is in harbor: her chickens under the wing, her soul in
safety. Whether she live or die, she lives and dies the Lords. Yea, in dying
she but sleeps (as Steven slept and David with his fathers.) Her flesh rests
in hope, her spirit is in Messiahs hands, the Lord of the resurrection will in
the appointed day, awake her: who mean time r^steth in the bosom of Messiah.

I have sworn ye (o daughters of Ierushalem) amongst the Roes and Hindes of
the field, that ye stir not up nor waken my Beloved till he please. First to
the version of the text, secondly, to the matter it urges. The first word
signifies more then simply to Charge, namely, to charge by an oath. So does Ar.
Mont. as also the Greek Adiuraui, (...).
I turn it preter-perfectly, not only because of his form, but also for that
the matter it self seems to exact it; whereof after. I read, amongst the
Roes, rather than By the Roes: first, because the Letter Beth is here prefixed,
which signifies in or among more properly, as was noted in the 5. verse:
Secondly, because it were very harsh for the Church to swear by Roes and
Hindes. That afterward I read, So read Trem. and Fr. Iu.
till He please, and so make the Church to speak it, rather then Christ, it is
not because the Original decideth the point (for there, as I may term it, it
is of a As is Dilectio mea, which may implie Man or Woman. And the word Please
has relation to My love; if the Hebr. Ahaba^ were not Dilectio, but Dilecta,
then it had been She expressly. But seeing the antecedent Love is in use
common, so must the relative verb Chaphets be.
doubtful Gender) but because the matter (whereof after) seems rather to
require i^.

Touching the matter, it is an Adjuration: wherein obseruable, first* the
Parties, secondly, the Thing. The Parties are three: first, the Church of
G^n^iles giving the oath; secondly, the Jewish Conuerts undergoing the Oath,
termed here Daughters of Ierushalem: thirdly, certain excellent persons
(termed Roes and Hindes) who are witnesses of the Oath and serious adiuration.
The thing adjured is, an Vndisturbance of the Beloved during some certain time
of his embracement.

The new Testaments church considered still as a Queen in the arms of
celestial Solomon, the few faithful of the Jews are considered as maids
attending her person (as in Ps. 45.14, 15) upon whom his Gentle Queen lays
this Iurament^ll charge or oath. For as the ancient Synagogue may once be said
to have sworn her Proselite^ (such of the Gentiles as were willing to make
themselves Jews, Ester. ^.27. Math. 23.15.) so, the Church of Ethnicks now
having the prerogative, and by Messiah made first and principal, may by like
rule, be said to bind the Jewish Proselites by oath unto Christian allegiance.
The ancient Synagogue is noted of Mose Ben-Maim^n in Asure biah, perek
thirteen; of the Babylonian Talmud, noted of master H. Broug^ton ^^ Daniel.
Rabbi-Mose to have committed their Proselites by Baptism, even a^ the Levites
e^tred the priesthood with washing. What marvel then if the Gentile-Church
admit the Jew by Baptism, as by a solemn oath, seeing such washing was by
our Solomon instituted for a Sacrament, wherein by oath the parties baptized
are devoted to Christian allegiance? By such solemn washing, the Baptized do
pass their faith and troth to Christ, whose lieutenant the Church is: and in
whose sole behoof she administreth this sacramental oath. For unto her Husband
and Lord she swears her Virgin-Proselites whosoever. And therefore in the
Celebration says not, Into my Name, but, Into the name of the Father and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; I baptize thee. Which Baptism into the
Trinity, is, for the Unity sake, said of Paul to be Baptism into Jesus (Romans
6.^. Gal. ^.27.) for that the Father and Spirit is no way One unto us, but by
the Mediator Messiah: who also (for that he is the Churches Head) has freely
communicated with her herein, by teaching, that Conuerts are baptized into his
Body, 1. Cor. 12.13. that is, into the communion of that faith, whereby He the
saving Head, and she the saved body are happily united.

While the Sinagogue stood, they swore us: but since their fall, Solomon: I
have seen servants on horses and Princes walking as Servants on the ground,
To. 11.20, 21.
Eccles. 10.7 Are we mounted on horseback? Well, through unbelief they are
b^oken off and we stand by Faith. Let us not be high minded, but fear: for if
God spared not the natural branches, let us fear lest he spare not us. We are
now up, but we may come down: nor are they so fallen, but they may rise. Let us
therefore so reign to day, as if we should serve to morrow. And let us so
compassionate them now, as we would have them to commiserate us then. As
Herodot. in Clio.
Cyrus in the top of his glory compassionated Cresus in his bonds (what time
the captive cried out, O Solon, Solon, Solon: which Philosopher before had told
him that no man could be termed happy before his death) Cyrus well remembering
that Cresus once was as himself, and himself might once come to a downfall
with Cresus.

Lect. VII.
David thought it a good means for tying his own soul to the good-abearing (
Ps. 119.106) how much more are we by oath to bind others to Christian obedience,
as Abraham swore his servant for providing an Helper for Isaac, Genesis 25.2 etc.
By whose oath (taken by the Lord God of heaven, the servants hand mean time put
under Abraham's thigh) old Augustine well understands Christ Jesus, Aug. de
bono coniugalica. 19
who was to come out of that thigh of Abraham. But as no oath is to be taken in
vain, so no oath is to be given or taken, but when it may bring glory to God
and advantage to the Church. As for oths taken for practice of evil (like to
that of the Jews for killing Paul before they should eat) it is evil to make
them, and double evil to keep them. Aug. ad Sever. M^leuit. Epis^^t in Decret.
22. qu. 4. cap. Inter caet.
Non est repertum insiurandum vt sit vincul^m iniquitatis, sed ad stabilienda
iusta, An oath is not found to be a bond of iniquity, but appointed for
establishing good things, as the Decretmaister well observes. Who also there
allegeth this from Isidore: In mala causa rescinde fidem, in turpiv^to muta
decretum, quod incaute promisisti ne feceris. Break thy promise in an evil
matter, change thy purpose in a dishonest vow: nor do that which heedlesly
thou have promised.

Ierushalems conuerts, as whereby Messiah might not be cumbred nor molested for
the time he should lodge with her. Wherein she alludes to a royal Spousesse
embraced of her more royal Love. Who for his quiet and her own joy should
charge the virgin-attendants to be quiet and hushed, during the time of their
wished rest. Wherein I do observe, This kind of Love the apostle remembers
saying Romans 15 3.
Christ would not please himself, but for his Churches sake was contented that
the rebukes of them that rebuked her, should fall on himself. If this his Love
(which still lives in the application of his ministry by whom he entreats
us in all humility) were well pondred of us, we would not only humble our
selves to him, Romans 15.1.1. cor. 10.24.
but also make it an argument (as the Apostle does) of bearing the infirmities
of the weak, and not still to please our selves, not s^il seeking our own, but
every man another wealth, as members suitable to such an head.

Secondly, it teaches how sweet the presence of Christ is unto Solomon says,
that good news from a far contry, are as coldwaters to a weary soul, prou.
25.25. To a soul distressed with sin; O how comfortable are the glad tidings
of Jesus, brought from heaven, a right far contry! The faithful meting with
this Love, embraced with this spirit, they count all earthly delites but dung
in comparison thereof. In this Love they would live, and in this Love they covet
to die: because so living and dying, they live and die Christ's.

Thirdly, we are taught to see that Christ be not disquieted, Ephesians. 4.30.
As the Apostle commands us to avoid the grieuance of his holy spirit, adding
this reason, because, by it we are sealed unto the day of redemption: so, we
are of the other hand to please the spirit, as we would not turn away the seal
of salvation. Nor, can this be, but when we use all the authority we have, to
prevent and appease evils. The Gentiles during the time of their superiority,
are to bind the Jews unto Christian peace. Princes must swear their
subjects. Ministers by their sacramental oath must bind their people. Parents
and Masters, must exercise their authority on their children and servants. As
the sword is not borne of the Magistrate for nothing, so neither the word nor
rod is commended to Ministers, and Civil superiors for nothing, If they may
be used for procuring duty unto man, how much more for causing obedience of
soul and body to God.

Fourthly, that the adiuration is limited to the Beloueds will and good
pleasure, it not only argues that this is spoken by the church of Christ, to
who^e will the refe^res her will (for Messiah referres not, the doing o^ not
doing of divine du^ies to his peoples will) But also it infers a knowledge
which the new Testaments church has of Christ's arising from the bed of the
Gentiles, for conuersing again with his ancient natur^ll Israel. This caused
Paul to write thus: To. 11.25, 26.
For I would not brethren, that ye should be ignorant of this secret (lest ye
should be arrogant in your selves) that partly obstinacy is come to Israel,
until the fullness of the Gentiles come in. As if he should say, Hardness of
heart shall reign in the ancient Israel, till the infinite multitude of the
Gentiles be accomplished: but their fullness once come, then the ancient people
shall be saved, by virtue of faith in the same Deliverer that came out of Zion.
This doctrine has again and again been taught in this song, whether for
further knowledge, I refer thee. Only here arises this question: Shall the
general calling of the Jews, be the falling of the Gentiles? I answer^, yea:
as the calling of the Gentiles was the fall of the Jews. For, in that their
general calling shall not be till the fullness of Gentiles be come in: what
can be implied, but that their fertility shall be our barrennes? To. 11.1. unto
verse 15. Ibid. verse 12 15, 18.
But as the Ethnicks vocation and graffing in, was the casting away of the
multitude of Isr^el, not of every particular member: so their receiving again
in abundance, shall be the riches of the Gentiles: yea, the very root whereon
the few of Gentiles shall grow. Now we labor of many sores which then by
their leaue^ unfolding shall be healed, Revel. 22.2. New Ierushalem from heaven
is builded amongst us, but her terrene perfection abides their general
addition: that so they without us, and we without them may not be perfect. That
their calling is not far off (I mean the addition of their mu^titude to the
few of their brethren, daily abroad receiving the faith) I ver^ly believe.
Why? because the Gentiles fulness appears almost come in. How appears that?
Even as the neerenesse of the Jews vni^ers^ll reiection app^ared. That is, by
a general neglect and contempt of religion, and the daily broching of new
fancies, with all greediness received. When the Jews were generally come to
that hight, then they fall and the Gentiles rise. Now the Gentile church is
generally come to the top of al iniquity: what then remains, but to cut
them generally off, and to graffe in the natural^ Olive into his own stock?

The parties adiuring and adjured, and the thing it self whereto they are
adjured thus remembered: it now rests we examine who be witnesses to this
adiuration. Witnesses of the adjuration*
They be the Roes and Hindes of the field: that is in mystery, such excellent
members and Ministers of Christ, as for very good cause may be resemblanced to
the Roe and Hind, not tied to any particular park (or congregation) but
living abroad in the worlds field: that is, in the Catholic Church, (so
compared in Matt. 13.38.) for that the Children of the new Kingdom, are no
more bounded up in Canaan, but growing in all nations. And these kind of
Ministers have commission to preach to these nations. Who (in one word) are the
Apostles and all such as the Lord uses in that glorious ministration. These
are they, who stand witnesses of the sacred oaths (ecclesiastical and civil)
which by the Gentiles have bin administered unto the Jewish nation attending
amongst them (whether baptized or unbaptized) and that for their peaceable
demeanor toward Christ and his church, till it please him otherwise to awake
for their general calling.

But ere I come to compare them with the Roe and Hind, let me dissolve one
doubt. May any Ministers (after the first Apostles, Evangelists and Prophets)
be said to succeed them in that Ministry? Many say no, but I say yea. For the
approbation whereof, let us first consider what their Ministry was: secondly,
whether in the judgment of ancient and Modern Writers) any have succeeded in
that ministry? And the rather, because the blind Doctor of Brownisme, does
term such Ministers, Iudes wandering stars, like as they in print have
affirmed Mr. H. I. to have a Seared conscience: both which are terms only of
final reprobation. I wonder what revelation they have had of our reprobation
final.

The ministry of the Apostles Evangelists and Prophets were different, in
respect of form in outward calling (for Apostles, had their calling immediately
from Christ. Evangelists immediately from the Apostles, to whom they were
Deacons, in English Ministers: the Prophets (or new Testaments interpreters)
they had their calling immediately from the Church of Christ, wherein they had
received the faith. But in the substance of their ministry they were one and
the same. All of them were ordinarily employed in preaching Christ, and in
gathering and planting the Churches. As for the working of miracles (necessary
the first preaching of Christ) they all were endued therewith, when so the
spirit of Jesus deemed it necessary. The gift of miracles was not always in
their power (as the gift of preaching was) but only upon extraordinary
occasion accompanied their preaching. All these three ( Apostle, Evangelist,
Prophet) do differ in respect of some accident in their calling: but for their
work they wrought (gathering unto Christ) they accord: all of them preaching
and planting the faith they preached. Apostles principal, because their
calling was immediately (as Paul speaks in Galat. 1.1, 12.) not of man, but
of God. Evangelists in the ne^t place, because called immediately by the most
excellent men of God, namely, the Apostles. Such were Luke, Mark, Timothy,
Titus, etc. attending the Apostles, as largely appears in their Acts, and
some of Paul's Epistles. Prophets were the most inferior of the three, because
their calling was immediately derived from others of the churches, less
excellent than the former. Of this number were diverse in the church of
Antiochia in Act. 13. ^. Of which, sundry after were promooued to an higher
degree: as Bar^abas and Saul separated, by the spirit of Christ to the
Apostleship ( verse. 2, 3.) And Judas and Silas to attend the Apostles, Act.
15.27.3^.

Ephesians. 4.11, 12.
The Apostle Paul in ^^^es. 4. lays down the work of Christ's ministry to
be this ^ For the gathering together of the Saints, for the work of the
ministry (that is) for the building up of ^he body of Christ. The work of
the minist^^^e so stands in these two things: first in Gathering the Church:
secondly, in Building it so gathered. For these two purposes he has given two
sorts of Ministers: first Apostles, prophets and Evangelists: Secondly, Pastors
and Doctors. The three first for gathering, the latter for building the
Gathered. Which causes Ma^ster Beza well to say, that Beza ser. 20 on Christ's
passion.
pastors and Doctors properly do not build, but properly do proceed in a
Church already builded: by building understanding Planting or Est^blishing: and
by proceeding he means edifying or building forward the work, whose ground
work is already laid. In planting or establishing the Church (which Master
Beza terms, Building,) The Apostles were Maister-builders or planters, 1.
Cor. 3.6.9, 10. The Evangelists and Prophets helped as servants. For Pastors
and Doctors they had their calling to particular Churches already plant^d,
whereto they were tied for building upon the foundation there already laid:
which well may be termed a proceeding in the work. The first three ufnctions
might perform the duties of the latter, because they were greater: but the
latter could not meddle with the work of the former three. For the lesser
offices are contained in the greater (as particulars in the universal) but not
the Greater in the lesser, no more than a General in a special. And hereupon
it is, that the Apostles (the greatest function) did ever in the first place
execute all the inferior duties, even of collecting and distributing the
alms, appertaining to the Deacon. Who when they had sufficiently informed the
ch^rches of all things, did ordain unto them For this see my Antidotons
Epistle.
Presbyters and Deacons, for proceeding in the house of God already planted.

This distinction of Gathering and Building (or of Building and Proceeding in
the worke-builded) it well remembered, how easy then shall it be in the next
place to find forth a ministry which succeeds the Apostles, Evangelists
and Prophets? A ministry one with them, and not for seperable accidents
(which consisted in extraordinary revelations and operations) but for the
Essence and Substance of their ministry. What was the substance of their
ministry, but a Gathering of the elect by preaching of the scriptures, sealing
them up in the Sacraments? which word and sacraments they incommended to the
Churches in their peculiar standing-ministrie. The ministry of Pastors and
Doctors (o^, of Priests and Deacons) is the same for substance with that of
Peter, James, John, the Apostles: of Mark, Luke, Timothy, Evangelists: of
Judas and Silas the Prophets. Only they differ in this, that the one sort are
tied to no one particular people, for that they are Gatherers: the other are
tied to a particular work already to their hand gathered. If we find some
ministry who besides the Gospel and Sacraments administration, shall with the
Apostles be untied to any one particular Church: yea, that besides are found
Ga^herers of people out of Babels mixture into Ierushalems unity and order,
shall we not truly say, they succeed^ the Apostles? But first let us see
whether the scriptures teach, that such a ministry should s^cceede the former:
secondly whether experience prove that such a ministry has succeeded. Ephesians.
when in the eleventh verse is repeated the ministers which Christ uses; and in
the twelfth verse, the work of gathering and building wherein they should be
used: then in the thirte^ne verse is laid down the time How long they shall
be so used, in these words: T^ll we all meet together in the unity of faith,
etc. that is to say in plainer and fuller speech: That ministry is to be used
for gathering and building the Church, till all the elect of Jew and Gentile be
come into one body: but that is not yet achieved: as yet therefore that
twofold ministry is to be used: yea, not to cease, till adding to the Church
cease: And that (I hope) will not be, till the whole world be summoned Math.
28.19, 20. Go forth to all Nations, Preaching and Baptizing, and lo, I am
with you unto the end of the world. Word and sacraments is the substance of
their commission, but they untied to any one people. In thi^ work some must
succeed, seeing he promises his presence for ever. They were not to live for
ever: therefore some other to the worlds end must succeed in the word and
sacraments, who also Paul charge Timothy (the Evangelist) to keep the
commandment without spot and unrebukable until the appearing of our Lord
Jesus Christ: 1. Tim, 6.14.
but Timothy was not to live so long: therefore the Apostle in the Evangelists
person does charge such Prophet (for that should agree to ministers of his own
sending) but by their fruit: that is, these that were true disciples of Christ
should know them by the fruit of their lips, namely, by their ministry
scattering from Christ. Otherwise they should usurp, both the conversation of
Christ's sheep, and also the term Prophet, which pertained to his own
ministry. And in referring them only to their ministerial fruit, and not
also to the Churches testimony from whence they come, he closely intimates,
that some should be such true prophets sent forth by him ( bringing no
testimonial from men) whom notwithstanding his disciples should acknowledge
for their work sake. And unto works of divine redemption, Christ did send the
Jews for proof of his being the Messiah: much more may a true Prophet be so
acknowledged by his work of Gathering to Christ. The scriptures so do plainly
teach, that the ministry of Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets is a
ministry continued to the worlds end. The same that were the ancient for
substance of ministration: the difference only consisting in some form of
external calling, or other extraordinary qualification. Which (by the way)
does convince such of not^ble ignorance, as refer their principal trial of
ministers to some outward form of calling.

Next to the Scriptures, let us hear the voice of sundry Ministers of the
Church, who had received of God to be faithful. Ignatius (most ancient)
teaches the Magnesians, Ignat. ad Mag.
how the Pre^byters (or Priests) were Loco Senatus Apostolici in place of the
Apostolical Sena^e. Ad Trall.
And unto the Trallians he affirms the Church presbyters to be the Session
and con-ioyned company of Apostles: even as the chiefest Presbyter represented
the person of Christ in their holy session. And Cypr. l. 3. ep. 9
Cyprian succeeding in another age, does teach the Deacons to be the more
submisse unto the Priests, why? quoniam Apostolos, id est, Episcopos and
Praepositos dominus elegit, etc. because the Lord Jesus himself did elect the
Apostles, that is, the Episcops and Ouer-seers: Whereas the Deacons after
Christ's ascension were but chosen of the Apostles, for being ministers unto
them. And in this path have successors still walked, affirming the keys given
to the Apostles, to be now in the hands of the Presbyters. All of them clayming
authority for preaching the word and administering the sacraments, from the
Apostles Mandate in Math. 28.19.

Now, if the Ministers allotted unto their particular Church, do succeed the
Apostles, because of their ministerial word, one and the same with the
Apstles, how much more are these like to the Apostles, who (besides the matter
of ministration, which is word and sacrament) have also a liberty to preach
whersoeuer? Such were Euagrius in his book of 70. disciples.
the 70. dispersed amongst the nations: and such were these of whom Eusebius eccl.
hist. lib. 5. ca. 10
Eusebius makes mention, who (says he) in Pantaenus time did travel to and
froe, for promouing and planting the caelestiall word with divine zeal, after
the manner of the Apostles: whom there he term^th, Euangeilists. But let us
hear some of our Modern writers, and that of special good report in the
Church: M. Bucer in l. 2. cap. 7. de regno Christi.
Martin Bucer boldly affirms that we have yet Apostles stirred up, although
not so sent, and qualified with like excellency, as at first. And in such
sense, William Tindall is called an Apostle of England: and Knox of Scotland.
But of master From Ephesians. 4. and in lib. de vera rat. refor.
Calvin all such are termed, sometimes Evangelists, sometimes Prophets: Why?
Because such succeed the one so well as the other, in the same work of
gathering out of confusion into order. Peter Martyr speaking of such as God so
has stirred up in this last age, he says first, that Pet. Mart. com. plac. 1.
class. 4. sect. 15
Ordination is not to be expected in such, seeing it is not to be had. And
secondly, that A calling from God is not lacking to such a one, whenas he is
bound by precept to do that he does: that is, to preach the truth of Christ
according to that measure received. These (says Calvin) that in this age have
held forth the Torch unto us, that thereby we might from daily error return
into the way: that they have been holy Prophets of God, the excellent (yea
divine) manifestation of their ministry uttered forth, that does witness the
same. To benefit the Church thus, they were never called of wolves who burned
with madness after deuou^ing and destroying it. To heal therefore this
incurable evil (specially, when usual remedies failed) it behooued them to be
sent of God his hand, for bringing help: whom the world would willingly have
hindered. And this he well notes to have been signified by the Prophets,
which in the old testament are promised, to be r^ised up for seeking up the
sheep, that were scattered in every mountain. The Lord promises, not to
stir up a Priest (for that was not his office, being a minister standing to
the temple) but a Prophet: for his calling was to call Priest and people^ to
Order.

And this self same doctrine did our Wicliffe teach above two hundred years
since, as appears in his Articles discussed in the Council of Constance. Nor
see I what the Apostle means in Ephesians. 3.5. (where he says) The Gospel is in
another sort now revealed to the Apostles and Prophets; except by P^ophets he
understand that ministry which ay succeed^th the Apostles.

Whereas some take the prophets in Ephesians. 4.11. to be only such as had the
gift ofsp^ciall foretelling things, they not only have the 1. Cor. 14. wholly
against them, where the new testaments prophets are largely declared to be
only such as waited on expounding and applying the scriptures, but also these
writers against them, Ambrose, Ierom, Brun^, Lombard, Aquinas, all on the same
place. Whereto (against the heart of Romanists, I will add that of Eckius:
Ecchius in his homily on the ninth Lords day after Pentecost.
Nor verily think I (says he) that Christ speaks here in Math. 7.25. of
prophets telling future things by the holy spirit, but rather, that by Prophet
he understands an Expositour of holy scripture, which whosoever do well unfold,
they are termed good prophets: but handling them badly and falsely, are
denominate Pseudo-prophets. And that such expositours of scripture are termed
Prophets, it is sufficiently pl^ine unto us from Paul, who witnesses that
Christ gave some to be Apostles, some Prophets, etc. confirming the term also
from the 1. Cor. 14. Which well remembered, how can they falt us for terming
Luther, Tindall, Husse, Sauanarol^, and all such the true Prophets of God: sent
of God (not of their Church) for calling forth people to the building up of
Ierushalems walls?

Whersom say of such, that they were extraordinary ministers, I answer: first,
there was nothing extraordinary in their ministry, seeing it was expreslie to
be proved by the written word, Secondly it is no more to be held extraordinary
in the new church, then it was in the old sinagogue. In Mother Zion were
unlimited Ministers (namely Prophets) so to the new Testaments Prophets are
giving. They had a standing minstry to their Temple and Tabernacle, these were
priests and Levites: so our churches of Christ their peculiar ministry of
Presbyters and Deacons. The Presbyters and Deacons proceed in the work
established: the Apostolical Evangelical, Prophetical ministry does call
people into order, and recall the straiers unto the first pattern. And these
new testaments Prophets (for that seems to me the aptest title) they have
their calling, as they of the old testament had: Some stirrd up immediately of
God, and acknowleged to be such for their work sake* some trained up in the
schools of Prophets and sent there-out by the voice of the faithful. The first
sent of God, in times more desperate: the other sent of the Church, when her
schools of prophecy are rightly settled. The more fully I have spoken hereof
because of fantastic spirits amongst us, who cannot abide to hear of any
ministry, but only of Parsons and Vicars tied to their particular
congregations: or (as they term themselves) Pastors and Doctors of particular
Churches. Would they but look with a single eye into this point, they should
see that in the worst times it is liklyer to find that ministry, which for
matter and manner do rather succeed the Apostles, then occupy the place of
Pastors: that rather are appointed with Paul to have the care of many
Churches, then but one congregation laid upon them. This ministry so
understood, let us see how Apostles, and their successors may be compared to
Roes and Hinds of the field.

Lect VIII.
FIrst, to the Roe. It is a Isidorus in lib. 12. c. 1. etymol.
Beast right swifte, coveting the height of mountains, and from the top
thereof (in time of Hunters strait pursuit) will cast it self down headlong
in safety, by casting the body within the compass of the horns. Hereto the
Apostolical ministry may have resemblance was the Gospel carried through the
earth by the Head Apostles and their concomitants. When Saint Paul writ his
epistle to the Romans, Romans 10.1^
behold their sound was gone through the earth, and their words into the ends
of the world. They that were not tied to till one oxgang of land, but to
break up the whole earth before them, it required speed. Necessity was laid
upon them, and a woe unto them, in not doing the Lords wo^ke spedily. For their
successors (no such miraculous ministers) how swiftly have they run through
the Churches field? Their speed from Church to Church, from one land to another
will te^tifie that. No one of the Miraculous Apostles did run through the
whole earth, for the ecclesiastical writers declare in what contries each of
them conuersed (and the book said to be written by Prochoru^ the Deacon of
Ierushalem, says they cast lots for several portions) but every one in some
parts more principally. As for the Apostle Paul, he was in his labors more
abundant then they all: and for that cause Saint Luke has specially drawn
his jornall in the Acts. So it has fared with such, as have succeeded in that
work. Some have labored more, and some less. Some have cared for more
churches, some for fewer. No one (with the Papal prelate) took charge of all,
though with S. Paul, he might care and thirst after the good of all.

Secondly, this large ministry has (with the Roe) still affectioned Habak.
3.19.
a property also given by Habakkuk to the Hinds when he says, The Lord will
make my feet like the hindes, and he will make me to walk upon mine his
places. These hie places are not the earths-mountaines (if we walk by a deeper
mystery) but the heavens (the hill of Gods holiness and our happiness) whereto
Paul ascended in the vision of his soul, and whereto Stephens heart and eye was
lift up in the end of his Apology, because his Defense was in the heavens.
Psalm. 121.2.
Not from the mountains of flesh and blood, but from the heavens comes our
help. But in a more literal sense (considering the persons we speak of) these
Mountains are also the Cities and chief towns of countries (as Ierushalem,
Samaria, Antioch, Corinth, Ephesu^, S^yrna, Rome, etc. Whether this kind of
ministry still ascended with the Gospel. As Satan still commanded the pages
or contrie-hamlets, by the Idolatry planted in the Cities, as heads of the
country: so the Lord ever by this Prophetical ministry, has first smit these
heads of the Nations: that the Cities won, they might command the inferior
places. The country-hamlets were called Pagi^ and very probable it is, that the
term Pagan was derived thence, because of the heathenisme in them, when the
Gospel was begun in the City. And hereupon it is, that the Apostles direct
their Epistles, not to the Saints or church of such pagies or villages, but of
such and such cities, as mountains and heads to the country, as the head of
Aram was Damascus, and Samaria the head of Ephraims people, Isa. 7, 8, 9.

Luke 1.69. psa. 132.7.
Who is their Head? Christ, who also is called the Horn of our salvation. Into
his hands (as into divine antlers) the prophet David commended his Spirit: nor
did the faithful ever find safety in the mountains offlesh and blood. And
therefore cast themselves thence into the merciful hands of Jesus* who has
given charge to his Angels to uphold them in all their ways, lest they dash
their souls foot against a stone. When Isreal's spies were let down by Rahab
over Ierichoes walls: and the Apostle escaping the Damascenes (by being let
down at a window in a basket, by the side of the wall, Act. 9.24.) What did
they but commit themselves to the watchful providence of God? And therein they
were as Roes, committing themselves to their auntlers help, from the height of
the Cities.

ps. 22.1. but with addition: for he is termed Aijeleth hashacar the Hind of
the morning, who in that Psalm is extremely hunted of the dogs of the
Evening. But to the present purpose. In the Hind (which is the Heart) I
observe, first her care for bringing forth her young in safety, Aristot. lib.
6. de animal.
who therefore auoydeth the tracts of wild beasts, and bends her body near
to the highway haunted by men. Thenceforth in Isid. etymol. lib. 12.1.
Secondly, their natural appetite in feeding sometimes of serpents, which
causes them much (as Chrysostom notes) to appetite the waters. Thirdly,
their provident wit: who smit with an arrowe, will seek out the Herb
Dictanie, and eating thereof, do shake out the arrow. Fourthly, I note the
Charity they have amongst themselves: who being to swim the waters for
pasture, do put the strongest before, upon whose back the second rests his
head, the third upon the second, the fourth on the third, etc. Lastly, I
observe their simplicity ouer-reached by the hunters craftiness: for while
they attend unto the noise of music (a thing which Isidore says they much
delight in) Aristot. ibi^. lib. 9.
they are foyld and wounded by their close lurking enemy. Now remains the
application of these particulars.

First, their provident carriage for safety in the time of delivery, Paul did
of his people. Our Savior commands them to beware of men. But of what kind
of men? Of such as he terms woolues, ( Nam homo homini Lupu^) amongst whom
he sent them. To beget and bring forth yonglings to Christ, must be with
regard of the paddes and tracts of unreasonable persons, from whom the Apostle
prays he may be delivered: And from whose devouring Jaws, such yoong-ones
must be guarded. A christian in the first birth, must be kept far from
devouring spirits. Spiritual parents must have a care of that, (otherwise the
beasts providence will condemn them) and Neophites or Christian Tenderlings
must learn to cliue and walk close by the sides of their Spiritual Parents;
otherwise they shall be less natural and more desperate tempters of God, then
be the seely Hind-calues.

Secondly, their eating of Serpents and thirst after Waters ensuing, Paul
con^esseth, saying: Romans 7.15.
What I hate* that do I. And how ready Peter and Barnabas were to swallow the
serpent of dissimulation, the same Apostle testifies in Galat. 2.13. not to
speak of Peter's ouer-deepe swallowing of evil, when therefore of Jesus he was
termed Satan.

But O the goodness of God! as of Serpents flesh Triacle is made a
preservative against poison: so the evil and several sins of the faithful
are turned finally to their good. Romans 8.28.
We know (says the Apostle) that all things (that is sin and all) they
work together for the best, unto them that love God, even to them that are
called of purpose. By how much the more, they have swallowed the serpents
poison, by so much the more, they thirst after the waters of Gods grace, for
quenching the fiery heat of sin in them. Yea, Psalm. 42.1.
so much the more they cry out with David, As the Heart braieth for the Rivers
of water, so pants my soul after thee o GOD. The more the reprobate sin,
the more they may, (for they devour sin, as the fish swallows water,) but
the Elect and Called of God, the more they have sinned, the more they hate
sin, and pray for the abolishment of sin. Romans 7.24, 25.
With the Apostle they cry out (feeling sinn^s poison) o wretched man that I
am, who shall deliver me? Who afterward can answer themselves thus: I thank
GOD, through Jesus Christ my Lord I shall be delivered. Even he is the waters,
whereon the thirsty soul drinks and is filled.

Di^t^nie, by the eating whereof the arrowe is cast out, which otherwise wou^d
canker and kill Nature, it argues the wisdom given by God to his children
(specially to his ministry) for expulsing the virulent darts of Satan, as also
for propulsing and beating back the cruel strokes of the wicked. For
expulsing such Satanicall darts, they take to themselves the He^b Faith, Ephesians.
6.16.
able to quench the fi^rie da^ts of the wicked. This wisdom was in the Woman
that long had labored of a bloody flix, Luke 8.48.
to whom our Savior could say, Thy faith has made thee whole. And this Faith
was it, whereby the hearts of the Gentiles were purified* and Faith is that,
whereby all our spiritual maladies are healed. Acts 15.9.
Yea, for not only expulsing, but also propulsing al manner of evil; what other
flower was sauoured to of the Ancient faithful? The Author of the Epistle to
the Hebrews manifests at large in his eleventh Chapter, that by faith they
wrought wonders, and brought mighty things to pass. By Faith the Apostolical
ministry has removed mountains, that is, impossibilities to nature. And
what was it but Faith in Master Tyndal that hindered the Diabolical Iugler
from acting his ^eats in the presence of Merch^nts? God his Hindes and Hearts
have by grace found forth such virtue in this Faith, as causes them to
prefer it before all other flowers of the field. Cyprian ad Quirin. li. 3.
ca. 42. Tantum nos posse quantum credimus. Omnia p^ssibilia credenti.
So much we can as we believe: For to the Faithful all things are possible.

Fourthly, Charity in the Hindes appears in their swimming, where the first
sustaineth the second: the second vpholdes the third, etc. The First of the
Hindes (which sustaineth, and is not sustained of any creature: for his own
power sustaines him) it is the Hind of the Morning, Isa. 63.5.
Christ Jesus himself. Paul follows Cor. 11.1. Christ is the foundation: on
him rest the Apostles, and we rest on them, and weaker are to rest on us: but
no further nor longer, than we rest on them that shall rest on Christ. You are
to rest on your Ministers, as they on the Apostles, and the Apostles on Christ.
But because no soul is to rest it self simply on Man, therefore Mark,
Barnabas, Peter, Thomas; yea, Abraham, Isaac, Iaakob, Judah, Moses, Aaron,
David, all are noted of the Holy Ghost of error. And because we must rest on
them, but as they respect and rely on Christ, therefore He (the Hind of the
Morning. psalm. 22. in the title) is preferred for all-sufficient. I am able,
Philip. 4.13.
(says Paul) to do all things, through the help of Christ, which
strengthens me. As if he should say, through Christ's strength I can do all
things, but without him, nothing. For by no other name, then by the name Jesus,
are we (says Peter) either healed or saved, Act. 4.9.10.12. So we must think
of his insufficiency, and of our own impotencie. And the succor we receive
from him, must teach us to succor and sustain one another. Philip. 2.4.
Which caused the Apostle to exhort thus: Bear ye one another burden and so
fulfill the Law of Christ, Galat. 6.2. Not looking every man on his own
things, but every man also on the things of other men. Which notably manifests
the impiety of our age, where ordinarily people look that others should
sustain them, but they make no conscience of sustaining others. Instead of
upholding their weak brethren with the Heart and Hind, they will labor rather
to withdraw their shoulder in the time of surging affliction, that so their
fellowe-members may sink and be drowned amidst their temptation.

Fifthly, Their simplicity, in being ouer-reached by the huntsman, during the
time they attend melody, it puts us in mind of a double simplicity in the
Ministers and members of Christ Jesus, and that in a double sort abused of the
wicked. The first simplicity is natural, the second, spiritual. By the
natural simplicity, they are carried many times to harken after the delights
of this life. Even then the wicked world is readiest to smite them through;
yea, Satan himself to snare them. For while the spiritual hind listneth to
the devil, to the world and the fleshes Music, then Satan lets his arrows
fly, piercing Judah, galling David, snaring Solomon. By the spiritual
simplicity, they are carried to listen unto heavens harmony, to be lifted up
in the spirit above the flesh, and to mount into heaven by the wings of
prayer. This melody is not (as the former) from an evil, but from the good
spirit of God. But at such time of spiritual delight, Satan is ready to pull
the eye of David down upon Bathsheba: no less pressed to buffet Paul and to
gall him in the flesh: 2. Cor. 12.7
Even as the head Hind Jesus was then most subtly assaulted by the devils
army, whenas in the Garden he was praying seriously, even in the mount of
Olives contemplating divinely.

In some measure, all the members of Christ Jesus are adapted to the Roes and
Hindes of the field: specially his ministers, but principally such of them as
have been and are the Gathering ministry: ministers appointed to trauase the
Catholic field of Jesus. Which latter paineful mounting spirited ministry,
are the sacred witnesses of the divine allegiance, whereto the proselites of
the Jews are sworn of the Christian Gentiles. Sworn they are, not to
disturb Messiah, no, not to stir him up till he please. While thus they be
charged to look to their allegiance, the Gentile Church is couched between
his loving arms, and sweetly passes her time in sacred contemplation. And
with these their mutual dilections, the second part is finished.

The end of the second part.
THE THIRD PART of Solomon his Song of Songs, Expounded and Applied By Henoch
Clapham

Esaiah 5.1. I will now sing to my Beloved, the Song of my Beloved touching his
Vineyard.

Printed at London by Valentine Sims for Edmund Mutton dwelling in
Paternoster Row at the sign of the Huntes-man. 1603.

To the Right Honorable Edmund Lord Sheffeild, Knight of the Honorable order
of the Garter, etc.
I Doubt not (Right Honorable) but you well understand the Romanists
Equivocations (for so their false-packing is of some W. at. and his fellows.
Secular Priests termed in print) not making conscience (many scholars of
them) how deeply they lie, so it may bring present advantage. Yea, an oath is
nothing with such, having their Match-diuell euasions, as sometimes had their
Hollinshed i^ Henr. 8. ^. 30.
Obseruant Friar Forest. Who coming to be burnt for teaching people in secret,
how king Henry was not head of the Church in his dominions, and then put in
mind how he had taken an oath to the contrary, he answered, that he took the
oath with his outward man, and that his inward-man never consented. These
fellows are like to one (of whom Cicero writes) who having taken truce with
his enemy for thirty days, did in the night season invade his enemies land,
saying: that The truce was taken for days, not for nights.

Hence it grows, they will tell plain people how Christ said Mass, and so
the Apostles after: as if that Mass ( indigestaque moles heap of riffe-raffe)
were not only so ancient, but had also Christ for the Author. But a Scholar
can send them to their Infinite-booke containing eight and twenty huge Volumes,
dedicated to their Pope Greg. the thirteen, comprising Tracts vtriusque juris,
Tom. 1. lib. Aymari Riualli. fol. 45.
gathered by Francis Zilettus, where their Record runs thus: A Petro vltra,
etc. Besides other Institutes, we have from Peter a part of the ordained Mass.
For after the consecration introduced of Christ, he used (which our Priests now
use) that prayer Pater noster. But Celestine gave the Masses Introit. Gregor.
found out the Kyrie eleyson. Thelophorus the Gloria in excelsis deo. The
Collations were invented by Gelasius the first: and the Epistle and Ghospel
were added to the Mass by Jerome. The Alelujah was taken out of the Church of
Ierushalem; and the Creed from the Nicen council. Pelagius found out the
Commemoration of the dead: and Leo the third introduced Frankincense. We have
the kissing of the Pax from Innocentius the first: but the singing of Agnus Dei
was instituted by Sergius, etc. As thus they make their Masses beginning more
Ancient then it is by their own Record: so, the same was (as appears) a long
time raking into one. Not a few hundred years was that Beggars cloak patched
together.

They will make a public brag of their Papal succession, and yet know that it
is undefined who succeeded Peter. Some of them saying Linus, some Clemens, and
some they know not what. Wherewith we can put them in mind, how a great sort
of their Popes were Distinct 65. capite Hosius.
sons, begotten by Subdeacons, Deacons, Priests. Who by an ordinance of their
Apostaticall Church must needs be Bastards: and so in their understanding of
Deu. 23.2. they must have been incapable of all Ecclesiastical function,
specially of Popeship. Though Parentall vices must not be imputed to Children
(for thereby they would euade, abusing Augustine therein) yet Children in
civil policy have been by law divine and humane disinherited, and made
incapable of many external privileges, by reason of Parents vices. And by
this rule it is, that our late malcontented Seculars (assuming To. Parsons the
Jesuit to be a Bastard) do urge his incapabilitie of Church-function. If such
(in the censure of their own laws) have been the Succeeders (a Dozen whereof
In a Tract of Min. marriag.
Doctor Barnes from their own writings has produced) how then, not to touch
their many Papal Their Genebrard notes in his chron. 23. schisms (sundry
holding many years) between the year 254 and 1439.
schisms, can they prove their bragged succession? Herewithall we may put them
in mind of Pope Ioane (who brought forth her Babie in the open-streete
between Theatrum Colossae and S. Clements Church) whereof arose their ten
Pees.

Penes portam Petri and Pauli, peperit Papa, pater patriae, paruum puerum.
Graced (as Chronica compendiosa utters) with a Devils speech, crying out in
a Consistory:

Papa pater patrum, Papissae pandito partum. For authority of which History
we have writers many, against whom they cannot (without blushing) except: as,
Polycronicon, Caxton, Volateran, Nauclerus, Marianus Scotus, Martinus Polonus,
Functius, Sabellicus, Sigibertus Gemblacens. Laonicus Chalcondila, Platina,
Mare Historiarum, Chronica compendiosa, etc. This standing so: their Succession
will prove but doubtful, schismatic, whorish. This they know well enough,
but with the simple they must equivocate and iuggle for advantage.

They will tell the simple, how all translations of the Bible (excepting their
Latine-one) are false and intolerable. Whereas, what knowledge soever they
have of ours, their scholars know, how our learned-men can produce many
hundreds of gross errors, from their Dunsticall latine-one, For this, see
their Santis Pagnin in praefat. ad Clem. 7. and their Driedo l. 2. c. 1. de
catalog scriptur.
fasly termed Ieroms. To give an vngainesayable touch: in Ezra. 9.8. for
paxillus, they read paxillius. In Prou. 16.11. they read lapides seculi for
sacculi, In Psalm. 133.16. they read, viduam ejus benedicam for victum: and in
Luke 15.8. euertit domum she overthrew the house: for euerrit she swept the
house: with many such Quid for Quos.

If Bellarmine and such say, that this has come to pass through drowsinesse
or ignorance of their Monks, who first writ them ( nam Monacho, quis
indoctior?) how comes it to pass, that they have printed them estsoones
without correction? Is i^, because they would be constant, although (God
knows) in evil? But not to speak of such Monkish errors: how haps there is
such war between two of their Popes ( Sixtus quintus and Clemens octauus)
Bellum papale per Th. James shows this.
either of them having their Edition, with (^ know not) how many thousand
variations: and whether of the Popes copies will they follow? Arias Montanus in
his preface to the Interlinear Bible, will tell them how the latin translation
faede corrumpitur, is filthily corrupted. Hereupon it is; that not only the
two Popes labored to mende it, but also, that Pagnin leaves the old latin
for following the Hebrew and Greek: as Arias after him, does also thousand of
times leave him, for following the original more nerely. Hieronym. ad Suniam:
and habetur did. 9. Aug. de doctr. Chr^st^, et ep. 19
And unto the Original, he teaches us to run in all difficulty: as was of
yore the sacred advise of Jerome and Augustine. In the mean time I dare say,
that God his providence has so ouerwatched this Bible (held in his right hand,
Reuelat. chapt. 5.) as unworthy he is of any Pastoral place, that from the
corruptest translation is not able, to hold our Christian doctrine against all
Romish Pagan-inuentions.

With these Equiuocatours I sometimes in the succeeding Treatise (so well as in
the former) do conflict: maintaining the ancient doctrine of Faith against
their Romish innouations. Against this (I doubt not) some of that Faction will
kick, in my native country: which somewhat more then a year since could like
of a violent hand in secret, for bastonadoing the Author. For a Religion it
is, that cannot be defended so well with words as swords: nor so easly by open
plain dealing, as by secret treatcheries and public Equivocations. Which
considerations had, I the rather have (in this particular Dedication) fled to
him that Can; and for holy respect I fear not, Will, ^oth accept and patronize
qualiacunque sunt these my poor labors.

Wherewith I rest Your Honors wherein I may, Henoch Clapham

The Text.
8 IT is the voice of my Beloved. Behold he comes leaping over the mountains
and skipping over the hills. My Well-beloved is like a Roe or young Hynde.
9 Behold he stands behind our wall, looking forth of the window: showing
himself through the grates.
10 My Beloved spoke and said unto me; Arise my Love, my Faire-one, and come
away.
11 For behold winter is past, the rain is changed and gone away.
12 The flowers appear in the earth: the time of the singing ( of birds) is
come, and the voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land.
13 The Fig Tree has brought forth her young figs: and the vines with their
small grapes have cast a savor. Arise my Love, my Fair one, and come away.
14 My Dove, thou art in the holes of the Rock, in the s^cret places of the
stairs: Show me thy face: cause me to hear thy voice: because thy voice is
sweet and thy face comely.
15 Take us the Foxes, the little foxes, destroying the vines: for our vines
have small grapes.
16 My Well-beloved is mine, and I am his, he feeds among the Lillies.
17 Until the day break, and the shadows flee away, return my Well-beloved,
and be like a R^^ or young Heart upon the mountains of Bether.
The third Part.
The Argument of this third Part.
The Church solaceth her soul in remembering the words, feature and presence of
her beloved. Messiah: protesting withal, her dutiful allegiance: even to the
subscribing unto his determined absence before incarnation, so well as to his
continuance in the heavens now till the time all shadows (whether Natural,
Legal or Evangelical) be to be abolished, to the full restoration of all
things.

CHAP. 2. Lect. 1.
Verse. 8.

It is the voice of my Beloved. Behold he comes leaping over the mountains,
and skipping over the hills: My beloved is like a Roe or young Hind.


THis verse, and the rest of this Chapter, begins and continues a new Act
of Messiahs love to his Church; specially, to this of the Gentiles. As Daniel
and other of the Prophets have sundry visions of one and the same thing, but
the latter visions ordinarily the clearer: so in this song are sundry Acts
expressing Christ and his churches mutual Loves, but every latter Act
(compared with the precedent) is a clearer of some former point, and a
perfecter of the former. In this Act we have the Church still speaking: either
declaring her own sense, or the actions of her Beloved. All tending to
express their mutual affections one toward another, in respect of Christ's
coming in the flesh, and the new churches glory accompanying the same. In this
verse is uttered the churches sense and feeling of Messiahs approaching in the
flesh, laid down first, from the knowledge she has of his voice; secondly of
his pace. The voice is made excellent by the subject, when she says, It is the
voice of my Beloved. The Pase is made excellent, first, from a word of
attention, Behold: secondly, from the speediness thereof: once, by saying he
comes leaping over the mountains and hills: afterward, by comparing him for
that, to the Roe or young Hind.

The Church of the Gentiles (figuratively considered as a seed, in the loins
of the ancient Patriarchs and Prophets) does listen Isaiah (foreseeing the New
Churches glory) does call upon her to Rejoice: Isa. 54 1. galat. 4.27.
saying, Rejoice thou barre^ that bear no children etc. which by the Apostle
is plainly applied to the church of the Gentiles, which then had no being by
sund^y hundreds of years. Which teaches the steadfastness of Gods decree, the
truth of his word, that future things are to him present: yea, that John, My
sheep will hear my voice: of whom before he has said, They know my voice:
How can the faithful hear and acknowledge his voice, seeing he is in the
Heavens, and we in the earth? His voice is now heard and acknowledged in his
written word, specially expounded and applied by his ministers. For so long as
his Canonical bounds are kept it is not we, Mat. 10.20.
but the Spirit of our Father which speaks in us. And for this cause our
Savior doometh the acception and reiection of his ministers, to be the
acception and reiection of himself and his father. Which as it teaches, how
these that be of God will hear his word: so further, that his word is to be
acknowledged for the Voice of the Churches Beloved. Nor will the faithful
withdraw their ear from hearing the law (for such their prayers shall be
abominable ^ Prou. 28.9.) nor yet hearing it, speak evil of it, as they
would not be found blasphemers of the Holy Ghost. But as the faithful (Christ's
she^p) can only acknowledge Christ's voice rightly when they hear it: so from
the mouths of Foxes, Woolues, Tigers, what can we expect, b^t barkings and
bawlings against the voice of Jesus. Be not therefore quiet in thy mind, till
thou find and feel these two marks of Christ in thee: first, a readiness
to hear his sacred voice: secondly, a willingness to acknowledge it for the
voice of our Beloved. And because his voice, therefore to be accepted, sweetly
embraced, and laid up in our heart, as the Gemme and Jewel of our Beloved,
sweetest Beloved, Christ Jesus.

Besides the Churches knowledge of his voice, she knows and discernes him by
his pase. And because she would have al her members to know the same with her,
she prefaceth her speech Attention, Behold, q. d. Behold how my Beloved comes
running like an Hind. First, herein I observe, how careful we should be, that
others, together with us, may hear and see Christ. When Isaiah fo^esawe him
coming to assume Behold: and when the Angel Gabriel came to assure the Virgin
hereof, he uses the same word, Behold. The Angels would have us to behold,
Isa. 7.14.
the Prophets would have us to behold; and what are we that we will not behold
and contemplate Christ's coming, and the manner of his coming? That which here
is to be beheld, is, first his pacing from mountain^ to So understood of
Gr^^gorius Magnus.
for the work of incarnation. Oh, (says the Prophet) that thou would break
the heavens and come down: and here the faithful foresee in the Spirit, that
the heavens gave place, and the Savior approached by degrees: descending (as
Roes from the Rocks) from higher to lower places. The Ancients see him coming
(yea, Abraham see his day, though a far off) the end of the Sinagogue and
the beginning of the New Testaments church see him come. Insomuch as John
Baptist put forth his finger, saying, Behold the Lamb, for the succeeding ages
of this Church, they behold Messiah passed and ascended from whence he first
descended into the lowest parts of thearth, Ephesians. 4.9. From whence we are to
behold him in the next place, descending to a new purpose. Before he came in
humility, to be judged, but now in glory, to judge: before to suffer in his
members, but now to be glorified in his members. He approached then by degrees,
so Gnasael in 2. Sam. 2.18.
Asahel for lightness of foot, was compared to a wild Roe. This Gnasael (or
Prepared of God) is Messiah, prepared a Savior in the sight of all people. The
first ran till he was pierced in the side, so did the second: The sight of
the first slain, it caused the people there to stand: and when should we
stop, but when we be come to our Asahel? In his death let us rest, the^e let
us ruminate. We run well when we rest there. Woe unto the merit-monger that
ouer-runnes this cross: that seeks rest beyond him: for by his blood-shedde
are we only saved: there let us rest, and pawse in his passion.

Lect. II.
Verse. 9.

Behold he stands behind our wall, looking forth of the Windows, showing
himself through the Grates.


THE Church listening and looking after Messiahs approaching in the flesh, she
(in the former verse) has heard and seen him, but as a far off. In this
verse, she exulting-wise, sees him right near, and in the following verses
introduces him familiarly speaking unto her.

For the sight of him here, she has it but in part, and (as it were) but by
halfes. She being within, does see him but as without under her walls, looking
in by the windows and the N^tteworke thereof. The Greek has (...), by the
nets.
This near sight, and yet imperfect sight, may be considered three ways, in
the impediments to sight: first in respect of the wall, secondly of the
windows, thirdly of the grates, all three betwixt her and him.

The wall I understand to be the ancient legal ceremonies, called of the
Apostle a stop and the partition wall, Ephesians. 2.14. For Abraham's people, they
saw and felt it with sorrow. Joy and comfort it was to see Christ standing
behind the wall of oblations, sprinklings of blood and washings: and yet a
sorrow to see him so, as unable to embrace him. A comfort to see the light of
the world, behind the sanctuaries lamps daily burning: but a sorrow to see
him slain, his blood powered out, and his flesh scorched with heauens-fire, in
the Bullockes, Goats, Lambs, etc. slain and burnt within and without the
Sanctuary of Israel. Oh that God would hasten the remoouall of Moses
ceremonia^l veil, from his Jewish people! that so they might see to the end of
all these things: namely that they were shadows of good things to come, the
substance and end whereof is Christ.

The second impediment, be the windows of this wall of ceremonies, Is^iah
ther^ prophecieth the Gentiles flocking to Messiah.
prophet remembers ( Isa 60.8.) that the Lords doves do fly and flock
together. The wall was a stop, and these windows are a stay: but much less
impeding then the former. Yea, these windows are made (as the Temples windows
were) for leting in light. That is, the sacred ministering knowledge of the
ceremonies (their use and end) to the Church: who through them (by the light of
the word) does contemplate and spiritually behold Christ Jesus, as behind
them. What can a man behold through a wall, but by the windows? And what
knowledge can be taken of Christ in sacrifice and sacrament, but by the
unfolding of scripture? Shut up the scriptures (as the Romanists have in a
strange tongue) and all ceremonies of the law and gospel, are but as a wall
without windows, an house without light, a body without eyes. And if the eye
be shut and darkened, how great is that darkness? But let the scriptures be
opened, and ceremonies are seen through, Christ is beholded, and Antichrist
disclosed.

Sanctum or Holy-place, where the Priests were employed about the Altar. For,
as the people were not to enter into the Sanctum, but to continue Luke 1.10.
Exo. 28.34, 35
without in prayer: so the particular could not be more than grates or
netteworke, seeing they were to hear Aarons Ephod-bells sounding as he went
too and fro in the public ministration: for whetting them up more fervently to
prayer and meditation of Christ's incarnation and sufferings. First, the wall
between the Church and her Beloved, secondly, the windows, now lastly, the
grates. The first kept them most asunder, the second lesser, the third least of
all. What may these grates be, but particular notices and near knowledges,
particularly enlightening our Conscience. Windows let in a general light, but
grates a particular.

Windows light, flasheth over all superficially: but these grates admit in
particular lights, flowing from one and the same Celestiall-sunne. This latter
knowledge therefore is more, then that general illumination administered
before, as by the large opening of the scriptures leaves: namely, this is a
particular application of Messiah, favorable aspects, declared in the word,
and sealed up in the sacraments. This Messiah approached from the mountains to
the hills, from the hills to the Temples wall: thence to the windows, lastly,
to the veil of net-worke: through which she might see her beloved (even the
high priest of al) more clearly and pa^ticularlie, with a nearer application.
In the time of the old world, he was as upon the mountains; in Abraham's time
as upon the hills: in Moses his time behind the partition wall: in Daniles
time as at the windows: and in the new testaments age, as beholding him
through the grates. Which the Apostle terms but a knowing of Christ in part;
and the beholding of him in a mirror, though with open face, 1. Cor. 13. and
2.3.18.

Nor is the cause of this our imperfect sight to be imputed to God, but to our
apostaticall nature, covered with a veil of peevish ignorance and fleshly
understanding: to which infirmity of ours God has applied himself in his
shining. The brightness of his glory no flesh here can behold, and live: but
when our Messiah shall again appear in the flesh 1. John 3.4.
We shallbe like him; for we shall see him as he is, Nor could we see him as
he is, were it not that he shall first make us like himself. But after that
Messiah has thus satisfied her sight, let us hear how he satisfies her
hearing.

Lect. III.
Verse 10.

My Beloved spoke and said unto me, arise my Lou^, my Faire-one, and come away,
etc.


THe word Gnanah signifies so to speak, as is by way of Answering. And
therefore of Arias Montanus turned expressie [ Respondit] My Beloved answered.
R. Selo^oh on Cantic. ^.
Rabbi Selomoh teaches the same on this place: adding besides, that it
signifies a Conclamation with a clear lifted up voice.

Here then we are to observe, a beginning of Messiahs speech to his Church and
continued to the end of the 15. verse, and all this recounted by the mouth of
his Church Before she heard his voice, but a far off. She saw her Savior
approaching swiftly unto her: And now being come so nere (as through the
grates he made himself known unto her) he answers her lowdly, he speaks unto
her comfortably.

That she says, He answered: it not only argues Messiahs affability and
much readiness to inform the faithful: but also, Church, whereto this
ensuing answer is framed. In the Gospel sundry times it is written, And Jesus
answered and said: which some term an Hebraisme, or a form of speech used of
Hebrews, even then, when as no demand went before. I respect not what is
Hebrews speech, but what is the speech of that Holy Canonical Spirit which
spoke in the holy Prophets of the Hebrews (for the holy men of God spoke as
they were moo^ed by the Holy Ghost) and I am sure, 2. Pet. 1.21.
that the Spirit of GOD will not say, He answered his Church, but when the
Church has spoken somewhat first, whereto he after frames his answer.

The Churches speech is Vocal or Mental. Vocal speech is that, whereto the
Bodies voice is adopted: and such speech we find not here (nor in the Gospel,
diverse times) whereto the answer may have relation. Mental speech is that,
which is begotten in, and brought forth of the Mind. And so we see, that our
Savior in the gospel frames an answer very often to the thoughts of his
hearers: and so he heard Moses cry, when Moses uttered never a word. Here
therefore we must necessarily collect, that something was said in the Churches
mind, whereto this answer is formed. By his answer, we may easily guess at
her demand. The answer (as afterward appears) tends to the drawing her
forth of an uncomfortable, to a comfortable estate: as it were out of winter
storms into a pleasant spring: her demand then by Analogy of Reason) must be
this: o Messiah, how long will it be, ere I be delivered out of this calamity?
Whereto he answere^h in effect, Even now the time is, therefore arise and come
away.

The Rabbines understand this answer to be made of God to their Israel in
Egypt, when they cried to the Lord for deliverance out of that bondage. True it
is that so they cried, and also by Moses received an answer for present
delivery. But, howsoever. I approve Onkelos and every of them for their
application of this song to their sinagogue (it b^ing a figure of the new
Church) rather then Johannes Halgrinus the Cardinal with some others, applying
all to the virgin Mary (for Genebrard himself affirms this not to be Genebr.
on Cant. chapter 1.
Germanus sensus the natural sense of the Song) yet we must know that the
Prophets still did specially aim at the New-church: their sinagogue but a
shadow, whereof she is the substance. This secret complaint must so be our
complaint, this demand our demand, and the answer here framed to our Israel
which was in bondage of sin, worse then that of Aegipt: captiued of Satan,
worse than that of Pharaoh. The Martire-soules under the Altar ( Revel. 6.9,
10.) are figuratively introduced, crying: How long Lord, holy and true: what
marvel then, if here the faithful cry, and enquire after delivery out of
Gentilisme? Yea, how well may the Gentiles seed (enclosed in their Fathers the
Prophets) cry after a freedom from the law of Ceremonies, Galat. 3. etc.
from the rudiments of the world, which the Apostle affirms to have been but
as Schoolmaisters, Tutors, and Governors for driving us to Christ.

Israel groaned after delivery, and so received a comfortable answer. The
Gentile church longed after Messiah (for we see how many of them having heard
Paul once, they beseech him to preach the same sermon to them the next Sabboath
day, Act. 13.42.) and lo, they are here comfortably answered. By which also we
may learn to believe the readiness of God to be merciful, if so we call unto
him, in time of affliction, psalm. 50.15. Yet this must aye be remembered, that
God is never minded to re-answer any petition, or demand with comfort, but
where the petition or demand is framed first by his own good spirit. The
infusion of which grace is termed well of Divines, the preventing Grace. And
this spiritual grace (made excellent by faith in the promised Deliverer) was
first given to ancient Israel, and afterward to the elect of the Gentiles,
before petition, or demand was acceptable. The answer generally so considered,
Let us come to the speech it self.

The speech uttered by Messiah, is to be considered: first, in My love and My
fair one. The old Latin (for no just cause termed Ieroms, except columb^ mea]
my dove, whereby may appear (as by passing many more places) that the Latin
Translator followed not the hebrew text. A trick used by too many at this day,
who will neither proceed in teaching according to our English translation (far
more perfect, then either the supposed Greek Septuaginta, or supposed latin
Jerome) nor yet once let us hear what the original is. Whereas the Hebrew
text (for the old Testament) it is that whereto in causes of difficulty we
should run, as is noted well, Arr. Mont. in his Epistles to the interlinear
Bible.
even by the Romanists themselves, our v^iust adversaries.

The first title, my Love, it is Dodi, whereof comes David, in english,
Beloved. A term given by the father from heaven to his Son here in the
earth, Matthew. 3. vlt.
when he said, This is my Beloved, figured by the ancient Beloved, David. Here
(as elsewhere) the word is given to his Church: for Christ and the church be as
two branches growing from one and the same Hebrewe So the Hebrews term their
primative words.
Root. And therefore (as before was noted in a like case) do mutually
communicate their titles. He, as the cause: She, as the thing by him caused.

my fair one. A fair term for the Greater to give unto the lesser: for
Christ to give to his church. Yea, a sign of singular conceit, for Messiah so
to denominate his Church before she was risen, before she was come away to
his sacred near presence. If Christ deem so amiably of a soul lying in
spiritual bondage, only because of a little good affection: how highly will he
judge then of a soul* when it has attained to excellent action?

Arise thou, Luke 1.79
come away. The bidding her Arise, it plainly points at the Gentiles estate,
who (as the Priest Zecharj well said) did sit in darkness and in the shadow of
death. Dan. 12.2
Who slep in the dust of the earth, as Daniel saw: and from that dust was bid
to arise by Isaiah, Isa. 52.1, 2.
foreseeing the glory of the church of the Gentiles. And that which was spoken
of so long before by them, is by Saint Paul argued from (as from the less to
the more) when he says to the Romans: Romans 13.11
It is now time that we should arise from sleep: for now is our Salvation
nearer than when we believed. q. d. in plainer speech thus: We were bo^nd to
arise from sleep in sin, when our Salvation was a far off, by reason of
the Saviors far continuance from us: and yet thereto we were called by
Faith: how much more now should we arise, seeing we enjoy the thing we
believed, Christ now being already come, whom once we only believed, he would
come? And that which the whol^ church is called unto, the Ephesians. 5.14
Apostle calls every particular soul to, when he says, Stand up from the
dead, and Christ shall give thee light. As our Predecessors, so we do
naturally sit in sin: And Christ still by his ministry biddes us arise,
lest we be found to sit in the seat of the scornful (by mocks persecuting
the spirit of Christ, as Ismael by his flouts persecuted Isaac) let us sit no
longer in sin, but arise, that Christ may give us light.

After she arises, he bids her come away. She is not to arise, Matthew, sitting
at the receipt of custom, that hearing Jesus to say, Follow me: did make no
more ado, Matthew. 9.9.
but Arose and followed him. It is no sitting in an occupation, no sitting in a
trade, no resting upon life, much less in filthy sin, when Christ bids,
come away. Were we as hie as Zacheus, we must come down, and come down
speedily: were we with James and John mending our nets, we must leave all and
follow him. Yea, if we will not leave riches, preferrement and life it self
when Christ calls, we shall be judged but unworthy of him. Specially, if
we find (as before) that he thinks most worthily of us most unworthy, we
shall show our selves not only beastly, but stupide and senseless stones,
not to arise away, when he lovingly inuites us.

Lect. IIII.
THE church has desired him to draw near, and he has done so; it now
rests, that she draw near to him, seeing he desires so. In mean time, he
uses such arguments, as may quicken her up to such holy obedience. For unto
her by her own report (and therefore unable to plead ignorance) he thus says.

Verse. 11. For (behold) winter is past, the rain is changed and gone away.

Verse. 12. The fl^wers appear in the earth: the time of the singing ( of
bird^) is come, and the voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land.

Verse. 13. The Fig Tree has brought forth her young figs and the vines with
their small grapes have cast a savor. Arise my Love, my fayre-one, and come
away.



Gregor. Mag. in Cantic.
Quid per hyemem, nisi legis aust^ritas intelligenda est? What is to be
understood by Winter, but the Laws austeri^ie? That question of the Ancient
one may answer thus: yes, by Win^ers weather may be meant two other things,
Persecution for Righteousness, and Bondage in sin. The soul that is
persecuted and hardly entreated of the world, is glad with the dove, of an hole
in the rock, of some shelter from Saul's breathing threatenings and murder,
more ter^ible then Winters face. Nor will such a soul willingly step abroad,
till that winter be ouerpast. This we see, not only in David, Elijah and
sundry of the faithful in Heb. 11: but also in our Savior Jesus his often
auoydance of such sharp weather, till he saw the last hour was come. For
Bondage in sin, it may well be compared to winter, for destroying the
beauteous visibilitie and face of Christianity, like as nipping winter
deflowre^h the beauteous face of a garden and Orchard. The church Eze. 20.6. etc
of Israel was so nipped and vnbeautified in Egypt by Idolatry, what time
Moses came unto them. And by his manquelling Idolatry, the Church of the
Gentiles captiued in Romes Egypt, was (till of late years) almost dead, all
over with Job vlcerated, almost no face nor appearance of a Christian Vineyard.
But (thanks be to God) both these Winters are in good measure passed, and the
nipping showers gone over our heads: whether we regard that universal
persecution or this general Idolatry, wherewith our people sometimes were
overrun. But neither of these I take to be the winter here intended. That
the Law with his showring m^naces are this winter, I rather understand: even as
by the subsequent Spring, I understand to be mystically meant, the Gospel. What
Winter is to the earth and the fruits of her womb, even that is the Law of
Moses to earthly man, and the fruits of his Nature. Does winternippe the
earths f^uites in the head, does it pluck his plumes, and does it cause the
sap to recule back to the root, and rests it there unseen till the
springtime? The Law of Moses does all this: for his stormy threats and
cursing showers applied truly and powerfully to the conscience, it nippes my
Gallant in the head, it cooles his courage, is pulls his high looks down to
the earth, seeing himself to be but a lump of earth. And thus the Law (as a
sharp Tutor and ierting schoole-m^ister) was appointed to whippe the Synagogue
(the Church in her infancy) unto Christ. And for this cause, Messiah calls
his Church heereforth, as out of an hole, where through fear she had lurked.
The Law was promulgate with ensigns of fe^re (namely with burning fire,
blackenesse, darkness, tempest: yea, so terrible was the sigh^, ^s Moses
said, I fear and quake, Heb. 12.18.21.) how much more must the breach
thereof, cause the sinner to fear, for whom all the terrors of God are
ordained? This stormy Winter begun with the Law in mount Sinaej; but when
the vocation of the Gentiles was to appear with Messiahs coming, then the
winter ceased, the showrs of judgment ended: or rather, the showers were
changed: from wintry showers to showers beseeming the spring. The Gentile
Church before unseen, was now to show her self. She that before sat in
darkness, was now to be brought into his maruailous light.

Had she heard no other agument for moving her to arise and go unto Messiah,
save this (namely, that the Winter was passed, the partition wall broken down,
the ceremonial nipping impediments removed) it had noted a sovereign love in
Jesus: but when he secondly adds, that the spring was come (recounting the
springs particular beauties) this argued a larger love: But when she was to
remember, that Messiahs coming was the abolishment of the first, and the
stablishment of the second, how might the remembrance of that double love
ravish sense, and affection with love! But let us consider the particulars,
whereby this Spring is described.

The flowers appear in the Earth. By flowers (who are appointed rather to
savor unto, then to feed upon) are understood the first fruits of the spirit,
whereby the Elect give a pleasant smell: and therein lies sweetness of
speech and words, going before works, even as flowers before fruits. For the
which cause, as the Apostle exho^teth that Coloss. 4.6. ephesians. 4.29. and 5.2, 4.
Our speech be gracious always for bringing edification to the hearers: to be
exercised in divine thanksgiving answerable to that sacrifice of a sweet
smelling savor offered up to God the father by Messiah our Beloved: so, the
Prophet Zephaniah in chapter 3.9. calls it a pure language which the Lord would
give to his people in their conversion. As we are called to bring forth
sauoury words before man (for evil words corrupt good manners) so, more
specially before our God, in our private and public spiritual service.
Otherwise, the Rose, Lilly, and other flowers of the earth will condemn us:
who in their kind smell sweet and are sauourie to God and man. Otherwise, the
nosegay in our hands shall justify the Earth, when our unsavory stinking
words and writings shall damn our nature. For by our words we shall be
justified, and by our words conde^n^d, says the Rose of Sharon, our Beloved
Lilly of the Valleys.

The time of singing (by Birds) is come. The clause ( by Birds) is not in the
original, but necessarily understood: seeing, not any singing, but such
singing of birds (as afterward, namely of the Turtle) is here understood: that
being one glorious effect accompanying the Spring. The old Latin turns it
Tempus putationis, the time of lopping or pruning the vines. The Zamir, of
which root is Mizmor a psalm.
word indeed sometimes so signifies: but, as it signifies also a singing, so
here it can only so be taken, not for a cutting. For helping the Latin
translation, Genebrard says, Old vines are cut in the Spring. But here we
see the vines brought in with their fruit after, and therefore not to be
considered in the lopping time: besides that, Genebrard observed not
sufficiently, that the Spring is here brought in with many fruits, for so
forward was the earth in Palestina: insomuch as our March (with them the first
month) Ioshuah 5.11 compared with the feasts times in Leui. 23. and enjoined
in chap. 2.14.
it affoorded ears of corn for oblation. Nay, Genebrard himself presently
after observes, that the word signifies also Cantillatio a singing: as also
that the birds in the springtide do sing: adding, Hic autem garritus auium
plurimum facit ad veris commendationem, this chirping of birds makes much to
the Springs commendation. And therein insisteth, as being hereto more proper,
which also has enforced their Arias Montanus to t^rne it with us, Tempus
ca^tus. Nor could Genebrard well avoid it, because besides the matter here
urging it, he see that Rabbj Selomoh* Aben-ezra, and the Innominate Rabbin did
particularly urge it in this place. First, to Birds: secondly, to their
cantillation. Birds in the scriptures are considered sometimes in the good
sometimes in the evil part. In the evil part (for herein I regard not so much
the method of natural art, as of grace often used in the bible) birds are
used: as in and about Ge. 15.9 etc. math. 13.4.19
Abrams sacrifice, where ravening birds would have consumed his oblation: and
in Mat. 13. where the birds of the air steal away the seed of godliness.
But sometimes, Birds are taken in the good part; as through the body of the
law, where Leuit. 12.6 and 14.4. etc.
Doves and Sparrowes are an analogicall sacrifice to God: as also before that,
in the flocking of fowls ^or such supply of oblation, unto Noah's Arc.

The singing of Birds, it is according as the birds be considered, good or bad.
For the singing o^ such Birds, as John mentions in Revel. 18. they be a cage
of unclean and hateful fowls, whose song is merely a black-santus,
consisting of mere discords. A noise fitter for hell, then for heaven: as be
all the iarring ordinances of Antichrist. For the singing here mentioned, it is
introduced in the good part, and therefore intimates unto us, the song of
Christ's people, opposed to the former of Antichrist. Specially here be
intended, the ministers of the ghospel, sounding out before the r^sidue, the
praises of our God. And in this place m^st prope^ly be conceived, the
Apostolical, Prophetical, and Evangelical ministry, which first sung to
others the Psalms of d^grees: whereby the lay people hearing the same, might
^e drawn to consent unto the divine consent of such loud noised cymbals.
Ezech. 33.32
Ezekiel s^ith that the people in his time, did hear the Pro^hets Lute, as
songmen of pleasant voice: that is, did delight to hear, but not to do. Here
the Church is called to do according to that they hear of these Apostolical
sweet singers of Israel: as before did, and hereafter again will appear.

The Holy Ghost here alluding to the sweet accents of birds, would not only
have us to acknowledge the Psalm. 148.10.
praise of God in their mouths, according to their kind: as also therewith
closely to confess the harmony of God his graces, represented by the Temples
tipicall melody: but also (and that more properly in this place) to take
knowledge of the ghospels sweet accents, soong by the gathering ministry
unto the disord^red Gentiles; namely, by Apostles, Evangelists and Prophets: as
sometimes the Temples music and song was uttered by that trinity in unity (
1. Chr. 15.19
Heman, Asaph, and Ethan) on the loud brazen Cymballs. When this kind of
ministry begun to sing the praises of Messiah, then the Gentiles begun to
appear a Church, then the time of her refection was present.

Wherein further may be seen the great difference between the gift of the
law, and the gift of the ghospel. The law given with terrible sound of
thunder, the ghospel given in fo^me of ^ele^^able singing: the first dashing
nature to the ground; the second watring the secret seed of election, does
cause it to budde and ascend to heaven rejoicing. Sing we therefore unto the
Lord a new Song, let his praise be in the congregation of Saints. Psalm. 149.1.
The first song was an Elegy or sad dumpe: this second an Eulogie, an hymn, a
psalm of gladness. If there be any Burden in this new song, Christ himself
bears it. The notes of delight are put in our mouths: O, let us pray for the
wings of contemplation, whereby we may ascend singing with the mounting Larkes
of the Morning.

In the third place is particularized the Bird of Birds in scripture, with the
consideration of her song, in that it follows: And the voice of the Turtle is
heard in our Land. This bird is in the original called T^r (whereof the Latin
by duplication has Turtur: for the Hebrews Vau valu^th sometimes u sometimes
o) which T^r appellatiuely is Order, as if this Bird before other birds should
be a bird of Order. This Bird is a kind of Dove Isidor. in e^ymol. lib. 12.
c^p. 7. and Origin on Leu. cha. 2.
addicted to the desert and solitary places, true to the Mate, whose song is
mixed with a groaning sadness; in the winter season couched in some trees
hollow truncke, coming forth in the spring with his troubled cantillation. By
this Bird here, some have understood the Church. In the 74. Psalm. I grant it so
to be taken in them words. Give not the soul of thy Turtle dove unto the
Beast. But here that cannot be granted, seeing the Church is here stirred to
arise by the voice of this Turtle: this voice being a motive to the Churches
obedience. What bird of Order must this be, that with his sad song does order
all the other birds? It is no other but he that in Leuit. 1.14 and 5.7. B^da
understanding by the Turtle, christ's Humanity.
Leuit. 1. and 5. is appointed for burnt sacrifice: even Messiah himself, who
during the laws winter was couched under shadows and lay therein as dead: but
together with the Gentiles time of vocation did step forth, showed himself in
our nature, sung personally to the Jews and first fruits of the Gentiles, but
ministerially to their successors by Subs^itutes. Yet, whether in himself or
others, all is the Turtles voice: a voice that may be discerned by his
sad-gladnesse, or glad-sadnesse. As the law is sung for preparing the way unto
his ghospel, so, the ghospel is mixed with the law, letter with spirit and
spirit with letter: rejoicing, as he cast his eye to the glorious purchase of
his Church, but sorrowing as he saw the cup of his fathers wrath that must
be drunk up before that purchase. No Turtle dove more solitary spirited then
he: who (as does the Turtle) would sometimes take his meat amongst mankind,
but after that would withdraw to be alone in prayer, etiamsi, nunquam minus
solus quam cum solus. And for his chaste union with his spousesse the Church,
no creature may with him be balanced for that: because with her alone he
lives and dies, ioyeth and mourns, ^her state ever made his own. O that we
would on the other side make his case ours, be faithful to him by life and
death, as it beseems the body to be suitable to the Head*

The first half of Messiahs Spring has benee considered in the purifying of
his Churches voice (first represented by flowers, secondly, by the singing of
Birds) now follows the consideration of works, represented by tree-fruits
(first by them of the Figgetree, secondly of the Vine-tree) And these fruits
make up this springs perfection, and stand for a Preludium to the Summer season.

Lect. V.
FOr the Fig Tree, our Savior in Saint Luke 21.29.30. he makes the burgening
thereof (as also, of other trees) 'to be a sign of Summers approaching. And
Plin. lib. 17. cap. 13. Quaecito occidunt, velocia sunt, vt ficus, etc.
Pliny numbreth it amongst the trees that are of quick nature: so that the
time of her young figs appearance, must (in such hot countries) argue the
springs ripeness, ready to entertain summer. Touching other respects,
Isidore notes, that it brings forth fruit three or four times a year: and
Pliny says of the Egyptian fig tree (which is like to be one with
Palestinaes) Idem li. 13. cap. 7.
pomum fert no^ ramis sed caudice ipso, that is, it brings forth his fruit by
the very stock, not by the branches. Both which declare (as also experience in
our own and colder countries) that the first frutizing of the Fig Tree is,
before the Springs ending. Luke 1.74, 75.
To that end (says Zecharj) we are delivered, namely, to serve him in
holiness and righteousness all the days of our life. Otherwise, it will
betide us as the Fig Tree which mocked Christ with leaves, when he expected
fruit, namely to be cursed from ever bringing forth fruit.

The Naturians further note, Plin. lib. 13.7 and Isid. in etymol. lib. 17.7
that the Fig Tree cut down and cast into the water, it presently sinketh. And
when it has sometimes lodged in the mudde, it afterward arises and floateth
above the waters, contrary to the order of nature in trees, who in their
dryness swim, but thoroughly humected and steeped, do forthwith sink to
the bottom. This may well represent a double qua^ification in Messiahs people,
the regenerate. The David's soul eftsoons) yet they rise again. They may
sometimes lodge under the mudde of earthly affects (as David, Solomon,
Hezekiah, and others have) but up at last they arise by the spirit of
repentance. For a just man (says Solomon) falls seven times, but rises
again. Yea, our savior says seauentie times seven times, but arises
again. By desperation they may be kept under for a season: but when they seem
swallowed up of that muddie evil, God gives them the comfort of his spirit
whereby they rise as high, as they were fallen low. And hereof I could give
particular instance not far off, without recording of ancient experience. As
for external afflictions, afflictions corporeal, we see the faithful that
way often cut down, sinking under as without life, subscribing (as did our
worthy Archbishop Cranmer) to muddie conclusions: but such. sleep not long ere
that they arise and burn the hand that so subscribed. This sinking under for a
time, is the effect of old Adams lust: but this mounting up again (even
against all order of nature) is the effect of grace, even of the seed of
election hid in our nature. This first qualification appears here in our
first resurrection: and blessed are they ( Revel. 20.^
says John) that have part in this resurrection, for on such the second death
h^th no power.

The second qualifications or property, is that, which first is of Humility
the high way to Glory. No sooner is John Baptists axe laid to the root of
their tree, but they (poor tender hearts) do sink under in the sight of
their sin, confessing themselves to be but slime of the earth. But mark the
issue: the Angel of God touches Daniel and bids him arise. Israel first
smitten down, Hosea 6.2
was after two days to revive, and the third day to be raised up. He exalts
them (says Mary) that be of low degree: for before Exaltation goes
Humility, ^uen as Pride goes before destruction. Against natures order quite,
that one should ascend by descending: but suitable to Grace; for even Messiah
that ascended, did first descend into the lowest parts of the earth. Let the
unregenerate be cut down howsoever: sink under they willingly will not.
Swim aloft they will so long as they can: such is the sturdie pride of their
hearts. But in due time the waters of Gods indignation drench them through, that
Exodus 15.5.
down they sink (as did Pharaoh) like a stone into the bottom: and there let
them lie to Doomesday. Condemn thy self and thou shall not be condemned: sink
thy self and thou shall not be drowned.

It is further affirmed of this tree, namely, that Pli^. l. 13. c. 7
Scalpendo tantum ferreis vnguibus, aliter non matures^it, it will not
otherwise ripen, then only by first scratching it with iron hooks or rakes.
Which plainly pictureth our untoward nature that otherwise will not become
fruitful in Christ's orchard, without he first do pierce and ripple the skin
of our soul with the doctrine of the law, as Job 33.16.
also by sealing corrections upon us.

Lastly (for this place) it is not to be forgotten, how Naturians affirm,
Plin. Isidore, etc.
that the wildest Bull is tamed quick^y by being tied unto the F^g-tre: like as
(by daily experience we find) that the Guinycok swells and becoms ^eirce by
beholding ofred garments: as also the Lion turning himself to flight, if he be
hunted with Psa. 22.12. where David (in the person of Christ) thus spaketh of
his persecutors: Many young Bulls have compassed me, mighty Bulls of Basan have
closed me about. Where the inferior persecut^rs are termed young Bulls: the
Superiors in their evil are resembled to mighty Bulls. Al, beasts and bruit
beasts, that set themselves against Christ and his members. But will these wild
Bulls be tamed by being united to the Fig Tree: that is, will their spirits be
meekned by being bound unto Christ and his members. In the second psalm they
are introduced, crying thus, Let us break their bands and cast their cords
from us. True: not because they were already yoked and bound, but because they
feared to be bound. All amongst us that be termed Christians, have seemed to be
united with Christ and his members, by the bands of word and sacraments: but
all such have not indeed been bound, for had they bin indeed of us they would
not have gone out from us: but (as Saint John says, 1. Ioh. 2.19
would have continued with us. Antequam exierent ergo, non ex nobis: therefore
(says Austin hereon) they were not of us, no not before they went out from us.
If they once had come verily under the spiritual bonds of Jesus (had they bin
as fierce as Saul) they would have become as meek as Paul. Then the Isa. 11.67.
wolf shall dwell with the lamb, the Leopard lie with the kid, and the calfe,
and lion, and fat beast together, and a little child shall lead them: even then
shall the mighty be subdued to the weak, the cruel to the meek, when verily
and in truth, they shall be spiritually knit unto Christ and his Church, as
Ionathans heart was knit to David the figure. Nay mark it, that Saul the King
breathing nothing but bloodshed against David, he no sooner comes near and
hears David's voice, but lo, his fury staieth, he pronounces David to be
more righteous then himself: and smitten with some remor^e, Sam. 24 17. etc.
and 27.21
he lift up his voice and wept. If that mighty Bull was so again and again
meekned, by but approaching near to that anointed Fig Tree: how gentle and
right easy would he have become, if once his heart could but have been knit
unto David's!

But passing by them foreign Bulls, Beasts that be without us, Jeremy terms
an Ierem. 31 18
untamed heifer, a fauage devouring wolf in our own flesh. What is the sin in
our nature? nay, what is our nature it self in the state of unregeneration,
but a beastly nature, and sin Prou. 14.10.
a Stranger, whom Solomon would not have to medale with our joy. If this Beast
be not bound to the Homes of Christ's altar he will devour us. Let thy brutish
nature be bound to Christ's Fig Tree, and the spirit of sin will some and some
die in it, and Nature it self will be tamed and become subject to the spirit of
grace. Bind it to the prince-fig-tree Christ, first by the cord of his word,
secondly by the bond of sacraments, thirdly by Continual prayer. And for
making thy nature more capable of grace by the former means, do first 2. Cor.
9.27
beat down thy body with Saint Paul, and bring it into subjection by much
fastings, watchings, hard lodgings: secondly frequent the company of holy,
sober, mortified persons, who can and do mourn for sin. For Solomon having
found by lamentable experience, what bodily spiritual fornication he had been
drawn unto by lewd company, he after that cries out, It is better to go to
the house of mourning then to go to the house of feasting: because this is the
end of all men (namely to mourn and cry) and the living shall lay it to his
heart. With the holy, we shall learn holiness: bind we therefore our beastly
nature to his spiritual Fig Tree, and so a better fruit shall spring out of
nature. This of the Fig Tree.

And the vines (with their small grapes) have cast a savor. Grapes of them
selves casting no savor, it must necessarily be understood of that time,
wherein there be small Grapes peeping out, and the flowers falling off: which
flowers give true pleasant odor. The Vines and Olives ( Pliny being witnes^e)
( Plin. lib. 16. cap. 25.
concipiunt Vergiliarum exortu, do conceive in the rising of the 7. Stars,
which is about the mid-spring: and for putting forth their berries (together
with the flowers fall) the time (as before) was more hasty in Judea, then in
the Latins contrie. So that I take this berry-state of the vines to denote the
springtime, as before, though the perf^ction or finishment thereof.

Seeing the vine is sundry times hereafter to be spoken of, Ezech. 15.1, 2, etc.
I will here observe the fewer things thereof. First, the Prophet Ezekiel
declares, that the vine-tree is for, his wood, less regarded for building,
then any tree of the forest, insomuch as none will make so much as a pin thereof
for hanging any vessel thereon, but rather cast it into the fire and consume
it. As the Lords prophet applied that to the Jews, so may I to the Gentiles.
What substantial thing is there in our nature, for the which we should be
depended upon? Behold we are vanity and lighter then vanity it self. Cursed
is he that makes flesh his arm to rest on: yea, that goes about to make one
pin of our natural abillements, as an article of faith to lean upon. Rather
we and our pura naturalia deserve to be cast into Hell fire.

Secondly, Plin. li. 14. c. 1. gives reason thereof.
the wild-vines by art (as by timely tonsure and yearlie clippings) are brought
to such perfection, as Nulli est ligno aeternior natura, no wood is found of
more durable nature. And this may well resemble the happy immortality of our
nature by Messiahs spirit and his word, even as by the ouer-shadowing of the
Holy Ghost. The Son of God was united to the first f^uites of our nature,
which in the grave never felt corruption.

An other thing for the present is this, that Vines, and their

The spring thus described (first, from gracious speech, figured by flowers and
birds singing: secondly, from gracious works of faith, signified by the fruits
beginning in the fig tree and vines) now remains to speak of the exhortation
subioyned.

Arise my Love, my fair one and come away.
Whereof having spoken largely in the tenth verse aforegoing, Arise and come
away, he infers,: first, an arising from evil wherein we lay captiued by
sin, through the curse of the Law, represented by winter: Secondly, a
coming into the liberty of the Saints, for serving Christ in word and
works: represented by the joyous Summer. It follows.

Lect. VI.
Verse. 14.

My Dove, thou art in the holes of the Rock, in the secret of the stairs show
me thy face, In Hip hill a double active
cause me to hear thy voice, because thy voice is sweet, and thy face comely.


THe Church herein continues her repeat of Messiahs speech: wherein I observe,
first, an exhortation, secondly, a reason thereof. The exhortation utters it
self: first, in a description of the Church: secondly, in the thing exhorted.
The description lies, first, in a loving attribute given by Messiah to her: My
dove. Secondly, in a manifestation of her mansion place: first, in saying, Thou
art in the holes of the Rock: secondly, in adding, In the secret of the
stairs. The thing exhorted is the manifestation of her self: first, in
saying, Show me thy face: secondly, in subnecting, cause me to hear thy voice.
The reason of this exhortation is drawn from her excellent qualification:
first, in this assertion: for thy voice is sweet. Secondly, in that
conclusion, and thy face is comely. Now, to the Exhortation and his parts.

My Dove] In chap. 1.15. I have observed certain properties of the Dove, and
hererafter shall have occasion to add some other things. Here only I note
Messiahs amiable conceit of his Church: who (even before she appears openly)
is no less his Love, then after. For, as the word Dove expresses Love; so,
the word of application My, argues near love. Which, as it ministers comfort
to the Elect (even when their innocence and simplicity of spirit is hid in
the Rocks cliffes, from the eye of men) so it further may cause us to
re-eccho. Says Christ to thy soul, Ioh. 20.16.28
My love: let thy soul turn back (as by Echo) the same note, My love: as
Mary, having hold of Christ's feet, cried, Rabboni my Lord: and Thomas having
grapled the wounds of Jesus) did cry, My Lord and my God.

For the place of this doves mansion here, it is The holes of the Rock, etc.
Some take, that here is intended the Churches station or biding plot in the day
of persecution: who then hides her self from the sword, as a Dove hides her
self in the Rocks. But that cannot be the proper doctrine here intended, all
the former ground of this Act remembered: R. Selomoh hereon.
A certain Rabbine understands it of the straits before and behind whereinto
the church is driven, having the enemy before and behind (the seas before
Israel and Pharaohs chariots behind) like to the Doves estate, who flying, the
cruel hawke does put her body into some Rocks slifter; not daring to look
out, because of her adversary without: nor daring to creep much inwards,
because of the serpent within, who lies hissing against her. And this is a
double persecution: persecution without, persecution within. Into such straits,
the faithful are often driven: and the Lord delivers them out of these
tentations. Othersome (as Barnard) do understand this Rock, mystically to
imply Christ, and the holes to signify the wounds of Jesus. That Christ is the
Churches rock of salvation, the Psalmist many times expresses: and is of
Saint Paul (in 1. Cor. 10.4.) plainly expounded. But for the holes or ca^ernes
in the Rocks (wherein the Elect do lodge, before the Gospels spring (even all
the time of the Legal winter) they (by apt proportion) do rather insinuate,
the secret councels of God sealed up in Christ, touching the Gentiles eternal
election and calling. As the Gentiles after their calling are said to be in
Christ (1. Cor. 3.1 Ephesians. 1.1.) and their life hid in Christ ( Coloss. 3.2.)
so, their election in him, according to that of the Apostle: He (namely, the
Father) has elected us in him (that is, in Christ last before mentioned) and
this before the foundation of the world. And (says the same Apostle to the
Galatians, chap. 3.23.) Before faith came (that is, before the gospels spring)
We (even Jew and Gentile after a sort) were kept under the Law, and shut up
unto the faith, which should afterward be revealed: namely, what time the
gentiles, secretly elected in Christ, should publicly be called by the
ministry of Faith. Thus the church elected in Christ, had her abode (even
before her caling) in Christ: yea, within the secret stairs and lodging p^aces
of Christ. Every elect soul, there had her place, like to a simple innocent
Dove in the secret cabines of a Rock.

What is the cause of final glorification? present Iustfication. What, the
cause of justification? our effectual calling. What, the cause of that
calling? Election, termed also praedestination. Romans 8.30
Whom God has predestinate, them also he called; whom he called, them also he
justified: and whom he justified, them also he glorified. And so, Election is
cause of our calling, of our justification, glorification. Rhem. on Heb. 5.
sect. 9
But what is the cause of such Election? The Rhemists answer, good works.
Bellarmine makes a flat contrary answer ( lib. 2. cap. 10. de great.)
saying. Electos esse Gratis, ante omnem operum praeuisionem. Men are elected
Gratis, ( that is freely) before all foresight of works. Whether of these
factions conclude rightly? Let us examine that. The Rhemists will have God to
elect man in respect of good works which he foresees shall be in that man:
that is, he elects before all time, in respect of good works, which shall be in
time. An opinion void of common sense: that the effect of Election should be
the cause of Election: that the latter should be the cause of the former. That
Election is the cause of good works, the Apostle witnesses saying: Ephesians. 1.4.
He has elected us in him, etc. that we should be holy: election so the cause
of holiness; as the tree going before, is cause of the good fruit which
comes after, not contrariwise. And for this cause the Apostle in Romans 9.11.
calls it Election, not by works (that is, without respects of works)
introducing to that purpose the electing of Iaakob before he had done any
good. Bellarmine so has the better, in concluding that God electeth freely
without respect of any foreseen works. But, will we have a direct answer
from scripture, touching the cause of Election? The Apostle says it is The
good pleasure of his will, who works all things after the council of his
own will, Ephe. 15.11. Who will have mercy on whom he will show mercy, Romans
9.15.18. So that there is the hiest cause of our election, his own will. And
therefore well said of Lombard: Lomb. lib. 1, did. 41. D.
Elegit ^os quos Voluit gratuita misericordia: non quia sideles futuri erant
sed vt fideles essent, God elected those whom he would, of his free mercy:
not because they were to become faithful, but to the end they might become
faithful. Ait enim Apostolus, misericordiam consecutus sum vt fidelis essem,
non ait, quia fidelis eram, for the Apostle says, I have obtained mercy, to
the end I might be faithful: he says not, because I was faithful. Nor can
the nature of God be known for only Active, and God in all things Agent, but
it straight teaches us to believe that he does all things without all outward
respect. If any thing in the creature should simply move or bend his Will, then
God should be Passive, he should suffer man to work on him, which were to
make the Creator a Creature: and the Creature therein greater than God. But the
curiosity of man's bottomless pit, will sometimes inquire the cause why God
so will (specially, Aug. de lib. Arbie. lib. 3. c. 17 Si hanc inuenire potuero,
nonne ^ausam etiam eius caus^ quae inuenta fuerit, quasiturus es? Et quis erit
quaerendi modus?
will reprobate?) Thereto I may thus answer with Austin, If I could find out
the cause of his will, would thou not then enquire for the cause of that
cause? And so, when should there be an end of enquiring? But for staying of
man's curiosity in such a profound mystery, I thus say with S. Paul in Romans
9.20. Oh man who art thou which pleads against God? Shall the Pot rise up, and
demand why the Potter so wills. Rather with the Apostle in another place,
conclude admiring, O the deepenesse, his ways are past finding out! For if the
Creature could swallow up all the reason of the Creator, God should be finite,
and God no God. The most learned reason, the most plain and ready reason, the
soberest reason of God his electing, reprobating or acting whatsoever, is this:
God so wills, or, it is, because God so will. An answer soon learned and as
readily made: and being put in practice, it shall stay much babbling and vain
iangling that destroies but the hearers.

As God did choose us and freely seal us up in Christ (the rock of our
salvation) before all time: so in time he calls us and comfortably speaks
unto us. Not entitling us according to that we are in ourselves, but as we are
in him. In our selves a serpentine brood, but in him Doves: by little climing
toward our head, as doves by steps and stairs do ascend the Rock.

Lect. VII.
Show me thy face] Having awaked his Love, he now exhorts, to show her face
unto him: or (more near to the hebrew) show thy countenance unto me. Greg. in
hunc locum.
Quid eniim per faciem, nisi fidem qua a deo cognoscimur, what can we
understand by the face, but faith, seeing by it we are known of God? Show me
thy Faith, says GOD, show me thy faith by works says, man. God takes
knowledge of us (face to face) when we apprehend Messiah by Faith. And for this
cause Saint Paul teaches justification freely by faith, seeing by that we have
peace with God, Romans 5.1. Man takes knowledge of us by works: and therefore
Saint James (who was but a man) says, Show me thy faith by works. The first
we call internal, the second external justification: the first justification
with God, the second with man. If thou would be justified with man, first
labor thy justification with God. So did Zacheus, when he said, Luke 19.8.
Isa. 8.18. Mark 9.24
Behold Lord: and so did Isaiah, when standing forth with his children he
cried, Behold: and so did the poor man in the gospel, when he cried, Lord I
believe. If thou can show thy countenance boldly to God, then never fear the
face of man. And how can we show our face to God? by first being quickened in
Christ, and at union with him by faith: for he it is alone, in whom the
Father is well pleased. Hear him, show thy face to him, and he will
comfortably show us the father; for none comes to the father, but by him.

And did we but know, the benefi^e ensuing our standing before his face, he
should not need twice to say unto us, Show me thy face. We cannot show our
face to him, but we shall see the face of him. And that which is more: while
we behold the Glory of Messiah with open face, we are changed into the same
Image, from glory to glory, as by the spirit of the Lord, 2. Cor. 3.18. that
is, whilst by the eye of faith we contemplate Messiah, we are turned (not into
Messiah, but) into his glorious Image. And this conversion, not by any natural
hand, but by the operation of the Lords spirit.

But here this question may be propounded: Seeing the Elect are always seen
of Christ, how comes it that here he craves their sight? I answer: He desires
not her sight, in regard of Election, bxt of Justification, which is alone by
faith, as before. For though Paul was elect before time, yet had he not faith
but in time. And that time of his justification by faith, did appear together
with the Ghospels springtime. The Church of the Gentiles, had her election
ever sealed up in Christ: but she had not ever faith in Christ. He therefore
here desires his love to show her countenance, which sometimes appeared not:
that is, to show the precious effect of faith, which always was hers in posse,
in regard of Gods d^cree: but not in Esse, in present habit or possession.

Cause me to hear thy voice.] What voice is this, which he so desires to
hear? Is it the voice of blasphemy, of taking God his name in vain: the
voice of uncleanness, of haeresie, of cursing? No* Messiah delights not in
that voice. Wh^t then is it? even that voice which is effected in her by his
own holy spirit. As the voice of preaching his glorious works, the voice of
sing^ng Psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs. But specially the voice of
sad-glad prayer; like to the joyous sw^et mourning note of the Dove in the
pres^nce of her mate. Sin ^addes this voice, but Faith glads it. Sinn^ draws
his notes down, and sin is the burden of this Song: but faith in Christ,
carries up the notes aloft piercing the ear of the highest. With this Douelike
voice, Messiah is so affected, as he entreats his Church to cause him to hear
her voice: quasidicat. Though I should s^eme not to hear thee at the first or
second; or more times: ye^ cease not to pray: pray continually, and pray
fervently, like to the poor widow that still importuned the Judge: the more we
pray, the more we may, and the more he would: like to a father, who seems not
to hear his child: because he would much hear the Child: seeming to eye
another thing, when he will indeed not hear any other thing, nor eye any other
thing with delectation. The reason of the one and the other follows.

For thy voice is sweet and thy countenance comely.] First, for the voice: it
must needs delight, because it is sweet, melodious, delightsome, and piercing.
Nor marvel, seeing all such voice is the effect of the Holy Ghost, the very
spirit of Messiah, and there must needs be sweet and pleasant to Messiah.
Would the Lord have put David so much to prayer, had not prayer been sweet to
the Lord? Would the heavenly Father have put his own Son so much to prayer,
had not his prayer been as sweet odours continually ascending? And would the
Holy Ghost have taught us, Continually to pray, to watch in prayer, in all
things to give thanks, but he knew that the Father and Son did sweetly affect
prayer? And as the voice of prayer, so the voice of reading, singing and
speaking as the words of God, they be all (as before has been cleared)
sacrifices of sweet savor unto God. Chrysostom. in ps. 41 Hae^ dico, non vt tantum
laudetis, sed vt and filios and vxores doceatis talia cantarecantica: non solum
texendo, alioue opere faciendo, sed maxim in mensa.
Chrysostom having praised spiritual song, he adds: This I speak, not to
the end that you should only praise spiritual Songs, but to the end you
should teach your children and wives to sing such songs, not only in knitting
or doing of other work, but specially at the table. And of the whole, Clemens
Alexandrinus writes thus: Vniversa eius vita (speaking de homine cognit.
praedito) est quidam celebris ac sanctus dies festus. Atque ei quidem
sacrificia sunt ipsae prec^s and lauds, and quae ante cibum fiunt scripturarum
lectiones: psalmi autem and hymni dum cibus sumitur: antequam eatur cubitum:
quinetiam noctu rursus orationes. Clem. Strom. lib. 7.
A man endued with knowledge, his whole life is a certain honorable and holy
festival day. His sacrifices, are very prayers, and praises, together with the
scriptures read before meat: psalms and himnes in the time of meat, before he
go to bed, as also, pouring out prayers again in the night season. Never
sung the Dove so sweet a song to her mate, as the Church sings to Messiah,
when her voice at all times is so sound^ng.

Thy countenance (or, Aspect) is comely.] Faith (being as before) the cause of
the churches countenance, the countenance of the faithful must needs be
glo^ious: for as the cause is, such is the effect. Eccles. 8.1
The wisdom of a man (says Solomon) does make his face to shine, and the
strength of his face shall (thereby) be changed. This is specially spoken of
heauens-wisedome which causes the souls face or countenance to shine: causing
a right strong heart to change the complexion from evil to good; of deformed
becoming comely. Nor is this wisdom otherwise in mystery to be understood,
then of the Son, who is the wisdom of our heavenly father. That Son of
heaven causes our face to shine: and this only, as we become one with him by
the apprehension of Faith. Faith purifieth the heart, causes a change of the
soul, inuests us with Messiahs righteousness, as Iaakob was clothed with his
elder brothers garment. One grain of faith remooueth mountains of
difficulties. Faith apprehending Christ truly, puts away the old corrupt
man, and puts on a new countenance (even the image of God) which makes the
church to Christ right comely. Luke 8.50.
Christ exacted of Iairus, Faith only for curing his daughter: and to him only
that belieueth, all things are possible, Mark, 9.23. Which true effectual
faith being in the Church only, it causes her alone to be described of Saint.
John in form of a Woman clothed with the Sun, all beauteous and comely.

Abben-ezra understanding (as other Jews do) this of their old Church
coming out of Aegipt, Abben-ezra heereon in his allegoric. expos.
he there infers, that the Church then showed her countenance to God, when
she believed, applying thereto that clause, They believed in the Lord. The
Psalmist long after that Exode or outgate from Egypt, prophecieth of a
departure forth of another Egypt, ( Ps. 68.31.) comparing there (in Verse. 13.)
the Church to a Dove that had lodged amongst pots, or as the word Shephatheim
may seem rather to imply, Killes or Furnaces) and therewith blacked: but then
annects this promise, yet shall thou be as The wings of a Dove that is covered
with silver, and whose feathers be yellow gold. This coming forth of Egypt,
was the Gentiles coming forth of horrible Idolatry, wherein all Nations had
lodged and blacked themselves. Who coming forth by obedience to Christ's voice
(called the obedience of Faith) were therewithal, not only washed from
deformity, but also covered with comeliness, compared to a Doves wings al
siluerie and g^lded. And that this is the proper point here intended by
Solomon, (Idolatrers and Idols lodged so in holes of Rocks in Isa. 1.20, 21.
as vn^ble to abide the glorious Lawgiver) I would rather conclude, if the
church would think it to be more direct then the former. For as the word Rock
is sometimes applied to Christ, in whom the church lives, so it imports
sometimes the mansion of Id^latrers.

But let the Mansion of this Church-doue be considered in Christ according to
Election: or in woods, groves, monkish cells, secret holes, in regard of her
passed idol^trie: beauteous and comely she is not made till she come forth and
manifest her faith, true working faith. For faith is the girdle that tyeth her
to Christ, and all the glorious shine of Christ to her. Is our voice sweet,
praise him: is our aspect comely, thank him: for as the Earth was uncomely till
he said Genes. 1.11
Let it budde forth, and then it was presently covered with B^auties carpet:
even so, it is the word of faith preached, whereby our Owlish Idolatrous hoing
was turned into a sweet Douish voice: and our Aegyptian-like blackenesse, into
a Douish comelin^sse.

Messiah praising this voice for sweet, and this countenance for comely (for how
should his gifts and graces in his own members, be otherwise?) it controlleth
them who say, in the faithful and regenerate there is no good thing: Romans 7.18
instead of saying, In their flesh (or unregenerate part) There is no good
thing. For where Isaiahs people cry out, Isa. 64.6.
We have all been as an vncle^ne thing, and all our righteousnesses (have
been) as fil^hy cl^uts, they speak first of the time past when they lay
drowned in sin: secondly, they censure only the actions of their own
vnregene^ate nature (for somewhat in body and soul is ever here vnr^generate
they bring not the actions, of the spirit in them under that judgment (not to
urge the Hebrew, turned of some Vkebege^ guid^lim, vestimentum c^ntonum, A^.
Mont. panniculus abiectissimus, Tree. Hereon Barn. in verb. Isa. ser.
as a ^estme^t of shreds) for as the Holy ghost is, such are his fruits.
Thirdly, they censu^ing themselves not for unclean, but, as unclean, it may
import some respect had to the work of God in them, which otherwise was
shadowed with the unclean clouds of nature. But much more Messiahs praise of
his churches face and voice, may control such, 5. I^stitia rect^ f^rsitan, sed
^o^ pura.
a^ upon Faiths weakness, shall conclude faith therefore filthy: that because
the graces of God in the reg^nerate are weak, therefore unclean: not only a
plain error, but also a blaspheming (or evil speaking) of the graces and
heavenly effects of God his holy spirit. Not to sever the works of the flesh
and spirit (that is of the regenerate and unregenerate part) it is to build a
Babel or Confusion: See more hereafter of this point, in verse 16. first
L^ction thereon.
contrary to the Apostles proceeding in Galat. 5.16, 17, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
Where the Apostle makes the fru^tes opposite each to other. The unregeneration
of our nature (soul and body: for the body is acted by the soul) it is
unclean and as a polluted Carrion: but it can no more d^file the gifts and
operations of the Holy Ghost in a new-man, then a stinking carrion can defile
the glorious rays or beams of the Sun shining thereon. David sometimes
complained of GOD his absence; not because he was indeed absent, but because he
felt him not present, namely, in mercy: So the Elect regenerate sometimes cry
out as all naught; not because it is so indeed, but because they, for that
present, have no feeling of the good work of God in them. As for spiritual
bystanders, they see God near them, and goodness then in them. It follows.

Lect. VIII.
15

Take us the Foxes, the little foxes, destroying the vines: for our vines have
small grapes.


HErein the Church repeateth a speech of Messiah, which concerns his care
over the faithful, in their first manifestation of Christian obedience. The
parts are these two: First, a commandment for apprehending the adversary,
Great and Final: laid down under the term of Foxes. Secondly, a reason
thereof. And this drawn, first, from the nature of these foxe-like
adversaries, in that they destroy vines: then from the time of vines
weakness, when it is said: Our vines have small grapes. As by Foxes,
understanding adversaries: so, by vines understanding the faithful, laboring
to bring forth fruit unto Jesus.

By Foxes, Divines have a double sense. Either they take them for Sins or for
Persons: seeing both of them bring detriment to the church. E^^ry sin, may
well be compared to a Fox (great sins to great foxes: small sins to small
foxes) whether we respect the subtlety of sin, or the harm and corruption
accompanying sin. And in such sense, all sin (great and small) is here to
be apprehended and staide as a capital adversary to the Churches good. More
commonly, (and therein I am willing to insist) by foxes, are understood subtle
destroying persons, laboring the ruin of the Church. And in such sense, our
Savior himself calls Herod Luke 13.32.
a Fox: Rabbi Shelom. and Abben-ezra hereon.
and in such sense, Rabb^ Shelomoh calls the Egyptians fox^s, for laboring
to destroy their males in the birth. And Abben-ezra terms the Israelites
themselves these foxes, for destroying the Lords vine in the flower (or first
fruits) by worshipping the calfe in the wilderness. For the better
understanding whereof, let us consider what be the properties of the Fox.

Isidor. etymol. l. 12.1.
Vulpes, quasi volupes. Which well resembles the turnings and windings of the
wicked* Qui nunquam rectis itineribus, sed t^rtuosis an fractib. current, who
run crookedly in all their ways. Against whom David thus prays, But these
that turn aside by their crooked ways, them (O Lord) lead forth with the
workers of iniquity: so peace shall be on Israel: Psalm. 125.5. Such by-ways
Iscariot ran, when he slunke aside to indent with the rulers for betraying of
his Master: and as foul an end did be^ide him. Achitophel was a subtle
winding Fox, but the snare caught him and hanged him for conspiring against
his Master. For all their crookings and turnings do but tend, to the seducing
and harming of others.

Isidor. ibid.
Volucres rapit and deuorat, he seizes on the birds, and deuoures them. Such
cloked ones, Psa. 10.8, 9, 10
David speaks of thus: He lies in wait in the villages, in the secret
places does he murder the innocent; he lies in wait to spoil the poor: he
does spoil the poor when he draws them into his net. He croucheth and
boweth: therefore heaps of the poor do fall by his might. Whose might is
prefaced by wicked slight. Ioab so bowed till Amasa fell into his paws: and
Absalom so crooched, till abundance of people fell into his snare. Wherewith
let me put you in mind of In vita Will. Tindali.
Henry Philips (an english Fox) who at Antwerp did first with all cunning, seem
dead to the world and Idolatry in the eyes of our divine Tyndall: but
afterward (Master Tindall having lent him 40. shillings, and carried him
forth to dinner) did betray the Holy-man into the hands of two Catchpoles, whom
Philips had placed at the door going out, for that devouring purpose. Who
(finally for the faith sake) being brought to the place of execution, was first
at the stake strangled with an halter, and then consumed with fire. Hereto, let
me add another History* Sleid. lib. 17.
John Diazius (by birth a Spaniard, by doctrine a Sorbonist) converted from his
idolatry, accompanying good men (amongst whom Martine Bucer) he finally was of
Bucer sent A ^itty upon the river Dimow.
to Nurneburge to ouersee the printing of a book there. A brother of his (
Alphonsus by name) a Lawyer and judge a latere to the Inquisition, he coming
to Nurnburge, did travel with the said John for his reducement to Popery.
But not prevailing, Alphonsus himself at last (O crafty fox) he feined
himself to be converted from Popery also. Who then labored that John would
accompany him into Italy: but not prevailing, the Fox Alphonsus departs,
exhorting his brother to constancy. About three Days after, he returns
again with a bloody Butcher, hired of purpose, who (whilst John Diazius was
reading a letter his brother gave him) did with an axe cleave his head in
pieces. The fact done, they fled, and yet were apprehended: but by the Popes
justice were acquitted. Yea, these lesser foxes (I warrant you,) they were (of
Reinard the great fox of Rome) held little inferior to Saints. Our Savior
bids us beware of woolues clad in sheepe-skinnes: and we from experience may
also cry one to another, Take heed both of great and small foxes, who under a
Frierly ducking humility, do subtly catch hold and devour the Lords
people. Some by crooching do ensnare the bodies life, some by counterfeite
humility do steal away the souls life. All of them subtle and destroyers
of the church.

Nay, by so much the more their malice is to be bewared, as it is approved to
be as vehement as fire: they thinking (which our Savior notes) that in so
doing, they do to God passing good service. A zealous ignorance, and yet right
beastly foxes. What shall we then conclude of such, as in the boiling ma^ic^ of
their souls, could be content (and sometimes do put in practice) to take away
the ^ues of these, who in their own conscience, do bring more vantage to
Christ's vineyard in one day, then themselves in 7* years, shall not these be
much more held for foxes! yea, for witting and wilful murderers. But when such
subtle Machiuils have laid their snares for others, we see (timely repentance
not interueening) that themselves are caught and strangled.

The Thracian Fox is noted in the frost time Plin. lib. 8. ca. 28
aure ad glaciem apposita, conjectare crassi^udinem gelus, by laying the ear
unto the ice, to take knowledge of the frosts thicknes: who finding so the y^e
strong enough, do run over for pasture. Such foxes there be of mankind, who by
the harkning of the ear and the application of senses, do see, if the plots
and grounds whereon they mean to work for profit be strong enough: which if
they find then they run to and froe for advantage. And to walk upon sure
grounds it is the whole scope of our mere Humanists* Such a fox beyond the
river was Sanballat, and such a fox was Tobiah the Amonite; who mocking the
Jews work, did say Nehem 43.
That if a fox went up, he should even break down their stony wall: thinking
the frost had made al their own p^ot-forme strong enough (who in their letters
to Ezr. 4.12. etc
Artashast pleaded the Kings tribute and honor) but God sent a thawe that
melted their ice, their ground work came to nothing. Though our politi^ians
ordinarily do walk on such grounds: yet sometimes a sudden thawe or storm
quasheth that ice, so they fall in and be drowned. Take heed therefore how thou
adventure thy life by the i^dgeme^t of thine ear* by the application of thine
natural senses. The eye sometimes judges of me^, as of trees: the ear, of
Hienaes noise, as of some Sheapheards voice: and yet plus valet ^culatus testis
vnus quam auriti december, one eye witness, is better then ten that report but by
the ear. Our Savior therefore is of I say set forth for a perfect Judge thus:
Isa. 11.3.
he shall not Judge after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove by the hearing
of his ear: that is, he would not judge by uncertain conjectures, shadows
and glimpsies. These that in cases of undoing a person, will be peremptory and
resolute upon insufficient trial (for the law forbids such indgement upon
one witness, and the receipt of an accusation against an Elder, under two or
three witnesses) they therein show themselves rather foxes, then imitators of
Jesus. The foxes will not adventure their own life, but where they think all
sure: but e^sily they will determine the spoil of others, upon a glimpse of
the first ear, without first lending the second ear to the Accused.

The last thing I note more particularly, fitting the present text Vulpes amare
vineas, that Foxes loves grapes. Ironically we say of a man, the fox loves no
grapes, when we mean, he seems not to love a thing which he cannot get:
like to a subtle fox which passes by the grapes vntouching them, whom he
sees to be underpropped beyond his reach: but yet by learing, one The Latins
also call him Legulus, a Gatherer, namely of grapes.
may know he loves them. The vine (as before and afterward often) does mystically
implie the Church: and here, the church of the Gentiles. The vine considered
here in her first grape, does intimate the spring of tender Christians,
bringing forth their first fruits, to the glory of God the planter. And these
foxes do so affect the Churches fruits, as it is meat and drink to them, to
chop them up and devour them. These foxes (forsooth) have no purpose to tear
the Lords vine, to devour the blossoms: but by their learing aside, we know
well their nature They count the spoil of Zion, that so as Lamen. 5.18
foxes they may run upon it: that there they foxes may have holes, where the
Son of man may not have whereon to lodge his head. Of which two l^gged foxes,
some be Civil, some Ecclesiastical, some Mixed. A Civil fox was Herod, and all
the Civil governors and people represented by that Satannicall dragon in Revel.
12. who watched to crop up the woman's fruit at the first appearance. For the
devil did that by his mystical body, died with red, as thirsting after blood.

Ecclesiastical foxes be such Churchmen and lewd Prophets as Revel. 2.14
Balaam: who for pleasing a great man, did teach how Israel might sin for
provoking their God to destroy them. And such were Nehem. 6 ^0. etc.
Shemajah and Noaajah, who were contented to be hired of Tobiah and Sanballat,
for fearing good Nehemiah from the work of the Lord. And such were the Priests
and Scribes of Iudeah, who labored to choke the Gospel in the first seeding.

The Mixed fox, is such a one as is both Civil and Ecclesiastical: and of this
nature is every apostaticall Pope, usurping both swords: Glossator in proem.
ant^ lib. 1.
the temporal sword over all Princes, the spiritual sword over all Churches.
In the Clementine Constitutions, he is called Stupor Mundi, The Astonishment
of the world: and indeed, he long time astonished the world and benumbed their
senses. Then after in the same place, he turns himself aside to the Pope
and says: Nec deus es, nec Homo, qu^si Neuter es inter vtrumque. Thou art
neither God nor Man, (what then* a Beast:) but a Neuter, Between both. Seeing
themselves will have him to be a Neuter, let it be. And seeing they themselves
will have him to be neither God nor Man, let him be a Beast, even Reinard the
great fox, whose den and earth almost undermined the whole earth. What a
friend he is to the vines, let it be judged by the carriage of his Cubs in all
countries, studying and practicing the ruin of Princes, the massacre of true
belieuers, the overthrow of parents, friends and natural country. No fox so
hungers after grapes, as they after firing the vines, and spilling the blood of
our mystical grape. The foxes so found out, it remains they be hunted. For
this cause the Lord of the vineyard is of the Church thus introduced, crying:
Take us the foxes, the little foxes.

Lect. IX.
THe Mystical foxes and their properties understood as before, it now
remains we entreat of the Lords huntsmen, who here are charged to apprehend
these foxes. The huntsmen are two: the Magistrate and Minister. The Magistrate
is appointed to seize upon the bodies of these crafty adversaries: and to that
end the sword is put into his hand. Romans 13.4
He bears not the sword for naught, for he is the Minister of God, to take
vengeance on him that does evil. Such an huntsman was Ioshuah, who chased the
Cananite foxes, and slew them. Such an huntsman was David in seizing on the
flowting foxes inhabiting Iebus. Such an huntsman was Josiah in pu^suing to
death the foxe-like priests of Baalim: and such an huntsman was 2 Kings 10
Iebu in Israel, when (having got the idolatrous foxes into their house of
Baal) he put them to the sword. And lest it should be thought, that such civil
pursuit of the Churchesfoes, did appertain only to that anci^nt Church of
Israel: let us remember, not only that Saint Paul (as before) does teach that
the sword is still put into their hand for such purpose: but also, how our
Savior with a civil whip did expel the Temples choppers and changers: giving
therein a taste of that civil authority which he naturally derived from
David: And thereby teaching civil Magistrates, the true use of the sword and
lash incommended unto them. Isai. 49 23. Revel. 21 24
That prophecy of Isaiah (namely, that Kings should be nursing fathers, and
Queens should be nurces) it cannot otherwise be verified to the new
testaments Church, then (as is recorded) first, by submitting themselves and
all their glory to the church: secondly, by licking up the dust from before the
churches feet: that is, remoouing scandalous and offensive things, which
vnremooued, might hinder the Church: might danger the vines, and murder the
Gospel in the birthtime.

Are the Magistrates appointed to hunt the Foxes? then are they not called to
be Foxes, to be Romish Reinards, spoilers of our Church. O that we had not
cause to complain of some subtle companions amongst us, that by crouching and
creeping, too often, do usurp the place of civil huntsmen, but (in troth)
either subtle Atheists, making advantage of all religions: or else Popish
Sanballats, that bend all their wit, wealth and might, to the ruin of the
Gospel, and introducing of Romish tyranny. Our Gracious Queen has appointed
them to assist her in keeping of Christ's vine, but these subtle Iehues
(howsoever zealous for the Lord* til they were established and fast seated in
their rooms) do afterward turn their zeal to the defense of Baal. Such
foxe-friends we not only find here in our land, but we hear sometimes of
such Captain Foxes in Ireland, who being sent forth by our Sovereign, to hunt
the Fox, do betray her vineyard to the Fox. Yea, when her Majesty has
appointed some to hunt the sea-foxe at sea: we hear sometimes how they uphold
the Fox in his rauine: at least, they wink at the sea-foxe, while he tears
our sheep, fleeces them of their wool, causes the merchant sheep to keep
at home in their fold, when for the good of our land, they should be pasturing
abroad. Take us these Foxes, says God to our Queen. Alas, she knows not
sometimes of these traitorous huntsmen: and sometimes when she knows them,
she cannot apprehend them. For seldom time are such foxes destitute of a
Favorite in or about the Court. Well, walk on sweetest Elizabeth, in caring
for this vineyards safety; and if men fail to take them, God himself will
look down from heaven and take them in their own snare.

Minister, that is, the Preacher of Gods word, he is called also to hunt the
fox out of Christ's vineyard. And if the cause be such as he cannot be driven
out, yet (at least) the Minister is to take him, to apprehend him, to endite
him, and condemn him, if he cease not in time to be a Fox: an enemy to the
vineyard. As the Mgaistrate is to draw forth the corporal sword, so the
Minister is to pull out the spiritual sword. And this is done two ways: first,
by the word including, secondly by the word expulsing. Math. 13. compared to a
tare in the midst of the wheat. Though a tare be visible, and the word of the
Churches Ministers does condemn it, yet that word of God in the Ministers
mouth does consider that subtle ^are within the Church, and in such respect
not to be expulsed the Church. Nor is he not expulsed, in respect of himself,
but in respect of the wheat, which otherwise were like to be torn up with the
Tare. And for this respect it was that Saint John did take and condemn
Diotrephes for a proud usurper, John 3.9, 10.
neither doing good, nor suffering others to do good: but yet would not command
the Fox to be excluded the vineyard. And for this tarish respect (a tare cannot
be pulled up but with the tearing up of wheat wherewith it is closed) Galat.
5.12.
Saint Paul wishes certain cut of from the Galatians: whom otherwise he durst
not command to be expelled the Church. And in such tarish respect (for these
foxes have such hold of simple souls, as for these souls sake, they be
permitted to stay within the Church) it was that the 2. Cor. 1^.
same Apostle condemned some in the Church of Corinth, for uncleanness,
fornication and wantonness already acted, whom (notwithstanding) he would not
command to be excommunicate Aug. contra Epist. Parmen. lib. 3.
as Austen well observes. As Tares represent not all ill, but only such weeds as
cannot be extirpate without wheats detriment: so, these tares (that have such
cleaving and nere communion with the faithful) are commonly subtle Foxes,
having such perilous hold of the vines, as drawn they cannot be therefrom, but
with the vines destruction. Such clinging tares, fast cliuing foxes (such as
Ioab and Shimei were, whom David for his time permitted, but not approved) the
Ministers are to take them, by their preaching to apprehend them; but cannot
adiudge them otherwise, then as tares in the wheat field, diseases in the body,
which can more easily be discovered and condemned, then with the churches peace
and good be severed. And this was the practice of the Sinagogues Prophets, who
continually cried out against the intestine adversaries, by legal menaces
hunting them as foxes: which adversaries they cold not expulse the Church, by
any ordinance of Moses. The Magistrate could only correct or take life away
from the transgressors of the moral law (for the Priests could only deal in
the Tabernacles ceremonies) and in the magistrates neglect of censuring the
breach of the ten commandments, the Prophets were to shoot out the Laws
darts: as also, in case of abusing the Tabernacles ceremonies. The Magistrate
ought to seize on the Churches adversaries by the sword, the ministers by the
word. Exo. 19.12, 13
As the man and beast that touched the mount (what time Jehovah did promulgate
his law) were to be smitten through with darts: so, these subtle vine-foes
approaching the public place of Gods presence, are to besmit thorough with the
laws mysticall-iaueling.

And as the word including does so take and sease upon them in the public
dividing of the word: so, the same word do^th take them in a grinne, and sna^le
them in ordinary discourse. This appears again and again in the Ghospel,
Luke 20.2. etc matthew. 22.16.
when our Savior answered the high priests and Scribes, after the Herodians,
and lastly the Sadduces, by demanding them another question. These several
foxes framed Dilemmaes (or two-forked arguments) wherewithal to endanger
Jesus. He (teaching so his ministers, yea, all his members) does not answer
directly, with either, yea or no (for if he had so answered, he had fallen into
the one danger) but thereupon he propounds another question, no less dangerous
for them to answer. Which perceived of the subtle foxes, they depart vnurging
him to answer them: because they could not, without danger, make answer to
him. If Christ could not utterly avoid the temptings of such foxes, neither
can we his members. 2 Cori. 12.16.1. cor. 3.19.
Labor we therefore to take them in a grinne: as the Apostle sometimes did
take the Corinths with guile: and as God himself takes the wise in their own
craftiness.

word expulsing, it is that use of Gods word, whereby such foxes are hunted
foo^th and expelled the Church: like as the Incestuous was expelled of the
Corinths, 1. Cor. 3. and 1. Cor. 2. as Hymen^us and Alexander (1. Tim. 1.20.)
were expelled of Paul: and as Timothy is charged of the Apostle to bridle such
cancred Teachers as Hymeneus and Philetus, 2. Tim. 2.16.17. And this is done,
by putting them forth of the Churches communion, lest otherwise they should
leaven the whole fellowshippe, or cankerfret the faithful. Aug. l. 3. cont.
Parmenian.
Tunc antem hoc sine labe pacis and vnitatis, and sin^ laesione frumentorum
fieri potest, cum congregationis ecclesiae Multitudo ab eo crimine quod
Anathematizatur, aliena est: And then this Expulsion may best be done without
blot of peace and unity, as also without harming the wheat: whenas the whole
multitude of the Church shall be free from ^ll partaking with the sin that is
to be anathematized. Quando ita cuiusque crimen notum est omnibus, and omnibus
execrabile apparet: vt vel non tales habeat defensores, per quos possit schisma
contingere, non dormiat seueritas disciplina.
Yea (as Austin in the same place ha^h) when the crime shall be so clear to
all, and of all held execrable; so that the sinner has either no defenders at
all: at least, no such proctors, as whereby a Schism may fall out in the
church, then let not the sword of discipline any longer sleep in the scaberd.
Then it is fit time, to cut such workers of iniquity, from the city of our
God: for no beast, that can be severed with the Churches peace, ought longer to
abide in the mountain of God his holiness.

This cutting off is done partly or absolutely. It is done in part, when either
the sinner is but debarred the Lords supper (the Lords steward knowing it to be
a ti^e fitter for him to fast, then with the residue to feast: and this was
represented by the pollutions legal, which made the body unclean to the
evening) as also but done in part, though in a greater part) when the sinner is
not only put away from the sacrament of Communion, but also from the prayer of
Communion. And this was represented under the Law, when for certain contagion,
they were expelled the host, and were no more to converse with Israel till
death, except the Lord cleansed them. And howsoever this excommunication be a
putting forth from all communion, yet it does admit the party some brotherly
love: seeing in such estate, 2. These. 3.15 1. cor. 5.4, 5
he is not to be counted as an enemy, but admonished as a brother. Though
familiarity be gain said him, yet not brotherly admonition: seeing, not the
Spirit, but the flesh was delivered to Satan for being humbled, and that for
preservation of the spirit in the Lords day of visitation: for this power is
not given us for destruction, but for edification. Of this debarring from the
Lords Table, as also driving forth and delivery to Satan, Chrysostom is
pl^ntifull. In Chrysostom. hom. 3. de David. and Saul.
one place, how earnestly does he wish to know them of the assembly, who the
day before had bin absent from sermon, and present ad iniquitatis spectacula,
at wicked plays. To what end would he know? Vt eos a sacris vestibulis arceam,
that I might (says he) drive them forth of the Church: non vt perpetuo foris
maneant, sed vt correcti denuo redeant: not to the end they should stay without
for ever, but that after co^rection they might return again: showing
afterward, how such dealing is oftentimes beseeming a father in his family,
and a Pastor in his church. In Homil. 83. sup. Matthew.
another place, he exhorts his fellow Presbyters to debar all known
unworthy ones from the Lords Table: and then turning (as it were to one of
them) he thus cries out, Quod siipsum* pellere non audes, mihi dicas, non
permittam ista fieri. Animam prius tradam meam, etc. If thou dare not debar
the wicked, tell me, for I will not suffer it. I will rather lay down my
life, and suffer my blood to be powered out, then I will agree to give the Lords
body to the unworthy: rather then I will grant that most holy blood to any
but the worthy. And how zealous, Ambrose was in this, Theodoret. lib. 3. c. 17.
and Sozomen. lib 7 cap. 24.
that his expelling of Theodosius his Emperor, will stand ever for witness.
Ambrose seeing no appearance of schism or churches harm, like to ensue such
expulsing (a great sign that his ministry was gracious withal) he so
puts the King forth, till he was willing to clear his hands of blood,
N^ssen^norat. de ^^s qui nolunt repr^hendi.
by public repentance. Think not (says Nissenus) that such segregation
proceeds of an Episcopal arrogancy. Vetus est regula ecclesiae, quae cepit
a lege and fuit confirmata in gratia: This is an ancient Rule in the Church,
having his beginning from the Law, and his confirmation in the Gospel.

absolute; as from all divine communion, so from humane familiarity: and all
this for ever. This excommunication is of the Apostle termed Maranatha. 1. Cor.
16.22. (of Mare Lord* and Atha he comes: for N. is interposed for sound
sake) because such a person is excommunicate to the death, and left to the
Lords coming: who can and will take vengeance of them that Love him not. Such
wicked-ones have once known and loved Christ as Jesus their Savior: but
afterward do voluntarily fall away from that Love (as some Hebrews that
turned back to Indaisme, and many now to mere Atheism) who doing it against
the Sight and Sense they had, are now held to be damned of their own
Conscience, and to crucify again the Lord of life (whereof more largely I have
written in Called, The sin against the holy ghost
a peculiar treatise:) and this kind of cutting off was repres^nted under the
Law, by that Cherem or deuoting of things to destruction, so termed in Ioshuah
7.1. and elsewhere.

Thus the Magistrate with his sword is to sease on the foxes: the Minister also
with the Word of God is to seize on them. If they cleave like Burres to the
vines, we are to stay them from further evil, (as much as in us is) but not
for dragging them away, to pull the Vine down, the Church on our heads. If we
can loose the hold they have, we are (having taken them) to thrust them out of
the vineyard, that Satan (who reigns without) he may vexethem: till by
repentance they cease to be foxes, as Nabuchad-nezzar (coming to the
acknowledging of the true God) ceased to be a Beast. Nimrod hunted, and Esau
hunted: but the Holy Ghost has marked both with a black cole, as an hunting
whereof they may be ashamed. The Prophets hunted, the Apostles hunted, our
ancient fathers hunted, and all of them hunted the Church-foxe. The same is our
duty; and in doing it, it is our glory. The Magistrate and minister is now
assembled in Royal honorable parliament: the GOD of Heaven bless them, guide
and assist them for strengthening our Vine, and for hunting out all sorts of
foxes, the Churches and our Sovereigns adversaries. Amen.

Lect. X.
16

My Well-beloved is mine, and I am his, he feeds among the Lillies.

17 Until the day break, and the shadows flee away, return^ etc.


THE Church having finished Messiahs speech (first, for calling her to
obedience; secondly, for remoouing impediments) she now concludes this divine
Act: first, with Praise; secondly, with Prayer. The matter of Praise lies in
this first verse: Wherein is uttered the praise of Messiahs love and feeding.
His love is laid down, in the gift of himself to her, whereby she in the next
place was made His. He being hers, she therewith became His. John 3.16.
God so Loved the world, that he has given his only begotten Son, that
whosoever belieueth in him, should not perish, but have eternal life. First,
the Father gives the Son, and he is willing to be given for us: secondly, the
Father gives us faith (as an hand) to receive his Son, and with him eternal
life. So that the giving of Christ to us first, does constrain us to give our
selves to him in the next place* 1. Ioh. 4.19
His love causes us to love: We love him, because he loved us first. Yea,
says our Savior, John. 15.16. Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you.
And so the Apostle notes our comprehending of Christ, to grow from our being
comprehended of him. Philip. 3.12. Whereby it comes to pass, that we are
not only Members of his body, of his flesh and of his bones, Ephesians. 5.30. but
also, (as Saint Peter witnesses, 2. Ephesians. 1.4.) partakers of the divine
nature, namely, by qualification and unity with the essence it self: God and
man in Christ becoming one. And thus whilst the Church praises Christ, she
preaches her own blessedness, given her by grace with Christ.

Love, she praises his Feeding: affirming that to be amongst the Lillies. In
the second verse it appeared, that the Church (and every soul purified by
faith) is represented by the Lilly: even by the fields Lilly, more gloriously
clothed in her inward man, then was King Solomon in all his external
royalty. This is the flower of Paradise, the pleasant plant of Eden. Ephe.
5.25. etc
This is it for whom Christ gave himself, that he might sanctify it and
cleanse it: that he might make it unto himself a glorious church, not having
spot or wrinckle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and blameless.
The perfection of whose beauty, as it is referred to another life; so, as
verily as in this life, Christ is hers, and she Christ's: so, verily is her
beauty and holiness here begun: for the which she is here represented to
the Milke-white Lilly, as Isid^re terms it. As al Lillies beauteous, Plin.
lib. 21.5. V^a radice quinquagenos s^pe emitt^nte bulb^s.
so the white most excellent: yea, as Pliny observes,) most fertile: yea,
that the droppings of the lilly, will cause and b^g^t more lillies. As for the
Church of the Gentiles, that she not only should be passing beauteous, but also
very fertile, Isaiah is wonderful plenteous.

Before we consider his feeding, let us first consider what is to be judged of
this church, and of every her lilly-white members. Christ lives in her, she
lives in him; and the same mutual inhabitation, is between Messiah and
every of his members. Are all the actions of the Church clean? Or, are they
all unclean? Or, are some of her actions clean, othersome unclean, or every
action mixed? For the resolution hereof, let us first r^member that double birth
observed of Prosp. sen^: 330. Vna es^ natiuitas de terra, alia de coelo: vna de
carne, alia de spiritu, etc.
Prosper: There is one Nativity of the earth, another of heaven: one of the
flesh, another of the Spirit. The first of these births, S. John affirms to be
of the blood and will of the flesh: but the other to be of the will of God, John
1.13. And this new or second birth is taught Nicodemus in John 3. to be of the
spirit: concluding there plainly, That which is borne of the flesh is flesh:
but that which is borne of the spirit is spirit. This remembered, the question
is easily answered: the actions derived or flowing from the first birth, they
be (as the nature is) unclean and filthy. And this is it the Apostle Paul
remembers saying: Romans 7.1^.
In me, (that is in my flesh) dwells no good thing. For the actions flowing
or growing from the second birth, they be (as the spirit is) holy and clean,
nor can they be otherwise. For this Saint John is thus peremptory: 1. John 3 ^
Whosoever is born^ of God sins not, for his seed remains in him: neither
can he sin because he is borne of God. He excepteth not against sin in the
first part, but in the second, where the seed of God abides, which is cause of
the new birth. Which consideration causes Saint Paul again to say, It is no
more I that do it, but the sin that dwells in me. Paul is not contrary to
himself in saying, I sin not, and, In my flesh is no good thing. Saint John is
not at war with himself, in saying, He is a liar that says he has not
sin; and again, he that is borne of God, sins not. As both of them
consider an old and a new Adam in the faithful: so, they give sin to the
first, and sanctity to the second. And this is more apparent. when as the
Apostle places two laws in these two parts: calling the one Romans 7.23.
The Law in my members, and the other, The Law of my mind: as also
considers in one, and the same man Flesh and Spirit, ( Gal. 5.17.) affirming
the one of them to be contrary to the other. Contrariety does not admit union,
for what communion is between Christ and Belial, light and darkness? None.
Irrefragable therefore bideth this Position: Zanch. 11. Thesis ex. 14
In Electis regeneratis duo sunt homines, Interior and exterior. I^ cum
peccant, secundum tantum hominem exteriorem: id est, ^a tantum part qua non
sunt regeniti, peccant. Secundum vero interiorem hominem, nolunt peccatum,
detestantur peccatum, and condelectantur lege dei: quare non toto animo aut
plena voluntate peccant. In the elect once Regenerate, there be two men, an
inward and outward. When these sin, it is according to the outward man: that
is, in that part wherein they be not regenerate. But according to the inward
man, they nill sin, detest sin, and delight in the law of God: for which
cause they sin not with the whole mind or full will.

As it should be a notable error to say, that the old man can bring foor^h an
holy or clean action: so, as maine an error it shall be to hold, that The new
man can send forth an unholy and unclean action. As the unregenerate part, is
a bitter fountain, that can send forth no sweet water: so the regenerate part
is as the Well of David, that can only send forth that is clean and holy. As
the cause is, such is the effect. As is the tree, such is the fruit.

And as it shall be an intolerable error to affirm of mere natural gifts,
that They be strong, therefore holy: so, ablasphemie (though not The
blasphemy) against the spirit of grace, to affirm of his gifts in us, (as of
Faith, Hope, Love) because they be weak, therefore unclean. If these two
births in us could be mixed together (as wine and water) for making a third
thing, we then might conclude a mongrell action. But the old man dies, the
new lives. The one of their Laws is as contrary to the other, as light and
darkness: and they fight the one against the other. So far be they from
communion and their actions from being mixed. If the Prophet cry, Isa. 5.20.
Woe to them that speak good of evil, and evil of Good, it stands us upon
to condemn the actions of our flesh, but to justify the fruits of God his
spirit in the regenerate. As it is proud prophanitie to give holiness to that
dog of our nature: so it is but counterfeite humil^tie, to charge the holy
things of God with uncleanness. For gaining the name of Humble, must we spit
upon the actions and gifts of the Holighost? God forbid. We may not do evil
that good may come thereof.

Besides must be observed, that not only the regenerate are thus clean and
holy in the part of their new birth: but also, that in their open state of
grace, they are of us to be termed Spiritual (because the Spirit of God in
them is principa^l) and (as in our Creed) a Communion of Saints or holy-ones.
August. in Galat. 4.
As they are to receive their denomination from the Spirit of GOD and his
sanctity, which in them is principal (which is cause of that distinction in
Augustine, Aliud est non peccare, aliu^ non habere peccatum. Nam in quo
peccatum non regnat, non peccat: It is one thing, not to sin, another thing,
not to have sin: For he sins not in whom sin reigns not: so it
pleases Messiah to judge of them throughout this song, as of incense trees for
savor, and as of beauteous flowers for favor. A soul seeing it self in it
self, has cause to cry out of it self; all unclean, Isa. 1.11.
all red as scarlet: but if it have the sight and sense of being in Christ, it
is to believe that crimson sins are all washed so white as wool: and that by
the blood of that Lamb, their garments are made white. And with boldness such
a soul may press into the divine presence, knowing that the gifts of his
own spirit, cannot but to him be acceptable. Nor is such persuasion and
boldness, the work of pride, but the fruit of Faith: even of faith, Romans 5.1.
whereby we have peace with God.

The place of Messiahs feeding, is amongst these Lillies: so that these lillies
are properly the place of his food and not (as some have taken it) the food it
self. Rabbi Selomoh does thus read it; who feeds his sheep amongst the
lillies, that is (says he) in a fit, quiet and beauteous Pasture-pl^t: not
unlike to that of David in ps. 23.2. True it is, that Christ has prepared a
pleasant spiritual place for the sheep of his pasture to graze in: but here
(I take it) she intends directly the refreshing place, which Messiah had chosen
to himself: and that is her self, chosen to be a Templ^ to the holy ghost, an
habitation to the mighty God of Iaakob: comparing her self to a field of
Lillies, R. S^lomoh hereon.
her several sanctified members considered. And hereunto Abben-ezra is drawn,
when not only he says, that the Lord is All^n-ezra in his dramaticall
interpretation.
drawn ( suaui odore floris i^tius) by the sweet odor of this flower: but also
In his allegoric. expos.
in lili^s designantur iusti, that by Lillies are understood Righteous persons.

Our Savior (by Saint John's Ministry) labored to open the hearts of the
Laodiceans, Revel. 3.20: to what end? That he might enter and sup with them.
And is there all? Nay that they likewise might suppe with him. The same mutual
and joint pasturing may be here intended: according to that which was in the 1.
chapter and 9. verse: and blessed be they which be invited to this supper, Revel.
19.9. Messiah feeds amongst these Lillies; and the Lillies again receive
nouriture from him and his spirit, represented by the watrie banks in psa.
1.3. He lives with us, not of us: but we live both with him and of him. Live
with him we do, because the members cannot be severed from such ^n head. Live
also of him we do, because, not only the earth is the Lords and the fulness
thereof (and so all live of him) but also in respect of his body and blood
(called in the Gospel a slain carcass) whereon, as eagles, by faith we tire
and foster. And so the faithful only feed of him.

For his feeding with us, it is plain from the union he has with us, both in
body and soul. And that is cause that in Matt. 25. he accompteth that which
was given to his poor members to have been given unto him. Not because his
own particular body was in them (for the heavens retain that, till he come to
judge both the quick and dead) nor since his own particular nature was
glorified, could it hunger or thirst after bodily refection: but in respect of
comm^nion and fellowship with such, spiritually through faith: his spirit so
chaining him and us together, by the bonds of faith. And in such respect, he
takes hard fare also with them; going down with Iaakob into Aegipt: with
Joseph into prison, suffering with the Saints in Damascus. Thus he feeds us,
and with us: He feeds us as a father: but feeds with us as a brother: yea,
as an husband and amiable lover. Now to her Prayer.

Lect. XI.
Until the day break and Shadows flee away: Heb. s^b.
Return my Well-beloved and be like a Roe or young Heart, upon the Mountains of
Bether.


IN this prayer I observe generally, the Churches Sob here, and Berach in chapter
8.18. I take to be as synonimies) or to haste away, according to the fathers
decree, till the time of darkness were ouer-shot: assimilating himself
herein to the young Heart on the mountains of Bether. To lack his presence, no
doubt a corasiue unto her: but having learned that God had so decreed, she
desires him to accomplish his will: herein referring her will to his revealed
will. A doctrine taught by Messiah, when he taught his disciples to pray, Thy
will be done, practiced by himself when he prayed to his father, Matthew*
26.39.42.
Not as I will, but as thou will: and a rule whereby every one that has a
portion in Christ, must be contented to walk. As a child ought to refer his
will to the Father* and a scholar to his Master, eu^n so (and much more then
so) ought we to refer our will (which is always weak, and often bad) unto
God his will, which is strong to prevail, and is always go^d. If love cannot
preuai^e with us for subiecting our will to his will in all things: Then let
the fear of his power force it. Folly it is to resist him that is stronger,
Number. 23.19.
Has he said it (quoth Balaam) and shall he not do it? And has he spoken,
and shall he not accomplish it? As if he should say, all the world is not able
to resist his will, to fru^^rate his word: for if they will not ioyn with it,
for partaking with his mercy, they shall be subdued of it, for partaking with
his justice. As we would be known to be of God and Christ Jesus, let us be ever
found subiecters of our will to his will: yea, it is a badge of the Church
here, and therefore cannot in the faithful be altogether wanting.

More particularly here is to be observed, first, the time of decreed absence
(and that is, Till the day break and shadows fly away) secondly, The manner
of his absence: and that is, Like a young Roe on the mountains of Bether.

The breaking of the day and departure of the shadows (for Night, Isidore
etym. lib. 5. cap. 31 Vmbraterrae noctem fa^it.
which is the earths shadow, does depart with the days breaking) it is
understood of some, to be the time of the Law preceding Christ's incarnation,
which law was nothing else but a shadow of good things to come: some others
understand it to be the time of the church in this dark miserable world,
specially after Christ's ascension. Not to meddle with other unapt collections,
I mean here (if God permit) to insist on both these times, as both well suting
to our former exposition.

Objection.
But here some will ask, how can the church of the Gentiles will Messiah to
retire, unto the time that Legal ceremonies vanish; seeing the Gentiles were
no people or church till that law was ended? Answer.
I answer, God that calls things that be not, as if they were; he (by
Solomon) brings in the Church of the Gentiles, even before she was. This
falls out by reason of the certain execution of his decree; as also by
reason things past and to come, are all present unto him and his Spirit. And
hereof it is, that his spirit very ordinarily in the prophets, does speak
offuture things as already existing. Nor but for such cause, could Messiah and
his church be introduced mutually parling in Salomons time, about a thousand
years before Messiahs substance put away the shadows, that so the partition
wall broke down, Iere. 15.1 ezekiel. 14 20
If Noah, Job, Daniel; yea, if Moses and Samuel, should rise up in their
behoose, they could not turn away the judgment. Has God promised mercy to
the contrite, salvation to the faithful, victory to his Church? It is as good
as done: hell gates cannot prevail against it.

For the time of Messi^hs absence, it lies in these two points: first, it
should be till the day break: secondly, till the shadows flee away. For the
day-breake, it implies to the Gentiles, only that Luke 1.78. (...): oriens ex
alto.
Day Star from an high did visit us: or as the Greek reads, wherein the
Rising (or, East) from an high did visit us. Which implies not so much the
Day Star (called Phospher and Lucifer, grown into evil report, because of
their application, to Satan and Nebuchadnetsar) as the Sun it self arising
in the East. True it is, that Messiahs star appeared in the East, but that
was not an ordinary, but extraordinary star, fore-prophecied of by Balaam
Number. 24.17.
Iaakobs star, whereby the Eastern Sophies had intelligence of Messiahs
birth. The last writing Prophet of Isreal's Church, he prophesying of this Day
break, does say: Malachi 4.2 Shemesh t^^dakah.
The Sun of Righteousness shall arise, etc. This light came amongst his
own, but they loving darkness more then light, labored by false accusations
to darken this Sun as sackecloth: they therefore kill him. But the firmaments
Sun pulled in his head, as ashamed to shine, when the Son of God might not
shine. Hereupon the day did plainly break (for the veil of the Temple brake
asunder) and as at his birth he was highly honored of the Gentiles, so here
at his death, Pilate (a Gentile) did honor him with a Kingly inscription,
against the heart of the Jews. The heathen Centurian and his com^any seeing
the events, Math. 27.54.
They feared greatly, saying, Surely this was the Son of God. With his birth
the day did break: with his death, the Sun rose higher: but with the Temples
overthrow by the army abominable of Romans, (which was about forty years
after his death) the Gentiles had the Sun of righteousness further risen
upon their Hemisphere; whereof more hereafter. Christ being thus (as Simeon
Iustus terms him) a light to Gentiles and a glorious light to Israel, it
teaches us all to show forth the virtues of him, that has called us out of
darkness, into his marvelous light, 1. Pet. 2.9.

Lect. XII.
T^ll the shadows fl^e away: q.d. retire my Wel-beloued till the nights
darkness be put to flight, till the ecclesiastical shadows be chased away
by the Suns bright rising. As Christ was this Sun ( Psalm. 19.5.
coming gloriously forth as a Bridegroom) so, the Law was but a shadow of
good things to come, the body whereof was Christ, Heb. 10.1. Coloss. 2.17.
wherein the Apostle may well allude to the shadow (accompanying a man's body)
which sometimes is before, sometimes behind, as occasion is ministered by the
Suns course: even as some shadows went before Messiahs incarnation, some
again followed behind: not unlike to the Number. 13.24.
two spies of Israel, carrying between them the cluster of grapes, for the
Churches comfo^^. As the Apostle calls all a shadow, so Solomon here uses
the plural, shadows: because the whole body of tipes would be considered in
the particular members. For the better effecting whereof, I will give a taste
thereof, by dividing all ecclesiastical shadows into these three classes or
heads: Chronologicall, Personal, Sacramental. By Chronologicall shadows, I
understand such as consist in Number. By Personal shadows, I intend such as
rest specially in some Persons. By Sacramental shadows, I conceive only such
as consist specially in typical elements for external signs, for which they
have of ancients been termed principally, Sacraments.



^ixe, which I term the number of creation. In six days, God begun and
finished his works of creation: not because it was of absolute necessity for
God to use such time: but for our instruction, for whom both times and
creatures were formed. Isid. ^^ymol. lib. 3. cap. 3. N^m vnum semen numeri
esse, non ^^merum volunt.
One is no number, but as the seed of number: because all number arises from
it. And for that cause, it may well be given to God: who as he is in es^^nce
One, so all number has his being flowing from him, and returning back again
into him, like the Hierogliphick serpent, which turns his tail round about
into his mouth. And that is cause why Christ God, does term himself Alpha and
Omega, (the first and last of the Greek letters) the beginning and end^ng. Two
is the first number, three the second: and this Three is not only made
glorious in the first three days work, with a glorious light before Sun,
Moon and Stars were created: but also is closely inferred in the third word
of the Bible. Genes. 1.1.
Where after Bresh^th Bara (in the beginning created) there follows Aelo^im
God, but inform plural: together with the third place; secretly teaching a
plurality of persons: that is, a sacred Trinity in Unity. In three days
more, heavens and earth are (with their whole host) perfected: and therefore the
number 6. well t^rmed of Divines, The perfect number, or number of perfection.
But what may 6. in the natural creation, figure or shadow forth? Beda, Beda
and ^banus on Genesis 1. and 2. in distinguishing the ages, being one with
Isidore. et^mol. l. 5. c. 39.
Rabanus and others shall in effect, answer for me. These six days do
insinuate the six ages of the world, wherein a mystical work shall be
finished, represented by the former natural work. The first age is from Adam
to Noe: the second from Noah to Abraham: the third from thence to David: the
fourth from David to the transmigration to Babel: the fifth from thence to
Christ: the sixth from Christ to the worlds ending. Some others do also divide
the world into six ages, but with some difference from the former ancients, in
the middle ages. But here I will content my self with that ancient
distinction: because thereto I may add their application of the 6. ages to the
six days: and the rather for brideling such as think such kind of doctrine
to be but of yesterday, nothing at all white headed.

In the first age of the world, (say they) man was made, tanquam lux, shining
as the Light. In which age, God divided the Sons of God (under the name of
light) from the Sons of men, as from darkness itself: Arc did swim
between the Rain and the Seas: and the evening of this age was the confusion
of tongs. his people from the Gentiles by In Abraham begun the distinction.
Abraham: seuering them like as he did the dry land from the inferior
waters. And heerewith was brought forth the branch (or budde) of herbs and
trees: that is, this age brought forth the This specially in their coming out
of Aegipt, and receipt of the Law.
Saints, and the fruit of holy Scriptures: The evening of this age was the
sin of wicked Saul, settled in eui^l. The fourth age begun with David,
whenas God established lights in the firmament of heaven: that is Prayed for in
Judge. 5. vlt.
the splendour of his Kingdom as the Suns excellency: the Synag. to Christ,
as Moon to Sun.
Synagogue Princes stars, Dan. 8.10.
Princes (as Moon and Stars) obaying thereto. The evening of this age
consisted in the sins of the king, whereby that people deserved to be carried
captive into Babylon In the fifth age, that is, in the captivity of Babylon,
there appear (as it were) animalia in aquis and volatilia c^li, fishes in the
waters, and birds in the air: because the Jews then begun People and Nations
represented by waters, Reu. 17.15.
Gentiles as in a Sea: nor had they any stable (or set) place, more than
flickering birds. The evening of this day, was the multiplication of sins in
the Jewish people: who became so blind, as they could not know the Lord Jesus.
Now, the sixth age begun with the Aduent of our Lord Jesus Christ. For as in
the sixth day, the first man Adam was of the slime of the earth, formed unto the
image of God: so in the sixth age of the world, the second Adam (that is,
Christ) in the flesh, is borne of the Virgin Mary, Here, and afterward,
Ribanus interlaceth somewhat. Al before, he uses Bedaes words, almost wholly.
he in a living soul, this in a quickening spirit. And as in that day, a
living soul was made, so in this age they desire eternal life. And as in that
sixth day the earth brought forth the kinds of creeping creatures and beasts:
so, in this sixth age of the world, the Church brought forth the Gentiles
appetiting eternal life. The which in sense was manifested to Peter (in Act.
10.) by a sheet of creatures. And as in that day, man and woman were created:
so, in this age of the world, Christ and his Church is manifested. And as Man
in that day, was set over the Beasts, creeping creatures, and birds of the
air: so, Christ in this age, was set over the Gentiles people and Nations,
that they might be governed of him: who were as Beasts given to carnal
concupiscence; or as serpents obscured with earthly curiosity: or as birds
lift up with pride. And as in that day man and beasts with him are fed with
the herb that seedeth, and the wood that brings fruit and green grass: so
in this age, the spiritual man (which is the good minister of Jesus Christ)
he with the people are fed with the nourishment of the holy scriptures, and
with the divine Law, (as with seeding herbs) for conceiving reason and speech
fertily: partly for the utility of manners and conversation beseeming mankind,
as resemblanced by trees bearing fruit: partly, for the vigor of faith, hope
and charity, unto eternal life: as it were with green herbs which wither
not with any heat of tribulation, etc. And I could wish that the Lord might not
find us (as it were) in the evening of this age. The evening of this age, is
thus spoken of by our Lord: Think thou that when the Son of man shall
come, he shall find faith on the earth? After this evening, shall be a morning:
namely, when our Lord shall come in his glory. Then the Saints shall rest from
all their works (or businesses) with Christ.

As the works of the six days were thus sealed up with a seventh days
rest: so the Ancients (not to touch any modern writers) could apply all to the
worlds six distinct ages, finishing them with the glorious Sabbath of
Sabaoths, the rest of rests. And this was clearly insinuated by the Holy Ghost
to the Hebrews, writ to this effect: Hebr. 4.8, 9, 10.
If Ioshuah had given Israel rest, then would not David after that day have
spoken of another Rest: But David has spoken of another Rest: Therefore there
remains another rest to the people of God: for he that is entered into His
rest, has also ceased from his own works, as God did from his. From which
scripture, as also from others of like validity, has analogically been well
concluded, how the six days did resemble typically the six ages of the
world: as well as the seventh day did represent eternity hereafter, wherein the
sons and daughters of God should rest from all their labors: no more
troubled with worlds garboyles, contrary to the Chiliasts assertion, who
dreamed (from a misunderstanding of Revel. 20.7. etc. that after the Saints had
rested a thousand years, Satan should anew assail and trouble them.

And besides that the number of Six is made sacred sundry ways in the old
Testament: we shall find the new testaments Revelation, to make it a number of
perfection to the Churches works, when as ( Revel. 10.7.) the mighty Angel
swears, That in the days of the Seventh Angel, when he shall begin to
found the trumpet, the mystery of God shall be finished: as if he should say,
the six trumpets (referred to the new testaments six ages) shall found to the
end of the Churches business: for when the Seventh begins to found, even
then the mystery is at an end and finished. But I will spare to speak more of
this number here, as also what I further think of the distinction of ages.
That which is spoken according to the Ancients their observance, may serve to
stop the mouths of such as cry for antiquity. Which summarily I shut up with
that of Isidore: Senarius namque qui partibus suis perfectus est, perfectionem
mundi quadam numeri sui significatione, declarat. Etymol. l. 3. cap. 4.

Lect. XIII. Sabbath of Days.
THe next chronologicall shadow, shall be Seven: a number of Rest: sanctified
by God himself, as was the number of Six. The number Seven, in regard of his
Rest, is termed Sabbaticall: and because in the great Sabaot of God, they shall
neither give nor take in marriage, Clem. Alex. in Strom. 6.
Clemens Alexandrine says, Merito ergo numerum ^ep^enarium existimant esse
sine matre and sine prole. They worthily therefore do think the number of
seven to be without Mother and offspring. So sacred is the number of seven,
as ancient Gentiles gave place to the seventh day for rest, as also for
perfecting the Creature. And to this end, the In Strom. l. 5.
former Greek Ancient introduces Homer, Hesiod, and Callimachus their Ancient
Poets. Nor proceeded it but from a deep conceit in Balaam (the Eastern
Gentile Prophet) when as he builded seven Altars, and offered up seven
Bullockes. But passing by such notes, let me come to the right sacred book of
God, and there shall plainly appear, how renowned this Sabbaticall number is.
And this shall be briefly observed, in God his sanctifying the seventh day, the
seventh month, the seventh year, and the seven times seventh year in the
old testament: then afterward, by renewing a memorial of the number so often in
the new testament.

Six days having finished the natural work of Creation, the Seventh day
God rested and sanctified it to divine contemplation: Genesis 2.2. Exodus 20.11.
Which resting from bodily travels for giving full scope to the spirit for
meditating in the mercies of God, did fore shadow a world of businesses in the
world, till the Seed (promised in Paradise) should come, in whom alone the
Church was to have her souls rest. And this was it which was shadowed, by all
other Sabatical or rest days; as plainly affirms the Apostle thus: Col.
2.16, 17
Holy Days, new moons, Sabaoths, were but a shadow of things to come, but the
body is in Christ. On which ground, the new testaments Church has abolished
these Sabaoths weekly and festival; lest otherwise she should Iudaize, as if
Christ were not come in the flesh. Objection: then in abolishing of the day, we
abolish the fourth commandment. Answer: no: we reserve the moral duty
(which is as the life and substance of that precept, in so resting and
meditating the next day after) only we put away the seventh day, which (in
regard of his number) was a shadow. Which next day after (the eight after a
sort) the Ancients still understood by the eight day allotted to circumcision:
but in nature being the first day, it was of Origin understood to be the day
wherein Manna first came down from heaven: representing Messiah the true bread
of life to the faithful. As the Sabaot day, God rested from creating any new
work: so Messiah on that day wholly did rest in the Sepulcher: Having on the
cross (when he cried, It is finished) put an end to the work of redemption.
They that afterward have invented new works for redemption, they do with
Genes. 36.24
Anah but find out the generation of Mules: and with the cursed earth, but
bring forth thorns, thistles, and degenerate vermin. When he was come, in whom
the father did rest, and the church was to rest; the shadow was to give place
to the substance, the typical seven to Messiah thereby typed and forefigured.

Lect. XIIII. Sabbath of Months.
AS six days brought with them a sabbaticall seventh day: so the time of
six months brought with it, his Sabbaticall seventh month. The first was
the Sabbaot of days, this second (as an Origin in numeros, whom Rabanus
follows.
Ancient well terms it) is Sabbathum Mensium, the Sabbaot of Months. Not so
termed because the seventh month was wholly, but because a great part of it
was to be rested. Leuit. 23.23 etc. Number. 29 1. etc.
The first day of this seventh month called Tisri, was the feast of Trumpets.
The tenth day was the feast of Reconciliation. The fifteenth day was the feast
of Tabernacles, and that continued seven days after: every which day had his
peculiar sacrifice.

Ierichoes walls, Josh. 6. By the two legal silver trumpets, the congregation
was informed of the times of assembly and departure: secondly, of war:
thirdly, of festival solemnities, Numb. 10.1. etc. Wherein were represented
these two spiritual things: the Word of God preached, and holy faithful
Prayer. By that blessed word sounded (as Isaiah was commanded in chap. 58.1.)
it pleas^th to shutter down the walls of the false church: to contrite the
hard heart, to over ^hrow the mighty imaginations of mankind. The sounding of
an instrument, was but a weak means for ruinating wal's, chasing of the
adversary: but the arm of Jehovah did accompany such means: so, the
preaching of Christ crucified, and that by such mean instruments as the
Apostles, of it self was unable to conquer one soul: but it being the
ordinance of God, and so accompanied with the powerful operation of his
spirit, it so has cast down the Oracle-walls of Idolatry, broken down the
high imaginations of flesh and blood, expulsed the Romish familiar Hobgoblins,
dispelled the clouds of golden legendarie lies. By the sounding of this word
we are also taught how to assemble, and how to depart about our several
aff^ires: the word of God is to be our delight and counsailour. Yea, this same
word is to be sounded over all our sacrifices and spiritual exultations, as
one sacred ordinance for hallowing all our worship. The trumpets also did
represent Prayer, when it is said, that upon their sound in warre-time, they
should thereby be remembered before their God. And hereupon it is, that we are
enjoined to Psalm. 50.15.
Call upon him in time of trouble: even as Solomon (in 1. King. 8.
his dedication of the temple) did interceede with the Lord, for hearing
Israel, when they should stretch forth their voice unto God in the time of
their straits. And so Hezekiah (stretching the adversaries letter before him,
Isa. 37.) did lift up his complaint to God, whereupon Iehouahs Angel issued
out, and ^lue of his enemies an hundred four score and five thousand.

The feast of reconciliation was an act of humbling the soul

The feast of tabernacles or boothes, put them in mind of Egypt, it became
their Seventh. For then the month Abib, called also Nisan, it was made the
First, Exodus 12.2. and 13.4. The Civil reckning thus
1 Tishri, 2 Marchesuan, 3 Cisleu, 4 Tebet, 5 Shebet, 6 Adar, 7 Abib, 8 Ijar, 9
Siuan 10 Tamuz, 11 Ab, 12 Aelul.
The Ecclesiastical thus. Their Civil account begun in our September, their
Ecclesiastical in our March.

1 Abib, 2 Ijar, 3 Siuan, 4 Tamuz, 5 Ab, 6 Aelul, 7 Tishri, 8 Marches. 9
Cisleu, 10 Teb. 11 Sheb. 12 Adar.
The Civil First became thus the ecclesiastical Seventh, for teaching us,
that All is become anew to the faithful: who are to rest in him, who was
figured by the High Priest entering into the Temples Sanctum sanctorum this very
seventh month, and in no other. This seventh day and seventh month, do
both lead us to rest in Messiah, in whom we are to Rest, for the Father in him
Alone rests well pleased.

Lect. XV.
But besides Day and Month, we are to observe the Year: which also brings
with it, Rest and Sabbaot. And this was done every Exodus 23.10. etc. Ieuit.
25.3 etc. deuteronomy. 15.1. etc.
seventh year, from the time of typical Joshua his partition of Canaan. Six
years they were to sow the land, the seventh year they were to let it Rest;
and the owners, with the poor, were to content themselves and feed on the
voluntary fruits of that Yeares-rest. Whereby all were taught, first, to rest
in the promised Messiah, who is alone sufficient to our earthly natures,
causing them to fructify without our natural tillage. Happy is the body and
soul (for that is our field and vineyard) that communicates with these
sabbaticall gifts, for their own good and sustentation of others. Secondly, it
teaches all Adams sons to labor the worlds six ages, but with respect of
that sabbaot in the wor^ds end, when so Christ Jesus shall be to them all in
all, what time happiness shall be (rich and poor, Abraham and Lazarus) to
rest in Him for ever. The poor then shall not envy the Rich, the rich then
shall entertain the poor into their bosoms, without grudge: for this is a
Sabbath of Rest in our God. Yea, before the worlds end, Reu. 14.13
Blessed are the Dead that die in the Lord, for they rest from their labors.

Furthermore, this sabbaticall seventh year did Deuteronomy. 15.1 etc.
forbid the Lender to ask the thing again which he had lent: and yet not to
lend unto the poor brother by reason of this seventh years rest, it was to
have a wicked thought and to sin: but to lend and so to give, it had the
promise of blessing to accompany that lender, in what-so he should put his hand
to. Besides, as this year, the Hebrew (which for need had sold himself to be
a servant) he was (except himself willed the contrary) to be set free. As
the Creditor might not debar lending, because the Seventh year was nigh;
so, neither for that cause ought he (through l^cke of full six years
service) to stay the poor b^other: either from accepting him into service for
such satisfaction, or (the seventh year being come) to retain him longer
against his will. For the breach of this law, Iere. 34.8. etc.
Jeremiah was sent to denounce against the Jews, these three punishments,
Sword, Pestilence, and Famine. All this plainly preached Mercy: that mercy
which the rich do owe in conscience to the poor: and masters to servants: one
Christian to another. The contrary God will be avenged of. And herewith (to the
comfort of faithful servants and poore-ones) it does typically preach, that in
heavens Sabbaot they shall rest, maugre the hearts of worldlings: for howsoever
they be men's servants, yet they be 1. Cor. 7.22.
The Lords of free men. Beda on this place.
In requie Nouitestamenti liberatus est. He is set at liberty in the Rest of
the new testament: how much more in the accomplishment of that Sabbaots
perfection?

But besides the Seventh year Single, Iubile rest. Le. 25.8, 9, etc
there was a seventh year multiplied by seven, which proclaimed the following
year for a year of much liberty. Seven times seven years were compted:
the last whereof is nine and forty. Then in the seventh Month the great
Iubile year was founded, which was the fiftieth year: that is, the year
after the seventh: which in progression of number is Eight: but in renuall of
number is the First. But that here is a renuall of the Sabbatical account, I
cannot see, though one of Scotland (otherwise worthy much reverence) does
teach: namely, M. Rob. P. in propos. 2.
that the Iubile-yeare is the First of the next seven. Which if, then this
would follow: that that seven should be but six, or two Rests should be held
in one seven: neither of which, I see any reason for.

This Iubile-yeare (being the 50. year, The number of eight.
the next year after the last seven) it is so in progress of account, an
Eight year: and so withal does secretly teach, that the Time and number of
Eight is sacred. Further it may appear from the time of Circumcision, which
ever from the Birth-tide was to be the Eight day: which Auntients still did
make a Representator of Messiah his day of Resurrection, which fell the day
after the Jewish Sabaot, or seventh day. All which we shall find to be
sanctified in the name Beda on Luke 2.
^ESVS, where Eight is renowned in Units or Ones: secondly in Tennes: thirdly in
Hundreds. For in the name JESUS, thou have the just Number of 888. thus: I, 10.
Greeks Eta.
E, 8. S, 200. O, 70. V, 400. S, 200. that is, IESOVS according to the Greek
writing in the New Testament: as if hereby were openly proclaimed, that Jesus
first is He, to whom the beast in Revel. 13.18. with his number of 666. is
opposed, whereof that adversary has the Name of Antichrist: that is, opposed
to Christ. Secondly, that IESOVS is the end of Circumcision and lubile, all
drawing to Him, as the Iubile or Iobel (of labal) does naturally signify. Many
take it to have the Name of a Rams ho^e, affirming that this Iubile was
proclaimed with such horne-trumpets. But as such deriuation is further fetch^,
so I see not how (by the scripture) it can be proved, that Rams horns were
then sounded. Nay it seems more probable, that after Silver trumpets were
instituted together with the law, that they only were in these solemnities
used. Draw unto Christ they did, in 18. Jubilees: the last of four Sabbaoths
or Seauens of Iubile, proclaming Christ crucified, by whom came everlasting
Redemption. But for the better observance hereof, let us consider the Peculiars
of this great Octonarie Rest.

First, in this Great year they were not to sow, no more then in the year
next before it, which was the last of the seven Seauens: for the supply of
which two Rests, the Lord promises to give sufficient the Sixth year for three
years, Leutt. 25.21. which secretly may teach: once, that such as put their
confidence solely in Christ, they shall find God to be Genes. 17.1.
El-shaddi All-sufficient unto them: as also, that Christ is an end to the
ceremonial law figured by the Seventh day: and the very Soul of the new
testament figured by the number of Eight, the verification of the former. Rest
to the Synagogue, Rest to the Church, rest to the Body, rest to the soul^^ who
first was God, then secondly Man, for double Rest to the faithful.

Secondly, all the Israelites) who before had sold any possession) were as this
year to return unto their possession. A reason that the land was not to be
cut off from any Tribe, was this: Leuit. 25 23.
The land (^aith Jehovah) is Mine: and ye be but strangers and soiourners with
me. For this cause it was his pleasure that his own Interest should appear,
in having his people always interessed therein: yea, and in the year of
Iubile, to seize on the very possession. And what does this shadow forth unto
us? This, first, that 1. Cor. 10.26
the Earth is the Lords, and all that therein is, and therefore all the
faithful Israel of God, truly interessed therein. They may for a season, be
out of the possession thereof: but in the mean time they have a true Title
therein: even in all the good creatures of God: for whose use indeed, they
were created: as who being only the persons, that can (to God his glory) 1.
Tim. 4 4, 5
sanctify them by the Word of God and Prayer. Secondly, though here in this
present world, they may be out of possession, yet (so verily as they be Meek
and Patient in time of such lack) they shall inherit the Earth; as our
Savior himself affirms in Math. 5.5. Where the word Clero-nomesousi import
th a Distribution by Lot: resemblanced by the several lots in Canaan,
distributed to typical Israel, by the ministry of Iehoshuah the figure of
Jesus. And hereof Saint Peter in his second Epistle, the third chapter,
speaks thus: But we look for New heavens and new earth (according to his
promise) wherein dwells Righteousness: as if he had said: though al be
dissolved, and by fire finally melted, yet there is promised (besides n^w
heavens) a new earth, which we, (with all the Righteous) do look for. While
the earth is filled with Iniquity, we may be out of possession: but when the
earth shall be resined and brought to his perfection, then we (even the
faithful) shall have it only in possession. Nor marvel that the Elect-ones
expect this great Iubile; for every inferior creature in his kind, does groan
after this day of Delivery, as resting in hope then to be freed together with
the Sons of God, Romans 8.18. etc. This day of delivery, this day of
Redemption, this time of Rest, it is not there, but there, not now, but then
fully acquired: Orig. in Numer. de 2. festi^^.
Nam si altius repetaemus quae vera sint Sabbatha, intra hunc mundum non est
very sabbathi obseruatio.

The third thing of the Iubile is this, that every manner of Servant was to be
set at liberty, For whereas the Voluntarie-seruant in Exodus 21. is said from
thenceforth to be a Servant for ever ( Verse. 6.) it is to be restrained unto
the year of Iubile, Leuit. 25.40. for servants of other nature were to be set
free every seventh year. L^gn^lam, for ever.
And that the term Legnolam is not to over reach the year of Iubile, the
Heebrewes Midrash on 1. Samuel. 1.22. teaches. And that it signifies not
properly For ever, but a Long time, Rabbi Kimcht teaches in his Rad^cals,
alleging to that purpose, Prou. 22.28. Where Gnolam cannot signify for ever:
no more than a servant could serve for ever, seeing he was not to live for
ever. If we turn it and understand it for ever in this or any other
ceremonial speech, it must be Aquinas in Heb. 7. Lect. 3
Ratione figurati, in respect of the thing figured thereby. And indeed, this
mystically implied, first, a releasement of such as had been seru^nts to
sin: secondly, a releasement at last from all slavery, as well of body as
soul. From sin, that was first sounded by the Trumpet of Messiah in his
public ministration of the word: for which cause Isaiah introduces him thus,
speaking, The spirit of the Lord upon me, therefore Jehovah has appointed me
to preach the Go^pel to the Meek. He has sent me to loose the bands of
contrite in heart: to preach liberty to the captive, and to the fettered, the
opening of the prison; to preach the acceptable year of the Lord, Isa, 61.1.2.
And most probable it seems unto me, that our Savior must fulfill the Iubile,
either in her Birth (which is termed The fullness of time, Gal. 4.4.) or in his
Baptism (what time from heaven was preached, that this was the Accepted-one:
who therewith entered into his public ministry) or (which is yet most
probable) in the year of his suffering: then upon the cross he proclaming, It
is finished: the Temples veil then rending, and therewith preaching an end of
legal ceremonies: the dead then arising and walking as having their bonds
loosed, and the doors of Sins prison set open. The ecclesiastical year so
begun (for he died in Abib) what a glorious year of spiritual liberty was
that in the Ministry of his Apostles? But together with this proclamation came
not the full liberty of the Saints. That remains hereafter to be fulfilled
in the next appearance of Jesus, who then shall restore store all things. Hebr.
4 9^* 10 11
There remains therefore a Rest to the people of God: and he that enters into
that Rest, shall cease from his works, as God did from his. Let us study
therefore to enter into that Rest: and in the mean time (groaning under the
burden of sin) let us (with the Apostle, Romans 7.24.) cry out, Who shall set
me free from the body of this death? Whereto let a good conscience reply: I
thank God (it will be) through Christ Jesus, for when he again appears, lift
we up our heads, for that is the time of our Redemption.

Lect. XVI. Against Romes Iubile.
CHrist having put an end unto this Judicial Inbile, how comes it about, that
Rome the last year kept a Iubile, as also for some other times in the three
hundred years next backward? It is, because Rome by that (as by other things)
must Iudaize and show themselves Antichristian, that is Opposite to Christ.
They may as well revive all the ceremonial Law, which were to rear up again
the Partition wall of ceremonies, and to preach actually, that Christ is not
come in the Flesh. For 1300. years (or thereabouts) the Church observed no
such invention, nay never dreamed of it. But about that time, Boniface, (or if
you will, Male face the Eight) he decreed there should be a Iubile solemn^zed
Extract. comm. ii. 5. tit. 9. c. 1.
every hundred year But Clemens the sixth (as besides the Extrauagants,
appears in his Bull,) he from Mo^es rule does institute the 50. year. For
some wiser consideration, Vrbanus the sixth brought it to 33. years: S^xtus the
fourth to 25. and Julius the second to every tenth year: for all which
consult with a right profitable Doct. Will^; in his Synops. Papism, the
Addition.
writer of our own. Wherein first observe the Spirit of gidd^nesse wherewith
these Apostaticall Popes were smitten, euene of them changing his predecessors
decree. Secondly, observe that all of them agree in one for ^earing up
Iudaisme. And (which in the third place must not be forgotten) all this
Invention was for setting asale their Bulls of leaden pardons. If the second
Pope thought an hundred years too long for catching of soules-money, and so did
draw it to the fif^eth year, never blame him: much less his successors to
fewer year, even now to ten. Who would have his Bul's to lie longer on his
hands? Only this I lastly observe to be the m^ine difference between the
Jewish and Romish Jubilees. The Jews therein did Give, these Receive: the
Jews forgave freely, but the Pope for Money: and for money he will (as the
Spirit speaks in Revel. 18.) sell the very souls of men.

Nor would it here be forgotten, how the great Romist Cusanus does divide the
worlds whole time into Jubilees. And (not to meddle with his calculation before
Christ) he teaches that the general resurrection of all flesh shall fall in
the 34. Iubile, even as Christ himself rose from the dead, in his 34. year:
as if these years of Christ's age, were a mystical shadow of so many Jubilees.
Now 34. Iubiles, being so many hundreds, they so do make 1700. years: and
these to be compted in the state of the new Testament. This number (but by
another Method) is observed, and so urged by a learned nobleman in Scotland.
That the Iubile shadows forth that great day of rest (a day like to the first
Sabbath, which introduces speech of Genes. 2.2, 3
Day but none of Night: because Day and Rest were to be Iehouahs last act in
creation) that the Iubile (I say) figured forth that great day of our
Redemption, it is plain and vngaine-sayable. But what number of time shall
finish all the worlds work, and introduce that Iubile of souls? I think that
number concealed from us: even as it is hid Man. 13.32, 33.
from the Angels, yea from the Son of man, in regard of his manhood.
Objection. Not the Day nor Hour, but yet the year may. Answ. If the Year,
then I would believe also that the very Day (if not also the Hour,) it might
be known. The Flood coming upon the world in the 1656. (which was the sixth
year after 33. full Jubilees, the Arc resting in the seventh) Noah was
foretold of the year, yea of the very day, Genesis 6.3. and 7.4. The Angel
Gabriel telling Dan. 9.21, etc.
Daniel of the 70. Sabaoths of years, which should be cut out, for declaring
Messiah in our nature suffering for abolishing transgression, he gives him
therewith intelligence of the hour: namely, that he, the Lamb of the world,
should be offered up that hour wherein he came to Daniel, namely at the time
of Evening sacrifice, which was the third hour after noone: for from the time
he preached that Gospel, Daniel was to rectify his account. But because, no
more the Year (then the Day and Hour,) can be known, I take it the Holy
Ghost also uses the word Time: when as (in the person of the Apostles) he
says of all the faithful their knowledge; ye know not when the time is, Mark
13.33. and therefore watch and pray continually. Another thing might seem more
necessary our knowledge (namely, When the Kingdom shall be restored to Israel,
Act. 1.6.7.) and neither that (in respect of his precise time) is fit for us to
know. That the Kingdom of Christ shall be restored to the natural Israel, it is
largely proved by the Apostle in Romans 11. but for the precise time, (of hour,
day, or year) it is not for us: Why? Because the Father has put it in his
own power. Even so our Savior touching the former, says, Only the Father
knows it.

Many have bin bold to prescribe, the year, and some, the day, but still have
lied. About some 540. years after Christ, a rumor was spread abroad, Leonard.
Aretin. de Gothothorum bello, lib. 1.
Quod MVNDVS esset cum prole periturus, that the world with his issue was then
to be destroyed. And it came so to pass: for a certain captain of
Justinians, going into Italy for warring against the Goths (his name being
Mundus, in english, WORLD, he then with his children was slain. In such a
second intent or secondary sense, a man may have guessed right: but this, not
according to his Own, but the Devils meaning. Isid. lib. 5. ca. 39. etymol.
Isidore having drawn out the worlds age, first to Christ, then from thence to
his own time, he says of the new testaments age, as I do: And Beda (de rat.
temp. c. 22.) has this: Reliquum sextae aetatis Deo soli patet.
Residuum sextae Aetatis tempus, soli Deo est cognitum: the Remainder of the
worlds sixth age, is known to God Alone. To the heavenly Father therefore leave
that: and for us, let us labor in watchfulnes, fasting and prayer: that so
whenever that day comes, we may lift up our heads in the assurednes of our
full Redemption.

Lect. XVII. Personal Shadows. Adam
Having thus given a taste of the sad wisdom of God couched in number (by
having somewhat suruaied the Numbers of Six, Seven, and Eight) I will now
turn from figures of Number and time (called Chronologicall or Arithmeticall
tipes) unto such shadows as concur with Persons: whom before I termed,
Personal shadows. And (this God willing) shall be done, by examining some
Persons before the law, some under the law. And of these before the law, I
will elect, first two before the Flood, Adam and Henoch: secondly, two after
the flood, Melchitsedech and Isaac.

For Adam) (the first man) he is a shadow of Christ called of the 1. Cor.
15.45 (...).
Apostle in 1. Cor. 15. the second Man or Adam. But Adam being a man of such
state as none of his sons after him (for first he was excellently good:
secondly, passing Evil: thirdly, good and evil) it thereby comes to pass,
that he is a shadow d^uersly. In reg^rd of his first estate, he figured
Messiah a Simili in some sort of likelihood. In his second estate, he shadowed
forth Jesus ex obliquo, ouer-thwartly. In his last estate he was a type ex
Renouato, in respect of Renouation.

For the first, behold the Genes. 1. and 2 chap.
First man in his glorious Creation, is made to the likeness of Aelohim
God-triune: secondly, proclaimed Lord over the common creature: thirdly, giving
titles to Airie fowls and earthly Beasts: fourthly, the Woman built out of his
side: fifthly, his Regal seat in Paradise. In all these points the first Adam
shadowed forth the second a Simili, in some due congruitie. First, for the
likeness of God whereto he was made, it is (no doubt) according to the
letter, the character of Righteousness and truth of holiness stamped in his
reasonable soul, Ephesians. 4.23, 24. Coloss. 3.3.10. but according to typical
mystery, Origin. tropol. in Genesis
This Image (as one well writes) it is our Savior, the first begotten of
every creature, of whom it is written (Heb. 1.3.) that he is the splendour of
light, and the express figure (or form) of his Fathers substance. Well might
he shadow forth Messiah that Righteous and Holy-one, when he himself was
truly Righteous and Holy: while he himself was more then a shadow, even
(after a sort) the lively image of Aelohim. O Adam, thou then might but
cast thy sight into thy self, and there (as in a glass or pure fountain)
thou might behold Heavens Trinity in Unity, as face to face: the receptacle
of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. If thou had there abouts spent thy
contemplation, thou had been changed into the same image, from glory to
glory, by the spirit proceeding from Father and Son. But contemplating the
creature without, for the Creator within, thou lost Unity with Verity, and
became One with Vanity. After the which, thou in this respect, did loose the
shadow of so divine a substance: and therewith rather became a shadow of Satan,
in Apostacy, darkness, confusion of Spirit.

Secondly, being proclaimed Lord over the Creatures, he herein liuelily
shadowed forth the Son of God, who (of the Father) has all things put in
Ephesians. 1.^2
subjection unto him. Which consideration (I take it) enforces the Author to
the Hebrews, there to appli^ the eight psalm to Christ-man, Heb. 2.5, 6. etc
and in regard of the one Nature, Son of man. Not that the eight psalm is to
be immediately understood of Messiah (for should he wonder at his Fathers
goodness toward him, as there is in verse. 4?) but applied to Jesus in a
secondary sense, as almost be all the psalms. Mere man in the first place,
bearing a representation of the Son of God, becoming Son of Man in the
second place, for the recovery of dominion lost by the first Man. For the
furthering of which mystery, I further conceive the two terms in ps. 8.4. by
which Man is expressed: for this the Hebrew reads: What is Of A^sh grief.
See my Bibliothec. 4. chap.
Aenosh that thou remembers him? and the son of ADAM that thou visitest him?
that is, what is Man (filled with grief for profaning Gods name) and the
Red-earths son (turning to earth from whence he came) what is he, that now
(since his fall) thou should be mindful over his Good? As if he should
further say, when he was (...) Vir: (...) l. omo.
ISH man in his fiery-like excellency, there might be some cause why thou
should let him exercise Dominion over the creature: but now being fallen from
thee, it is a wonder thou do not always afflict him, yea, presently say to
his offspring, Return to earth, O ye sons of Adam. Thus Man, in his
Innocence, did stand a shadow of the Son of God, Heir of the world: but
becoming a Lord of Mis-rule, he lost dominion over the creature: and therewith
ceased the figure, till (by faith) he became one with Christ, to whom all power
in heaven and earth is given for himself and his mystical members.

Thirdly, In giving titles to birds and beasts, he herein shadowed (not only
the Treasury of wisdom and knowledge hid in the Arc of Christ's breast,
Coloss. 2.3. but also) the practice of Messiahs wisdom, in giving fit
attributes to all the birds and beasts subjected (from sea to sea) to his
dominion. These birds of the air (representing such people as specially have
their conversation in heaven) and beasts of the field (denoting such people, as
specially savor earthly things) to the one kind and to the other, Christ
gives names in his sacred word. The first sort he calls Spiritual, or
heavenly: the second Carnal or earthly. And as fowls of the heaven have their
difference and distinct names withal, so these spirituall-ones have their
discrepance, for which our Savior affoordeth several titles, whether amongst
such as govern, or are governed. The like is amongst the earthly, where some
are Leopards, some Bears, some Dogs, and all Behemoth. But as Adams apt terms
were changed, what time (at Babel) tongues were confounded: So Antichrist in
his confusion of times and manners, has given new Names to Christ's creatures
(as Nebuchadnetsar gave new names to Dan. 1.6.7.
Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah) to the end that Christ's religion might
die with their names. Yet all this keeps not the Elect from religious
obedience, nor yet does alter the property of the creature.

Fourthly, as woman was built out of his side, Genes. 2.23. compared with
Ephesians. 5 30, etc.
so herein he resemblanced Christ, who has made his Church Members of his
body, of his flesh, and of his bones, Ephesians. 5.30. a right great Mystery, as
the Apostle terms it. Quid est quod Adam dormiente Eua producitur: nisi quod
moriente Christo ecclesia formatur? What is meant by this, that Adam sleeping,
Eve is produced, but that Christ dying, the Church is formed, Greg. in Ezekiel.
hom. 6. post. C.

Lastly, his Regal seat Paradise, might well shadow forth Christ's Regencie
in his Church: for He it is, that only dresseth the vines, maintains the
plants and waters the whole garden: for which respect he in the 4 chap. 15.
verse is called the Fountain of the Gardens: and of Isaiah in chap. 5 he is
brought in singing a song to his beloved vineyarde, a song containing his
Gardnerlike offices. Had but Adam duly considered his excellency in shadow,
he would not so easily have severed from the substance. But turning his back
upon the Lord of life he first lost the Image of Aelohim: secondly forfaited
his Lordship over the creature: he thirdly made shippewracke of his variable
wisdom for apt appellation: he fourthly haled pain upon mankind for
procreation and education: and fifthly, finally expulsed himself Paradise. So
ceasing to shadow the Son of God, ex congruo, in direct verity, in the next
place he must be considered a shadow, ex oblique, oppositiuely.

That the first Adam shadows forth the second oppositiuely, it comes to
pass through Adams sin; sin being of no other nature than contradictorie
to God, to righteousness, to holiness. This crosse-respect the Apostle
remembers in 1. Cori. 15. As in Adam all die, even so by Christ shall all be
made alive. For howsoever ( Leo inserm. 18. de pass.
Adam primus and Adam secundus vunm erat carne) The first and second Adam were
both One in Flesh, yet ( non opere) they were not One in work and in deed.
And this shadow I term with Zecharias, (Luke 1.79.) The shadow of death: a
shadow, wherein mankind sat till the second Adam (the day star from an
hie) did visit us.

That he was a shadow in the third place, namely in his state of renouation
(which consists in the renuall of Mind and will unto the image of God, the
work Faith in the promised Seed) it follows a minori admaius, thus. If he
shadowed Christ in the state of Natural Holiness (for Holiness at first was
borne and bred with him) then much more in his State of Super-naturall holiness,
where all was from Heaven anew derived. In his first standing, he shadowed the
Son of God, properly as God: but in this his state of Grace, he shadowed the
Son of God also, as Man in our nature: for in him thus regenerate, God and man
were united in One: and the Image before lost, is thus recouerd with advantage.
The Apostle therefore bidding the sons of Adam put on this Shadow, his Image:
he bids them Ephesians. 4.24 galat. 3.27.
Put on the New man, that is, put on Christ: as a shadow, more then a shadow,
more then an image, in a manner A Substance. Whereto Origens epithets may well
be given, viz. Invisible, incorporall, Incorrupt and immortal. And thus did
Adam shadow forth Christ: first, ex Congruo: secondly, ex Oobliquo: thirdly,
ex Rencnato. First, in his state of Creation; secondly, Miscreation; thirdly,
Re-creation; In the first, a shadow natural: in the second, unnatural: in the
third, supernatural.

Lect. XVIII. Henoch
Henoch, does shadow-like point unto Christ. First, for his Generation, it is
precisely noted of Gods spirit to be, Jude 14.
The Seventh from Adam, which in Genesis 5. is thus: Adam begot Sheth: he
begot Enosh: he begot Kenan: he Mahalaleel: this begot Iered: and he Henoch,
(...), the seventh (^aith Saint Jude) from Adam. So that the doctrine of
number before taught, being herein remembered, it makes Henoch (for his number)
a Sabbaticall person, pointing forth Messiah the promised seed, in whom
Mankind was solely to rest. The former six ( Adam, Sheth, Enosh, Kenan,
Mahalaleel, Iered) they were every of them bright stars leading to Christ,
and for that cause couched (of S. Luke) in our Saviors Genealogy, but Henoch
(the seventh) was he that made up the Pleiades, seven better stars, then
them in the firmament: for these be not Palfiies in Charles wayne, but in the
ecclesiastical chariot of heavens Solomon.

Secondly, for Henochs name (in English Taught or Dedicate) it points forth
Jesus, Taught of God the father, and Dedicated to his fathers will for his
Churches redemption. Saint Luke does strictly note his enlargement in learning,
when he says, Luke 2.52.
And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature; not in respect of his Godhead,
but Manhood, whereby he was One with Henoch. And that he was dedicate to his
fathers work the Psalmist witnesses thus: Psa. 40.6, 7, 8
Mine ears thou have boared (for so Caritha of Carah signifies) which Paul to
the Hebr. 10.5. paraphraseth thus, Arr. Mont. and Pagnine turn it, sodisti
A body thou have ordained me: whereby is signified our Saviors voluntary
service, whereto he freely dedicated himself: by allusion to the servant in
Exodus 21.6. who binding himself freely to his master, had (for a sacramental
sign thereof) his ear pierced. And for dedicating himself unto his service,
he was contented, and did take upon him the form of a Servant. philipp. 2.7.

Thirdly, The truth of which being so taught and dedicate, appears both in
Henoch the figure, and Messiah figured. Henoch by vocation was a Prophet (as in
Jude 14.) so was Christ: whereof more in some other personal shadow. Henoch
walked with God, so did Jesus. Henoch was taken away of God from the earth: so
was Jesus, death being unable to hold him under, and his holy flesh incapable
of feeling corruption. Henoch was no more seen: nor shall the Humane nature of
Christ be any more seen locally in the earth, until he come to judge the
quick and the dead: for till the Restoration of all things, the heavens
(says Saint Peter) must contain him, Act. 3.21.

Fourthly, as the number of his generation, so the Time of his life is
mystical. The years of Henochs life were 365. Which number ( Archangeli apolog.
pro Cabal. and conclus. page 387.
a peritioribus Anatomicis) of the most skillful Anatomizers has been
observed in man for Sinews and Ligatures. And the Cabalists conclude, that
there be in Gods Law, so many Paul. Rici^s de Mosaic. leg. mandatis tells
which they be
Negative commandments, even 365. All which, as it lacks not his mystery, so
for the present, I observe this, that Henoc^s number for Years, and a years
number for Days, they be both one: Henochs years 365. the years days
(according to the Suns course) Beda de not. rer. cap. 35. and l.^ 1. de rat.
temp. cap. 9. Isid. erymol. lib. 5.36
365: pointing forth the glorious Son of God, in whom all our days and
years are sanctified. The Prophet in Psalm 19. does speak of the Natural
Sun and his circuit according to the letter: but according to mystery, the
Son of God is he, who (as a strong Giant) runs his course, the Alpha and
Omega of his Churches days and years. Thus Henochs beginning, progression and
^nding, did lively shade forth Messiah in certain particulars. Nor have
writers let all this pass by in silence: for thus they can speak: Henoch
ambulau^t cum domino, id^m conuersatione: ambulanit cum Domino, id est, in
ascentione figuram Christ^tenens: Henoch in his ascension did carry a Figure of
Christ, Beda in Genesis 5. Another more largely writes thus: ^ Raban. in Genes. 5.
Hic autem Henoch etc. This Henoch (the seventh from Adam) who pleased God,
and was translated, he signifies the seventh Rest, Ad quam req.
whereto every one is to be referred, which in the si^tage of the world (as in
the sixth day) is formed by Christ's coming: for the six agss of the world
once run, and Judgment done with the renuall of heaven and earth, the Saints
shall be translated into the life of perpetual immortality. And a late writer
says thus: I^cobus Brocardus in Genesis 5
Signatur in ipso Christus etc. In Henoch, Christ is sealed (or signified) who
did the will of his father, afterward ascended into heaven, and afterward
appeared not in his Church: seeing (as it is said in Revel. 12. The Son of
the Woman was rapt up into heaven. From thence he is to come with his 144.
thousands. Therefore Henoch (when it is said, he walked with God) does sign
forth Christ to have preached the Gospel. While it is said, he was taken
away of God, it declares Christ to have ascended to the right hand of the
Father. When it follows, he appeared not, it signifies Christ's
Nonappearance in the church while the Dominante Papa, Christum non apparuisse
in ecclesias
Pope dominee^d etc. Thus they (and right many more) have precisely observed
Henoch to be a figure, type or shadow of Christ Jesus. These two shall suffice
for the time before the flood.

Lect. XIX. Melchi-tsedek.
AFter the flood, I will produce Melchi-tsedek and Isaac: and first, of the
First. Melchi-tsedek we we read of in Genesis 14. where he is introduced
unawares, meeting Abraham from the spoil, causing bread and wine to be brought
forth unto him and his for his refection, blessing Abraham and receiving Tenths
of him. All which, the Author to the Hebrews remembers in chap. 1.1, 2, 3,
etc. applying al to Christ, as the only He which was figured by the former:
which is to be considered; first, in respect of his Generation^; secondly, of
his Name^ and thirdly, of his Office.

For his Generation, he is said to to be without Father, without Mother,
without kindred, having neither beginning of his days, neither and of life,
wherein he is likened to the Son of God. Could these things agree properly to
any Man? No man so q^alified can be produced. These things agree in propriety
only to the Son of God: for the which it is said, He was likened to him:
whereas otherwise it might have been said, He was one and the same with him,
and so no shadow of him. And yet (howsoever not in propriety. yet in a
certain true respect) all the said particulars may be affirmed of him,
Theophilact. on Hebr. 7.
quia eius generatio subabscurior fuerit and l^teris is non sit demandata,
because (as an ancient Greek vrg^th) his generation is subobscured and not
committed to sacred letters. Wherewith take that of an ancient Latin, Haymo
ibid.
Introducitur sicut Elias etc. he is sod^inly introduced as is Elias. For it is
not at all to be believed that Melchi-tsedek was without father or without
Mother (for Christ according to either nature had father and mother) but it is
so said of him, because he is so suddenly introduced in holy scripture. Whereto
accords that of the Sirian Interpretor: Whose father nor mother is writ in
the Genealogies: but still of the Hebrews affirmed to be Shem, for sundry
probable respects: howsoever in the story he comes in with a New name, for a
mystical purpose. But consider the things in Christ, and we shall find all in
him substantially: without father, so was Christ in respect of his Manhood:
without mother, so was Christ in respect of his Godhead: without kindred, in
respect of both Natures united in one person: for as the Father and Holy Ghost
were not Hominified, so (to the checking our Familists) Mankind is not
Goddified. Having neither beginning of his days, nor end of his life, in
respect of his eternal Godhead, he had no beginning: and in respect of both
natures effecting one person Mediator, his life is without ending. On the
cross he laid down his bodies life for a season, but took it up again by
the Spirit of Sanctification: so that howsoever he may be said then (regarding
the Abstract) to be Alive and Dead: yet respecting the Concrete (for the Person
was not dissolved) he may be said, even in the Grave to be living. Thus the
Creature shadowed the Creator: and that which was said of Melchi-tsedek
(Kata^ti) respectively, is verified in Christ ( haplos) simply, properly, fully.

For the name, it is precisely opened unto the Hebr. 7.2.
Hebrews: first, when he is said to be Melchi-ts^d^k King of Righteousness or
Justice: secondly, when it said he was Melchi-salem, King of Peace. His
Righteousness appears to be such, as when Genesis 14
Amraphel, Arioch, Kedor-laomer and Tidal the four Kings, did make war with
five Kings of the plain, about justice and injustice: then was this
Melchi-tsedek vnchalenged, vncharged of wrong. His Peace appears, in that he
had no war with others, nor others with him, even when all the Country round
about him was together by the ears. And so for his time, he might well be
termed a King of righteousness, a King of peace. But for the perfection of these
attributes, it could not be applied to See for Salem my Description of New
Ierus^^lem
Salems (or Ieru-salems) King: seeing, only he could properly be termed king of
Righteousness and Peace, that should be the Fountain and Original of
righteousness and Peace. And that only can be found in Messiah, for which he is
termed of Isaiah cha. 9.6. Sar-shalom the Prince of peace: and in chap. 53.11.
to be that tsaddik Righteous one that shall justify Many. For this
Righteousness and Peace is not as a standing poole, a quality in himself for
himself: but as a fountain springing up in all the faith-full for their peace
and justification And for this cause, the Apostle terms him (...), our peace:
and (...), our Righteousness, Ephesians. 1.14.1. Cor. 1.30. Because in no other
person or thing, the Churches peace and justification is to be found: not from
an other (then Jesus) is Justice, is peace to be derived. So that Justification
by Christ only, true peace of conscience in Christ only, it is no new doctrine,
but preached long since in Melchi-tsedeks name: not to mention the first
preaching of it in Paradise, Genesis 3.15. Further hereof in his office. For his
office, it was double: first, in that he was a King: secondly, Priest. For his
Kingship, it is made excellent from the place: he was King of Shalem. Shalem
was afterward called Iebus of the Iebusites inhabiting it: and after that,
Ierushalem: five miles (as Chytraeus, alleged by Master H. Br.
some take it) from Hebro^, where Abraham dwelt. Shalem being Peace, who should
this city, of peace be? Not the wicked: for to them (says my God) there is no
peace, Isa. 57.35. then it must needs be the Godly, who of Ezekiel. (48.35.)
are termed Iehouah-shammah, because the Lord dwells There: represented by
Ierushalems peace, when Shelomoh (or Solomon the Peaceable) was King in it.
This peace is begun here, but perfected elsewhere, and that only when we
shall have attained our perfection laid up in Christ.

Secondly, he was Cohen, a Priest: enlarged by mentioning him to whom he was
Priest or sacrificer: namely, Leel Gneleon, To the most high God. By which
addition he is distinguished from all false Priests. So that thus he was the
only open King for justice, and the Highest Sacrificer to the true God in that
age. If it be lawful to divine, who (of all men mentioned in the scripture,
then living) this King and Priest may be, me thinks he should not be any other
than that Son of Noah (not borne in, nor much known to the new-world) in whose
tents God was to dwell, till Iaphet (in his Gentiles) should be by the Gospel
persuaded to return and dwell therein.

But wherein does he show him a King and a Priest? He shows himself a King,
when as Hotsia lechem vajajin, he caused to be brought forth bread and wine for
refreshing Abraham and his people: which very well of the Look in my
Bibliothecaes 14. chapter Elucid. whereto may be added Bed a hereon: Isidore de
eccl. Offic. l. 1 cap. 18. with Cyprian, Macarius, Ba^^, ^erome, Theoderet,
Damas^ene, Gis^^bert, etc.
Ancients was observed to shadow forth that Souls refection, which is offered
to us in the new Testament under sacramental bread and wine. In which respect
Chrisos. is bold to say, protulit sacramenta, he brought forth sacraments, in
Psalm. 109. secundum Lat. that is such sacramental Signs, as only in right
appertain to Abraham and the faithful, who by fa^^h see and apprehend a
mystery under the letter, Christ under the shadow, eternal food under
elements temporary: this offered and given as freely to all suc^, are tired
with fighting against the Devil, World and Flesh: as the former to Abraham's
literal soldiers, returning wearied from the battle.

Touching his Priesthood, it is recorded of him, Vajebarcehu he blessed him:
and the blessing was this: Blessed be Abram to God most high, the possessor of
heaven and earth. Melchi-tsedek pronounces this blessing, but Messiah could
only give this blessing: for He only had all power in heaven and earth given
him, for the good of his people. Glorious was the blessing pronounced (in Numb.
6.24, etc.) by the chief legal Priests, but the Exhibitor of these blessings
was only Christ Jesus, figured by them and this. Old Isaac could say to E^au
of Iaakob: I have blessed him, and he shall be blessed: but without all shadow it
may be substantially pronounced of Jesus: my people I have blessed, and (maugre
all the Gates of Hell) they shall be blessed. Further to speak of shadow in King
and Priest, I refer to some other persons under the Law. Let this here
suffice for Melchi-tsedek.

Lect. XX. Isaac.
ISaac is the next I here observe: whom the Author to the Hebrews remembers to
be a Type, when as he says that Abraham received him from death Heb. 11.19
(...), in a parable, that is, in shadowing sort. For the Apostle Paul, he
teaches the Galat. 4^^
Galatians, that in Isaac another thing was meant. The first points at
Christ, who dying yet was not dead^ the second (in a secondary sense)
expounds Isaac to shadow the church or faithful, who become that they are,
by God his promise, not by nature.

How he represents Christ, might many ways be observed: only I will observe
that part of his history in Genesis 22. whereto the Author to the Hebrews
relates. And herein I will observe, first the Name: secondly, the Thing. His
name is Isaac (in Hebrew form Of Tsacak to laugh.
Iitscak) in English Laughter. And who is the Churches laughter? The Psalmist
says, that when Israel was freed from Babels capituity, Psalm. 120.1.
their mouths were filled with laughter. As that deliverance shadowed the
faithful their freedom from satan and sins captivity, so their deliverer
is Christ (whereof after) and He is it only, Clem. Alex. in padagog. l. 1. c.
^.
that fills our hearts with laughter. For which the Apostle says, Philipp.
4.4.
Rejoice in the Lord always, again I say rejoice. And indeed, all laughter and
joy out of Christ, is but a Diabolical grinning. Abraham hearing that he
should have a son in his old age, he (for joy) laughed: and the world in his
old age bringing forth Christ Jesus (according to the ancient promise) has
occasion much more of laughter and holy rejoicing. God give us hearts to
rejoice in this Isaac.

For the thing, Isaac was freely offered up of Abraham: and yet not He, but the
Ram died. The Ancients here have observed and applied much. I only here do
urge these particulars Beda in Genesis 22.
Sicut Isaac ipse sibi ligna portauit, ita Christus in humeris portauit lignum
crucis: as Isaac himself carried wood for himself, so did Christ Jesus carry
the wodden cross. Isid^r de e^cl. offic^is, l. 1 c. 29
Because with the wood (that is, the fruit of the tree) we were wounded in
Adam, we are again by the mystery of wood, healed: namely, by Christ his
death upon the legal tree accursed. For he became a curse for us, that we
might become a blessing to his Father. Furthermore, when all came to all, the
only begotten of Abraham died not, but the Ram entangled in the briers,
died. So, not the only begotten of our heavenly father died, in the nature
whereby he was his only begotten: but in his sheepish nature, by which he set
free the sheep of his pasture. Died he not? The like has Beda heereon.
Significat domini diuinitatem, dum non fuit occisus: in that he was not
slain, that represents his divine nature. Gregor. in 6. hom. in Ezec.
He so died for us in his humanity, as notwithstanding he remained immortal in
his divinity. The Godhead being impassible, it was by the Scape-goate in
Leuiticus 16. that went from the sight of men al-arets gezerah into the land of
sequestration. As for his Humane nature, that was the Ram entangled in the
briers and thickets of our sins: for if worldly cares be thorns ( Math.
13.22.) then well may the sins of the world be the thickets that held Christ
Jesus to death. So I understand it of sins, rather then with some other of
sinners. And yet it is true, that abominable sinners compared to thorns, 2.
Sam. 23.6. they apprehended and bound him as a Malefactor. Rab. hereon.
Others understand it of Christ, crowned by the Jews with thorn: and so
indeed he was crowned and abused. But properly, and next hand it was our
sins put upon him, that captiued his humanity, during the occultation of his
divinity. O cruel crown of thorn, deserving nothing at all to be
worshipped: but much more cruel sinners that bound him as a Malefactor: and
notorious pricking sins, that plagued him to the death. The snares of death
took hold of him, when our snare thereby was broken, and we (as a Bird)
delivered. Well may the mountain where he suffered, be called Iehouah-ijreh,
The Lord will provide: for as it was promised to Abraham, it has been
performed to us, God has provided: what? a Savior for his people. The Lord
make us thankful.

That secondary sense, whereby Isaac shadowed the Church, I here omit. And
this shall suffice for a ^aste of Personal shadows before the Law. Now I will
(as God shall enable) begin with such personal types, as were under the
times of the Law: and hereof also but a taste of some few. And this is it to
be done, first by producing some circumcised: secondly, some uncircumcised: and
yet both sorts figures of Messiah and glorious things accompanying him. For
circumcised under the Law, I first will propound Aharon, the great son of
Leui, the high priest, first ordained to Isreal's tabernacle.

Lect. XXI. Aharon.
IN Aharon I will not observe, whatsoever might be observed (for that were to
exceed much the proportion I have kept before in other shadows) but only
these particulars: first, his Name: secondly, his Office or function. And in
that function, first, his form of Instalment: secondly, his garments thereto
consecrated: thirdly, the official Action. First, to his Name Of Har, or herer.
Aharon is a Mountain: or (as Ancients usually expound it) a mountain of
height, or, high mountain. And how well in this Name, Messiah and his Kingdom
is shadowed, let us consider, specially in two scriptures. The first shall be
that in Isaiah, 2.2. the second, that in Dan. 2.44, 45. Isaiah says, that in
the latest of Days (Beacharith haiamim) The mountain (even) the house of the
Lord, should be prepared in the height of the mountains, and that it should
Lift up it self above the Hills, and whereto all Nations should flow, etc.
that is, In the latest or last of the worlds days (that is, in the worlds sixth
age) God will effect this glorious work: namely, he will Lift up his Son,
and he shall draw all faithful of the Gentiles so well as of Jews) unto him.
A standart shall be lift up, and from far they shall bring their sons and
daughters to march under it, to become subjects of this kingdom, called
typically sometimes, The mountain of his holiness. As for Daniel, he tells
Nebuchadnetsar plainly, how in the last times, God would set up a Kingdom
which should never be destroyed: yea, such a Kingdom, as should abolish humane
vain Regiments, for making room to it self: because of Dan. 2.34*35
a little stone cut from the mountain, it should grow to be a great mountain,
filling the whole earth. Which Stone is that Petra where of Petrus took name:
the corner stone and Rock of our Salvation: who (howsoever small at first) yet
finally is grown as a mighty mountain, his Christian Kingdom filling the
earth: which is indeed the Real mountain of Gods Holiness. He, the Stone
and Head, but his mystical body and Church i^ the Kingdom and large spread
mountain: for such is the union of Christ and his members, that what is first
said of him, is often again in the second place applied unto them; specially,
in their ioynt-communion. And thus in the name of Aharon is shadowed forth,
that Messiah in his mystical body, is as a Mountain: first, so* Eminency and
height over all the earth (He over the People: his people over the earthly
Abiects) secondly, for Universality: seeing in tract of due time, his Church
should no more be paled in Judea, but should flow through the earth with such
success, as it should never be destroyed. The breadth, the length and depth,
and height of our heavenly Father his love in Christ, it secretly is couched in
this little Name; O thou great man of God, Aharon!

For his Office, it was Kehunnah, that of Priesthood, incommended to Israel,
till Messiah came; Read the 7, 8, 9, and 10 chapt. to the hebrews.
who was to be a Pri^st after an other order, even of that in Melchi-tsedek: a
Kingly priesthood. And so our Lord and great priest came not of Leuies tribe
(as did all the legal priesthood) but of King^y Judah, as is evident, hebr.
7.14, 15. And as this legal priesthood was only tied to Leuies type, during
their ceremonial service: so, not every Leuite offered this sacrifice but such
sufficient-ones only, as were of Leuies son Kohath. As for the two younger
houses ( Gershom and Merari) they were shut from the Altar, and employed in
inferior places and seruice^, Numb. 3. and 4. Wherein (though darkely) might
be represented Christ the elder brother, in whom the sacrifice satisfactory
rested: together with his two younger brethren (for we are all so called to be
priests, Revel 16. Pet. 2.9. Romans 22.1.) namely, Minister and Layman: who are
employed in inferior services, subordinate to Christ Jesus our hie-priest.
Which priesthood of ours, consisting in offering up our selves a reasonable
sacrifice, is as far differing from that of Christ's, as Gershoms and Meraris
from that of Kohath. Gershom and Merari with Israel, were called Exodus 19.6
a Kingdom of Priests, as now all Christians are termed to the same God, Kings
and Priests: but as he was To die the death, whatsoever he was that touched
the arc with Vzzah, though a Leuite, but not of Kohath and Aaron: so
whatsoever he amongst Christians, that shall usurp upon Christ's sacrifice, or
(with Apostate Papisme) encro^h on his office, they stand condemned of high
treason, conspired against the Lord and his Anointed: for M^ssiah is the
Sacrificer absolute, having trod the wine press alone. They and we are but
S^crificers Respective, so termed in respect of conforming our selves unto him,
who has been so sufficient for us: as members not vn-naturall, must needs
conform themselves to their head. This generally of the Office shadowing and
shadowed: now to the three particulars before specified: his Enstalment, his
Garments, his Action.

For his Enstalment, Compare Exodus 28. and 29. with Leuit. 8. and 39.40
first, Moses (bearing the person of God) he causes Aaron and his Sons (for
he was to have them joined therein) to come from amongst the people assembled:
in whose presence he declares Iehouahs will touching Aaron and his sons for
s^crifice-hood. Secondly, Moses w^sheth them with water. Thirdly, he puts on
them the prescribed ceremonial garments. Fourthly, he fills their hands with
obl^tions frumentall and animal: shaking them before the Lord, and then
offering them according to the ceremony prescribed: putting of the blood on
their right ear, on the thumb of their right hand, and on the great toe of
their right foot, annoynting them with the sacred oil. Fifthly, they feasted
at the Tabernacles door with the consecrated bread and flesh. Sixthly, they were
to watch seven d^yes and seven nights at the tabernacles door: for that was
the time of their consecration, as they would avoyde to have sudden death
inflicted from heaven upon them.

All his installment (according to ceremonial appearance) it was passing
glorious: and notably shadowed forth the super-excelling installment of
Messiah to the work of Redemption. Did not Aaron take this office unto him,
but was he caled of God thereto? Hebr. 5.4.5, 5, 9, 10.
So neither did Christ take this honor to be made the hie-priest, but he that
said unto him, Thou art my Son this day I begot thee, even he gave it him. And
being consecrated, was made the Author of eternal salvation unto all them that
obey him: and is called of God an high priest after the order of Melchi-tsedek.
Only, where the Leuiticall priesthood had Co assistants in that sac^ifice,
Christ Jesus had no help: Isa. 63.5.
for looking about (as Isaiah ^aith) if there were any to help him, lo, there
were none, and so his own at me sustained him. Assistants he had in the
Gospels publication (namely, his Apostles, Evangelists and Prophets) but in the
work of our absolute redemption, he had no fellow: which further was shadowed
forth in the Hie-preist, who only might enter into the Sanctum sanctorum for
making atonement.

For Moses his washing them, that shadowed the immaculate and unspotted estate
of Jesus: For such an hie-priest it besemed us to have, as is holy, harmeles,
undefiled, separate from sinners, hebr. 7.26. The annoynting them with such
sauoury oil, it shad^wed the Holy Spirit with his sauory operations, by virtue
whereof, every thing in him was to his fathers nos^thrills, redolent. The blood
sprinkling and oblations burning, did fore-type, the sufferings of our
hie-priest: for without his blood was no purgation. That feasting at the
Tabernacles door, it shadowed with what cheerfulnes our Messiah came to do his
fathers will. As for the seven days and their nights they so continued, it well
resembles our Sauiors consecration for this business, to the whole seven ages
of the world: for he is the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world:
Christ' yesterday, to day and the same for ever. This instalment was preached
in Paradise, believed of Adam, shadowed in his Abels sacrifice, and so
continued almost 4000* years, what time he appeared in our nature for
effecting of that amongst men, which otherwise to his father was from the
beginning in Act, seeing with God there is no time past, or to come: but all
things present. This breifely of the installment into office.

Lect. XXII.
FOr the Garments of his office, they are numbered Beda de tabern. etc cap. 3
li. 3 for which see Exodus 28 4 etc. Isidore so understands eight, in et^m. lib.
19. cap. 21
Eight: first, A breast plate: secondly, An Ephod: thirdly, A Robe: fourthly, A
broydered Coat: fifthly, A Miter: sixthly, A Girdle: seauenthly, A plate of pure
Gold: and lastly, linen Breeches. With these eight was Aaron clothed what
time he was to exercise his Arch-function. Of the which, erant quatuor (vt
annota^it Beda) and minoris ordinis sacerdo^ibus concessa) four of these eight
were grant^d to Priests of the lower order: namely, the breches, the broidered
coat unworthily turned a strait linen, in the old latin (as Arias and
Pagnine have observed) then the Girdle and Miter. And if the M^tter and form
of this sacred attire be considered, O how truly Pontifical were they! But
thereof only a taste.

Exodus 39 27 etc. comp^r^d with ch^p 28
Their Coats, their mitred ornaments and breeches, were made of pure-fine
linen, termed Bisse. So were their girdles, but perfected up also with blew
silk, and purple, scarlet and needle-worke. But for the other garments, wherein
the Minor-priests had no interest, there behold more. The Robe (called of the
Greeks (...) a garment to the foot: such a one as our Savior is repres^nted in
Revel. 1.13.) it was to be altogether of blew silk: and the hole for the head,
of wouen work: strong as the collar of an Habergeon. Upon the skirts whereof
were tached Golden-bells and Pomegranates. The number of whch Bells (and the
Pomegran^ts must be no l^sse) are of Clem. Alex. in Strom. 5
Clemens Alexandrine s^d to be 166: but Beda de Tabernaculo, etc. lib. 3. cap.
6. So R^ban^s in Exodus both of them following Isidore.
Beda affirms them to be but 72. from the testimony of Josephus the Priest in
his Antiquities. For my part, I rest where the scripture rests. It affirms
nothing of the number: nor will I.

The Ephod (a shorter garment, drawn over the Robe) it was made of Gold, and
blew silk, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen of broyderie, upon
the two shoulders whereof were couched two Onix stones: having six of Isreal's
sons names graven in the one, and six in the other.

The Breast Plate of judgment (couched upon the Ephod, and very short) it had
the same stuff as had the Ephod: but coupled to, with gold chains fastened in
gold rings. In whose Square were couched twelve precious stones: every of these
gemmes having engraven one of the names of the Tribes of Israel. But within
this Breast Plate was put the Vrim and Thummim: two things not expressed in
scripture what they be: nor can any Jew affirm indeed, what they were. Nay, as
only they were of God given to Moses so to be inserted; so is it not probable
that ever any but Moses did see or know them. And which is more, after they
were once lost, (and in Esraes time the Priest had them not, Esr. 2.63) it
never appears they were had again. The Angel bid Manoah not enquire after
his name which was Secret: and the scriptures concealing what Vrim and Thummim
was, I leave it as a Secret.

The Plate for the Hie-priests miter, was of pure gold, tied to with a blew
silk lace, even to the front of the Miter: wherein according to art was
graven, HOLINESS TO JEHOVAH. Thus was Aarons body adorned, and so was his head
decked, and all these tirings (by reason of their mystery) precisely of the
Lord, called, (...) Bigede K^desh Garments of holiness, Exodus 28.2.4. garments
for his consecration: and yet all but Hebr. 10.1.
(...) a shadow of good things to come: namely, in Christ Jesus the Hie-priest
of our profession.

For the four tyrings of Aaron which he had in common with the
minor-p^iesthood, we may behold in them, the pure innocence of Jesus, more
white than linen, more spiritually fine than B^sse. Which Righteousness of
his imputed to his church, is called ( Revel. 19.8.) pure fine linen and
shining, even the Righteousness of the Saints. If Solomon cast his eyes to
this, no marvel though he said, Eccles. 9 8.
At all times let thy garments be white, for no such occasion of triumph, as to
wa^ke purely, having the bright shining purity of Jesus put upon us; for that
is to be clothed with Christ, as the Woman in Revel. 12. is clothed with the
Sun. More particularly, the Broydered coat may represent that Isa. 59.17.
Justice which he puts on as an habergeon. The breeches well represent his
Purity covering the shame of our nature. The Girdle of his ^oynes and reins,
is expounded of the Isa. 11 5.
Evangelical Prophet, to be Justice and faithfulness. The Miter cloased about
below, but open above, point-wise to heauen-ward, it well might shadow that
salvation which he brought from heaven, for mankind below. We, the Body that
is saved, he, the Head that saves us. And hitherto the Apostle leads us when
he wills us to take to our selves Ephesians. 6.17. compared with Isa. 59.17.
the helmet of Salvation, which is no other than our head Christ, as Simeon
well urges when he says, Mine eyes have seen my salvation. The inferior
Priest did thus in his garments represent Christ with his graces, whereby we
stand and are saved. But to take a little view of the other four garnishings
which were proper to the Hie-priest, it shall be to survay a more plenarie shadow
of all things.

The four tyrings absolute to Aaron and the Great^sacrificer in succession
unto him, be these, first, the side Robe, secondly, the Ephod, thirdly, the
Brestplate, lastly, the Golden plate. For the Robe, consider his heauen-blewe
or hyacinth color, and what can one behold therein, but glory or heavenly
majesty? such as is represented to John in Revel. 1.13. where our great
Hie-priest stands amidst the Churches, clothed with Majesty, as with a
state-garment. As John see him, we should all see him, in the spirit of our
Mind: namely to be clothed with Majesty and renown; no more knowing Christ
according to the flesh, but according to his glorious immortality, from the
abolishment of corruption in all his mystical members: for to them it is
finally appointed, that dishonor, corruption and immortality shall be put off,
that so they may be invested with mortality, uncorruption and glory. For, as
we have borne the image of the earthly Adam, so shall we bear the image of the
heavenly, 1. Corinthians 15, 49.

Cabalists in these 72. do understand 72. tongues and nations arising upon
Bab^ls building. Archangell in Cabalist. do^.
In the Bells and Pomegranats circuiting the skirts of this garment, much may
thereof be spoken, and all according to the analogy of faith. Whereof now
only this: In the golden bells, making a golden sound as Aaron went in and
out, not only is represented Prayer which powerfully was offered up of Jesus,
but also (and that more properly) Beda. d^ tab. lib. 3. c. 6.
Sonitus verbi, the sound of the word. Messiah himself was the Word of the
Father: by which Word the worlds were made. But the Bells here shadow not that
uncreate word, but that Creature-word which our great Messiah has sounded in
the ears of his people. Which word should be dear unto us, even as the fringe
of our garment: placed about our seete for directing str^ight steps
accordingly. Yea, it shadow-wise preaches, that we must sound well to others
for their direction also in holy duty. Specially, the Ministers of God must
v^ter this golden sound. Iram (been inquit Beda) contra se occultiiudicis
exigit, si sine praeaicationis sonitu inced^t: he p^ouoketh the anger of God
against him, who insisteth not in the sound of preaching. Nor is it s^fficient
to pray or preach, except it may be vnde^stood of Gods people: for 1. Cor. 14
8, 9
if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare hims^l^e unto
battel^? except (^aith the Apostle) ye v^ter words that have signification, how
shall it be understood what is spoken? for ye shall speak in the air. As
Christ rung this bell before us, so we are to ring it unto others: specially
that peale, whereby people may take knowledge of Messiah gone into the Holy of
holies ( Heb. 9.24.
even into the very heavens) to appear now in the sight of God for us.

For the Pome^granets, consider their composition: they were made of blew silk
and purple scarlet. Not to meddle with I^sephus, no, not with some christians
their elementall conceits grounded here upon colors: it is certain, that by
these pomegranats (a most excellent fruit) is shadowed forth good works: and
by these dainty colors is intimat^d the Beauty and comelin^sse of good
works. It is a frequent use of scripture, to compare Mankind to a tree, and
his actions to tree-fruites: and as such fruit^s are commanded, so a^e they of
the Holy Ghost commended for beauteous. Instance it but with one particular.
That love which causes brethren to dwell together in unity, is it not
commended (for Tob and Nagnim) comely and amiable? p^al. 133.1. Yea, good
works are the beauty of mankind. Which, as they abounded in Messiah, so
neither can be lacking in his members. Was it the Leuiticall posie, A Bell and
a Pome^granat, A Bell and a Pome-granat? Let it also be the Christians Emblem,
A word and a work, A word and a work: or Faith and Frui^es, profession and
practice: Say well and Do well: what thy words sound, let thy works expound.
To make a noise in words, but to abolish deeds, it is to wear a Bell without
a pome-granat, a breach of the Law. Let the many grains cou^hed under one
pill, put us in mind of ( Bedaes meditation.
multifaria virtutum operatio, vno Charitatis munimine) of the manifold
operation of virtues in one bond of Charity. Such words* such works
concurring, are as the fringe of a Christians garment: not only profitable to
the Wearers, but also to the Hearers. And this briefly of the Robe.

Lect. XXIII.
THE second differencing garment is the Aephod (an indument upon the other)
stately, for his colors and stuff: for it was made of beaten-gold,
blew-silke, and purple, and scarlet and fine twined linen: and such were the
shoulders edges. But on either shoulder should be a bosse of gold, and in the
same couched one Onix-stone, wherein Isreal's names (as before) were graven,
that so Aaron might carry the remembrance of Israel on his shoulders before
Jehovah. For the state-colours and stuff, I will meddle no more now, than
thus, they represent in Christ Jesus, nothing but that is excellent: for a
practike-rule it is in Divinity, that heavenly things incomprehensible, be
expressed by such earthly things as are excellent, and within our
comprehension. Only somewhat touching the Onix-gems on the shoulders.

The Onix in his color, is Plin. l. 37. c. 6
humani vnguis similitudine, like to the nail of a man's finger: that is,
whitely-red or ruddi-white: the very color of mankinds nature, first fetched
from the earth: excellent in the first Adam, but perfectly excellent in the
second Adam: who afterward in this song (cap. 5.10.) is said to be white and
ruddy, the chiefest of ten thousand. And therefore in this pure earthlike gemme
may well be shadowed all mankind supported by Christ Jesus, for which the
Apostle terms him (...) the Savior of all men. King of Mauritania.
Atlas of Poets is said (in respect of his great astrologicall skill) to
support the firmament on his shoulders (pretty and witty to their shadowing
purpose) but in typical Aaron do here behold him that Sustaineth all things
with his mighty word, Hebru. 1.3. But mark his carriage, with his difference.
He caries all things (chiefly, all men) but so, as principally he sustaineth
the Israel of God. Which when the Apostle considers, unto this ( The savior
of all men) he adds, (...), specially of belieuers (1. Tim. 4.10.) even as
here in the shadow, he vpholdeth all mankind, but specially Belieuers, the
Israel of God, whose names are expressly engraven on his shoulders (as good as
written in the palm of his hand) by reason whereof, their mystical walls are
even in his sight. Let heavens fall, let earth move, yet God is good to
Israel, even to the pure in heart. Let the mother forget the child, yet will
he never forget his people. To that end has our Hie-priest undertaken our
flesh-like Onych nature, that he might save all such as come unto the Father by
him. This briefly of the Aephod: now next to his Breastplate.

After the differencing tires of Robe and Superhumerall, we are to consider
the Rational or Breast Plate of Judgment. For color and stuff, it was like
the Superhumerall or Aephod* but in length and breadth only of an hand: coopled
at the corners with gold chains, fastened to rings. Afterward, there were
platted upon it 12. precious stones (every stone having graven in it one of
Isreal's sons names) but within was secretly couched, the Mystical Vrim and
Thummim. And (according to former proportion) hereof so briefly as I may.

The colors and stuff, do still shadow forth, that every thing in Christ
Jesus, is glorious and excellent. The Rationalls square form, with his 12*
precious gemmes and names engraven, does point unto Revel. 22.14.15 where the
new Ierushalem is foure-square, and the foundation 12. precious stones, wherein
the names of the Apostles were written. De tabern. lib. 3. cap. 5.
As Beda by the 2. shoulders could understand the Church; first of Jews,
secondly of Gentiles: so by Aarons Pectorall, we are well to understand the
ancient church in Revel. 7.4. etc. pointing at Saint John's Pectorall,
representing a large Church of the Gentiles. And therefore, where Aarons
Breast Plate was but an hand-square: Saint John sees a new pectorall,
thousands of cubits square. But as Christ is the Rock whereon the whole Church
of Jews and Gentiles is builded: so all that is represented by Aharons Breast,
whereon this Rational (or reasonable people) is placed. Wherewith is to be
observed, how every faithful soul is, before God, as a Gemme of much price:
though differing in colors (for the same measure of glorification is not to
all) nor every one of same operation (for one and the same spirit ministers
diversely) yet, all virtuous, all gracious, all members of Jesus.

For Vrim and Thummim we know as Nownes Common, but not as Names proper. Both
of them are Nownes of the plural number: the first signifying Flames or
Lights: the other signifying Perfections or finishments. For some Greeks and
some Latins they have used other version, but I know not how to defend it. As
they were in this Breast Plate, so were they names proper, but so we know them
not. And this well shadows out Messiah, Coloss. 2.3.
in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge: who is to his
members the same that Vrim and Thummim was to the Gemmes, namely a reuealer of
his fathers secret: for where these are gathered together in his name, there
he will (by his spirit) be amidst them, for leading them into all truth. And
if it be lawful for me to guess, how this Vrim and Thummim did manifest
Iehouahs secret, I take it to be by illumining such a Gemme or Gemmes, (whom
the case concerned in regard of such a tribe, tribes, or family) with perfect
letters or writing for that present: and so Vrim to have his name in regard of
that Light; and Thummim to be so called, in Respect of his perfect or absolute
declaration: finishing and putting an end to some scruple. But howsoever, two
glorious hid creatures they were, whereby (as by instruments) it pleased God to
reveal some secret, when Aharon consulted. And as the father reueales nothing
but by his son ( John 1.^.
for he is that true light, which lightneth every man that is borne into the
world) so is there no coming unto the Father but by him. As for the Romanists,
who affirm that [ Decret. lib. Sext. cap. 1.
Romanus Pontifex iura omnia in scrinio pectoris sui clensetur habere,] the
Roman Hie-priest is to be thought to have all laws in the closet of his
breast: they herein do but labor to hoise up a ^east into Christ's place, who
only is the Wisdom of his father. For their Apostaticall Beast, he is rather
(...), that Outlaw spoken of in 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. figured by Antiochus Epiphanes
in Daniel 7.8.20. etc. ^ermed Zech. 11. vlt.
Rogni haae^l my vain shepherd, a fugitive from the flock: upon whose right
hand and eye the sword of Gods judgment is. By reason whereof, neither can his
hand hold the sheep-crooke, nor his eye discern the true sheepefold. This
briefly of the Pectorall.

The fourth and last differencing tire is a Plate, made of pure gold, put
upon a blew silk tape, wherewithal it was tied to the fore front of the
Miter: in which was curiously engraven, (...) Holiness to Jehovah. And this was
Aaron to bear on his head, for taking away such sins of the people as were
mingled with the sacrifices; that so God might be well pleased with sacrificer
and sacrifice. All which shadoweth a necessity of Messiah, ^uen in our best
actions. First, Our Aaron and Aarons head is Christ Jesus ( Coloss. 1.18.) and
Clem. Alex. in strom. 5.
That Savior is the head of his church, who has for sign of his regal
empery [Pileus capiti impositus] that Bonet on his head. Secondly, for the
s^cred Superscription, it plainly preaches, that all Sanctity is to be
ascribed to the Lord. And that Isaiahs Seraphim (in chap. 6.) do testify: when
(as out of fiery flames) they cry, holy, holy, holy, Lord God of hosts. All
holy art thou O sacred trinity and unity; and with thee dwells nothing but
holiness. Thi^dly, and whereas Aaron must by intercession remove the
Israelites stains in sacrifice, it teaches: first, that in all our spiritual
obl^tions (prayers, pre^chings, alms etc.) there be blots and imperfections.
Not that such blots or stains be the works of ^aith, or effects of God his
grace in us, (for that were to blaspheme God and his grace, whose ^ffects are
all holy, as be their Cause) but they be cankered blossoms of the unregenerate
part, who never can be but filthy like the old Adam they flow from. In which
respect, so long as the old Adam is our crooked neighbor (which will be all
our lifetime here) we all are ever to pray for the remission of our
trespasses. Secondly, it teaches us to offer no word nor work to God, but by
his son our Mediator and Hie-priest, Christ. And this is by vision signified
to S. John (in Revel. 8) where the prayers of the Saints are offered up in the
golden censor of the great Angel of Covenant, that is, Christ Jesus. And S.
Peter (in his 1. ep. 2. chap.) expresses it plainly, when he terms the
faithful, an holy priesthood, for offering up spiritual sacrifices acceptable
to God by Christ jesus: a doctrine right frequent in scripture. For this is the
Mal. 3.1, 2, 3.
Maleac habberith the Angel of that covenant; who shall sit down to try and
fine the silver: he shall even fine the sons of Leui, and purify them as
gold and silver, that they may bring to the Lord in Righteousn^sse.

Thus Christ our Aaron, has perfectly put upon him all the Judgment, justice,
truth and holiness that was shadowed in Aaron, and every of Isreal's
hie-priests. It remains, that we, by truth of faith, do Romans 13.14
put on the Lord Jesus Christ as a garment, for our able standing before God in
his glorious day of judgment.

Lect. XXIIII.
THE Instalments and Garments thus spoken of, it now rests I say something of
Arons Action, in respect of his sacrificehood: and yet thereof but a little. It
consists, first, in Oblation: secondly, in Benediction or blessing. Oblation,
is the offering up of some ceremonial creature unto God, in the behoof of the
church. And this is to be considered; first, in his offerings presented in the
Holy-place or Sanctum: secondly in the things which he presented in the most
holy or Sanctum Sanctorum.

The things offered up in the Sanctum (for the Tabernacle was divided into the
Court Sanctum, and Sanctum-sanctorum) Number. 18.1, 2 and 28.1, etc.
this Hie-priest had in common with the Minor priests, but the Hie-priest still
superior in such oblations. And these kind of off^ings were Daily. But an other
kind of oblation (peculiar to the Hebr. 9 6.7 Leu. 16.2. etc
hie-priest) appertained to the sanctum-sanctorum or Most-holy: into the which
none might enter but the Arch-sacrificer: and this only, once in the year
(namely, in the tenth day of their seventh month ( Tishri* answering to the
most part of our September) termed the feast of expiation, Leuit. 16.

In his daily sacrifice, was shadowed forth that Lamb, which with God was
slain from the beginning of the world: even Christ Jesus, shadowed in the
sacrifices of Adam, Abel, Sheth, and so forward to the time of the law. And
from that time shadowed (as in other things, so) specially in the Legal lamb
offered every morning and night: first in the Tabernacle, then afterward in
the Temple. So that it may well be said of him, that he was killed all the day
long; yea, all the worlds years along. The Minor-priests (that is the Heads of
faithful families) did ply the shadowing Altar with such types: but Christ
(our Aaron) he was the Head-priest, and Governor of his holy Family: who
(being better then the figure) did not offer for his own sins (in that he
was sinlesse) but for the sins of his people. And this in mystery he did and
does ever: for which he is termed (as before) a priest according to the Order of
Mel^hi-tsedek, that is, an Eternal priest: more perfect than that of Aaron.

But for offering up himself Actually in that our Nature which Really is to
satisfy for transgression, it was to fall out in the end of the world, (
hebrews 9.26.) that is, in the last Age or mystical Day. Which oblation, as it
was himself, so but One, and Once represented by that one day of Expiation,
wherein the hie-priest was to enter the Most-holy. Then the which what can be
said more fully, for abolishment of Romish Real flesh-sacrifice, which daily
their blasphemous Priests, would be thought to offer up, after that by
muttering, charming, breathing they have made to them the body of a false
Christ, begotten of Bake^s bread. In the generation of which false Christ, the
Bread is Patient in room of the Virgin: and their unholy breath is Agent,
insteade of the Holy Ghost ouer-shadowing. The very repetition of which
Stage Play is a sufficient conf^tation: So much briefly of Aarons oblation.

Aarons Benediction or Blessing, it is either that which he powered out upon
inferior officers: or else, upon all the people. The inferior officers were,
first, Minorit-priests: secondly, Serviceable Levites: for every Priest under
the Law was a Leuite, but not every Leuite a priest. For these officers
ecclesias^^ke, they were blessed of the Hie-priest in their Number 8.11 vsque ad
sinem.
entrance into such function: together with other peculiar ceremonies. For
blessing the people, that specially was done at the time of their public
worship (as in Leuit. 9.22.23. Numb. 6.22. etc.) the equity of both lying in
that Ancient Canon: hebr. 7.7.
Without all Contradiction, the Lesser is to be blessed of the Greater. By all
which is lively shadowed, that Christ our high priest is only he, by whom
Minister and people become blessed. The heavenly father blesses, but by his
Son our Mystical Aaron. This does the Apostle remember, when to the
Ephesians (chap. 1.3.) he thus prays: Blessed be God, even the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, which has blessed us with all spiritual Blessing in
heavenly thing^s, through Christ. And of him it can be only essentially said,
that he, the Greater, blesses us the Lesser. Who (as before he was shadowed
in Isaac, so he) can only say, Such I have blessed, and they shall be blessed.
Which action of blessing is in the Gospel very frequent: whereas, not only he
blesses Ministers and people, but also meat and drink, a more inferior
creature. To him let minister and people repair for a blessing: Ministers for
speaking effectually, People for hearing effectually. If he bless, their water
is turned strait to wine: but if he curse, their thigh rottes, and their
figtree will never become fruitful. Let this here suffice for Aaron.

Lect. XXV. Joshua.
THe next personal Shadow shall be that great successor of Moses, the Leader and
Planter of Israel in Canaan: who primordially was termed Hoshea; but
secondarily IEHOSHVA, Number. 13.9.17. The Talmud Hieros. in Cohem Gad^^: observed
of master H. Br. in Dan.
Rabbines do prettily search out from whence this Iod comes (for so Hebrews
do term the letter I,) which here is preponed to Hoshea; by which it comes
in hebrew form, to be Iehoshua. Who therein observe how it was that IOD, which
was taken from Abraham's wife, when of Sarai she was called Sarah, Genes. 17.15.
Which letter IOD (of Greeks called Iota) wandered as without a resting place,
till such time as it found a place in Hoshea. Whereto that ancient proverb
might well allude in Math. 5.18. One Jot, or one title shall not escape, till
all things be fulfilled. If the Jewish Cabalists were not here blind, Sarah
should not more easily lead them to Iosuah, then the blessed Virgin might
lead them to JESUS. Nor (were not a veil over their eyes) could they rest in
this, that Hoshea assumed Iod from Sarah: but rather Cabalike-wise be led
thereby to Jesus, who assumed the Woman's seed, the seed of a Virgin: that so,
what woman had lost, it might be found in Jesus. Did Moses the great Lawgiver,
afford that IOD to the Archduke of Israel? But Jehovah (greater than Moses) he
that gave the law primordia^ly to Moses, even he gave a Jot of woman's seed to
our captain Christ. Nor what the Father has given him, can any man or Devil
pull out of his hands. This to the Cabalists.

But for our more particular information, let us consider this shadow, first,
in his Name: secondly, in his Office. The name Hoshea or Iehoshua or Joshua,
they are in hebrew form, the very same that Jesus is in greek form. Which
causes the Author to the Hebrews, chap. 4.8. (writing in Greek) not to say,
If Ioshuah had given them rest, etc. but, If Jesus had given them rest: for
every of them are derived of one and the same Root ( Iash^, not sounding
Gnaijn) and in english is a Savior, according to the interpretation of that
very Ang^ll Gabriel, in Math. 1.21. where the promised seed is termed Jesus,
why? Because he shall save his people from their sins: even as the Judges
(after Joshua) were termed Saviors, for God stirred them up temporarily to
save Israel from the yoke of the enemies. So that Hoshea and Jesus have one and
the same name of Savior: the first of them tempora^ly Nom^n enim Jesus (quod in
lege praedicabitur) erat adumbratio Domini: Clem. Alex. in paedag. lib. 1. cap.
7.
saving Israel, according to the proportion of a shadow: the second saving all
his people eternally, according to the proportion of a substance.

For his Office, it has generally been noted in his Names signification,
which more particularly I will observe: first, in his Conducting of Israel:
secondly, in his Circumcising of Israel: thirdly, in his Dispossessing of
Cananites, and Possessing Israel of Canaan. In conducting of Israel, he
shadowed our Savior Jesus, who unto Joshua (in chap. 5.14.) does term
himself Sar-tseba-Iehouah, The captain of Iehouahs Army: that is, the Leader
of his people. In which respect also every Judicial and Regal Annointed-ones
were figures. And blessed are that people, who have Christ Jesus for their
Joshua, for their Gedeon, for their David, for their Captain. All Baptized-ones
do profess that ( By God his grace) they will march under his Banner (a
red-crosse in the white-field of an vnspott^d Conscience) fighting against the
Devil, the World, and Flesh. As they would not be arraigned of perjury, yea,
of capital hie treason in conspiring with the enemy, let all such look to
that sacramental oath, and at least (now at last) become more faithful
Followers.

2 Joshua receiving commandment of God, to Circumcise Israel now the Second
time (chap 5.2.) it will shadow forth that Circumcision which is made without
hands, Coloss 2.11. (and the very same repres^nted by Baptism) which is an
inward circumcision made by the Spirit. This the Apostle (in Romans 2.29.) does
call, Circumcision of the heart in the spirit, because in such an heart was
that mortification which was represented by the outward sign. But for the
first circumcision, he says it is in the letter, that is, only according to
outward observance: and this he says, does make a true Jew, that is, a true
Christian to Godward. As that second circumcision did well represent
Regeneration, so Joshua herein did well r^present our Jesus, by whose spirit
and word we are inwardly circumcised and Baptized: for though John power on the
water, yet Christ must minister the Spirit. Orig. on Ios. 5.
It is Christ that has given us the second circumcision by Baptism of
New Birth; it is he that has purged our souls. Nor without the second
Circumcision, is the shame of our mystical Egypt, removed.

3 Joshua Dispossessing Canaan of the uncircumcised, he therein may well shadow
forth Christ Jesus two ways: first, in dispossessing the earth of the
reprobate, that so the meeke-ones may possess it, Math. 5.5.2. Pet. 3.13. For
as it was created for the sons of God, so only they shall finally possess
it, and have a glorious use of it. Secondly, it may well shadow also, the
dispossessing our bodi^y earthly Canaan of spiritual Cananites (of
uncircumcised sense and affection) and this was Orig. on Josh. Lect. 1. and in
Tropolog.
Origens meditation, when he thus writ: Within us are these Nations of vices.
For within us are Cananites, within us are Perezites, within us are Iebusites.
Yea, I say more, that the seven accursed Nations (of Cananites, Hittites,
Hiuites, Perizzites, Girgashites, Amorites, and Iebusites) are naturally within
us: who only can be cast forth by that stronger-man Jesus, as sometimes the
former nations were cast forth by Ioshu. 24.11
Joshua: and as (after that) seven devils were cast out of Mary Magdalene by
Christ Jesus. But the dispossessing of evil is here but in part (for still
there is some Canaanite in our land) and so we be taken up for better use but
in part. But when our Aug. cont. F^ust. lib. 16 remembers this.
Jesus shall come from Paran mystical ( Habak. 3.3.) as Joshua did from Paran
literal ( Numb. 13.1.) he shall, not only begin, but also live to perfect
such purgation. So much for Joshua.

Lect. XXVI. Samson.
THe next shadow I select from many, is Samson, or (according to Hebrew form)
Shimshon. In whom we will consider, first his names signification: secondly,
his calling. His name (being derived of Shemesh) it is ( Sol-eius) as much to
say in English, as his-sunne. Amongst the Judges stirred up to save Israel,
Samson shined as a Sun in that Churches firmament. All of them stars, but
this Deliverer a Sun among the stars, casting his glorious lightsome beams
through Canaan and Palestina. But if we make transition from this shadow to his
substance, we shall find Messiah to be that glorious bright Sun wherewith
the Church is environed in Revel. 12.1. etc. out of whose Goshen there is
nothing but Egyptian darkness. This (in mystery) is that Sun in Psalm.
19.6. Who is like a Bridegroom coming forth of his nuptial chamber ( for he
that has the Bride, is the Bridegroom, Ioh. 3.29.) and he is that Gibbot
mighty strong-man that runs his course, and none can resist him. When the
Jews and Gentiles, by nailing him to the cross, and sealing him in a tomb,
did labor to stay his course, they yet prevailed not: for his sound went forth
to the ends of the earth right quickly, Romans 10.18. Mean time, as they abused
him on the cross, the very firmamentall Sun did preach to all the world,
that the divine Son of heaven was suffering an eclipse in his course. At the
eclipsing of whose Glory, that sphericall Sun did blush, did turn away his
light, as abashed at mankind, that shamed not to do violence to the Author
of Nature, the beginner and finisher of our salvation. In comparison of this
Sun, Samson was but a star: for from this Sun, all Churches stars do
mutuate their glittering shine, do derive their Glory. Which Sun, as it has
these forty years together (and upward) given a large shine in our land by
the beams of his Gospel: so, God grant that our sins do not cause this
Sun to set: that we nail him not in his members on the cross, lest
spiritual darkness cover all our ear^h at noone-tide.

For Samsons Calling, it is twofold: first, Ceremonial: and secondly, Moral.
His Ceremonial Calling is that whereby he was imme^iately sep^rate from the
womb, for which he was called Nazarite. His Moral vocation is that whereby
in ripe years he became a Martial Judge over Israel. For his Ceremonial
title, we will first consider the Word, then secondly his Ceremony. The word
Nazarite (of Nazar) does signify One separated or exempted from common
things, to the end a certain vow may be performed to the Lord, as in Numb.
6.2. And indeed, our sacred vows to God will not be performed, otherwise then
with Henoch and the Nazarite we separate our selves from the common courses of
Men, that so we may walk with God. And such perfect separation was in Christ,
for which he is so often of the Holy Ghost termed Nazarite.

I am not ignorant, that many (from Math. 2.23.) do affirm that Jesus is
termed Nazarite, not in respect of the ceremonial term, but of the City
Nazaret wherein he sometimes dwelled. And their reason is twofold: first,
because Saint Matthew says, that his dwelling in that City gave cause, why he
should be called Nazarite: secondly, because the Syriak text reads Look^
Tremelius thereon
Natsareth with tsadi, not Nazareth with zaijn. For the Syriaks form of
writing, it is not much material: seeing Translators use much liberty in
proper Names: as in the Gospel, one and the same word is written diversely, as
Gersene, Math. 8.28. is Gaderene, Luke 8.26. Mark 5.1. so Simson in Hebrew (if
we aspirate not Shin) is Sampson in Greek, and Samson in Latin. Which over
much respect to the Syriake, has not only led many to think that our Savior
had the name Nazarite only from that City, but also, that the town Nazareth
had allusion to Isaiah 11.1. where Christ being prophesied of, the Prophet
says, And there shall come a rod forth of the stock of Ishaj [Venetser] and
a graffe out of his root: or as some will, a goodly spring out of his roots:
though indeed I cannot see how Netser can signify a spring, except by spring
they mean a sprout, twigge, or ^prig. But passing by the Syriaks ts^ it is
sufficient that the original Greek in the New testament, does never write it
otherwise then with z, because the Greeks z^ia does naturally express the
Hebrews zaijn not tsadi. Nor would it be vnheeded, that the Holy Ghost still
reads, (...) (or (...)) Jesus the, or that Nazarite, rather than of Nazareth.

Touching Saint Matthew, it is true, that the people took occasion of so
terming him in regard of that City: but does it therefore follow, that the
Holy Ghost made the same to be his Only reason? When as Caiphas prophesied,
that It was expedient one should die for the people, understood he as the
Spirit of prophecy understood? No such matter. The soldier percing our
Saviors side, he therein fulfilled a prophecy in Zech. 12.10. and yet with no
purpose to fulfill that prophecy. But in this point the scripture is right
copious: nor unto us should it be strange, that Man often fulfilleth the
scripture unknowing: and in aiming at one end, does accomplish that which the
Holy Ghost applies to another. But to press the point a little further. Saint
Matthew saying, He went and dwelt in a City called Nazareth, that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken according to the Prophets, that he should be called
a Nazarite: in what Prophets is it so said? Find that and ^he knot is unloosed.
Read the 4. great prophets and the 12. l^sser prophets, and thou never finds
it once. In a word the prophecy appears in Judges 13.5. where it is said of
Sam^on the figure, Graec. (...).
Nezir Aelohimijhieh hannagnar, and that boy shall be called a Nazarite. Which,
howsoever found in this place alone, may be said to be according or by the
prophets: first, for that this book (containing an history of so many years)
must be pend by more th^n any one Prophet: secondly, it may be so said, in
respect of the Jewish division of the Bible, who part the old testament into
Ierom. in prologo Galeato.
three books or several volumes, thus: Genesis, Exodus, Leuit. Numb. Deuteronomy. do
make one book: Joshua, Judges and Ruth are with them but one Book: Eusebius.
eccles. hist. li. 6. out of Orig. on psalm. 1.
Judges, Samuel, Kings, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and the 12. small prophets,
all they make the second book: Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Preacher, Canticles,
Daniel, Chronicles, Ezra 1. and 2 being Nehem.
Ezra and Hester make the third book. The book of Judges so con-ioyned in the
second Volume, may well be numbered within the prophets: specially seeing
history includes prophetical mystery. And that S. Peter plainly intimates
in Act. 3.24. when he says, All the Prophets from Samuel, and thenceforth as
many as have spoken, have likewise foretold of these days.

Some understanding Joseph to be Nazarite from Genesis 49.26. (where the word
Separate is Nazir, remembered also of Moses in Deuteronomy. 33.16.) do therefore
understand the prophets Matthew speaks of, to be Iaakob, Moses, and the Penner
of Samsons story. Which indeed is something: but howsoever he was of men
called Nazarite (and that often in scorn, Nazarenus a loco, Nazarenus a merito.
^. sanctus sieve mundus: quia peccatum non fecit. Isidor. etym. lib. 7.2.
as were his disciples afterward, Act. 24.5.) yet so was he truly termed by
the Spirit of prophecy, first in respect of the Nazaren-shadow: secondly in
respect of his peculiar Nazarite, Samson He being unto both of them, the Thing
that was shadowed.

Touching the Ceremonies appertaining to a Nazarite they consist in
Abstinencee: and this, first in Samsons mother, secondly in himself. The
abstinence of his mother does consist in forbearance, first of strong drinks,
inebriating potions: secondly, in avoiding the touch of such things as the law
made unclean: and both these she has in common with the vowed Nazarite.
Compare Judge. 13. with Number. 6.
Over and besides which, the voluntary Nazarite was to abstain from shauing
and cutting of his head for a season: a vow which Saint Paul him self entered
into. Before the Laws burial or ceremonial obsequies were finished: but now
no more then other Leuiticall rites, to be practiced.

1 That abstinence from strong drinks (together with their adjuncts) did not
only argue how sober the faithful should be in their bodies, for offering
themselves up to god as a reasonable sacrifice (a thing which drunkards can no
more do then beasts) but also by this external sobriety they were taught
(and we no less to learn) the inward sobriety of the soul. Our Savior in
Luke 21.34. remembers both these thus: Beware also of your selves, lest at any
time your hearts be burdened with surfeiting and drunkenness, and with the
cares of this life: by drunkenness and surfeting understanding that which
burdens Body: by cares of this life, understanding such irregular affections
which burden the soul and make it spiritually drunken: which Timothy (the
Lords warrior) is not to cumber himself withal, and that as he would please
his master: Nor is surplussage of care and feeding only forbidden to every
Christian Nazarite: but also (in times of special duties) all use of such
principal diet is to be omitted, and every care to be cut off for pleasing our
God Of the first, good Timothy made conscience, so far, as the Apostle was
glad to teach him, that seeing he was fallen into notable weakness, he
therefore ought not any longer to drink, only water, but now, for his
stomach sake, to drink a little wine, 1. Tim. 5.23. for no abstinence is
commanded, to the destruction of the body, but only, for natures humiliation.
Many we have that will plead from this to Timothy, the liberty they have to
drink strong things, but they forget to take pains with Timothy, Barn. s^rm.
30. in Cantic.
till infirmity of body require it. Barnard reprooueth many o^ his time for
their overmuch curiosity in diet ( Qui in totus flunij^, Agris, hortis,
cellarijsue reprerire vix possint quod commenderent: Who in all rivers, fields,
orchards, cellars, can scarce find that which they may diet on: abusing to
that end, the former speech to Timothy. But what faith the good Father
further? Da mihi alterum Timotheum and ego cibo ^um sivis, etiam Aur^ and poto
balsam^. Give to me such another as Timothy was, and if thou will, I will
seed him with gold, and give him bal^^ for drink. Which scripture, as they
abuse for upholding a gluttonous beast-like life: so for nourishing inordinate
cares, they abuse another place to Timothy, where the Apostle ^aith thus: If
any one (...).
provide not for his (specially of his family) he has denied the faith, 1.
Tim. 5.8. but this helps them nothing, seeing provision may be without care of
the heart, without disturbing the affections. In which respect, the Apostle
uses a word derived of Nou^ the Mind: as if the Head and Senses (rather then
heart and affections) were employed in such christian providence or provision.
And because Christians (specially, in special duties) are not to trouble the
heart with cares of this life, our Savior sends them to learn of Birds and
Lillies (in Math. 6.) who walk on in their duties without all care and
carking. These that thus carelessly abuse scripture for maintaining their
drunken cares, we may say of them, as Isaiah said of their predecessors,
Isaiah. 29.^.
They are drunken, but not with wine: they stagger, but not with strong drink.
And therefore in such spiritual drunkenness, as incapable of divine
instruction, as Nabal in his corporeal drunkenness, was incapable of Abigails
information. For cross them in these cares, and (it may be) they will die of
the pet within 10 days after, as did Nabal: who live a contrary life to the
Nazarite, to our Savior Jesus, who not only in special cases did practice
extraordinary Fasts, but also in his whole life, did voluntarily tie himself
to a marvelous abstinence.

2 That they were bound from touching of any such thing as the ceremonial Law
reputed unclean, that did in mystery prohibit the faithful, of all communion
having with Satan and his work of death: who as he is an unclean spirit, so
every work of his is uncleanness, and to be reproved, Ephesians. 5.11. not to
be coupled with, but come out from, 2. Cor 6.14. etc. This touching of
uncleanness is twofold: either our consent too evil in Action or in
Affection: which very aptly of the Apostle is expressed by drawing in one yoke
with wickedness. Christ himself lived in a Church and Common wealth, where no
uncleanness ecclesiastical and civil was lacking What then? Was Christ
thereby made unclean? No: for neither did he Coact evil with them, not yet
Affect the evil which was amongst them: but rather (as edifying occasion was
offered) did publicly reprove them. And not to touch their impurities, neither
in affection nor action, but rather to reprove them, this is truly to come
out from amongst them. Place maybe changed, and evil actions and affections yet
continued: and evil and unclean manners may be changed where yet the place is
continued. In this abstinence from gilt of evil, all the Nazarites of God are
to labor: but only that Nazarite of Nazarites, Christ Jesus himself can
stand forth and say, I have touched no uncleanness. Only here is our comfort,
that for clensing us from such pollution, there remains a satisfactorie
oblation, Numb. 6.9. etc. And that is Christ Jesus, the Tu^tle and immaculate
Lamb, by the sheding of whose blood only we are cleansed.

3 Virumenim tonsum decet, muli^rem non d^cet, Isidor. etymol. l. 11. c. 1.
The Nazarite was to abstain from shauing and poling the Head. For the woman,
it is her praise to have long hair, because it is given her for a Covering:
and it is a woman's shame, to be s^orne or shaven: but Nature it self teaches,
that it is a shame to man, to have long hair, 1. Cor. 11.6.14.15. Howsoever
then it was a Nazarites ceremonial duty to have long hair, yet therein is
secretly preached, that there was a certain shame in such side locks: even as
it is one mark of Nebuchadnetsars being a beast, to have his hair grown long
like to Eagles feathers. Unto which sacred word of God, if our people gave
credit, then they would be so far from taking their long Medusaes shagges
for a glory, as they would therein shame and know themselves worthy to be
counted for that, amongst the number of beasts: To whom that ancient adage of
ours is adopted, Pluscri^is quam ingenij.
Bush-naturall, more hair than wit. If they would herein be Nazarites, then
let them (as before) abstain from wine, from all strong drinks, from other
dainties, and from having communion with any uncleanness. And yet if they were
minded so to do, they should but Iudaize, and after a sort preach that Christ
is not come in the flesh: seeing his so coming, is the abolishment of legal
shadows.

Our Messiah fulfilled this abstinence from Glory (in the room thereof
clothing himself with shame) not so much in wearing long hair (for I know not
whether the painter deal rightly therein) as in bearing our beastly shameful
Sins upon him, a^ a burden. Which sins of ours grew and multiplied in
length upon him (who is the Churches head) and he under them mourned, till the
time of his voluntary vow was expired. And that vow was then fulfilled, when
upon the cross he cried, Tetelestai, It is finished.

4. Whereas not only Sam^on was tied to these legal obseruances, what time
he should be borne: b^t also his Mother is of the Angel en^oyned such
abstinence before and after conception: she herein might well resemble the
blessed Virgin Marie, to whom the Angel Gabriel related the extraordinary
form of Messiahs conception, by the Holy Ghost his ouershadowing. Which
blessed Virgin (no doubt) upon such intelligence would right willingly abstain
from wh^tsoeuer might vnb^seeme such a Glorious generation: as also endeavor
aft^r every obedience, by the which she might be the fitter Temple of the
holy ghost, the fitter Mansion for the mighty God of Iaakob. With the angel
she conferred at Nazaret (Luke, 1.26. etc.) and therewithal might secretly
observe, that the Holy thing which was to be borne of her, he should be some
new Samson and extr^ordinarie Nazarite. Even he by whose abstinence Adams
Gluttony was to be cured. Even he, that should touch no unclean thing for
clensing his myst^call body: and yet should undergo our Sin and Shame for a
season, that so at last he might shave and sheare it quite off for our
Redemption. So much, as Samson was a Nazarite.

Lect. XXVII.
TOuching his Moral or Judicial calling, I will observe, first, his
Preparation thereto: secondly, his Practice. For the Preparation [ Ruach
Jehovah So Arr. turns it: and Pagnin in the toote pagnam.
Iepagn^moh [ Judge. 13.25.
the Spirit of Jehovah by turns acted him, or smit him: like as a Musicians
fingers smit an instrument for effecting melodious harmony, which without such
stroke, would sound nothing. Wherein is secretly intimated, that not Samson
alone, but every man also, is as an instrument strong (with the cords of ^e^^e
and affection) but giu^ng forth no true sound, otherwise then they be smit and
instincted by the saving Spirit of Jehovah. And for such respect it is, that
the Apostle wille^h the Ephesians to make melody to the Lord i^ their hearts,
chap. 5.19. Could Samson not set upon his Iudici^ll calling, ti^l this divine
Musical Spir^t cam^ upon him and acted? Nor did our Messiah-Samson attempt
such public calling for delivering his Israel, till the same spirit came upon
hi^ in the form of a Dove: which spirit else was alw^yes with him, but quasi
latenter as it were in a more hid manner. Samson, till he was grown to man's
s^^te, i^ scarslie heard of: but then the Spirit coms upon him and drives him
forth to skirmish. So our great Nazarite conceales himself much till he was
grown to be about 30. years ^ged: then he steps forth to Baptism (within the
divine tents of his father) where the Holy Ghost comes upon him and acts him
thence into the wilderness, where he was to begin his skirmish. Thus fitted, he
goes forward, and this for the preparation.

His Practice I will consider, first, as he has to do with a Beast: secondy,
with men mannered like beasts. The Beast is, Judge. 14* 5, etc.
a young cruel Lion, which comes roaring upon Samson; whom the Nazarite seizes
on, and teareth in fitters. By the carcass of which Lion, Samson afterward
coming, behold Bees had couched honey therein, whereupon he framed that Riddle:
Out of the Eater came meat, and out of the I so take it, because an opposition
is intended.
sharp came sweet. Samson having a calling to skirmish with unreasonable men,
the Lord deals with him (as sometimes with David) he casts a Lion in his way,
that so conquering that beast, he might with more strength of faith, lift up
his hand against the uncircumcised. And such rude copings as this, eue^y
Nazarite of God meets with. But in ouercomming such temptations, let them not
say that flesh and blood has delivered them, but that their conquest is by the
Spirit of God, whose grace is sufficient for them. But for the further
mystery I will relate unto you, first the application of a certain August. on
psalm. 70.
Ancient: secondly, what I conceive (with some other) further.

Augustine by this Lion, does understand such brutish Kings and princes, as at
the Gospells first out-gate, did rore against our Samson (Christ Jesus) whom
finally he did spiritually conquer and bring under. Who (being once subdued to
Jesus) did afterward (as Isaiah foretold) become nource-fathers, and
mother-fosterers, and feeders of the Lords people. And true it is, that the
earths Governors were first such Lions, and secondly such profitable Bees, in
feeding the faithful with the hony-combes and sweet of their Kingdom. Nor
need it be a wonder, when as Saul (a great Master of Israel) did at first,
rage and roar against Jesus: who afterwarwards (being knocked down, and his
heart contrited or rent) did become of a Saul, a Paul: of a Persecutor, a
Professor: of a Lion, a Lamb: of an eater, a feeder of many with that food of
the word, which David affirms to be sweeter then the honey and the hony-combe,
Psalm. 19.10. This age affords many such Saul's, but few Paul's: many Hornets,
but few Bees: much gall and aloes, few hony-combs. Nay, which is more, the
hony-combs, which others left to the Church, a number do spoil the Church of
them. Sic Nos non nobis, mellificamus Apes.
Fight the Lords battles they may that shall, but honey few of them shall
catch, nor yet a poor hiue to put their he^ds in. But enough of that, lest the
wasps sting me.

In a nearer sense (for the head is nearer then the members) I do with some
Ni^olaus Collado in l. de I^su Nazaraeo.
other vnderst^nd Satan by this Lion. As Saint Peter does resemble the Di^el to
a roaring Lion walking about, seeking who he may devour, (1. Pet. 5.8.) nor
know I but the Apostle may allude to the fo^mer: ^o, it wel^ fitteth the time
of our Samsons outgate into the wilderness. What time, not only he was acted
of the holy spirit, but also did there meet with hells hungry Lion come for^h
against him, roaring and bellowing his horrible t^ntations. But our Samson in
the power of his own word and spirit did cope with that Lion, and (as David
som^times did) too^e hold of his beard and slew him. Is the serpents head then
broken, is he fallen as lightning, and is the Dragon with his Angels cast out?
Yes, the woman's seed has bruised him, Michael has b^ought him down and cast
him forth, what then ensues? This: In his carcass the Lords sacred bees do
hiu^, and so out of him comes honey, the sweet favor of God to salvation. What
is this carcass? It is that wherein Satan's spirit sometimes lived, but now
is exp^lsed, and become the habitation of a better spirit. Generall^, it i^ the
Kingdom of the world, out whereof he is cast, that so the Lords Apostolical
minist^ie, may in all places plant the word of he^uens kingdom: howsoever in
tract of time the carcass has corrupt^d, and the honey been mingled. More
p^rticularly, this carcass is the nature of Jew and Gent^le, naturally
posses^^d with an unclean spirit, till our Samson (by the finger of his spirit)
haue^en^ our hea^^s and cast forth that strong man, Sin. After which, hi^
m^nist^riall Bees) directed by the spirit of he^uen) do convey into us the
honey combs and sweet promises of life eternal: so that thenceforth our words
become sauorie to others, and our works no less delitious to the tasters.
This briefly of Samsons vict^rizing the Lion.

The second practice of his Judicial captaineshippe is exercised upon the
uncircumcised Philistims, notable oppressors of his Israel. And therein I will
note, first his slaught^r of a thousand with an Asses Iaw-bone: secondly, his
carrying away of the City Azzahs gates and posts upon his shoulders: th^rdly,
his own death, with about some three thousand of his enemies, by pulling
Dagons house down upon their heads.

In the first may be rep^es^nted, Christ Jesus his conquest, and that by a
right simple inst^ument, if it be valued by the worlds iudg^ment. For what is
the word preached to the wise of the world? Is it 1. Cor. 1.18.
Foolishness? And these from whose jaws it comes, are they iudg^d otherwi^e
then Asses, and rid of the wo^ld, as Balaam rid his Ass? But as the Ass
reproo^ed him; so, by the foolishness of preaching (1. Cor. 1.21.) it pleases
him to save his people, and to ouer^hrow the vnbelieuer. For the foolishn^sse
of God is ^i^er then men, and the weakness of God is stronger then men, 1.
Cor. 1.25. Not a thousand, but many thousands fall before this iaw-bone (for
every substance is more glorious then his shadow) and yet out of this
ministerial Iaw-bone do issue the waters of life, which in the faithful,
spring up to eternal life. Such golden treasure he has laid up in e^rthen
vessels (termed Gods fools and asses) that the excellency of that power,
might be of God and not of us, 2. Cor. 4.7.

In Samsons sleeping within the City Azzah (or Of gnazaz to strengthen.
Gnazzathah, Judge. 16.) carrying away the gates and posts thereof (upon his
rising from sleep) to the mountains top that is before Hebron: thereby, the
learned Collado, did understand our Jesus the Nazarite, his passing through the
midst of his adversaries unharmed, what time (in Luke 4.) they had brought him
to the top of a steep mountain^, from whence they had purposed to have cast
himself headlong. But with ancient This tradition, the top-paintings of
nardins church in North-holand will witness, not to allege other authority.
tradition I understand it as much more proper, of Messiahs sleeping in the
grave, under the dominion of death (that strength of death well signified in
Azzah) what time the Jewish uncircumcised Watch ( Math. 27.65.66. and 28.4.11.)
did awaite the Sepulcher, where Jesus for his unworthy churches love did
sleep. But (maugre the hearts of the watch) our Samson did arise with the
mystical gates of Hell and death upon his shoulders (no marvel though
hell-gates cannot preua^le against his Church) together with the posts and
spiritual sustentacles thereof. Which when he had done, he preache^ to his
disciples in a mount, that All power in heaven and in earth was given him: from
which Mount he asc^nded into the mount of he^uen, leading captivity captive,
having spoiled principalities and powers, that so h^ might give gifts to his
people.

In Samsons death, I will note, first, his being cap^iu^d: secondly, his being
flowted: lastly, his pul-downe of Dagons house. He was captiued of the
Philistims, what time his Collado does well term his Nazarites hair.
Sacramentum and obsignationem r^boris, page 52
Sacramental lock^s were first shorn away by Delilah. What is Delilah? It
sounds in English, Poverty and Weakness. Who captiued our Messiah-Samson?
The spiritual uncircumcised of the people. By what means came he to be
captiued? By the pr^uation of his strength. But (which excels the shadow)
himself was willing to l^y down his strength; by the which before he had
forced them backward, and cast them down to the ground, Ioh. 18.6. Such was
his love to his poore-weake Church (a body of vanity and adultery in her
self) as for her sake, he willingly became captive, that she might be freed
from vengeance. For the Flouting of Samson, it intimated the intolerable
derision of Jew and Gentile practiced upon our Arch-iudge, what time they had
bound him and brought him to the public place of execution. At him (as was
sometimes foretold of David) they shut up their tongues: nodded their heads,
flouted with, Hail King, with many other reproachful subsannations and
girdings. All which actions were but as a play of the uncircumcised Philistims
in the Temple of Dagon.

In the pul-downe of Dagons house, do remember, that Samsons locks and
strength being increased upon him, he lays his hands on two
principall-pillers swaies down the whol^ house before him; and so with his
own fall (like a right captain, who for the general good, negl^cts his own
temporary particular) he overthrows the people and Princes mounted in the
Galleries and high places. Now to the mystical application. Our great
deliverer ( Messiah) howsoever he laid his strength aside afor^, (in the sense
of which weaken^sse he cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?)
he yet at last grew so strong on the cross, as in the stretching out of his
hands he cried valorously out, Coloss. 2.15
IT IS FINISHED, that is, the full redemption of Israel is now achieved:
Principalities and Powers in the highest places are overthrown: on the cross
I triumph over them. It is said of Samson, that The dead which he slew at his
death were more, than they which he had slain in his life. Judges 17.30. And
of Christ's death, it may be much more said, that it was far more exitiall
and mortal to infernal powers, then was his life. Which advantage by his
death, because Peter not seeing, contradicted: he therefore is of Jesus termed
Satan and bid come behind him, as sauouring earthly things rather than
heavenly. This briefly of Samson, and a Greater than Samson.

Lect. XXVIII. Iehoshua.
THe next personal shadow shall be the last of the circumcised which I mean
hereto observe. His name is Iehoshua: by function he is the Hie-priest unto
Judah after their return from Babel, and in the tim^ of their temples
re-edification, Hosh. 1.1.12.14. For his name Iehoshua (more shortly, Joshua,
and in Greek form JESUS) I have noted the shadowing use thereof before in
Joshua, the capt^ine of Israel. Only here we f^rther may note, that Christ is
a SAVIOVR not only as he is a King and fights his churches battles, but also
as he is our Hie-priest and offers up himself a sacrifice.

This Iehoshuah is in vision beheld of the Prophet Zechar. 3.1, etc.
Zechariah, as standing before the Angel of the Lord, with Satan at his right
hand to hinder him: presently whereupon, his unclean garments were stripped
off, and change of Garmen^s with their Diadem, put on. And of these things
only now. That Iehoshuah in all this is a shadow of our Jesus (besides that
the hi^-priest was so always) it may be observed after in the 8, 9, and 10,
verses of Zecharies third Chapter: where the two titles Tsemach and Aeben that
is, Branch and stone are applied to this P^iest: for his representing of
Messiah the life of our tree, the cornerstone of our salvation. But to the
particulars.

1. Iehoshuah stands liph^ei before the countenances of Iehouahs Angel. The
Angel of Jehovah (that of ancient time led Iaakob, and spoke to the ^athers in
the Wilderness) he is no other Son of God, before whose Faces (that is, in
the very fullness of whose face) the priest stood in all his actions of
oblation: but more fully in the face of this Angel of Covenant, what time he
set his face on the Sacramental Ark of Gods presence, whereupon were fixed the
faced Cherubims. Our hie-priest Jesus (in whom the Godhead dwelt somaticos
bodily) he ever in his function stood before the very face of his heavenly
father, but more specially, when he set his face toward the Holy of Holies,
the heavens, whither he was to enter for making continual interc^ssion for his
people. Thither he looked, and thither he directs his prayer of prayers, in
John. 17.1. etc. Which, as it leads us to him for Sole-meditation; so to
offer up our prayers, alms and our selves, (a living sacrifice) as in the very
presence of GOD, and that before the very face of our Jesus, the fathers
Archangel. For as by no other name we are to be saved, so by no other Angel,
can we have access unto the Father.

2. Mark, that Satan stands at Ioshuahs right hand lesitno to satanize him:
that is, showing his adverse power for hindering such oblation and intercession.
And who is that Minister, and what is that Christian, that has not often found
Satan at their right hand (in the midst of their right-handed blessed actions)
crossing, hindering, opposing? But when our Jesus was to offer up himself a
pure unspotted oblation, O how Satan in himself and his members, labored to
shake his right hand; Nay, good Peter (or ever he was aware) was a Proctor for
Satan, Math. 16.23. He of his blind good meaning exhorting Christ to pity
himself, received this speech from our Lord, Come behind me Satan: by the
very phrase teaching him, that in his former suggestion, he had but plaide
Satan's part, and therefore his place was to stand behind, as the devil did at
Iehoshuahs elbow.

3. But Satan thus stands not at the right hand of Jesus without a check:
for thus he speaks, The Lord reprove thee Satan: and that Lord which has
chosen Ierushalem, reprove thee. For, is not this as a brand plucked out of
the fire? Wherein not only we may note a reprehension: but also, a reason
thereof. The reprehension is made excellent, from the person which is to
reprehend: and that is Jehovah that has chosen Ierushalem for putting his name
there: yea, He that has taken Iehoshuah (as a brand) out of the flaming fire.

That Jehovah ((...)) the Being of Beings is to reprove him, it twiteth Satan
with his sl^p from his first being, his backesliding from the place of his
Creation: by the which, of an happy Being, he is become a satan, that is, an
Adversary to every blessed being. When satan contendeth with our Michael the
great Angel of the Covenant, about the Body of Moses, our great captain used
the same speech, The Lord reprove thee ( Jude 9.) a twiting curb for satan.
But here being an opposition, not to the body of Moses, but to the body of
Jesus, (for contending with the Mosaicall shadow, it was a contradicting of
Jesus the substance) he is not only taken down with the respect of his
Creation, but also of his Churches Election, (under the Choice of Ierushalem)
as also of Jesus his preservation from out the fire of affliction, what time
his fathers indignation flamed against him, for our sins sake upon him. While
he burned, the heavenly father seemed to have forsaken him (for so he cried, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? But having burned to the full-point of
satisfaction, his father (which was his own arm, Isa. 63.5.) sustained him:
upon which deliverance he cried, It is finished.

Lastly, we are to observe Iehoshuahs garments: first, such as were put off:
secondly, such as then were put upon him. The garments where with he was first
covered, but afterward to be put off, are epitheted Of tsoa dung of jatsa to
go out: quia est exitus ventris.
tsoim filthy, as filthy as dung: which mystically is interpreted in the same
place* to be iniquity: and indeed, there is no filthiness to iniquity.
These filthy garments, these damnable iniquities, they are the sins of Christ
his mystical members, put upon Jesus their Hie-priest. For the which sins as
he was to satisfy: so, no satisfaction without suffering, without passing
through the fiery furnace of Gods indignation* Hercules his supposed venomous
shirt never cleaued so close to his ribs (in the tearing away whereof, he is
said to rend withal the flesh) as this filthy garment of ours, cling'd to his
back: set on fire by the justice of Jehovah, to the scorching and tearing of
soul and body. But satisfaction made, the uttermost farthing paid, off go
these garments: and change of garments are put on. Mortality is put off,
immortality and glory is put on. Howsoever at first he was made lower than the
Angels, yet thus at last he is crowned with Glory and renown; Hebr 2.7. for
which he prayed in John 17.1. etc. For the change of Garments and Diadem
here, they have allusion to the clothings and Miter commanded to Aaron and
every his successor, whereof before I have largely spoken. And therefore in our
Iehoshua, we see an end of Aarons ministry: the shadow giving place to the
Substance. From Jesus his double clothing, I might pass to his mystical body
the Church, who is commanded to put off the old man, and to put on the new (a
doctrine auowed in Baptism) but now that shall not be necessary. And so far
the Personal shadows under the law circumcised.

Lect. XXIX. Cyrus.
Under the time of the Law, but yet uncircumcised, I will now only note Cyrus,
the great King of Persia: the subduer of Babel, the returner of Jews to their
Ierushalem, the furtherer of the Temples rebuilding, and therefore called, The
vncted of Jehovah, 2. Chron. 36.22, 23. Ezra. 1.1, etc. Isaiah 44.28. and 45.1.
etc. To the more methodicall understanding whereof, I will note, first his
Name: secondly his Country: thirdly, his Office: His name is Cyrus, which
diverse do diversely english, some cleaving to one language, some to an other.
But to me it seems reasonable to cleave to two languages: the Hebrew and
Persian: for so in Isaiahs Hebrew, he is of the Holy Ghost termed (an hundred
years at least) before he was borne: Justin. hist. l. 1
and by that name of shepherd in Persi^ (after his bi^th) he is said to be
named. And so (as I noted before in Samsons Nazarisme) the holy ghost the^eby
intending one thing, but men meaning another. In the Heb^ew I see nothing more
probable then that is compounded of the letter Caph and the word Rosh, in
English As-an head. And was not he as an head to his people Israel, a civil
Political head for the weal of Gods people? An Head he is not term^d, it may
before that he was uncircumcised (for Princes of the Circumcision are often termed
Heads of the People) but As an head, because he was of God mystic^lly
anointed to the welfare of his people.

The Persians calling him Cyrus, what should they ther^ by signify? I rest in
that which ancient Hisychius Io. Wolphius in Ezra cap 1. ^aith hereof: Omnium
verisim^llium est.
concluded, namely, that in it they had respect to the Sun, which in their
language they call [(...)] Cyro: as being a Sun ouer-shining all the shepherds
chi^dren, with whom (as humane antiquity records) he was trained up. Unto
which his first shepherd like estate, I doubt not, the Spirit of prophecy
alluded, when he faith, Cirus my shepherd, Isa. 44.28. And this their King-Like
shepherd, they might the rather call Suane, for that Justin. hist. li. 1. Nam
and sol^m vnumdeum Per^ae es^e evedunt. Before which he notes that Cyrus was
made King amongst the shepherds as they played
they worshipped the Sun: Whereto the spirit of pro^hecie may well allude
when as by Isaiah cap. 44.5.6.) he saie^h, Though thou have not known me, I
have girded thee: that they may know from the rising of the Sun to the fall,
that there is none besides me: For the application of all this to Christ, there
shall here need no discourse. For as in Samson we learned that Christ Jesus is
the Churches Sun, imparting shine unto all, so, in him and others has been
observed, that he is to his Church, not only As an head, but an head: yea, that
supreme mystical Head, to which all Political heads are subordinate.

2 Cyrus, by country, is a Persian. It was termed Persia of Paras, which
signifies, to part or divide. And so Daniel expounds the verb peers in his
chap. 5.28: with due allusion to the King of Paras then encompassing the
City: who (together with his uncle Darius) did soon after part and divide
the Kingdom of Babel: dividing Gods people from the Gentiles, by pasporting
the Jews back again to their own country. When Babel was first a building (
Genes. 11.1. etc.) the sacred Trinity in unity, said: come let us go down and
there confound their tongue: which confusion did presently divide and part the
people. Nor till our Sunnelike Cyrus come down with glory, will the present
Babel of the world be overthrown. Some thing was done in his first coming
(whereof in the next place) but an absolute parting of the wheat from tares:
an absolute division of Heavens sheep from Hellish goats, of the circumcised
from the uncircumcised, that awaiteth his coming as King, for the first was as
a servant shepherd: such as Cyrus his state at first was, but in the second
place a Kingly Diuider.

3. For the calling whereto the Lord anointed this Persian: Isaiah (in the
former places) depaints it in many golden ph^ases: but in the first place, in a
general term called of the Lord, My shepherd: and afterward the
Accomplisher of all my desire, which desire he accomplished: 1. in subduing
Nations, whereby he became Monarch of the Eastern world, 2. in gaining the
riches and treasures that before were couched in Darkness: 3. in delivering
Judah out of captivity: and 4. in putting down a law for Ierushalem and the
temple, saying to Ierushalem: Their first Return was not only to build the
temple, but also the city
. Thou shall be built: and to the Temple, Thy foundation shall be surely laid.
That he so subdued nations, and therewith got their treasure, Pl^n. 33. l. 3.
cap.
humane writers witness that, and the sacred scriptures conceal it not. That
he sent Gods people back again, the blessed word neither conceales that: 2.
Chron. 36.22.23. Ezra 1.1. etc. enriching them in their return with some of
his gained Hidden-treasure. But whether the City and Temples building is to be
counted from this Cyrus, many do make it a right great question. For the
better conceit whereof, it shall be necessary to lay down the Angels speech
in Dan. the ninth, from whence arises this question, and more then this.

The Angel Gabriel (he that afterward brought word to the Virgin Mary
touching Messiahs conception) his words to Daniel be these, Seauenty seauens
Nechth^k so turned of Trem^l. Pagn. Ar. Mont.
are cut out upon thy people and upon the city of Kads^^ca.
thy holiness, for consuming wicked^esse and to So Tremel. and Ar. Mont. etc.
even as it is turned afterward, to seal vision, etc. And it may be that ^t
relates to Daniels being sealed up in the Den: as afterward Messiah was
sealed in the Tomb.
seal sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring
Righteousness everlasting, and to seal vision and Prophet, And to annoint the
Holy of Holies. These seauentie seauens (being seauens of years, according to
that Prophetical proportion in Numb. 14.34. and Ezech. 4.5.6.) they do amount
to 490. years: and so of the Church it has still been numbered. Now for the
parts of this gross sum, this Angel Gabriel (in English, Man-god:) for
bringing news of Messiah, which should be Man-god) he afterward divides into
parcells, with special charge, that it be heeded and learned, for thus he
proceeds: And know thou, and understand From the out-gate of the Word, To
cause the It must mean the first return, or else Daniel could not understand
Gabriel.
Return, and to build Ierushalem, and unto Messiah the PRINCE shall be
seauen-seauens, Vaf can signify no less; besides that, it coupleth two
numbershere, respecting the two subjects, of these numbers, before spoken of:
namely The Return and Messiah. Where One (otherwise learned) does pawse at
Seauen-seauens with this stop (:) commonly called Colon (and this by reason of
the Heb. accent there called Athnach, concluding so but seuen-seauens to
Messiah the Prince; and therefore the term Messiah but to signify some Jewish
Governor anointed them) it may be easily observed in infinite number of places
through the Bible, yea, sundry times before in this chapter, that Athnach
supplieth our Comma noted thus (,) except in such places we should hold it an
accent Musical, rather than Grammatical. For the next words, It shall be
builded, etc. I necessarily include them in a Parenthesis, seeing they relate
to Ierushalems building.
then Sixty-two-seauens it (shall be builded again street and wall in the
straitness of Times.) And after these sixtie-two-seauens shall Messiah
I^ccareth of Carah so signifies. See a reason of this phrase before in Lection
18. note 2.
be pierced through, (...) word for word, And not to (or, for) himself. Pagn.
and Ar Mont. subscribe to that.
and not for himself. (And the The Romans under Titus, 40. years after Christ's
ascension, were so the scourge of God in destroying Ierushalem that murdring
city.
People of a future Captain shall destroy the City and Sanctuary, and the
end thereof shall be with an Hereby is signified an incurable overthrow of that
ceremonial kingdom, as once of the old world with a deluge.
inundation; and to the end of the war are God had determined, that the
Destruction should not be at once, but (as letting forth the waters of his
wrath gushing) at sundry times. Thus, upon Messiahs death he remembers the
punishment: and then comes to speak of Messiahs last seven more
particularly: which also done, he then (the seauentie-seauens concluded)
returns ^o the Punishment.
desolations cut out.) And he shall strengthen a Covenant to Many in
one-seauen. And in half of that seven, he shall cause sacrifice and oblation
to Though the Jews sacrificed after for forty years, yet the Ceremonial
Sacrifices, did now virtually cease: seeing Messiah the substance of all the
^hadowes, and the end of the Ceremonial law, had so offered up himself a
sacrifice, once for All, Heb. 7.^7. Whereto I doubt not our Savior had
relation, when (on the cross) he cried out, Tatelestas, it is finished; where
upon the veil of the Temple rent asunder, preaching to them, that the^ was an
end put to these matters.
cease. And upon the Or, Army.
wing of Abbominations he shall make desolate, and that to the end: pouring It:
namely, Desolation.
it also upon the That is, upon the Jews, cut-forth (or allotted) to
destruction. Thus from the first Return upon the word of Cyrus to Messiahs
ceas^^g oblation, are 70. seauens of years. For Ierushalems destruction it was
40. years after: neither did Gabriel count to that, howsoever speak of it.
Christ told the Jews that within a generation, Ierushalem should be laid waste;
but neither of the year, nor day, not hour he tells them. Neither (as he was
son of man, that is, by his humane knowledge) did he know it: seeing the
prophets, nor Gabriel, had from God spoken of that precise time. And still, for
probation of his doctrine, he sent them to the Prophet^
cut-forth destroyed. So far Gabriels golden Oration, Now to the present
purpose. Herein (besides other things) he has taught Daniel, that from the
Out-gate of that Word or Edict (whereby the people were to return from Babel
to I^dea, for building Ierushalem, there should be seauentie- Seauens to that
following time, wherein Messiah should come, for consuming sin (that is,
sacrifice for sin, besides the killing of sin in our nature) bringing in
withal eternal righteousness etc. Which glorious effects, seeing they
accompany none but Jesus Messiah: of him Alone (and of no other Anointed one
or more) can this be spoken. A golden prophecy for his matter (the matter is no
less then the Quintessence of the saving Gospel) and every of these 490.
years, are as so many golden linkes of Time: beginning with the Shadow, and
ending with the thing shadowed. Great pity but we should fasten them aright.
For in them lies open matter for stopping the Jews mouth, for abolishing
Mahomatisme, for conuincing of Papisme, for settling a true Christian* Daniel
(in English, The Judgment of God) to him was this Oracle delivered, for light
and salvation to all such, as rest not in humane fancies, but) in the Judgment
of God. But to the question.

When and by whom this Word or Edict should go out, it is of many called into
question. The cause of which contr^rietie arises, first from certain parts of
Gabriels speech: secondly, from the profane Greeks their Olympique
computation. From Gabriels speech, some take the 490. years should finish with
his assuming our nature; in respect of which extraordinary conception, they
think that phrase ( the showing, or The anointing of the holy of Holies is
used. Some think by that speech is intended his Baptism: for that the
Holy Ghost then openly ouershadowed him. Others cast the period of these 490.
years upon Christ's death, because of these words: After the threescore and two
sannets, Messiah shall be pierced thorough. Others understanding by Messiah or
Anointed, not Jesus the Christ, but the Jewish anointed, shadowing Governors
do fasten the end of Gabriels seauens upon Ierushalems destruction: first,
because the Anointed Government then ceased to be: secondly, for that Gabriel
in the end of this Oration does speak of Ierushalems desolation, which fell
forth about some forty years after Christ's ascension. Four sundry opinions
thus arise from three speeches of this sacred Prophecy. As for them that
think, how by a certain number of years, an uncertain is meant, they make
the Angel to come about an idle message. He professes (verse 22.) that he came
to give knowledge and understanding to Daniel: but if by seauenty seauens he
meant eighty seauens, or some other number, then the Angel taught him nothing:
for Daniel knew before, that Messiah should come and finish our redemption. So
certain an uncertainty is this, as it is unworthy to be numbered with the
worst of the former four. For all the former hold the number of 490. years
proper and certain, only they call into question: first when these years
begun? secondly, when they finished? And hereunto some of the former have
been drawn from a certain computation of the Greeks called Olympique, of
the hill Olympus, where Gallants from all parts came and strove for the
victorious Garland. These Olympiq^e maisteries were (as some have taught) every
fifth year: but against them, Onuphr. comment. lib. 1. Fastorum.
Onuphrius opposes many others, that conclude them to have been held every
fourth year. Plutarch. in initio Numae Pampil.
Such uncertainty there is in this Gentilique computation. As the famous
Plutarch could say of the Olympiades beginning, [ Tempora igitur diligentius
exequi per difficile est: and ea maxim quae ex victoribus. Olympiae ducuntur:
quoru^ descriptionem aiunt sero Hippiam Eliensem aedidisse, nullo subnixum
necessario ad fidem Argumento] in effect, There is no trust to be given unto
Olympiad reckonings: so, I may say of their Endings, little assurance can be
had, whether every fourth year: or not also sometimes the fifth year, as the
Romans held their Lustrum: or not whether (sometimes) every other year, seeing
greediness of Gaming will not always be held in like compass.

Now forsooth, some affirming that Cyrus victory fell in such an Olympiade, and
our Saviors birth, baptism, Death (in respect of Augustus and Tyberius Caesar
under whom they f^ll) to fall in such an Olympiade: between which Olympiades
more years arise then these 490. of Gabriel: they hereupon conclude, that the
Angels seauens must begin later then Cyrus Edict. Some labor to prove that the
Greeks account may be reconciled with our Saviors baptism, at least, with his
death. Others migh^^ly resist that: who to make Daniels seauens finish
Ierushalems last desolation by the uncircumcised Romans, do begin the
account from Darius Nothus (said to be He in Ezra 6.) what time a renuall of
Cyrus his edict went forth. And this must be about some hundred years after
Cyrus. Some other taking this Darius in Ezra for another then Nothus (namely,
for an Artaxerxes severed, surnamed Long-hand) do begin the count about some
six and thirty sooner: but for that, are forced to prosecute the after-time as
they may. And no marvel, for if the Gentile-writers confound one Governor with
and for another, no marvel though their years reckonings be as confused in
this, as about Great Homers time of life, where some of them cannot come within
two or three hundred yeare^ one of another.

As for the book entitled A plain and perfect Method, it herein does answer
the self. For speaking of these years in three places, each place (as
forgetting the other) does oppose to the other. And that which teaches the
Persians government to have been but 130. years. does hew off the other two
legs: seeing these which follow the Greeks, do a^gment the Persians
government an hundred years or thereabouts. For the difference is not about
years in the following Gouernements, but only in this. Such ill-happe have
men meddling with Gabriels Oration, when as they fly the Scriptures simplicity,
and betake themselves to corrupt history.

Another opinion (lately come out of the North) does join the beginning of
Gabriels years ( without all question) to the first year of Cyrus his
Monarchy, wherein he returned the Jews: and the ending of Gabriels half
seven he fastneth upon our Saviors death. But mark with all, that as the
Angel parted the seauenty seauens (first into 7. seauens: secondly, into 62.
seauens: thirdly, into one seven) so between the first number of seven
sennets and the second number of 62. he interiects 63. years for making good
the Computaion of profane Chronicles. Which in very troth (with that of
putting down of a certain number for an uncertain) is to teach Daniel one
thing when himself means another: and so to make Daniel nothing wiser than
before: yea, which is more: it is the putting in of a leather, thong to
Gabriels golden chain: the sowing of Daniels ground with miscellaine: the
yoking of an Ox and Ass together. And all these inconveniences grow, from
laboring that the Bible may conform it self to Gentiles uncircumcised
Chronicles: where religion teaches us to draw them to the Bible. And if they
will not thereto be drawn, then to cashire them (specially Graecians) for
falsifiers, deceivers.

For as the Apostle could say of the Cretians: They were always liers: so more
Generally we may with ^0. Reuelin. de verbo mirif. lib. 2.
Iamblicus and the Egyptian priest in Platoes Timaeo, hold these generally for
Children, lying and unconstant. And how unconstant they be, it well enough
appears in the great variety of Computation, introduced by writers on this
scripture. Seeing some of them still serve for confirming the absurdest
iudgem^nt.

But to pass from Fables to faith, from Profane to divine Writers, let us
from scriptures of our God labor to find out the beginning, continuance and
ending of Gabriels seauens of years. The Angel comes to Daniel for giving
him understanding, as of the Thing in particular: so of the gross time and his
parts. When the Angel came unto him, it is noted in Dan. 9.1. namely, in the
first year of that Darius the Mede, which before divided the Kingdom with
Cyrus upon the present surprising of Babel. Which also in 2. Chron. 36.22. and
Ezra 1.1. is termed the first year of Cyrus. From this time the computation
was to have his beginning. Which may appear, first from Cyrus Edict then going
Darius in Ezra 6. who there groundeth his proclamation upon the Memorandum of
Cyrus his established-canon. For as the Laws of Medes and Persians were not to
be altered ( Dan. 5.8, 15.) so this King fastens his commandment upon the
decree of Cyrus. And unto this Word of Cyrus, the Jews did lean in their
answer to the Adversary: nor durst the Adversary but appeal thereto, if so,
such a decree was Ezra 5.7, 8, 9, 10, etc. Thirdly, it appears from the
Angels mouth, who says, that the 70* seauens were to begin with the Edicts
out-gate for returning the people to build. Which return was then made, in the
first year of Cyrus and his Darius. Darius (which in their computations must
be some hundred or 64* or more years after Cyrus) then the age of diverse of
the Returned would arise to an incredible number.

For as there were diverse beholders of the New-Temple, Asher ra^eth-habaijth
harishon: who had seen that very first house, well therefore called Zekenim,
ancient or old-men.
who before had seen the first Temple ( Ezra. 3.12.) and that with such
judgment, as they wept at the inferioritie of the second: so, give them but
30. years at the time of their captivity: then the seauentie of captivity:
then a hundred or sixty four after their Return: and so they must be aged
then two hundred years* or 164. yea and so much the more aged as the temples
work endured, after that second authorized onset. But that many cohabitants
should then be so aged, it is not easily credible. It was a fair age to be
149. and within 49* years of the return, the work was to be finished, as the
Angel tells, in saying, From the out-gate of the Word, to cause a Return
and build Ierushalem, shall be 7. seauens: that is, 49. Whereto it is like the
Jews cast their eye in John 2.20. Where they say the Temple was 46. years a
building, not compting the first In the end whereof Daniel fasteth, Daniel 10.1.
three years, when ^he foundation had been laid and staide.

Objection. So in John, 8.57. they say that Jesus was not yet fifty yeare-old,
does it follow therefore he was near fifty. Answer. I answer, first, they
were more expert in such monuments as the Temple, (wherein they had a deep
superstition) than in our Saviors age, which nothing they regarded. Secondly,
they were to determine, not what our Savior was, but what he was not: namely,
that he was not so aged as Abraham. And to this purpose they had spoken well
enough if they had said, thou art not yet a 1000. years old: where as Abraham
died above 1770. years since. Object. Gabriel says not alone, that there
should be seven seauens to that building, but also to the Anointed: and your
selves grant that Jesus the anointed then came not. Answer. I answer, the
words [ And to the Messiah or Annointed] they are joined to the 62. seauens
following: secondly, they that would by Messiah understand the Jewish body of
government, they neither can deny, but that they had a Messiah shadowing
Gouerner ( Zorobabel the Lords signet) in their first return. With the Ancient
Clem. Alex. strom. 1.
Clemens (whom infinite troops have followed) I conclude this, thus: Quod in
septem bebdomadib. aedificatum sit Templum, hoc clarum est: It is as clear as
the Sun, that the Temple was aedified in the seven seauens of years: that
is, in the first 49. years following the Edict of Cyrus. And so does David
Chytr. on Ioh. 2
David Chytreus conclude from Metasthenes the Persians account, as of all most
probable.

For the 62. seauens (that is, 434. years) they stand as an intervallum of
time, between the material temple, (which was the shadow) and that holy of
Holies Christ Jesus, the Temple shadowed: who after to the Jews thus said:
Destroy this Temple, (pointing at himself) and in three days I will raise it
up again.

For the last 7. of years, therein our Savior was baptized, publicly
preached and died. And that his death put an end to this seven (and so to the
490. years.) I see no otherwise from the Angels speech. For howsoever he speak
of their Cities final desolation by Vespasians army, yet Beda confesses
that, thus Quod autem se quitur: and ciuitatem and sanctuarium dissipabit etc.
Non ad 70. hebdomadas pertinet lib. de natura rerum cap. 9.
he brings it not within the compass of the former Seauens: but precisely
places it after Messiahs death: it being a judgment upon them and their
Children, for preferring the Murderer Barabas, to the Lord of life Jesus. And
as he precisely affirms, that Messiah in the half of that last Seven should
cause sacrifice and oblation to cease (and that was by this death, he himself
preaching that in his last speech, it is finished) so, the Angel in his first
speech says, that 70. seauens were cut out etc. for consuming iniquity, making
reconciliation for bringing in eternal justice, for sealing up vision and
Prophet and for anointing the Holy of Holies. The Epoche or period of all
which, most probably can be fastened to our Saviors death: even that time of
offering up himself upon the cross, the time of Evening sacrifice, wherein
Gabriel came first to Daniel for enforming him of these Seauens. If any of
these years should ouer-reach his death, I would then think (with diverse
ancient and modern writers, holy Christians) that it should be three years
and an half, given unto the Apostles for full conuincing the Jews by the
Gospel. And hereto the Text seems to lend a look, when as the hebrew
reads: Half the seven shall cause oblation and sacrifice to ^ease. Where
the word Chatsi is one with the latin Dimidium.
chatsi signifying Half or Middle (and it is generally held that our Savior
preached half seven years) it has caused some to think it to be the first
half, rather than the second. But the former is to me most probable.
Notwithstanding, if any in this or the former parts of number, be otherwise
minded, I mean not thereabouts to be contentious. Only, herein let us at least
accord, that the Angel has spoken properly and plainly: but our sins
hinder us from conceiving many things rightly. And this so briefly and
plainly as I can, in so intricate a question.

1. Did Cyrus the anointed Shadow, send forth that Edict or word, whereby
Ierushalem and the Temple were builded? O, but the anointed Substance (Christ
Jesus) sent forth a Word for building his Church, and framing Temples to the
Holy ghost: things greater than that of Ierushalem and the Temple in Judea. All
the commandments coming forth from Princes for furthering the Churches
work, they must receive their Authori^^e, and have their due reference to the
word of our Cyrus the substantial Anointed. For of his word (much more than
that of Medes and Persians) it may be said, It admits no alteration. As
Princes would not be thought to alter the word of our great Monarch, let them
bridle The Seculars and Jesuits that still from beyond sea desire hither to
come, for hindering the Lords work.
the enemies beyond the River, that so the foundation of Religion and Church
long since laid (and by Idolatrers staid) it may go forward, be built upon,
and rise up toward perfection. Yet when we have done what we can. the Temple
will come short of the first: the state of the Church in this age nothing
comparable to that of the first age. Cyrus the uncircumcised must give place to
Solomon the Circumcised: Some secular felows would seem to build with us, but
Nehemiah may not suffer them.
and the one work to the other: even as Solomon was of Christ Jesus a more
perfect Shadow, and the first Temple, more excellent than the second. Though
yong-heads will admire the latter, while more Ancient spirited weep at the
remembrance of the former.

2. Did Cyrus subdue Nations, Note. If the Brownists understood this truth,
they would not sleep in schism
purchase their riches, set Captives at liberty? O, our great Monarch received
of his father, All authority in heaven and in earth, for arming his spiritual
captains: whereby their ministry became so effectual, as hie and strong
imaginations were brought down: the Nations were subdued to his word: Kings of
the Nations offer to him their hid treasure, as sometimes the Eastern Sophies
did to his own person offer Gold, Mirrh^, and Frankensence. For setting such
at liberty, as before were captiued of satan, and chained under the power of
darkness, he therein has been no less glorious. O, it remains, that as
he has set us free, so we do no more entangle ourselves: but that setting our
faces toward Heavens Zion, we labor to be as He-goates before the Flock,
drawers of others by our holy example. And this we see, Beda in Ezra cap. 1.
Quod Cyrus Rex Dominum Saluatorem and Nomine designanit and factis: that King
Cyrus, both in his Name and Acts, does shadow forth our Lord and Savior. So
much shall suffice for a taste of Personal shadows.

Lect. XXX. Tree of Life. Shadows Sacramental.
Having thus given a taste of shadows Arithmetical and Personal, it now
remains that I speak something of Sacramental shadows. The word Sacrament
is of right large use in Ecclesiastical writings. Insomuch as, whatsoever the
Greeks call Mysterion a Mystery, the Latins often term Sacramentum a
Sacrament. Which more particularly may appear in the Old Latin translation
of the new Testament, who in Ephesians. 5.32. Revel. 17.1. turns Mysterion by
Sacramentum: for that in such large sense, every Ecclesiastike secret is a
sacrament. But after-age has called it to straiter sense, defining that to be
only a sacrament, which is Lemb. lib. 4. did. 1.^. cited from August.
Sacri rei signum, a Sign of some holy thing. Which external sign is of God
appointed (for he alone can institute such a sign, who can give the grace
thereby signified) for assuring his church of some necessary grace. In a word,
Sacraments (as some have noted) are of two sorts: the first only
Representative: the second also Exhibitiue. Representative sacraments are
such-signes as only represent some grace: and that is commonly some common
grace. And so the Raigne-bow was and is, a sign of God his grace or favor,
touching the no more destroying of the world by water: Paradise and Canaan
Representatours of Heaven: Noah's Arc, the Tabernacle and Temple, shadowers of
the church. Exhibitiue Sacraments are such signs, as not only represent, but
also do exhibit unto the Belieuer, the very grace signified: and such be the
signs of Bread and Wine in the Lords supper, of water in Christian Baptism.
Of which kind of sacrament I mean here to insist: giving unto you an assay
thereof: first from such sacramental exhibitiue shadows as went before the
Law: secondly, under the Law.

Before the Law, I will propound: first, somewhat of Paradise in the state of
Man's innocence: secondly, some such shadow as fell out of Paradise, in the
time of man's nocencie. In the Garden I note a certain peculiar tree placed in
the midst thereof, called Genes. 2.9.
The tree of life (unto which tree there is due allusion in Revel. 22.2.) which
was Tremel. and Ian. in annotat.
Simbolum and Sacramentum vitae, a pledge and Sacrament of life: termed of
Rabanus, sacramentum visibile invisibilis sapientiae, a visible sacrament of
invisible wisdom. The tree termed The knowledge of good and evil excepted, it
was permitted Adam to eat of all the other trees: therefore also to eat So
Lomb. in lib. 1. did. 17. F
of this sacramental shadowing tree. And hereto it is the Holighost alludeth
in Revelation 2.7. when he says, To him that overcomes, I will give to eat
of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God. Yet between
the eating of this and the common trees, there was great difference. For on the
common fruits he was to eat for bodies sustentation, but on this peculiar
tree for his souls instruction. Which caused an Ancient well say, Beda in
Genes. 2.
in eo erat sacramentum, in caeteris lignis ^^^^entum, in the tree of life
there was a sacrament, but in the other trees, nourishment. And what was this
internal sacrament, or grace signified? Rabanus shall answer, Sanctus
Sanctorum v^ique est Christus, it is no other than Christ the Holy of Holies.

So Haymo on Apoc. 22. Lignum quippe vitae, Christus est, sapientia dei patris
de qua Solomon ( in Pro. 3.18) dicit: Lignum vitae est bis qui apprehenderint
^am: and qui tenuerit eam beatus. He is the Churches life: for without feeding
on him by faith, we with Adam fall under the power of Death. He indeed is the
tree of life, planted by the rivers of waters, which brings forth his fruit
in due season, whose leaf fades not: and whatsoever he does, it shall
prosper. The best tree he is in the Churches Garden: and in the midst of the
Court of Conscience he is to be planted. But if we fly him for tasting of
Antichrists tree (a tree of knowledge for good and evil: the good of that
religion being a cloak of the evil) then we deserve to be driven from the Acts
3.15.
Lord of life, even as Adam was forced from the sacramental shadow.

Was Adam then taught, that life was the free gift of God? How much more now
(having sinned) is it the gift of God freely without all demerit? Stood Adam
then in need of a sacrament for sustaining his faith? How cursed are they then
with the Suenkfeldians, that pretend such a perfection in this life as needs
no preaching, no sacrament. When Adam had (by reason of his sin) cut himself
voluntarily from the Lord of life, was he thereupon driven from the external
sign of life? Yea: for teaching the governors of the Church to seclude such
from sacramental signs, as first have openly and impenitently cast behind
them the thing signified. And thus in Paradise under shadows, the Gospel was
preached, and holy discipline practiced. This briefly of the tree of Life.

Lect. XXXI. Sacrifice.
THE next exhibitiue sacramental shadow shall be that of Sacrifice, instituted
of God unto man, in the time of his Nocencie. And this I will not prosecute in
all his particulars (for that were to swim through an Ocean of ceremonies)
but somewhat Generally and Superficially: first, by speaking somewhat of the
Persons employed in sacrifice: secondly, of the sacrifice it self.

The Persons personally employed in Sacrifice were Men. As the Apostle under
the state of the Gospel, would not at any hand permit a Woman to execute the
public ministerial function (1. Cor. 14.34, 35.1. Tim. 2, 12.) because she
was not the first in Creation, though first in transgression: so from the
beginning it was in the Church of God, no otherwise practiced then by men: as
for testifying their headship in that kind: so, for the better shadowing forth
Messiah, whom in that action they were represented. Now of men, some have
thought that two sorts were unto this action before the law licenced: the
Firstborn and Prophets. So to conclude, they were led, not by any direct
Canon of Gods word, but from such presidents as where they find the elder
sacrificing with Kain and Noah: or (notwithstanding their Iunior-ship) are
found sacrificing with Habel and Abraham. From which presidents (if their
reason be drawn into form, they can no otherwise than thus syllogize: The
Elder and Prophet did sacrifice: therefore only they two might sacrifice. This
word Only in the consequent (more then in the antecedent) bewrayes a maime in
the argument. If they frame their reason thus ( We find only them two
sacrificing, therefore only they two might sacrifice) that is so weak as this:
We find in the word only, that fire came down from heaven after the flood,
for consuming wicked and the belieuers sacrifice: therefore only after the
flood fire came so down. This reason may be true, yet not necessarily true,
seeing fire might come down before (as Theodotion in Beda and Raba.
many have thought, upon Habels sacrifice,) although not in scripture recorded:
seeing the grant of this (and so of the former) is nothing ag^^nst any Canon of
faith, given before the Law. Secondly, what warrant is there, that Habel was a
Prophet, more than any other believing I^nior? If any say that Habel did not
sacrifice but only by the hand of Adam, the same may as easily be affirmed of
Kain the Elder, and yet neither of them proved; first, because the scripture
says not so: secondly, because no Canon forbade them: thirdly, because we
never read of Adams sacrificing, although (no doubt) he sometimes did
sacrifice: fourthly, the Genesis 4.3. etc.
text implies their immediate coming to Jehovah themselves with their
sacrifice. All which makes me to think, that before the law restrained it to
Leuies tribe, it was lawful for any faithful Man to sacrifice. But seeing
every thing that is lawful, is not presently therefore ^xpedient, nor always
does edify (1. Cor. 10.23.) it is likely (for order sake) that the chiefest of
an assembly was chosen (one or more as circumstances urged) for offering up the
oblations, Job 1.5. and 42.8.
as Job sometimes for his Children and kinsfolks.

So honorable a thing it was to sacrifice, as the infidelious people did
Apishly immitate that in all ages: yea, Fenestella de sacerd. Romans cap. 11.
pleraque, sacra a solis Regibus obiri consueta, the most of the sacrifices
were of their Kings alone offered: as being an action beseeming the princes of
the people. Whereto Clemens Alexandrine subscribeth, saying: Clem. Alex. strom.
5.
The Aegiptians did not commit their Mysteries to every one amongst them etc.
but to these only which were to come unto the gouern^ment of their kingdom:
and of the priests to such as were most approved for education, learning,
lineage. Which observed, it causes me to think they err, who in Gene. 47.22*
do turn the word Cohanim princes, denying them to be Priests: not only against
the ordinary use of the word, but also against the hie honor which Egiptians
ever gave to their Priesthood. The same error I take to be committed by them
in Exodus 2.16. for turning Cohen a prince, as if Iethro were not a Priest:
whereas to be a Priest, it was nothing derogatorie to a prince, but rather an
addition of divine honor. Nor is it to be maruailed at, that Idolatrers of the
hiest place should then be sacrificers, seeing the princes of the Faithful
were then employed in that: and the Idolatrous never came behind the
Faithful, in giving to their Priests hie honor and ho^orable endowments.
Objection: It is not like that Moses would match with an Idolatrous Priest.
Answ. Why not so well as with an Idolatrous Prince? But what need more then
that in Exodus 18.12. where it is plainly said: And Iethro (Moses Father in law)
did take burnt-offrings and sacrifices to Aelohim: that is, he sacrificed to
God. To say he offered by the hand of Aaron or Moses, it is not only besides
scripture, but also somewhat harsh, he being an uncircumcised Midianite. That
they feasted together with him presently after the sacrifice, it is no more
then Iaakob did with his Idolatrous kindred in Genes. 31.54. a thing, not only
lawful, but expedient, the circumstances considered. Honorable was the
Priesthood before the law, but made more divine under the law: the former
liberty to sacrifice being restrained to one particular family, namely, that of
Aaron. But thereof sufficiently before in his Shadow. So much for the Person.

For the Sacrifice, let us consider, first, the word: secondly, the Thing. The
word Sacrifice is so much as a thing made sacred, or holy. In the Original, it
is termed Mincha, Gnolah zebach, Karban. It is termed Mincha, because it was an
oblation or gift: Gnolah because it ascended, namely in the flame of fire:
Zebach of killing. And because these slain^ creatures were laid on the altar,
it therefore is termed Mizbeach. The sacrifice was termed Karban of drawing
near, namely, to God: and thereof it is that the word Korban rose in Mark
7.11. The Sacrifice or sacred thing it self, it was Animate or In-animate. An
animate or breathing Sacrifice was that of Habel, for he Himself offered a
Lamb: Porphyr. lib. 2. c. 1. de sacrif.
contrary to blasphemous Porphiry, who says: The first Sacrificers did not at
first offer Beasts, but herbs, etc. Whereas at first, there was little other
use of beasts than for Oblation. An inanimate or vnbreathing sacrifice was that
of Kain, for he offered some shock of corn or some such like thing: and both
these kinds of sacrifices were plenteous under the Law: the quick consuming
whereof into ashes, was an evident sign of Gods acceptance, Psalm. 20.3.

And what by these sacrifices was shadowed? The son of Man, even as the tree of
life did represent, The Son of God. These sacrifices (and specially the
Animate) did represent that humane and earthly nature of ours, which the Son of
God was in the fulness of time to assume, for our redemption: in respect of
which nature, the Prophets saw him as the Son of Man, long before he became
indeed, The Son of Man. And thus the fall of Man brought with it, the fall of
Gods Son. The Head is contented to stoop with his body, Christ with his
Church: pawning himself for her, payning himself for her: becoming poor for
making her rich, giving her liberty by his captivity: procuring to her
pleasure by his pain, life by his death. Nor did the Sacrifices only represent
this, but also exhibit and seal Christ (with his benefits) unto the faithful
Communicant. In which respect it is, that the Author to the Hebrews says Hebr.
11.4.
that Habel by his Oblation obtained witness that he was just: that is,
imputed just by Christ Jesus sealed to his conscience. To whom (as to all
ancient Belieuers) Christ was the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world:
Heb. 13.8.
Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day, the same also for ever. Iamblicus de
Mysterijs, in cap. de virt. sac.
The Egiptian priest could say; Deus vim ^fficacem imprimit Sacramentis, God
deeply printeth an effectual operation in Sacraments, speaking of their
fantastic Sacrifices; but the faithful of God under and before the law,
might in deed and truth say, that a vital power was con^aid unto them by the
Sacrifice: no less then eternal life by Christ Jesus, sealed unto their
Conscience by the stamp of his Spirit. By which external shadow they were so
taught and sealed, till Messiahs day did break, and the Laws shadows fly
away. So much generally of Sacrifice.

Lect. XXXII. Circumcision.
THe next Sacramental exhibitiue shadow shall be Circumcision, first
incommended unto Abraham in the seventeenth of Genesis, and continued in his
seed, till Christ put that away for establishing Baptism. But baptism by
sufficient preaching being once established, thencefoorth Christ Jesus should
profit him nothing that would be circumcised, Galat. 5.2.

This Circumcision was nothing else but a solemn cutting away of that
fore-skinne in a Manchild, which appertains to the generatiue part. Which the
Lord (at the first institution thereof) does sometimes call his Covenant,
sometimes the Sign of his Covenant. Why? Because the thing signified was to
the true Belieuer, conua^de with the sign: even as it is in all exhibitiue
sacraments. And that is it which causes the Apostle (in Romans 4.11.) to call it
[(...)] a seal of that Righteousness which is by-faith. Which Sacrament was
to Abraham's n^turall s^ed (as Baptism, is unto Christ's spiritual seed) an
infallible sign of being received into the Cou^nant of grace, and holy Church
of GOD. For by this sign, the Hebrew Israel and Jew (all Abraham's petigree)
were distinguished from all the world besides, termed Gentiles. The ancient
profane Herodot. Herodot. in Enterpe. He lived about Nehemiahs time, as is
guessed.
records that the Colchians, Egyptians, Aethiopians did circumcize
themselves; and of the Egyptians he will (forsooth) that the Phaenicians and
Syrians in Palestina (these must be the Jews) they learned Circumcision. Yet
(forsooth, says he) ^ cannot define, whether the Egyptians learned it of the
Aethiopians, or they of the Egyptians. Deuteronomy. 30.6 coloss. 2.11.
Silly Greek, it is something he says, but far from the truth. He thought
the Jews had lea^ned it of the Egyptians. Why? No doubt, because he had
heard, that sometimes their predecessors had been in Aegipt. Whereas it was
instituted near two hundred years, before Iaakob went down into that
country. And whereas he affirms so many of the Gentiles to circumcise, it is
nothing likely, they ever having the Hebrew^s and their religion, in horrible
detestation. Only this may be: some of Abraham's seed (specially by Ismael,
borne of the Egyptian Hagar) might be sparsed in such places and there
continu^ this ceremony.

But for circumcision to be practiced by natural Egyptians, it is against all
probability. Philo Iudaeus therefore in his discourse of Circumcision, making
one argument of the use thereof to the bodily cleanenesse, (specially in the
priests) he therewithal affirms of the Egyptians* that they* for such
purpose, did (...) their bodies. For Circumcision, we see how odious it was
unto the Gentiles in the time of Maccabees, as diverse Jews (for lives
preservation) were glad to vncircumcize themselves, by a painful stretching
and curious phisiking of the scarred skin^e. It is sufficient that the ancient
Greek has recorded the Ceremony, though altogether ignorant to whom it
appertained: and to what end, used.

But what is shadowed in Circumcision? First, If we respect the paring away of
the flesh, it shadows forth the expoliation and casting away of the olde-man
with his inueterate lusts. And this of the Holy Ghost is often termed, the
circumcision of the * heart. If we respect the shedding of blood accompanying
that cutting, it may well represent the blood of Christ Jesus appointed to be
poured out for our sins, for the washing away of our lusts^ for without blood
no remission, Heb. 9.22. And if with the representation we respect what therein
to the faithful is exhibited, it is no other thing than Christ, who of God the
Father is made unto us, Wisdom, Righ^eousnes, Sanctification and Redemption,
1. Cor. 1.30. Who by his spirit and word works in us true mortification to
sin, and true Vivification to Holiness and truth of Righteousness. Nor
less was taught to Abraham, at the gift of Circumcision.

For being [ ben] a Son of 99. years, he in his old age is tau^ht to cut
off the old man, that so a Couen^nt may be sealed in his flesh. The Couen^nt is
expr^ssed when he says, I am God all sufficient, walk before me and be thou
upright: wherein the Lord not only calle^h Abraham and his seed to
uprightness of Ob^dience toward him, but also preaches and promis^th to be
God all-sufficient unto him and his. Nay, lest he should think his obedience
the Cause why God would be sufficient unto him, the Lord first pronounces him
El-shaddaj; and then bids Abraham walk uprightly: because his
All-sufficiencie in the first place, was cause of his integrity in the second
place. Which covenant standing of free grace and promise, it could not do
less than lead Abraham by the hand unto the Seed of promise (even Christ
Jesus) by whom all the earth was to receive a blessing. Unto the which blessed
seed, the Lord seems to will Abram and Sarai to Behold: when as he turns
Abram into Abraham, and Sarai into Sarah: so, adding to their names the hebrewe
letter [(...)] which in english is, Behold. Whereto the Angel Gabriel might
have an eye, when to the Virgin Mary he cried, Behold. Which letter (of
hebrews termed He^, of us, H,) is to Cabalists their character of the And
indeed it is but aspiration^ nota, a letter of spirit or breathing in heb. gr.
and latin.
holy ghost. By which form of learning (if Abraham ever approved such
learning) that faithful couple were taught, to give the praise of all
goodness to that Spirit of God, by whom they were sealed unto the day of
redemption. Thus the Church in her infancy was taught by letters. In this
state of the Gospel we should be able to put these letters together, for
spelling a Word: even that Word, which assumed Flesh for the circumcising and
saving of Mankind. So much for circumcision.

Lect. XXXIII. Passover.
THe fourth sacramental shadow exhibitiue, shall be the Passover. The
Passover is a certain sacred feast, instituted to Israel of Jehovah: what
time they were presently to depart out of Aegipt, that ancient house of
Bondage. For the better understanding whereof, I will first observe the Name:
secondly, the Thing it self. The name in the Original is Pesach (from whence
the New Testaments language has Pascha: and in our old language Pase,) it
signifies no other than a Trans-ition or Passing-ouer. Which term of
Passover is given to this feast, from the Angel his Passing-ouer the Houses of
such as kept this feast; when in other houses he slew the firstborn of Man
and Beast, Exodus 12.12.

For the Feast it self, it offers to our considerations: first, the Time,
when? Secondly, the Meat, what? Thirdly, the manner How it was then to be
applied. The time offers to us, first, the Month; secondly, the Day; thirdly,
the Hour. The Month is termed Exodus 13.4 compared with the 12.2.
Abib: in English, a stalk of corn with the ear: so termed, for that Israel
in it was to offer the first fruits of corn to Jehovah ( Josh. 5.11. Leuit.
23.14.) and not only because in that month, the green ears of corn
appeared. Which month is made excellent otherwise; for where before they held
only a Civil account of the year, beginning with Tishri (answerable to the
greater part of our September; for the worlds creation they held to begin
with the Autumnes Equinoctial: seeing Adam had at first a ripe harvest) this
Abib was so the seventh: answering with the beginning of the Springs
Equinoctial, entering in March.

But now by a new account (called the Ecclesiastike reckoning) the Civil
seventh is made the Churches first and Head-month. Which in regard of the
shadowing feast, does not only lead us to Christ, as he is the head of the
Church, from whose reign in their hearts, the faithful are to take their
account: but also, to Christ rising fresh and green in that month, the first
fruits of our bodies Resurrection, rising up to heavens glory. And that he
was this corn, remember his own speech: verily, verily, I say unto you:
Except the wheate-corne fall into the ground and die, it bideth alone. But if
it die, it brings forth much fruit. John. 12.24. When saint Peter therefore
(of a blind good meaning) did labor to stay his Master from so dying: our
Savior terms him Satan or Adversary. To what? To the much fruit which would
arise by his dying. And this the Spirit foretold long before in Salomons
psalm, saying: Pissath-bar etc. An handful of corn (or a So Ar. Mon^.
particle or moytie of corn) shall be in the head of the Mountains. The fruit
thereof (ijrgnash) shall burst out as (that of) Lebanon. And they shall flourish
from the City, as the herb of the Earth: psalm. 72.16. Plainly did the
spirit so foretell, what great abundance of faithful people should arise,
from that one blessed grain of wheat sown and dying. The very word [ Bar]
not only signifying Corn, but also (and that more usually) a Son.

Yea, where Ben implies an ordinary son: Bar imports a Son of
excellency: and so it is given to the Son of God in Psalm. 2.12. A grain of
him (namely, his humane body,) it was sown in the earth this month of Abib.
But the third day after it rose (it needed not three months with shadowing
corn) and with it rose the bodies of many ( Matthew 27.52, 53.) showing
himself thereby, the Lord of life and resurrection. O let us sanctify the
first fruits of our nature unto him, who in the first fruits of our nature
has dyed for our redemption, risen for our Justification and ascended for our
Glory.

The month so considered, the Day follows. The Day is twofold: first, the
tenth day wherein the Animal was prepared: secondly, the fourteenth day,
wherein it was slaughtered. For the tenth day, Rabanus well observes that
Christ Jesus (represented by the paschall Lamb) he publicly preached in
Ierushalem so long before the feast day, setting himself so apart to be
crucified the fourteenth. Nor is it unlike, that so many days before the Judas
Iscariot had concluded in his heart, the betraying of Jesus. Which length of
time does make his sin more egregious: namely, a considerate sin in an
h^rd heart: not all that while relenting. Some other scruples (touching our
Saviors time of eating the passe-ouer and his crucifixion) I here pass by.

For the Hour of this feast, it was [ bein h^agnarbaijm] between the two
euenings. What time is that? Joseph. Scalig. de emend. temp. lib. 6. having his
ground it seems from Iosep^. de bello ^^d. lib. 6.
Interuallum oblationis and occasus: it is (says one) that time which passes
between the euenings oblation and the Sun set. But with Beza and our
marginall translation, I take it to be the Twy-light: and the rather because
G^e^eb implies a mingling. Of what? of light and darken^sse: being derived of
Gnarab to betroth: for that it is the betroth^ng or coupling together of two
days. And in this feast, it was the coupling together of the fourteen and
fifteen day, about the Suns setting: which mixture of time we term
Twilight: and the Hebrews, gnarbaijm. Thus the tenth day of the first month,
the Animal was deputed to death: the fourteenth day i^ died. And like enough
about the third hour of the after noone (in the days twelve hours, it being
the ninth) the Animal died, the very time that Messiah yielded up the ghost.
And in the twilight after the Paschall feast begun, as a sanctification of
light and darkness, and of all times to the faithful feeders of Jesus. So
much of the Feasters time: not meddling at all with the feast of unleavened
bread, his time adjoined.

This Paschall feasts-meate, was a yeareling of the sheep or the Goats: that
is, a lamb or kidde being a year old. The perfection of age, did argue the
fullness of Christ Jesus (who also is termed our Passover and paschall Lamb,
1. Cor. 5.7.1. Pet. 1.19.) for the creature (lamb or kidde) in the one of them
was represented Innocence: in the other Nocency. The Lamb an innocent thing
not opening the mouth against the shearer: the young goat a nocent harmefull
creature. The lust therefore compared to sheep, and placed on Christ (the
great-shepheard) his right hand: the wicked therefore compared to Goats, and
put apart on Christ's left hand: as is the Devil and his Angels. But how could
Christ be represented in either? For the Lamb, none doubts: seeing that he
only was without blemish, and no guile was found in his mouth. For being a
yoong-goat, it was for that, he was not only Beda on Exodus 12.
hostia pro peccato, an oblation for sin: but also, because he was of God
made sin for us (who otherwise knew no sin) that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him, 2. Cor. 5.21. In taking a Lamb for the feast, they
were to see the innocence in Christ; but in taking a yoong-goat, they might see
our nocency and damnable guilt upon him. This briefly of the meat.

Now to the manner How, it was to be applied: first, before the eating:
secondly, in the eating: thirdly, after the eating. Before the eating it was to
be slain. Hebraei soli signo sanguinis tuti fuerunt: non qui^ cruor pecudis
tantam inse vim gerebat, vt hominibus salut^ esset: sed imago fuerat rerum
futurarum: L^ict: de vera sap. lib. 4. cap. 2^
Which argued, that there was no redemption to the Israel of God, from
captivity of Hels Pharaoh, but by the death of Messiah. Secondly, the blood was
to be dashed upon the doors cheeke-posts, and above. Which well might import
the door of our soul, needefully to be sprinkled from an evil conscience: for
keeping away the revenging Angel. Nor can we be so sprinkled, but by the blood
of Jesus, Hebr. 9.14. and 10.22. Thirdly, the flesh thereof was to be roasted
with fire. Which well represents the scortching ire of his fathers
indignation burning against him: by the greatness whereof, he was forced to
sweat blood: yea, to cry out: My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

2 In the eating consider, first, the Parties: secondly, the Thing. The Persons
were the same family, whereto they might ^oyne some other, in case themselves
could not eat up the Animal. In one sufficient family, might well be shadowed
forth that one Catholic Church of God, joined unto one Christ. And in Rabanus
his consideration
two families united, might well be tiped out the fewer of Jews, and the more
of Gentiles called together, for making one body to Christ: that so, they
without us should not be made perfect, Hebr. 11.40. For that they were to eat,
it was not only, a part, but the whole, with head feet, and purtenance. By
Head and Feet, some Beda, Raban.
Ancients do understand the Divinity and Humanity of Christ, both which are
spiritually swallowed of the true belieuer, whereas Heretics often are found to
swallow but the one. As our Arrians, that for essence only holds him Man: and
the Anabaptists, that make him only in substance God. But thereby may be
further meant: that the higher things of Christ and the lowest things of
Christ, with every thing or circumstance appertaining to the Word made flesh,
it should of every christian Church be received by faith, and digested by
practice. Which aptly reprooueth such, as affecting high-points, do reject
rudiments: or affect rudiments so, as they despise to be led on to perfection:
or affecting higher and lower points, do contemn circumstances. Whereas the
least thing in Christ Jesus, is to a faithful Israelite right sanable.

3 After they had eat, look if any thing remained, it was to be consumed in
fire. Rab. hereon.
What is this, except when there is something concerning the mystery of
Christ's incarnation, which we cannot understand and penetrate, that then in
all humility we leave it to the power of the Holy Ghost. Touching the
ceremonies, first, of standing: secondly, having a staff in the hand: thirdly,
of eating it hastily: fourthly, The sour herbs Josephus speaks of were
qualified, and in a second service.
with bitter herbs, and fifthly, shodde, they seem all of them to be
appropriated only unto their eating of the Passover in Egypt: and in the
wilderness at least, not agreeing to their time of Rest in Canaan. For as then
ceremonies did tipe forth the readiness and speed they were to make thence
upon the Lords Call (it being a land, as the ceremonies also taught, of vn-rest
and bitterness) so our Savior (who came not to break, but fulfill every jot
of the law, he (with his disciples) is found sitting and aside leaning in the
passover. And here I prosecute only that which after the institution, remained
the same to that Church after. Into which order of continuing-ceremonies, it is
generally See Bezae^ large annotations on Mat. 26.20.
thought of Hebrew Doctors, that the dashing of blood upon the doors cheeks,
and vpper-post, may be referred. This briefly of the Pass-ouer: in whose place
we have our Lords Supper: the Sign changed, but the thing signified, still
continued.

Lect. XXXIIII. Manna.
MAnna shall be the next Sacramental exhibitiue shadow. Of which Manna thou
have the narration in Exodus 16.12, 13, 14, etc. and briefly thus it is: Israel
murmuring at their want of bread in the wilderness, the Lord rained from
heaven a bread, white, like to hoare-frost, but proportioned like Coreander
seed. This bread they gathered (for forty years together, one just month
only excepted, Exodus. 12. and 14.4. Josh. 5.11.12.) in the week six days:
every day an Omer (or Gnomer) full: but the sixth day, double measure, for
serving them also in the Sabbaot, wherein it rained not. Which bread, as they
were to gather but for the day (and thereof, he that had gathered more, had
nothing over: and he which had gathered the less, had no lack) so, being
reserved (beyond the commandment) until the next day; lo, it was full of
worms and stinking.

For the better understanding and use whereof: I will observe first, the Name:
secondly, the place from whence it came: thirdly, the external resemblance:
fourthly, the time of gathering it: fifthly, the measure thereof to the
Gatherer: sixthly, God his judgment upon the abuse thereof. But hereof so, as
the mystical use thereof may also therewith be uttered.

1 For the name of this bread, it is MAN, or Mannah: and the term is given by
Israel unto it, what time they first see it. Touching the signification of the
word Man, two sorts of people conclude diversely. The one sort are such, as
read Isreal's speech [ Man hu^] interrogatiuely, Man hua in Exo. 16.15.
so: What is this? The other sort is such as read the speech affirmatively,
thus: It is Man: or, It is a gift. These that read interrogatiuely, do make
the word MAN in propriety to be a So Cyril on Ioh. 6. and Plan tins Index.
Syriake word, in English valuing, What. And that course is followed of the old
Latin translatour: who (as appears in my old written-bible) both puts
down the text, and in the text also coucheth his own significatiue opinion,
thus [Man hu? quod siguificat, Quid est hoc?] Man hu? which signifies, What is
this? This his opinatiue signification, he might with more modesty have put
into the margin, and not therewithal to ad unto the text. Pagni^ turns it,
It is man. Arias Montanus crosse-wise turns it, Manest. Quid h^^?
What Is this? But what have we to do in Exodus with Syriake phrase? Israel in
Moses speaks only Hebers language: and therefore Man hu if read
interrogatiuely, must be: Is it a gift? if affirmatively, which reason rather
euinceth, then thus: It is a gift. For Man (of Man^h) is in Hebrew a Portion or
gift, and here it is such a portion to Israel, as they were to acknowledge it,
the free gift of God. And what did this Mannah or gift lead them unto? To no
other thing then Christ, who is given of God the Father unto us for feeding our
souls in this worlds wilderness; while we are travailing toward the true
land of Rest, wherein shall nothing dwell but Righteousn^sse. In which respect,
the Apostle (in 1. Cor. 10.3.) does call Manna spiritual meat, and our
Savior himself in Ioh. 6.3^, 35. does plainly expound himself to be that
bread of life, which was shadowed by the perishing Manna. Wherein Cyrill well
thus s^ith: Sensibile illud Manna, Intelligibi^e hoc figurabat: That sensible
bread did figure forth this Intelligible bread. And Augustine has this, [ Aug.
de poe^itent. vtilitate
Quicunque in Manna Christum intellexerunt, eundem quem nos cibum spiritualem
manducauerunt] whosoever in Manna did understand Christ, even they did eat the
same spiritual meat which we do.

2 Which Manna is made excelent, respecting the Place from whence it came:
namely from Heaven. And therefore in psalm. 78.24.25. it is called the wheat of
heaven, and [ Leche^ abbirim] turned of the Septuaginta, bread of Angels: but
according to the Original, Bread of the strong-ones. And them I take to be no
other, then Aelohim, Father, Son and Holy Ghost: the very strength of Israel.
Thus the strong God from heaven showed his might for feeding his people. But
here a contradiction may seem to arise, seeing our Savior (in Ioh. 6.32.)
faith, that Moses gave them not bread from heaven. Which indeed is no
contradiction: seeing our Savior speaks not Simply of Bread, but of
true-bread, which also is of him called [(...)] bread of life, or of that life
which is eternal. That which Moses gave, was temporary bread, bread of death
(seeing the eating thereof would not preserve from death) but Christ (who
thereby was represented, and to the true belieuer exhibited) is the true and
very bread, whereon who so feeds, shall live to God for ever. The first was
heavenly bread, in respect of being rained from above: but coming into
balance with Christ's flesh, it must give place as earthly. The shadow must
stoop to the substance: the sacramental sign, to the thing signified. The
Sign considered apart from the Thing, it is earthly and corporeal: but
jointly considered with the thing of the sacrament, (as in psalm. 78.24.1. Cor.
10.3.) it is heavenly and spiritually. And such is the nature of every
exhibitiue sacrament. Amb. de sacrif. lib. 5. c. 5.
Which Ambrose well observed when he said [ non iste panis est qui vadit in
corpus, sed panis vitae aeternae, qui animae nostrae substantiam fulcit,] it is
not this bread (speaking of the Eucharist) which goes into the body, but the
bread of eternal life, that vnderproppeth the substance of our Soul. Barn. de
coen^ Dominiserm.
Nor less excellent is that of Barnard: [hic pereat physicale nutrimentum.
Cibus iste non est ventris sed Mentis] here let the natural nourishment
perish: for this is not meat for the belly, but for the mind. As our Savior
almost abolisheth the sign for establishing the Thing signified: so have many
ancient Greeks and Latins almost in speech destroyed the Eucharists bread and
wine, for establishing the body and blood thereby signified. But as our Savior
did that, not simply, but comparatively: so the Auntients must be understood
charitably.

3 For the external resemblance, it was in quantity like to Coriander seed:
in color white, like to hory frost. Coriander seed is (of the Plin. l. 1. c. 11
Naturian) held to be, semen firmum, a firm and a fast seed. The Lib. 20. c.
20.
principal whereof he ascribes to Aegipt. Israel being but lately come out of
Aegipt, they might in this resemblance to Coriander, be led to the Seed of the
woman, which, as by the stooping of the Godhead to earth, was to be assumed in
the earth. A little seed (and as slenderly valued) when he was in the earth:
but finally, become so tall a tree, as it ouer-peereth Nebuchadnetzars, and all
the trees of the field. And by the Mannaes whiteness, they might be led to
such a seed of the woman, as should be sinlesse, unspotted, exempted from
humane generation. Thus from the Sign, they might pass to the divine gift
signified: feeding by faith on the seed promised to Abraham: a seed more pure
and sweet, then all the Mosaicall Manna.

4 The time of gathering it, was the whole week in the mornings, the Saboth day
only excepted. The six days might (as Ancients observe) well represent the
worlds six ages, wherein the Israel of God is to seek up Christ and the
things of Christ. As for the day of Gods great Sabbath and eternal rest, it
administreth nothing unto these foolish virgins, that then think to acquire
oil, to obtain Manna. In that great Rest, we are to live by the Graces of
Messiah here obtained. The collection every day, teaches every day to seek
the things that are from above: and the gathering of it in the mornings, does
well inform us, first to seek the kingdom and his righteousness: not
doubting, but in so doing, all other things shall be cast upon us after. For the
Day wherein Manna first rained, it is most probable, to be the first day of the
week. Why? Because the Lord at first tells them, Exodus 16.26
that six days they should gather it, and the seventh day, rest: secondly, as
they thus gathered the six days, so some went out in the seventh (which was
Sabbath) but found none. The first day of the week, it so raining down Manna
(as Origin collected, and others from him observed) what day was that but Lords
day, the day of our Lords resurrection: that very day wherein not only natural,
but also that supernatural light burst out of darkness. That day therefore let
us arise early and go out of our houses to the public assembly of God, to
seek and gather the bread of life. Origin. hom 7 on Exodus
In the Lords day (one well writes) the Lord continually showreth down Manna
from heaven. Them that that day, through lazines, neglect to go forth, GOD
justly may fa^ish, and unto them deny the bread of eternal life. Our Savior
rising that day, he preached therein 5. or 6. times. The Apostles conuened
duly together in that day, establishing it to the churches. The Churches have
in all ages uniformly maintaind it. Go forth this day to seek and gather true
Manna, and the whole week after shall be the rather blessed unto thee. But
sleep, slug, gut and gull at home this day, and the whole week after is like
to be accused unto thee. As thou loves God, hear his word in the public
places: there fill the Omer, and return home therewith for feeding thy family.

5 The measure which every one was to gather full, is termed Gnomer or Omer: in
quantity, the tenth part of an Epha. An Sebast. Mu^. in Matthew. 13. ann^tat. d.
Epha contains the quantity of 432. Hens-egs, the value of euery-ones
gathering amounted so to a competent measure. And yet so, as he that gathered
much had nothing over, and he that gathered little, had no lack, Exodus 16.17.
When Manna represents Christ, then this Omer does well represent the
Belieuers Capacity, whereby he is enabled to receive the things of Christ. And
thereto the Apostle may allude in Romans 12.3. when he admonishes to understand
no further, then God has dealt to every man the measure of faith. To every one
God has given a measure of faith (as an Omer) whereby he is made capable of
grace in that measure. For the filling of which sanctified capacity, every
belieuer must ^oorth with the assembly, to gather heauens-food, before the
Sun of persecution arise and cause it to melt from the face of the earth. O,
how many mornings have we slept away our thirst: having gathered no knowledge
of Christ, by the which we may be relieved in the heat of affl^ction* God be
merciful unto us, in giving us grace to trudge abroad hereafter: redeeming
that time we have lost: For the days are evil. If we but take pains to fill
our Omer, mark the mercy of God: we shall have to sustain us, so well as they
which have gathered more. Like to that in the parable, where they that came
last into the vineyard, do (so well as the first) receive the penny. As that
penny intends not the measure of glory, ^ere of I have spoken more largely in my
Antidoton.
but only eternal life: so may this measure of Manna: seeing Christ is
eternal life to the repentant, so well to the latter as former repentant. But
as Christ will be thus one and the same to all: so only to that all, which
come out with their Omer, endeavoring to their power, to fill it: for in such a
case, the will is accepted for the deed. And that may be a motive, for rowsing
the sluggard. 2. Manna in a secondary sense (as the Apostle observes in 2.
Cor. 8.14, 15.) does represent that temporary substance, whereof God has made
his children stewards, for some equality in ministering that, as God administered
the former: namely, that the abundance of some, may supply the want of others,
that so there may be equality. By which divine rule the faithful walked in the
first christian church at Ierushalem; and that voluntarily. But afterward,
zeal abated, charity grew cold, and the Apostle Paul was glad to lay a
commandment on the Churches, for laying somewhat apart every Lords day, for
relieuing the Saints. But in after-age what says Chry^ostome? Chrysos. in
hom. Oportet haeres. esse.
even that we may say: I am enim friuola illa verba Meum and Tuum, quae tot
bella mundo inuexerunt, ex sancta illa ecclesia erant exterminata,
Inhabitabaturque non al^ter terra, quam ab Angelis caelum: At that time, them
two idle words (Mine and Thine) were rooted out of that holy Church: which
since have haled so many warfares into the world. There the earth was no
otherwise inhabited, then heaven of the Angels. But now I may add the earth
generally no otherwise inhabited, then Hell of devils. Question, Should every
one then have like measure? Answer, The Holy Ghost urges not that, but this,
that the poor have their lackes supplied of the Rich. The distinction of poor
and rich the Holy Ghost takes not away: nay, he establishes them, (for God
has made them both, Prou. 22.2.) but he commands us to tender their need,
as we would have God to tender ours: that they may be comforted in their place,
as God has comforted us in ours. But whereas in the sixth day they were to
ga^her double, namely two Omers, that may not only (which Ancients have
observed) teach, that in the sixth age of the world (namely, in this state of
the Gospel) a double grace is offered: but also, that in the last time of our
life we are to labor for the more grace, by how much the more, our weekes-age
is welnie run, and the great Sabbath near us. So far ought we to be from
concluding, The older we are, the more idle we may be.

5. Touching the judgment of God inflicted on the mis-application of Manna, it
is this: if any Israelite should reserve thereof until the next day after
gathering thereof, God smit that with stench and an horrible worm of
corruption. The reason hereof grows from hence, because God gave for the day,
sufficient for that day to the Gatherer. And therefore none could be reserved
till the next day, but it must grow from one of these two evils: either from
d^ffidence or distrust in Gods providence, as if God would not administer new
Manna the next day: or else of sleepy slothfulness to go out the next day:
for the nourishing of which idleness, they should the former day so lay up for
the after day. Both which were notable evils, whether by Manna we understand
the things of Christ, or temporary substance here vouchsafed. In Mannaes
shadowing forth Christ, we are taught first, not to distrust the sufficiency
of Christ in any one day: secondly, for the things of this life not to be
careful for to morrow. That we are not to distrust christ's sufficiency for
every particular day, it is because, Jesus Christ yesterday, to day, the same
is also for ever, Hebr. 13.8. for never is his hand shortened, that it cannot
save, Isah. 59.1. Did Christ feed thee yesterday and to day? the same he will
also do to morrow. But as thou went out and labored for his grace yesterday
and to day: so thou m^st out and renew thy labor to morrow. Touching caring
for to morrow, our Savior forbids that, when he says, Care not then for to
morrow adding this reason: for the morrow shall care for it self; the day
having enough of his own grief, Math. 6.34. Labor we are daily for temporary
things (for it is the property of the Parables-foole, to say, heart be at
rest, thou have abundance, thou need labor no more: for a Christian is still
to labor, if not for himself, yet for helping of others) but labor we are
without carking, caring, afflicting the soul. We need not grieve for to
morrow: for if we live so long, we shall find the time to bring with it,
sorrow sufficient for it self. But if any will of diffidence in Gods
providence, content themselves with these things divine already acquired (the
Hebrews sin in chapter 6.1, 2. and the sin of a number now, who content
themselves with the beginnings of Christ, not drawing on to perfection) it
shall be just with God to make them stink in the nosethrills of the people:
yea, to smite them with the worm of conscience, which may gnaw them in hell
for ever, Isa. 66.24. Mark 9.48. Whether it proceed of diffidence in Gods
after-prouision: or of idleness to strive after the renuall of Mercy: The
like judgment may in justice be inflicted upon distrust and negligence in
acquiring civil temporaries: seeing to the upright walker God has promised
all good things, Psalm. 84.11. but enioyning therewith, that they must labor as
they mean to eat, Genesis 4.19.2. These. 3.10. But O cursed age! how many now
store up in diffidence, till God smites them with Nabal, Ananias and Saphira:
and how many with the fool in the Gospel (having filled their barnes) leave
off to labor, give themselves to ease and gluttony, till ease have slain
them, and the Angels of Gods wrath do unawares take away their soul? Which if
a wickedness: then how great a sin is idleness in the poor* In them it must
be one of the seven capital sins with a witness: seeing they have nothing of
their own, wherewith to maintain their ease and gluttony. These often prove
gad* bees, flying upon Gaddes hill, till they come to hang on Tyburne or
elsewhere, till they stink, and the worm consume them. So much of Manna.

Lect. XXXV. Rocke-water.
The next exhibitiue sacramental shadow is the Rock-water spoken of in Exodus
17. the history whereof, briefly is this: the Israelites murmuring in the
defect of drink, and Moses complaining thereof to God: behold, the Lord
commands Moses to take his rod, and therewith smite a certain Rock,
promising therewith the issue of waters for quenching Isreal's thirst. Moses
hereupon tak^th his rod, does chide the people, smites the rock twice, and
waters issue out abundantly, Numb. 20.10, 11. But because Moses and Aaron
believed not rightly that promise, God denies to them the bringing of Israel
into the land of promise: Ibidem. 12.

That this Rocke-water signified, yea, to the belieuer exhibited, Christ and
the things of Christ, is plain in 1. Cor. 10.4. Where the Apostle teaches,
that the fathers did all drink the same spiritual drink: for they drank of
the spiritual Rock that followed them; and the Rock was Christ. Was that
Rock the very Christ? No: no more than the spiritual bread and wine in the
Lords supper, is the very Body and blood of Christ: but so called, because,
together with the sign, the thing signified was exhibited. Fide manente, Aug.
in Johan. trv^t. 45.
signa sunt mutata. Ibi Petra Christus: nobis Christus, quod in Altari penitur:
The same faith (says Austin) abides still, but the signs are changed. There
the Rock was Christ, but that which now is placed on the Altar (or communion
table, namely the bread and wine) even that is Christ unto us. But for the
clearer understanding of this sacramental shadow, let us consider more
particularly: 1. why Christ is termed Rock: 2. what is meant by the waters
issuing thence: 3. by the stroke whereupon the waters issued.

1. Christ is termed Rock, because (as the Psalmist terms him) he is the
Rock of our salvation: that is, even Mat 7.24, 25 For this, see New Ierush.
sermon. 2. at large.
He, upon whom if we build, let the rain fall, the floodes come, the winds
blow and beat upon our house, it yet falls not: because it is founded upon
that Rock. Even he is that Rock upon whom the Church (the house of God) is
builded: whereby it comes to pass, that the infernal powers cannot prevail
against it, Math. 16.18. Thus to the whole church he is the same that he is to
Peter and every particular Belieuer: and to every particular member the same
as to the whole. Shaken they may be, as was Peter, but not finally removed, no
more than was Peter. Which caused an Ancient well say, Barnard. in sermon. 61.
The Rock is in heaven; in the same is stedfastnes and assurance. And indeed,
where else can it be, but in our Savior? The world roareth, the flesh
oppresses me, the world follows and hangs upon me. And yet notwithstanding, I
fall not: For I am founded upon a sure Rock.

2. What is meant by the waters issuing thence? Origin makes this answer:
Origin. in Exodus
Percussus enim Christus and in crucem actus, Noui testamenti fontes produxit:
Christ being smitten and hanged on the cross, out of him issued the fountains
of the New Testament. By which fountains he should mean nothing else but
Mysteria, the secrets of the Gospel, as somewhat before he had spoken. Rabanus
hereon has: Percussus enim Christus, sitientibus lauacri gratiam and donum
spiritus sancti ^ffudit: Christ being smitten, he powered forth to the thirsty,
the grace of our washing, and the gift of the Holy Ghost. And true it is, that
what we draw from Christ, it is to the world a Mystery, and so are all the
things sealed up in Christ Jesus, revealed only to his members. And as true it
is that our new births washing, and every gift of the spirit, it flows out
of him, as from the Head-fountaine. As they be mysteries, so our Savior
thanketh the heavenly f^ther for hiding them from the world, but revealing them
to his children. And as they flow from him, not only as a fountain, for
washing away sin and uncleanness ( Zechar. 13.1.) but also to become in us
an eternal spring flowing up unto heavens Paradise: so, himself teaches the
woman of Samaria (John. 4.14.) that he was to give these waters: and soon
after informs his Disciples, that none could drink them but by Faith: when
as he thus says, He that believes in me, shall never thirst, John. 6.35.
Jesus Messiah is thus, Cantic. 4.15
The fountain of the gardens (for watering the churches) the well of
liuing-waters, springing up in the true belieuer, unto Eternal life.

Open thy filthy he^rt, and these waters will cleanse thee. Set thy mouth of
faith to his mystical side, and quench thy spiritual thirst: yea, cease not
to draw, until thou have drunk up eternal life. Be not drunk with wine,
wherein is excess, but ^e fille^ with the spirit, Ephesians. 5, 18. These waters
have (to Gods praise) ^loted ^long through the midd^st of Englands Paradise.
God grant that our sins become not as coardes for bringing in Romes
Philistims for stopping and fil^ing up our wells with Gravel. In Queen Mary's
days they had dammed them up: but our Isaac dug them ^new and gave to them
ancient names. Sweet heavenly father, for thy Sons sake continue them still
open, even to our posterity for ever: that so thy poor Israel may never have
occasion to murmr.

3. The strokes which Moses gave were two. Thereupon he is of God charged with
infidelity: which causes divines to conclude the sign thereof in his
smiting. Tremell. and Fr. lun.
Some have taken it, that he ought only have spoken to the Rock: and
therefore his smiting (though it had been but once) to be a sign of
diffidence: as if God would not by the word alone have fetched out waters. But
such, comparing to this purpose, Number. 20. and verse. 8. with 11. should
therewithal have remembered Exodus 17.6. where it is plain^ly commanded, that
he should also smite the Rock. Others more generally have deemed, that his
diffidence was declared in his smiting the second time: whereas the Lord only
bid him speak and smite: not smite twice. And indeed this is somewhat,
though it may be, not all. For to what p^rpose would so wise a man smite the
second time, but because the waters issued not upon the first stroke? How fell
it out then that waters came not upon the first blow? Because he distrusted the
Lords word. Yea, Aaron that smit not, is accused of diffidence also. And
indeed* a right hard thing it was to believe that a rock should send forth
abundance of water. Besides which circumstance, observe also the speech of
Moses to the people: Hear now ye Rebels: shall we bring you water out of this
Rock? He says not, that they would fetch water out, but asks the question
shall we? as if they would save their honesty, though water came not out:
se^ing they made no promise of bringing it out. The not issuing of waters upon
the first stroke, it taught Moses and Aaron the fruit of diffidence in Gods
promise: but issuing forth upon the second blow, it taught them, that God is
faithful who has promised, though his children many times be faithless.

But what does this rod and the stroke therewithal shadow? The rod, I know
not what it may better resemble than Prayer (the spirit of prayer, in respect
of God, called the Isa. 11.4.
rod of his mouth) wherewithal Christ Jesus is pierced, and cannot but open to
the meaning of his own Sprite: even as in the Gospel, our Savior could not
but awake and satisfy his disciples thirst, when as they cried, Save us, or we
perish. Moses (representing the law) Beda and Rabanus in their meditat.
does lead the Israel of God to Christ for water of refreshment. All s^biects
to the Law must come to him, and there, with the spirit of prayer, smite. If
our infidelity cause that no refreshment come from his presence upon the first
call, smite we must again, and the winds, storms, and b^llowes of tentation
shall give place. James 4.3
We often ask, and receive not, because we ask amiss, namely, to satisfy our
own lusts. But asked w^e in faith without wavering, we could not but receive:
for in so knocking, he himself has promised to open. But because we begin
with Moses, to halt in the beginning of prayer, shall we not therefore persist
and renew our petition? God forbid: for as an Beda in Romans 1. ex August.
Ancient could well say, [ melius est in via claudicare, quam prater viam
fortiter ambulare] it is better to halt in the way, than to walk uprightly out
of the way: so I conclude it, far better to persist in prayer with
imperfection, than desperately to leave off prayer, which is flat defection. If
Moses his weakness hindered that effect which should have followed the first
stroke: a sign of a strong rising faith it was in Moses, to repeat the
stroke. And thus this Rock, the waters* rod, and strokes, do lead us unto
Christ, and the things of Christ. So much for this shadow.

Lect. XXXVI. Brazen Serpent.
THe last Sacramental shadow which I observe to be given unto Israel, for
sign exhibiting Messiah to the true Beleuer* it is that Brazen Serp^nt lift up
in the wilderness of Moses, at the Lords commandment for the saving of Israel
from the stinging of Serpents Numb. 21. Which Serpent so lift up, our Savior
himself (in Ioh. 3.14.15. and 12.32.) does expound of himself* For the
better understanding whereof, let us consider: first, Isreal's disease:
secondly, the Curation of that disease.

Isreal's Disease was a mortal sting or poison, smit into their bodies by f^ry
Serpents, stirred up of God for punishing their murmuring against the Lord.
This murmuring was their rebellious speech uttered against the Lords magistrate
and Minister ( Moses and Aaron) for that they lacked ordinary bread, and were
fed only with Manna. Of which sacramental bread they speak despitefully:
first, when they say, Our Souls lothes it: secondly, when they lightly term
it, light bread. Which dealing of theirs, the Apostle calls, a tempting of
Christ: when by way of use he says to every Christian: Neither let us tempt
Christ, as some of them also tempted him and were destroyed of Serpents. Their
Souls thus tempting Christ, yea, murmuring against Christ (first, in respect
of their lewd language against the Personal figures of Christ ( Moses and
Aaron) secondly, against the Sacramental shadow of Christ (that is, against
Manna) the Lord punishes this disease of the Soul with that of the Body,
effected by the fiery darts of Serpents: like as in 1. Cor. 11.30. he punished
many Christians with bodily greiuances, for abusing the Lords sacramental
supper. All which teaches us (as we would preserve the Body from temporal
plagues: and the Soul from being stung with the fiery Serpents of hell) to fly
all murmuring against the good gifts of God: be they Personal or
Sacramental. It is said of the serpent termed Actuarius de medic. compos. in
cap. de Rabioso cane.
Aspis, that he gives a wound to the body [ puncto acus simile] not bigger
then the prick of a nedle. But mark the effect. A little blood therewith
disti^leth, and that right black. A sudden darkness ouer-spreadeth the eyes.
The whole body falls to labor thereon, [ non sine quodam voluptatis sensu]
but not without a certain tickling pleasure. In a word, the whole man is
quickly overthrown.

The Aspe and Orig. in Exodus 16.
these fiery serpents, is satan and the damned spirits, who of God are stirred
up in justice to punish our abuse of holy things. The serpents sting is Beda
on Numb. 21.
Sin [1. Cor. 15.56.] and these sins, are the fiery darts of the hellish
wicked, Ephese. 6.56. The stroke of sin seems so small as a pinnes point:
which causes fools to tush thereat, as being a thing of nothing: but heed it
well, and thou shall see black blood stand in it, a sign of death, the least
sin of his own nature, being mortal. And watch the effects of this Sin
further: and behold, the eye of the soul darkneth more and more: and when the
eye is darkness, how great is that darkness? The whole soul therewith
falls of traveling with sin (but with a certain itching pleasure,) the
fruit of which labor is a l^e in the right hand, when so the soul awaketh.
This is the Aspe, this is the fiery serpent that stingeth: that old serpent and
dragon, that stung man and murdered mankind from the beginning. And this is
his sting, Sin: even the peruersion of our nature, that tickling foolerie
wherewith we delight our selves to death and destruction. This for the disease.

The Curation of Isreal's disease literally was thus: A brazen Serpent (called
also The letter S^in, ho^soeuer pronounced.
Sharaph and plurally Sheraphim, Number. 21.9. compared with verse 6. from their
fiery appearance) such a serpent, upon Gods commandment, was artificially
made of pure sparkeling brass, and lift up on some pole. Whereto, if the stung
Israelite cast up his eye, lo, he was immediately cured.

Now unto what mystery did this lead Israel? Namely to lift up the eye of the
soul unto Jesus Christ, who upon the cross was lifted up for saving the true
belieuer. This our Savior teaches when he says: And as Moses lift up the
serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of man be lift up: that whosoever
believes in HIM, should not perish, but have eternal life, John. 3.14, 15.
The lifting up of the bodies eye unto that, led them to the lifting up of their
bodies eye (a believing mind) unto this. The fal^ing of the body there, led
them to the souls salvation here. Tempor^ll life in the former, did preach to
them eternal life in the latter. Thus that sin which was committed by eating
of the forbidd tree, is here salued by the Lord of life hanged upon the t^ee.
The S^rpent with sting, is here overcome by a Serpent without sting. O that in
our Douish innocence, we could for avoiding ^uill, be so wise as Serpents!
Has Satan by the fi^ry darts of sin s^it us? Hold out the shield of faith,
(Ephe. 6.16.) and they are quenched. For the faithful are deliu^red from these
empoysonments of sin [ cum Chr^^tum in cruce eleuatum interioribus abtutibus
semper aspiciunt, Beda on Numb. 21.
] whenas they shall continually, with the inward sight, behold Christ lifted up
on the cross: [ Et illi qui per fidem appropinquauer^nt, saluifiunt] for all
such as approach to him by faith, are saved. Sursum corda, here I may call
people to lift up their hearts, and then with Saint Stephen they shall see
Christ (not only crucified, but also) on the right hand of his father
glorified: there making intercession for every of the faithful, there being no
other name (unto us) under heaven by the which we are to be saved. Thus the
fiery and furnace-like affl^ctions of Jesus, do expel the fiery sting of the
wicked: this fire expelling the former. And thus all Shadows before the Law
and under the Law, do lead the Church to Christ Jesus crucified, and now
glorified. He being the substance, the shadow cease. The day-breake of the
Gospel, has put an end to the Laws night and darkness. So much briefly of
shadows Arithmeticall, Personal and Sacramental.

Lect. XXXVII.
Until the day break, and the shadows fly away, Retire my well-beloved and be
like a Roe or young Heart upon the mountains of Bether.


We have before at large examined the sorts of shadows, types and figures
which were to give place and break up, with the time of the Gospels bright
appearance. In the second place (as at first I observed) it remains, that
something be said of the shadows under the Gospel, which are not to fly away,
until the second coming of Christ Jesus: for so it may be, that the Church
here designeth, not only the First, but also the Second coming of Messiah.
With which appearance the Sabbaticall morning shall begin; a day without
darkness and evening (as is his shadow Genes. 2.23.) for then we shall see
Christ Jesus as he is, and no longer be under shadows, 1. John 3.2.

The shadows peculiar to the time of the Gospel, (for imposition of hands is
in common to both Testaments) they be two: Baptism and the Lords supper. And
unto these two it was that Ancients had relation, whenas they say [ Beda ex
August. in cap: 19 Io^an.
aper^it latus vt illic quodammodo ostium vitae panderetur, vnde Sacramenta
Ecclesiae mana^erunt:] The side of Christ was pierced, that so the door of
life there might be set open, from whence the Churches sacraments have issued:
understanding so by water, Baptism: and by blood (synecdochically) the Lord
his last supper. Hereupon it was, that Augustine (balancing the old and new
sacraments) he says in one place, that Christ has given to us [ Aug. de
doct. chri. l. 3. c 9.
Pauca pro multis] a few for many: and in another place, he says, that Christ
has joined his people together [ In epist. ad Ianuar. 10^.
sacramentis numero paucissimis] by sacraments, fewest in number. Now, the
fewest in number is Two: for [ vnita^ non est numerus] one is no number. As for
the Romanists numbering up to the Gospel, seven Sacraments, it is quite besides
book, proceeding only from sup^rstition, as was that in their elder brother
Balaam, calling for seven Altares, seven Bullock^, and seven Rams, Numb.
23.1.

To discourse here of these two sacraments, it is not my purpose: first, for
that such doctrine is often upon occasion delivered amongst us: secondly for
that the doctrine of these two sacraments, it has often been urged before in
our discourse of the old Testaments shadows. Mutantur signa, Res autem signata
manet, the signs are changed, but the thing signified rem^ineth. For unto
Baptism, thou may refer all the shadow-washings with purifications: and
unto the Lords supper, thou may refer all the mystical eatings and
drinkings, in and without Paradise: before and after the flood: before the Law
and under it. And this is the new Testaments perfection and glory: that in one
speech, two things are spoken: that in two sacraments, two hun^^^d are sealed
up to the faithful. Which two sacraments, as they lead unto Christ, so when
Christ our life app^areth in glory, these sh^dowes must vanish also. Ambros. in
Coloss. 2.
Appar^n^^ v^ritate figura cess^t: sic^^ (...) abse^^^ Imp^r^tore, im^g^ ^iu^
hab^t authoritatem, pr^sente ^on habet: the truth it self appearing, the
figure cease: even as an Emperors image has authority in his ^bsence, but
being present no such matter. Till that day therefore break, and these two
shadows also fly away, let us with all truth of faith and thankfulness, set
forth the precious passion and bloodshed of our Savior Christ Jesus. Thus much
touch^ng the time of Messiahs decreed absence.

It remains in the second place, that the manner of his absence be considered:
namely, as a Roe or young heart upon the Mountains of Bether. And herein
obseruable, first, the Creature whereto he is resembled, namely, a Roe or young
Heart: secondly, the place of his abode, and that is, the mountains of Bether.
Of the Roe and Hind, I have before spoken in verse 7. and 9. and that somewhat
amply: here therefore I pass by such particulars as touches that resemblance.
Touching the Mountains of Bether, something is to be spoken, wherewith the
whole is to be concluded. Bether is here taken of some for the Proper name of a
place so termed: of othersome it is taken Appellatiuely, and so is englished,
mountains of division. If the proper name of a place, then it is not yet
obs^rued, what place that should be; excep^ that which in 2. Sam. 2.29. is
t^rmed Bithron, in the land of Gilead. As for the old latin that reads
Bethel (belikes Lamed wanted the head, Sixtu^ 5.
and so he took it for Resh) followed of Pope Sixtus in his edition, Clemen.
8. Se bellum Papale.
I set not only all H^brew coppies against that, but also Pope Clement his
edition.

If the Hebr^e word Bether be not a proper name, but a Noune Common (and so it
is to be termed, Mountains of Division) then it is a question, what mountains
these be, who (according to the Letter) are pointed at. As I know no Writer
that has determined that, so I can not guess wh^t mountains, except they
should be, either the Mountains that environed Ierushalem, or suppo^ted Zion,
which neither I see, how And yet in a figure, those mountains may be ^o
termed. The reason whereof see upon cha 4.6. hereafter: which ver^e, if it
expound this, then the mountains of Myth and Incense be these Diuiders.
literally they may b^ so termed: or else, the two Mountains Gerizim and
G^ebal (Deuteronomy. 11.^0. and 27. etc. Josh. 8.33.) where the twelve tribes were
Divided: Simeon, Leui, Judah, Issacar, Joseph and Benjamin, uttering the
blessing from mount Gerizim: and Reuben, Gad, Asher, Zebulun, Dan and Naphtali,
uttering the Legal curse from the other mountain. And betwee^e what could
there greater Division be, then between Blessing and Cursing? Let the
Mountains be what they shall be, I doubt not but thereby we are mystically
led: first, to the partition wall which divided between Jew and Gentile,
until the coming of Christ, who then of two were made one: no people then
standing of as accursed, but all called into one Sheep fold for communicating
with the Gospel of blessing. Secondly (as we respect Christ now returned into
the heavens, the mountains of Gods holiness) so, it further in mystery
leads us to these mountains of notable division, by which we yet are parted
from the full fruition of Jesus. So that the church of the Gentiles
figuratively introduced before Christ's incarnation, does but subsc^ibe to
Messiahs mystical feeding in Israel (to whom the Oracles were committed, and
they so lift up above the Nations) till the Day wherein the Gentiles should be
visited, the wall of ceremonies pulled down, and the shadows vanished. But
the two people once made One by the Gospel, the Church so here may be
introduced, subscribing to Messiahs continuance in the high Heavens, until the
great Sabbaticall day begin to break: what time, not only the Churches
sacramental shadows shall vanish; but also the Night of sin, the works of
darkness, the shadow of death shall fly away, and be no more seen.

As a Roe and Hynde he sometimes fed in the height of Judah, but now rests in
the height of Heaven, solacing at the right hand of glory. There (O thou whom
my soul loves) be as a Roe or yong-Hart, lately chased and bloodily entreated
in our valley of death: there rest and solace thy self, maugre the Dragons
gaping, Antichrists warring, the Atheists yealping against the Moon. Thou
did promise, being once lift up, to draw all thy members unto thee. O my
souls Joy, thou was first lifted up between earth and heaven, for thy
Churches redemption: and now thou art exalted hier then the heavens, for thy
peoples glorification. Draw us (O sweet Hynde of the Morning) draw us after
thee; that howsoever the body converse here awhile below, yet our souls
conversation may be aloft with thee: So be it.

And so an end of the third Part.
Faults to be corrected.
IN the last line of the ^pistle to the Ministers, read unlearned p. 3. last
line read he was not only ^ Prophet p. 17. in the margin read (...). p. 23.
l. 3. re^de threats. pa. 24. line 25. read Blessednesses. page 35. line 10.
blot o^t in. page 42. l. 37. read strai^d. p. 63. line 29, 30. in some books,
blot out where vision world. line 33. read arc. p. 66. line 27. read s^ndry
Images. p^. ^8. in the marg. read Bim^sibbo. p. 73. l. 9. read pl^a p. 76.
li. 1. read the word Monch. l. 17. read medicin^. pa. 84. l. 7. read it
signifies. p. 113. for lines read letters. pa. 116. last line but one, read
sick^n^s. pa. 120. last line, for committed read received. page 127. l. 11.
read sunctions. pa. 131. last line read testament. p. 132. l. 1. read given.
p. 137. l. 26. re^de sufficiency. p. 156. l. 10. for lute read but. page 173.
lin. 28. read great and small. page 203. l. 17. put out of. p^g 208. l. 18.
read many half hundr. pa. 215. l. 9. read which is to the Hebr. 10.5.
parap^rased thus. pa. 252. l. 23. read s^ut out. pa. 257 l. 8. read other
than the Son. l. 19. read mediation. page 283. l. 22. read spiritual. page
285. l. 30* read th^ist* Other faults I desire the gentle Reader to correct as
he finde^ them.


