Nay, I will taste of other assayes
And space our dame for holy days
So that for very need she must use her feate
With other of her house, and such as she can geate,
Yet is she not much to blame
Though she increase her husbands name
Such children ^o bring as now ye see me
Tall men as I am unworthy though I be.
Justice Thou spekest like a Lorell full larg and full lewdly
And not like a child gotten of true matrymony
And yet though thy person enduce no lykelyhode
That in thee should be any manhood
Yet beside that thou seem of manhood frail
Because so abused is thy light apparaile.

Iniuri. Apparel, good sir, what fault is that
Though gray be her cote why blame ye ye wild cat
Why should ye him deem of nature frail
Though as wise as ye would were a Fox tail
Or a cote after the comen usage
Or have by nature a mad vysage
These be no witness for Justice to dyserne
Nor certain knowledge of nature to learn
And christ taught you sir how ye should judge men
S^yenge Noli^e iudicare secundum faciem.
And yet in nature better knowledge should be
Then is in apparel ye know perdie.

Justice O yet in apparel is great abusion
If it be framed without dyscretion
For in apparel there may a great token be
Of fraylenes, of pride, and instabylytie,
If common assyse therein use no mesure
For then is apparel a wanton foolysh pleasure
And folly, best mede is of presumpcyon
When nature or reason used resumpcyon,
And therefore Christ taught a great wise prose
Saying Ex fructibus eorum cognoscetis eos.

Iniuri. Yet with ye same text I pray you wipe your nose
He said not Ex vestibus eorum cognoscetis eos.

Albion. Yet freindes I pray you once again
To seat your trauice that breeds disdain
And heartily both I do you pray
That both your frendshyps have I may.

Injury Sir as for mine ye shall not mysse
But this gentleman I think will go pysse.

Justice Nay sir Albion I will not draw back
If that of me ye have lack,
So that I were in perfyte suertie
That this man here should manhood be.

Injury Now Christ's benedycyte
How Albion and Justice has forgot me
Because of me they had no exercise
Of long time by any enterprise
Wherefore sithen ye can not know me by experience
I wot not how ye should know me but by my credence
Therefore by my troth and by my honesty
Believe me, for manhood truly I am he.

Albion. Then by your oath I am content
To have your frendshyp with good assent
And Justice I pray you to do the same.

Justice Sir if manhod be his name
As he has sworn I would be glad
That his frenshyp also I had.

Albion. Then Justice I pray you both
Let me knyt you both upon his oath.
And the^ he takes both their hands together saying Now freindes I trust we be
all three
And with this knot I pray you contented to be

Justice Sir ye ought to be contented best of all
Where justice is treited with due equity
And where no favor nor mede should be
And when reason has tried there every deal
That such an act were good for the comen weal
If therein any loss may be
To the disaduauntage of Principaltie
Such an act leseth all his suit
With a little indoysing of reason astute
And if it touch the Lords sprytuall
Or be disauauntage to the Lords temporal
Fare well, go bett, this bill may keep
As well as through the parlyament creep
And if that Merchants be moouid with all
Or any multitude of the comen hall
This is not for us say they than
This bill is naught but for to wype a pan
And this is all your new equity
And for all your message, yet thus will it be.

Albion. Alas if this may not reformed be
I shall never be sure of prosperity.

Iniuri. Ye and what follows hereof master Albion
To your person universal derysion

Albion. Why to me derision.


Iniuri. For all other strange nations
They will rail on you with open proclamacions
Saienge whosoever do as he dose
Is half a man and half a wild goose.

Albion. Why half a man and half a wyld goose.


Iniuri. For with hie reason they say ye can dispute
And try out perils with labourous suit
And eke the treasure for the comen veil
As far as wit or reason can assail
But when all is done and your statute made
Then soorth ye go in a wise trade
To bring it all to good conclusion
And put it never in execucyon
Then speak they further in steed of a mock
They have made a statute like a woodkoeke
That has but one eye and the other blind
And it will turn with every wind
And for because ye study but for the beginning
And never provide for a sure endyng
Beginning like a man ye take great assay
At last like a wyld goose even but to fly away.

Justice Well if this be true it is more pytie
Yet let us endeuer both ye and I
To taste our message that it were done
To help here of some reformacyon.

Albion. Ye that to do I pray you both
And to you two I promise by oath
I shall me endeuer with the co^mynaltie
Their hole allegyaunce to keep in unity.

Justice Then God be your speed for I will forth my way


Albion. And I will after god guide us that best may.


Iniuri. And I will tarry no longer while
But as I see you over the style.

Then departs Albion and Justice both. Iniuri. Now here begins a game ywys
For manhood they wene my name is
But trust me syrs if I should not lie
My name is called Injury
Which name to hyde I thought it polysie
And turn it to manhood, and wot ye why?
It is a part of our new experyence
When I against right make styffe defense
That Justice in his seat may not be enstabled
Then am I Injury manhood called
O than of me craketh every man
How like a Lord this fellow stere can
The law to defend without a fall
For all their pledyng in Westminster hall,
Or say what they will and babble there
Yet mayntenaunce and I will keep the chere
If it come once to the country
Then as I will so shall it be
A very cause syrs why I hyde my name
Was, they should not suspect my fame
Because I would spy all their intent
To change their purpose after my judgment
And so will I do, for this is their pretense
By mean of Justice to bring in experyence
That peace should continue the people among
And so by that mean to banysh me wrong
But trust me syrs I will none of that
But rather by their faces I will them scrat
And me to mayntaine in this opynion
I have an old mate called Dyuycion
That shall be of my counsel in this case
Which I trust will not turn his face
Till Peace be driven clean from Albion
And then let Justice and me alone
For I trust or he and I have done
He shall go whystle in a mary bone
As for any ryghtfull judgment
That after this shall follow his intent
And now syrs will I goo my way
My fellow to seek, find him if I may.

Here Injury goes out, and then Division comes in with a byll, a sword a
buckler, and a dagger. Diuisyon Have in the ruske
Out of the buske
A lustye Captain,
A Boore with a tuske
A sturdie Luske
Any battle to detain
A stalyon stout
To bear it out
In every wheare,
And never to Loute
For a knaves cloute
though my head it bear.
As styffe as a stake
Battle to make
As never aferde.
I can awake
These knaves and take
Them fast by the berde.
For Peace is bent
Nor (...) intent
To live at ease,
Shall not prevent
Let of my judgment
To (...) in disease.
Such can I have
To conjure a knave
Out of his skin,
Though Justice rave
To hang or save
Fie on him horson.

Here comes Injury in again. Iniuri. Mary fie on him horeson
What art thou mad again.

Diuisyon What (...) old freinde Injury
How were other hanged and (...)

Injury By god because I took delay*
For lack of thee to be mine (...).

Diuisyon What horson would thou have me
Be trussed up instead of thee.

Injury Ye by god, but even for a say
That I might learn of you to know the play.

division. To play horson, what menist thou by that

Iniuri. By god me thought even now ye were in a snare
Or else an huntyng to catch an bare
But hark I say, do together and spell
Beware ever among of the frery clerks bell.

Diuisyon. It is doubtful to me all that thou spekest
I pray thee spell it thy self and tell me what thou menest

Iniuri. But would thou needs so feign know it
I tell thee with Albion and Justice I am knyt
Therefore it were wisdom for thee
To beware what thou say before me

division. What horeson then thou have forsaken me.

Iniuri. Nay I had lever ye were skynned all three
For I have turned the wrong side of my hode
And told them my name was manhood
And now by god in any wise
For both our eases I must have thine advise.

division. What have thou now changed thine old copy
To Justice and Albion to be a comen hoby,
Or art thou a ferde of thy old name
That in every place is had in fame
And is supported in such suffrentie
From the lowest unto the highest degree.

Iniuri. Nay by god I was not aferd
It was but for to claw their berde
Or rub it of all that they meant
That I might know all their intent
Whereof the matter is to long to tell
For the time that we did mell
But shortly to show thee for a conclusyon
Their mind is to bring us both to confusyon.

division. I pray thee by what mean.

Iniuri. Albion has sent Justice to Pryncypaltie
To have assystence, and me to suffreyntie
Of the Lords temporal to have their aid
That Justice in no wise should be delayde.
And this thou know well enough perdye
Thus they mean to destroy thee and me
And as for Justice forth is gone
Speed as he can, but I tarried alone
And yet I would no messenger be
Till I had the aduyce of thee
Therefore how say thou now in this case
We shall not be idle to play at this bace.

division. Tush as for this I care not a puddyng prycke
For we two will go through thyn and thycke
Maygresse their heads euerychone
Though they be as hard as rock or stone

Injury I pray thee tell me how

division. First I my self will enterprise
That peace shall have no exersyse
Between the commons and Pryncypalitie
Nor between lords spiritual and lords of the temporaltie

Injury Or you go any further tell me by what mean

division. I have two spies of great exercise
The one is called double deuyce
Him will I send I may tell thee
Unto the court to Pryncypalytye,
And him will I charge that with his prouisyon
Pryncypalytye and the commons to set at dyuysyon
The second spy is called old debate
A synguler fellow with a ballyd pate
Him will I send to the lords spiritual
To cause them to wrangle with the lords temporal.

Iniuri. What shall they use in their devise.

division. The one to principalytie shall surmyse
That the commons hearts do arise
Against him, when that he does ask
In time of need, our money for task,
His heart to move with such unkindness.
Then the same spy shall use like doublenes
And go to the commons and to them tell
That Principalytie with equtie does rebel
More to his lucre in every deal
Applyeng his affection then to the comen weal
And how that he of negligence
Does not apply for their defense,
Neither by Sea nor by land
Neither by hye ways, neither by stronde
But thieves and raueners and murders eke
Daily true men they pursue and seek
And that his laws indifferently
Be not used, but maintenance and brybary
Is suffered alone without reformacion
That the poor commons is in altercation
Of this matter and wot not what to say
Bringing them in opinion yt they ought not to pay
To pryncypalytie their duty of very desarte
Except like duty be mynistred on his part.

Iniuri. I make god a vow this is a sovereign bayte
To bring our purpose to a narow strayte
But what shall the other spy then do
A fellowship tell me that also.

division. Mary he shall enfourme the lords temporal
That the spyrytuall men would rule all
And say it were shame to them by the rood
That been dyscended from the noble blood
To suffer any other of such power to be
To have the governance about principalytie
Sythen they inheritoures are borne to be
Of the hye counsel by blood and dygnytie
Which medycyne I trow will not lyghlie starte
Till it has tyckled them all by the heart
Then shall the same spy taste the other part
And turn to them the wrong side of the carte
And say that god of his hye great grace
To them has given good fortune and space
By lerning sadness and gravity
And for their due reward in honor to be
And bear to them boldly in hand
That they ought by reason to rule this land
Because the power of temporaltie
Has no knowledge in conning perdie
Neither in youth will labor the passage
Of pain for virtue to rule in age
So that if they rulers would be
They know not how, for in suffycientie
Thus will I divide by this proper train
That peace amongst them shall not rain.

Iniuri. Mary this is a cast of a new horse comb
To rub any on the nauyll that has a tickle womb
This gere will work after my fantasye
To make of an old grudge a new frenzy
And this opens the gate even for me
That both the one and the other degree
Shall wrestle with them self in such afflictions
That euerychone shall disdain at other jurisdictions

division. What will thou do the^ let me here thy cast

Iniuri. This gentle sede will I sow at the last
When Peace by thee is in perplexity
And wore not in what part quyete to be
Then Justice must ever be in doubt
Which part at need shall bear him out
So that for my part he shall stand still
While I run at large and have all my will.

division. But to what conclusion wylt thou bring it then

Iniuri. Why know not thou, then hark me man
This Justice is a fellow of a far cast
And dryueth such dryftes to rule all at the last
And Peace is his brother of one degree
Which has a fair daughter that is called plenty
And Albion as long as rest him treates
He loves fair flesh of all meats
And it is a comen saying that Justice Peace and he
Will conclude a marriage with fair dame plenty
And then will Albion that old soot
With rest and peace so on her doot
That than she by her and her freindes
Shall sail in storms at all wyndes.

division. By gods bread thou say troth
But this to help we must not use sloth.

Iniuri: No, and therefore hark me to an end
Thou and I shall this matter defend
For thou shall to Albion a messenger be
And say thou were present when principality
With Justice fell at great debate
When that his message he did delate
From Albio^, and tell him that principality in no wise
His will with equ^ti^ will grant to exercise
But that the law should be out after his lykyng
And every wryt after his entytelyng
And that his will who ever list to strife
Should be the best part for his prerogatyfe
And than they both sodeinly upon this
In great rages departed wys
Wherefore Justice said I am in such confusyon
That I am ashamed to turn again to Albion
And when this message thou have done soberly
Tell him thy name is Polysy.

division. What the devil menest thou by that
Should I decemble from a wyld cat
That ever before this have used patchyng
And now to play the wise man and leave scratching.

Iniuri. Why horson it is a point of hye madness
For a time to desemble sadness,
And though thou be all ready as mad as a heart
Yet will I make thee madder then thou art

division. Well say on then.


Iniuri. Mary then even thus I say
When that to Albion thou have taken thy way
And done thy message as I thee bad
He will for a while be pensife and sad
And he will ask thine advise
Then must thou dissemble thy self wise.

division. I make god a vow that is impossible
That I and wisdom should knyt in one quyneble
Or in my brain to print such abusyon
That wisdom and I should be in one conclusion
For when I was young my mother charged me
And said beware wit son though thou never thee.

Iniuri. and I am not disposed to change much your live
But here me speak an end though you never thrive

division. Well say on then and tell me what counsel
I shall give Albion that may sound dwell
To both our profits that would I know.

Iniuri. Thou shall teache him a wrong cross row
And tell him best it is after thine advise
With mirth and Prodigality him to exercise
And take of his own good while he may
Lest all at last be brybid away


