An epistle of the prophet Hieremie.

The translatour of this work unto a certain friend of his, sends gretynge.
Sir
after most hearty recommendation, it may like you to understand that I write
unto you at this time for the accomplysshement of my promise, for you remember
(I am sure) that in our last communication had together, you desired
effectually to know mine opinion concerning Ymagery, wherein at that time,
though peradventure for defaute of lerning, I was not able to satisfy your
mind, yet for as much as at this day, the same matter is put in question, and
diverse great learned me^ do vary in opinions upon the same, I thought it not
vnco^uenie^t to take some further pain for to enserche the treuthe thereof. And
so perusynge diverse great authors, I fortuned in the redyng of the old
testament, otherwise called the Bible, to find out ye sixte chap. of Baruch
the prophet, which by cause it entreats principally and all together of
Ymagerye, for the satisfieng of your desire, I translated and drew in to
english as nere as I might, according to the pure truth of ye text: whereby,
I doubt nothing, but you shall be clearly put out of all doubt and error / if
ye can find in your heart to bestow a little of your leisure in the reding of
hit. For I do advertise you not only read it / but also exactely and thoroughly
to ponder and mark every point thereof. And for the declaration of my mind
herin / I have always thought that for because these Images lack ye use of
the.v. sensis, and besides that in process of time do both corrupt and
consume like as does gold / silver / stone / and wodde / and the stuff and
mattiere whereof they be made, I suppose the^ to have none other supernatural
virtue / than they had before they were made into Images. And not withstandyng
that there hap some true and unfeigned miracles to be done at the places where
such images be worshypped / yet I think that they be not done by the virtue
of those images / nor of god for the images sake / but to thentent that the
people should know yt the saints, whom thymages do represent and bring unto
our remembrance, were ye true and faithful servants of god in prechyng and
teaching his word. But I will deteyne you no longer from the redynge of Baruch
his epistle, wherein (because it is the very scripture and word of god) you
shall perceive the effect of this matter much better than I or any other can
open or declare unto you. And thus fare ye well.

The copye of an Epistle, the which Hieremie the prophet sent unto the
children of Israhel, being in captivity under Nabuchodonozor the king of
Babylon, for to instruct them as he was commanded by god, taken out of the.vi.
chap. of Baruch.
Because of the sins that ye have committed before God, ye shall be led
prisoners in to Babylon by Nabuchodonozor king of the Babylo^s, when ye
therefore shall come unto Babylon, ye shall be there many years and long time
unto.vii. generations, but after that, I shall deliver you from the^s in peace,
Than shall ye se gods of gold, of silver, of stone, and of tree, yt shall be
borne upon men's shulders, putting the people in fear. Beware therefore that ye
do not like unto the strangers, and that ye dread them not, nor be moved with
any fear. Therefore when ye shall se ye people worshyppyng before and behind,
say in your hearts, Lord god, it is you, which must be worshypped, And mine
angel is with you, and I my self shall require your souls. For the wod of
them is framed and fashoned by the carpentours, and those that be of gold and
silver, are false, and can not speak. And like as apparel is made for a
virgin that loves, so are they made of ye gold yt they have received. Their
gods have golden crowns on their heddes, from which the prestes do take the
gold and silver, and divide it among them selves. They give also thereof unto
harlottes, and garnysshe hores therewith. And when they have received it again
of the harlots, they garnysshe their gods therewith, yet can they not be kept
from rustyng and vermyne. For when they be covered with garments of purple, the
prestes must be feign to make clean the faces of them, by cause of the dust of
the house, whereof there is much plenty in those parties. Some also have
septres in their hands like unto men, and like unto judges of a realm, the
which puts not him to death that trespaseth against them. Some also have
swords in their hands and axes, yet can not they deliver them selves from
battle, nor from thieves. wherefore be it known unto you, that they be no gods,
therefore do ye no worship unto them. And like as a man's vessel when it is
broken seruethe to no purpose, even so be their gods, when they are set up in
a house, their eyes are full of dust by reason of their fete that come in. And
like as doors are made fast about him yt has offended a king, or as a corpse
that is brought unto his grave, is kept in, Even so do the preestis make sure
the doors with bars and locks, to thentent that they shall not be robbed of
thieves. The people do light candels before them, and that in great nombre, of
the which they se not one, for they are as it were blocks in an house. And
they say that the serpents of the earth do lycke their hearts, wha^ they do
eat them and their garments, and yet they feel them not. Their facis are
made black with ye smoke that is in the house. The howlets and swalowes, and
the birds do flee upon their heddes, ye and also the wawlynge cattes, whereby
ye may know that they are no gods* therefore do ye not fear them. The gold
also which they have to make them glorious, will not glyster, except ye rust
be skoured of. For wha^ they were first cast, they felt nothing. They were
bought with all manner of prices, yet is there no spirit in them. For lack of
fete, they are carried on folks shoulders, whereby the people may perceive their
impotencie. Confounded be they therefore that worship them. And for that
cause, if they hap to fall down on the earth, they are not able to rise by them
selves. And again, if one do set them vpryghte, they can not stand by them
selves, but men be feign for to stay them up with their shoulders, like as they
do corpsys. Their preestis do selle that that is offered unto them, and abuse
it, ye and their women do take thereof, and give never a whyt unto ye syck nor
unto the poor women vnpuryfyed and having their flowers do handell of their
sacrifices. Saying therefore that ye do know by these things, that they be no
gods, do not fear them. For what cause are they called gods? because women do
offer all manner of things unto those gods of gold, of silver, and of tree,
and prestes do sit in the houses of them, with iagged vestementes, having
their heddes and berdes shaven, whose heddes are bare. And they rore cryeng out
upon their gods, like as they do at the supper of one yt is deed. The prestes
take away their garments, and therewith do clothe their wives and their
children. And if any do them displeasure, or do them pleasure, they are not
able to requite it, no more are they able to make a king, nor to depose.
Se^blably they can give no riches, nor can revenge their harm. If any have
made a vow unto them, and has not performed it, they do not require it. They
save no man from death, neither do they defend the weak from the mighty,
They restore not the blind unto sight, neither do they deliver any man from
necessite. They take no pytie of the wydowe, neither do they any good unto
orphelyns.

Their gods of tree, stone, gold, and silver, be like unto stoones of the
mountain. And they that worship them shall be confounded. How than may it
be supposed or said that they be gods? Moreover the Caldees do no honor unto
the^ which when they perceived that the dombe could not speak, they presented
it unto Bell, prayinge him yt he would make it to speak, as though the things
that move not, might have any sense or felyng. And they them selfs when they
perceive this, will forsake them. For their gods them selves lack their
senses. women also being gyrded with cords do sit in the high ways, burning
the leaves of the Olyue trees, And when it fortuneth that one of the^ is taken
up by any man passing by the high way, and slepeth with him, she vpbraydeth
her neighbor therewith, that she is not esteemed so worthy as her self, and
that her cord is not broken, but all things that be done unto them are false.
How than may hit be supposed or said, that they be gods? For they are made
by workmen and gold smythes, They shall be none other things, but even as it
pleases priests to have the^. The goldsmythes also that make them, live not
ever. How is it possible than ye things of their making should be goddis? But
they have left feigned things and opprobred to them yt shall come after them.
For when war shall chance unto them and aduersyte, the prestes do immagyne
where they may hyde them selves with them. How than may it be believed, that
these are gods? The which can neither save them selves from battle, nor
deliver them selves from adversities. for all be it they be made of wood, of
stone, of gold, and of silver, it shall be known afterward, through out all
nations, yt they are counterfeit things, And it shall be manifest unto kings,
that they are no gods, but the works of man's hands, and yt no work of God
is in them, whereby than it is evident that they be no gods, but the works of
man's hands, and that no work of God is in them. They constitute no king in
any realm, nor will send rain unto men. They will discern no judgment,
neither will they defend countries from iniuryes. For they can do nothing no
more than ye crows that are betwyxte the sky and the earth. For if there
chance any fire upon the house of those gods of tree, of gold, and of
silver, their prestes forthwith will flee, and save them selves, but their
gods shall be burned in the mids like as blocks, and will not withstand
any king nor battle. How than may it be esteemed or suffered, that they should
be gods? These gods of tree, of stone, of gold, and of silver, the which are
of les strength than are the wicked, can not save them selfs from thieves. They
shall rob them of their gold and silver, and their garments, where with they be
clothed, and yet can not help them selves. Better it is therefore to be a king
that shows his puissaunce, or to be a profytayle vessel in an house, wherein
the owner may take pleasure, or to be a door in an house, that keeps the stuff
in saufegarde than to be false gods. The son and the moon, and the sterres
that do shine, when they are sent forth for necessary things, do obey.

Semblably the lyghtnynge when it apperethe, it is visible, And like wise ye
wind does blow in every contreye. And the clouds (when they are commanded
by god to pass through the world) they do according as they be commanded.
The fire also that is sent from above for to consume hills and woddes, does as
it is commanded. But these are not like neither in beauty nor in virtue, unto
any of these things. wherefore it is neither to be esteemed nor said, that they
be gods, for asmoche as they can not give judgment, nor profit any thing
unto men. Ye therefore knowing yt they be no gods, do not fear them, for
they will neither curse kings, nor bless them. Also they do not show unto the
people signs from heaven, neither shall they shine as the son, ne give light
as the moon. The beastis are better than they, which can flee under houses, and
help them selves. And so hit can appear unto you by no means, yt they are
gods, for which cause do not fear them. For like as in a place where gourdes
do grow, fear keeps nothing, even so be their gods of wodde, silver, and
gold. They be in like case as is a white thorn in a gardeyn, whereupon every
bird sits. Semblably their gods of wood, gold, and silver, are like unto
a corpse that is cast into the dark. Ye may know also by ye purple and the
other painted colors, yt they have upon the^, yt they be no gods. And in
conclusion they shall be eaten up, and rebuke shall come in ye contree, Better is
ye just man, which has no images for he shall be farthest from rebukes.

Finis.
Thus ends the divine epistle of the prophet Hieremie, disswadyng the people
from Ydolatry, that is to say, worshyppyng of Images.
Imprinted in Southwarke by John^ Redman for Roberte Redman.

CVM PRIVILEGIO


