THE SECRETS OF THE REVERENDE MASTER ALEXIS OF PIEMOVNT.

Containyng excellent remedies against diverse diseases, wounds, and other
accidents, with the manner to make distillations, parfumes, confitures,
diynges, colors, fusions and meltynges. A work well approved, very
profitable and necessary for every man.

Translated out of French into English, by Wyllyam Ward.

Imprynted at London by John Kingstone for Nicolas Inglande, dwelinge in Poules
churchyard.

ANNO. 1558. Me^ss. Nouemb.

(...) health. In all these things are certain secret virtues, which be
manifest signs of gods love and favor toward man: for he created them
to the intent that men should use them, glorify him, and give him thanks for
them. And because the use and knowledge of them, and their virtues, is so
expedient for all creatures, God of his mere goodness, has not only given unto
the diligent searchers thereof, the gift of perfitte usage, and understanding
of their operation in this time of Christianity: but also unto infideles
before Christ, being ignorant from whence that gift came: who,
notwithstanding their ignorance, did so reverence the wonderful virtues of
things created in the world, that they thought that each of those things had
had in it self a certain divine power, or else that there was of every thing
a several god or creator. Now, if they gave such honor unto things
created, not knowinge the creatoure, what would they have done, if they had
known and confessed God to have been the only maker of the world, of man,
and of all things therein, of nothing? Truly they would not have done as
some curious Christians among us now a days do, which (as your honor well
understands) most impudentlye despise all manner of medecines, and
ignorauntly dispute against the virtues and operation of herbs, and trees,
saying: that if the sick man be appointed of God to dye, all the medecines in
the world can not save his life. Whereunto it may easily be answered, that
every man that is vexed with a disease, is not appointed of God to die of the
same: but the infirmity is sent him as a punishment for his offenses, and yet
has God created things to give him ease and remedy for his disease, which no
Christian man ought to contempne or despise: for he that despises the work,
seems to contempne the workman. And again, because that the appointment and
determination of God, concerning the life and death of man, is so secret, and
so far beyond the capacity of man's reason, and understanding, and that we
know not when God has prefixed the term of our life, we use in our
infirmities and weakness, those remedies that God has created to be received at
their hands, to whom he has given the knowledge how to minister them unto
us. All these things are abundantly enough known unto your honor, with a
great many more reasons then I am able to allege, and therefore I do but bring
owls to Athens in declaringe this unto you. But thus much I may well say,
that most mad are they, and void of all reason and Christianity, that wyle
set so light by the works of God: yea, they are unprofitable members of a
commonwealth, not worthy to bear the name of Christians: for by their fond and
false persuasions to the ignoraunte and simple ones in their diseases, against
the receiving of any medicines, many times it chau^ceth, that they following
their foolish advise in neglectyng Physic, they be cast away and perish,
which otherwise might have been saved. Me thinks this should be sufficient
to persuade the^ to embrace good and wholesome remedies: they see daily that
herbs, oinctmentes, plasters made of things growing on the earth, and such
like, by their virtues, do cure and heal external and outward wounds,
sores, cuttes, swellings, and other infirmities of the body, and yet they will
not believe that such virtues can heal the internal and inward diseases.
Utterly ignoraunte be they, that so imagine with them selves, for they that
despise Physic, despise a heavenly science. But what be they that thus
contempne it? Forsooth ignorant and unlearned men, that bark at, and backbite
them that take pains for the commodity of all men. But it is commonly seen
and proved. Scientia non habet inimicum praeter ignorantem. Which saiynge (I
fear me) is verified more in some of us English men, than in any other
nation, I would God it were not. And yet I think there is no man so
bestiall, so rude, or so blunt of wit, but that he is (by a certain instinct
of natural inclination) desirous to know things not before known, to hear
news not before heard, and to understand books in his maternall tongue, written
first in a foreign langage, to the end not to seem altogether ignoraunte in
matters both of the liberal sciences, and also of histories, set forth for his
rudiment and instruction, as in Cosmographie, in Astronomy, in Philisophie, in
Logike, in Rhetoric, and specially in Physic, whereof we had never so much
need as in these our days, considering the strange and unknown diseases
that swarm among us, and mo in number then can be found remedy for. Therefore
considering with my self (right honorable) that I could not better declare my
bounden duty unto you, nor do my country a greater pleasure, than to put
some thing abroad under your honors name, whereby it might receive some
commodite: I have taken in hand to translate this noble and excellent work
called, The Secrets of the Reueuerende Master, Alexis of Piemount, first
written in the Italian toungue, and after turned into French, and of late
into Dutche, and now last of al into English, because that as well English
men, as Italians, French men, or Dutchmen, may suck knowledge and profit
hereof: being a work come out of the hands of so famous a man as Alexis is, and
dedicated first to such a noble prince as the duke of Sauoye is, to whom
trifles or fables are not to be presented, nor being a man under whose name
and protection lies or vain inventions ought to be set forth. Therefore
wayinge the age, the learning and fame of the auctor, and the nobility of the
said Prince, men may easily judge that such intolerable pains have not been
taken in the collection of these secrets, to blow an untruth into men's
ears, but rather that this book has been published and communicated to the
world by the said Alexis, for the care and good zeal that he had to the
health of men's bodies, and that men of all countries might have the knowledge
of that with ease, sitting at home in their studies, which he got with great
travail and labor, wandering almost all the world over, as in his epistle
here to the reader he declares.

And now (right honorable) like as Christopher Plantine of Antwarpe, the
printer of this work in French, chose the Prince of Piemount, to protecte and
adourne the fruits of his labors, under the honor of his name: even so I
the translatour hereof into our English tongue, have thought it my duty
(with your honors favor) to present this my translation unto you, and to
put it forth under your honors name and protection, desiring, and humbly
requiring the same, to accept my poor good will, having good hope that you
shall find such things in the discourse of the whole book, that you will
not only take pleasure in the knowledge of them: but also commodity, if it
please you to put in experience and proof, those that seem most best unto
you: whereof there be some as excellent and as easy, as were ever set
forth in any toungue, as by your honors wisdom and judgment, in the
readyng you shall easily perceive. I am not able sufficiently to praise the
excellency of the book, and the diligence of the aucthour, ner to extol the
wonderful gifts of God in men, which according to their talent, impart to
the world the increase and fruicte of soche gifts, as he distributeth unto
them. Of the which gifts I think I should not much err, if I said Phisike
to be the best and the most necessary Nam si corporum nostroru^, and
tranquillitatis vitae (quae sine secunda valetudine vix esse potest) rationem
habere volumus, fatebimur medicinam excellentissimam, mortalibus necessariam
esse. And even so Cornelius Celsus which wrote most excellent Books of
Phisike, affirms saying. Alime^ta sanis corporibus agricultura promittit:
sanitatem autem aegris medicina: et idcirco deo optimo maximo gratias habere
debimus, qui vitam nobis elargitus est: deinde medico, qui eam nobis conseruat,
diuturnioremquod facit.

All this learning and knowledge do the Greek auctors affirm to be most
aunciente, and most necessary in a commonwealth. For, as it is desired of all
men to live in health of body, so is it requisite that medecines, both
preservative and curatiue, be had and used among men, which not only
comfort the infirm and diseased body, but also puts the soul in
remembrance of Gods great power and might, that has given such virtue unto
things growing on the earth, for man's commodity, preservation, and health:
which health I pray God long to remain with you, and all your family with
much increase of virtue and honor, under the protection of almightye God.

Your humble Servant William Ward.

Don Alexis to the reader.
THey that have known me in time past, or to speak plain, have used me
familierly all my life time, can peradventure, tell how God by his great
goodness, has made me to be borne of a noble house and blood (according to
the commune, I will not say vain, persuasion of them, that stablish nobility
more in the merits of another man, than in our own) and that besides this I
have always had my pleasures, and great plenty of richesse, yea far passing
the smalnes of my deserts. I will say yet more (not to boast or to auaunce my
self, but to the end to refourme the gentill reader, and to give thanks unto
God) that there be many which know, how I being given even from my first
youth unto study, have gotten, not only the knowledge of the Latin, Greek,
Ebrue, Caldei, and Arabic tongue, and also of diverse other nations and
countries: But above al thing having by a natural inclination, taken a
singular pleasure in Philosophy, and in the secrets of nature, have wandered
and travailed abroad in the world the space of.xxvii. years, to the intent to
acquainte my self with all sorts of learned and discrete men. By the which
diligence and curiosity, I have learned many goodlye secrets, not alonely of
men of great knowledge and profound learning, and noble men, but also of poor
w^me^ artificers, peysantes, and all sorts of men. Moreover I have been three
times in Leuant, and sundry times have traua^led almost all other parts of the
world, without resting or seiourning at any time in one place above.v. months.
Now this my study and desire of knowledge, as well of the universal sciences,
as of particular secrets, and although it was given unto me by nature, as to
the most part of men (for every man by an instincte of nature desires to know
things) yet have I always been noseled up by a certain ambition and
vainglorie, to know that, which an other should be ignoraunte of: which
thing has grafted in me, a continual niggardnesse or sparing, to distribute
or communicate any of my secrets, yea unto my most singular friends that I
had: saying, that if the secrets were known of every man, they should no more
be called secrets, but public and common.

Now, it chanced these few days past, being in Milan: in the fowerskore and
two year, and seven months of mine age, that a poor artificer was
maruelously tourmented with the stone, and had been two days without making
his urine. The Cyrurgen that dressed him, knowing well that I had many
secrets, and singulerly for the stone, came to me, and requested me that I
would teach him the receipte, or at the least to give him the medecin,
composed and ready made, for the health of the patiente. But I perceiuyng that
he would use other men's things, for his own profit and honor, refused to
give it him, but willed him to bring me unto the sick man, and that I my self
would minister the medecin unto him gratis. The Physician, either fearyng
blame if it should be known, that he had recourse to the aid of an other
man, having peradventure, bosted that he had the secret himself, or else in the
mean time, still to make his profit in dissembling the matter, and differryng
it yet two days more, with diverse excuses and colors, until he brought me
to the patiente, whom at my coming I found so nigh his end, that after he
had a little lifted up his iyes, castyng them pitiously toward me, he passed
from this into a better life: not having any need, neither of my secret nor
any other receipt to recover his health. With this case I was moved to soche a
compassion and sorrow, that not only I wisshed my self evil, but also I
desired to die: seeing my ambition and vain glory, to have been the cause that
this poor man was not succored with the remedy, and gift that God the
father, and Lord of us all had given me. Wherefore, so great was the remorse
of conscience in me, that, desiryng to sequestrate my self from the world, and
not findyng my self of soche a disposition of mind, that I could live in a
Monastery among religious men, better edified then I, I was at the last
fully resolved with my self, to choose a place separate from any Town, where I
have a little land, some books, and a study, for to avoid idleness. Here I
live a life, which I call a Monks life, with one servant, which goes to
the town, not to beg, but to buie my provision, and other things
necessary: for to sustain his poor life and mine, as long as it shall please
God.

But yet not having the power to put out of my fantasy, but that I was a very
homicide and murderer, for refusing to give the Physician the receipt and
remedy, for the healyng of this poor manne, I have determined to publishe and
communicate to the world, all that I have, being assured that few other men
have so many as I. And mindyng to set forth none, but soche as be most true
and proved, I have these days paste (taken partly out of my Books, and partly
out of my memory, all those that came to hand) made a collection of soche as I
am certain be veritable, true, and erperimented, not caryng if some of them
be written, or printed in any other Books then this. For of this my collection
the reader, as touching those, may at the least take this vtilitee and
profit, that whereas before he might have doubted, whether soche remedies
set forth by an other manne, were true or not, he shall be now assured,
under the affirmaunce of my faith: For truly, I would not set my self
(being in the age, and disposition, both of body and mind, that I am now
in) to write fables or lies, that should continue always. But of one poyncte I
will advertise the reader, and that is, that he do the things with good
diligence, and that in medecines concerning man's body, he use the aid and
help of physicians: Although in deed many of them, moved with a certain
rustic, and evil grounded envy, with a passion of Ialousy, are wont to blame
and contempne things that come not of them selves. Wherefore, as well in this,
as in every other point, if he that will use these, should perchance find,
that the thing would not take effect according to his contentation, let him
beware that he abuse not him self in the confection of them, and to begin
again with more diligence. Assuringe him self, that (as I have said) there is
nothing in this book but is true and experimented. And giving always glory and
praise unto god only for all, have a good hope, that, by mean of his divine
grace, I will consequentlye make you a present of the rest of all that I have
gotten in so many trauayles, voyages, costs, and diligente study.

Fare well.
THE Secrets of the reverent Master Alexis of Piemont.
THE FIRST BOOK.
The manner an secret to conserve a man's youth, and to hold back old age:
to maintain a man always in health and strength, as in the fairest flower of
his age.
All this is taken out of the long study, and diverse experiences, that a
gentleman made, by the space of many years, in the service of a noble Lady.
Being a thing most certain, that an old man, of three skore and ten years, all
withered withage, of a very evil complexion, and subject to diverse kinds of
diseases, was altered and changed, as into the age of sxe oir eight and
thirty years.
First, men ought to have always in remembrance, and before their iyes,
that no grace, gift, or commodity, is to be hoped for, but of God only. In
whose great clemency and goodness, the great prophet, being assured, and
stablished in conscience, through his perfect faith, cried, saying:
Renouabitur, sicut aquilla, inuentus mea. And by the same mercy and goodness,
he prolonged, so many years, the life of Ezechias: and made Moises to live a
hundred and.xx. years, and more, and not one of his tecthe, at any time mouyng:
without any dimnes of sight, or ache of head. He then, as a most mighty
creatoure, and father of all, having assigned unto man, the term of his life,
and left him to the arbitremente of his own will: and also having given
virtue, strength and properties unto things, and leauyng them to execute
ordinarily, their mouynges and nature, has also left power unto human
creatures, to preserve them selves in health, until the term and prefixed
end of our life, both universally and particularly. But, for asmoche as we
know not, how to emploie things, according as they are conuenable and meet
for our nature, and our chances or necessities, our disordinate manner of life
makes us to live, the most part in diseases, to precipitate our yougth and
to abbreuiate much our life. Then, having our thought and mind, always firm
and sure in him, and replete with faith and devotion, saying in the name of
his infinite goodness, unto our selves: Longitudine dierum replebo eum, et
ostendam illi salutare meum. We will commence and begin, as inspired with him,
and assured to help our selves, with the virtue and strength of things,
created in the world by his divine power, only for our benefit. And mindyng
for a public profit, to communicate some thing, as well searched and found
out of my self, by long experience, as lately obtained and gotten, of a
special friend of mine, which also, by great diligence and experience, has
by the space of seven years: proved this manner of preserving and stablishing,
the health and yougth, I will first give you the manner, how to make a
miraculous licoure, conseruatiue, and restoratiue of the natural heat, and
radical humor, in the which two things consists, principally the health,
the vigor, the strength, and the life of man.

To make a precious licoure, and of inestimable virtue: the which taken at the
mouth, strengthens and augmenteth the natural heat, and radical humidite
purifieth the blood, and cleanses the stomach from all superfluity of
humors: and by that mean conserueth the health and yougth, and prolongeth the
life of him that uses it.
IN the month of May, at the Son risyng, thou shall take up in a peuter
dishe, or some vessel of glass, being very clean, the dew that is fallen
upon Rosemarie, Borrage, and other good herbs, Sage only excepted, for it is
a thing most certain, that under Sage certain venomous beasts, are wont to
assemble, which infecte and poison it, with their breathe: and though that the
leaves, may by wasihing be purified and cleansed, from soche exhalatio^ and
breathing, yet nevertheless, if the dew that falls upon the leaves, chance
to take soche venim and poison, it is not possible by any means to purify it:
and therefore you shall not take up the dew of Sage. Then, after having
gathered as much dew, as you think good, have three glasses ready, of soche
greatness as you will, the which glasses you shall fill, some what more then
half full: the one with Sugar, the other with Manna, and the third with
Honnie, the rest of the glasses remaining still empty and void: and then fill
them all up, full with the said dew, stopping them fast with white wax, and
cover them with a linen clothe. Keep them also in a cupborde, or some other
place out of the Son, as long as need shall be to use of it, as we will
declare afterward. And then take the inice of Quinces, and have ready in a
little glass, some good Agaric, broken in pieces only, and not in poulder: the
which you shall cover, with thesaid juice of Quinces, in soche sort as you
have done with the Sugar, and other things in the glasses, and keep it well
covered. Then, take the Juice of all these things followyng, of red Roses,
or incarnate, of Succorie, of Endive of Fumiterie, of Buglosse, of Borage, of
Mallows, of Hoppes, of the leaves and flowers of March violettes: and of each
of these juices a like quantity: then mix them well together. That done, take
a pound or two of Aloes Epatica^ or as much as you will: for the more there is,
the better it shall be, because that thesaid Aloe being sosteeped, watered, and
prepared, as we will she we you, is a very exquisite and familiare medecin,
to keep in a house, and take of it by little lumpes or pills, ones in the weke,
when a man goes to bed: for it keeps the body from putrefaction, and from all
evil humors: and is very profitable and good, against the ache or pain in
the ioinctes, and also for the French Pockes, as herafter we will declare
orderly.

Take of the said Aloe, of the best and the freshest, soche a quantity as you
will, and put it in a cup of glass, or clean platter, as is above said, and
set it in a window or some other place in the Son, watryng or stepyng it in
thesaid juices mingled together, giving it thereof as often as shall be sufficient
to make it moist, and to make of it as it were athicke sirop. Then cover the
cup with a clean linen clothe, or paper, to keep it only from the duste, and
leave it so in the Son. And when it is almost waxen dry, embibe or water it
again as before, and let it stand in the Son. This shall you do, so often,
until you have made it soke and drink up as much juice, as the weight of
half the Aloe only: that is to say, if the Aloe weighe two pound, make it
drink up at diverse times, one pound of thesaid juices. This done, take these
things followeyng, Turbit half and ounce, fine Sinamom, Spica Nardi, Fool
foot, alias Astrabacca, Squinantum, Carpobalsamum, Xylobalsamum. The wood
whereof natural balm comes.
Xilobalsamum, Lignum Aloes, Bdellium, Mirrhe, Mastic, of each of them an ounce,
with half an ounce of Safron: All these things being well beaten into powder,
and put into a clean pan, you shall pour into them, so much common water,
that it surmounte thesaied matieres, a good hand breadth, lettyng them boil
with a a small fire, the space of an hour or more. After this you shall
strain the said decoction, and by little and little, water from time to time,
the said Aloe in the Son, as you have before done: and this you shall do so
long, until the Aloe have drunk up all the decoction. This done, take it out
of the Son, and it shall be a precious thing, to keep in your house, as we
have all ready declared, which also maintains the body in health, keeps the
head clean, and causes to have a good color, and a quick and lively
spirit, to them that use of it. He that is not of ability to make this
mixtion, in the manner above said, may make it in this wise. Keep diligently
the said Aloe, in little disshes of wood, to make this that we will speak
of, here followyng. Take Aqua vite, not to fine, nor of the first stillyng, but
stilled twice, or thrice at the most. And put in diverse little violles of
glass (the one bigger then the other) all these things followyng, well beaten
into powder, at the lest those that may be beaten, puttyng also in each of
them, asmoche of the Aqua vite, as shall be three fingers above them in the
Violles, doing as hereafter follows. Take an ounce of small fine Perles, well
washed three or four times in clear water: and then being dried, and laid
in the juice of Lemons, or Cytro^s, well strained, leave them so by the space
of three days: and so put the said perles, that they may be with thesaid
juice, remaining in the glass, putting to them Rose water, three fingers high
or above the perles, as is before mentioned. Then take an ounce of fine read.
Coral, and put it likewise in the Juice of Lemons or Citrons, vsyng it in all
poinctes, like as ye did the perles, puttyng it in a glass by it self with
Rose water, with four ounces of blew V^triol, well burned in a close pot. This
done, take the flowers and tender stalks of Rosemarie, of Burrage, of
Buglosse, of Sage, of Selandine, of Isope, of Scabiose, of Rue, of saint Ihons
worte, of Primroses, together with all the tender leaves of the said herbs:
and then stamp them slightly in a mortar of stone or wood, and put them
altogether into one glass, or into diverse, with as much Aqua vite, as will be
above them, three or four fingers, as we have said of the other things, and
let them frande so in the glass, well stopped with ware or bombase. Take after
this, half an ounce of Saffron, well beaten into powder, and put it in a glass
by it self, with Rose water, after the manner of the other things: then put to
it four ounces of Triacle, with Rose water, in an other glass, after the
foresaied manner: and take one ounce of fine Cinamom, a quarter of an Ounce of
Cloves, an Ounce of Lignum Aloe an ounce of Anise seed, and ounce of Fenell
seed, half an ounce of Smallage seed, five or six ounces of Ieniper berries,
half an ounce of Cheruell seed, of the seed and bark of a Cedartree, of each
of them two ounces, half an ounce of Myrrh, a quarter of an ounce of Storax or
Styrax Liquida, an Ounce of Bengewine, an ounce of Sandali, of all sorts of
Mirabolanes, of each of the^ three ounces, of Pine apple kernelles mondified
three ounces, of yelowe Ambre which the Apoticaries call Carabe, two ounces,
three ounces of white Dittanie grene or dry, the eight part (or as little as you
will) of an ounce of Musk. Let all these things he well stamped, and mixed
together, and put in a glass with their Aqua vite, as is said of the other.
You must then stop well all the said violles or glasses, or other vessels,
with wax or bombase, and with parechement over it: and so set them a day in
the Son, and the night followyng, in the air abroad. The morrow after, take
some great vessel of glass, as thick as you can get, having no cover,
because you may always look into it: and thereinto you shall power fair and
softly the Rose water, that is in all the glasses, each of them being colored
with their substance, in soche manner that no part of the substaunces, which
are in the bottom, be mixte with it. And after, having put all the said Aqua
vite, into the said vessel, as is above said, ye shall set it in some place,
where as no Soonne can in any wise come unto it. But beware that the three
first glasses, that is to say, with the Sugar, the Ma^na, and the Honey in the
dew, ought never to be set in the Son, but must be kept until you put it in
ure, as we will show you. And after that you have poured, the Aqua vite, out of
all the said glasses, ye shall put in other fresh, and set them well stopped
in the Son, and in the night in the air, as is before said. Then put them
all together with the other, in the said vessel of glass, and put again in
every violle other Aqua vite, and do as before: and thus must ye do eight or
ten times, or till you see that the Aqua vite, will be no more colored, or
have taken all the substance of the drooges, that are in the violles. A man
can not change the said Aqua vite to often, because ye must pass all the
said waters of life, through a bath called Balneum Marie, as we will
hereafter declare by the which ye may pass, as well a great quantity as a
small, and by this mean also, ye shall lose no part of the virtue, or
substance of the said things, having drawn and taken it all with the said
Aqua vite, of the which ye must first have made provision, of four or five
flagons. Then, ye must take all the said Aqua vites, being put into one
vessel, and mixte them well together, with the three first violles, where the
Sugar, the Manna, and the Ho^nie, with the dew, is: and then the violle with
the Agarie, and three ounces of the said Aloes, prepared and watered. After
this, put all these things in a great violle made of good and thick glass,
to the end it be not in danger of breakyng, in handelyng of it. And to be more
assured, after ye have well mixed all together, ye may divide all the
substaunces, into diverse small glasses, or violles, to pass them through the
said Balneum Marie, at sundry times or at ones in diverse little fourneises, in
this mananer. You shall set and trim the violles with straw or Towe, in the
bottom of a pan or caudron, wherein there must be water, and set the said
caudron upon a furnaise of earth, and this is called stillyng per Balneum
Marie: Then set unto the violle, his Limbecke, with his recipient that the
substance take no wind or vent: then you must make your fire so, that the
caudron may sees or boil fair and softly, and so shall you distille and
make come into the recipient, all the Aqua vite as clear as Cristalle, the
which, because it has been passed through, by distillation diverse times, will
be better for all things then the other, and principally to be taken at the
mouth, because it keeps part of the virtue and strength of the things,
that it was put into. Also you must understand that of the five parts only,
of all the substance, which shall be in the violle or violles three or four
parts must be distilled: and the rest to remain in the bottom of the said
violles. This done, let the oven or foruaise and the caudron cool, and in
undoing the Limbecke, and the recipient, ye shall take away the violles,
keeping well this distilled water for to serve you, as we have before said: and
then put all the substance, which remains in the said violles not
distilled, into some other great and thick violle or glass, well covered or
bound in wicker or osiers, stoppyng it well with wax or bombase, and above
that, with a double parechemente, and lock it handsomely in some place, far
from the Soonne, and out of all heat.

This licoure has not his like in virtue, the which taken every weke ones or
twice, the quantity of a sponefull, preserves health, drives away all evil
complexions from the body, maintains and strengthens so the natural heat,
and radical moistness, and vpholdeth a man in his strength and vigoure of
the heads, and of the wit, makes the visage well colored, the breath sweet,
the body young and lusty, that a man is not able worthily to esteem, or judge
the virtue thereof: and less able to express and praise the great goodness
of God the creatoure, that gives soche virtue unto things created, and
opens the wit and understanding of man to know them, and to use them to
the profit and commodity of his creatures.

Now the manner how to use it, is this: In the Spryng time, ye may take it
alone, or with a little broth of Veale, Pigeons or Chickens, or else in
Maluoisie, or some other good white wine. In Summer, ye must take it with water
of Buglose, or the decoction of Borrage, Buglose, Lettese, Succorie, Endive, or
else some of the said herbs: and at all times it is good to take of it a
sponefull, put into half a glass full of the milk of a woman, new brought a
bed of a man child, or of a nurrice that gives a man child suck, or else in
Gotes milk. And the quantity and often using of it must be observed, according
to the persons, and time: for, unto a weke and aged man and those that have
been lately sick, or weak of nature, ye must give it oftener, and a greater
quantity, then unto a young and lusty man. Also a man may take of it oftener,
and more in Winter, then in Summer. Now ye must understand, that all the
flowers, herbs, and other things rehearsed, are not found together in one time
and season: wherefore the said licour can not be made at one time, but
beginning the first or second week of May, it shall be at the least, the
end of September or October, before ye can make an end: and therefore you
must gather from time to time, each thing in his season, as you may get them,
and put them in some vessel, every one by them selves, or with the other
things that they ought to be joined with, after the manner above said: and use
to dress and trim the said things, according to the time that you may get
them in. And yet if you can not furnishe your self, with all soche things as I
have declared, take those that you can get, provided, that the rest which
you can not get, be not of to great importance: but it should be more
expedient and sure, to have of all, seeing there is nothing of any great cost
or charge, or to hard to be gotten. Moreover, if you will have your matter in
good perfection, there rests but to make a natural dissolutio^ of fine gold:
and when you will take of it, take two parts of the said licoure, and one
part of the dissolutio^ of the gold, which we will teach you to make
hereafter: although that in this present book, we will make no mention of
the perfitest manner, of making soche a dissolution, which we have gotten by
great study, and observation, and by often experte^ce of the thing, that we
will do, as well for not being very possible to show it by writing, without
making demonstration thereof: as for other causes but we will put here some
other manners and ways, both good and true, and of soche importance, that
peradventure better has not, unto this day, been found.

A potion or drink, to be used in stead of Sirop, good for men of al ages and
complexio^s, that will be purged the which, taken what day you will, drives
a way the evil humors, without mouyng or troublyng the good, or doing any
burte: And is also very good for the great Pockes, and all infinnities, as well
of the stomach, as of the head: and is like wise profitable for them that be
in health, to take twice in the year, in stead of an ordinary purgation, that
is to say, in the Spryng time, and in September.
TAke Mallows, and boil them in water, until they be soft, that they can
almost be no softer: then strain the decoction, and take powder of Seen, and
of the bark of Lignum sanctum, called Guatac, of each of them seven ounces,
well beaten to powder, and cleansed or sifted, Salt Ammoniac two dragmes: and
in the mean time, set the decoction of the Mallows upon the fire, with half
a pound of Honey, and let the said decoction be about two common glasses in
quantity, whereunto ye must put half a pound of wine lies, and then let it
boils fair and softly, the space of half an hour, skimmyng well the Honnie.
After this, ye must strain it, and put it hot as it is into a pot by little
and little, where the foresaied things be, that is to say, the Seen, the
Guaiac, and Ammoniac salt. Now in powryng, you must always stir the said
things with a Spone, or some other thing. And then immediately ye must cover
the pot with his cover, in shuttyng it close, and closyng it up with claie,
round about the sides, so that nothing may breath or respire out, and so set
the pot upon the fire, by the space of two Pater nosters, and no more. Then
take it from the fire, and wrap it in a pillowe of feathers, well warmed by the
fire, or in a tubbe or barrel, full of branne well heated, or in some clothe
very hot, to the end it may be well nurrished and kept warm and leave it so
by the space of ten or twelve hours. Then afterward ye must open the pot, and
strain the said substance, through a strainer or thick canuesse, and you
must have ready before, half a glass of white wine, and in the same three or
four ounces of Rubarbe, cut in small pieces, and that the Rubarbe have been in
it, the space of a day or two before: the which wine ye shall power into the
decoction of the said things, as soon as it is strained, as is aforesaied: and
put thereunto an ounce of Aloe Epaticum, prepared and ordered, as is above
said: or at the lest as the Apoticaries do sell it, and call it Aloe Lotum,
with the juice of Roses, or other wise, the which ye must put in, well beaten
to powder, with half an ounce of Cassia Lignea, and keep all this composition
in a violle, or other vessel well covered. The manner of receiuyng it, is to
heat it a little at the break of the day, and to take half a glass full or
more of it, according to the exigent of the sickness, and the quality of the
person, and having taken it, he must keep his bed a while, and sleep, if it
be possible: and then rise and walk about the house, or else where at his
pleasure. Nevertheless, it were better that he kept the house, and specially
because of the mouyng of the body. And this may he use.v.vij.ix. or.xj.
mornings: for the plurality can not hurt. Also this potion or drink, is of
soche exquisite bou^tie for man's body, that we need to use none other manner
of purgation, or medicine.

A very easy and good remedy, for to heal all manner of Pockes, which is
made with little cost, and requires not that a man keep his bed or his
house, but may use it going in the streets: And it is also very good for all
sorts of grief in the iointes, in what part of the body so ever it be.
TAke.iij. pounds of raw Honey, and a pound of the Juice of the flowers of an
herb called Molis or Lung worte, which has his leaf somewhat long, fatt, or
full of carnosite, and somewhat white, his flower Yelowe, fassioned like a
belle: and for lack of the flowers, the Juice of the herb: then take half a
pound of Lignum Sanctum, beaten into powder, and having let it boil in common
water, a good while, ye must strain it, and put the said juice with the said
Honnie, into a pot, puttyng to it three ounces of Aloe epaticum, ordered as is
before said, or as the Apoticaries sell it, washed with the Juice of Roses. And
then, upon the said Aloe beaten to powder, ye must pour as much of the said
water, wherein the Guaiacum has boiled, as will mount in the pot four or
fine fingers high: Sorbu^ latin. French. Corme There grows none i^ England,
and therefore we have no English name for it, saui^g some english it, and call it
seruis beries
then add thereunto two ounces of the Vineigre of Squilla, and let it boil
fair and softly, by the space of half an hour, or a little more, skummyng
well always the H^unie, and when it has almost boiled enough, put unto it
three ounces of fine Sinamo^, well beaten into powder, set it again a while upon
the fire: then, having taken it of, and setten it up to keep, ye must heat
of it in the morning a glass full: and after you have dronken it, eat a little
piece of a Quince, or of a fruit called in Latin Sorbum, in French Corme, or
grene Grapes, Pome Granade, or of some other bindyng thing, what ye will: and
keep your bed, sleapyng as long as you will: and also after you be risen,
and have done your business, yea, out of the house, if it come so to pass.
But (as we have said) to keep your bed or house, is always the best for
you, when ye use Physic. And this potion or drink, must you take from day
to day: but if the pain be not to vehement, it shall suffice being taken
twice in the week: and this doing, you shall see a wonderful operation, and
ye shall not need to use Lignum sanctu^, nor any other thing. This remedy only
is sufficient for all men, and has been proved and experimented diverse
times, and upon diverse persons.

To dissolve and reducte gold into a potable licoure, which conserueth the
youth and health of a man, as well taken by it self, as mingled with the
foresaied licoure, spoken of in the second Chapter of this present book, and
will heal every disease that is thought curable, in the space of seven days
at the furthest.
TAke a glass full of the Juice of Limons, and heat it over the fire, until
it begin almost to sees: then take it from the fire, and strain it three or
four times through a Linen clothe, and afterward distille it through a long
gutter of Felt: then take two pound of raw Ho^nie, and set it on the fire
in a pot, mixyng with it the said Juice of Lemons, and adding thereunto half a
pound of common salt, that is clean, white and well beaten: mix well all
together, and let it sees fair and softly, until there remain no more skum
of the Honnie. Then take that remains in the pot, and distill it in a vrinall
of glass, making but a small fire at the beginning, encreasyng it by little
and little, and at the end great and sharp: and when all is cooled again,
open the violle, and power the water out of the recipient, into an other
violle, stoppyng it sure for taking vente. This dooen, ye must break the
vrinall of glass, and take the lies that shall remain in the bottom, and put
it into a covered pot, the which pot you must cover over and over with claie
or mortar, to the entente it may the better endure the fire: and after put it
into some fournesse, where glass is made, or into a potters fournesse or Lune
kill, or some other semblable thing, so that it may be in a great fire, by
the space of two or three days. And after that the said substance shall be
taken out again, stamp it well, and for a pound of the same, put in four
ounces of Manna, and two ounces of Sugar candy, and if there be more or less
of the substance, ye must put in a good proportion of the Manna and Sugar candy, in equal quantity with the substance. Then put al into an other
vrinall of good glass, well claied, and power upon it the water, which you
kept before in the violle, puttyng thereunto twice as much fine Aqua vite, as
was in the said first violle. And having trimmed and set the vrinall of
Glass upon the fournesse, with his limbecke, and his recipient, and well
closyng all the iointes with claie or mortar, ye shall make the matter distill
fair and softly, with a small fire: for it will easily distill: and when it
will distill no more, augment your fire, so that ye may distille all that is
possible. But you must leave the water, with the violle, upon the fournesse,
without mouyng it any whit, until you will put it in experience. This done,
take fine gold foil, that is of xxiiij. Carates well fined with Antimonium:
and take of the said fotle, what quantity ye will, in a cup of glass, in
minglyng them well with Honnie, or with Iulep roset or Violet, as men are wont
to dress it to write withal, whereof we will put parfitely all the manners and
fasious, in the fifth book of this volume. And after you have well unmixed, and
purged it from the said Honnie with hot water, as shall be said in the
same place, you shall put them to stille in a violle of glass: and then having
taken of the recipiente, put the said water into a long necked glass, well
stopped with white wax, having first put upon the said gold, which is in the
violle, the height of five fingers of the said water: and then set to the
limbeck with his recipie^t, stoppyng well with clate the iointes, making the
water, which shall be upon the said gold, to distill with a small fire, not
augmenting it at the end, to make all to distill: and care not if the gold
remain some what moist. This done, take away the Limbeck from the Violle,
without taking away or vntiyng the recipiente from the said Limbeck, not
sturryng the water out of the recipient. But take some man to help you, who,
whiles you take the Limbeck of from the Vrinall, shall power upon the said
gold, the same water that you kept in the violle, stopped with white wax: and
let him put in as much as at the first time, that is to say, the heighte of
five fingers: then immediately set the Limbeck upon the Vrinall again, closing
well with claie the iointes or sides a new, making the distillation as before,
and so consequently, until all the water of the said violle, be distilled
upon the said gold. And finally, ye shall power the gold out of the violle
into a glass, somewhat great, to hold the water that you have distilled into
it at diverse times, as we have said in the Chapter before: then set to the
Limbeck with his recipient, and see that by the space of.xv. or.xx. days, the
water of the bathe be hot, without seethyng, so that yet nothing may
distille. Then after make the water to sees, and distille all that may be
distilled: and in the bottom of the violle, the gold will remain dissolved
into a licoure most precious, which you must keep in some little glass well
stopped. And if you will have it yet finer, you may make it without taking it
out of the said glass, in puttyng to it again the said water, and distillyng
it a fresh, not keeping (for all that) the water from seethyng, as you did
before, but make it sees and distille all at ones and this distillyng may you
reiterate as often as you will: for the oftener it is distilled, the better it
is. Thus doing ye shall have a right, natural, and perfect potable gold,
whereof somewhat taken alone, every monethe ones or twice, or at the least
with the said licoure, whereof we have spoken in the second Chapter of this
book: is very excellent to preserve a man's youth and health, and to heal
in few days, any disease rooted in a man, and thought incurable. The said
gold will be also good and profitable, for diverse other operations and
effects: as good wits and diligent searchers of the secrets of nature, may
easily judge. In this same manner (obseruyng all things diligently) a man may
make of s^iluer beaten into foil to have likewise a potable s^iluer, of a
meruellous virtue, yet not soche as the gold: And I assure you, that I saw
above,.v. years ago, an English man have a water made of silver, paraduenture,
trimmed and dressed after an other sort, according to diverse different ways,
te^ding (notwithstanding) all to one end, with the which water the said
English man did many things, esteemed as miraculous, in healing many painful
diseases and infirmities of man.

To heal an excrescens or growyng up of the flesh, within the yard of a man,
albeit it were rooted in of a long time.
TAke the lies of Honey distilled, or, if you ca^ not have soche, take Honey,
and burn it in a pot: and put the black leefe that shall remain in the
bottom, into an other pot, or into an iro^ pan, and set it to burn or calcine
in a vernishers fournesse, or soche other in a great fire, by the space of.iij.
or.iiij. days, whereof ye shall have a substance as yelowe as gold, the which
will be excellent, to lay upon all manner of wounds: for it eats away the
evil flesh, mondifieth, and heals the good, without pain or grief, which
makes to be much better for all wounds, then is the Precipitatum, that the
Syrurgens commonly use. Take then of this powder an ounce, of Dogs turdes.ij.
ounces, leese of wine half a dragme, which is the half of theight part of an
ounce, fine suger^ a dragme, roche Alume burned a dragme, of Nill a dragme let
all these things be well beaten to powder, and sifted through a fine seeue
and then take grene leaves of an Olive tree, and beat them in a mortar of
stone, moisting them a little with white wine, the which being well stamped, ye
must strain in a press, or between.ij. tra^chours, for to get out the Juice,
and put to it as much Plantaine Juice: then set it to the fire in a little
pot, and afterward put in it by little and little the said powder, minglyng
altogether continually: And last of all ye must add unto it, a little grene
wax, and a very little Honey rosat, that it may be a liquide ointemente and
so keep it. This ointemente is very precious, to consume all manner of
ercrescence, or growyng up of flesh, in any tender place of the body, as in
the secret members, or in the nose, whereunto a man dare not applicque any
strong or smartyng thing. Now when ye must use it for the carnosite, within a
man's yard, you shall take first of all a Squirte, and fill it with white
wine, wherein dry Roses, and Plantaine leaves have been sodden and boiled,
wherewith also ye shall mix a little woman's milk, or the milk of a Got: then
wash well the man's yard within, with this Squirte: After this take a little
wax candell, somewhat long, and of soche greatness, as it may enter into his
yard, at the poincte whereof ye shall put a little of the said ointemente,
warming it a little, and thrust it as far into his yard as you can, until you
feel the Carnosite, and leave the said ointmente within the yard a little
while: then take it out again, and do thus morning and euenyng, liyng a bed
his bealie upward, when ye shall put in the candell with the ointement, and you
shall see a meruellous effect: for it shall heal him thoroughly, in few
days, without any danger.

To heal all manner of inflamatio^ and evil disposition of the liver, and by
this same secret have been healed certain persons, which had their faces as
it were Leparie, great swollen legs, their hands inflambed, and rough
within side.
TAke flower, or Amilum made of Barley, which ye shall easily find at the
Apoticaries, and sees it half an hour in common water: then strain it, and
put it in an other new pot, that is clean and not, puttyng to it a few
Mallows, Succorie, Hoppes, Endive, and Burrage: and sees all these together,
until it be dissolved, and add to it an ounce of Sandal: and then strain
all, and take in a linen clothe, as much Cassia extracta, as will go in to
two Nuttes, and put it within the said linen clothe with the Cassia, while
the water be hot, pressyng it so hard between your two fingers, that all the
substance of it, may go into the said water: then put it to the Sugar or
Penides, as much as you will. Of this drink, which is of a very amiable
sauoure, ye must take from day to day, a little glass full in the morning,
liyng in your bed, with your breast upward: then laiyng some linen clothe upon
your stomach, sleep if you can, and take of it also after you be up, and have
dooen your necessaries, the which doing you shall find your self very well
healed in few days. But here note, that this must be done in Summer, and not
in Winter: and he that has his stomach very cold, may wear before his breast,
some piece of Scarlat, or other clothe, and sometime annointe his stomach with
an oil, made for the weakness of it, the perfect composition whereof, we
will put hereafter.

To heal the Emorhodes or Piles in a night, a rare secret and very
excellent.
TAke the leaves of grene Elder, and boil them in water, until they be
dissolved: Then take a piece of read cloth, a little bigger then the palm of
your hand, and stretche it a long upon your palm. Now, must the pacient be in
his bed, with his bealy douneward, because ye must lay the said leaves upon
the Emorhodes, hot as they were taken out of the caudron, having laid upon them
before, a little oil Olive. Then take an other little piece of cloth, with other
leaves, and take away the first, continuyng thus, and chaungyng always the
leaves, if not all the night, at the least as long as ye may: and also in the
mean time, ye must let the patient sleep as much as he will, who, in the
morning shall find him self as lusty, and as well disposed as if he had never
had the disease.

A singular ointment, which heals all burnynges with fire, not leauyng any
cicatrice or skarre where it has been.
TAke the white of two Eggs, two ounces of Tutia Alexandrina, two ounces of
quick Lime washed in.ix. waters, an Ounce of new Wax, with as much Oil
Rosatte, as shall suffice, and make thereof an ointmente, which ye shall find
very good, for this that we have spoken of.

A perfect and proved remedy for them that be weak of stomach, and can not
keep their meat, without vomityng it up again.
Having taken two pound of red wax, and made provision of a dishefull of
oil olive, take pieces of Alablaster, and heat the^ in the fire, and then
quench them in the said Oil: heat them again, and quench them as before:
and so three or four times. This done beat the Alablaster to powder, and mix
it with the said ware and oil, wherein it was quenched: then put all to
distill through a croke necked violle, like a Bag pipe claied round about,
saving the bottom, which distillers beyond sea do use, the French men call
Retorte or Cornue, and make soche a fire, as the Oil may distille, with all the
rest yt possible may be distilled: and then keep it, puttyng to it half an
ounce of Mirrhe, beaten in powder. And when you will put it in effect, ye must
take a little pan of Brass, or Iron: and having the tops and leaves of Worm
wood, which is a bitter herb, put them in the said Oil, and sees or fry
all together: then take it, hot as it is, and rub the patientes breast with
it, up to the throat, doing thus always at night, when he is in his bed, and
it shall make his stomach strong. He must use in his meat, as much Rosemarie
as he can, be it raw or otherwise, and specially in his drink. He must use
likewise the most excellent Aqua vite, whereof we will speak hereafter.

An excellent remedy, wherewith a woman of.xxxvi. years was healed, that had
so marred her stomach, that in the space of two years and an balfe, she was
never naturally purged douneward: and as soon as she had eaten any thing, she
vomited it up again, so that she became yelowe, and as dry as a stick.
A Monk, of the order of saint Augustine, a man of great knowledge, and
full of marvelous secrets, healed the said woman, with this remedy followyng:
and, in the space of.xvij. days, made her as whole and sound fair, and well
colored, as she was before her sickness.

First of all, he had made a little oven, like unto soche as men bake bread in,
ye which he did heat with rosemarie: and the said Oven was in facion like a
Bakers Oven, wherein he baked little pretty loaves and cakes, which he gave her
a lone, without any other thing to eat, viij. or.x. days, and gave her white
wine to drink without water. He gave her also gentle meats, with Sinamom and
Sugar: and every morning gave her in a glass, about a finger heighte of
water, made after this manner following. Aqua vite half a glass full, wherein he
put the yelowe pille of half a Citron, or Orange cut in pieces, the flowers of
Rosemarie a handful, fine Sinamom an ounce, Safron a quarter of a dragme,
Be^gewin a dragme, with a little Musk: and made her to be washed over and
over, or bathed in the decoction of Rosemarie, and other sweet herbs, ones a
week: and every night anointed her breast with the said Oil, distilled and
sodden with Wormewoode. And above al things, commanded her to keep a Cushen
upon her stomach, in the night time, and caused her to lie long a bed in the
morning: he made her also eat the confection of Diambre. And in this wise he
made her in xvij. days, as whole and as fair, as she was before, whom no
Physician could ever find remedy for, during all the time of her sickness.

Three remedies very good against he worms in little children.
TAke the flower of wheat well boulted, as much as will lie upon three
crounes of gold, and put it in a glass, and power unto it well water, or
fou^tain water, so much as will stiepe the said flower, and make it look like
as it were milk, and no thinner: then give the child drink of it, and you
shall see that with his siege, the Worms will come forth stark dedde, which
is a very good remedy.

The second remedy.
TAke a Citron or Orange, and make in him a hole, as big as a penny, by the
which hole with wringyng, ye shall make the licoure come out: and having made
a hole into the middle and more, ye shall power in to it oil of Baie free or
leaves, the Juice of Rue, the Juice of Wormwood, Triacle, flower of a kind of
poulse corn, called Lupinum or Lupinus in Latin, having one stalk, the leaf
in five divisions, the codde creuised about, having in it five or six
grains, hard, broad, and read. They be common in France and Italy, but
here uneath known. And sees all this a while: and then power it in a dishe,
and annointe therewith the childs navel, stomach, temples nosetrilles, and
the vttermoste part of his poulses, and ye shall immediately see a wonderful
operation.

The third remedy.
FOr children that be so little, that a man can not minister the medecin in at
the mouth, you shall take very good Aqua vitae, wherewith ye shall wash or
weate the stomach, or the breast of the child: then powder over the said
places, with the powder of fine Mirrhe, and lay the child down a little while,
with his breast upward, and you shall see incontinent, that with the dunge of
the child, the worm shall come out dead.

To heal children of the Lunatike disease, which happens unto them, by
reason of a worm with two heads, that breeds in their bodies, the which
worm, coming unto the heart, causes them to have soche a passion, that
often times it kills them.
TAke the tender stalks of a Wildyng tree, and dry them in the shadow: then
stamp them well, and sifte them, and take of the said powder, and the root
of Gentian, and of long Perne of each of them a quarter of an ounce, and half a
quarter of an ounce of Mirrhe. All these things well beaten in powder, ye shall
put in a disshe, or in some other vessel, as you think good: moist them with
a little water: then take of it with your two fingers, and weate the lips and
the mouth of the child. Do this three or four times, and you shall see the
worm come out dead with his siege. This have I often times seen by
experience, and many children, which, for lack of good help, have died with
soche manner of Worms, the which afterward being opened, men have found
the Worm stickyng upon their hearts. And for the same accidente the other
remedies, which we have written before, against the Worms, be also very good.

A remedy for the falling sick nesse.
TAke Germander gathered in Ma^^, when it is in blosome: dry it in the
shadow, and make it in powder. And when you will use it, take the yelke of an
Egg or twain, and sturryng or breakyng it with a sponefull of the said
powder: then sees it, and give it to the paciente to eat. Do this, Morning
and Euenyng, eight days long: but all this while he must abstain from wine,
and carnal company of women, from al sort of poulse, as Beans, Peason,
Vetches, Tares, and soche other, from Salades, salt Flesh, and from all other
things, which are of a hard concoction or digestion. A very goodly and
notable secret.

To make oil of Brimstone, to heal all manner of Cankers diseases or sores,
which come of a putrified humor, and run continually, commonly called
Fistules, and also to heal old and inueterate wounds.
TAke Brimstone beaten in powder, and having steeped and mollified it, with
common oil, put it in a Gourde, apt to still out of, so that it be brought
as it were like pa^^e, the which you shall distill through the mouth of the
said Gourde: and the oil that shall drop out, ye shall put into a violle,
fillyng it half full: and afterward fill up the said violle with Plantan
water, and with the Juice of Cardus benedictus, and so let it boil a pretty
while. Then wash the wound with Aqua vite, or white wine, and lay to it of
the said oil, and in few days ye shall heal it parfitly.

To take away the venim or poison from a wound, made by some poisoned weapon
or arrowe.
TAke Assa Fetida, and a gomme called Galbanum, of each of them an ounce, and
steep them in Vinaigre, the space of a night, then set it to the fire to
dissolve, and strain it through a Linen clothe, miring with it two ounces of
Vnguentu^ diabasilicu^: and lay it to the wound, and incontinent the said
ointmente will draw unto it self, and kill all the venim, so that the wound
may afterward be healed, as all other manner of wounds be: and in case ye
lack, or can not get Galbanum, it shall suffice to have only Assa Fetida, to
draw the venim out of the said wound.

Against the bityng of all venomous beasts.
AS soon as the person feleth himself bitten, with any venomous beast (or at
the least as soon as is possible) take grene leaves of a fig tree, and
press the milk of them, three or four times in to the wound. And for this
serves also Mustard seed mingled with vinagre.

To draw an arrowe head or other Iron, out of a wound.
TAke the juice of valerian, in the which ye shall weate a tente, and put it
into the wound, laiyng the said herb stamped upon it, then make your bindyng
or band, as it appertains, and by this means ye shall draw out the Iron.
And after heal the wound, according as it shall require.

Against a vehement cough of young children.
TAke the Juice of Persely, powder of Commin, womannes milk, and mix all well
together: then give the child drink thereof, and after, make this ointment
following. Take the seed of Line or Flax, and Fenigreke, and sees them in
common water: then press with your hand, the substance of the said herbs,
which you shall mingle with Butter, and so annointe the childs breast with
it, heatyng it often times.

For him that has a bunche or knobbe in his head, or that has his head
swollen with a fall.
TAke an ounce of Baie salt, raw Honey three ounces, Commin three Ounces,
Turpentine two ounces, intermingle all this well upon the fire: then lay it
abroad upon a linen clothe, and make thereof a plaster, the which ye shall
lay whote to his head, and it will altogether aswage the swell yng, and heal
him clean and nete.

A good remedy for one that is deffe.
TAke Mint, Sage, Penniroiall, Rosemarie, Isope, Mugworte or Motherworte, wild
Minte, Calaminte, Camomille, Millefoile, Yarrow or Noseblede, herb saint
Ihon, Wormwood, Southernwood, Centorie, of each of them a hand^full: Sees
them in a clean pan, with as much good white wine, as there be herbs, and
let it sees altogether, until the third part be diminished: then cause these
oiles following, to be made at the Apoticaries: old Oil two ounces, oil of
Leeke, oiles of Almondes, of each of them an ounce, of the juice of Rue half an
ounce, of Maluoisie an ounce and a half: put all these things in a long neckt
glass or violle, and let it sees with a small fire, until the Juice and the
Maluosie be almost all consumed: then take it from the fire, and put in to
it these Drogues following, well beaten into powder, that is to say, Spiknard,
Coloquintida, the stone of a Beuer, called Castoreu^, Mastic, of each of them a
grain and a half: stop well the said violle, that nothing may take vent:
then put it in a pan full of water, and make it sees the space of three
hours. Then take it from the fire, and power the said licours in some platter,
which you shall set in the son, and leave it there until it shall become
very clear, and having strained it through some fine linen cloth, and pressed
well the substance, ye shall put a grain and a half of Musk in a disshe, and
incorporate it well by little and little, with the said Oil, and then keep it
in a violle, well stopped with wax and Parchmente. After this, take the pan
with the said herbs, and heat them upon the fire: then take, for a cover or
lidde, a fonnell made of white Iron: and when ye go to bed, cover the pan
with the said fonnell, and see that the pan be good and hot: then, by the
little hole above, let the patient take the smoke into his ear, by the space of
half an hour. This done, heat the said oil, until it be luke warm, and
let it drop into his ear two or three drops: and stop his ear with a
little Musked bombase, or Cotton, and let him sleep thereupon. Now he must, in
receiuyng the parfume or smoke into his ear, have in his mouth some dry
Beans, and after he has chewed them, spit them out again, to the end that in
chewyng, he may open the conduites of his Ears. And with the grace of God, he
shall find himself healed in few days, provided, that the disease be in
aniwise curable. If in case this help not, ye need not seek any other
remedy in the world. If a man have also any hummyng or noise in his ears,
let him use the said medecin, and you shall se, with Gods help a wonderful
thing: for it will heal the defenesse of a man, though he have had it.xxx.
years, so that he be not borne deaf. Let him use also to take pills to purge
his head, and to eat good meat always.

To heal a woman that has the Matrice out of her nanaturall place.
TAke a Flinte stone that has been always in the earth, and not taken the
air, and put it in some basket, covered in a great fire: and when it is very
hot, put it in a little Tubbe or barrel, and weete it with Vinagre cast upon
it, and cause the woman to stand over it, to receive the smoke or parfume of
it, and than let her go to bed, for this must be done at night. Ye shall,
after this, take of the juice of Rue, and make a little round balle of Cotton,
whereunto ye shall tie a threede: and than dippe the said balle in the said
juice of Rue, and put it into the mouth of the Matrice, the which will
incontinent take the balle, and draw it in, and than it will return into his
natural place again. But you must bind and tie the ball sure and well,
least paraduenture it should remain within. After this, make an ointment as
follows, wherewith ye shall anoynte the reins of her back. Take an herb
called in Greek Ciclaminos, of the latins Rapum, Tuber terrae, or Vmbilicus
terrae, of the Apoticaries Panis porcinus, of the French men Pain de pore, and
Rue, as much of one as of the other, and stamp them well: and than sees it
in a pan with old oil, until the whole be diminished by the third part.
This done, let it cool again, and having pressed out all the substance, ye
shall power it into an other new pan, adding to it a little new wax, and
heatyng it all together, until it be well incorporated: tha^ annoynte her
raynes with all, and lay hot Tow upon it, and than swaddel her as women do
young infantes. And so she must be laid in her bed, with her belly upward,
and her head lower than her buttockes. This must ye do from night to night,
three times, and she shall be healed. She must also eat whote things in
operation, as Pigeons, and Hens, with spices and other like things. She
shall be healed without any grief, and if she had had it.xxx. years.

To make a woman's milk to come and increase.
TAke the green leaves of Fenell, and make thereof a decoction, be it in wine
or water, whereof ye shall give the woman drink, as well at her meals, as other
wise, as often as may be, and she shall be abondant in milk. Furthermore, if
the woman have not ordinarily her natural purgacion called Flowers, this wll
serve her for a good medecin.

A very goodly secret for the gommes or burgeons that remain of the great
Pockes, as well old as new.
TAke Bole armenick, Vinagre, and oil Roset, and make thereof a defensife, A
defe^sife is made when a surgien will lay any drawing or healing plaster upon
or to a wound, he makes some oyntme^t restrain ^iue because it shall not
draw or heal to fast, and that is called a defensife.
or ointment, annoynting the burgeons round about.iij. or.iiij. fingers large:
tha^ take.ij parts of the oil of an herb called Euphorbium, first found out
by Iuba the king of Libia. Look Ruellius, Lib. 3. cap. 53. and one part of
oil Violet: and mix them together, and annoint the burgeons with all, having
first well washed them with Red wine, vorie hot. And when you have thus
anointed them, with the said oil of Euphorbiu^, lay upon it some little band
anointed with Butter, leaving it so three or four hours, or as long as you
will: than uncover the Burgeons, and if you find no bladders, do once again
as before, until you se some. And than you may prick and break the said
bladders, or let them break of them selves: and than ye may heal them with
some healyng ointment.

Another remedy for the same bourgeons of the Pockes.
Wash the burgions with Wine, and make the defensif above said: than
take.iij. parts of Vnguentum aureum, and one part of Sublimatum, well broken
or beaten: mengle the said Sublimatum with the said ointment, and lay it with a
plaster upon the burgeons, leaving it thereupon, a day or more, if you can, and
ye shall find the burgeons or buddes, and the flesh fair and neat, which will
seem to be a miraculous thing, and if it work not well at the first, ye
must renew it again, twice or thrice, according as the burgeons shall be hard
and old. Now, when they be thorowlie dissolved and leused, take Butter washed
with Wine, and lay it upon a linen cloth, and put it upon them, and so shall
you heal them perfectly. Note also that the said ointment, with the
Sublimat, will draw unto him all the aquosite, and evil humors of the arm or
leg, whereunto it is laid. Wherefore it will not only heal the place where
you lay it, but will also purge the whole member of all evil humors, that is
in it, and therefore there is a very good water confect and made of it, for to
heal scabbes, as we will tell you afterward. It heals also all other
accidents, whereupon you make any outward application: and (as we have said)
draws to him self all the watrishnes, and humor of the member, whereupon it
is laid. Now, when you will lay it upon the burgeons, or upon any corrupt
place, weete well the linen clothe, and the band that you will bind it withal:
weete well also round about the infect or sore place: for the said medecin,
will draw all the corruption through the said places. And this is a very
worthy and cra^i^^te secret, for all things, so that it be well used, made
and applied.

A very easy and parfite remedy for him that has any blow with aswo^
d^staffe, or stone, or other like thing, yea, though he were gr^uouslie wounded.
TAke Taxue barbatus, and stamp it, and take the juice of it: and if the
wound bleed, wipe it, and make it clean, wasshinge it with white wine, or
water: than lay of the said juice upon the wound, and the herb upon it, of
the which you took the juice, and than make your bindinge, and let it be on it
a whole day: and you shall se a wonderful effect.

A water to beale all manner of wounds in short space: which is a thing that
every man ought always to have in his house, for the accidents and chances
that may fall, seeing it is easy to be made, and with little cost, and that it
is of so marvelous an operation.
TAke a pound of new yelowe wax, or as much as you will, and let it melte
upon a fire in a clean pan: and then power it into another pan, or dishe,
wherein must be Malmsey, Muscadel, or other white wine that is very good:
afterward take it out of the wine and melt it again: then power it again upon
the said wine, doing so.vii. times. And then take the said wax, and melt it
upon the fire, mixyng with it a handful of brick finely beaten into dust:
incorporate all well together, and put it into a croke necked viole of glass,
which distillars, call a Bagpipe, claied about up to the mids of the neck:
and let it distill first with a little fire, by the space of.viij. hours: and
afterward make your fire greater, and at the end very great. But you must
above all thing, close well the sides and joints of the said vessel, and of
the recipient, which must be somewhat great. After that the oven and all the
other things be cold again, you shall take the water out of the recipient,
and shall power it into a violl well stopped with wax and cyred clothe, so
that in no race it may take vent: neither set it in a place where any heat
of the son or fire may come to it: for it is of so fine a substance, that
it would fly and vanishe away immediatlye. The said lycour is merueylous
good for all kind of wounds: and ye must weate and moist the wound with it,
and hynde upon it a piece of lynen clothe steeped in the said water. And among
all the experiences that has been seen, this was experimented and proved upon
a servant of a noble man called Feonello Pio de Carpe, resydent in Venise, the
year 1548. the which servant having received a stroke with a dagger upon
the insteppe of the foot, which is a place very dangerous, did nothing but
lay thereto a little of the said water, which a gentell man of the said
Senyor Leonello had in his house: and in the space of two days he was so
healed that skant could a man perceive the cicatrice or skarre where the cut
was: it is also exceeding good for shronken synowes. And if this foresaid water
be well and naturally made or distilled the second time, it is of so fine and
persyng substance, that if a man lay of it upon the palm of his hand, ye
shall see it perse through incontinent and in a moment, and leave the place dry
as though it had never been laid there. Therefore they that have any
knowledge may help diverse diseases, in adding to it some other licour or
powder, such as they would have perse into the flesh.

To make oil of S. Ihons wort, which is called in Venise, and in diverse other
places read oil: and is of such virtue that a man can skantly express it,
as well to heal wounds, as other infinite diseases, whereof we will show the
most notable, and those that have been found true by experience.
YOu must gather in the month of May and June, the herb called of the Greeks
Hypericon, of the Latynes Perforata, of the Frenchmen Millepertuis, and of us
in England S. Ihons worte, before it begin to floryshe or have flowers: and
stamp it in a mortar of marble, or of wood very clean, and put it so
stamped in a violle or glass: and then power to it as much white wine as will
cover it all over, and add to it of good oil olyue about the height of two
fyngers, leauyng it so in the said glass well stopped, and after that ye must
gather the said herb with his blossoms upon S. Ihons day in the morning after
the son is risen, and puttyng the blossoms a part, ye must stamp well the
herb with the stalks, and after ye have cut it very small, take it out of the
mortar, and stamp it in the same mortar also a little, the flowers or blossoms
which you kept a part, and mingle them with their herb, which was stamped
before. But the blossoms must wey four times or very nigh as much as all the
herb that ye gathered in the month of May, and before S. Ihons day, and was
put in the said violle or glass, with the wine and oil olyue. You must
after this mingle al these things together, and put them in some violle or
glass, or else in some pan of earth very clean, with the said wine and oil
olyue, and put to it again other wine and oil, until al be covered as
before: and then set all this in the Son in some vessel well stopped. And
twelve or fiftene days after when the seed of S. Ihons wort shall be ripe, you
must gather of it in the morning after the Son is up: and stamp it well, and
so mingle it with the said herb, and blossoms: but you must put no wine to
it, saving only the oil olive. And the said seed must in quantity wey as
much as the fourth or third part of the said herb before the wine be put
to it: also the oil must be of such quantity, as may be above all the
substaunces a good handful or two. After this set a caudron of water on the
fire, with hey or straw in the bottom: and put the said violle into it so
that it be not in danger of breakyng, when the water begins to sees. This
manner of setting the violles or glasses in a caudron of boylyng water, is
called of our modern Philisophers, Balneum Marie, and it is dressed and
trimmed in this sort, as well for to distill with a Lymbecke, as for to make
putrefaction, euaporation, or dissolution: of the which things we will speak
afterward, when we comme to the matter of distyllyng. Then must you make the
water in the said caudron to sees, with the substance which is in it, by
the space of three or four hours, according to the quantity of the said
substaunces, until the wine, or at the least the most part of it be drunk and
consumed, which ye shall know in this manner. Take a little of the substance on
the end of a stick, and cast it in the fire, and if it burn without any
noise, it is a sign that there is no moore wine left. The said violle must
be uncovered while the water boyleth, because the wine may euaporate and
breathe out. And if the said substance be so great in the violle, that it
pass five or six pound, ye shall put to it these things following, according
to the weight and measure that we will show you, and keep alwais good
proporcion, according to the quantity of the weyghte of the water, which
shall be moore or less then five pound. First take quick brymstone, or else
when it is made into long canes or sticks half a pound, commune white salt,
eight ounces, of smallage a dishfull well washed, first in water, and then in
honnye rosat, or other honny (so that it be sodden and skymmed) four ounces:
ten ounces of Turpentyne, washed once or twice in well, river, or conduite
water, of the juice of Taxus barbatus, of the juice of white or black
Dictamum, of each of them four ounces, of Saffron three ounces, roots of
Dictamum, roots of Gentian, the roots of Imperatoria the roots of the herb
called Crocodilium or Carlina, the roots of Valerian, and the roots of
Selandyne, of each of them two ounces. And if the said roots be green, you
must stamp them well: if they be dry, ye must beat them into powder: an
ounce of myrre, two ounces of read ware, two ounces of fine Triacle, an ounce of
the seeds of a Cedar tree, three ounces of yuy seed through ripe, four ounces
of the seed of a Bay tree through ripe, six ounces of aqua vitae, an ounce of
Synamom, half an ounce of lignum Aloe. Let all these be well stamped, and put in
a violle or vrinall with the said herb, blossoms, and oil: ye must stop
well the said violle, that the substance have no manner vent or euaporation.
Then make a fire under the caudron so that the water may be hot without
seething, and keep it so the space of two or three days: and the longer the
better. If in case the fire go out in the night there is no great danger: ye
may make it again in the morning, but you must keep it so much the longer.
Having then taken the violle out of the caudron, and left it in the Son all
the rest of the Somer, keep it in your house well covered: and the older such
oil wareth, the better it will be. But it shall be good to put to it every
year new juice, of the said herb S. Ihons wort, and of the blossoms and
seed well stamped, and that the said blossoms, herb, or seeds be sodden,
by the space of four or six hours in oil olive: and then must you power
all the oil with the substance into some vessel, and press well all the
blossoms and the herb, and cast them away, and put in other: and if ye
should do so every year the oil would not be the worse but rather
better. If al these foresaid things can not be gotten in one season or time it
is no matter: for a man may put them in as he finds them: and if ye can not
get them all, ye may put in them that ye can find or get. The virtues of this
excellent oil are infinite, of the which we will speak only of the chiefest,
and those that have been proved by experience, as well of us as of other in our
presence, and by our appointment and orderinge. First, it has as much or more
virtue, then the true and right baulme, and it is good for all cold griefs,
as well within as without the body: for the Sciatica, and cold gout, in
heating it and rubbing the place withal: for a quartayne, tertian, or quotidian
ague, when a man anointeth the raines of the back an hour before the ague
come. Also it heals marvelous well Colicam passionem, when a man rubbeth or
anoynteth warmely his breast or stomach withal, and when it is put in glisters
with other substaunces, as we will declare in the chapter of the Colicke
passion. And if ye anoint the place about the privy members of a man or woman,
it will make them to urine or piss well. If a woman have her fruit dead in her
womb taking three or four dragmes of the said oil, she shall be delivered
incontinent. It is likewise good for all griefs of the breast or stomach. It
is a thing above all other most excellent and miraculous for the plage,
anoyting the raines of the back, and in drinking two dragmes or two dragmes
and a half in good white wine: but note that it must be drunk before the
sixte hour after the sickness is begone, and rub the place of the
sickness with it, it being heated. It heals moreover all manner ulcers,
sores, boyles, botches, and corrupt matter within the skin covered with a
skabbe, as well old as new, and also brusings, or knockes. And good for other
infinite things, as every man may daily prove by experience. And specially it
is very good for the retraction or drawinge again of wounds or such like.

To make an oil of a red dog, by the mean whereof (beside other infinite
virtues that it bath) I have bealed a friar of S. Onofres, who had by the space
of xij. years, a lame and dry withered arm like a stick, so that nature gave
it no more norishement.
TAke a young dog of read hear, and keep him three days without meat: and
then strangle him with a cord, and let him lie dead a quarter of a hour,
and in the mean time boil a kettle of oil upon the fire, and put the dog
in whole or in pieces, it makes no matter how, so that he be all there with
the skin and hear: and make him sees so until he be almost sodden to
pieces, keeping always the kettle close covered. In the mean time take
Scorpions to the number of four skore or a hundreht, and put them in a
basyn on the fire, until they be thoroughly burned. Then put them into the
said kettle with the oil and the dog, putting to it a good dishfull of great
ground worms, achees called of the apoticaries bismalua or maluiscus and in
Latyne hibiscus or Athaea.
or smallage well washed, a good handful of S. Ihons worte, a handful of
wild or marshe mallows, and a handful of wall wort, with an ounce of Saffron.
Sees all these things well together, until the flesh of the dog be broken
and fallen in pieces. And because ye must have much oil, ye may at the first
put into the kettle two parts of water, and one part of oil: and in
sething ye may power in water, until the dog be all together broken, as is
already said: then let it wax cold. After this ye shall take the bones of
him and the herbs, and when ye have pressed and squissed them well, that all
the substance remain in the said oil, cast them a way.

This done, you shall take only that which is above upon the water: that is to
say, the oil and the grease, and cast away the water, if there be much: but
if there be but a little, so that you can skant discern the oil from the
water, ye shall take all together, for a little water can not be but good. Then
strain it through a strayner or canuese, first weated or steeped in white
wine: and take then vnguentum Agrippe seven or eight ounces, of the marie of the
gambon and bones of a hog, a pound, of the marie of the hinder thighs of an
ass a pound, or as much as you may get. Put all these things together,
with the said oil and grease: and make it sees upon the fire: then add to
it a dishefull or an half of oil rosat: and when it setheth, you shall put to
it three ounces of Mastick, two ounces of Gomme Elemi, eyghte ounces of red Wax:
but the Masticke and the Gomme must be well beaten into powder and sifted.
And when all this has boiled the space of half an hour, let it cool again,
and set it in the Son in some kind of vessel well covered by the space of
certain days. Then shall you have an excellent substance and matter for all
kind of cold infirmities, and for many other. And as I have alredie said, I
have seen the experience of it in a Friar of S. Onofrey, that is to say: of
them that wear anhabit of Roan color: but (as he said) he dwelt not in the
monastery, because of the said infirmity of his left arm, which was as
dry as the branch of a withered tree. Moreover, he said unto me, that he
did not remember nor could tell whether that chanced unto him, either by
sickness, or by some wound or hurt. The said arm was become smaller then
the other almost by half, so that the said arm had almost no strength at
all, and could not help it self in no wise. I caused him then to be
anointed with the said oil (which I had set in the Son the Somer of the
year 1547.) by the space of.ij. miserere, and made him tarry in the Son
until the said oil was clean dried up, and had perced through the said
arm: and within.lv. days, men did perceive and see perfitelye that the veins
gave nourishment unto the membre. Nine days after, the arm was as full of
flesh as the other: and with the help of god, was as whole and sound, as
though it had never been hurt. This said ointment or oil is a precious
thing, and good for all cold infirmities, and for the gout: and specially for
all contractions or shrinkinges together of synowes or members, and wounds,
albeit, the man were wounded in the mids of the body, in putting into it
this oil, shall a miraculous thing beseene: and it is also good for the
sinowes. As I came from Jerusalem in the year 1518. in a ship, of the which
the master was called Peter de Chioggia, we were set upon by five foystes of
Pirates, on this side Corphu, and one of the Mariners so attainted with the
stroke of a gonne that he had his arm bruised and broken, and with the same
blow another hurt in the breast. The Physician would have cut of the arm. But
among other things that I carried about with me, I found a bore of the said
ointment, wherewith I anointed his arm, and in the space of six or seven days,
he was healed miraculously. I have made many experiences, as well upon myself, as
upon others: and having given of it unto diverse men to aid them selves
withal, they have told me that they have found in it a marvelous virtue and
operation. If you make this oil in the time when the herb of S. Ihons wort is
found, ye shall put in the herb, the blossom, and the seed: but if it be in
the time when it can not be found, after ye have made the first decoction of
the dog, as we have said, ye shall boil the oil and the grease once again,
putting to it the oil of S. Ihons wort, whereof we have spoken before, or as ye
may get it: that is to sai, half as much as all the oil and grease is. And if
ye can not find bismalua or wild mallows, ye may put instead of it, y^
ointment called Dialtea, which is found commonly at the Apoticaries. And when
ye will boil the dog in the kettle, it shall be good to put to it, three torteses
that live on the land and not on the water, and so shall the said ointment be
very excellent for the gout. A certain man of mine acquaintance, of the age
of thirty years, vexed with the gout, whom I made take of this oil, and
anoint himself a little in the place of the grief, and about it, putting to it
two parts of oil rosat, one part of oil violet, and two parts of the said
oil of the dog, told me that he had found a merueylous ease and help by it.
And the said grief returning again four times at sondrie times, yet
anoyntinge himself therewith three times (as is aforesaid) the pain came unto
him no moore in the space of three years that we were in Rome together,
which was the year 1514. And this man was called Diego, a Portugal, and
dwelte at the mount Jordan. Since that time, being gone to Venise, and from
thence into Leuaunt, I have heard nothing of him.

To make an ointment, the most excellent in the world, whose virtues are
infinite, as we will declare afterward. Which, Princes ought to command to
be made and kept in their common wealths: and that it should be made in the
presence of Physicians, as Triacle is made: or at the least every man ought to
have it in his house, and specially because a man may make a great quantite of
it: and the longer it is kept the better it waxes.
TAke first oil Roset, the oils of Violettes, the Oil of Neuuphar, oil of
Spick, oil of the herb called Costum commonly called Cocus or herba marie,
the oil of Bay, oil of Nutmegges, the oil of the blossoms of Iasemin, of
each of them a pound. The oil of Nutmegges, and of Sinamom, is made in
seething, Nutmegges, or Sinamon well stamped, in oil Olive. And in the like
manner, ye may make the oil or decoction of Xilobalsamum, of Carpobalsamum, of
lignum Aloe, of Mirrhe, of Frankensence, of the gu^me of Iuie, of Masticke, and
of Cloves, and it shall suffice only, to put in the oil of these said spices,
half as much as each of the other mounteth unto, that is to say, half a pound.
Likewise must ye make oil of Campher, but ye must not sees it, but only
warm the oil Olive, in a little pan and pour it so upon the Campher a good
way of from the fire: than must you soubdaynlie cover it: for the Campher is so
fine and delicate, that it would incontinent breath out and vanish away: and
therefore does the Campher cleave unto the lidde, and sides of the pan because
it cannot get out. You must put only half an ounce of Campher, for every two
or three pound of the whole quantite of the other oils together: than add to
it, a pound of the oil of Turpentine, made by distillation, and three ounces
of the oil of Storar liquida: after this, put all these oils so mingled
together, into a great cawdron or kettell tinned within, which must be high
and narrow, to the end that all the things, that ye will put in, may
afterward be well covered, with the said oils: And the said cawdron, ought
to have a cover that may close him well and justly: than set it upon a small
fire, and put in three of these black Vipers, iij. Todes.x. of these little
beasts, called in latin Tarantulae or Stelliones, which be like unto
Lisardes, having spots on their backs like Stars, and.l. Scorpions. And
if ye can get any other venomous beasts, put them in quick, if not at the
first time, at the least at every time when ye can have them: and after you
have well covered and closed the cawdron, give it but a light fire, the space
of.v. or.vi. days. It shall be good to set the said cawdron, in manner of a
Fornayse, as it were to make Salt peter, or as Soap cawdrons be set: than
after, by the space of a day, make the fire a little greater, until all the
venomous beasts be broken into pieces, and almost consumed in the said oil,
wherinto it should be good, to have put first, a pot of good white Wine. Than
having taken the cawdron from the fire and taken all the said beasts, press
them or wringe them hard in some canuesse or linen cloth, weat^ with white
Wine. Than take the oil of Saint Ihons wort, compounde, as we have before
declared, half as much as all the oil of the said beasts, and the third
part of the oil of the red dog, mingle all well together, and put to it
the blossoms of Selandine, the blossoms of Saint Ihons worte, such a
quantite as you will, puttinge also to it, a handefull of white salt, the
juice of Taxus barbatus, and of white Dictamu^, at your discretion: the juice
of Crispina rubra, if ye can get it. This Crispina rubra, is a herb like
unto a Thistle, and is taken of Ioannis Agricola, to be the brier called
Respis: but it has leaves l^sser, and tenderer than a Thistle, and is eaten
almost in every place, in Italy, in Salades. And there it is called in some
places, Cardonello, and in Venise, Sigone. The red Crispin is in all poinctes
like unto the white and green, and differs in nothing, but in color: it is
a very precious herb. I saw once a man, that clefte a young Kiddes head,
almost a sunder: and after laid to it, only the juice of the said read
Crispin: and joined the head together, and bound it with a band: and in two
days the Kidde was healed, as sound as he was before. Also it is very good,
in the time of a Plage or pestilence, as we will afterward declare. Than, if
you can get of the juice of the said Crispina, or Cardonello, ye shall put a
pound of it, with the said oils, and as much of the juice of Carduus
benedictus, a pound of the flouers or blossoms, of the said Carduus
benedictus, an ounce of Lignu^ Aloe in powder, and an ounce of Saffran. Set all
these things well mixed together, in the Sun, all the whole Summer time, in
diverse vessels of glass, or of earth leaded within, well covered with paper or
linen clothe. And keep it as a precious thing: whose virtues to express, it
is impossible. The said oil is excellent good, principally for all manner of
contractions, and shrinkinges of the members, of a man's body, and of wounds,
as well old as fresshe, against Fistules, Cankers, and the disease called in
latin Struma, which is a swelling in the throat, of gathered matter and blood,
which we call in English, the Kings evil, or the Quinses, when the place of
the sore is rubbed with it, or when Towe weate in the said oil is laid unto
it, and beginning in the first quarter of the wane, or decreasynge of the
Moon, (with the grace of God) the said accidents, shall be healed before the
new Moon. Also the said oil, is good against all manner of venim or poison,
being anointed about the heart, if the Poison be taken at the mouth: and if a
man be bitten with any venomous beast, or hurt with any intoxicated weapon,
ye must wring well the blood out of the wound. and than rub the place, and
round about it with the said oil. It is also good for any member that is
stiff, and nomine, and almost for all diseases that can chance unto man's
body, whereunto any outward application is made of it.

A very true and proved remedy, against a Quartayne ague.
(...) iij. or.iiij. graynes of Frankensence, of the male kind otherwise
called Olibanum: than cover again the said hole, with the little piece that
you took of first, and roste it so upon the embers, so that it burn not, but
that it may wax tender. Than take it from the fire, and break it into.iiii.
parts, with all the Frankensence in it: and so give it the pacient to eat, it
will by and by, make the Apostume to break, and heal him clean. The
foresaied Smith, had al ready shut his teeth, so that men were feign to open
them with a spoone or knife: and so they put of it into his mouth, as well as
they could, and straight way he turned with his breast, upon the beds side,
and spitte out a great part of the matter, that was come forth of the Apostume
broken: and thereupon slept more than.ix. hours, and when he waked, he called
for meat, and found him self thorowlie whole, which was a thing worthy to
give God thanks for.

Another secret, or remedy, against the said disease of the Pleuresye.
TAke the flower, that sticks on the bourdes and walls of a Mill, and make
thereof paste with water: and so make little cakes, of the bigness of a grote,
or somewhat more, and having baked or fried them, in an iron lady, or in a
friyng pan, with the oil of Scorpions, lay one of them so upon the place,
where the patient feels his greef, and that as hot as he may endure,
rubbing, and annoyntyng it with the said oil of Scorpions: and when one of
the cakes is almost cold. Lay to another very hot, and heat the first again
in the said oil, and so consequently take away one, and put to another.x
or.xv. times, and shortly after the Apostume shall break, and in spitting the
matter out, the patient (with Gods aid) shall be healed.

Another good secret against the same disease.
OPen a white lofe new baket, in the middle, and spread it well with good
Triacle, on both the halfes, on the crommie side, and heat it at the fire:
than lay one of the halfes, upon the place of the disease, and the other half
on the the other side of his body directly: and so bind them, that they stir
not, leaving them so a day and a night, or until the Apostume break: which
I have sometime seen done, in.ij. hours or less. And than take away the
bread, and immediately the patient will begin to spit, and void the
putrefaction of the Apostume, and after he has slept a little, ye shall give him
some meat, and with the help of God, he shall be shortly healed.

Another remedy against the same disease.
TAke a toothe of a wild Bore: and if the pain hold him in the right side,
ye must take the tooth of the right iawe: if otherwise, ye must take the left
tooth: yet not withstanding. it has been found by experience, to be all one
of which iawe so ever it were. Scrape the said tooth with a knife, upon a
clean table, or upon a paper: than take of the same scrapynges, as much as
you may lay upon two grotes, and give the pacient drink of it, with a little
Barley water, or in the brothe of little read grains like unto Ciche peason,
or with white Wine with a little water. This has always been found very good
and true.

To make a water, good for the breast or stomach, of the which men use to give
them drink, that be tourmented or grieved with the stitche in the side, or
pleuritike Apostumes the which water is of a very good savor, and mondifieth
meruclous well the breast or stomach.
(...) the space of two Miserere: and then wasshe the leg well (that is to
say the wound and round about the wound) with the said wine luke warm.
Then take these pouders following, that is to say, Aristolochia, both of long
and round, Masticke, Myrre, Dragons blood, called in English Pellytorie of
Spain, Aloe epaticum, Nyll, called in Latyne Tutia, the bark or ryne of
gourdes burned, of each of these an ounce, Nummia, or as some call it, Humia,
and Boale armoniacke, of each of them a quarter of an ounce well stamped, and
strayned, lay all upon the said grief: than take the herbs boiled in wine,
as is aforesaid, and bind them upon the wound with a band, in chaungyng it
twice a day, or at the least once, and you shall see the leg healed in few
days.

To heal swollen knees or legs, read, and full of humors: a secret
merueylous good, easy to be made, and of little charge, and often times proved.
TAke the skin of a dog, if you may get it: or if not, take a white lambs
skin, or else the skin of a kidde, and cut a piece of it as broad as the
palm of your hand, or moore, and another piece of the length of your hand,
or somewhat moore: then melte in a pan on the fire these things following:
rosen of a Pine tree two pound, Galbanum.v. ounces, Masticke an ounce, Musk,
Amber, Tyuet, of each of them six graynes, or as much as you will, and break
the Masticke between two papers: then put the rosen and the Galbanum to melte
in a pan with a small fire, and when it is well melted, ye shall put the
masticke to it, and stir them well with a little stycke, to the intent that
nothing burn. After this lay it abroad whote as it is, upon the said skin
half a finger thick. Then take twelve or fiftene of these little beasts
called Monks peason or sowes (whereof is found a great quantity under
stones in moist places) and them in a mortar, with a little Barrowes grease^
make thereof an unction or ointment to lay upon the said plaster of the
skin, heatyng the said skin at the fire, and lay it under the knee, or
under the calfe of the leg, hard bound, and leave it so two or three days:
but if the leg be hearie, ye must shave the hear away with a rasour, for the
plaster would else cleave to it, when you take it of again, if you find that
it has made little bladders, perce them, and wipe them clean. This done, wash
them with the wine, wherein the decoction of the Agrimoyne, the Olive leaves,
the Roses, and plantaine was made: and so wype and dry them again. Make
clean also the said plaster, remouynge and sturryng a little the ointment:
and after having heated it again by the fire, lay it again upon the leg.
Do thus every third or fourth day, and you shall see that the plaster shall
have drawn unto it self in a small time a great aquositie of the leg, and
shall have taken away the redness, inflammation, and swellinge. And if there
be a wound, you shall heal it, as we have above said.

A very sure and perfect remedy against a Sciatica, often times proved and
experimented in diverse parts of the world.
First make this confection that follows. Take three pound of raw honny, and
put it in a pan with two glasses full of water, and make it sees or boil
together, until you see the sku^me or froth mount up, the which you must
take away. Then take the roots of the herb called in Latin Acorus and in
English Galingale, or of the herb called yelowe Gladen, make them clean, cut
them in small pieces, and stamp them well. Take of these herbs one pound for
the said three pounds of honnye, and put them by little and little into the
said pan, always sturryng them a little, letting them so boil, by the space
of a good hour.

Then put to it also an ounce of fine Synamom well beaten into powder, take it so
from the fire, and keep it in the same pan, or in some other vessel. Give
unto the patient of this conserve at night when he goes to bed, about four or
five sponefulles, and in the morning early as much or more. Give him also
thereof before his meals and after: the oftener he eats of it the better he
shall be. If it be in winter, heat it for him a little: and while he thus uses
it, let him always sit upon his buttockes, that is to say: upon the bone or
huckle where the Sciatica is, with the plaster declared in the chapter before,
that is to say, of yt Rosen, Galbanu^, Masticke, the little beasts called
Monks peason or sowes, with the rest there mentioned. Then, at the end of ten
days take it of, and lay it other ten days upon his thigh. And from thence
take it again, making it clean, mixing and sturring it a new, and lay it
under the calfe of the leg ten days more: and at every time you shall see
that it will have engendered little puffes or bladers, and drawn to it self all the aquositie and watrishnes, in such sort, that it will take away the
grief and heal it. This is a very rare secret against such a disease,
which very few Physicians cold hitherto find certain remedy for. If in
case the disease be old or has run long, give the pacient sometime this
glister following. Take Mallows, Mercury, Fenell, green or dry, Wormewode,
Rue, wild Cucumbers broken, as much of the one as of the other: than, put to
it two handfulles of branne, sees all in common water, until the third part
be deminished: and so let it cool again. After this, take a dishe and a
half full of this decoction, three sponefulles of skimmed Honnye, oil of
Camemille, and oil of Rue, of each of them an ounce and a half: mingle all
well together, and make a Glister of it, which you shall minister unto the
Pacient in the morning: and so make him lie upon that side where the Sciatica
is. Two days after ye shall give him another Glister, after three days
another: and than four days after yet another, continuyng so a month
together. If the grief be so endured and hardened that it will not behealed by
the aforesaid remedies, you may give him Pills the third day after, the
fourth day, the fyfte day, and so unto six or seven times. But the Pylles
will profit the Pacient nothing at all unless he abstain from eatinge salt
or sharp meats, and from all sorts of pulse corn, as Pease, Beans, Tares,
and Fitches, and such other: likewise from drinking water, or white wine.
Many have been healed only with the said plaster, not leauinge to do
their business abroad notwithstanding: other have also used the conserve. But
in so many years I have had but two upon whom (for to take away the disease
being old and far goen) I was constrained to use the said Pills and
Glisters, whereby they were healed. I had also one, which used but only the
plaster and the conserve, of whom the huckle bone was out of joint, and
hardened, and with the said remedy he was perfitly healed in the space of
three skore and ten days, and the said bone returned again into his
former place and state: but he told me that whilst he used the said plaster
and conserve, a Nonne counseyled him to take from day to day, four times,
the bigness of a Nutte of Turpentine washed in Borrage water, and that he
should not tell me of ^t, whereby he found him self healed in short time.

A water for to heal in five days at the most, all manner of great skabbes,
as well inward as outward: and is a water clear and white, and is of an
odoriferous savor, such as a man may present to a Queen.
TAke Plantaine water two glassefulles, Rose water a glassefull, of the water
of the flowers of Cytrons or Orenges half a glass full, or less: put all
this together in a clean pan or violle of glass: and put to it an ounce of
Sublyme, that is to say: quick silver, such as commonly is found at the
Apoticaries: it must be well beaten to powder. Then let it boil (...) his
body, as long as he may, and he shall find it very excellent.

Another remedy against the same disease.
TAke half a glass, or less, of the juice of Barberies, when they be very red, and ripe, and put into it as much red Coral, well beaten in powder, as
will lie upon two grotes, and give the patient drink thereof.

Another perfect remedy against the same disease, and to make a man piss that
has been.iiij. or.iiij. days without making water, and that in the space of
half an hour, and will break the stone within.x. or.xij. days.
TAke fine powder of Virga aurea, and put a sponefull of it, into a new laid
Egg, soft roste, and give the patient drink thereof, in the morninge at his
breakefast, and let him not eat at the least in four hours after, and than
shall he make water in less tha^ half an hour. If ye use this continually,
the space of x. or.xii. days, as is a foresaid, you shall make him piss out
the stone without any pain or grief.

Another remedy against the Stone and pain of the raynes.
TAke the seeds of blew Violettes, or march Violettes, the seeds of common
Burres, with their little poddes and all, or ripe Burres a pound, put them to
dry in an Oven (for otherwise it will be a hard thing to stamp them) stamping
them afterward with their seeds. This done, take a quick Hare, and strangle
him with a cord, to thentent there be none of the blood lost: put him so
whole, or in pieces into some vessel, feet, guts, head and all: than put him
to burn in an Oven, so that all, as well the bones, and the skin, as the
flesh be brought to powder, this dooen, ye shall stamp it well, and mingle
the powder with the two other pouders aforesaied: dry Oken leaves, well beaten
to powder.iiij. ounces, dry Saxifrage or Sampire, half a pound, Bay
berries.v. ounces. Let all these things be well beaten in powder, sifted, and
mixte together.

Give of this powder unto the pacient, as much as will lie upon a grote,
making him to drink it, in the morning, to his breakefast, in white wine, and
let him do this often times. It is the most exquisite thing in the world, as
well for the gravel, as for the stone: but for the gravel, you must take
less, and not so often as for the Stone.

The last, and the most excellent remedy of all, against the stone, be it in
the reigns, or in the bladder, of what qualite or quantite, so ever it be.
IN the month of May, when Oxen go to grass, or be at pasture, ye shall take
of their dunge, not to fresh, nor to dry: than distille it fair and softly
(to the end it smell not of the smoke) into some vessel of glass, or earth
leaded within, of the which dunge will come a water, without savor or evil
stenche, which will be very good, to take of all manner of spots, or
blemishes in the face, if you wash it, with it, morninge and eueninge. You
shall keep the said water, in a Violle well stopped: than take.iij. or.iiij.
Radishes, such as men eat in salettes, cut them small, and put them in a
Violle, and fill up the violle with wine greek, or good Malmsey, or other good
white wine, lettyng it stand so in the Sun, and in the air, a day and a
night. Than take one part of that wine, two parts of the said water, of the
Ox dunge, half a part of the water of Stawberies. iij. or.iiij. drops of
the juice of Limons, or Citrons: and let there be of all these waters, so
proportioned together, half a glass full, or some what more, into the which,
you shall put a piece of Sugar, or a little Honnie roset: for the one and the
other, serve as well to the savor, as to the profit of the substance. After
this, you shall put to it some of the powder mentioned in the Chapter before,
as much, as will lie upon a grote, and than give the patient drink of it, and
shortly after you shall se a wonderful effect^ for many, unto whom I have
given of it, have not tarried half an hour, but they have pissed, in the
which piss, they have found so many little stones, that all together, came
to the bigness of a Walnutte, and of others, unto the quantite of a hasel
Nutte: in vsinge often the said remedy, they have finally been perfectly
healed. I caused once a gentilman of Millan, to take of it by the space of.xii.
days, whom the Physicians esteemed as dead, and would have cut him, but in the
space of the said.xij. days, I made come out of him so many stones, that all
together came to the quantite of an Egg, I made him make his water through a
linen cloth, laid over an Vrinall, to the intent, to take up the stones
together: and the third morning, he would take the glass, a little more than
half full, and shortly after, being about to make water, he began to cry
out, for the great pain he felt in his yard: after this pain was paste,
lookyng in the linen cloth, he found a stone as long and as big, as a
Been, somewhat pointed at one of the sides, which paraduenture, in passing
through his yard, caused him to have all that pain. Now, although that many,
as well of old time, as now of late days, have written diverse and sondrie
remedies, against the said disease, yet was there never found a surer, truer,
or presenter remedy, than this. The said water and the powder, may be kept
long, but you must at every time renew the wine of the said Radish, and the
juice of the Limon or Citron, for in the space of two days (the wine chiefly)
gives such a sent, that a man may skant endure it.

For him that spittet^ blood, by having some vein of his breast broken.
TAke Myse dunge, beaten in powder, as much, as will lie upon a grote, and put
it into half a glass full, of the juice of Plantain, with a little Sugar, and
so give the patient drink thereof, in the morning before his breakefast, and
at night before he go to bed. Continuyng this same, you shall make him whole
and sound.

Against the grief in the Lunges, and spittinge of blood, a thing experimented.
TAke an herb called Farfara, or Tussilago, of the Apoticaries Vngula
caballina, Coltes foot in English, the French men call it, pate de lion.
Incorporate it well, with the larde of a Hog, chopped, and a new laid Egg:
boil all together in a pan: and give the patient of it to eat, doing
this.ix. mornings, and you shall se a marvelous thing. This is also very
good, to make a man fat.

Against the pain of the flanks, of the reins, and all other greefes.
TAke three quarters of an ounce of Stora^ liquid^, Capons grease, or Hens
grease, the grease of a Goose, the grease of a Ducke, of each of them.v.
dragmes, of oil reset.iiii. dragmes, of read War.ii. dragmes and a half, of
Butter half a dragme: melt the greases, the oil, and the Butter altogether,
power them together, and mingle them. Than having put to it the Stora^, spredde
it upon a linen cloth, and so lay it hot upon the place of the grief, and
you shall incontinent se him whole.

Against the stinkinge of the breath.
TAke Rosemarie leaves, with the blossoms, if you can get them, and sees them
in white wine, with a little Myrrh, Sinamom, and Bengewin: and taking of the
said wine often times in your mouth, you shall find a marvelous effect.

Against the bytyng of a mad dog, and the rage or madness that follows
the man after he is bitten.
TAke the blossoms or flowers of wild Thisltes, dried in the shadow, and
beaten into powder, give him drink of the same powder, in white Wine, half a
Walnut shell full, and in thrice taking it, be shall be healed: A thing
found true by experience.

To take a way the dead flesh, that comes or grows in the nose.
TAke the juice of Leekes, that have not been twice planted, and add to it a
little green wax, and make an oyntement thereof, puttyng to it a little of the
fine powder of the leese of wine, and put often times of this ointment in the
nose of the pacient, and you shall se a marvelous thing.

For one, which (with falling from some high place) fears to have some thing
broken in his body.
TAke half a glassefull of oil Olive: and put into it, powder of the seed of
Cresses, the quantity of half a Walnut shelfull, than give it the patient to
drink, at once, or at twice. It shall be good to let him blood, immediately
after he is fallen, or as soon as is possible, and as soon as he is let
blood, give him this drink. And he that cannot drink the oil, let him take
the powder with wine. If you cannot get the seeds of Cresses, give him of the
powder of Mean, of the which there is always enough found at y^ Apoticaries:
if he be bruised or hurt outwardly, annoint the sore place with oil Roset, and
than lay upon it, the leaves of Myrnis, and of dried Roses, and so shall you
heal him parfitlie.

A very good and easy remedy, against the disease, called the Kings evil.
TAke the herb called Farfara, Fool foot in English, well stamped with his
roots, and being myngled with the flower of the seed of Line or Fla^e, and
the grease of a Barrow: make thereof a plaster, and lay it upon the sore,
changyng it twice a day, and all the sores of the disease, shall be resolved
into sweat. After they be healed, wash often the place with white wine, by
the space of.x. or.xv. days.

Another remedy against the same disease.
TAke the stones of a horse, and put them in a Fire pan, among the embers and
coals, leauyng them there, until they may be beaten into powder, than give the
patiente drink of the said powder, in white wine, the quantite of two penny
weight, continuyng this the space of.xxi. days: by this means you shall make
him cast out at his mouth, all the ordure and filth of the evil, and shall
heal him thoroughly.

To know whether a woman, shall ever conceive or not.
TAke of the ruen of a Hare, and having frayed and consumed it, Coagulum
Leporis dela pressure de lieure.
in hot water, give it the woman to drink, in the morning at her breakfast,
than let her stand in a hot bathe: and if there come a grief or pain in her
belly, she may conceive: if not, she shall never conceive.

A very rare remedy for to take the kernels out of a man's throat, in fifty
days at the f^rthest.
TAke the roots of Walwort, well washed, and boiled in white wine, and take
also, these things following: Sponge burned half a pound, and two hundred
corns of Peper. Al these things being well beaten into powder, boil them, in
the said wine, with the Walwort roots: and having sodden them well, pour out
the wine, and keep it in a viol well stopped in some moist place, than give the
patient of this wine to drink, three times a day, at every time a glasseful,
that is to say, morning, noone, and night.

And while he uses this, he must eat no other bread but Barley bread, and
drink his wine without water. He must also abstain from eating any manner
herbs, Fysh, Garlic, Beetes, or other such like. This manner of regiment,
ought a man to begin, at the full moon, continuyng until the end of the
same, and after until the quarter encreasynge, of the next Moon: that is to
say.xlv. days, and without doubt the patient shall be healed.

Another remedy, easier to be made.
TAke dry Camomill redact into powder, and mengled with Honnie, then take in
the morning, a sponefull of it, into your mouth, and as much at night, lettyng
it go down of it self: use this continually, until you be healed, use good
government as is before said.

A thing proved, and experimented, to be very tra^ against the same disease.
TAke Polipodium (which is an herb, like unto Fern) growyng upon the stumpe
or stock of a Chestnut tree, if you can get of it: if not, take of the other,
and beat it into powder, give the patient drink thereof, with wine or Honnie,
twyse a day, at each time, as much as will lie upon a grote: continue this,
by the space of.xxi. days beginnynge at the quarter decreasyng of the Moon,
and keepynge always good diet, as is above said, he shall be whole.

To make the skin stretch and return again into his place, after the
kernel is healed.
TAke the knoppes that remain on the Rose stalk, after the Roses be fallen of
(which be like beadestones, facioned like an Egg) with the seed that is in
them, Alom of the ^ocke, the flower or blosome of a Pome granade, of each of
these a like quantity. Sees them in white Vinaigre, until half be consumed,
put to it also half as much as all the rest, of Ros syriacus or Rhus. Which the
Apoticaries call Sumach, or Sunach, stamped, and boil all again, until all
the Vinaigre be almost wholly consumed. And of that which remains, annoint
the place round about: and by that means, ye shall cause the skin to
stretche, and come to his place, as it was before.

A very exquisite remedy against the disease called in Latyne Augina, and in
Greek Synanche, which is an inflammation of the Muscle of the inner Gargill,
the French men call it Squinancie, in English Quinsey.
TAke the water of Scabiose, a pound, of Aqua vite, an ounce, mengle them
together, and lay it upon the soore, or grief, and you shall find the
Pacient whole in three hours.

Another against the same disease.
TAke Swallows, bake them in an oven, beat the^ to powder, and lay them upon
the grief through the mouth if it be possible: if not you shall entermingle it
with Honnye roset, and a little Flower or Meal, of Amylum, and then put it in
his mouth, letting it go down of it self, and you shall see a merueylous
thing.

Another against the same sickness.
TAke oil of Roman vitriolle, and put two or three drops of it, in white
wine, with the which you shall gargle or wash your mouth and throat often
times.

A very good remedy against the kings evil.
TAke Ceruse or white Lead well stamped four ounces, oil Olyue, eight ounces,
let this boil together five or six hours, styrring it continually: and when
it is waxen or become very black, it is sodden enough: then spread it upon a
lynnen cloth, and lay it unto the place of the soore: if the soores be broken,
they will be healed incontinent: if not, they will resolve and leuse, and
shortly heal thoroughly.

To heal the same disease by a substance taken at the mouth.
Dress a Hen as it were to eat, so that she be boiled in a great pot or
caudron, with a great deal of water without Salt, letting it boil until all
the bones be separated from the flesh: then take the said bones and dry
them in an oven, or at the fire, so that they be not burned or wax black,
after this beat them well to powder, and take of the seed of Sesamum, beaten
well likewise into powder, and mengle it with the powder of the Hens bones,
as much of the one as of the other. And so take a sponefull of the two
pouders, and mingle it with Honnye, causing the Pacient to eat of it at night
when he goes to bed, and in the morning when he rises. This ought to be
done from the beginning of the quarter decreasinge of the Moon unto the end:
It is a very excellent secret. It also happened to me of some men, in whom
the said disease was so old and so far gone that this said remedy could
not help them, whom I caused to take with the said powder specified as
follows, which ought to be made after this manner. Take a certain little
Serpent called a Slow worm^: boil him in oyl^ Olyue, until he be broken and
consumed, then rub the evil with the said oil, and lay pieces of towe upon
it, leaving it so three or four days: and after that, make a new anointing,
and lay tow to it again as before. By this said remedy I healed them
perfitlye, thanks be unto God.

A heavenly water which has many goodly and ^^table Virtues, as we shall
show you after.
TAke Cloves, Nutmegges, Ginger, Zeduaria, long Pepper, round Pepper, the
seed of Ienuper, Orange pills, the blossoms or flowers of Sage, Basyll,
Rosemary, Maioram, round Mint, Bay berries, Pe^nyryall, Gentian, Calamintha,
the flowers of Elder, the flowers of white and red Roses, Spicknarde, lignum
Aloes, wild Cubebes, Cardamomum, or grains, which the Apoticaries call
Granum paradisi, fine Cynamom, Calamum Aromaticum, Sticados, Chamedrios, called
in English Germander, Camepitheos, Melligetta, Masticke, Ensence, of the male
kind, Aloe epaticum, Anyse seed, the seed of Maioram, or Maioram gentle,
dry figs, dry Raisins, Dates, sweet Almondes, kernelles of a Pyneaple, of
each of these an ounce, white Honnie, six ounces. Then take Sugar waiyng as much
as all the said composition, and mengle well all together, putting also to it
Aqua vite waiyng as much as all the said substance, but the said Aqua vite
must be distilled five times through a Limbecke, receyuinge always the best:
and mingle all the said things together in the said water: then put all into
a violle well stopped, leaving it so the space of two days. Then afterward
you shall set it upon the fornesse with his Limbecke and recipient, distillinge
it with a small fire, whereof will come a clear and precious water, continue so
the fire, until the water begin to change his color, and come forth white:
then change the recipient, and receive the said white water a part, for it is
not good, but for to blaunche and make white the face, and there is neither
spotte nor lyntell, or any kind of read burgeons in the face of a man, the
which, being washed with this water by the space of fiftene days will not go
out, and wear away, leauinge the face and the skin white, shininge and well
sauouringe. This is a very rare kind of washinge, and meet for great ladies
and princesses. You shall mi^e the first water which is clear, with Aqua vite
of like quantity, the which is called Mel balsami. Now having put and
left all these things in a violle well stopped, the space of two days, set it
to distill with a small fire, then receive and put the first water by it self,
which will distill very clear, and odoriferous. When you see that the water
begins to come forth like rain water, change your recipient, and receive
that same likewise by it self, until you see the third water come out,
which will be of sanguyne color, the which you shall power into a violle,
and stop it well with wax: keep it diligently as a precious thing: for it
has many notable and excellent virtues, of the which the best be these that
follow. The first is, that if you lay a little of it upon a fresh wound,
there need no other medicine to cure it. The second is, it is good for all old
wounds, against the Canker, the worms, and against Nolime tangere, and all
other diseases growinge, ye must weate the soore places with it every second
or third day once, and by this means, in the space of fyftene or twenty
days, he or they shall be healed. The third is, that if any manne have a
Carbuncle, or Saynct Antonies disease, called commonly in Italye and in
France, S. Antonies fire, or other pestilenciall syckenesse, and wash the
place with the said water, will it kill it within an hour. The fourth is, it
is good against the pain of the eyes, so that the eye be not out, or lost: if
you put a little drop of it into the eye in the morninge, and as much at
night, it will heal the pain in fiftene days. And although it be somewhat
prickyng, yet the grief of it passes soon away, so that it can not in any
wise hurt the eyes. The fifte is, that if any man have the stone in the raines
of his back, and in the bladder, and drink three drops or a dragme of it
with a little white wine, he shall be delivered thereof in few days. The sixte is,
that it heals the Emeraudes or Pyles, if they be washed with it every day
once. The seventh is, that it heals all manner of disease or pain of the
Matrice and the colic, when a sponeful is drunk of it with the broth of a
hen, or of cabbeges. The eight is, that when a man batheth the shronken and
endured synowes of the body, they stretche, and heal in few days. The nynth
is, that it heals runnyng and watrie eyes, when a drop is put into them in
the morning. The tenth is, that it is very good to heal all manner of skabbe,
skurfe, and other like things, washing them with it often times. The eleventh
is, that if a man put a drop of it into his ear at night or in the morninge,
it takes away all the grief and worms that engender in the ear. The
twelfth is, that it heals all venomous bitinge, when ye wash the venomous
place with it, and is far better for such an accident then the triacle is.
The thirtenth is, that it kills all worms in man's body, if a man rub
his nosestrelles, or drink a very little of it. And finally, it is also very
good for venomous hurtes or wounds, and for all wounds incurable. It heals
the kings evil, and the disease called the fallinge sickness, and all other
infirmities in the exterior parts of the body, and with this water may a
man wash him self, or else drink it. It is also good for every cold
sickness, and restoratiue for old folks, or those that are consumed and
debilitate with hunger, sickness, or sorrow of mind. It conserueth the
radical moisture, and natural heat, it mainteyneth health, and keeps a man
in long life, who so ever uses it as it ought to be used.

Pills of a Marvelous operation and virtue, against the Sciatica, which we
promised to speak of in the chapter of the Sciatica.
TAke ^illes Alephangines, of Hermodactil maioris and minoris, of each of them
a scrupule which is the third part of a dragme.ij. graynes of salt Gemma,
dissolve and stir them with the juice of roses, and make of all this
substance five pylles, and at the beginning, when the Sciatica is fervent and
great, you shall take of the said five pylles every four days: and when it
begins to declyne and assuage, you shall take them only the fyfte day,
than, the syxt, the seventh, and the eight day, until all be done: and take
them always in the morning at the break of the day, absteynynge at the least
six or seven hours from meat. Now, although that the said pylles be not for
a man to keep his chamber, and that they provoke not to the stool, yet ye
must not drink any white wine, nor water, nor eat any salt things, nor
any kind of pulse corn, as beans and peason, with such other like nor
oynyons, garlyke, or such like, if the disease be inueterate, old, or far
gonne.

A notable secret to heal a mad man, be it that the madness came unto him by
a whyrlynge, or giddynesse of the head or brain, or otherwise.
First of all make him four Glysters, in four morninges, one after another.
Let the first glyster be simple: that is to say, made with water wherein ye
have boiled or sodden wheat bran, commun oil, and salt. Let the second be of
water sodden with malowes, mercurye, pellitory of the wall, and violet leaves,
with oil and salt. Let the third be of water boiled with oil, salt, sodden
wine, and honny. And let the fourth glyster be of the like decoction that the
third was, adding to it end^ue, buglasse, and the tops of the branches of
Walwort. And after that this decoction is strayned, ye shall put to it an ounce
of Cassia fistula, and half a quarter of an ounce of Metridate. Now, having
given him these four glysters four sundry mornings, you shall give him this
medecyne. Polipodium of an Oak well stamped, a handefull or twain, and wrynge
out the juice of it, and put it in a glass the quantite of two fingers high,
puttinge to it two ounces of honey roset, and a quarter of an ounce of Electuary
roset, and as much of dyafenycon. All these things being well incorporated
together, give them unto the pacient to drynk at night when he goes to
bed.ij. or.iij. hours after the son set, and give it him luke warm: if
in case he will not take it, bind him, and hold him parforce, make him open
his mouth, put some stycke between his teth, and than power the medecin into
his throat, as men do unto horses. And when he has taken all, if it be in
Winter, you shall make him sytte so upon his bed half an hour, well covered
round about, to the intent he take no cold after it: if it be in Summer, ye may
let him go about the house where he will, but se that he go not out. When the
medecin has done his operation, take this oynctment following: that is to
say, a pound and a half of the juice of the roots of Walwort, whereunto you
shall add as much butter: boil this together a good while, until all the
juice be almost consumed, than put to it oil of Camomill, oil roset, oil of
saint John's wort, of each of them an ounce. Incorporate well all these things
on the fire, and make thereof an oynctment, wherwyth you shall annoint the
pacient from the neck unto the fete, arms and legs and all: but the
oynctment must be hot, and he must be so well annoycted and rubbed that the
oinctment may penetrate and perce through. Continue, doing this the space of a
month, annoyntynge him every euenyng and morning, or at the least once a
day. The third or fourth day after you have begone to annoynte him, burn him
with a hot iron upon the seame or ioynynge together of the head, and at the
first lay upon the mark a linen cloth with barrowes grease, leaving it so
the space of viij. or.x. days: and after wrappe a great Cyche pease in yuy
leaves, and put upon the said yuy leaves a piece of the sole of a shoe made
fine and thynne, byndynge it under his throat with some band, or beneth his
head, so that it may bide on, and change it always at night and in the
morning. If in case he pass four months and receive not health, or return
to his wit, ye must begin again to give him the same glysters he had
before, and the same medecynes, annoyntyng him as before: and without doubt
(by the grace of God) he shall be hole. He must eat at the beginning chyckens,
mutton, and roast veale: after, you may give him roste and sodde with pottage
of Amylum, beetes, and mallows, and also new laid eggs, putting spices in
his meat, causynge him sometime to eat, (either in his pottage or otherwise)
betayne, sage, maioram, and mint, not sufferinge him in any wise to take salt,
sharp, nor aygre things, pulse corn, Garlike, Onyons, nor such like, ye may
give him white wine with water: let him also carry ever about him some good
odours, and hear melodye or music: speak oftentimes soberlye and wyselye
unto him, admonishinge him to be wise and sage, rebuke him of his folly when he
does or speaks any fond things. And in such case the authority of some
fayer woman avails much to tell him all these things, for good admonitions
are of great virtue, and strength, for to stablyshe and settle a brain
troubled or dysquieted with any sycknesse or passion.

Pylles of master Mychael a Scot, the which heal the grief or pain of the
head, be it inueterate or recent, purge the brain, claryfye the syghte, cause
a man to have a good memory, good color in face, and be also very good for
many infyrmities.
TAke of Aloe washed.iij. scrupules, the roots of wild gourdes, of al sorts
of Mirabolanes, of the confection made with Scammony, called Diagridion,
Masti^, Bay berries, and Roses, of each of them half a dragme, of Saffron a
scruple, Myrrh half a scruple: stamp all well together, and make thereof
Pylles with the juice of Colewortes, and take three or four of them when you
goo to bed, every third or fourth day once.

Against the pain of wemens breasts, a very excellent remedy.
TAke the yelkes of two new laid eggs, the weight of two pence of new Wax,
a little oil roset, a little Nyll, called in latin Tuti^, prepared and trymmed
in Rose water, set all this on the fire to melte in a clean pan, and when it
is cold again, spread it upon a lynnen cloth, and lay it to the sore breasts,
but you must have first washed the said sore places with white wine, wherein
has been sodden leaves of Roses, Plantayne leaves, and the leaves of an Olyue
tree, both green and dry, and after having wyped and dried it again, lay
the plaster to it, dressed and prepared as I have said, and incontinent the
sore shall he healed.

To ripe a felon, Cattes here, botch, byle, or other apostumes or swellings,
which have need of quick and sudden ripinge.
TAke crommes of bread, Raysins dried in an Oven, or otherwise, and than well
stamped, Butter, Hogs suet, Leven, cow milk, and a little Saffron. Make of
all this an oyntmente and lay it upon the sore, putting first a little Saffron
in poulder upon the very place where you will have it break, and upon that the
plaster, leauinge it so until night, and change it morning and euenyng, so
shall you make it soon ripe and break, then dress it with oil roset, and
yelkes of eggs one whole day, after that purge away the ordure and fylth
with some drawing ointment. Finally you shall lay to it the ointment of Aloe
and Tutia, or some consolidatiue or healyng oyntmentes.

To resolve a felon, Cattes bear, byle or botche, at the beginning.
TAke the roots of wild or marshe Mallows called of the Apoticaries Bismalua
or Maluauiscus, mu^dified and made clean, and cut in small pieces, well
stamped in a mortar of stone. Than take some great pot or caudron that
holds six or seven great violles filled with water, and boil in it these
things folowinge: Lickerous, Isope, green or dry Sage, Rosemary, Carduus
benedictus, figs, dry Raisins, Amylum of Barley, or Barley flower, of each
of these things at your discretion, and as much of the one as of the other:
and add to it more, a handful of Succorie, with his roots, let all this
sees in the said caudron or kettle, the space of an hour, or a hour and a
half, and then let it cool again so that you may well endure your hand
in it. Than take out all the said substaunces, and put them in a clean
canuesse, and wring out all the substance into the said water in the kettell:
put in it also two or three pound of the said roots of Maluauiscus stamped,
as before, then set it to boil and sees again three hours or more: take it
from the fire, and do as you did at the first time: but if it had so much
sodden that all the roots were broken and consumed, it should not need to
have strayned or wrong them through a canuesse. This done, take the decoction
of it, and set in a pot upon the fire, with as much Honnie, or little less,
leaving it to boil so fair and softlye, taking away the skomme that shall
come of the Honnye. After it has thus boiled a good space, add to it an ounce,
or as much as you will of Sinamon, and a quarter of an ounce or more of
Bengewine stamped, and a little Musk: then take it immediately from the fire,
and cover it, to the intent it take no vent: specially, if you have put in
the musk, which would else vanishe away with the smoke, wherefore you may
put in the Musk when the water is luke warm after it is taken of: So shall
you have an excellent conserve to use and occupy all the winter, as well at
night, as in the morning, and at all times when you list, but you must at
every time you take warm it again, and take thereof.ij. or.iij. sponefulles
at a time. And if you will have it thicker, put to it powder of sugar, or
Penides: and if you will have it clearer, ye must put to it a little more of the
first decoction, which we have spoken of. This secret is of such
excellency, that if a man use of it in the winter, as before is said, it is
not possible for him to be vexed or turmented with the cogh, rumes, murres,
catarres, or any other like disease.

A goodlye and pleasant secret to beale the cogh, in rubbing the soles of
the feet: and is a thing very easy, and certain.
TAke two or three Garlike heads, well mundified and made clean, stamp them
well, than put to them hogs suet, and stamp them well a new: and at night
when you gooe to bed, warm well the soles of your feet, and annoint them
well with the said confection, and then warm them again as hot as you may
endure, rubbing them well a pretty space: and being a bed let your feet
be bound with some warm linen clothe, and rub also the small of your
legs with the said ointment, by this mean you shall be healed in three
nights were the cogh never so vehement. If you will at your meals use of the
said decoction in your wine, or otherwise, you shall find your self well at
ease in your stomach, and head, and shall the better drive away your cogh, and
all other evil dispositions of the body.

A very goodly and easy remedy to heal in a day or twain, all manner of
inueterate and old wounds, wherein is grown dead and superfluous flesh, and
wounds that can not be cured by any other medycynes.
TAke three ounces of Turpentine (first washed in commune water, and then in
Rose or Plantaine water) and the yolke of an egg, an ounce a glass full of the
said wine: but you must have taken first a Walnutte, a Fig, and two or
three little branches of Rue. If you do this in the morninge, you shall be
assured for that day.

An ointment to make an apostume break, and the soore of the plage to fall of.
TAke a quarte and a half of common oil, and set it on the fire in some
vessel, then put to it four ounces of Ceruse or white lead well stamped,
litarge of silver very fine and thin, three ounces, common Wax, four ounces,
and leave it so long upon the fire, until you may spread it with your
finger upon a marble stone. This done, take it from the fire, and power a little
vinagre upon it, but you must hold it far of, to the intent it leap not in
your face: than make of this ointment a plaster, as great as all the soore,
and make a hole in the mids of it as big as a penny: after this, make a
little plaster of some ointment that mortifieth, of the bigness of y^ said hole:
than make another plaster of the same bigness, the which you shall lay upon the
soore, so that the plaster with the mortifiyng ointment be between both, and
leave it upon the soore the space of.xxiiij. hours, than change only the
middle plaster, that is to say: he that mortifieth, and put another in his
place, the which you shall also let lie four and twenty hours: and before that
the plaster be laid round about and stretched, annoint the place very
thick with fresh Hogs suet, or Hens grease, to mollify it, and so you
shall make it hard in the middle, and round about you shall make a circle of
tender flesh, in such sort that the soore will break out and come forth.
And the eight and forty hours once passed, after you have taken of the
plaster, lay upon it another plaster made with fresh Hogs grease, and
immediatlye will fall of from it a dead flesh in manner of a round pommell, and
there will remain a hole, the which you must heal with some oyntmente or
else with Diaculum magnum: and when the flesh begins to grow, lay to it
burned Alom, by the space of four and twenty hours, and then the said
ointment upon it.

Another remedy against the plage.
TAke the top of Rue, a garlyke head, or half a quarter of a Walnutte, and
a corn of salt: eat this every morninge, continuing so a month together,
and be merry and iocunde. This receipt is also good against worms.

Another very good remedy against the plage.
TAke Aqua vite, the water of wyld perceley, called in Greek Mellissophyllon,
Melyphyllon, and Melinon, and in latin Apiastrum, and Plantayne water, of each
of them a pound, and when you will use of it, which you ought to do daily,
you shall take as much of the one as of the other, so that all together mount to
the quantity of two fingers high in a glass, and than drink it, so shall you
be preserved and saulfe from the plague. This water is also good for fistules,
and wounds, and is well tried and experimented.

Another perfect recept against the plague.
TAke a violle, or some other glass, and fill it unto the third part full
with fine tryacle, and one thyrdendeale, or third part with Aqua vite, and
the other third part with the vryne of a young man child that is a vyrgyne,
and helthfull: myxe all well together, and give the pacient drink thereof three
morninges, that is to say, every morning a glassefull. This has been proved in
Venyse, the year 1504.

Another against the plague.
AS soon as the person fealeth him self infected, let him take the best
Triacle he can find, and after having swallowed down a part of it, let
him take of the same the bygnesse of a Chestnut, and lay it upon the sore that
begins to rise, rubbinge it well round about with the said Triakle.
Incontinent after this you must take a Pygeon, and cut him in the mids
quick, feathers and all, lay him to the sore warm as he is, and let him lie on
it, until that part of the Pigeon be waxen and become grene, and the Triacle
read: then take it of, and you shall see that out of the Pigeon will come a
green water, which is all the venim that was in it. Ye must afterward cure
the place with this plaster folowinge. Take two parts of fresh Barrowe
grease, and one part of wormwood well stamped, and lay it upon the sore.

A thing oftentimes proved and experimented against the plague.
TAke Mastic two ounces, Euphorbium an ounce, Spicknarde.v. ounces, beat this
into poulder, and give it the patient to drink. If he be under.x. years of
age, give him a scrupule of it. If he be of years from x. to.xx. half a
dragme: but if he be above.xx. years old, ye shall give him a dragme, than
take the herb called in Greek Pentaphilon, in latin Quinquefolium, and in
English Cinkfoile, and wrappe it like a round apple in a piece of linen
cloth, layenge it so under whote imbers by the space of four Miserere, and
after having taken it out again, cut it in three pieces in the myddle, and
lay it upon the sore or grief, which you shall cause to cease immediately.

A preservative against the plague, oftentimes proved.
IN a dangerous time, take.iij. little branches of Rue, a Walnutte and a
fig: eat all this, and you shall be safe.

Another.
TAke the dunge or excremente of a young boy between ten and.xij. years of
age, and dry it, and after beat it into poulder: This done, put of it at the
most two sponefulles in a glass of white wine, and give it the pacient to
drink at the least six hours after the grief takes him, and the sooner
the better. This has been found true in many men.

Another.
TAke the juice of a white Onyon, Honey, Vynaigre, the juice of Rue, and of
Saint John's wort, of each of them a like quantity, mix all together, and give
the patient to drink thereof two thirdendeales of a glassefull, but let him
have it whote, and before the sixth hour after the pain shall have taken him:
This done make him sweat as much as he may in his bed. This has been found
of great perfection, and experimented upon diverse men.

In a suspecte time of a plage.
TAke Pulliole or Peniroyall, in latin Pulegium, with Sugre roset, and make an
electuary, the which you shall use and eat, in a suspect time of a plague, at
your breakefast, the quantity or bygnes of a Chestnut, this have men proved,
and found good.

Another well tried and proved against the pestilence.
TAke Walnuttes when they be grene, tender, and good to make (...) or
preserues, put them in Vynaigre (...) of.viij. days, than take them out
again (...) them in pieces, putting them so into a (...) Vinaigre, and
stille the water of (...) you shall give the patient drink ever (...) a
glassefull, and when he has drunk it, let him sweat well in his bed.

A very perfyte secret against the plague.
TAke an ounce of Aloe Epaticu^, half an ounce of Myrrh half an ounce of
Saffron: beat into poulder and sifte the Aloe and the Myrrh together, than
beat the Saffron in poulder, stiepe, and soke it, or wash it with white wine
very strong, so that it be like a sauce, than put the other poulders to it,
and mix well altogether, if need be you may put more wine to it, so much that
of all may be made as it were a lump, and so pills. And if you will make it
very strong, for every ounce put to it half an ounce of Diagridrum, and half
an ounce of Camphyre. Master Frauncesse Albert took three eight parts of the
said Pills, without Diagridium, sokynge and steepinge them in good wine, and
gave them to the patient as soon as he could: and so made him sweat much in
his bed, for by sweatinge the venom did resolve.

Another very good secret.
TAke the flowers or blossoms of Walnuttes, and dry them in the shadow, and
when the Nuttes be in season to confict, you shall cut part of them into small
pieces, the which you shall put in strong Vynaigre by the space of three
days: than take th^im out, and mengle them with the said flowers, distilling
them through a Limbecke of glass, or of earth leaded within: keep this water
diligently, and when any man feels him self taken or infected with the
plage, give him of it as soon as is possible two ounces and a half, or three
ounces, and you shall drive away the disease by the course of the belly, or by
vomitynge, or else will make the sore or botch to come forth, the which you
shall make ripe and break, as we have before declared.

To make a carbuncle, and al other botches, apostumes and plague soores to
break, a present remedy and very easy to make.
TAke Baye Salt well beaten into poulder and sifted, incorporate it with the
yelke of ^an Egg, and lay it upon the carbuncle or sore, and be assured that
(with the grace of God) it will draw to it self all the venim and poison of the
plague or soore, so that in short time he shall be cured: A remedy oftentimes
proved.

A very good remedy against the marks of the plage, commonly called Gods
marks.
TAke fresh and green Rhaponticum, which is the herb and rote called the
more and great Centorie: it is named of Pliny (as Ruellius writes) Rhacoma,
the rotes of the herb called Sanguinaria Dactilon, of some Dens canis, of
Dioscorides Coronopus, that is to say, crows foot. Some take it to be
Dandelion. The roots of Turmentylle, white Dictanium, of each of these an
ounce, stamp all well, and put it in a pot or vyole, with well, river, or
cunduyte water, at your discretion, rather to much then to little, until it
pass half a handful above the other things in the pot or more, then let
it boil with a little clear and flaminge fire without smoke, until it be
diminished of the third part, than strain it out softly, and it will be of the
color of wine, keep it in some vessel of glass, and when necessity
requires, you may give the patient a glassefull of it in the morninge, and as
much at night, two hours before supper, and it, must be very hot: than cover
him well in his bed, and make him sweat. When the marks come forth, he
shall become like a lazar or leper and shall be shortly cured.

Against the mortality of the pestilence, a very perfyt remedy.
TAke Gentian, Seduaria, roots of Turmentille, of each of them two ounces,
read Sandale, whit and recent Dictanium hearts horn burned, white pearls,
Bole armenick, round Aristolochia, of each of them an ounce, Campher half an
ounce, white Sugre two ounces, of all these things well beaten to poulder, you
shall take at every time a dragme, with three ounces of endive water, or sorell
water, mire the water and the poulder with the bigness of a Walnutte of fine
Triacle. You must ministre this medicine before the sickness has continued
with the person twelve hours, for it is than surer. If in case after the
twelve hours it work not so well as you would have it, yet must you have a
good hope. And if the patient be yet in the age of infancy, you shall give him
half a dragme of it, with an ounce and a half of one of the said waters, and
with a like quantity of Triacle. The said drink is not soluble or laxatiue,
nor causes no grief to him, but only kills the poison. If any man had
dronken or eaten any poison, this is a very good medecin for him: it is also
good against a hot fever or ague. Note also that (if it be possible) the
patient must be let blood before he take the said medecin: if not, let it
be done afterward, that is to say, on the same side that he fealeth the grief.

To make little round apples or balls against the plage.
TAke Laudanum half an ounce, Storax calamita an ounce, Olambre diamusci, of
each of them half a dragme, Campher two graynes, Cloves fiftene grains,
Nutmegges, Mace, of each of them half an eyghte part, damaskine Rose a
scrupule, Synamom half a dragme, Spicknarde fiftene graynes, Musk, C^uet, of
each of them eyghte graynes, fine Uiolettes half a dragme, lignum Aloes four
grains, Calami aromaetici the bigness of a Bean, fine Amber four grains,
Myrre the bigness of a Bean. Stamp first the Laudenum with a hot pestell,
than stamp well the Storax calaminta, and all the other things each one by it
self: and than mix all together, and stamp it still with a hot pestell,
addinge to it at every time Storax liquida, and Rose water, until all the
said things be well incorporated: and than make your round apples or
balls.

An ointment to kill the plage.
TAke Soap makers water, and boil it until it wax or become as it were an
ointment, than take of the wood of Willowe, or Beeche, and burn it: after,
quench the coals in vinagre, and dry them in the shadow, in such sort that
a man may stamp and sift them. Take also quick lime at your discretion, and
mingle it with the said Soap water: then take the same powder until you have
enough, and half an ounce of fresh and sweet Hogs grease or seyme: mix all
together, after this dooen, take of little green worms shininge with a gloss
like gold, bred in the top of Ashes or Olives, called in Latyne Cantharidae
or Cantharides half a dragme, beat them into powder and mix them together,
with the rest, making an ointment somewhat hard: leave it so in some vessel
well closed and stopped, and if there arise any oil upon it, take it of fair
and softlye.

A very perfect oil against the plage and all poison.
TAke oil of the eldest you can find, and boil it the space of an hour, and
for every pound of the said oil, put in.l. scorpio^s, or as many as you can
get, put all this in a pot uncovered, the which pot you shall set in a kettle
or caudron of boylinge water, until the third part of the oil or somewhat
less be consumed. Than take out the Scorpions, and power the oil through a
canuesse into another pot, or violle well stopped, which you shall set in
the Sun the space of two or three months: if it be not in Summer, set it
upon hete ashes, by the space of three or four days. (...) sit upon the
botche or soore, or the place of the plage, and hold her so a good while. Then
you shall see that the said Hen will have drawn all (or at the least some)
the poison and infection, and that shortly after she will die. It shall be
good to do this with two or three or more Hens, immediatlye one after
another, the which will draw all the venom out of the soore. This done,
annoint the place with good Triacle, and let not in the mean time to use other
remedies by the mouth, whereof we have spoken here before, that is to say, the
Yuy or Baye berryes, or some other remedy, that you find must ready. If the
soore be so hard that it will not break, you may use the foresaied remedies
to make it break, to the intent that all the venom may comme out, and void
from the heart.

An advertisement and warning of great importauuce, to preserve a man's
self in time of pestylence.
BEcause the evil humors that be in man's body, do easelye receive the
corruption and infection of the air, it is good to keep the stomach, and the
head clean purged, not to ouerlade it with eatinge and drinkinge, but to
abstain from gross meats, to purge him self as often as is possible, with
some gentill and familier purgation, as Cassia, pills, as the pills of
Masticke, of Aloe, or of other such like things, and above all, to use often
of the leese of wine, called Tartre, which you must beat well in poulder, and
stiepe it with hot water, and than strain it or dreane it fayer and softely
out: Afterward dry it thoroughly, as men do white salt, than keep the same
poulder, and put three ounces of it with a pound of sugre roset, and in the
morninge take a good sponefull thereof until there be an ounce or more, and do
this from day to day, for it will keep your body clean, and purged: and he
that can not do it with Sugre roset, let him take the leese stamped, and stiepe
or wasshe it in the broth of flesh or of colewortes, sturringe it until al be
leused and undone that may be leused, then let it stand a while, and after
power softely the broth into a dishe, cast away the substances that go to the
bottom, and drink the broth: do this every day at the hours of your
meals, or at the least every second day, or when you shall think good. It
shall be good also to eat in your pottage, things that purge the blood, as
Buglasse, Borrage, Succorie, Let tyse, and such like: and above all not to
keep your stomach over charged, nor to empty: and in the morninge betime, to
take some of the foresaied preservatives, as the poulder that was experimented
in England (as we have recited) or such other like. Than.ii.or. iii. hours
before dinner to take some of the said other preservatives, as the Rue with a
fig, and with the Walnutte, which is a thing very good, or some of the said
confections, or a piece of the pille of a Cytron conficte, or a sponefull of
the juice of Citrons dressed as we will declare hereafter, and to use of it at
meals in manner of a saulce, and after meals to use of the seed of Citrons
confict in Sugre, as they make the Coriander, and Almondes, which is a thing
very good against all manner of venim and poysen. And likewise at your meals
to eat the white and the inn side of a Cytron with a little sugre if you will,
and to eat it with flesh, or bread (as men eat lemons) in the morninge, at
none, and at night when you go to bed. It should be also very good to bath and
wash your hands, your temples, your poulses, and pour nose with Vinaygre
roset, or with other, whereunto you must put a little Campher, rose water,
Lignum Aloes, Xilobalsamum, if you can get it, if not, a little Sinamom in
steed of it. It is good always to keep such manner of Vinaigre beside you in
some viole, for to use of it when time shall require: for it is a very good
preservative: and if you can not have the Vinaygre compounde, as is said, use
Vynaygre of common wine. Also it shall be good to carry about you some parfume,
or good odor, either in your gloves, shurte, handkercher, cappe, bearde, or to
hang it about your neck, or otherwise. Your house ought to be kept as
clean and as nete as is possible, not sauoringe of pysse nor other ordure, ye
ought to keep it shut, washinge often the gutters and priuies. Ye must also
keep as few foul and stinking clothes in your house as is possible. Rich
men ought oftentimes to parfume their houses with some notable parfume, whereof
we will put in the book following a good nombre. Poor men may make provision
of leaves, and of the wood of a Baye tree, of Rose mary, Ienepar, Cypres, and
to use it as often as they may, burninge it in the mids of their chamber, or
house, and principally at night and in the morninge. Likewise of Orange and
lemmon pills, or other sweet smellinge things. Storax calamita, and Labdanum,
be good chepe and are very good for this purpose. As concerning the
disposition of courage and mind, ye must consider that sorrow, sadness, or
melancholy, corrupt the blood and other humors, weaken the heart, and
deprave and hurt nature, therefore ought a man to avoid them as much as is
possible. Also if a man be to merrye oriocunde, it dilateth, and enlarges the
pores and passages of the seed of man, and the heart, so that he is the more
inclined to receive the evil air, and venim, which are things* that
penetrate and pearce sore. Also a man must beware of drinkinge to much wine,
for it makes merry and chereth a man out of measure. Now because that in time
of a pestilence every man is afraid, so that he thinks that a man can not
ketch the disease, in being to merry (onles it be so that he be drunk, as is
said) but contrary in being to sad or sorrowful: for sorrow and sadness
come of them selves, not sought after: Therefore it is good to use temperance,
and moderation, walkinge and recreating him self honestly, not using to much
carnal company or copulation. And above all, a man must have always a sure
hope and confidence in God, ever to he ready and disposed to dye, when it
shall please him to call us, not estemynge so much this mundaine life, or
fearinge so much death, which is none other thing than an issue or
departinge out of this life full of calamities, and an entering into an eternal
life replenished with all joy, solace, and pleasure.

To dress and order the Juice of Cytrons, for to use of it as is before said.
TAke the Juice of Citrons as much as you will, and put it in a pan leaded
within in, than add to it two ounces of skimmed Honnye for every pound of
the said Juice, a little Sugre after your discretion, a little Synamom in
poulder. Let this boil a very little while together, and than keep it and
take of it before your meal, and at your meals, in steed of sauce, which
is a very good remedy, as well for to preserve a man against the infection of
the air, as to drive it away after he isfected with it. It is also a very
good medicine for to take as soon as a man doubts to have received some
poison into his body.

The end of the first book.
take Musk, Amber, and Ciuet as much as ye will, in a vessel such as
parfumours use, and put to it. iii. or iiii. drops of fair water: after
this, tempre it with a little rose water, until it be like tender and soft
past: than set the vessel for to parfume and smoke upon the fire, like as men
parfume chambers: and se that all the fume and smoke he received through the
said nuttes. This done, you shall take out of it the oil which will be very
excellent, as well to use alone by it self, as to parfume gloves, and all
other things.

To make an odoriferous and sweet water, very good.
TAke twelve pound of Damask rose water, Lauander water, Cloves, Synamom, of
each of them a dragme, Mace, great Cardamomum, Musk, Amber, of each of them
half a scruple, dry Pylles of Citrons, Sandalum citrinum, Ireos, of each of
them half a dragme, Bengewin, Storax calamita, of each a scrupule, and of all
this make a composition, the which you shall put in a vessel of glass well
stopped, leauinge it so by the space of fiftene days. Afterward let it be
distilled in Bal^eo Marie, the manner whereof is described in the first book,
and the water that shall issue out of it, put in a violle well stopped in the
Sun the space of fiftene days, and than shall you have a water of great
excellency.

The second odoriferous water.
TAke the leaves of Damask roses, the fresh leaves of Gylle flowers of each
of them a pound, the flowers of Rosemarye, the flowers of Lauander, the
flowers of Iasemyn, Maioram, Sauourye, Serpyne, or Serpille, called wild Time,
or running Time, which grows on old walls, over wells and pondes: and in
some places it smells like time, and in some places like to Sauourye, it is
called in Latyne Serpyllus or Serpillum, in French du Serpolet, of these three
ounces, of dry Citron pills an ounce. After this Synamom, Bengewine, Storax
calamita, of each of the^ two dragmes, Nutmegges, Macaleb, of each of them a
dragme: but you must stamp well the herbs, and bray the spyces well, then put
all together in a earthen pot leaded: and after it has stand in the Sun,
by the space of two days distille it in Balneo Marle. And to the water that
issues out, put a scrupule of fine Musk, lettinge it stand afterward in a
violle of glass well stopped by the space of twentye or thyrtye days. Then
shall you have a notable water.

The third sweet water.
TAke six pound of Damask rose water, a glass full of Malmsey, three pound
of Damask rose leaves fresh and new, Lauander flowers, the flowers of green
Spike, of each of them four ounces, the flowers of Cherfoyle or Cheruille,
flowers of Iasemine, the flowers or blossoms of Olyue trees, of each of them a
pound and a half, the dry flowers or blossoms of Orange trees three ounces,
of the dry pills of Cytrons four dragmes, cloves a dragme and a half,
Synamom, Storax calamita, Bengewyne, of each of them two scrupules, Nutmegges a
scrupule. Let all the said spices first be well beaten into poulder, and then
put all together into a violle well stopte by the space of ten days, than
after let all be dystylled in Balneo marie. And to the water that comes
out, add Musk, and Amber, of each of them a scrupule and a half. You must
keep it in the Sun and in some neat place.

The fourth sweet water.
TAke Cloves well beaten in poulder two dragmes, the poulder of Sandalum
citrinum, and Macaleb, of each of them a scrupule, ten pound of Damask rose
water, and the water of the herb that the Italians call Soltanella four
pound, Lauander water a ponnde. Let all this be left together by the space
of four days, and then put it in a Limbecke, and distell it, unto this water
that comes of it, let these spyces following be put well beaten to poulder,
that is to say, Cloves, Synamom, Bengewine, Storax calamita, of each of them
half a dragme: and then again distill it in Balneo Marie. Finallye you shall
put to it Musk, and Amber, in all, half a scrupule, and let the water be
kept in a violle, or other vessel of glass well stopte.

The fyfte sweet water.
TAke four pound of Damask rose water, Lauender water, Spike water, of each
of them three ounces, the water of blossoms of Lymons, or Orenges, the water of
the blossoms Myrtell of a tree, blossoms of Iasemin, of Maioram, of each of
them half a pound, Bengewyne, Storax calamita of each a dragme, Musk half
a scrupule. Mengle well all together, and keep it in violles well stopte six
days.

Then distille it in Balneo Marie, and keep the water in a vessel of glass,
by the space of fiftene days in the Sun, and afterward reserve it for to
serve your turn, when you will occupy it.

The syxte odoriferous water.
TAke fresh flowers of Rosemarye two pound, Amber a scrupule, three pound
of the flowers of Orenges, Lemons and Citrons, all confusely together, which
the French men call can de naphe, leave all together in some vessel well
stoppte ten days. Then the water being distilled in Balneo Marie, let it
be kept in a violle of glass very close and stopped.

The seventh sweet water.
TAke of the foresaied water of Naphe, four pound, Damask rose water, two
pound, with half a scrupule of Amber. All these things being well mixed
together, and put in a violle of glass well stopte, leave them in the Sun
by the space of a month, and then keep them to occupy at your pleasure.

The eight odoriferous water.
TAke four pound of Damask rose water, with six ounces of Lauender water,
the flowers of Iasemyn three pound, with half a scrupule of fine Musk. Keep
well all this together in a vessel well stopped, by the space of ten days: and
after distill it in Balneo Marie, until al be come out. Then keep it in a
violle of glass, for your use when you shall occupy it, and you shall find
it a merueylous water.

The nynth sweet water.
TAke the Pills of Orenges, and of green Citrons of each of them half an
ounce, Cloves a scrupule, the flowers of Spike newelye gathered six ounces. All
these things must be mixte together as before is said, with six pound of
Damask rose water: and after they have stand certain days in some covered
vessel, you must still them in Balneo Marie. And the water that shall come
of it will be very excellent.

The tenth odoriferous water.
TAke two pound of the leaves of Damask roses, Macaleb half a dragme, half
a scrupule of good Amber: and having first beaten that which is needful,
set all upon hot ymbers two or three days: but before you distille it, you
must let it steep ten days, in ten pound of the water of Damask roses, and
so than distill it in Balneo Marie. The water of it must afterward be kept
in the Sun the space of fiftene days.

Oil of Orenges very excellent.
TAke a pound of sweet Almondes well pilled, the flowers of Limons or Orenges,
as much as you will, the which you shall divide into three equal parts: After
this you shall lay the third part of the same flowers abroad upon a very
white linen clothe in a sieue, strowinge also abroad upon those flowers half
of the said Almondes, the which you shall cover with another third part of
the said flowers: And than the rest of the said Almondes, the which you shall
cover finally with the rest of your flowers, so that the Almondes may evermore
be in ye myddle of the flowers in the said sieue, and so leave them together by
the space of six days, renewinge and chaunginge every day the flowers, and
than the Almondes. This done, you shall beat the Almondes in a mortar, and
press them in a fair white lynnen cloth, in a pressour, until there issue out
a very clear oil, whereunto you shall add a little Ciuet, Musk, and
Bengewine. Afterward leave it in the son eight days, in some vessel well
stopped.

Oil of Iasemine, and of violettes.
TAke sweet Almondes well pilled and brayed, the flowers of Iasemyn as much as
you will, and layeng them rank upon rank, you shall leave them in some moist
place ten days together or more, than take them away, and press out the oil
in a pressoure: the virtue of the which oil serves for diverse things. In the
like manner may you have oil of Violetes, and other flowers.

Oil of Nutmegges very parfyt.
TAke Nutmegges, of the best you can find, and according to the quantity of
the oil that you will have: and having cut them in small pieces, you shall
put to them as much Malmsey as will cover them over in some vessel of glass
or other, leauinge them so the space of three days. Than take them out and
set them to dry in some clean place, by the space of two days. Finally heat
them at the fire, sprinklinge them with rose water: Than press them as is
before mentioned, in a pressour, and you shall have out of them an excellent
oil good for many things, which must be kept in some clean vessel well
stopte.

Oil of Bengewyne very excellent.
TAke six ounces of Bengewyne, well beaten into poulder, the which you shall let
dissolve a whole day in oil of Tartre, and Rose water, of each a pound: and
than with a close pipe ye shall distill it through a Limbecke, and so keep it
as a thing most excellent.

Oil of Storax very excellent.
IN like manner is made oil of Storax. Take Storax liquida, what quantity you
will, and put it in Rose water two or three days, the^ dystill it as the
Bengewin was in the manner abouesayde. First there issues out water, and then
a very excellent and precious oil.

Oil of Myrrh, good for them that have their flesh full of humors, and
carraine lean, for to make it tractable, quick, natural, and strong.
TAke Eggs hard roasted, and cut them in the mids, take away the yelke,
and fill them up with Myrrh beaten into poulder, and put the^ in some moiste
place, where the said Myrrh may dissolve into oil, by little and little.
This oil makes not only the face or other parts of the body soft and
tractable, but also takes away all Cycatrices and skarres.

The manner to make that oils shall never wax moldy, nor putrify.
TAke for every pound of oil two graynes of salt, one grain of the filing
of copper or brass, as much roche Alom as salt, and boil all the said
things a letle together in Balneo marie: than strain it out, and let it
stand eight days in the Son. And than keep such oil as long as you will,
and fear not, for it will never diminishe, putrifye, nor corrupt.

Poulder of Iris.
TAke Iris elect, what quantity you will, and after you have well beaten it
into poulder, stiepe it, and temper it also well with Rose water, and lay it
than abroad upon a sieue covered. This done, take Storax calamita, and
Bengewyn, of each of them half an ounce, beat them well into poulder, and
make thereof an infusion into a glass of Rose water, and having poured it
under the said sieue well covered round about, ye shall afterward sees it upon
the embers. And so the Iris waxinge clean and dry, receives the parfume of
the other substaunces. This poulder will be excellent to give an odoure unto
clothes or garments, and all other things.

Poulder of Violettes.
TAke Iris, knoppes of Roses, of each a pound, pills of Cytrons dry.iiii.
ounces, Gylleflowers, Sandalum citrinum, dry Lauender, Coliander, of each of
them two ounces, Nutmigges an ounce, Maioram dried, Storax calamita, of each of
them an ounce and a half, Bengewyn elect six ounces. Beat to poulder and sift
finelye all the said things, and the poulder shall be made: the which you
shall keep in a viole of glass, well stopped that it take no vent.

A white poulder to put in little bags.
TAke Saudalum Citrinum a quarter of an ounce, poulder of the best Bengewin that
may be gotten, Iris, of each of them an ounce, and boil them in Rose water
enough: than take burned Alom and well sifted twelve ounces, let it lie in the
said water and make pills, or little balls flat at both ends, of the
biggenesse of peason or biggar, the which you shall dry in the shadow: and
afterward beat them in to poulder, and syft them again, and than it is made.
But if you will have it musked, take Ambre and Musk, each of them. xxiiii.
grains, Ci^et.xviij. grains, and mixing all this together, fill we it little
bags of linen cloth Taffeta, or other sylk, the which you may lay among
clothes, or other garments, a thing very excellent.

Poulder of Cypres.
TAke a little herb that grows and is found upon the stock or stumpe of
Walnuttes or Oaks, which is like little hear, and must be gathered in
Ianuarye and Februarye, when the wether is dry, dry it, and than wash it
with fair river or well water, and dry it ones again in the shadow, and
having washed it so three or four times, you shall put it in rose water by the
space of an hour: After beat it into poulder very small and syfte it, but the
sieue whereon you must strowe the said poulder must be always syrynkled a
little with rose water, coueringe it well, to the intent it take no manner of vent:
And after this you must parfume it with these things following, that is to say:
with Bengewyn, Storax calamita, of each of them two ounces, of the sweet parfume
called Thymiama, a dram, Lauander half a dragme, Lignu^ Aloe, a quarter of an
ounce. Beat each thing by it self grossly, and than mingle them together, and
divide them into four parts, whereof one part must be set upon the furnis in a
vessel within ye sieue leuing it there til it be al consumed, and do so with all
the.iiii. parts, until all the powder of ye said parfume be burned. But you
must take heed that the pan dysh, or other vessel, wherein the said
poulders shall be put for to be brent, be set under the sieue, where your
poulder is, and that the sieue be well covered, that nothing vent out, so that
the poulder in the sieue may receive all the said parfume. Than after take an
ounce of the said poulder, and intermire with it by little and little, six
graynes of Cyuet, and. xxvi. grains of fine Musk, well beaten together in
poulder. This poulder must be kept in a viole or other vessel of glass very
close, to thentent it take no vent, and must also be set in a dry place. This
is the most excellent poulder that a man can make. It is very true that out of
Cipres and the east parts men bring to Venise certain round balls of a
yelowe color, which they call Butri, of an I Will nigh unto Candy, called
Butra, and say that it is Ox dunge taken up in May, and diverse times
sprinkled and watered with rose water than dried, and finallye made in to round
balls, the which the parfumers do braye, and without any more parfuminge them
in a sieue, they add unto it Bengewyne, Musk, and Ciuette, more or less,
according as they will make it good.

White musked Soap.
TAke Soap scraped or grated, as much as you will the which (when ye have well
stieped and tempe red in rose water) leave it eight dais in the sun: Than you
shall add to it an ounce of the water or milk of Macaleb, twelve grains of
Musk, and six grains of Ciuet, and reducinge all the whole into the form
and manner of hard past, you shall make thereof very excellent balls.

Another kind of odoriferous white Soap.
TAke Venise Soap of the eldest you can find, the which you shall cut or
scrape with a knife, and set it three days in the Son: And after having
well brayed it, you shall dissolve it in a vessel leaded within, with a pound
of good rose water, lettinge it boil with a small fire, than you shall put to
it of the root of Iris, called Ireos, beaten into poulder.iiij. ounces, Amylum
six ounces, white Sandale two ounces, Storax liquida an ounce, Oil of Spike an
ounce, and sturringe it always with a stick, ye shall afterward let it cool
again. And finally make balls of it, even as you will.

To make Damaskine soap musked.
TAke a pound of the best Soap you can get, and after having grated or
skraped it very small, take fine Synamom, Nutmegges, Storax calamita, of each
of them an ounce, lignum Aloes two dragmes, Bengewine perfect and thorowlye made
two ounces, the poulder of Viollettes an ounce. Having beaten well to poulder all
these foresaied things, you shall add unto them a dragme of the poulder of
Cypres, a little Musk, and Ciuet: then steep and temper it in Rose water, and
after leave it forty days in the Sun, in moving and sturring it often
times. Than make balls of it, or little round loves, the which you must
keep in boxes of wood with cotton, wolle or bombase.

To get out the milk of Macaleb.
Because the use of the milk of Macaleb has been put in many compositions,
as we have said, we will teach you the manner how to get it out, which shall
be this. Take the Macaleb, which are little soote and odoriferous graynes so
called, the which you shall stamp in a mortar, with Rose water, or some other
sweet water, until they be like a sauce, and having put them in a poke of
linen clothe, you shall press the milk out of them in a pressoure, or
between two little bourdes. Then braye again, with the said water, that which
shall remain in the poke, and press it a new, until there issue no moore
milk. But here I must advertise you, that this milk continues not above two
or three days: therefore you must immediatlye put it in effect and occupy it.

Poulder of Ciuet very exquisite.
TAke Sngre candye what quantity you list, and put it in a brazen mortar: and
after you have well beaten it, add to it as much Ciuet as you will: and make
thereof poulder, the which you must keep always close.

A priucipall poulder.
TAke Damaskene Roses, Cipre Alexandrin, Sandalum citrinum, of each of them an
ounce, Iris half an ounce, lignum Aloes, Calamus aromaticus, Galanga Bengewine,
of each of them a grain and a quarter, you shall make of all this a very
fine poulder, and incorporate it well, keepynge in a violle well stopped.

A white odoriferous poulder.
TAke Iris elect three ounces, white Sandall two ounces, Damask roses, Lignum
Aloes, Bengewyn, Cypre alexandrine, of each of them two ounces, Musk four
graynes, Ciuet three graynes: beat them a part, and sifte them: then
incorporate them together in the same brazen mortar, that you did beat them
in, and keep the poulder of them in a violle well stopped.

A red poulder.
TAke Damask roses two ounces, Sandalium citrinum an ounce, lignum Aloes, Cypre
alexandryn, of each of them a grain and half a quarter, Iris half a grain
or more, Cloves a scrupule, fine Musk three graynes, Ciuet two grains, Amber
two grains. Bray them and mix them together, and so keep them.

A black poulder.
TAke Cipri Alexandrini, lignum Aloes, of each of them half an ounce, Sandali
citrini, Damask roses, labdaniterreni, of each of them a quarter, Cloves a
grain, and a little more, Musk three grains, Cyuet two graynes, beat them
in poulder and keep them.

Poulder of Cypre very exquisite.
TAke a pound of the moss of an Oak, and wash it well in faier water, until
the water remain clear: then lay it abroad upon a table in the Sun until
it be dried: after, sprinkle or water it, with rose water: and having it
left it so covered in a dishe or platter, you shall lay it a broad again in
a very hot Sun, when it is dry enough to beat, beat it in poulder, and
sifte it finelye almost all: You shall sprinkele or water this poulder, with
Musk rose water, and lay it abroad upon a great sarce, turned downewarde,
good and thick, and some what course, under the which sarce, you shall make a
perfume as follows, couexinge it with a clothe, which be thus: Bengewine two
graynes and a quarter, Labdani half a grain and more, Storax calamita two
carrettes, lignum Aloes half a grain and more, fine Musk half a grain. Beat
all these things grosselye, and after mix them together, then put by little
and little the poulder under the sarce in some pot sharde, with a little fire
in it, and cast it in as you would do Frankencese, staiyng at every time,
until the first part, first cast in, be consumed. Now, all the said
perfume being dooen, if you will make the said poulder very fine and
exquisite, unto every ounce add these things folowinge, Bengewine a carret,
Musk four grains, Ciuet two grains, beat these by them selves very
small and fine, and mingle them with the said ounce of poulder, so that all
may be well incorporated together: than keep it well, for it is notable and
singular.

Another way to make it very perfect.
TAke the recente and fresshe dunge of an Ox, and dry it in the Sun, or in
an oven, then beat it, and sifte it, sprinkle it well after with Rose water,
and leaving it so in a vessel, the space of a day, dry it again in the
Sun. And when it is dry, bathe it again with Rose water, and dry it
again, and do so three or four times. The last time you shall water it or
bathe it somewhat more then the other times, because it may cleave to the
bottom of the vessel, which must be well leaded within, and very clean,
after this you shall remove and stir it well, and perfume it with some
perfume, that the other foresayed poulder was perfumed with. Then having
perfumed it diverse times, you shall let it dry in the said vessel, taking
heed also that it take no vent. And after it is well dried stamp it, and sift
it a new again, and then keep it in some violle: and if you will make it
very fine, take an ounce of the said poulder, three grains of fine Musk,
four grains and a half of Bengewine, two grains of Cyuet, braye and
incorporate all well together, and keep it.

A sweet and odoriferous poulder, very excellent to lay in chestes and
cofers.
TAke the buddes of Roses as many as you will, and dry them in the shadow:
than set them abroad when the son is most hotest in a clean vessel,
puttinge to them such a quantity of Rose water as will bear them up, and
sturrynge them well, leave them in the Sun (covered with a linen cloth)
until it be hot. And when they be dry, and have drunk up all the rose
water, take for every pound of Roses, ten grains of Musk, and a quarter of
fine violettes beaten small into poulder, in puttinge to them by little and little
of the said poulder, and mixinge well all together, until they begin to be
incorporated: but before you put in the said poulder, dreane and power out the
water of the said vessel, that there remain not a drop in the bottom. This
done, lay the said roses abroad in a basen of copper, or of brass, which is
better, and let the said basin be plain and even, not inbossed, and set them
in the Sun when it shyneth most hotest, coueringe them over, so that
nevertheless they may dry, than make a poulder of them, and keep it. And if
you will give a sweet odor or savor unto your garments, take the said Roses
so dried before you beat them in poulder, and put the^ in some little linen
bag very fine, the which you may lay in your coffers, or where your
apparel lies.

An odoriferous and sweet poulder.
TAke the buddes of red Roses, and braie them in a mortar, as though you
would have the juice out of them, than set them in a hot Sun, sprin klinge
them with Rose water, and so water them and dry them again oftentimes, and
than make of them a poulder, the which you shall parfume with the poulder of
Cypre, as the other aforesaid, and keep it in a vyole.

Oil of Bengewyne.
TAke Bengewine as much as you will, and lay it under a dungehill in a violle
or glass well stopped (so that it take no vente) by the space of fiftene or
twentye days: Than strain it, and keep it in a viole, for it is a singular
and deintie oil.

A very good and odoriferous poulder, to carrye about a man, or to lay in
coffers.
TAke fourtene ounces of roses newly dried, fine cloves, two dragmes, the seed
of Spyke a dragme, Storax, half an ounce, fine Synamom half a dragme. Braye
them, and keep them in a violle well stopped, you may also put to them (if you
will) two graynes of fine Musk, Ligni Aloes half a dragme.

Balls against the pestilence or plage, which also give an adour unto all
things
TAke Storax, one part, Ladani one part, cloves half a part, Campher at your
discretion, but less then of any of the other substaunces, of Spikenarde a
good quantite, and of Nutmegges also, of all this make paste with Rose water,
in the which you shall te^per Gomme dragant, and Gomme Arabike, sturringe and
brusyng them well. Of this past you shall make balls to hold in your hands,
and to smell to.

A princely licour.
TAke Musk, Ambergrise, Ciuette, of each of them four graynes, braye all
together, and incorporate it with a little oil of sweet Almondes, and make
thereof a licoure, which you shall keep in a bessell of yuorye well stopped,
and use of it as you use Ciuet.

Liquide and soft Soap of Naples.
TAke strong lie, with two parts of the ashes of the wood of the tree called
in latin Cerrus, which is a kind of tree like to a poplar, having a straight
long stem bearinge a kind of maste, roughe without like a Chestin, and one
part of quick time, and make it so strong that it may bear a new laid
egg swimminge between two waters. Take eighte potfulles of this lie very hot,
a potfull of deeres grease or suet well strained clean: mingle them and set
them on the fire, but see that they sees not. Put all in a great vessel
leaded within having a large bottom, leauinge it in Summer in the Sun, and
styrringe it four or five times a day with a stick, and note that you must
set it in the day time in the sun, and the night time in the air abroad, so
that it rain not, continuinge thus the space of eight days. Let it ware as
firm and as hard as you will, so that it remain nevertheless in the form of
past, and the older it is, the better it will be. Than afterward take of this
mass or past, as much as you will and put it in a vessel leaded, styrringe it
well with a stick, and add to the same as much fine Muskte Rose water as you
will: keep it eyghte days in the Son, styrringe it from time to time, as is
aforesaid: and if it wax to hard, put Rose water to it, in such quantity,
that it be neither to hard nor to soft, and fill as many little boxes with
all, as you will.

To make the said Soap musked.
TAke fine Musk as much as you list, beat it well in a brazen mortar,
putting to it Rose water somewhat warm, and having mixed them well together,
put them in the vessel where your Soap is, mengling them well together, and
let them stand a while, and than fill little boxes with it at your pleasure.

A very excellent paste and sweet, made with Musk, which eaten causes a
sweet breath.
TAke Gomme dragant stieped and tempered in Rose water, until it be soft and
white, make thereof as it were paste, and take of it the bygnesse of a Hasel
nut, bray it in a brazen mortar, puttinge to it a little poulder of good Sugre,
and half a grain of fine Musk, stieped and tempered in Rose water, mix all
well together.

And if you will have it better, put to it more Musk and Sugre, and than as
much Mace beaten in poulder as will lie upon a pennye, and mix it again well
together, than put to it a little of the meal or flower of Amylum beaten into
poulder: but it were better to put in read Sandal, well broken in sonder,
indifferently, and to put it in by little and little, so much that a man may
make of it convenient paste, the which you shall cut after your fantasye,
and dry it in the shadow. And if you will have it of diverse colors, add to
it such colors well ground as you please. Provided that they be colors,
wherein there is no poison or danger: you may also gylte or cover with silver
the said pieces, as men do confitures, and they will be very good and of the
best making.

Another very excellent.
TAke Gomme Arabike.v. ounces, fine Sugre.iiij. ounces. Amylum.iij. ounces, and
for each ounce of these foresaid things.x. grains of fine Musk which will
mount in the whole to a hundred and twenty graynes, and than it will be perfect.

Dentifrices or rubbers for the teeth of great perfection, for to make them
clean.
TAke poulder of read Coral.iiii. ounces, of the shardes of Galleye pottes two
ounces, of cuttle bone an ounce, of a Pumeyse stone an ounce, cloves, Synamom, and
Masticke of each of them a dragme, Perles stamped half an ounce, Dragons blood
an ounce, fine Musk.iii. graynes, stamp well the whole and syft it through a
sarce, than mengle it well together and incorporate it with Gomme dragant
tempered and stieped in Rose water, make all into dowe or paste, and make
thereof things to rub your teeth with, to make them white, wherewith you shall
not only make them very fair, but also preserve them from putrefaction.

Oil of Bengewin odoriferous.
PVt a pound of Bengewin well beaten in poulder, into some short and wide
vessel, so that you may put in your hand, than put to it two pound of Rose
water, and mix all well together, and so cover it with a Limbecke or
stillitory of glass, well bound with a linen cloth, and all the ioynctes and
sides well stopped. Give it at the first a little fire, until all the water be
drawn out (and this is the water that we spoke of before,) and afterward
increase your fire by little and little, and the^ you shall se the oil come out,
and incontinent set under another clean recipiente to receive the oil, and
make under it a great fire, to the intent that all the oil may come out, the
which being all distilled, there will come forth a certain Gomme, like unto
Manna, the which will be very good to keep. And when you will make sweet or
odoriferous water, take a violle full of clean well water, and put into it a
little of the said Gomme, and it will make it smell sweet, but you must stir
it well. If you will have it better, take Rose water, and not well water.

Oil of Storax calamita.
TAke storax calamita as much as you will, with such a quantity of Rose water
as pleases you, and put it in a large pot, not closinge the joints or
sides, but let the Limbecke be a little at one side, to the intent it may take
air, and alter not the fire, but keep it according as you shall se shall be
nedeful. And when the oil comes, change the recipient, and than make a
greater fire, and receive the oil, and keep it, for it is a singular and
deynty thing.

To make oil of Labdanum.
TAke fine Labdanum, and mundifie it well, and do with it as you did with the
Bengewine: But if you will have it otherwise, you may take as much as you
will of it, and having broken it in small pieces, put it weete into a
vessel of brass, puttinge to it a pound of Rose water, and half a pound of
the oil of sweet Almondes, cover well the vessel with his cover, and stop
it with linen cloutes plaistered over with claye or other matter, setting it
so to dry: than afterward set it upon a little fire that it may boil fayer
and softely two or three hours. This done, you shall take it from the fire, and
let it cole before you uncover it, than take it quickly out, and put it in a
vyole. And (to the end to preserve it the better) put to it a little roche Alom
burned, or else a little Ambergryse. And when you will put it in the vyole, you
must put it in as clear as is possible.

Oil of Nutmegges.
TAke what quantity of Nutmegges you will, the which well broken into pieces
in a mortar, you shall put it in a large or wide vessel, powrynge upon them
a little Aqua vite, so that the Nutmegges may be thoroughlye wette. Let them
stand so two or three days, in styrringe them sometime, and turninge them
vpsyde down, and see that the said vessel be well stopped, then add to it
as much Rose water as will be above the Nutmegges, two or three fingers high,
and cover them with the Limbecke, closinge it well. Distill them at the first
with a small fire, until all the water be come out: than change the
recipient, and augment the fire, so much, till you cause the oil to distille
out, and when you see that all is almost come forth, make your fire very great,
and keep the said oil in a violle.

Another manner.
TAke a pound of Nutmegges, the which being well broken in pieces, you must
put in a new vessel of earth well leaded within, than power upon them
Malmesey, or some other wine, until they be all covered, and that the wine be
above the Nuttes two fingers high: After this you shall put to it at the
least two pound of fresh butter, and mingle all together, stoppinge or
coueringe well the vessel, and leave it in the heat of the Sun in some
pan, or in some other hot place, by the space of four or five days, than
boil it upon the hot coals with a small fire, until the wine be consumed,
than power it through a new course linen cloth before it be cool. This done,
set the oil certain days in the Sun, in a violle of glass, until the
thick substance be descended to the bottom: Finally power it so again
thorough a new course lynnen clothe, and put it in another vyolle, and so
keep it.

A very exquisyte soap, made of diverse things.
TAke Aluminis catini three ounces, quick lyme one part strong lie that will
bear an egg swimminge between two waters, three pottels, a pot of commun oil:
mengle all well together, puttinge to it the white of an Egg well beaten, and
a dysshefull of the meal or flower of Amylum, and an ounce of Romayne Vitrioll,
or read lead well beaten into poulder, and mix it continuallye for the space
of three hours, then let it stand, by the space of a day, and it will be
right and perfect. Finallye, take it out, and cut it in pieces: after set
it to dry two days, in the wind, but not in the sun. Occupy always of
this soap, when you will wash your head, for it is very wholesome, and makes
faier hear.

Soap with Cyuet.
TAke of the said Soap as much as you will, and set it a while in the Sun
in Rose water, putting to it the poulder of Cyuette, and mixinge it well. And
if you add to it also Musk, it will be the better, so that the Musk have
been before steeped and tempered in rose water.

Soap with diverse sweet and excellent oils.
TAke of the foresaied Soap, which has stand a while in the Sun in Rose
water, and put to it a little of the oil of Bengewine, or of some other
odoriferous oil, and mix it well: but you must put in of the oils
reasonably, neither to much nor to little, but with discretion, according to
the quantity of the Soap.

Soap rosat.
TAke fresh and recent roses well stamped, and incorporated them with the said
Soap, as before, the which you may also dode at your pleasure of all other
sorts of flowers.

White Soap of a good savor and odor.
Having cut, after the manner of Damasco, in small pieces the oldest Soap that
is possible to be found, you shall lay it abroad upon a table, in a place
where it may dry, than having left it there, the space of eight and or.x.
days, you must after ward stamp it lightlye or slenderlye, and make thereof
poulder: and the same being sifted, you shall add to it four ounces of Ireos,
upon ten pound of the said poulder, white Sandall three ounces, two ounces
of Macaleb, an ounce of the meal or flower of Amylum and all well beaten into
poulder, you shall mix it with ten pound of the poulder of the aforesaid
Soap: then all being joined together, you shall put it in a mortar, with an
ounce of Storax liquida and a walnut shelfull of the oil of Spike, and having
well stamped it altogether, it shall be made. Then afterward make balls or
square ^akes of it, as you will, with the meal or flower of Amylum: then dry
in the shadow, and keep them, for it is a thing very excellent.

Perfect soap.
TAke six graynes of Musk tempered and steeped in good Rose water, four
grains of Ciuet, reduced and beaten into poulder, and mingle them with the
said Soap, but the tempered or steeped Musk, must be hot, and by this
means you shall have a very perfect Soap.

Whole and massy black soap.
TAke ten pound of the said poulder of Soap well sifted, cloves four
ounces, of good Mace two ounces, damask Macaleb, Cyperus which the Apoticaries
call Iuncus odoratus, Sandali Citrini, Storax liquida, of each of them an
ounce, sweet oil as much as shall suffice: and having stamped that which
ought to be stamped, make of it as is above said. But if you will have it
more singular, put to it Musk tempered in Rose water, as before, with a little
Ciuet, after incorporate well all together, and make thereof balls or square
cakes, or hearts, or such other forms, as you lust to muke your self: then
dry them in the shadow: and so shall you find them of a singular good odor
and savor.

Damask parfume.
TAke fine Musk four gaynes, Cyuet two graynes, Ambergris, fine Sugre, of
each of them four graynes, Bengewine a grain, of fat Storax calamita three
grains, lignum Aloes two grains: beat them well into poulder, and put all
together in a little parfuminge pan, power into it as much Rose water, or the
water of the flowers of Orenges, Citrons, and Lemons, all together, as will be
two fingers high above the other drooges, in making under it a small fire
that it may not boil, and when the water is consumed, you shall power in
other: and having continued thus doing a certain number of days, you shall
have an excellent Soap.

Another parfume of Damask.
TAke Storax calamita, four ounces, Bengewyne four ounces, Labdanum lignum
Aloes Synamon, of each of them an ounce, Sperma Ceti, a dragme, Musk four
scrupules, cloves, a dragme, Rose water eight ounces, stamp them, and put
them in the parfuming pan.

An excellent pomander.
TAke.xvi. or.xx. Pepins, or other sweet and melow apples, y^ which being
pared and cut in quarters, you shall add to every quarter four or six
Cloves, then put them in some vessel of earth well leaded within, with as
much Rose water, as will cover them over. Then cover them with a trenchour, or
some other clean thing lettinge them so stand one whole day. And after
power them all in some new vessel well leaded, putting to it four pound of
fresh hogs suet, well taken from the flesh and skin cut very small, and
well chopped with a knife: make vrder it a small fire that it burn not, than
in straining it out, you shall make it drop into some vessel of fresh and
clear water, and so purify the grease three or four days, keeping it in the
same vessel, and chaunginge often times a day the said water: for the
oftener you change it, the better you shall purge the grease.

Than take out the said seyme, the apples and the rose water together, and
take the fat out of the vessel, dreaninge it well, and adding to it
Spikenarde, with two ounces of Cloves, an ounce of Synamom, a quarter of
sandalum citrinum, an ounce of Bengewyne, and as much of storax calamita. Braye
all these kinds together, and put it in a fine linen clothe, in manner of
little purses: but let the cloth be some what large, and bind it well that the
said kinds scatter not abroad among the grease. Then make it boil with a little
fire, far of from the flame or leyt, or set before it some tyle or brick
letting it boil so fair and softlye, four or six hours, until all the
rose water be vanished away, which may be proved in this manner. Put a little
stick down to the bottom of the vessel, and pluck it out again quickelye,
and put it in the fire: and if it burn without any noise, it is a token that
there is no moore water: but tarte until it be all well consumed, sturringe
it sometime, to the intent it burn not to, or smell of the burning. Beware
also of the smoke, for if it take once y^ savor of it, you can never get it
out, and when all is well sodden, take eyghte ounces of white Wax, and put it in
the said vessel, mixinge all together, and let it so melt with the said
substaunces, the which you must now and then stir. This dooen take it from
the fire, letting it stand and rest a quarter of an hour, that is to say:
until the gross substance be descended to the bottom: then power it faier
and softlye through two new course linen clothes, into a vessel well leaded
within, wherein must be two dishefull of Rose water: but take here of
pressinge it, so that the lees come not out into the same vessel (but into
another) for it would be somewhat red. Let it so cool until the next
morninge, and when it is solid, hard, and massy, denide it into four parts,
and put it into a round vessel leaded, styrringe it well with a pestle,
addinge to it by little and little good and fine Muskte rose water, and so stir
it until it be well incorporated. Now, if in case you se that it does not
well incorporate together, set it a little upon the fire, and when it is hot,
power, rose water upon it, sturringe it well about, until it wax very fine
and thin, but take good head to the fire. And so keep it in new and clean
vessels.

Another Pomaunder.
TAke Pippins or other like melowe Apples, and lay them upon a tyle for to
bake in an Oven, the^ take out the core and the kernels, and make them clean
within, brayenge and breakinge the rest, and strain it thorough a fine
canuesse or straynour. This done, take as much fat or grease of a kidde as you
have Apples, and strain it likewise, boylinge it all together in a new
vessel well leaded, until the rose water be consumed: than add to it Musk,
Cloves, Nutmegges and such like substaunces of a reasonable quantity,
according to your discretion: provided always that they be well brayed and
broken in pieces, as is above said, and boil them in the like manner
aforesaied, then strain them and keep them.

Another Pomaunder.
TAke fresh barowes grease and put it in a new vessel, with rose water
underneath, and whiles it melts in the same, you shall take out that which is
melted, to thend it smell not of the fire, than put it in cold water the space
of.x. days, raising, and lifting it up every day.ix. or.x. times, and styrring
it at each time chaunginge always the water. Than take of the said Apples,
and purify them clean of their kernels, cuttinge them in quarters not pared:
this done, lay them three days to stiepe in Muskt rose water: take also
fiftene Cloves stieped a day in cold water often times renewed, and putting
them after in a fine linen cloth, boilinge them in rose water with a small
fire, the space of an hour: than having well scommed away all the ordure and
filthe, put in three ounces of white Wax, and make it sees a little, and after
strain it into a new vessel well leaded, leaving it so all a night. This
done, you shall take out all the white Pomaunder, and because there will remain a
little ordure in the bottom, you shall put it in mortar with rose water, and
stir it: the more you do sever it a sonder in styrringe it, and put rose
water to it, the more shall you fine it: but you must se that the mortar be
clean. Than take the tallowe or grease of a young barrowe, and stiepe it in
cold water, leauinge it so the space of four days, but you must often
change the water, and purify the said grease well of all the little skins
that is in it, veins, and gristels.

Take likewise twenty of the foresaied Apples, and for each Apple put in three
or four Cloves, and having divided the Apples in four quarters cores and all,
stamp them a little. Than take the said tallowe or grease and put it in fine
rose water, until the said water be consumed, and after you have boiled it
fair and softly, put in the said Apples stamped, and make them boil, adding
to it a little fine Synamom, Spiknard, Nutmegs, and other spices, such as you
think good. And when it has boiled enough, strain it through a linen cloth,
into some clean vessel. It should be well done to put to it a little calves
tallow well purified in the manner aforesaied. And when it is sodden and
strained, mix all togethers and put it in a clean vessel, it is a very
exquisite thing.

Excellent Ipocras.
TAke an ounce of Synamom, of Ginger.ii. dragms Melligetta three dragmes, Cloves
two deniers, Nutmegges, Galanga, of each of them a denier, stamp all, and put
it in a ielley bag or strainer, than take a pint of the best read or white
wine you can get, or a pint of good Malmesey or other strong wine, mix well
all togethers, than take a pound of Sugre fined, and having stamped it, put
it into the other wine, and so pour it upon the strainoure, wherein you did put
the said wine with the spices, than having taken it out, you must pour it
on again, so often until it become as clear as it was before, styrringe it
sometime in the strayner or bag: and here note that this is to make but a
flagon full. Wherefore, if you will have more, you must take a greater
quantity of the said things. And for to make it very excellent, you may
bind a little Musk in a fine linen clothe at the end of the strayner, so
that all the substance may pass over and upon it, the which by that mean
will receive the odor and sent of the said Musk.

To make little cusshins of parfumed Roses.
TAke buddes of red Roses, their heads and tops cut away, dry them in
the shadow upon a table, or a linen cloth: water and sprinkle the said buddes
with Rose water, and let them dry, doing this five or six times, turning
them alwais to the end they wax not vinewed or moldy: than take the poulder of
Cipre, Musk and Amber made into poulder, according as you would make them
excellent, for the more you put in of it, the better they shall be: put to it
also Lignum Aloes, well beaten in poulder. Let the said poulder be put with the
buddes wete with rose water Muskt, mixing well the buddes together with the
poulder, to thend that al may be well incorporated, and so shall you leave them
so al a night, covering them with some linen cloth or Taffeta, that the Musk
may not breath or rise out. The which thing done, take finallye little bags
of Taffeta, of what bigness you will, and according to the quantity of the
buddes that you would put among all the poulder. Than close up the bags, and
for to stop up the seames, you must have your mixtion of Musk, Amber, and
Ciuette, made as it were to ceare with, wherewith you shall rub all a long
the seames, to stop the holes made with the needle in sowynge: You may also
sow some ribande (of gold, or sylke, or of what you will) over the said
seames. These be the best that a man can make: and (as I have said) the more
Musk, Amber, Ciuet, and Aloe you put in, the better they will be. If you will
make them with less cost, take such buddes as are spoken of before,
prepared and ordered in the same sort, and in steed of Musk and Amber, put in
the poulder of Cloves, Synamom, Irios, and a little Mace, obseruinge such a
manner of parfuminge the buddes, as before.

Matches or little lights of a very good odor.
TAke of Campher an ounce, of white encens two ounces, beat them into poulder,
and make thereof little round Apples, or balls with a little wax, than put
them in a vessel with rose water, and light them with a candell, and they
will give a fair light, and a very good savor.

A composition of Musk, Ciuet, and Ambergrise.
TAke a dragme and a half of good Amber, and bray it upon a Porphyre stone
with oil of Iasemin, first alone, and than a little with Musk, as much as
shall suffice. This done, add to it Damask roses, and Bengewin, of ethe of
them an ounce, Irios a dragme and a half: All these things beaten in poulder,
and strayned or syfted, you shall braye with a dragme of Ciuette, until they be
brought into the form and manner of an oynctment. This done, keep it in a
Horn, or vessel of glass well closed.

A parfume for a Chaumber very excellent.
TAke Storax Calamita, Bengewine, Ligni Aloes, of each of them an ounce, coals
of Willow well beaten into poulder.v. ounces. These things mixed with Aquauite,
as much as will suffice to make paste, make thereof little cakes, or other forms
what you will, and so keep them. And when you will use or occupy of it, put it
into the fire, for in consumyng, little and little, it will make a singular good
odor in the place where you burn it.

Soap of Naples.
TAke Deares grease, or the Tallow of a Cow, or young Calfe, or of a Kidde a
pound, put it in a vessel of earth well leaded: and after you have well
strayned it, put upon it, with discretion to much nor to little, of Soap makers
lie, the first, best, and strongest of three sorts that they use, called the
master lie, and keep the said grease in the heat of the Sun, mi^ynge it
well there, and like wise in the night abroad in the air: but take heed that
there come no water to it. When you se that it is somewhat dry, put to it
again as much as shall need of the second and third lie, mixed together
which Soap makers use: Rub a little upon your hand being clean, and if it
make a frothe, it is a token it is made.

Parfume for a Lamp.
TAke Ligni Aloes a quarter, Begewine an ounce, Storax calamita half an ounce,
Musk a scruple, Ambergreese half a scruple, Rose water inoughe. You shall
put all these things well beaten to poulder into the Lamp.

A short parfume.
TAke a glassefull of Rose water, Clones well beaten in poulder, a penny
weight: than take the fire pan, and make it read hot in the fire, and put
thereon of the said Rose water with thesayd poulder of Cloves, making it so
confume, by little and little, but the rose water must be muskt, and so you shall
make a parfume of excellent good odor.

An odoriferous parfume for chambers.
TAke Thymiama a pound, Storax liquida two ounces, Storax calamita three
ounces, Labdanum an ounce, coals of Willowe and Tracagantum as much as you will:
but stiepe or temper the poulder of the coals, and the Tracagantum with rose
water, and let it lie so three days a stiepe in the same water, and then make
thereof paste.

A very good parfume for to trim gloves with little cost, and yet will
continue long.
FIrst let the gloves bec great, and of good thick leather, to the which you
shall give a little Ciuet all alonge the seames: Than wash them in rose water,
twice or thryse, pressing them hard: this done, take two parts of rose
water, one part of the water of the blossoms of Mirtell tree, mingle them
together: addinge to it two parts of the water of the flowers of Orenges,
Lemons, and Citrons, called of the Frenchmen, can de nafe, and wash them so
long therewith, that they savor no moore of the leather: then lay them in a
platter, and leave them there covered with the said water, and pouldered over
with the poulder of Cypres, by the space of a day or twain. This dooen, take
them out, and press them a little, and so dry them in the shadow. When they
be half dry, give them a little Ciuet in this wise: put as much Ciuet as you
shall think good in a dishe, with a little oil of Iasemyne, that is not old,
the which you shall make to dissolve before the fire: than annoint therewith
the gloves within side, and rub them well between your hands chafing them at
the fire, until you think that the ciuet be perced and gone through them, and
leave them so a while. Then after rub them well with a clothe, to the end the
Ciuet may perce the better, and the gloves wax soft: then draw and stretch
them out abroad, leaving them so the space of a dai, and when you shall think
they be humyde and moist, enlarge them, and blow them, and puff them up:
leave them so until they be half dried. Than take good parfume to burn, and
hold them over the smoke of the said parfume, to the eude that it may perce
and go into the inner parts of the gloves. and parfume them within side. This
shall you do thrice a day, the space of.xx. days, weating them at each time
with a little parfumed water, and wrappinge them with some white linen cloth:
than take Musk, and Amber as much as you will, and put it in a tin platter,
with oil of Iasemine, or Bengewine, or some other oil: let them well dissolve
at the fire, with a little perfumed water, than annoynte them with a pensell on
the out side, and not within: annoint also the seames with Ciuet, and lay them
certain days among dried roses. Finally, lay them for the space of.iij.
or.iiij. days between two matresses: than will they be excellent, as if it
were to present an emperor withal.

A very exquisite Ciuet to parfume gloves, and to annoint a man's hands with.
TAke three pound of white wine, the tallowe or grease of a Got, sheep, or
Kidde, a pound: boil all together with a small fire upon the embres or coals,
in a covered pan, than take them from the fire, and when it is cool again,
put them in a platter with clear water, and wash them well five or six
times: and put them again in clear water all a night. This dooen, take a
pound of rose water: two pound of white wine: and with this boil the grease
upon the coals with a small fire, until one half be consumed: than take sweet
Nauewes, and roast them under the ashes, but burn them not. And for each pound
of grease, take half a pound of the inner white of the said Nauewes, and
boil it in rose water, the space of half an hour, than strain it, and put
it into a mortar with oil of Iasemin, or of Citrons or such like, or else with
a little Ca^pher: After this you shall take a dishe or the bottom or foot of a
glass, wet within with Rosewater, wherein you shall make the form and facion
of the Ciuette, addyng to it first of all three ounces of Ceruse, well beaten in
poulder for every pound of tallow or grease, and it will be an excellent and
princely thing.

Oil of Roses and flowers, very parfit.
TAke the seed of Millons well mundified and sta^ped, and lay them by ranks
or by beds, with the flowers of Roses, by the space of.viii. days, then take
a little linen bag wette in Rose water, or in the water of other flowers, in
the which bag you shall put the seed: and having well bound it, put it in
a pressour, and press out the oil, which will be very precious, and the
which you must keep always close.

Oil of Cloves very noble.
TAke Almondes mondified and made clean with a knife, and broken in pieces,
stiepe or temper them in Rose water, than dress them in this manner. Take
Cloves stamped, and temper or lay them in Rose water, and cover the vessel
diligently, leauyng them so until the water have taken the virtue of the
Cloves: put also the Almondes in the said water, and leave them there until they
be swollen with the water. And after you have taken them out and dried them in
the Sun, lay them in the water again to swell, and afterward let them dry
well as before, continuyng thus.v. or.vi. times: Then put them in a press, and
press out the oil, which you shall keep in a clean vessel well stopped, In
this manner may you make oil of Musk, of Amber, of Bengewin, of Storax
calimita, of Aloe, of Synamom, of Mace, and of Nutmegges. You may make them
also in diverse sorts, and put to them Aqua vite.

To make an excellent parfume to parfume Chambers, garments, Coue^lettes,
Sheets, and al other things, belonginge to any Prince.
TAke pills of Citrons dried in the shadow, and if you can not get of
Cytrons, take of Lemons, or Ore^ges, or if you can get none of these, take the
leaves of Roses either green or dried, according to the season of the year:
and whatsoever is of al these things abouesaid, you must occupy it whole or by
small pieces, and not in poulder. And when you will make the parfume, take of
the said pieces as much or as many as you will, and annoyncte them well with
Ciuette on every side: after lay them upon some coals in the mids of the
Chamber, or some corner, as you lift, this will give a very pleasant and
precious odoure thoroughoute all the Chamber. If you will yet make it better,
you may put with the Ciuette, Musk, and Ambergrise, as much as you will: and
if you desire to make it with less cost, and yet nevertheless very good,
take Rose water of the flowers of Orenges, or such other odoriferous and sweet
water, with Oil of Iasemin, or of Cloves, or such like at your pleasure, with
the which you shall temper and stiepe Storax calamita, and a little Lignum
Aloes, if you have any, if not, you shall do well enough without it: add to
it as much Ciuette as you will, and make a licoure thereof as thick as sau^ce,
wherewith you shall annoynte the Citron or Orange pills: than lay them so
upon the coals, and it will be an excellent thing, and continue twice as
long as it would do, if you burned the odours without the pills, and besides
that it makes the parfume to dure longer, they make also the composition far
better and perfecter. If with the said parfume you would parfume lynnen
clothes, Sheets, or other like things, make it in this manner. Put the lynen,
and things that you will have parfumed, in a cofer, that has no chinckes,
cliftes, chappes, crestes, holes, or is broken, whereby the smoke may have issue
out. You must range and lay your linen and other things on each side of the
cofer, leauinge a place in the myddle to set a little pan, or other vessel
with fire in it, and the said pills to parfume them, you may also lay
clothes upon the ly^de of the cofer. This done, you must set in the middle the
little vessel with coals, and also the pills: and having shut the cofer,
you must let all the parfume burn out, not openinge the cofer of long time
after. And having thus tar^ed, open the cofer, and turn your linen and
other things, to the end to parfume them on the other side that is not
parfumed, and put in new parfume, doing as before, you shall find this of a
great excellency, so that the cofer it self shall be so well parfumed with
it, that all that you put afterward in it, shall sauoure of it. And if you
will, you may also parfume in the said cofer other little coffers for
handkerchers, and other things, as little cusshy^s, and bags of Roses,
which are parfumed also with out side, being kept in the cofers, for they
give always an odoure and sauoure to things that you put in them.

Round apples or balls to take ou^ spots of oil (...) grease.
TAke purgine Soap, or soft Soap, and incorporate it with the ashes of vines
finely sifted, as much of the one as of the other, than put among the said*
poulder Roche Alome burned, and the dry leese of ^yne well beaten into
poulder, incorporate well all together, and make thereof little round Apples or
balls: which you may use to take out spots of any garmente.

To make a paste for sweet ^eades or Beadestones.
TAke a pound and a half of black earth well beaten into poulder, four
ounces of Gomme dragant, and lay it a stiepe, or temper it in a mortar, with as
much Rose water as will cover the earth with the said Gomme dragant, and
stamp it well by the space of half an hour, with these sweet things
folowinge. That is to say: Storax calamita, an ounce, poulder of Cloves half
an ounce, Labdanum, half an ounce, Synamom half an ounce, Sandalum Citrinum,
half an ounce: beat all into poulder very finelye, and mix all together with
the foresaied paste, than take it out of the mortar, and braye it well between
your hands, by the space of half an hour. And than you may make thereof
Beads or Beadestones.

The end of the second book.
THE Secrets of the reverend Master Alexis of Piemount.
THE THIRD BOOK.
A goodly secret for to condite or confyte Orenges, Citrons, and all other
fruytes in syrop, which is a notable thing.
TAke Cytrons, or other fruits, and cut them in pieces as you will, taking out
of them the juice or substance that is within them: than boil them in fresh
water about half an hour, until they be tender, and as soft as you wuld have
them. And when you have taken the^ out, cast them in cold water, leuing them so
until night. After this you shall set them again to the fire in other fresh
water, and do but only heat it in that water with a small fire, for it must
not sees, nor be to hot: but let it only simper a little, you shall continue
thus.viij. days together, heatinge them every day in hot water, and puttinge
them again at night in cold water. Some heat the water but once a day, to
thend not to make the citrons to tender, but change the fresh water at night
to take out all the bitterness of the pills, the which being taken away, you
must take sugre, or clarified honey and prepared (as we will declare afterward)
wherein you must put the citrons, having first well dried them from the water.
In winter you must keep them from y^ frost, leaving them two or three hours in
a place mete for the purpose: and in Somer you shall leave them there all a
night, and a day, and a night in honye. Than boil the honey or sugre again by
it self, without the Orenges or Citrons, by the space of half an hour or
somewhat less, with a small fire, and being cooled, set it again to the fire
with ye Citrons, continuing so.ij. morninges to the end to bring the honny to
his perfection, according as need shall requier. If you will put honnye in
the water, and not Sugre, you may clarify it twice, and strain it through a
stramer, according to the art and manner, that hereafter I will teache you, to
the end you may have perfitelye the use and facion of making all such
things. Now, having thus warmed and clarified it, you shall strain it, and
set it again on the fire, with the Citrons only, making it to boil with a
small fire, the space of a quarter of an hour: than take it from the fire, and
let it stand and rest, at every time you do it, a day and a night. The next
morning you shall boil it again together, the space of half an hour, and do
so two morninges, to the end that the Honnie or Sugre may well and perfitlye
be incorporated with the Cytrons. All the art and conninge consists in
boylinge this cyroppe together with the Cytrons, and also the cyrope by it
self. Wherefore he that has no skyll in the boiling of it, will quickelye
let it take the smoke, so that it shall savor of the fire: but he that can
trim it well, it is an exquisite and pleasant thing. In this manner may al
other fruits be dressed: as ripe Peaches with the in side and skin, Lemons,
Orenges, Appeles, green Walnuttes, Lettuse, well made clean, and voyded of
their great leanes, and other things like, all the which you must boil, as
is aforesayed: but some more some less, after as need shall be, and according
to the nature of the fruit. So shall you make always a good perfect, and
durable thing.

The manner how to purify and prepare honnye and sugre for to confite Cytrons
and all other fruits.
TAke every time ten pound of Honey, the white of twelve new laid eggs,
and take away the froth of them, beating them well together with a stick, and
six glasses of faier and fresh water: then put them into the Honnye, and
boil them in a pot with a moderate fire, the space of a quarter of an hour,
or somewhat less, than take them fair and sofetlye from the fire, scumming
them well, and pass them so hot through a strainer: for it shall be the
fairer, and the clearer, for any thing that you will occupy or use it about.
Having thus ordered it, take for six pound of Cytrons, twelve pound of
Honnie. The Sugre is also ordered and dressed in like sort as the Honny is:
but if you will con^ite Citrons with Sugre, you must note this difference,
that for six pound of Cytrons, you shall put but.ix. of Sugre, for to
confite them, so that they may be kept all the year. This is, because the
honny makes a great deal moore skumme and froth, then the sugre does, and
therefore you must put the third part moore of Honnie. In keeping this
proportion, you can not fail to do it well.

To confite Peches after the Spanyshe facion.
TAke great and fair Peches, which you shall pill and make clean, and cut
them in pieces, and so lay them abroad upon a table fair and clean in the
Sun by the space of two days, tourning them ever at night, and in the
morninge, and put them hot into a Iuleppe of Sugre, well sodden and prepared
as is aforesaied. And after you have taken them out, set them again in the
Sun, tourninge them often until they be well dried. This dooen put them
again into the Iulep, and then in the Sun, until they have gotten a fair
bark or cruste, as you will have them, and this shall you do three or four
times: then being thus prepared, you may keep them in boxes for winter, for
it is a soueraygne thing.

To make Conserve or Confiture of Quinces, called in Latyne Cotoneatum,
Cydoniatum or Cydonites, as they do in Valence, which also the Geneuoyes
do use.
TAke Quinces, and purify them, and when you have taken out the kernelles,
sees them in fair and fresh water, so much, until they open and break, then
strain them through a clean strainer, that there remayn nothing in the said
strainer, but only the hardness of them, that is to say: the skin the
kore and such like. For eight pound of the said strained substance, you
must put three pound of faier and fine Sugre: and taking a vessel of tin
fair and large in the bottom, you shall myngle the Quinces with the Sugre:
and then set them to boil with a little fire, sturrynge them with a broad
sklyse of wood, until all be well sodden, which if you will know, look when
all shall leuse it self, and cleave no more to the said vessel, for then it
is sodden to his perfection, and shall be time to take it of. And if you put
to it any Musk, stamp it with a little Sugre, as much as you will, and cast
it into the said vessel, sturring it always with your sklyse of wood. If you
will add spices to it, put in Synamom, Cloves, Nutmegges, and Ginger, as much
as you will, boylinge the Musk with a little Vinagre. This dooen, with the
broad sklyse lay of this confection of Quinces upon a table, where first you
must have sifted and strowed Sugre, and so make round, broad or long pieces,
as you will with the circle of a bore, of what greatness you list: then set
them in the Sun until they be through dry. And when they have stand a
while, turn them up side down: making them always a bed of lifted Sugre
both under and above. Then turn them still in the said Sugre, and dry
them in the Sun, so long until they have gotten a fair white crust of
Sugre. Better comfites of Quynces, sweeter, or hartier than this, a man can not
make. In like manner may you dress and trymme Peches, Pears, and other kinds
of fruits: A thing of great singularity.

To make a paste of sugre, whereof a man may make all manner of fruits, and
other fine things, with their form, as platters, dishes, glasses, cups, and
such like things, wherewith you may furnish a table: and when you have done,
eat them up. A pleasant thing for them that sit at the table.
TAke gomme dragant, as much as you will, and stiepe it in Rose water, until
it be molified. And for four ounces of Sugre, take of it the bigness of a Bean,
the juice of Lemons a walnut shell full, and a little of the white of an egg:
but you must first take the gomme, and beat it so much with a pestel in a
mortar of white marble, or of brass until it become like water, then put to
it the juice with the white of the egg, incorporating well al together. This
dooen, take iiii. ounces of fine white sugre, well beaten to poulder, and cast
it into the mortar by little and little, until all be turned into the form of
paste. Than take it out of the laid mortar, and bray it upon the poulder of
sugre, as it were meal or flower, until all be like soft paste, to the end
you may turn it and facion it which way you will. When you have brought your
paste to this form, spread it abroad with Sinamom, upon great or small
leaves, as you shall think it good: and so shall you form and make what things
you will, as is aforesaied. With such fine knackes as may serve a table,
taking heed that there stand no hot thing nigh unto it. At the end of the
banquet they may eat al, and break the platters, dishes, glasses, cups, and
all things: for this paste is very delicate and saueurous. If you will make a
thing of moore finesse than this, make a tarte of Almondes stamped with sugre,
and rose water, of like sort that march pains be made of. This shall you lay
between two pastes of such vessels or fruits, or some other thing as you
think good.

To make a confection of Melons or Pompones.
TAke what quantity of Melons you will, and take them before they be full ripe,
but let them be good, and make as many cuttes in the^ as they be marked with
quarters on every side, and having mondified them, taken out their kernelles,
and pilled of the utter rine, stiepe them in good vinaigre, leauinge them so
by the space of ten days: and when you have taken them out, take other
Vinagre, and stiepe them a new again, other ten days, remouinge and
styrringe them every day: than when time shall be, take them out, and put
them in a course linen cloth, driyng and wiping them well. Finally set them in
the air the space of a day and a night, than boil them in honey, and by the
space of ten days give them every day a little bubbling or boilinge, leaving
them always in the honey: and let them boil at each time only but one wawme.
Then take the said pieces, and put them in what kind of vessel you will, and
take these spices folowinge, the poulder of Cloves, of ginger, of Nutmegs, and
of Sinamom, whereof you shall make spices, this done, make one bed or rank
of the pieces of melons, and another of the spices: than take fine white honey,
and pour it upon them in the said vessel.

To make Melons and Pompones sweet and very delicate.
TAke fine sugre, and dissolve it in water, than take the seeds of a Melon,
and cleave them a little on the side, that sticks to the melon, and put them
in the sugared water, addinge to them a little Rose water, leave the said
seeds so by the space of three or four hours, and then take them out, and you
shall see that as soon as the said seed is dry, it will close up again.
Plant it, and there will come of it such Melons as the like has not been
seen. And if you will give them the sauoure of Musk, put in the said water a
little Musk, and fine Synamom. And this may you do also with the seeds of
Pompones and Coucombers.

To confyte orange pills, which may be done at all times of the year, and
chiefly in May, because than the said pills be greater and thicker.
TAke thick Orange pills cut in four or.vi. pieces, and sti ep them in water
the space of ten or.xii days. You may know when they be stieped enough, if
you hold them up in the sun and se through them, for than they be stieped
enough: and if you cannot see through them, let them yet stiepe until you
may: than afterward lay them to dry upon a table, and than between two dry
linen clothes. Moreover put them in a kettle, or vessel leaded, adding to it
as much honey as will half cover the said pills, more or less as you shall
think good. Boil them a little, styrring them always and than take them from
the fire, least the honye sees to much, for if it should boil but a little
more then it ought to boil, it would be thick and massife. Let it than
stand and rest four days in the said honey, stirringe and mengling well every
day the said Orenges and honey together. For, because there is not honey
inoughe to cover over all the orange pills, you must stir them well and
oftentimes, to the end they may al equally receive of the honnye. This shall you
do three times, geuinge them one bublinge or boilinge at each time, and so let
them rest and stand.iii. days as we have said. Finally you shall strain or
dreane them from the said honye, and boil them in as much other honnye as
you shall think will suffice, and after you have let them boil the space of
a Credo, take them from the fire, and bestow them in vessels, putting to them
of the best spices you can find, as Ginger, Cloves, and Sinamom: mix all
well together, and you shall have made an excellent thing. And note, that the
honey that shall remain, will be still good for to dress and trim other
Orenges, or other things withal.

To confyte walnuttes.
First take Walnuttes when they be little and green, with the pille or husk
and al, and make in them.iiii little holes, or mo, than stiep them in water.xi.
days, or more or less: make them clean and boil them in honey, as the
foresaid Orenges, but make them sees four times as much. And note that the
honye is always good, but you must oftentimes put in fresh, because it
consumes. Finally you shall dress them with spices, as the Orenges, but put
not many cloves to them for they will make them to bitter.

To confyte Gourdes.
TAke the neck of the Gourde and cut it in long pieces, as you think good,
and power upon the^ boiling water, and do so.xi. morninges, but you must have
pilled them finely; and taken away the inner part that serves for nothing.
This done, sees them in a kettle until they be neither to much nor to little
boiled, but even hole and massiue not broken: than dry them upon a table in
the shadow the space of two days, and after wipe them clean piece by piece,
with a linen cloth, and do with them as with the Ore^ges.

To confite cheries.
TAke cherries and leave them a day in the sun than take out the stones, and
set them in the sun again three days: after this sees them as we have
said of the Orenges: but you must leave them in honey.xv. days, and by the
fire.iii. days, so that they may only be kept warm, to the end they sauoure
not of burninge, or of the fire. And after you have well mixed and incorporated
all, you shall put them in honey with spices. Al these confitures may dure
many years, so that you refreshe them with other honey boiled a little, when
they be diminished.

To make little morsels as they use in Naples, an exquisite thing, for they be
very sauorous, do comfort the stomach, and make a sweet breath.
TAke three pound of fine sugre, ye flower of meal.vi. pound, of Sinamom three
ounces, Nutmegs, ginger, pepper, of each of them balfe an ounce, but let the
quantity of the pepper be greater than of the residue, raw white honny, not
clarified, three ounces. First make a round cycle with the said flower, in the
middle whereof, you shall put the Sugre, and upon it a pound of Muskt Rose water,
bray and break well all these things with your hands, so long, until you
feel no more Sugre. This done, you shall put in the said spices, and than the
honey, mixinge well all together with your hand. After this mengle it again
among the flower, and keep some of it to flower the tile or other things that
you must bake it upon. And when all is well brought and made into past, you
shall cut the little morsels in sunder with your hands, making each of them
three ounces weight, or there about, than turn and make them in to the form
of a fyshe, dressinge them with your instrument meet for the same purpose.
Than heat your oven and lay them upon little tiles of copper or earth, making
first upon the tiles a good thick bed of flower, you must bake them the mouth
of the oue^ open, keeping evermore a fire at one of the sides of the mouth of
the oven, ye must also touch them often times, to se if they be baked enough,
and whither they hang sure, and hold together between your fingers: You may
also bake them in the fire in ouens of copper covered, such as tartes be made
in, then when you have taken them out you must gilt them.

The end of the third book.
THE Secrets of the reverend Master Alexis of Piemount.
THE FOVRTH BOOK.
An odoriferous and precious water, wherewith a man may weate or bath any
linen clothe, to wype or rub his face, which will make the flesh white and
well colored: and the more a man rubbeth his face with it the fairer it is, and
also continues.vi. months: (...) thing experimented and proved yea, and it
for a queen.
TAke a pound of roche Alome, washed and burned, Malmesey two glasses full,
paste of Borax.vi. ounces, white Gomme dragant a pound, Gomme arabicke three
ounces, stiep al in the Malmsey, by the space of two natural days, myngle it
with two pottes of Goats milk, and stop it well that it take no vente:
than take nine ounces of Sublimatu^, and set it to burn or calcine in an
vnyelded pot, well closed up in a furnayse, and two pound of Ceruse of
Alexandria, prepared in this manner. Lap it up with the white of an egg, in
some lynnen clothe, and boil it in sweet lie, until the third part be
deminished: than mix all these things well together. This dooen, take two
pound of raw white Honny, three pound of Terebentyne of Alexandria, three
glasses of stilled vinagre, Ginger stamped.vi. ounces: boil all with the said
vinagre, vntyil there be but two glassesfull left. Than take.iii. ounces of fine
Mirre elect, and put it upon the said things: after this take two ounces of
litarge or white lead of silver well beaten into poulder, and boil it in.iii.
glasses full of good vergeous or white wine, until the third part be
diminished: than with a little cane, read, or stick, mix or stir well all the
said things together, in some vessel, the space of.vi. hours. Finallye, put
into the same about fifty snailes out of their shelles and made clean, an
ounce of Campher, a good fat hen flawen and broken into small pieces,
without washing her, two Orenges without their pills, kernelles, or the little
skin within the pille.xii. Lemons ordered likewise, or else the juice of
them, which will consume the said snayles, and all will wax like paste. This
dooen, take the white of.xxv. eggs new laid, hard roste, with the which you
must incorporate six ounces of Synamom, and a certain quantity of sugre
candy, and put all together in a violle into the bathe or baine, and still it.
The first water that shall come of it, will be white, the second yet whiter,
which you shall receive a part by it self, and the third very white. Then
myngle the first with the last, and distill it again, and keep it, for it is
good: yet not so good as the second, which is very excellent above all things
in the world, and that must serve for the visage or face. If you will dress or
trim handkerchers with it, as is above said, take what handkerchers you
will, so that they be not very fine, and lay them in a platter, and power upon
them as much water as will cover them, leaving them so the space of six
hours, than having taken them out, and hanged them up, in such sort, that the
water may drop out of them into the same platter, ye shall let them so dry,
then bathe or wash them again, as before, other vi. hours, driyng them
again, and so.vii. times. Than shall you have an excellent thing.

To make a water that will make a white and pale person well colored.
TAke white Pigeons, and fatten them with Pyneapple kernelles, the space of.xv.
days, and than kill them: and having cast away the head, the feet, and the
guts, with all the garbage, distill them in a limbecke with half a loffe of
Succarine Alom, three hundred leaves of fine silver plate, five hundred of gold
foil, and the cromme of.iiii. white loves stieped or weated in almonde milk,
a pound of the marye of a calfe or ox, and fresh barrowes grease. Make all
this to distill with a little fire, and you shall have thereof a very perfect
water.

A very good water to make the face appear of the age of.xxv. years.
TAke a couple of calves feet, and sees them in xviii. pound of river
water, until half be consumed, then put to it a pound of rise, and let it
sees with crommes of fine manchet bread stieped in milk, two pound of fresh
butter, and white of.x. new laid eggs, with their shelles and all: set those
al things to distill, and into the water that shall come of it, put a little
Campher, and succarine Alom, and you shall have an excellent and noble thing of
it.

A water to beautify the face, and all other parts of the body.
TAke of white Borar two ounces, roch Alome an ounce, Campher two dragmes,
Alome called in Latyne Alumen scissilae or plumae, which naturallye grows
like a stone, and not withstandinge may be divided, there be long strakes
seen in it, and the Alome called Alumen catinae, because it is boiled in a
caudron, and is made more pure by an herb (like to herb yuye) burned into
ashes and lie made therewith, of each of these an ounce: beat each of these to
poulder by them selves: and than incorporate all well together, and put it in
some great vessel full of condite water, the which you shall cover and close up
sure with a lynen cloth, and set it to the fire, the space of two hours, than
take it away, and when it is cold again, put it in another vessel, and
take the white of two eggs new laid the same day, and beat it well with a
little vergeous: and so put it in the vessel with water, and leave all so
together the space of.xx. days in the Sun, and you shall have a perfect
thing of it.

A water to make the skin white, and to take away the sun burning.
TAke half a potfull of rain water, and fill it up with vergeous, than sees
it until it be half consumed: and in the mean time that it yet boyleth,
fill it with the juice of Lemons. When it has sodden, take it from the fire,
and put to it the white of.iiii. eggs new laid, and well beaten, but the
foresaied substaunces must be cold before you put in the said white of the
eggs: and than is it made.

Another water to beautify the face, and to make it appear of the age of
fiftene years.
TAke quick Brimstone an ounce, white ensence of the best.ii. ounces, of Myrre
two ounces, of fine Ambergrise.vi. dragmes, beat each of these drooges by them
selves, and then mingle them altogether with a pound of rose water. This done,
put them to distill, and keep it in a vessel close stopped. And when you go to
bed, wash your face therewith, and leave it so not wiping it: and in the
morning wash it again with well water luke warm, and by this mean shall you
maintain, and keep the skin very delycate, fine, and smoth.

An easy water for Ladies and gentil women.
TAke the white of eyghte new laid eggs, and beat them until they be
converted into a clear water, then strain them, and take Alumen catinae or
Dessquamatum, Boras, Campher, Alumen zucharinum which is made with Alome
relented, Rose water and whites of eggs into the facion of a Sugre lofe, of
each of them an ounce, of Vinagre eight ounces, water of bean blossoms two
ounces. Let all these said things be finelye stamped and beaten in a mortar,
and than put all together in a great violle of glass, the which being well
covered, you shall leave in the sun the space of fiftene days, styrringe the
said water twice or thrice a day, and so let it stand and rest. This done,
put it in another violle, and wash your self with it when you will, leauinge
it so a certain space upon your face: and than rub it with a piece of
scarlet. The lady or gentlewoman that will use often times to wash her face
with this water, yea, were she of years three score, she shall appear to be of
the age of, xv. year.

To make a goodly luster or beautiflynge of the face, good for ladies and dames.
TAke a great Lemmon, and make a hole in the top of him thorough the which
hole you shall take out of the substance within the bigness of a Walnutte:
and fill it again with Sugre Candye, with four or five goldfoyle leaves, and
cover it again with the piece that you took of, sowinge it with a needle, so
that it may remain fast on. Than set the said lemon to roste upon the coals,
right up, and after as it shall begin to roste or boil, turn it often,
until it has sweat a good space, than take it of. And when you will use of
it, put one of your fingers into the hole that was sowed up, and rub your
face with it, with some fine linen clothe, and it will prove an exquisite
thing.

To take out spots, lentilles, or pimpels of the face.
TAke the meal or flower of a kind of pulse corn called Lupinum, which
grows in Italy and France, but here uneath known, the fresh and recente
gall of a goat, the juice of a lemon, Alome sucharine, incorporate well all
together in manner of an oynctmente: and rub at night the place with it where
the spots or burgeons be, and you shall be incontinent cured of them This is
well experimented and proved.

A very good way how to give a luster or show to all distilled water.
TAke little green pine Apples well mondified, cut them in little round and
flat pieces: which you shall stiepe three days in cow milk, changing the
milk once a day (but it were better in goats milk) at the end of three days
distille them with these poulders following. Poulder of glass four ounces,
pieces of read coral two ounces, Sugar Candy four ounces, roch Alome.i. ounce,
quick silver mortified with spittle, an ounce and a half.xij. new laid eggs
broken with their shelles and all, Turpentine washed in ix. waters, four ounces,
Snailes such as carry no shelles on their backs and if you can not get such,
take those that carry shelles. All these things well stamped each one by him
self, mingle them together, and than make in the Limbeck a row or bed of
them, than a bed of the poulders, and one of Turpentine, and so another of
the snayles, and thus one upon another, until the Limbecke be full, than cast
upon it a glassefull of good white wine, and make unto it a temperat fire. Thus
shall you have such a water as you wuld desire, the which you shall keep in a
flagon of glass: for it is very good to make white and to beautify the flesh,
and to take away the wrinckles of the face: A thing proved.

To make a water of white Melons, that makes a fair skin.
TAke white Melons well made clean of their pills, and cut them in pieces a
fyngar thick, leaving all the mids alone, than take these things folowinge:
Succharyne Alome four ounces, quick silver broken or mortified, an ounce, Roch
Alom burned an ounce, Turpentine washed a pound.xij. new laid Eggs stamped
with shelles and all, white Snailes cut in pieces as many as you will, Sugar.
iiii. ounces, with a glassefull of goats milk, and one of white wine: than
fill the Limbecke with the said things, layeng rank upon rank, as we have
said of the other water before. Give it than a little fire, and keep the water
in a viole, which will be excellent to wash your fa^e with. After this
manner is made ye water of Auguria of the blossoms of beans, of mallows, and
of the blossoms of Tansey, or wild vine, and other such like things.

To make a very good water of Gourdes, as well garden Gourdes as wild.
TAke Gourdes, and pluck of their utter pille or bark, cut them into little
round wheels, than put to them six ounces of succarine Alome, an ounce of Alom
sciffilae or plumae, the value of a penny of Myrrh, half a pound of
Turpentine washed, four new laid eggs stamped and well beaten together,
six Lemons cut in trenches, Snailes as many as you will, a glass of white
wine. Beat into poulder that which ought to be beaten, and mix well all
together, making the first rank of Sugar, the second of poulder, and the
third of Snayles: than put the wine, the Lemons, and the eggs upon all the
rest, and so distill it with a small fire: and the water that comes of it
must be kept.viii. or.xv. days in the sun in a viol. A man may make the like
also of Gourdes that grow nigh unto the sea.

An ointment for the face which being kept on, or used continually the space
of eighte days, alters the skin and renews it finely.
TAke four new laid eggs, and lay them eyghte days together in strong
Vinaigre, so that they become tender and soft, that you may take of the
shelles. After this take out the yelkes finelye that you break them not, and
put them in an earthen dishe leaded. This done, take the value of a penny of
white Turpentine well washed, the value of a half penny of sugre Candy, and
twice as much of the paste of Borar, Campher, Verdegrise, Roche Alome, of each
of them six deniers. All these things well beaten to poulder, take.ii.
quarters of quick silver mortified with spettle, or the juice of lemons, oil of
wine leese called Tartarum.iiii. ounces, a white onyon, which you shall boil in
white wine, and strain through a strainer, and mingle all this with the yelkes
of the eggs, incorporatinge, and beatinge all well together, with the juice of
two lemmons. And at night when you go to bed, lay the said composition upon
your face, neck, and breaste, lettinge it so dry of it self. Now, you must
stir it well at every time you will occupy it, and you may not take it to
sone from your face, for than you shall mar the skin: but you must let it
lie on the space of eight days. And although you would think the said
composition burned or flawed of the skin of your face, you may not for all
that take it of, but let it work his operation, and at the end of eight days
take it of in this manner following. Take wheat bran, mallows, leaves of March
violettes, Bean poddes, crommes of bread, and a good quantity of raw honny,
and boil al these things together, until it be all soft, than power it in
to some pot, and let it cool until such time as you may endure the smoke
thereof, holdinge your face over the pot. Also cover well your head, your
breaste, and other places, where you have laid the said past, and hold your
face so over the smoke of the pot until the sweat drop down by all your face.
And wha^ you perceive your self to swet take a little of the said water, and put
crommes of bread in to it, and when you have well sweet, take of the bread
crommes, and rub with them al about where the composition is laid: for there
the skin will be very tender, and therefore must you rub hard, until your face
be clean of the said past, or composition, than immediately wash your face
with clean water, and wipe it dry again. After this, you must take some
distilled water, wherein is no strong substance, and bath your face with all
five or six times. If in case there remain behind any of the said past in
any place of your body, rub it well with the said crommes of bread, or some
linen cloth, wete or dieped in such distilled water, and you shall incontinent
see that that skin which was rough, thick, and rude, shall be changed and
altered into a fine, fair, and delycate skin. But beware that in eight days
after you go not abroad in the open air, or to nygh the fire, lest the new
fine, tender, and delycate skin, should be burned, or take any hurt. This
is a goodly secret.

For him that has naturally a red face.
TAke four ounces of the kernelles of peches, two ounces of gourdes seeds, and
make thereof an oil, wherewith you shall anoint his face morning and evening,
and this will kill and destroy the redness. A thing found true by experience.

To make aqua argentata or siluered water, which makes a white ruddie and
glistring face and is made like a water and not like an ointment, that the
dames of Italy for the most part do use, although that few men make it as it
ought to be made.
TAke.iiii. ounces of Sublimatum, and break it in sonder in a mortar, styrringe
it always with one hand. When it is broken enough, take.iiii. deniers of
quick silver, and put it in strong white vinagre the space of viii. days,
than put it in another vessel with other vinagre, and boil it a little. This
done, take the quick silver out of the vinagre, and lay it in a dishe, taking
the crome of a lofe, which you shall cromme with the said quick silver,
styrring well altogether, until the quick silver be fair and clear, than
blow in it, and the bread will fly away: than shall you put this quick
silver, so purged, with the sublimat, in mixing and styrrynge it well with one
hand, and so it will become white as snow: than take hot boylinge water, and
power it into the said mortar, which must also be hot, and stir it well and
mix all together, and so let it stand and rest. After this take diligently the
water away, which will be very good for scabbes, or skurfe: and power to it
other sethinge water, and was^he it well, as before, four or five times. This
dooen, take.xii. or.rv. Perles, and a Carlyn or two of gold broken in sonder,
or else a little Campher, a little Boras, a little Talchum, if you have any. All
these things shall you break and bruise in sunder, with one hand in a mortar,
and so leave it fourtye days in the Sun, sturring it every day with your
hand the space of half an hour. After the said forty days take four
new laid eggs, the which being a little heated by the fire: you shall
brake: and having taken the whites of them, you shall put them into the said
mortar, mingling well all together, and so shall you do this water following.
Take little ripe Lemons, and take of the outward yelowe pille, than cut them in
small pieces, with.xii. new laid eggs, beatynge the yelke, the white, and
the shelles together, than adding to it two ounces of Turpentyne, you shall put
al into a Limbecke, making to it a little fire, whereof you shall have about a
glasful of water, with the which water you shall temper your siluered water in
the mortar: than keep it in a violle close stopped, in a cole place: And so it
will be an excellent thing, and it were to give a queen. And when you will
occupy of it, let your face first be clean, and than lay to the said
water, as much as you shall by your discretion, think sufficient, lettinge
it dry of it self.

To make an oy^tment for the face.
TAke three ounces of the fat caul of a fat lamb, the which you shall put
into fresh water, changing it every day fifty times, seven or eyghte days
together, then cut it very small, put it in an earthen pan leaded, full of
white clear Vinagre, with a dragme of Campher stamped. Boil this together by
the space of two or three Pater noster, and after strain the grease with the
foresaied things, through a white linen clothe, than let the grease cool,
until it be hard again: and if there be any ordure or fylthe at the
bottom, you must take it away. After this take two ounces of the oil of
Tartare, and put it in some vessel upon the coals, until it come together:
and having set it in a moist place by the space of a day and a night, put to
it an ounce of Borar well washed, than stamp and mix all well together,
adding to it an ounce, and a half of Ceruse washed, and having put all in a
new carthen pan leaded, set it on a small fire, styrryng it always well
together, until all the said things be well incorporated together: and after
that you have laid it upon your face, lay on also a red color made with
the grain whereof Scarlate is died, called in Latyne Coccum, and with Brassel,
for it shall be better than with Brasyll alone.

To make a red color for the face.
TAke read Sandall fynely stamped, and strong vinagre twyse distylled, than
put into it as much Sandall as you will, and let it boil fair and softly, and
put to it also a little roche Alom stamped, and you shall have a very perfect
read. If you will make it odoriferous and savor well, put a little Musk to
it, or else Ciuet, or some other odoriferous thing what you list.

To make the face fair.
TAke Beans and a kind of a little grain called in Latyne Faseoli, and Cyche
peason, and make a poulder thereof, which you shall stiepe and temper in luke
warm water, with the white of an egg, and the milk of an ass: and than lay
it out to dry. And after stiepe it in a little water, wherewith you shall
wasshe your face, and it will become fayer, clear, and nete.

To make the face fair another way.
TAke the fresshe blossoms of Beans, and distyll them through a Limbecke, and
so wasshe your face with the water that shall come of them.

To make the face fair.
TAke the flowers of Rosemary, and boil them in white wine, than wash your
face with it, and use of it for to drink and so shall you make your face
very fair, and also your breath sweet.

To take out spots or read pimples out of a man's face and to make the skin
very fair.
TAke a little roche Alome, and break it a sonder into small pieces, than take
the white of an egg newely laid even at that instant, the which you shall
set to the fire in a little pan leaded, with the roche Alome, and leave it so
until you see that it begins to boil, mingle it always with a little
stick. And when it is waxen hard, annoynet well al yourface with it three or
four days, and it will make your face fairer. A thing found true by
experience.

To make a water that makes the face white.
TAke Lytarge, Silver sublymed the value of a grote, and put it into some
vessel with strong white vinagre, than boil it until it be deminished the
heyght of two fyngers: let it stand and rest, than strain it and keep it.
Also milk and the juice of Orenges mixed with the oil of wine lees is very
good.

Another manner to make the face fair.
TAke the gall of a Hare, of a Cock or Hen, and of Eeles, temper them with
Honnye, and put them so into a vessel of brass well stopped, for to annoint
your face with when you list, but take heed it touch not your eyes: for it
would inflame them and make them look read, and so hurt you.

To take of spots lyntelles or read pymples out of the face.
TAke green Lisardes quick, and boil them in oil until the third part
be consumed. Strain this, and put to it white ware, and than make thereof an
ointment, wherewith you shall often times anoint your face.

To take of a ringe worm or tetter that renneth all over a man's face, called
in French Le feu volant.
TAke the roots of La^athum acutum, called Sorel as well wild, as of the
garden, wash them well and mondifie them, and cut them in small pieces, the
which you shall stiepe in strong white vynagre, and leave them in it two days
and two nights. Afterward rub the place of the sore with it three or four
times a day, and at night with the said pieces of the sorell retes, letting
them stiepe always after in the said Vynagre, and you shall be cured.

To drive a way life.
TAke encens, and the larde of a barrowe Hog, properly called barrowes
grease, Boil them together in an earthen pan or pot leaded, and with this
ointment rub or annoynte the place where the life be.

To make a water that takes of all stayninge, dying, and spots from the
hands of artificers that get them by workinge, and makes them very white
and fair: It is also good for them that be sun burned.
TAke the juice of a Lemon, with a little baye salt, and wash your hands with
it* and let them dry of them selves: wash them again, and you shall find
all the spots and stayninges gone. It is also very good against the scurfe or
scabbes.

To make a water that makes the flesh and skin of a man or woman very
fayer, and will be kept like a precious baulme.
TAke a young crow even out of the nest, if you may get one so: if not, take
him as young as you may: to whom (by the space of.xl. days) ye shall give
none other meat, but the yelkes of hard eggs. Than kill him, and flawe him,
breakinge the flesh into small pieces: than take leaves of a myrtle tree, and
lay one rank of them, and another of the little pieces of the crow, in some
great violl of glass, powdered and strowed over with the poulder of Talchum,
stamped with the oil of sweet Almondes, and put in as much of it as your
discretion shall judge, for a great quantity will do no hurt to it. And if
there remain yet any pieces of the said crow, make thereof another rank,
adding thereto some myrtle leaves, and than of the Talchum, and the said glass
must be large, wide, and low. Finally you shall pour upon it three or four
ounces of the oil of Myrrh, dressed with eggs, as is declared in this book.
Than set the said violl or glass under the Limbeck, stopping well the sides
and joints, that it take no vent, and likewise the recipient: and give it at
the beginning a small fire for the space of four or five hours, so that al
these things may be dissolved, and as it were, break, and corrupt among them
selves: than make the fire greater and greater, and at the end very great for
the space of an hour, letting it after cole. And if the fire have been great
enough, the water will be yelowe, and somewhat read, the which water you shall
put into another like glass, great, according to the quantity of the said
water putting to it half a pound of rosemary blossoms, half a glassefull of
Aqua vite, setting al to distill again with the limbeck, and recipient as
before: you must put in the recipie^t, or at the beke of the limbeck, some fine
little cloth, wherein must be white Bengewin stamped between ij. papers as well as
you can. When this water shall be distilled, it will be very clear and fair,
which you shall keep in a viol, well stopped with wax, and cered cloth, to the
end it take no vent, and you may neither keep it in the sun, nor in any hot
place. This will be a noble and precious water, which has not the like in the
world for to make the skin fair, and to preserve it. The manner how to use it
is this. First, you must wash your face well with clear water distilled,
and than rub well both face, breast, and other places of your body where you
list, with a piece of scarlet weted in the said water, and lie down upon your
bed, holding a little while, the piece of wet scarlet upon your face, and thus
may you do every.viii. or every.xv. days once, or else every month, or
every two months. In the mean time you may use some other water, as the water
of Bean blossoms, of gourdes, of melons, of onyons, of white flourdelice, of
the rote of the herb called in latin Dracontium, or more commonly Serpentaria,
in english dragons, and of other like: but you must take heed that you put in
it no sublime, nor Ceruse in any wise. Thus shall you have a water of a
merueilous virtue, to make your skin and flesh fair and natural, and to
conserve and keep it long young, gaye, fresh, and nete.

A very goodly water to wash the face, neck, and the breast, whereof a man
may make a great quantity, for the more there is of it, the better it is: It
makes the skin and flesh of the face fayer, not burtinge or destroyinge the
teeth, and shall seem that the face is nothing at all helped with any color,
but that it is even so by nature.
TAke two fat Pigcons, two pound of Veale, seeds of Spurge, pilled three
ounces of Pine apple kernelles, sweet Almondes, bitter Almondes, the roots of
white and yelowe flower delice, Beans broken in pieces and mo^dified, the gall
of an Ox, the root of Dragons, the root of a little young Ash, or romon
Diptum, a little lemon the yelow pill taken away, and cut in pieces, the cromme
of a white lofe wet in milk gomme dragant stieped in wine, gomme Ammoniac
slieped in Vinaigre, and let there be of all these things a reasonable
quantity. Than put thereunto flowers or blossoms of Ligustrum, which is a tree
having leaves like an olive tree, but they be brother and softer, and more grene
of color, which does bear white flowers and sweet, whereof is made an oil
called Oleum ciprinum. And this free does grow in watrie places, as Willowes
and salowes do, and bears a black fruit like unto an elder free, and
distill all these with a small fire, having bound or tied a little linen cloth
with Musk, and white Benge wine, at the beck of the Limbecke: than keep the
water in a glass well stopped, for it will be very excellent to make a white
and natural skin or flesh, without hurtinge the teeth or any other thing.

To make a very excellent read color for the face, which is natural, and
continues long upon the face, making it always gayer and fairer.
TAke the whites of.xxv. hard Eggs, and put a glassefull of the milk of
green figs among them, if you can get none of it, take little figs that be
not ripe, and cut them in small pieces, which you shall mingle with the said
eggs: and than distill them, and the water that shall come thereof, makes of
it self the flesh white: but if you will make it read, take for every
glassefull of the said water, two ounces of Alome Scissilae or plumae, beaten
in poulder, half an ounce of the grain called in latin Coccum, wherewith
scarlet is died, and two ounces of the graynes that men use to die Cr^mson ^ilke
with. Let all this he put in a viole well stopped, that it take no vent, then
set the vyole in a kettle of bote water (not boylinge hot) by the space of
eyghte days. This done, strain out well the substance of the said
colors, and take the water so colored and died: and put to it as much
more of the same Alome, and graynes as before, and set it again altogether in
hot water, by the space of eight days: than strain out the water, and add
to it the third time some Alom, and grains, with a little gomme Arabic, that
is to say, for every glassefull of water, half an ounce of gomme, setting it
again in hot water eyghte days, as before: and after you have taken it out,
strain it, and you shall have the fairest read, that is possible to wish
for. Than weate some little piece of Scarlate or Crymson sylke in it, and rub
your face therewith so long until the flesh begin to wax somewhat
chafed, and the red well perced through. You may also add to it what odoure
or sauoure you will. And if you will not set the violle in hot water, as is
aforesaied, set it before a little fire, not sufferynge it to sees, and that
for the space of a day or moore: than strain it, and you shall see all
things come to pass, as I have said.

Another kind of read very good for the face, easier to make, and with less
cost.
TAke two ounces of fisshe glewe very clear, and stiepe it in white wine, the
space of five or six days, until it be very soft: than take Brassell that
is good and of a good color, well scraped or cut in small pieces, than stiepe
it in well water, so that the water be above it moore than a hand breadeth,
and a half, this dooen, boil it together with a small fire, assaiyng evermore
the color upon a paper, until it be to your fantasy. And before you take it
from the fire, put to it, for every glassefull of the said color, an ounce of
raw roche Alome beaten in poulder, and Gomme arabicke, as much as three or
four beans. Than take it from the fire, and keep it in a v^olle close
stopped: and so shall you have an erquisite thing. Women of base degree, are
wont to sees only the Brasyll in wine or water, putting to it a little roche
Alome, and Gomme, letting it hoyle until the color be to their mind.

Other take read Sandall or Saunders, the which they put in wine, or at the
least in Aqua vite, and not boil it at all, but keep it so the space of a
night. Than in tourninge the water, they put moore Sandall to it, and a little
moore Alome, according as they like the color.

An excellent white above all other,
TAke brayed Talchum, and burned tin beaten in to poulder with a wodden
pestell, than wash them and mingle them together, and put them in some manner
of platter, or other great and large vessel, covered with such another, and
so set it in a glassemakers fornayse, the space of three or four days. And
having taken it out, it will be as white as snow. Than braye it finely with
the water of young fygges, or with the milk of green fygges, or with
distilled vynagre, or some other such sharp and clammy thing.

To make hear as yelow as gold.
TAke the ryne or the scrapynges of Rubarbe, and stiepe it in white wine, or in
clear lie: and after you have washed your head with it, you shall weate your
hears with a sponge or some other cloth, and let them dry by the fire, or
in the Sun: After this weate them and dry them again: for the oftener you
do it, the fairer they will be, without hurting your head any thing at all.

To make lie to wash the head, which (beside that it comforth the brain, and
the memory) makes the hear long, fair, and yelow, like gold.
TAke lie that is not to strong, but as women commonly make it to wassh their
heads: and make as much of it in a kettle, as will serve you ten washinges,
putting to it this following. The pills of ten Orenges, or of sweet Lemons, if
you have any, if not take sour ones, the pills of Cytrons, as many as you
can get, be they green or dry it is all one, the blossoms of Camomell,
Baye leaves, a handful of the herb called Maiden hear, half a handful of
Agrimoyne, two or three handefulles of Barley straw, chopped in pieces, half
a dishefull of a kind of pulse corn, called in Latyne Lupinus and in French
Lupius, having one stalk, the leaf in five deuisions, the cod creauesyd
about, having in it five or sire graynes, hard, broad, and read, they be
commonly in France and in Italye, but here in England uneath known, and
therefore they have no English name: they must be dried, a dishefull of
Fennygreeke, half a pound of wine lies, or two or three disshfulles of Brom
blossoms, whereof it is good always to have some dry in your house to make
such things withal. Put all this that I have named in a great vessel with
the said lie, leaving it always so, to take thereof and occupy when you
will. And the longer the said lie shall be compounde with the foresaied
things, the better it will be. The said composition will be good for five
or six months or moore: and you may renew it at your pleasure. But when
you will put it in use, take it handsomely and cleanely up, without touching in
any wise the said drooges put in it: and in heatinge it again you may put in
it a little Myrre and a little Synamom: and thus shall you make it very good, as
well for the health of the head, and eyesyghte, as for to beautify and make
the hear fair.

Lie to make hear black.
TAke Gomme lie, and boil it with a handful of the leaves of Beete, three or
four handfuls of Sage leaves, either green or dry, and as much Myrre as you
will, with Baye leaves, and a few leaves or outward pille of a Walnut. But
when you will use of those lies that make yelowe or black, rub not your
face, or your neck with it, least they become black, or yelowe, although
they dye not the skin so soon as they do the hear. And after having thus
washed your hear, you must wash your face with common lie, or clear water,
or else with white wine.

An oil for to annoint the hear, which makes it yelowe like gold, long and
glystryng like burnyshed gold.
TAke a glassefull of the oil of Sesamum, which is a white grain growing in
India, whereof oil is made, which is called oleum Sesaminum, if you can get
of it, if not, take oil Olyue not green, but very yelowe, and clear, where
unto you shall put three ounces of dry brom blossoms, well mundified, from
the verdure and greenesse that is in them, and from the white that you shall
find within: than stamp them so grosely, adding thereunto an ounce of the yelowe
that is in the middle of white flower delices, and a quarter of an ounce of
Curcuma, and the sixte part of an ounce of Saffron, with a little Synamom,
Bengewine, Musk, and Ciuet, if you will. All these things will give a good
savor, help the color and comfort the head: you must put all together into
one vessel or violle, wherein must be oil, which you shall keep in the
Sun all the Summer, and so take of it at every time, a little for your face,
and the older it waxes, the better it will be. Also you may at the end,
put the oil again upon the said drooges, into the vessel, for they will
continue still good together many years: or else you may change those
substaunces, according as you see need. It shall be also very good to anoint
with this oil the kombe that women kembe them selves with, in the Sun: or
else lay some linen cloth hot upon their head, and let it so lie, without
putting any other thing to it. This is a thing very rare and excellent for a
queen: for to do thus there can not be found a better.

A very goodly way or manner how to make yelowe aberne hear, without standinge
long or nothing at all in the Sun, a rare and a very excellent secret.
TAke half a pound of Antimonium, half a pound of wine leese, nine ounces of
salt Peter, al these things being finely brayed and incorporated, take an
earthen pot or pan, and put it in the middle of a fire, that the fire may be
both above it and underneath it, until it be read hot: than cast in the
said poulders, by little and little with a spone, tarryinge a little space
between every sponefull castinge in, until the first be all burned, and
continue so castinge in one sponefull after another, until all be in. But this
must be done in a chymney, or in an open place, because there will rise such
abundance of smoke that it is not possible for you to endure it, than having
letten it cool, break the said pan, and in the bottom you shall find as
it were a manner of a thick cake or brown lofe. Than break the said matter
and substance in diverse pieces upon the ground, or in some clean place, and
you shall find in the middle, certain little graynes like unto fine silver:
but they be brittle and easy to be broken. And this is it that the searchers
out of the secrets of nature do call the king or chief of Antimonium,
which in operation belonging to metal serves for many things, as we will
after declare. But this will not serve any thing at all for to make hear white
notwithstanding you must keep it by it self. Than take the rest, and the
black substance and yellowe, and all that you find in the bottom, and on
the sides of the said pan. All the which things (because they will
incontinent wax moist) you shall stamp grossly and quicklye, addinge to it
for every pound, an ounce of Vitrioli, rubified or made read, as we will show
you hereafter. This done, put all these things together in lie, not to
strong, and let it stiepe until it becomme as it were a saulce, putting to
it, two ounces of the oil of yelkes of Eggs, if you have any, if not, take
Oil Olyue. Now, you must keep this licoure thick as it is, in some
vessel, until it be hard, and you shall find it always good. When you will
put it in effect, take common lie, and put into it two or three ounces of raw
Roche Alome stamped, and wash your head with it as you are wont to do. And
after you have washed it, without dryinge it any otherwise than of it self,
annointe all your hear with the said lycoure heated, and being thus
annoyncted, wrappe them in a hot linen clothe, resting your self a while.
This done, you shall take of the said annoinctynge, washing your head with
hot lie, vsinge and dressinge the Soap as you shall think good. And finally
wasshe your head and hear again with a little warm white wine, and wrappe
them with a hot linen clothe, or dry them in the Sun, or by the fire, as
you will, and last of all you shall annointe your self with our said oil,
or with the Oil of Iasemin, or some other odoriferous and sweet Oil, which
may conserve the hears that they break not, and may give them a luster to make
them glister and shine, using this manner of annoynctinge every.xv. days, or
every month, as you list your self. By this mean you shall have faier
hear and glisteringe like gold. But remember to use in all things a
discretion, and diligence, at the first when you use any receipte, as for an
example in this confection, you must take heed that the lie be not to
strong, least with the said oynctment (which I tell you is very strong) it
eat and consume your hear. Also you must well consider the quantity, and
how long it must lie on your head, before you wasshe it away, as is
declared: and so, according to the experience that you shall have in the
effect, you shall use and govern your self in all things, for there is no
rule so certain, but leaves always some place for the discretion, diligence,
and Judgment of the person that will follow it, and put it in ure or
effect.

An ointment to make the hears fall from any place of the body.
TAke the whites of three new laid eggs well beaten, eight ounces of quick
lime, an ounce of orpiment, and the whole being beaten in poulder, let it be
put among the whites of the eggs and add to it after a little lie, so much
that it may make it a licour thick like saulce. Than with a pensill or some
other thing, anoint the place from the which you will have the hears fall,
and leave the oinctmente so upon it the space of a quarter of an hour, or a
little more, than wash the place with warm water, and all the hear will fall
of, or if not, you must annoincte it again, and having stayed a while, wash
it as before, and the hears will fall of without doubt. Finally you must
anoint the said place with oil Roset, or with the oil of Violettes, and the
skin will remain very faier, and without hurt.

An oil or licoure to make the hear fall of, and may be kept as long as a man will: It is also good for all occasions.
TAke an ounce of Soda (which is ashes made of grass, whereof glassemakers
do use to make their Cristall) ten ounces of quick lime eyghte ounces of
Orpimente, and make thereof a fine poulder, which you shall put in a pan,
with as much sweet and clear lie as will be above the poulder a handefull:
than boil it together a good hour, and after having let it stand by the
space of xxiiii. hours, you must strain it, and take three ounces of it, and
put thereto an ounce of oil Olive, and let it boil together until the water be
consumed and vanished away, which you shall know, castinge a drop or two
into the fire, with a little stick, and if it make no noise, it is a sign
there is no more water left. If you will make it odoriserous and sweet, put to
it Musk, or Ciuet, and so keep it: and when you will make the hears to fall of,
wash first the place well with hot water, tha^ annoinct it with the said oil,
and leave it so a certain space and than wasshe it again with hot water, and
all the hear will fall away. Finallye annointe the place with oil Roset, or
violet oil.

An advertisement or lesson for them that will make the hear fall of.
First, you must note that the hear will not fall away, but when the moon
decreaseth, that is to say, in the quarter of the wane, and it is far better to
make them fall of with the oinctmente, or with oil, than to pluck them out
with a pair of pincers, as some gentle women do use in France, because it
does violence unto the flesh, moves the blood, and enlarges the pores, and
also makes the hear to grow again greater.

Therefore in all sorts it is good to anoint by and by the place with some
coolinge or refreshing oil, as oil roset, or of Violettes. Likewise, you
must understand that oftentimes the oynctment being mixed with Orpiment,
burns the skin, and that comes by the naughty or to strong composition
of it, or when a man lets it dry to long upon the place, or without first
wasshinge the place with hot water, or when a man annoincteth not the place by
and by after the hears be fallen, as we have said before.

To cause that the hear shall grow no more or to make them come out thynne
and fine like the first soft hear or mosynes of the face.
A Man can scant find a remedy that the hear grow no more, because that many
when they will do it, they make certain oyntementes very cold and dry,
wherewith they anoincte the place a good while, not doing any good at al, by
reason of the power of nature, which has always his course, and casts out
her superfluities, with the hear. Therefore they burn the skin and do but
mar it, wherefore you must note that they must make them fall of in the last
quarter of the wane of the Moon, and then incontinent annoyncte the place with
oil rosat, or of Violettes: this dooen, the hear grows again weaker,
softer, and finer: and slacketh at every time moore and moore in coming forth.

But if you will that it never grow more, use these remedies folowinge, which
are very good, and certain by experience. Take the little stones of Olives
burned, the outward coddes of beans, dried, the seed of Henbaine, Litarge of
gold and silver, the shelles of fyshes called in Latyne Tellmae, burned, and
the juice of black Poppy, as much of the one as of the other, and half as
much Orpiment as of one of those things. All this being beaten to poulder,
boil it in as much oil Olive rosat, as will cover them six fingers heyght,
styrringe it continually by the space of two or three hours: than let it
cool, and strain the said oil, and so keep it, putting to it the fourth
part of the oil of Selandyne. And when the hears be fallen, take a little
linen cloth, wette in the said oil luke warm, and lay it upon the said
place, leauinge it so bound on all a night. In the morning take of the lynnen
cloth, and annoint the place with oil rosate: and at night lay the lynnen
cloth on again wetted as before: and this do.vi. or.vii. nights, but let it
be in the wane of the Moon. And if you perceive that the hears grow again,
make them fall away again at the next wane of the Moon, doing in all points
as before: you shall not often do it, but you shall make that the hears shall
never grow more.

To make a kind of cloth or plaster to take the hear from the face, neck,
and hands, or from any part of the body.
TAke two ounces of Turpentyne, half an ounce of white wax broken small, or
some what moore or less, according as need shall require, Bengewyne, Storax
calamita, at your discretion. First melte the wax a little, with a little
fire, and than the Bengewyne and Storax: after this, put in the Turpentyne,
adding to it a little Ceruse well brayed, and settinge it to the fire, put in
to it a little Masticke, and make thereof a mixion neither to thick nor to
clear or thin. Than take a piece of linen clothe of what bygnesse you will,
and lay it abroad upon a table, spreading afterward the said composition upon
it with a spone, or some other thing, as it were in manner of a plaster, than
let it cool, and keep it so the one upon the other open, without folding up
the lynnen clothe, for when the said mixion is cold, it is hard. If you will
put it in proof and occupy, do as follows.

At night when you gooe to bed, wash your face and neck with luke warm
water, rubbinge it well with a linen cloth, or with your hand: and when it is
dry or when you have wiped it, take a piece of the said plaster, or cyred
clothe, and heat it by the fire, until the said mixion be liquide and
soft, then immediately bind it upon your face, or upon the place, from
whence you would have the hear to fall, and press it hard on, leauinge it
so all night. In the morninge go to your lokinge glass, and pluckynge of one
end of the said lynnen clothe, you shall pluck away with it all the hear
of your face, and so shall you leave a very fair skin. And if in case there
remain yet any of the said mixion upon the flesh, wasshe it with hot water,
and with wheat branne, rubbinge it so long with some piece of lynnen cloth,
till you make it fall of, than wash your face with Aqua vite, or white wine, or
with some other distilled water, being not to strong, but let it be of Melons,
or gourdes, or of such other like and use afterward waters meet for the face,
as you list, and thus shall you keep and maintain your face as clear as
glass.

A marvelous secret, which the great lords of the Moors do use, whereby
they make that their children have no hear under their arms, or other place
where they will. And this secret found I in Syria, the year 1521. by the
means of a lord of the country, whose daughter I healed.
AS soon as the child is borne, they make ready by and by a piece of fine
gold, or a Ducar, or else a ring, or some like thing, and keep it in the fire
until it be read hot, not meltyng it, than they carry it with a payer of
tongues and lay it upon the place, where they will no hear shall grow, and
immediately annoynte it with oil Rosat, or the oil of Violettes: than
after.xxiiii. hours, they do the like again, and by this means there grows
never hear in that place. I have often times made the hear fall from young
gentil women's brows and foreheades with this medecin and they have found it
wonderful: but the gold must be very fine, which suffexeth no token, mark or
skarre to remain where the burning was, as other metals do. I have kept this
secret hidden a long time, ^although that diverse times, men would have given
me great gifts, yet I would not publish it a broad, until now that I have
done it, in this present book.

To make a kind of cloth, called cloth of Leuant wherewith women use to color
their faces.
TAke the shearynge of skarlate, and boil it in water, where quick Lyme has
been boiled: and after you have boiled it a good space, you shall strain it,
and take a potful of it, and put into it two ounces of Brasill, cut in little
pieces, addyng to it an ounce of Roche alume, and as much of Verdigreese, and a
quarter of an ounce of gum Arabicke: and after you have well boiled it, the
space of half an hour, take a piece of old linen clothe, of what bigness
you will, and wete it in this decoction, or red color, than cover the pan, and
let the said mixtion cool, by the space of a day and after you have taken it
out, dry it in the shadow, and keep it in some vessel, among odoriferous
and ^oote things, for to help you.

The same another way.
TAke a glassefull of Aqua vite, a quarter of an ounce of the grain that I
spoke of before called Coccum, half an ounce of Brasyll, half an ounce of gomme
armoniacke, put all these things together, in the glass where the Aqua vite
is, than stop it clase, for fear it take vent, and the said glass must
be full. After this set it upon a small fire, making it sees fair and
softlye, or else set it in the Sun, by the space of two or three days.
This done, strain it, and put in it pieces of old linen cloutes, as we have
said before. If you think, in strayninge this water, that the color is not
read, to your mind, your may put in moore of the said grain and brasell.

To dye a white bearde or hear of the head into a fair black.
TAke good galls of Leuant, or such like, and fry them in oil, but let them
not burn: than stamp them, and sifte them once or twice. Take also Ferretum
or Spanishe black, which the Frenchmen call Atrament d'Espaigne, the which
likewise you shall stamp and beat well to poulder. Than take a pan full of
lie, and put into it the pylles or rynes of Pomegranades, Walnut pills,
Pineapples, Myrre, Sage leaves, as much as you will. Let all this boil
together, until it be brought unto the third part. You must have in it
also two parts of galle, and one of Ferretum, tempering and incorporating all
well together, until the black color content you, wherewith you may die your
bearde, and hear, in this manner. Wash your bearde with lie not to strong,
least it hurt you: and whiles your head or beard is yet hot, annoint it with
the said confection: but it must be luke warm, to the intent it may
penetrate and perce the better, and so leave it a certain space. Than wasshe
your head or bearde first with lie, and than with hot water, and you shall
have your head and bearde sayre and black. This hurts not, nor smarteth
any thing at all, neither brings any inconvenience to the head.

A noble and excellent poulder to make clean the teeth, to make them fast and
white, and to conserve the gommes. A better thing can not be found, and it
were to give or present to a Queen or Princess.
TAke Lacca of grain, Lacca de grain, is a certain confection or mixtion,
made of grain, and are little round red balls. Lacca is a Turkish word, and
not used among us, but among the Italians,
if you can get (...), if not, take of the grain it self that is very good.x.
parts, seven parts of barley cakes or bread, so burned that they be brought
to coals, Lignum aloe (...). parts, fine pommeyse stone scoured and made
clean in embers, and stieped or tempered in white wine, or in Vinaigre eight
parts, dragons blood three parts, roche Alome burned four parts, honnye
burned in a pan until it be first black, and than yelowe, three parts
(and this may you do of the lees of honnye, that remains when it is
distilled, puttinge it in a pan, and settinge it in a glassemakers fournesse
the space of a day or two) coals of the wood of rosemary, three parts, fine
Synamom two parts, Bengewyne one part, Bole Armenick oriental, nine parts,
white wine lees two parts, Aleblaster one part small pearls one part, the
scrapynge of yuorye two parts, little Quinces not ripe, of the byggenesse of a
Walnutte, or a little more, six parts. Now the best be those that be not
come to perfection upon the tree; the which you must burn in the fire, even
unto coals, Mastir eighte parts. Let all these things be well stamped, and
passed thorough a fine sarce, addinge thereto a little Musk, and some Gold or
Silver foil. This done, you shall keep the said poulder in some box well
stopped, and so shall you have a precious thing. And when you will occupy of
it, wasshe your mouth well first, with clean water, or wine, than rub your
teeth with your fingar, or some lynnen cloth, taking of the said poulder upon
it, and after wash your mouth well. Thus often doing, you shall always have
your teeth very white, fast in your head, strong and not hollow.

To make a very excellent conserve to scour the teeth, to comfort the
gummes, and to make a sweet and good breath.
BEcause the use of the poulder to scour teeth, seems less commodious, than
some licoure or conserve, which agrees better with the mouth, therefore we
will write here a very excellent one, which has not his like in the world,
and must be made as follows. Take one part of syrop roset, two parts of the
syrop of Myrtell, or of the wood called Lentiscus, out of the which comes a
gomme called Mastir, put this together in a clean pan, than put to it of the
said poulder for the teeth, whereof we have spoken in the Chapter before, so
that al may be brought into soft paste or dowe, than set the little pan upon
and chafinge dishe, wherein must be some hot ashes, with a few embers, or
else at the least set it far from the fire, and make it boil sayre and
softly, styrringe it always, until it be as thick as honny or thicker: than
take it from the fire, and put to some goldfoile and musk, what quantity you
will. And so shall you have a singular thing for to do this that I have spoken
of.

An advertisement or lesson concerning the making of poulders, and conserues
for the teeth.
IF you will make the said things as excellent as is possible, you must take of
the said things as much as you may get: or if you cannot have them al, take at
the least the most excellent, as grain, pearls, Coral, yellowe Amber, Lignum
aloes, Boale Armenick, also the coals of Barley Cakes or loves when they are
burned, and all the other things be very good in it. And if you woulds give it
to some great prince or lord, which had rather have it of a good color, or
would know the things in it, you may make it as is said, of sewe things,
with goldfoile and Musk. And he that will make it with less cost, and a
greater quantity, may (with the things mentioned in the chapter with the
poulder) add poulder of brickes, poulder of marble, Creuise or lopsters
shelles burned, and a little white salt, the lees that remains in the
bottom when men make strong water, called Aqua fortes, is also very good,
either by it self, or mingled with some other thing, and so shall you have a
great deal of substance with small cost. And if a man will make a conserve of
little charge, and without much labor, he must take raw honnye, or honny
roset, and mingle it with the said poulders, and so rub his teeth therewith,
with his finger, or with a linen clothe, and wash his mouth well after it.
Doing this every eight days, he shall make his teeth very fair and white. A
thing very good, and mete for every man.

An exceeding white and good poulder to scour the teeth, which is meeter for
lords and great men, then any of the other before.
First here is to be noted a goodly and notable secret of great virtue, for to
scour and make white teeth, which is the pommeise stone alone, so that it be
of that fine and white stone, which shoemakers do use to whiten white leather
Shoes, and well beaten in poulder: For in rubbinge your teeth with the same
poulder, if scoureth and makes them clean, and takes away all the roughness
of them, as men see by experience, that the pommeise stone is used to polysshe
bones, marble, and other like things. I have seen of my friends, men of great
judgment and knowledge, which gave nothing unto great men and Lords, but
the said poulder, when it is well beaten in poulder, a man can not tell what it
is: also you may give it a little savor, layinge it among bags of Musk and
Amber, of whom it takes an odor, and I have seen men of estimation, that
held it for a thing of great importance, when they saw the virtue and
operation of it. Now, if you will make a white poulder, more noble and more
profitable for the teeth, and gommes, take small pearls stamped a little, or
else whole, and put them in a dyshe, or in a wide glass: than take the
juice of lemons or orenges, strayned thorough a linen cloth, at the least six
or seven times, and pour it upon the said Pearls, until it cover them over
three or four fingers high, and you shall see that in short space it will
begin to boil, and than cover it with some paper, or linen cloth, leauinge
it so three or four days, and at the end you shall find the said pearls
dissolved and molten in the iayde juice, and turned into a paste as white as
snow, marye there will be a little yellowe skin upon it, engendered of the
said suyce. This done, take clear well water, or the water of Lentiscus
distilled, and pour it upon the said paste, three or four fingers heighte
above. Than take a little forke, or the steal of a silver spone, or some
thin stick, and styre the paste well about in the said water, lettinge it
so stand, and finallye cast out the water, and if you see yet any of the
yellowe, remain upon the said paste, wash it again, as before, and cover it
with a paper, lettinge it so dry of it self, in the sun. After this you
shall take three parts of the said paste, or white poulder, four parts of
white Pommeise stone, as is aforesayed, two parts of white Bengewine, one
part of Roche Alome well burned, one part of white Coral, half a part of
white yuorye, half a part of Aleblaster very white. Break and bruise all
these well upon a table of marble, or in a silver cup, puttinge to it some
silver foil, and thus shall you have a very white and excellent substance or
matter to make your teeth as white as snow. And if you will, you way put it
to keep in a conserve, with the syrope of Ceder, or honny Roset, or otherwise
as you will. Also, if you will make the said poulder very read, dress it
only with the Lacca of grain, and a little read coral. Now, because that
in stampinge, it will wax somewhat white, put to it a little Boale Armonicke,
with a little of the juice of Dragons blood, and also gold foil. You may
g^ue to all these said poulders what odoure and savor you will, but unto the
white poulder you may put no Musk nor Amber, nor any other such drooges, for
it would take away the whiteness, but you may put it well enough in a
little bag among Musk, or other odours.

A distilled water, excellent for to make the teethe white immediatelye, and
to preserve them wonderfully.
TAke a pound of the first water distilled of honny, the which is white:
than put it in a violl, with an ounce of commune white salt, half a pound of
raw roche Alome, an ounce of Salt Peter, half a pound of ye water of the
leaves of Lentiscus, two ounces of Mastick, the heighte of two fingers of
Vynaigre in a glass, and as much white wine: Distill all these things with a
small fire, that they smell not of the smoke, nor any burninge: continuinge
your distillation in such sort, that you be at the least four and twenty
hours in distillinge the whole, or else you may make it distill in Balnee
marie, which is the sureste of all. Now, you must continue your
distillation so long, until there be a moist substance to come forth, and
into the water that distilleth out, you shall put a little poulder of fine
Synamom, a little Lignum Aloes, and Boale Armonicke, for to give it a red
color, which many men like well: also for to give it a strength and odor,
you shall put in raw honny making it dissolve in the heat of the Sun, for
it is a thing good for the gummes, and gives a good favor to the water. Keep
this well as an excellent thing, and it were for a queen. And when you will
occupy of it, wash well your mouth first, and wipe your teeth with a little
piece of white linen clothe, and than pike them with a tooth piker made of the
wood Lentiscus, or some other thing wette in the said water, or with a
little clothe, rub them a little, and incontinent you shall perceive and
feel it fasten and bind your gommes, and comfort your teeth making them
fair and white. And he that loves better the white then the red, let him
put no Synamom, Boale armonicke, nor Lignum Aloes into it, after it is
distilled, but let him put it in to destill with the other things, puttinge of
each of them as much as there is of Masticke, and it shall be even as excellent
and as white as otherwise.

Three aduertisementes or lessons of importance to keep the teeth white and
vncorrupt and also a sweet breathe.
THe first is, he that uses not to wasshe well his mouth ever when he has
eaten his meals, shall I have always yelowe teeth and a stinking breath. The
second is, he that slepeth with his mouth close, has likewise an evil
breath, and foul teeth. The third is, that for to maintain and keep the
teeth fair and white, and a sweet breath, when a man is laid is his hedde,
and when he waketh in the morning, it is good to purge well the breaste and
throat, spitting out all that is gathered together that night: which also is
good for the stomach and head. And having your teeth and breath warm take a
lynnen cloth or the corner of the shete, and rub your teeth well within and
without, to take away the fumositie of the meat, and the yelownesse of the
teeth gathered together in the night: for it is that, that makes your teeth
yelowe, and gommes read, and corrupts your breath. This is a very
necessary thing to be known, and ought well to be observed: It is also good
to eat every morning some graynes of Masticke.

A decoction to wash and scour the mouth, to fasten lose teeth, to
consolidate and make sound the gommes, and to make the flesh grow again if
it were decayed or fallen away.
TAke half a glassefull of Vynaigre, and as much water of Lentiscus, of
Rosemarye, Myrrh, Mastick, Boale Armenicke, the moisture that distilleth out
of Dragons blood, Roche Alome burned, of each of them an ounce, ^ine Synamom
half an ounce, well, river, or fountain water, three glassefulles: mingle all
well together, and let it boil with a small fire, addinge to it half a pound
of honny, taking away the scumme of it, than put in a little Bengewine. And
when it has boiled a quarter of an hour, take it from the fire, and keep it
in a clean vyole, and wash your teeth often times withal, as well before, as
after meat: and holdinge it a while in your mouth, it is very good for the
head, and makes a sweet breath. A thing of great excellency.

The end of the fourth book.
THE Secrets of the reverend Master Alexis of Piemount.
THE FIFTE BOOK.
To make perfyt Asure, such as comes from beyond the seas.
TAke first a pound of Lapis Lasuli, spotted like Marble, and somewhat of the
colloure of Asure, with some veins of Gold, or green, of the which you
shall make this proof following. Take a little piece of it, and put it upon
hot coals, blowinge it with a pair of bellows, the space of an hour, than
let it cool again and touch it with your hand, if it break, and undo like
earth, it is nothing worth, but if it abide fyrme and hard together, and
keep his color of Asure, it is good. Than take a pound of the same, and
break it into small pieces, which you shall melte in the fire the space of a
good hour, blowinge it continuallye. This done, take good Vyneygre distilled,
in some kind of vessel, wherein you shall quench the said pieces, and let
them dry: than take water made as follows. Take a pan leaded, and put in
it a quarte of clear water, and a little raw white honnye. Boil it, and
skymme it well, until there be no more skumme, and so let it cool. Than take
of Dragons blood well stamped, the quantity of a Walnutte, and wette it little
and little with the said water, and it being well dipped, strain it through a
linen cloth, into some vessel leaded. And you must note, that the water may
not be to rod, nor to clear, but between both, that is to say, between
clear and read, to the end that the Asure may take a Violette color. After
this, braye well the said Lapis lasuli, so molten and burned, with the said
water (as vermilleon is commonly brayed) by the space of an hour or more: tha^
assemble it together in a glass, or some other vessel leaded, ample and
large, drying it in the shadow, and not in the Sun: for it would lose his
color. And when it is dry, beat it well to poulder, and keep it in some
clean lynen cloth well (...) than make this past folowinge. Take two ounces of
the cousin or gomme of a white pine tree, two ounces of Pigraeca two ounces of
Mastick, two ounces of ye oil of line, two ounces of Turpentine, two ounces of
new Ware: stamp well that must be stamped, and cut the Ware into small
pieces, than put all in a new pan, and boil it till it come to his
perfection, which may be known, by castinge a drop of it into cold water,
and if in taking it with your wette hand, it cleave not to your hand, it is
parfecte: and therefore you shall strain it through some clean cloth, into a
vessel full of cold water, but this must you do while it is yet hot, for if
it be cold, it will not strain, and leave it so long in the water, until it
be hard, than take it and set it to dry. Now, when you will incorporate it
with the poulder, do thus: Cut the said confection in small pieces, which you
shall put into some kettle tinned within, and set it so on the fire, and when
it begins to bubble up, put to it an ounce of the oil of bitter Almondes,
lettyng it so boil the space of two Miserere, and in the mean time make ready
your poulder of Lapis lasuli in a vessel, with some little stick made for the
purpose: than take the kettle, and pour it by little and little, into the
vessel upon the said poulder, not ceassinge to stir it always with the
little stick, until it be all well incorporated with the said poulder of
Lapis lasuli, This done let it cole, than annoinct your hands with oil Olive,
and take the said substance, and toss it up and down with your hands, to
the end to incorporate it well together. And after you have brought it to the
form and fashion of bread or paste, put it in a vessel leaded, and keep it
so the space of ten days at the least.

And when you will take out of it the Asure, make first clear lie, with the
ashes of vynes, of the which you shall set a kettle full to the fire,
seethinge it as hot as you may endure your hand in it: than after, put the
said confection or paste in a vessel leaded, and add to it as much of the
said lie as you shall think good.

Than styre the said substance fair and softlye, until you see the Asure
come out, and when you see it issued out, pour the said lie with the Asure
into a vessel leaded, of the which vessels you must have a good number, than
put to it again of the other hot lie, doing as before, puttinge it afterward
again into another vessel, and do thus until there be no more Asure. And
here you must note, that of a pound of Lapis lasuli if it be fine, there is
lost but an ounce, and is had out of it in the whole, eleven ounces, that is to
say: five ounces of good and fine, three ounces of a mean sort, and three ounces
of courser. The fine is worth at the least two crowns and a half the ounce,
the mean, a crown an ounce, and the other half a crown. Now, after you have
gotten out all the Asure, look well which is like the one the other, for to
put each of them by them selves into three parts, as we have said. Than wash
it well with fair and clear lie, pouringe it out of one vessel into another,
until it be come to a good color, and purified from all ordure and fylth. And
when you think it is clean enough, dry itin the shadow, in a chaumber, and
when it is dry, take a glassefull of fine Aqua vite, and stiepe in it a little
good brasill, and than trim and dress your Asure with the same Aqua vite,
and let it dry, continuinge so the space of three days, until the Asure be
participant, and have taken part of such lycoure, and than it shall be of an
excellent fine color. Keep each sort by it self in bags of leather well
sowed and bound.

To make a fine confection of grain, called Laeca of grain.
TAke a pound of the shearinge of scarlette, and put it in a new pan full
of lie that is not to strong, and boil it until the lie take the color of
it. This done, take a bag, large and wide above, and narrow poincted beneth,
whereinto you shall power the said shearing of scarlette, and the lie, setting
a vessel underneath, than wringe and press the bag hard, that all the
substance, and all the color may strain and dreane out, after that wash
the shearinge and the bag, in the vessel where the color is. And if you
think that the shearinge has yet more color in it, boil it again with
other lie, ordring it as before. This done, you shall heat the said colored
lie upon the fire, but let it not boil, and you must have ready upon the fire
some clean pan, with clean water, into the which being hot, you shall
put.v. ounces of Roche Alome, beaten to poulder. And as soon as you see it
dissolve, take a bag, like unto the first, and when the color is hot,
take it from the fire, and put into it Alome, and cast all so together into
the bag, setting under it some vessel leaded, and look if underneath the
color come out read, than take hot water and pour it into the bag, with
all the rest that was strained out of it, into the said vessel under the
bag, and pour that so often, which shall strain and run out underneath,
until the licour that shall issue out, be no more read, but clear as lie:
having thus strained all the water, the color will remain in the bag,
which you shall undo and sever a sonder with a sclyse of wood, putting it down
to the bottom of the bag, and bring it al into a mass, or lump, or into
little tablettes, or into what form you will, and than dry it upon a new
clean pauinge tyle, in the shadow, within your house, or else abroad where
no sun shines. And so shall you have an excellent thing of it.

To dye bones into a green color.
TAke a pan full of clear water, and put into it a good great piece of
quick lyme, leauinge it so the space of a day. The next day morninge mingle
it well together with a stick, and so let it rest, and at none stir it
again, and likewise at night. The next morninge folowinge, you shall strain
it clean out and keep it, in the mean time have the bones that you will die
in a readiness, and boil them well in other common water, wherein Roche Alome
has been dissolved, and when it has boiled a good space, you shall take them
out, and let them dry, than scrape them well with a knife, and put them into
the said lime water, and addinge to it some Verdegrise, you shall let them
sees well, and than take them out. And after you have wyped and dried them, do
with them what ye will, for they will be very fair: And instead of the said
lyme water you may use piss, which will be of the like operation.

Another manner how to die bones, or Iuorye, into the color of an Emeraude.
TAke Aqua fortis separatiua, and put therein to fret and dissolve, as much
copper or brass, as the water is hable with her force to dissolve and leuse:
this done, put in what piece of work you will, being first cut in the
form that you will have it, as beftes for knives, penkniues, ynckhornes,
images, or any other thing to your fantasy, leave them in it the space of a
night, and they shall be of the color of an Emerande. Now, if in steed of
copper or brass, you did put in Silver, it would be the better.

To die bones read, blewe, or of any color you will.
First boil your bones in Alome water, than take quick lyme water, or piss,
and in this water or pysse, you shall put Brasyll, Azur, or an herb called
Rub^a, which the Apoticaries call Rubramaior, and Rubra tinctorum, or Rubea
tinctorum, wherewith they color wolle or skins, in English Chickweede, or
what other color you will, and than sees your bones or Iuozie therein, and
they will take such color as you put in.

A very goodly secret to dye or color wood, of what color a man will,
which some Ioyners do use that make tables and other things of diverse colors,
and do esteem it among them selves to be of such excellency, that one
brother will not teach it another.
TAke early in the morninge, new and fresh horse donge, made that night, and
take of the moysteste ye can get, with the straw or lytter and al, and lay
upon some little sticks laid a cross one overthwart another, and set some
vessel underneath, for to receive that shall drop or fall from the said
donge. And if you can not have enough in one morninge, do the like two or
three times, or as often as you will: than when you have well dreamed out the
water of this dong you shall put into every pot of the said water, the
bigness of a bean of Roche Alome, and as much gomme Arabic. Than stiepe what
color you will in it, using diverse vessels, if you will have diverse colors,
and put in what pieces of wood you will, holdinge them at the fire, or in the
Sun: and at each time pluck out some pieces and lay them apart, leauinge
the other in, for the longer ye let them lie in the water, the more will the
color alter. And in this manner you shall have a great quantity of diverse
colors, the one cleerer, the other darker, and may use it to your
commodity, so what use you list, for they shall be colored both within and
without, so that they will never lose their color, neither by water or any
other thing.

To counterfeyte the black wood called Hebenus, or Hebenum, and to make it as
fair as the natural Hebene, which grows no where but in India.
ALl kind of wood that is like unto this Hebene, may be dyed black: but the
hardest and the massiuest (as box and other like) are meetest for it, Sola
India fert Hebenu^
and will be bryghter, and above all, the wood of a Mulbery tree, as well the
white as the black, is the best to be colored, albeit the black be much
more for the purpose. Take than the said wood, and let it lie the space of
three days in Alome water, either in the Sun, or a pretye way of from the
fire, until the water wax somewhat warm: than take oil Olive, or Oil of
line seed, and put it in a little pan, wherein is the bygnesse of a nutte,
of Roman Vitriole, and as much Brymstone. This done, sees your wood in the
said Oil a certain space, and so shall you have a thing very dark of
color. And the longer you let it boil, the blacker it will wax, but to much
boylinge burns it, and makes it bryttle, therefore both in the one and other
you must be circumspecte, and use discretion.

To die skynnes blewe, or of the color of Asure.
Having first well washed the skin, and than wrong him, take the berries of
walwort, and elder berries, and sees them in water, wherein Roche Alome was
dissolved, pass him once through this water, and let him dry, than pass him
again through the same water, and being wiped and dried again, wash him with
clear water, than scrape out that water with the back of a knife, and once
again pass it over with the same color, and let it dry, so shall it be of a very
blew or Asur color.

To die skins in chickweede, called in latin Rubra maiore, or Rubra
tinctorum, into a red color.
Having anoincted, washed, wrong, and laid abroad the skin, as is aforesaied,
wete it with water that white wine lees and baye salt has been boiled in, and
than wring him. Take than creuises or crabbe shelles (be they of the sea or of
the river) burned into ashes, the which you shall temper with the said water
of the lees and salt, and rub well the skin therewith, than wash him well
with clear water, and wringe him. This done, take ruddle tempered in water of
lees, and rub the skin well over and over with it, and than with the
foresaid ashes, wasshinge, and wringinge it three times. Finallye, after you
have washed him, and wrong him, if you think it be not well enough, you
shall give him one dienge with Brasyll. The paste or mass of Rubra tinctorum,
must be made with water that lees or tartre has been boiled in, and the said
water must be luke warm, when you make the paste of ruddle, than leave it so
the space of a night. After this, put upon the said Rubra tinctorum, a little
Alome, dragges, or lees, or Alome catinum, stieped in water. You may also add
to it the color of the shearing of scarlet, which has been taken out
boylinge in lie, which is a goodly secret.

To die skins Green. Sap green is made with the berries of a Dog berry tree

Anoint the skin, and wash him well with cold water, and than in hot water,
and so wipe and dry him. This done, take of the grains wherwt men the sap
(the decoction whereof shall be put in the end of this book, with them of all
other necessary things) and the said graynes or berries must be very ripe,
than put them in clear water, covered a fingar height, put therein also Roche
Alome, and give them only one wawlme on the fire. This done, strain them
out into some vessel, than take the skin, and fold him in the middle,
rubbinge him well on both sides, with the said sodden grains, or berries,
which remain in the pan, and after with raw Alome poulder. This done, take
the ashes of shepes donge burned, and wete it with the said color that you
strained into the said vessel, and rub the skin well on every side, than
clear him again of the said grains, and wash him with clear water, and
set him to dry without wipinge him. Finally cast on him two glassefulles of
the said color, and it will be a perfect green.

Another way to dye skins green.
Let the skin be annoincted, well washed, wrong, and stretched out as
before, than take of the same grains and berries ye took before, which you
shall stamp and sees in Roche Alome water, and give the skin two wypes
over with this color, and so let it dry. After this you shall give him one
dying or colouringe of yellowe, made with the graynes, or berries of Nerprum,
sodden in water and Alome, and a little Saffron, and you shall have an
excellent green.

To die the said skins green another way.
TAke the skin, being annoincted, washed, and spredde abroad, dye and
color him with the color made of sap green, and put to it a few ashes
wette in water, and so rub the skin all about. And when you have washed and
wyped him again, give him one wype over with and Indian color sodden in
Roche Alome. And when it is dry, lay on it of the foresaid yellow, and you
shall have a fair and lively green.

Another way to dye skins of Asure color, and fair.
TAke the skins of black grapes, and rub well your leather with all,
until it wax somewhat blewe, and alsoo rub it well with the poulder of
Indicum, then wash it, dry, and polyshe it. Than stiepe the Indicum in thick
red wine: and when the skin is washed, annoinct him with it, and you shall
have a fair skin asured blewe.

Another manner to dye skins Green.
TAke ripe elder berries, and the berries of walwort, and of sap green, and
this well stamped, you shall put to it Roche Alome, as much as you shall
think good, but rather to much than to little: than take the lie, and put
into it the said berries of sap green, and sees them one waulme.

This done, put in the berries of the walwort, or elder, and make them sees
also one waulme, than take them from the fire, and let them cool, and after
rub the skins with them. Finallye, ye shall cast upon them, the ashes of
sheep donge, rubbinge them well with it. After this, give them the colored
water that the said grains or berries were sodden in, than take of the water
with a curryers knyfe, and let them dry. And if you need to give them more
color, than you may put in more Indicum boiled, and it will be the better.

To die neates leather into a green color, as well in galle as in leaves.
POlyshe well the leather with a pommeyse stone, annointe it well with oil,
and wash it: than take an ounce or two of galls stamped, and put it in hot
water, leaving it so an hour, than strain it through a linen cloth, and put the
leather into the same water, rubbinge it well with your hands, and leave it so
the space of an hour: and having taken it out, wring it, and stretch it
abroad, and tight it. Than take the grains or berries of Nerprum, gathered in
July, when they be yet green: dry them, and stamp them well, adding thereto
for every skin, two ounces of Roche Alom beaten in poulder, and mingled with
the poulder of y^ said berries or grains. Than power upon the said poulder
boylinge water, and let it cool, this done, pour of the said water with the
said grains upon the skin, rubbinge it well over with the palm of your
hand, than stiep the ashes of goats donge, in the water of the said grains,
and with the same water rub likewise the skin well with your hand, after
this wash him, and scrape out the water with a tanners paring knife, than
tight him out, and take other ripe gains of sap grene and set them to sees,
hole, in water with Roch Alom, and afterward let them cool. Than take of the
said sodden berries or grains, and rub the skin with them with your hands,
and put of the ashes upon it, which you shall stiep in the same green water,
that the said berries were sodden in. Finallye, you shall wasshe the skin, and
take out the water with a scraping knife, tha^ you shall give it a course over
of the said grene water with a brush or clout meet for such a purpose: And
than lay him to dry, and trim him, and you shall have a fair grene. If you
will have the color darcker, or sadder, when you set the said grains to
sees with the Alom, you shall put to it a little Indicum well brayed. And you
must note, that the water must be hot when you stiepe the ashes in it, with
the water of the grains of Nerpru^.

To die skines green with the flowers of Ireos.
TAke the fresshe flowers of Raphanitis, Ireos, a kind of flower deluce called
in latin R^phaniti^
or Ireos, and stamp them well, than take the dry grains or berries of
Nerprum, and with them stamp roche Alome, a reasonable quantity, whereof a
great deal can do no hurt: put to it a little rain water, and mingle all
this with the foresaid flowers stamped. Keep this color in some clean vessel,
and than take the skins, being anointed, and washed as is aforsaid, and put
to them the grains of sap grene with the ponlder, in the same manner that we
have spoken of the other: wash them, and scrape of the water with a knife, and
so let them dry, and give them one wipe over finely with the said color that
you kept, let them dry again, then dress them according to the science, and
you shall have fair leather.

To die bones in a turkishe or read color.
ALl kind of bones may well be died and colored, but hearts horn is far
better then any other. Take than what bone you will, and shape him into what
form you please, and pullish him, and then boil him in Roche Alome water a
good while, letting him afterward dry, than take good grene, and stiep it in
goats piss, and put it in some copper or brazen vessel, well covered, and
hide it under a dongehil the space of.xv. or xx. days, and then shall you
find it very fair. You may make the like also with the brine of a man instead of the goats pysse. And for to make it read, put in Cinabrium, or
Brasyll, in stead of green: but than you must put it in some vessel of wood
or glass, and not of copper nor brass.

To die hogs brystels and other things, for to make rubbers and brusshes.
First wash well the brystels, the^ take water wherein Roche Alom has been
boiled, and put the said bristels therein, and let them lie until they take a
color somewhat yellow: than take Chickeweede well stamped, and put it in
Vyneaygre. Afterward set a kettle with clear water on the fire, wherinto
you shall cast the said Chickeweede, with the Vyneaygre and all, and when it
begins to boil, cast in the brystels, and let them sees but a very little
while, than take of the kettle from the fire, and let it cool, and so shall
you have your bristels of an excellent good color.

To dye the said bristels yellowe, green, or blewe, or any other color.
First you must wasshe them, and let them boil in Alome water, as the other
before: than take Ligustrum, and saffron, if you will have them yellowe.
Indicum, or the juice of elder berries, or walwort, or else of the flowers of
Ireos, if you will have them blew. If you will have them green, take paynters
green, and dress them as is above said, assayinge sometime if the color
please you. And by this means you may dye them what color you list.

To make a purple, which is a color wherewith men use to make a color like
gold, for to paynte and write with.
MElt a pound of fine tin, and melted as it is, take it from the fire, and
put into it. viij or ten ounces of quick Silver, mingle well all together until
it be like as it were dow: than take a pound of Brimstone, and a pound of
Armoniacke salt well brayed. Incorporate all this with the said dowe of the
Tin and Quick Silver, and braye them well together in a mortar, or other
vessel of wood, or stone, and not of Brass. Than put all this composition into
some violl, which must be well luted or clayed about the mouth, or so
emplaistred that the clayinge or lutinge be higher than the violle a finger
height or twain. Than afterward set it so upon the fourneis, making to it a
slow fire at the first, and after a little bygger, and so you shall maynteyne
it, styrringe at times with a little stick that which is in the glass. And
when you see that it will make a yellow color, take it from the fire, and let
it cool, and so shall you have a very fair purple color like the color of
gold: Afterward braye it with lie, and wash it with piss, or lie, addinge
to it a little Saffron, and stiepe it with gommed water, as you shall see
hereafter moore plainly.

To make Lacca of Brasyll.
TAke two pailes full of strong lie, and put in it a pound of the shearing
of sine scarlette, and let it boil until the said shearinge be all together
dissolved and consumed into water: than after pour it into some vessel of
wood or stone, and cast into it by little and little, a pound of Roch Alom,
minglinge it well with a sclyser of wood, and pour also to it, by little and
little, two payles full of cold water. And after put it in a straininge bag,
and let it dreane / and trickle out, then put that remains in the bag
into some vessel of glass. This done, you shall set on the fire a pound of
Verzine or Brasill cut in pieces into a payle full of lie, and let it sees
until it be diminished the thicknes of a finger, than strain it in another
bag, and let the water that comes out be set again on the fire, with an
ounce of gomme Arabic made in poulder, and let it sees until it be diminished
half a singer: then power it upon the said composition, that you did put into
the vessel of glass, minglinge well all together with a wodden sclyser, than
put it in a bag, and strame it well. The dowe of Verzine will remain in the
bag, whereof you may make round apples or balls, and dry them in the
shadow, and it will be parfite.

To make white tables to write in with the point of a wyre, such as come out
of Germany.
TAke plaster called Gipsum, cribled and sifted, and stiepe it, and temper it
with hearts glue, or other, and give your parchment leaf one touch with it,
and when it is dry, scrape it, that it may be even and bright, and cover it
over again with the said plaster, called Gypsum, and scrape it as before:
than take Ceruse, well brayed and sifted, and stiepe it with the Oil of line
seed sodden: Anoint your tables with this mixtion, and let it dry in the
shadow, the space of five or six days. This done, take a cloute, or linen
cloth wete in water, wherewith you shall flicke and make smoeth the said
tables, but the cloth must first be wrong hard, and the water pressed out,
then leave it so the space of.xv. or.xx. days, until it be through dry, than
apply it to your use.

To make roset, or ruddle.
TAke an ounce of Brasill broken small, a quarter of an ounce of Ceruse, and a
quarter of an ounce of Roche Alome, mix all these things well together, and
stamp them well, than pour pysse upon them, until they be al covered with it,
leauinge it so the space of. iii. days, and mixing it. iii. or. iiii. times a
day. Afterward strain it through a linen cloth, and put it in a pan not
leaded, or in a mortar of white stone and let it dry in a place where there
comes neither Sun nor day light: than scrape the said roset, and keep it,
and when you will write withal, stiepe it in gommed water.

To gylt over parchement, leather or other such work, which men use in stead
of hanginges, or tapistry.
TAke three pound of the Oil of line, Vernix, Pixgraeca, of each a pound,
half an ounce of Saffron poulder. Boil all this in a pan leaded, so much,
and so long, that puttinge into it a hens feather, and taking it by and by
out again, it seem as it were burned. Than take it from the fire, and take a
pound of Aloe epaticum, of the best, well made in poulder, and cast it in by
little and little, styrringe it incontinent well together with a strong
stick: for otherwise it would swell and rise up a lofte. And if in case for all the styrringe it rise up, take it of the fire, and let it stand a while,
and than set it en the fire again, making it boil a new, styrring it always
diligently. And when all is well incorporated together, take it from the fire,
and let it rest a while, than strain it through a linen cloth, into some
other vessel wherein you will keep it, and it is made. Now, if in stead of
Saffron, ye did put to it of the yellowe seed which is in the flowers of
Lillies, you shall make it much better and fairer. When you will gylte the
parchemente, you shall give it a ground or situation with the white of an
Egg, or Gomme, whereupon you shall lay silver or tin leaves, but it shall
not be so fair with the leaves of tin, as with silver. Than lay the said
Vernix hot upon the parchement, or leather siluered, and you shall see
immediately a color of gold very fair. Let it dry well in the Sun, and
print it, than paynt it with what color you will.

To dye Crimson sylke.
First cut in s^nder, or scrape hard Soap small, and melte it in common
water, than take your sylke in a lynnen bag, or of fine canuesse and thynne,
and put it into a kettle with the said water and Soap. Let it bosle half an
hour, slyrringe it that it cleave not to the kettle, then take it out, and
wash it in salt water, and after in fresh water. Take also for every pound of
Silk, a pound or more of Roche Alome alayde in cold water, and see there be
water enough, into the which you shall put the said sylke without any bag,
and without settinge it on the fire, leaving it so the space of eyghte hours:
than take it out and wash it in fresh water, and after in salt water, then
again in fresh water, and let it not dry, but put it wete as it is in a
kettle with the Crimsen, well stamped and systed, that is to say, three ounces
for every pound of sylke. If you will have the sylke of a higher color, take
four ounces of it, and boil it in as much water as will cover the sylke, and
that the water be above it four or five fyngers high, and for each pound of
the said Crimsen, you shall put in three ounces of small galls of Istria,
well beaten into poulder: or instead of them, you may put in half an ounce of
Arsenick Cristaline, for every pound, which will make the color fayrer, but
it is dangerous because of the smoke, and all incenueniences that may happen,
where such water may fall. And when it begins to boil, put into it your
Sylke, prepared and ordered as is aforesayed, and let it boil a quarter of an
hour. Finallye take it of, and let it dry in the shadow, and you shall have
an excellent thing.

To prepare and trymme Brasyll, for to make of it four diverse colors.
PVt Brasyll in as much clear water as ye will, and sees it until it be
diminished of the third part, or at the least until the color please you,
that is to say, that it be very read, then divide this color into. iiii
parts: and if of one of the parts you will make roset, put nothing to it, for
the color will be such of it self. If you will make the other part blewe,
put to a little Lime water, and you shall have very fair blew: mary the
Brasyll must be luke warm. If you will make it Violet, put lie to it: but if
tawny, you shall put to it Alumen fecis.

To make roset of Brasyll another way.
TAke a pot of water, and put in it the byggenesse of a Walnutte of vnsleaked
Lyme, leauinge it so the space of a night, then take as much Brasyll, bruised
and broken, as will fill the vessel, that you will boil it in, half full:
than pour into it the said water with the Lyme well strained, and let it so
stiepe in the said water, the space of four hours, making it afterward
boil until it be come to half, than how down fair and softly the vessel
that you boiled it in, and draw out the color into some other clean
vessel, putting to it the quantite of a Cyche Pease of Roche Alome, well
brayed, and put it in when it is very hot: than shall you have a goodly
thing to do withal what you will. If you will write with it, add to it a
little Comme water. If you will make it Blewe, put to it three ounces of Lie,
more or less, into a vessel, and you shall have a very sayre blewe.

To make beyond sea Asure, without Lapis La^uli.
TAke an ounce of Silver, calcined or burned with Aqua fortis, and an ounce and a
half of salt Armoniack, mix all well together with vynayger, and let it
clarify a little. If the Vynayger be more than the said things, take away
that is to much, and put the rest in a vessel well leaded, and well stopte,
that the substance have no vente out, leauinge it so xxv. days, and at the
end you shall find very fair Asure.

To make a grene color to write or paynt with.
TAke Verdegrise, Litarge, Quick Silver, and braye all this together with the
piss of a young child: and than write or painte with it, and you shall see
an excellent color, as it were an Emeraulde.

To braye fine gold, wherewith a man may write, or paynt with a pensyll.
TAke gold leaves beaten, and four drops of honey: mix it well together, and
put it in a glass. And when you will occupy it, stiepe and temper it in
Gommed water, and it will be good.

The same another way.
TAke as much as you will of the leaves of gold or silver beaten, and lay it
abroad in a large cup or glass, as even as you can, and wette it with
clear water, than braye it with your fingar, wetinge sometime your fyngar, but
spread it not to much abroad in brayinge it, and continue thus doing until
it be well broken, puttinge unto it always water. And when you think it is
broken and brayed enough, fill the cup with clean fresh water, and stir
it well, than let it repose half an hour: After this strain the water, and
you shall find the gold in the bottom of the cup, the which you may dry
at your pleasure. When you will put it in (...), stiepe and temper it with
Gommed water: also you must keep it well covered, that it take no fylth. This
is the best way that is, to make brayed or pow^^ed Gold.

Another way with Purpurine.
TAke Purpurine, which you shall find to be sold, or that you have made your
self in the manner aforesaid, than put it in a dysh, with pysse or lie, and
dippe it well with your fingar little and little: afterward fill the dyshe
with pysse or lie, and let all setle down into the bottom. This done, stir
it again, changing often the said lie, until all be as you would have it,
and finelye being broken and pounned, and that the last pysse or lie be as
clear as when you did put it in, and after you have strained it out, you
shall put to it a little Saffron, and temper it with Gommed water. Than may
you write, paynt, or do any thing else with it.

To make a ground to gylt upon, with burnished gold.
TAke Gipsum, the quantity of a Walnut, Boale Armenicke, the byggenesse of a
Bean, Aloehepaticke, Sugre candy, of each of them the quantity of a Bean,
stamp them by them selves, and puttinge the one upon the other, you shall put
to it last of all a little Ciuette, or honny.

To lay or settle gold with a single ground.
TAke fine Gipsum, Aloe Epaticum, Boale Armenick of each like quantity, and
temper it with the whites of new laid eggs, which you have strained through a
linen cloth, and if your ground be to strong you may temper it with water.

Another way to lay on gold.
TAke Gommed water, and with the same only put gold, and the said ground
will be good upon parchemente, or upon skins, the like may you make with
the whites of new laid Eggs, and with the milk of figs alone.

To make colors of all kind of metalles.
TAke Cristall, or paragon stone, and braye it well with the white of an Egg,
and than write with it, and when it is dry, rub the writynge with gold, or
any other metal, and you shall have the same color that the metal is of.

To lay gold on a black bottom or ground.
TAke the smoke of a Lamp, and powne or braye it well with the Oil of line,
or of Walnuttes. And when you will lay the gold upon the said ground, se that
it be neither to moist nor to dry.

To make letters of the color of gold, without gold.
TAke an ounce of Orpimente, and an ounce of fine Cristall, and braye them each
one by him self, than mingle them together with the whites of Eggs, and
write with it.

To make silver letters without silver.
TAke an ounce of Tynne, two ounces of quick silver, and melte them together,
than braye them with Gommed water, and write with it.

To make green letters.
TAke the juice of Rue, Verdegrise, and Saffron^ braye them well all together,
and write therewith with Gommed water.

To make white letters in a black feilde.
TAke the pure milk of a fygge tree, in a glass, and set it in the sun the
space of half an hour: than alaye it, or temper it with Gommed water, when you
will occupy it. And when you have written with it black the paper with incke,
as much as you will if the paper be great: and when it is dry, rub it well
with a linen cloth. Than the letters that you made with the milk of the fygge
tree, will go of all to gether, and the paper will remain written white,
because it was kept and preserved by the same mylk, from the yncke, where the
letters were. The like may you make with the yelke of an Egg, tempered in
water, with the which you may write also: And when the writing is dry,
rub well the paper over with incke, as before. And when it is dry, rub the
said letter, made with the yelke of the Egg, with some lynnen cloth or knyfe,
and they will goo of, and leave a white space, whereby you shall have fair
white letters in a black paper.

To make a green color for to write and paynt withal.
TAke green byse, and stiepe it alone in Vynaigre, and pass it through a
linen cloth, and braye it well upon a Porphire stone, with clear water, and
put to it, in brayinge it, a little honny, and let it d^e well, than braye it
again well with Gommed water, and it will be perfect.

To trim and dress Asure.
AZure is brayed with honey, as green, but ye need not purge it otherwise:
temper it with ye whites of Eggs beaten, or with the water of glewe, and not
of Gomme. The water of glewe, is made with parchement glue, clear and
mollified, and strained as Gomme is.

To dress or trim Cinabrium, for to write or paynt with.
BRay well the Cinabrium upon a Porphyre stone, with clear condite water,
than let it dry, and put it in an ynckehorne, or glass, but it is better in
an inckhorne in winter. After this pour piss into it, minglinge it well
together, and leauinge it so until night, until all the Cinabrium be gone to
the bottom: than change the pysse, and do as before, leauinge it so until
the next morninge, chaunginge so the urine or pysse four or five days, until
al be well purged. Than take the white of an Egg well beaten, until it be
brought into clear water, which you shall pour upon the Cinabrium, so that it
be more than a fingar above it: After mix well al together with some stick of
a Walnutte tree, or else with some little bone, than let the Cinabrium
descend down to the bottom, and do with this as before with the pysse, the
space of two or three days, and this will take away all the sauoure of the
piss. This done, ye shall put another white of an Egg and mingle all well
together, and than it will be perfyt: you must keep it well stopped. At every
time that you will occupy of it, stir it well: and when the white of the
Egg is so dressed, as is declared, it never corrupts.

A ground to lay gold upon any metal or iron.
TAke Vernix liquida, a pound, Turpentine, Oil of line, of each of them an
ounce: mire well all together, and it is made.

To gylte the edges of books.
TAke the quantity of a Walnut of Boale Armenicke, the byggenesse of a Cyche
pease of Sugre Candye: braye them dry the one with the other, and put to it
a little of the white of an Egg well beaten, than mingle well all together.
This done, take the book that you will gylte, which must be well bound, well
glewed, even cut, and well polished, set him fast in the press, and that as
even and as right as you can possible. Then with a pensill give him a wype
over with the white of an Egg well beaten, and let it dry, than give him also
another with the said composition. And when it is well dried, scrape it, and
pollish it well. Last of all when you will lay on the Gold, wette the said
edges with a little clear water, with a pensill, and than incontinent put on
the gold leaves, cut in that biggenesse they ought to be, and when it is
dry, pollyshe it with a dogs tothe. This done, you may make what work you
will upon it.

To keep whites of eggs as long as a man will without corruptinge, and
without putting Arsenick to it. A secret not much known.
TAke the whites of Eggs, not breakinge them in any wise, and put to them as
much white Vynaygre as shall suffice, that is to say, a reasonable quantity,
leave it so the space of two days, than pass it through some linen cloth,
without breakinge or beatynge the white of the Eggs, leauinge it so the space
of eight days, than strain it again, and put it in a violle well stopped,
for to occupy when you have need.

The manner how to make the ground or foundation for Indicum.
TAke Gomme Armoniacke three parts, Gomme Arabic one part, Serapinum, a
fourth part, stiepe these in Vynaygre, until they be very soft, than mix
them well, and strain them through a linen cloth, and it will be very good to
occupye when you have need.

Another perfyt ground for the same thing.
TAke Gomme Armoniack an ounce, Gomme Arabicke three ounces, and stiepe it in
Vyneaygre the space of a day and a night, than take the biggenesse of a
Walnutte of good yellowe Honnye, and a Garlyke head, well pilled and made
clean, and well stamped. Boil all these things together in strong Vynaigre,
puttinge to it a little Aloe Epatic, and let it boil a good while, than
strain it through a linen cloth and wringe out well all the substance of it.
And if you think it be liquide or soft, or to clear, boil it again, until
you think it is thick inoughe, than keep it in a glass, or vessel of earth
leaded, or of bone. When you will gilt any thing, anoint it first with this
composition, with a pensill, and rub it well, so that the ingra^ing be not
filled, and leave it so as long as you will: than, wha^ you will lay on the
leaves of gold, blow a little your breath upon the said foundation or
ground, and set on the said leaves of gold, disposing and orderinge them as
is requisite, pressing them well down with a pensil, or with a little wol or
bombase, and than shall you have a very excellent giltyng.

A goodlye way how to make Gold and Silver in poulder, a thing easy to be
done, and there will come of it an excellent color. This is a very rare
secret, which has not been used nor known until this present.
TAke leaves of gold a crown weighte, or as much as you will, and set it to
the fire in some little clean pan or pipkin, and in another vessel you shall
put four times as much in weighte of quick silver, a good way of from the
fire, so that it may but only warm a little, for otherwise it might vanishe
away. Let not the leaves of gold take so much heat, that they melt, but let
them wax almost read. This done, take them from the fire, and the quick
silver likewise, which you shall pour hot upon the leaves of gold, and
incontinent mingle them well together with a little stick, the space of a
Paternoster, and pour it afterward into a dyshe full of clear water, and you
shall have a dowe of the said gold and quick silver, but the color of the
gold will be so darkened and obscure, that a man shall perceive and see
nothing at all. And this is the dowe that the Goldsmythes call Amalgama, and
the learned men Malagma, which is a Greek word, and being corrupted of the
Arabians, was changed into Amalgama. Also you may make this cold, in brayinge
the leaves a good while with the quick silver upon a Porphyre stone, until
all be mixed and joined together.

And braying it also with strong Vinagre, or the juice of Lemons, it will
sooner be made, and will incorporate and come together the better, than must you
wasshe it wise or thrice with clear water. Now, how soever you have made this
dowe, or Amalgama, you must strain it thoroughe a lynnen cloth, fine and
thick, to the intent that a part of the quick silver may go through: or
else strain it thorough a wild goats skin, or a lambs skin, which is
far better, and press it hard, to thintente there may come out as much
quick silver as is possible. Than take that remains in the cloth or skin,
and put to it half as much fair quick Brymstone citrine. First stamp well
the Brymstone and mingle it with the said paste or dowe: and being so
myngled, set it on the fire in a dysshe or iron lad^e, leauinge it so until
all the Brymstone be burned, and all the rest yellowe. Than let it cole, and
put it in a dish washing it so often with clear water, till you have a fair
color of Gold. Than keep it in some glass or earthen vessel leaded, as you
do the other punned and brayed Gold, and when you will put it in experience,
stiepe it in Rose water, or other, wherein you shall have mollified or dissolved
some clear gomme Arabicke.

Than dress and order it to write or paynte with, and you shall have an
excellent thing. When you have written or painted, being once dry, you may
burnishe it with a dogs toeth, which you can not do to the other brayed or
punned gold, that Scriueners and Painters now a days do use. This secret
has been practiced of the old and ancient writers, as we see in some of
their books. But now you must use the practice to burnish it, layinge a white
paper upon the gold, and rubbinge first upon the said paper with the dogs
toeth. And if you think that it is not yet burnished enough, you may
burnishe it once again, with the toeth upon the Gold without the paper
betwixt.

To make a very fair Vernix, to vernishe the said gold, and all other
workemanshippe.
TAke Bengewine, and bray it the best you can betwixt two papers, than put it
in some violle, and pour upon it good Aqua vite, that it be above the
Bengewyne three or four fingars high, and leave it so a day or twain, than
put to it, for half a violle of such Aqua vite, fine, or six blades of
Saffron slenderly stamped, or else whole. This done, strain it, and with a
pensill Vernishe therewith any thing gylted that you will, which will become
bright, and fayer, dryenge it self immediatelye, and will continue many
years. Now, if you will dress Silver in such a manner, do even with the
silver leaves as you did with the Gold, if not, in steed of Brimstone you
shall take white commun salt, then dress the Vernish in the foresaied manner,
puttinge to it the Almonde or Bengewine, that is to say, the white that is
found in the mids of Bengewine, and put in no Saffron at all. And the said
Vernishe of Bengewine, and Aquavite, without any other thing, is very good to
vernish all things, as well painted as not painted, and also to make tables
and coffers of Walnutte tree, and Nebene to glister and shine, and of all other
things: Likewise works of Copper gilted, and not gylted: for it makes
bright, preserves, aydeth the color, and dries incontinent, without taking
any dust or fylth, but that you may make it clean with a linen cloth, or with
a foxes tail, which is better, as if it were not vernished at al.

To bray or break gold or silver easily after the comes manner that the best
workmasters do use.
TAke what gold leaves you will, and incorporate them well in a cup of
glass, with Iulep roset, stir ringe it well with your middle finger, little
and little. And when all is incorporated together, braye it well upon a
Porphyre stone, than pour by little and little, clear water upon the said
stone, mixing it alwais: After strain the said gold and Iulep, into a dish, or
cup of glass, and wash well the stone that there remain nothing. Than
stir all with your finger in the said dishe, and let it so repose: after,
pour the water out, and put in other fresh, clear, and warm, and wash it
so, until all the Iulep be washed and cleansed out, and that the water
(putting it in your mouth) be in no wise sweet, than let it dry. This d^en,
you shall put it in a cup of clean glass, and rake out a few hot embers a
good way from the fire, that the glass break not, whereupon you shall set the
said cup, until the gold wax very hot, and be returned to his natural
color. Finally temper it with go^med water, for to put it in experience.

To make a lycoure, that makes a golden color without gold.
TAke the juice of Saffron flowers, when they are fresh upon the plant, and
if you can get none, take Saffron dried, well made in poulder, and put to it as
much yellowe and glisteringe Orpiment, that is scaly, and not earthy: than,
with the gall of a Hare, or of a Pike (which is better) braye them well
together. This done, put them in some violle under a donghyll certain days,
then take it out and keep it, and when you will write with this licoure, you
shall have a fair color of Gold.

Another licour of the color of Gold, for to write and to gylte iron, wood,
glass, bone, and other like things.
TAke an egg laid the same day that you begin to make this, the which egg
you shall open at one end, and take out all the white, than take two parts of
quick silver, and one part of salt armoniack, that is clean, and well
beaten: and of these two things, you shall put as much upon the yelk of the
egg that remains in the shell, as will fill it up again: than mingle well
all together with a little stick. After, stop the said egg with the piece
that you took of, closinge it well with a piece of wax, that nothing may
enter into it, nor any thing issue out.

Than lay it under horse donge, right up, the open end upward, this done,
take another half egg shell, and make as it were a cover or a cappe upon the
said broken end, coueringe it with dunge, and leave it so the space of twenty
or five and twentye days, and so shall you have a very fair color of gold,
for to write, and to do what you will withal. And if the said substance be to
hard or to thick, you may break it, or temper it with gommed water.

Another goodly licour, to make a golden color with little cost, and is a
thing easy to be done.
TAke the pills of Citrons, or Orenges very yelow, and clear the^ well of the
white that is within side, than stamp them well in a mortar of stone, or
wood, well made clean, and take good yellowe Brimstone, clear and bright,
and well beaten in poulder, which you shall mingle with the said pills
stamped, stampinge well all together. This done, you shall put all this into
a violle, and keep it in a deep sellar or cave, or in some moist place, by the
space of.viii. or.x. days. Finallye, you shall heat it again by the fire, and
then write or paint with it, and you shall find it a very excellent color of
Gold.

To make yncke, or a color to write with, in a very good perfection.
TAke good Galls, and break them in three or four pieces, that is to say,
stamp them slightly, and put them in a fryinge pan, or some other iron
pan, with a little Oil, frieng them a little, then take a pound of them, and
put it in some vessel leaded, pouringe into it as much white wine as will
cover it over, more then a good hand breadth. After, take a pound of Gomme
Arabic, well stamped, and eyghte ounces of Vitriole well made in poulder: myxe
all well together, and set it in the sun certain days, stering it as often
as you may: then boil it a little if you se that you have need, and after
strain it, and it will be perfect. And upon the lees that shall remain in
the bottom, you may pour other wine, and boil it a little, and strain it.
You may put wine upon the same lees as often as you will: that is to say, until
you se yt the wine which you put in, will stain or be colored no more. Then,
mingle all the said wine, whereunto you shall put other g^^^^s, gomme, and
vitriole, as at the beginning the^ keeping it in the Sun, you shall have a
better inck then the first, and do so every day, for the oftener you do it,
the better you shall have it, and with less cost. And if you find it to
thick, or that it be not flowinge enough, put to it a little clear lie,
which will make it liquide and thin inoughe. If it be to clear, add to it a
little gomme Arabic. The galls must be small, curled and massiue within, if
they be good. The good vitriolle is always within of a color like unto the
eleme^t. The best gomme, is clear and brittle, that in stamping it, it
becomes poulder easily, without cleaning together.

A good way and manner how to make incke for to carry about a man in a dry
poulder, which (when he will write with) he must temper with a little wine,
water, or vynaiger or with some other licour, and than he may incontinent put
it in experience. With the said poulder all other incke may be amended, be it
never so evil.
TAke Peche or Abricot stones with their kurnels, sweet Almondes, or bitter,
(...) that they have their shelles hard, and that the Almondes be within them.
And if in case you can get but the said stones without their kurnels, it
shall be good enough, but yet not so good as with the kurnels. Take then all
the said things together, or those that you can get, and burn them upon the
coals: and when they be very read and ens^amed, take them out, and thus
being redacte and made into very black coals, keep them in a pan.

Take likewise Rosin of a Pine tree, and put it in a pan, and make it flame
and burn: than take another little scillette, or else a little bag holden
open, with little sticks laid a cross over it, or otherwise, as you shall
think good, and hold the mouth of the bag downewarde over the flambe, so
that the smoke of the said Rosin may gather together, and stick round
about the said pan or bag, and when all the Rosin to burned, and all cold
again, cause all the said smoke to fall upon a paper, or table, or some other
thing, and keep it, but if you will not take the pains to make this smoke,
bye it of them that make printers incke. Of this black or smoke, you shall
take one part, or what quantity you will, of the coals of the said stones
another part, of Vitriole one part, of fried galls, as is aforesaied, two
parts, of Gomme Arabicke four parts.

Let all these things be well stamped, sifted, and myngled together, and then
keep well this poulder in a linen bag, or of leather, for the older it is,
the better it will be. When you will occupy it, for to make y^^ke thereof,
take a little of it, and temper it with wine, water, or Vynaigre, the which
being put into it warm, the yncke shall be the better, nevertheless, being
put in cold, it makes no great matter, and you shall have immediately very
good incke, which you may carrye where you will without spillinge or
sheadinge. If you have naughty inck, put to it a little of the said poulder,
and it will becomme immediately very good black, and have a good gloss.

To make a great deal of yncke quickly, and with little cost.
TAke of the black that Curriers or tanners do black their skins with, for
you may have much for money: than take of a fyshe called a Cuttle, which
costeth almoost nothing, and chieflye in places nighe to the sea side, and in
eating the said fish at diverse times, you may keep the galls together.
Than myngle the said galls with the Tanners color, and without any other
thing, you shall have a perfect Incke. To make it yet better, you may put to
it of the said poulder made of the coals of Vitriole, of Galls, and of
gomme, and the said. Incke shall be very good to print in copper, putting to it a
little vernix, and a little oil of line, so that it may be liquide and
flitting of it self, for to pearce the better into all manner of engrauinges,
and that it may abide well upon the paper, without renninge abroad.

To make Printers Incke.
PRinters Incke is made only with the smoke of Rosine, as is abouesaid, and
is tempered with moist Vernish, you must sees it a little, to make it liquide
or thick, as you shall need. But in Winter moister then in Somer: and always
the thicker makes the letter fayrer, blacker, clearer, and brighter. But in
what manner so ever it be, it must be ever well mixed with the smoke. And to
make it liquide, as is said, you must put to it more oil of line, or of
Walnuttes to the bernyshe. If you will make it thicker, put less Oil, and
more smoke, lettinge it sees more. If you will Printe read, in stead of the
said smoke, mingle Vermillion well brayed, with the said Vernishe. If you
will Printe green, put in green Bice. If you will make it Blew (as men have
done sometime heretofore) take Azure of Almaine, or of that of glass, which is
now made at Venise, doing in all points as we have spoken of the black incke.

To make yncke so white, that although a man write with it upon white paper, it
may easelye and perfytlye be read. A very goodly thing.
TAke the shelles of new laid eggs, very white, and well washed, then bray
them well upon a clean marble stone, with clear water. Put them in a clean
dysh, until the poulder descend to the bottom: after dreane out the water
lightly, and let the poulder dry of it self, or in the sun, and so shall
you have an excellent white, that neither Ceruse, nor any other white in the
world may be compared unto it, if you dress, and keep it clean. And when you
will occupy it, take gomme Ammoniac well washed, and mollified of that yellowe
skin that is about it: then stiepe It the space of a night in distilled
Vynagre, and in the morninge you shall find it dissolved, and the Vynagre
shall become whiter than milk: the which you shall strain through a clean
lynnen cloth, and with a little of this white licour you shall temper the said
poulder, and than write or paynt with it, and you shall have a white,
excellent above all other sorts. A noble woman of Italye used no other thing
to blaunche her face: and kept her self very white with all, and yet it
appeared not that she used any such thing. Also the said poulder hurts
nothing at all the face, nor the skin, nor yet the teeth, as the sublime,
the Ceruse, and other like things do, which gentylwemen often use, to their
great detriment and hurt. But if you will use the said white made of egg
shelles upon your face, you must braye and consume it very fine, and that it
have almost no palpable substance, and that it may be penetratiue and
pearsinge, to the intent it may continue. In the which thing every man may
prove and assaye what his wit is able to do. But above all things, when you
will use it for the face, it is necessary that you put to it the third part of
calcined and burned Talchum, as we will show you in the book folowinge.

To make a poulder to take of blottes of yncke, fallen upon the paper, or else
the letters and wrytinge from the paper: which is a rare secret, but yet
profitable.
TAke Ceruse well brayed, and make thereof a dowe with the milk of a fig
tree, then let it dry: afterward braye it again, and dry it as before, and
so seven times: then keep it so in poulder. And when you will use it to take
out blottes, or letters out of paper, take a little linen cloth wette in
water, pressinge and wringinge the water out, then spread it abroad upon the
place where you would have it, and leave it thereupon until the paper and the
incke be moist with all: than take away the wette cloth, and upon the blotte
or letters that you will have taken away, put a little of the said poulder of
Ceruse, leauinge it so the space of a night. In the morninge, you shall take a
linen cloth clean and dry, wherewith you shall rub of softlye and finelye
the said poulder, and the paper will remain exceeding white for to write upon
again, as well as before, and better. And if al be not well rubbed of at the
first time, you may do it once again, and you shall not fail.

To make a kind of vernish, but much fayrer, and better than that which
Scriuenars do use; and is of less cost, and stinketh not as other vernish
does.
THe Vernishe which Scriueners commonly use, is nothing else but the gomme
of Ieniper made in poulder, and of the same is liquide vernishe made, in
boylinge the said gomme in the Oil of line, and of this poulder do Scriueners
use to cause that the incke run not abroad, and that the letter be the
fairer and cleaner. Now for to make a poulder of like effect, and very fair,
with less cost, and without any evil savor, take Egg shelles what quantity
you will, taking away the little skin within side: and when you have grossly
stamped them, put them in a panns that will endure the fire, coueringe it
with some cover, then set it in some glasiers or potters furneis, or in a
brick, tyle, or lyme makers kylle, leaving it there until all the shelles be
come into a very white poulder, which is called Egg lyme: syfte it, and keep
it. And when you will occupy it, cast a little of it upon the paper, or
parchement, and spread the poulder well upon it, rubbing it well with a Hares
foot, or otherwise then taking away that is to much, write upon it, and you
shall find it of better effect then the vernix. When the writing is dry, if
you will take away the said poulder, yea the common vernishe, for fear
least men should white their hands, rub the paper or parchement with
crommes of white bread, for it will draw to it self, and take away all the
vernishe or poulder that is upon it.

To make incke to rule paper for to write by, where of the writing being dry,
the lives may so be* taken out, that it shall seem ye have written without
lines.
TAke Paragon stone, stamp and bray it well, then take the bygnesse of a little
nutte, of the fayreste tartre or lees of white wine, calcined and burned,
settinge it to stiepe and dissolve in a dyshful of clear water, and than
strain it out. And with this water you shall temper the black poulder of the
Paragon stone, until it become like incke, with the which you shall rule your
paper, or parchement: and write upon those lines what you will with common
inck. And when the writing is dry, for to take out the said lines, you shall
take hard crommes of white bread, and rub your paper over with them, and
the lines that you have ruled, will go out, as clean as though there had
never been line at all. This is a goodly secret, and very rare.

*The end of the fyfte book.
THE Secrets of the reverend Master Alexis of Piemount.
THE SIXTE BOOK.
To sublime Quick Silver, that is to say, to make common sublyme, that
Goldsmithes, Alebemistes, and Gentil women do use, and that men use in many
things concerning Phisycke.
TAke a pound of Quick Silver, and put it in some vessel of wood with a
little Vynaygre, and Salt Peter, than braye it, and mortify it well with a
wodden pestell. Than take half a pound of commen salt, four ounces of Salt
Peter, and let all this be well brayed, and put upon the Quick Silver in the
same vessel of wood, styringe well all together, puttinge to it two pound
of Roche Alome burned. Incorporate well all this together, and put it in a
violle, or some pot, luted and clayed a finger higher then the substance
within is. Then put it, and dispone it, in a pan or scillet, upon sisted
ashes: than set the said pan on the furnes, settinge the Limbecke upon the
violle or pot luted, and then the recipient, to receive that distelleth out,
as men do in all manner of distillations. Make to it at the first a slow fire,
until all the moisture be drawn out, which you shall take out of the
recipient, and keep well, for it will be good for many things, and specially
for to mortify other Quick Silver, to make other sublime. This done, make
your fire greater, and continue it so, until you see Mercury or Quick Silver,
to be sublimed thoroughly white, that is to say, that it be risen above all the
substance, and made as it were a white cake. And if you will make it higher,
that is to say, unto the neck and brimme of the violle or pot, then take a
sheet of paper, and wrappe it round about the violle or pot, that is to
say, about the body of it that is uncovered above the furneis: then increase
your fire, and make it greater, and this white cake will rise by little and
little, and will cleave to the brimme of the pot, remaininge there like a
little be^^e of white sublime, then let it cool. Than take of the recipient,
and lift up the Limbecke, making the pot clean without side, to the intent
that when you break it, there fall no filth among the said sublyme. This done,
break the violle or pot and in taking of the sublime, you must keep it from
the smoke, and in this sort you may make a loaf or cake of a hundred, or two
hundred pound, or as much as you will, kepinge always the proportion of the
quantity of the things, according to the weighte here above written. The
lees that remains in the bottom of the said pot or violl, may be stamped
and dissolved in boilinge water, and than strain it, and let it sees, and
than dry thorowlye: there will remain in the bottom a salt, which will be
of the nature of the Salt Peter, of the common salt, and of the Alome that you
did put in. And the said salt will be very good to make other new sublime,
with other Quick Silver, and vinaiger: or else in stead of Vynaigre you may
take the foresaid water that distilleth in the sublimation, and so shall you
make it very perfitte. And you must note, that the said sublime, made with
Roche Alome, is better for gentilwomen, that will paint their faces with
sublime. But I counsel them, that in stead of sublime, they use some of the
waters that I have spoken of in the books before. For Goldesmithes,
Alkemistes, and for many things required in Physic, it is better to put in
raw Vitriole, in stead of burned Alome: but this is very evil and hurtful for
gentlewemen: for, the most part of them that make sublime, make it with
Vitriole partly because it is made with less cost, and partly because it is
profitabler for many things, the^ made with Alome, which is almdost for
nothing but for gentlewemen. There be some naughty persons that put
Arsenic Cristallyne to distille with Quick Silver, a thing practiced of to
many men. Wherefore it is good and profitable to admonyshe every man that he
take heed, for certainly, in respect of a little gain, they make them
selves worthy to be burned quick: for besides that men se oftentimes, that by
such sublyme women have their faces swollen withal, like a bladder blowe^,
also it may happen that in Physic they hurt or kill men The said sublime
made with Alome and Vitriole, may easily be sublimed a new, that is to say,
for every pound of this sublime, to put to it half a pound of common white
salt, or burned Alome, or vnsleaked lime, in settinge this to sublime, as
before: the which will sublime it self much sooner, and will wax fayrer, the
oftener you sublime it. The Alchemistes, following the precepts of Geber, of
Saint Thomas, and other Philosophers, go about and spend time to sublime it
diverse times for to make it firm, among whom there be that sublime it a
hundredth times, and other some two hundredth times, and yet at the end bring it
to none effect: and that comes, because that always they put in, in
subliminge the said lecs, that is to say, the salt, alome, or vitriole, as
we have said. And seeing that the nature of the fire is to fix and make firm
things that sone flit away, the oftener the said sublime comes to the fire,
the more does it fasten at every time, but that part that is fastened, is
always mingled with the said lees, and so is lost: Therefore they which made
the said sublimation, not consideringe the reasons and causes why such a
thing happens, found that by little and little their sublime was
diminished, and (peradventure) thought it had flowen away, or else consumed
in the fire, rather than to believe that it remained in the said lees, from the
which it can in no wise be separated. Now mindinge philosophicallye to
proceed in the fasteninge or fixinge the said sublyme, you must first sublime
it three or four times, with common salt, burned Alome, lime, or Talchum, as
is said to the intent that in this wise it may be mondified, and cleansed from
all earthy and unclean substance, that it conteyneth, and from the
superfluous moisture, whereof it is full. It is mondified and made clean of
the earthy substance, because the earth sublimeth not, but remains in the
bottom of the viole or pot, cleauinge with the grounes, which is the Salt,
Alome, or Vttriole that is put in it, the which things we call here lees or
dregs, because they remain in the bottom, as the lees of wine, or of Oil
does. Also it is pourged of the aquositie, or superfluous moisture, two manner
of ways. The first is, because that with the same, or distilled water,
wherewith it was watered, as we have said before, the moisture or watrinesse of
the said Quick silver distilleth out in a vapor. The other is, because of the
often subliminge it, the nature of the fire is annexed unto it, which
diminishes it, the which two things are the principal cause why it
fasteneth. And so are they the only parts that make the perfyt fixion or
fasteninge, according as they are sufficiently joined with the things that
you will fasten or fix. And here we mean no other thing, by the thing fixed
or fastened, but that the fire has made such a decoction, that it danisheth
not away, or is lightly carried away with the wind, and that all the
substance remains in the bottom, and consumes no more.

Therefore, after you have sublimed it three or four times, and that it is
well pourged of the carthye substance, and of the superfluous moisture, as is
aforesayed, you shall set it to sublime a part by it self, without any
grownes or lees, and shall sublime it so often, until all remain fixed to the
bottom of the violle or pot, and that it fly not away nor diminishe for
any great fire that you make.

But if you will make it in less space, and easier, observe this rule, which
is certain and infallible.

When you have sublimed it three or four times, or oftener, you shall add to
it the fourth part of fine silver calcined and burned, as we will afterward
declare: than after you have mixed it well together, set it to sublyme: and
when it is sublimed, mingle that which is risen up, with that that remains
in the bottom, then sublime it again, and so, so often that it rise up no more
but remain in the bottom for all the vehemence of the fire, and so shall it be
perfect, very white, clean, fusible, and penetratiue or pearsinge. And he that
would make a good quantity of it, and is not hable to put to it as much
fine silver, as the fourth part of it, he may make it in this manner folowinge.
After he has sublimed it three or four times, with the grownes or lees, as is
aforesaied, let him keep it by it self, and take a little of it that is to
say, as much as for to join or put with the fourth part of fine silver, that
he should put to it, as in example. If he have but half an ounce of Silver, let
him take an ounce of the said sublime, and when he has mixed it together, let
him sublime it as often as before, until all remain fixed in the bottom, and
he shall have two ounces, or little less of sublime fixed: for the fire in
dryenge it, and making the decoction, cateth and consumes some part of it,
beside that consumes in stampinge, and in the vyole or pot. Than let him
take these two ounces fixed, or as much as is of it, with three times as much
of sublime not fixed, that was kept, and then let him mingle all together, and
sublime it as often as before, until al be fixed. And if he will make more of it,
let him take again three parts of the other sublyme: and so shall he make it
as often and as much as he will, which is much better then to make it all at
once, for by this means is volatile fixum, and fixum volatile oftener made,
which is that, that the philosophers esteem most, and is also more fusible,
more pearsynge, and of greater virtue. In this operation consists all all the
secret, and the greatest maistry of the Philosophers, and cheiflye of Geber,
who makes the most part of his work in this manner of subliminge and
firinge often times, and only keeps the thing secret that must be
sublimed, the which thing because he will hide it from them that be not
worthy to know it (as him self affirms) he calls it Quick Silver, but he
means another thing, although in effect the same thing declares that it
is but quick silver, but brought from his nature unto a perfecter degree, as for
example. Dowe, is meal, not in his first essence and being, but is redact and
made of the baker, into a more estimable nature, and nerer to perfection. No
man ought to hope to attain to this high knowledge, by his own wit, but
only by the grace and gift of God, who (as all the Philosophers say) Cui
vult largitur, and subtrabit.

To make Cinabrium, and thereof to make loaves of a hundredth or two hundredth
pounds, as great as a man list as those are that come out of Almayne, which
secret has not before this time been known of any in Italy.
ALl those that delight in secrets, and principally in things belonginge to
metalles, know how to dress Cinabrium, but in a small quantity, as a pound
or two at a time, and not past. In Germanye, and some parts of France, there
be that make it in great lompes, or masses, and send it so into Italye, and
over all the world, and yet keep it marvelous secret to them selves, without
publishinge it unto many men. Therefore we will also communicate this secret
(although it consist in a small thing) to the glory of God, and the profit of
the commonwealth, reachinge here in a breife manner, to make it in as great a
quantity as a man will. Take of Quick Silver nine parts, Brimstone citrine
two parts, yet many men put three parts of Brimstone, for the nine parts of
quick silver, other four, and some as much of the one as of the other. But
when it is for to paynte with, there cannot be to much Brimstone, for there
comes the liuelier color of it, and for other things it is better that for
one pound of Quick Silver, there be but three or four ounces of Brimstone.
Put then the Brimstone in some large pan, meltinge it with a slow or small
fire: and when it is molten, take the Quick Silver in a linen cloth, in your
left hand, and wringe it little and little into the said Brimstone (which
must first be taken from the fire) and mingle it with a stick, to the end the
quick silver may incorporate it self well with the Brymstone, not ceasinge to
stir it, and to loose it always from the pan, until all be well cooled,
and you shall have a black mixture, which shall be neither like the
Brimstone, nor quick silver. Stamp this mixtion, and bray it well, and sifte
it, and of this poulder you may make what quantity you will, puttinge it in a
great pan. Now if you will dress the Cinabrium, you shall take a violle of
glass as great as you will, yet see notwithstanding that ye fill the said
violle but a quarter full with the substance that you shall put in it. And
after having well luted and clayed the violle, with a claye or paste made with
white claye, and the shearinge of cloth (which men call Lutum sapientiae, as
we will show you hereafter how to make it perfectly) and when it is well
dried, put in as much of the said poulder, as will fill a quarter of the
said violle, or less, and without closing up the mouth of the said
vessel of glass, ye shall set it upon a great furneis, if you have much
substance, than make under it a flighte and slow fire, the space of two or
three hours, and afterward somewhat greater. But for to make a great
quantity of it, you must ever and anon, put in of the said poulder,
leaving so still the said vessel of glass upon the fire to sublyme: then
take a stick made meet for the purpose, that may reach to the bottom of
the said vessel, and be more then a handefull without, and have also upon
the stick a round lump of the said Lutum sapientiae, to the intent that
the said stick so being put into the viol, it may close the mouth of it, and
that when the stick rises up, the piece of Lutum sapientiae, may also rise
withal, and open the mouth of the said violle. You must have also made
ready, and settled, a fonnell (such as they fill hogs heads of wine
withal) which must have always the neck of it within the mouth of the
vyolle, and that the stick may go thorough the myddle of the funnell, that by
that means, it may stop the strayte of the funnell, with the mouth of the
violle.

All these things thus set in order, you must keep the said poulder nyghe
unto the fire, to the intent that it may be hoate: for if you should put
it in cold, upon the hoate that is in the Violle, you should make cold, and
let the sublimation of the Cinabrium.

Now, when the first poulder has been on the fire, the space of five hours,
and that it is thoroughlye, or partelye sublimed, lift up the stick a
little, that is in the pot, and so open the mouth of it, in lyftinge up the
round piece of claye that stopped it, and put in three or four sponefulles
of the said poulder that you kept warm, then let down the stick, with
the round buttonne of claye, that it may close the vyolle, as before.

And you must understand, that the said stick is not put into the violle
for any other cause, but to keep that the said poulder which is in the
bottomme, beginning to sublyme, should not cleave round about the mouth of
the violle, for than it would stop it so, that you could put none other
poulder into it, nor make the loaves so great, as is said: and herein
consysteth the whole Secret to make the loves great. For if you would put
in all the substance at once, that is to say, a hundrethe, or two hundredth
pound of substance, you should make the mass, or lump so great, that it
would never be brought to perfection, and must make so great a fire to it,
that rather it would melte both the vessel, and also mar the furneis, than
the matter or substance would sublyme.

But in puttinge it in thus by little and little, the stick being in the
middle, all the substance sublimeth, baketh, and waxes read, and by little
and little, sticks to the highest part of the vessel, then, in puttinge to
it again new poulder, it descends to the bottom, and there findinge all
things hot, with that that it is hot it self, and in a small quantity it
sublimeth, baketh, and waxes read incontinent, incorporatinge it self with
the first. So in puttinge in, by little and little new hot poulder, and
keeping always the fire in one state, you shall make as great a quantity of it
as you will, and shall have very great loaves of fair Cinabrium, the which will
have only a hole in the middle, which is the space where the stick went
through. Finally, you may put to it new poulder in taking away the stick all
together, and closing the mouth, and than make a fire: for this last poulder
will likewise sublyme, and will make a bottom to the lofe of Cinabrium,
Moreover, note and understand, that the great fire, that is to say, long
continued and kept, hurts not, and now and then you must move, and lift up
and down the said stick, to the intent that the Cinabrium cleave not to it,
and stop so the mouth of the vessel, that you can put no more fresh
poulder to it, as is said. This is the sure, and perfect way and mean how
to make Cinabrium in as great loaves as you will, which hitherto has not
been known in Italye. You may do the like in pottes of potters claye white,
so that they be well luted and clayed over, that they may endure the fire,
and not break.

To fine and renew Borax.
BORAX was called of the ancient writers Chrisocolla, and was both natural
and artificial, as Plini, Dioscorides, and other write, and men did use of it
in Physic, and also to sowder Gold and Silver, and other metalles, as men use
yet now a days: for the nature of it is to melte, and to resolve quickly
any souderynge. It is used in work also for to make a body, that is to say,
to gather together the fylynge of Gold and silver, and in all other things,
wherein a man has need of a quick and sudden foundinge or meltinge.
Moreover, gentlewemen help them selves also much with it to make them
fair: for it makes the skin very white, fine, and clean, without danger
of any poison, or of hurtinge the teeth, or flesh.

The ancient men of old time had of it grene, whereof now a days is none
found, nor yet any man makes it. Marye, we have that is very white, and
alsoo somewhat black, which peradventure a man may say is like their grene.
The white is in little long pieces, with certain synewes or veins all a
long, so like unto Roche Alome, that many are deceived, or deceive other with
it: For when a man sets the said Borar upon the fire, it boyleth, and
swells up in all points like Alome, and so remains white, and full of
hoales like a sponge, and easy to be broken with your hands, even as Roche
Alome burned. But subtyle and craftye merchants know Borax from Alome three
manner of ways. The first is, that Alome put in a man's mouth is eygre and
sharp of taste, and restraintife, but Borax has no manner of taste, but a dead
and unsavory guste, as a mean between the savor of Oil, and whaye of Milk.
Therefore they that will deceive other, and falsifye the true Borax, take little
pieces of raw Rocfe Alome, and keep them in Oil of Almondes, in whay, or in
milk. Some other put to it also honny, or sugre, for to moderate the
eygernesse of the Alome, with the sweetness of it. Other there be, that melte
all the said things on the fire, and than set them to cool in some cold
place, until all be waxen into ye, or little stones, and puttinge to it Salt
Peter, Sal alcali, Tartre, Alome de fece, and such like things, and make
little stones somewhat like unto Borarx but first they differ in form and
fashion, for the true Borax is always long in form, and the stones where
Alome is among, are never brought into any form, but into little square
stones. Furthermore, they differ in the second sort, and that is this: That
Alome being burned, makes a greater lump, then when it is raw: but the true
Borax is brought and reduced into a very small quantity, and this is an
euidente sign to know it. The third, which is of most importance and the
sureste, is, that the matter wherein the Alome is, will not souder in no manner
of wise, and will not melte neither, so well as the Borax will. I say, it will
not melte so well, because that where any Salt Peter, Tartre, and Sal alcali
is, there the matter will melte, at the least in some part: for all the said
things help to the foundinge of metalles. The Salt Peter, when there is a
good quantity of it, is known incontinente upon the fire, for it makes the
boylinge wateryshe, and casts about, as it were little sparks of fire.

The other things made with the foresayed mixions, diverse times, in whaye,
milk, or in water, and congeled into little pebbles, make certain stones, but
they be always salt, to brighte, and to violente to melte: for when a man
will souder any work of Gold, or thin Silver with it, it causes the work
to melte together, and where as there is Sugre, it leaves the Gold and Silver
spotted. Men make other mixtures, which are very good for to souder, or to
melte, which nevertheless are differente from the Borax in form and
sauoure, of the which we will make mention hereafter.

Now, for to return to the true Borax of our time, men bring us certain
barrels full, of a kind of grease, full of certain little pebbles, which is
called the dowe or paste of Borare. Unto this day men have brought it out
of Alexandria, where it was alsoo of old time made: and therefore is it that
the aunciente Arabian Anthones, which have written of things concerning
mettalles, called the Borax Nitrum Alexandrinum. And within these few years,
they have begone to bring it from the Weste parts, yet I can not tell
whether it be made there, or else paraduenture it be brought latelye out of
the Indes. There was within these few years so great lack of it in Italye,
that it was sold at the least, for a crown an ounce, of that, that was made
into stones. And now, within this two year, there is come such hahoundaunce
out of the Weste parts, that the pound is worth but a crown and a half,
and less.

The way how to make it (which is used in the said West parts) is thus. In
Mines, where Gold and Silver, or Copper is gotten, is found a kind of water,
which (as I my self have seen and proved by experience) is of it self very
neete and excellent for to souder or to found with. And also I know a place
in Germanye, where there is a great vein of such water, which
notwithstanding, the paysauntes know not of. Now, they take this water, with
the earth that is underneath it, or on the sides, and boil it a certain time,
and than strain it, and so leauinge it, it congeleth into little pebbles, even
like unto Salt Peter.

And therefore if a man should keep them long so, they would not continue,
but would resolve by little and little: Also for to make them better, and to
preserve the^, and norishe them in their own nature and kind, they take the
grounds or dregs that is left of the said water, and earth, putting to it
barrows grease, or the grease of some other beast: than they goo to the mine,
where they make a great hole in the ground, in the bottom whereof they lay a
rank of the said grease, and upon that a rank of the said little pebble
stones, and than again another of grease, and so consequently as much as they
will, but so that the last rank be of grease, or of the said dowe or paste,
and so they leave it open and uncovered, the space of certain months: yet
many of them do all this within their houses, in the earth, or in great
vessels. Than, when they will sell it, or send it out of the country, they
take the said paste or dowe, with the stones and all, with a fire pan or
some like thing, and fill barelles and tonnes of it. Alexis speaks of Italy,
and not the translatour of England.
This is the same that comes unto us, which we call dowe or paste of Borax.
It is sent also from the countreye where Borax is made, or little stones of the
said paste, so renewed and fined as I will show you. About thyrty year ago
they sent much more of this Borax, fined and renewed, than they did of the
paste, because that in Italye they could not dress nor make it, nor bring it
into little stones, wherefore it was not put in ure, but of certain women in
distillations, for to paint them selves with. Since there has been one in
Venise that began to dress it, and after him a woman whom he had taught. These
two gat a great sum of money, and the said secret was long between them
two only, although it was desired of every man long before. Finally, it is
now come so far forward, that many men in Venyse can dress it, but one
makes it far better, then another, and peradventure very few have the
perfection of dressynge it, with such adnauniage that he loose nothing of the
substance, and to make as much of it as is possible perfectly, as I will
show you hereafter following. Now, you must take first of the said paste, that
is not moldy, vinewed, or putrified, for than it is a sign that it should be
old, and of many years, and thereby the little stones should be diminished,
lost, or decayed. Yet nevertheless this is of no great importance: for it is
better to assay with your finger within the past, to se if it be full of the
said pebbles, for the world being all together given to gain, and full of
deception and fraud, they that make it, put sometime very few pebbles in the
said grease, for to have more substance: and beside this, they that bye it to
sell again, take out also a good quantity of the said pebbles: wherefore it
is necessary to be circumspecte, to the intent that diligence may surmounte,
or at the least discover the gile and deceate. Fynallye, if you will fine and
renew the said Borax from such paste or dowe, do thus. Take water luke
warm, that is to say, for two pound of paste, half a payle full, which
you shall put into some earthen vessel, puttinge the paste into it, than with
your hand fraye and stir it in sonder, as you would temper leaven for to
kneade, after this, strain out the said water well thoroughe a straynoure,
and take the little stones that remain in the said vessel, that is to say,
those that be of the bigness of a Walnut, or bean, and put them in a vessel,
sprinklinge them with Oil Olyue, as though it were a salade, but the Oil
must be white: and if you have none good, take common oil and set it in the
sun, purginge it well, and annointe the said stones with it, minglinge them
well together with your hand. Afterward put them in a little bag, and mix
them well together again, as men do confitures, this done, put them in
little boxes, and keep them, and thus shall you have the best Borax that can
be possible. If you will renew and multiply it, do thus. Take the same water
that was strayned out, and put it in a kettle upon a small fire, keepinge the
fire always in one estate, than scymme it with an iron ladle, and put also
with the scumme, the ordure and filth that shall be in the bottom: but take
good heed, that in seething it fly not away. Continue thus dooinge until it
be well sodden, which is known thus: put a little upon your nail and if it
run not, it is enough sodden, or else you may prove it upon a paper, as men do
Syrops, and if it bide still, it is sodden, or wette a stringe in the said
water, and hold it betwixt your fingers, than pluck it out by the end,
and if you feel it roughe, it is sodden. Then take the kettle from the fire,
and cover it with some cover fytte for it, that there fall no ordure or fylth
in it: this done, bury the kettle in wheat branne, and close it well round
about, coueringe it with clothes or other things, so that it be well stopped.
You may bury it, or hyde it in a hot dungehyll, and leave it there the space
of eight or ten days, and afterward uncover it, and you shall find cruste
upon it, the which you shall take and put in on one side, and you shall find
in the said kettle, as it were little pieces of ice, which you shall take
out, and put in another vessel, wasshinge them with cole and fresh water,
than dry them upon a table in the shadow, and let those stones which at
the first time remained in the straynoure, be mingled with the said pieces of
ice. Than take Alome de fece, that is white, four pound, in three payles full
of water, three ounces of Salt Peter, than boil this with a small fire, and
scymme it, as you did the other, in prouinge it upon your nail, or upon paper,
if it be sodden, as before. This done, take it from the fire, and let it rest,
and when it is clear, take a little payle full and a half of it, and set it on
the fire in another clean kettle. And when you see that it will boil, put in
the said cruste, and that it be of ten pound, and make it sees as the
other did, essayinge upon your nail or paper, as you did before. Than put it
in a little virkin, and lay two sticks a cross, with four cords, whereunto
you shall tie a little lead, to the intent they may stretche well, and without
touching the bottom, by four fingers, and that to the end the Borax may
stick and cleave to it, and than bury it as before. This must not be put int
the bag, but anoint the same that you find stickinge upon the cords with a
feather, and the other that remains still in the vessel, you shall sprinkle as
it were a salade. The clear that you shall take out of it, must be of the
biggenesse of a hasell nut or bean: and the other will be less, you shall put
into the water that remains, which water you shall set on the fire, making
it sees, and doing as before, and so continue until all the water be
converted and turned into Borax, so that nothing be lost. And remember (at
the beginning when you dissolve in luke warm water, as we have said before)
to put to it the bigness of a ciche pease of the ruen of a Hare, for that will
make all the other parts of the Borax to cleave and take together.

A good and easy way to make Aqua fortis, better then any other.
TAke Roche Alome and Vitriole, or salt peter, or else all three together, of
each of them like quantity, that is well calcined and burned, and well brayed.
And if you will have it stronger, put as much salt Peter a part, as of Alome
and Vitriole together: put all this in some pot or violle, well luted and
clayed over, and in the recipient or receptorie two ounces of well water, for
every pound of the said substaunces. Let the receiptorye be in fresh water,
and always wette above with some wette linen cloth, so that it be never dry.
And by this means the exhalations or fumes will better mingle them selves with
their water, and will not stick or cleave to the recipiente. This done, take
the pot or violle luted, and trim it so that the mouth hang downewarde,
joining it with the recipiente, without a Limbecke, luting and claiyng well the
ioynctes and sides with flower, and the whites of Eggs: and dispose and order
it in such manner, that the fire come not to the recipient. And at the
beginning put a few hot coals under the bottom of the vyolle or pot,
until the matter loose and dissolve it self, and pass his first furye. This
done, cover it with coals, and the fire must be very high: and for to do
best, there must be little walls of brick to hold up the great coals, in
great quantity upon the said pot. When you have made this great fire, the
space of three or four, or six hours, all will be made.

Than let it cool, and take out the water, which is very good and perfect, and
keep it in a vessel of glass well stopped with wax.

The true and perfyte practice to cast medalles, and all other workemanshyppe,
as well in brass, as in gold, Silver, Copper, Lead, Tynne, as of Crystal,
Glass, and Marble.
First of all, you must have always the earth or sand ready, wherein you
will fashion and form your work: but because there be diverse sorts, and
every man dresseth it as he can get it, and as he has skill in making it,
we will put here some of the surest and most parfitest, and of diverse kinds,
to thend that if a man can not get or make the one, he may evermore have
recourse to the other. And understand, that all these that we will put here,
may be set a work each of them by them selves, or mixed one with another, or
all together, for they are good every way. The bounty and perfection of each
of these earthes for to cast any metal in, consists in these things, that
is to wit: that first and chiefly it be fine and small, and in no wise
roughe, or full of grommels, to the intent that all things may easily take
print. Secondly, that they receive the metal well, and that they neither
cleave, break, chappe, or wax into a cruste. They must also be tempered with
a water called Magistra, (of the which we will speak afterward) to the
intent that being dry, they may be harder, and hold faster together.
Thyrdelye, that they may continue, and serve at diverse foundinges and
meltinges, to the intent that when you will cast many medalles, or other
things all of one sort, ye need not at every time make new mouldes. Also
you must understand, that for metalles that are soft, as Lead, and Tynne, all
earth, so it be good, will suffice: Provided always, that it be fine and
small, and well tempered with the said Magistra, as I will declare here after.

The first earth to cast in a moulde all manner of fusible matter.
TAke Emerill, that men burnishe swords or armoure with, and braye it very
small, in flaming it, as we will show you afterward, and temper it, or
reduce it into dow or paste, with the said Magistra, as I will tell you
hereafter, and so dressinge it, you shall make a very good earth, which will
continue for many foundinges and meltinges, so that it be well governed and
tempered, and the more it is occupied, the better it will wax: Provided, that
it be always brayed a new, and than watered and tempered with the Magistra.

The second earth or sand.
TAke pieces of those vessels, or pottes of earth that are made in Valentia
in Italy, or other that glassemakers use to keep their molten glass in the
furnesse, and if you may only get the bottoms, or the pieces from the middle
to the lower: most part of them, it shall be the better, in taking away the
glass that is round about them, if not, take them as you may. Than take
Goldsmithes crosettes, or meltinge pottes, new, and break them in pieces,
and that the weight of the said crosettes be as much as the pieces of the
said vessels before. All these things being first beaten and stamped in a
mortar, let them be well brayed after upon a Porphire stone, with water, as men
braye colors, and having made them very fine and small, by seethinge them
again on the fire, as we will after declare, keep them in little goats
leather bags, or in some cloose boxes, to the end that because of their
finenesse they fly not, and vanisshe away in the air.

The third earth, or sand.
TAke the filinge of iron, sand, or iron oore, or the sparks that fly from
hoate iron when it is beaten, or else all together: but that it be pure
without any earth or fylth: than put it in an iron pan, or in some other
vessel that will endure the fire, sprinklinge it with strong Vinaigre, and
keeping it on the fire the space of eighte hours, after this temper it again
in Vinaygre, and then incense, and heat it in the fire, brayinge and renewinge
it diverse times, as the other. And keep it in leather bags, or in boxes well
stopped.

The fourth earth or sand.
TAke pieces of a pommeise stone made hot in the fire, and quenched in
Vynaygre four times. Than take. ii. parts of the sparks of iron brayed and
stamped, and one part of the pommeise stone Mingle al together, and put it in
the fire, and braye it often times, and so keep it as the other.

The fyft earth, and the most parfyt.
TAke mutton bones, but if you take those of the head, they will be better, if
not, take of what part so ever it be, and burn the^ upon the coals or in some
furneis, until they wax very white: than stamp them, and sifte them. This
done, you shall put the poulder in some iron pan, or other thing, among the
coals, so that it may burn well, than put to it a good handful of tallowe,
styringe it with some iron, in such wise, that all the tallowe may be burned
with the said poulder, leaving it so on the fire yet half an hour. Than
take it out and braye it, and burn it again, sprinklynge, and brayinge it
often times as you did the other, until it be very fine and small, and than
shall it be perfect, and will serve for many foundinges or meltinges.

The syxte earth.
TAke Cuttle bones, and burn them in the fire, until they be very white, and
use the^ in all things as you did the mutton bones, and than keep it as
before. Fynallye, there is also earth made of the ashes of Vynes, of straw, of
burned paper, of horse dunge, dried and burned, of brick stamped, of Boale, or
of read earth, or other like things that remain in the fire without
meltinge, wherein men printe very well all manner of metal, the which also
neither break, cleave in sonder, nor chappe, as is aforesayed.

A goodlye way and manner how to make all these earthes very fine, and small,
and almooste impalpable.
TAke which of these foresaied earthes you will, or any other, and after you
have well stamped it, and syfted it, dry it in a kettle by the fire, or in a
fryenge pan, or other vessel, until it be very whoate: than take it from
the fire, and stamp it well, as before, with water or Vynaigre, heat it
again, and braye it stylle with water, or Vynaygre, and never dry: doing so
five or six times. Fynallye you shall put it in a vessel of white earth,
well leaded, and power into it as much clear water as will surmounte it four
fyngars high: than stir it with a little clean stick, and let it rest
the space of an Aue Maria. Afterward pour the said water finely and wisely
into some other vessel that is clean: And upon the said earth that remains
in the first vessel, you shall power other water, and styre it as before:
than power the same with the other first powered out, and thus do so often,
until that with the water, you have poured out all the finest and smalleste
part of the same earth. And if there remain yet in the first vessel any
part of gross earth, braye it a new, and than put it with the other. This
done, you shall let all the same fine and small earth, which you poured into
the other vessel, go down to the bottom: and than power out fayer and
softely the water, and let the poulder dry that remains in the bottom, the
which afterward you shall braye well once again, and pass it through a fine
sieue or sarce of Silk, if you think good, and you shall have a poulder,
such as there is not the like, which you must keep, as the other before, in
leather bags, or in boxes of wood well stopped, pastynge or glewing the
sides, to the intent that the poulder fly not away, for it is a substance
almoost as fine and as subtyle as the air.

To make a water called Magistra, wherewith the said earthes to make mouldes
is tempered, and moysted again at every castinge and foundinge.
TO cause that the said earth be fast and firm, and that being fashioned
and dry, it may hold together, and not fall again into poulder, you must
make this water, which is called la Magistra, which is a word, not known
from whence it is deducted, as the Philosophers have forged and given names to
certain waters, according to the effect that they serve for, as they have
done of this water. And it seems that they meante by this, the same thing
that we understand by the mean or way, or such a thing, that is a mean or
way to keep together or to dissolve, or to do some like thing: thus it is
made. They take common salt, the which they wrappe in a linen cloth wette in
water, or other licour, and being so lapped up, it is laid in the middle of
the embers in a furneis, or in some other like place, to the intent that with
a^payre of bellows they may give it always a great fire, or else they put
it in some croset, or other small vessel, iuted and clayed, blowing it well the
space of an hour, than they let it cool. And he that will not blow it
always, as is aforesaid, let him lay it in the mids of hot coals, and
yet cover it well with fire, and when it is cool again, be must stamp it,
and put it in a pot well leaded, and put to it as much water as will cover it,
four or six fingars high: than must he set it on the fire, and styrringe it,
he shall make all the said salt to dissolve. This done, it must cool again,
and he strained or passed thoroughe a felt twice: and this is done for to
moist or baine the said earthes, and to make them hold together, as we will
declare afterward. Also you may make this Magistra with the whites of Eggs,
beaten with a stick of a fig tree, until they be converted and turned in a
froth or scumme, then let them rest the space of a night, and in the morninge
pour out the water that is found under the froth. With this water is the
said earth moysted and hayned, and it appears that it is better then other:
for it makes it faster and firmer, and cleaner, nor cleaves so sone unto the
things cast in the mouldes: therefore some put a little of this water of
whites of Eggs, with the other Magistra made of salt. Other put to it a
little water of Gomme Arabic, addinge in all things judgment, experience,
and industry.

To make Lutum sapientiae very parfytie.
TAke of the best white potters earth that you can get, for in one place there
is better than in another, that is to say, of that which can best endure the
fire, as such as they make pottes of in Padua, and likewise in Germany: for it
is of such perfection, that the pottes which be made of it, and wherein they
dress their meat, may also serve to found metalles in. Take then of the
best, and specially if it must serve for a thing that has need to be long
upon a great fire, otherwise, take such as you can get. There is found of
it, that is of a graye color, as the common sort is, and also there is white,
that men use in some place of Vicence, which is like loaves of Gipsum, or
plaster, and is called of the Italians Florette de Chio. We here in England
upon the use thereof, may give it what name we will. Potters use of it in
Venise, for to white the dishes, and other things, before they vernish or
pollish them. There is also found of it that is read, as in Apulia, where
there is great quantity, and that they call Boale, and is the very same that
some Apoticaries do sell for Boale Armenick, and the Venitians use of it, for
to paynt read the forefrontes of their houses, with lime, brick, and
Vermillion, coueringe it afterward with Oil of line. This red earth is the
fattest, and the clammiest of all the rest, and therefore it cleaves soonest
by the fire, if it be not tempered with some other substance. And because that
all the said earthes be to fat, the one more than the other, therefore men
put to them some lean substance. Now, if you take of that of ash color,
which is most commen, and the lest fatty, you may compose and make it in this
manner. Take of the said earth four parts, of cloth-makers floxe or shearing,
one part, ashes that have served in a buck, or other, half a part, dry horse
donge, or the donge of an Ass, one part. If you will make it parfiter, put to
it a few stamped brickes, and sparks of iron: let all these things be well
stamped, and sifted, that is to say: the earth, the ashes, the horse donge,
the brickes, and the sparks of iron: than mingle all together, and make it
into earth, and make a bed thereof, upon the which you shall cast by little
and little, the floxe, as equally as you can. This done, power to it water,
styringe it well first with a stick, and than with a pallet broad at the
end. And when all is well incorporated together, as you would have it, lay
it upon some great board, and beat it well, and that a good space with some
great staff, or other instrument ofyron, minglinge and stearinge it well, for
the longer you beat it, the better it is. By this mean you shall have a very
good claye for to lute or clay, and join violles, flagons of glass to still
with, and bottels of gourdes for stilling and other great things, as furnesses
and such like, as we will declare afterward. But he that will make it with
more ease, let him put the earth only, the flox, and the horse donge, with a
few ashes. Some put no horse donge to it, and some no floxe, according to the
purpose that they make it for. For to stop and close up the mouths of
stillinge glasses, or violles, to the intent they take no vent on the fire, the
said clay will be very good: nevertheless men put to it two parts of quick
lime, and the whites of Eggs, and then it will be surer to let nothing vent
out but the glass it self. All kind of clay or earth would be kept moist, and
ready dressed for him that will occupy it continually, but it must not be kept
to watery nor yet left to dry, for than it would serve for nothing, saying
that after it is once hardened, a man can not dress it any more to do any
good withal. And when you put water to it, it is mollified by little and little
above, and is as it were a sauce, but within remains hard, and if you put to
much water to it, you mar it utterly. Therefore, when you see that it
begins to wax dry, feed it a new little and little with water, styringe
it till it be well, and so shall you make it perfect.

Certain things, which he that will take in hand any foundinge or castinge
of metalles, must always have ready, and in order.
BEcause that instruments and means, be those that make all things come out
of the workemans hand with a perfection, therefore, to the intent that when
the time is come to begin a work, you be not vnfurnyshed, or sustain damage
for lack of things necessary: First, let your coals be of strong wood,
young and dry, your crosettes or melting pottes without cleftes or chappes,
and of graye color, which commonly are better than the black, or white. you
must have a little burde to give it vent over the mouth of the croset, which
is uncovered for certain causes: a cane or reed to blow away the ordure and
fylth out of the croset, a thing easier than with a pair of bellows: an iron
with a hoke, for to take the coals out of the croset or meltinge pot, and
likewise a pair of tongues: a press of wood to keep fast and sure the
fourmes or mouldes in pouringe in the metal: two little tables or more of
walnut tree wood, or box, or of some other hard and massiue wood, or else
of copper made very even and equal on every side, for to turn the mouldes,
and to keep them steddye: two pieces of wolle, or more, to the intent, that
if in fasteninge the mouldes in the press, they be not equal and even with
out side, these pieces may fill up the empty place: a compass and a rule for to
part and divide the casting holes and pipe wherein the metal must run: an
iron made like a scrapinge knife or rasoure, sharp at the end, and edged at
the sides, such as gilters do use to make even the castinge holes, or pipes of
mouldes, the which will serve to make the breathinge hooles and pipes that the
vapoure goes out at when the work is made, and having no such instrument,
you may make them with a knife, as handsomely as you can. You must also have
ready a little oil, and turpentine in a dyshe, with a little paper, or some
piece of linen cloth to wette in the said oil and turpentine, and to burn
it, for to parfume the fourmes and mouldes when they be well wiped, to the
intent the metal may run the better. And because that sometime such
parfume fills up the holownesse and engrauing of the work, you must have a
hares foot to wipe away the superfluity of it, and also for to swepe
together the dust, to the intent it fall not when you will cast any thing in
the mouldes. And than must you have a brushe, or rubber of latin wire, and one
of sylke, such as men make clean combs with, for to rub and pollishe the
work, before it is fourmed and fashioned, to the intent to pollishe it and
dress a new, as need shall be, when the work is cast.

The manner or order that a man ought to keep, wh^re ^e will cast or found
medalles, or any other thing.
First, you shall lay the medalle or other work that you will cast, in a
dyshe with strong Vynaigre, Salt, and burned straw: than rub it well with
your hand, until it be clean: likewise with a rubber, or brushe. This done,
wash it in fresh water, and wipe it with a linen cloth. After this, lay
upon a table of hard wood, or of copper well pollyshed, half the moulde or
form, that is to say, the female. And let the myddle part, that is to say,
that which is joined to the other, be laid upward upon the table, in which
things thus laid, you shall lay your medalles, or the thing you will form
or fashion, and let it be clean, as we have said, orderinge it in such
sort, if there be but one, that it be just and directlye against the
conduyte or pype, and as low in the frame as it may, to the intent that the
pipe or cundite may be the longer, and that it may have metal enough. If there
be more than one, you shall order and set them on the sides of the form or
frame, and leave place in the middle for to make the hole or pipe, to power the
metal in. And if there be more then two, you must beware that one receive not
the metal of another, but make to every one his little pipe or condite,
which may answer and come justly to the pipe or hole in the middle. Then
take one of the said fine earthes, well sifted thorough a fine sarce, and when
you have well brayed it, put it in a platter, or great dishe, to the intent
that in handelinge it, there go nothing out, and you shall moiste it little
and little, with the water called Magistra, mixinge it well with your hands,
and rubbinge it so long between your hands, that wringinge it with your
fiste, it hold and cleave together, but you must note, that I speak of
moistinge it, and not of through wettinge it, for it may not wete your hand in
pressinge it, nor cleave unto your hand like past, but tha it only hold
together a little more or less then dry flower or meal, and being so wrong
in your hand, it may break in pieces when you touch it with your fingar. And
having thus brought it to a form, lay it handsomely upon the medals in the
form or mould, with thendes of your fingars, and than with your hand wringe
it, and press it hard down, not sparinge to press it well, in puttinge upon
it the other little table, and pressing it down with your hands, as hard as
you can, yea with all your might.

Than with a cutting iron with a right and even edge, and with a ruler made
just and even by line the said fourmes with the earth, cutting away
handsomely, the earth that passes over the said mouldes, and so lay them
upon one of the pieces of wolle, and then the little flat table, then you shall
take with both your hands the two little tables, above and beneth, and holding
them fast together, turn handsomely y^ mouldes vpside down, and taking of the
table, you shall se under the medals, in lyftinge it up, if there be any earth
entered in, if there be, you must take it away with the hares foot. Then,
setting the other part of the form or mould in his place, you shall fill it
with the same earth, pressinge it well, as before, and making it even and
equal with the iron. Afterward, with the point of the iron, you shall lift
up a little, at one of the corners, half the moulde or form, and take it of
fayer and softly with your hand, and take out the medalles nimbly, touching
them a little round about, with the point of a small pen or quil, if at the
first they will not come out, turninge downward that part of the mould wherein
they did stick wha^ you opened it. And if yet they will not come out, strike
them a cross with the point of a knife, until, that turninge downewarde the
mouldes, they come out. And if in case they be not well printed, according to
your mind, you may put them again into their place, and press them again:
and having set on both sides the two pieces of wolle, and the tables, close
them in the press. Fynallye, with the said shave, or sharp iron, make the
said pypes or conduites holowe, compassinge them with your compass, and
rule, in such sort, that they come just and equally: than shall you trim
them so against the fire for to dry, tourning them sometime, until they be
well dried. Then with a match or wyke tempered or wette in Oil, and
Turpentyne, and being set on fire, smoke it, and if there remain any
superfluous thing, wipe it away with the hares foot. Then join them together
again, and having laid to them the wolle, and tables, wringe them a little in
the press, and in the mean time having made ready and molten the metal (if
it be silver, or white copper, it is known by the shininge of it, and
clearness in the melting pot: and if it be tin, by castinge into it a stone,
or some paper, and that it burn it) you shall cast it, and the thing shall go
well, without any other help or aid, for to make it run, saving that
after the tynne is molten, put in a little, that is to say, a twentieth part of
sublimata^ in respect of the whole quantity, and one ^^ghte part of
Antimonium: for beside that these things make it run well, they harden it
and make it sownde well.

Then the mouldes being cold, take out handsomelye the medalles: and when you
will cast other, you must parfume and smoke the mouldes again: and then
press them, and so cast your things as before, and do it as often as you
think good. And if you see that the mouldes be not broken, and that you will
keep them for another time, you may lay them in a dry place, and they will
keep well. Finallye, the said earth taken out of the mouldes, brayed and
sifted, will be always better to serve your turn. The medalles so cast, are
sodden again afterward, and wax white, so that they be not of Tynne. Also
you may give to all these medalles what colors you will, as we will declare
more at large hereafter.

To make a white, to blaunche and make white medalles, or other things newlye
molten, and also for to renew medalles of old silver.
TAke the medalles, or other things newly founded or molten, or else the old
ones that you will renew, and lay them upon the coals, tourninge them
often, until they wax of a graye color, than rub them with a brush of
copper wire, puttinge them afterward in this white color folowinge. Take
salt water of the sea, or common water salted, with a handful of baye salt,
wherein you shall put the lees of white wine, and Roche Alome raw.

Boil all this in a pan leaded: and if the work be of copper, made white by
any sophistical substance, you shall put to it these things folowinge, that
is to say, Silver heaten, or Siluerfoile, the weight of a Spanish Real, Sal
Armoniacke, waying three times as much, Salt Peter the weighte of flue
Realles. All the said things being put in some pot of earth, with a cover
having a^^ole in the mids, set them in the middle of the fire, coueringe it
with ashes and coals up to the neck, and leave it there so, until all the
humors be breathed out, then let all cool again, and beat it into poulder
very small. This done, take an ounce of this substance, or somewhat more or
less, and boil it in the said white confection of the Salt water, only
half a quarter of an hour, puttinge in the medalles, or other works. Then
pour out this water with the medalles into clear and luke warm water, and
after rub the medalles with the Tartre or lees, and other things that
remain in the pot: and having washed them well with fresh water, wype
them dry.

To gylt iron with water.
TAke well, river, or conduite water, and for three pound of the same, take two
of Roche Alome, an ounce of Roman Vitriolle, the weight of a ponny of
Verdegrese, three ounces of Sal gemma an ounce of Orpimente, and let all botle
together: and when you se it boil, put in lees called Tartre, and bay salt,
of each of them half an ounce, and when it has sodden a little while, take it
from the fire, and paint the iron with all, than having set it in the fire to
heat, burnishe it, and it is done.

The like another way
TAke Oil of line four ounces, Tartre or wine lees two ounces, the yelkes of
eggs hard roasted and stamped, two ounces, Aleo cicotrinum, an ounce Saffron a
quarter of a dragme. Boil all these things together in a new earthen pot a
good space, and if the oil of line cover not all the said substaunces put in
more water until there be sufficient, then anoint your iron with this mixtion,
having first burnished it, and so shall you make it of the color of gold.

To gylte iron with gold foil, and water, or else with gold mixte with
Quick Silver, as goldsmythes are wont to gilte silver.
TAke Romayne vitriole an ounce, roche, Alome, two ounces, salt Armoniack an
ounce: all these things being well beaten in poulder, and boiled in common
water, take your iron well burnished, and wette it with the said water,
rubbinge it well: than lay on your goldefoyle, and let it dry by the fire.
This done, burnishe it with stone Hematite, as men are wont to do, and it will
be very fair. If you will gilt with gold mixed with quick silver, as
goldesmithes use to gilte silver, you shall add to the said water, a dragme
or Verdigreese, half an ounce of Sublimatum, and let it boil al together, than
put your iron to boil in the said water: but if it be so great that it can
not go in, rub it with the said boylinge water, and heat it, that it may
receive the Amalgama of the quick silver and the gold, the which Amalgama we
have taught you to make in the fifth book, in the chapter of minglinge or
mixinge gold. And when you have heated the iron, gylt it with the same gold
so mixed with the quick silver, and smoke or fume it at the fire with a lamp,
or with Brimstone, as goldsmithes commonly do, or rather with wax, whereof we
will hereafter show you a very good manner and way, and better then that is used
in Germany, or in any place where it has hitherto ben used.

To die or color into the color of brass, or also to gylte Silver, which
shows better, and continues longer.
IT is a thing most certain, that gold set upon white iron or silver, shows
not so fair as upon brass: for as soon as it begins to wear a little, men
may see the whiteness of the iron or silver, which is not so soon secne upon
any read color. Therefore many practiciens, when they will gylte any
wood, or other thing, lay the bottom or ground (not of read, as the most
part do) but of yelow to the intent that the gold shall not so soon appear
worn, as upon the red, and more upon the white.

The said yellow can not be laid upon iron or silver: but leaving all this
aside, when you will gilt silver, or give a color of brass unto iron, you
shall do after this manner. Take verdet, or Verdegrise, Vitriol of Almain, and
salt Armoniacke, at your discretion, but let the Vitriole be of a greater
quantity than the other things: put all this well beaten in poulder into
strong Vinaiger, letting it boil half an hour. And when you have taken it
from the fire, while the substaunces be yet boilinge, you shall put in your
iron that you will color, coueringe well the pot with his cover, and with
cloth upon it that it vent not out, and so let it cool, and you shall have
your iron well colored, of a brazen color, and thus may you gilte it with
quick silver, as if it were brass. Esteem this as a goodly secret, and also
profitable.

A water or color to lay under Diamondes, as well true as counterfeite, that
is to say, made of white Sapphires, as we will declare afterward.
TAke the smoke of a candell, gathered together in the bottom of a basen, and
make it into a dowe with a little oil of Masticke: than put the said
mixtion under the Diamonde in the ringe, where you will set it.

To counterfayte a Diamonde, with a white Saphyre.
THis secret is known well enough of the Iewellars, that use almoost all one
manner indifferent good: but we (after we have described their fashion) will
show you a way far better. They take a Sapphire of a good white color, and
set it in the fire in a goldsmithes croset among the fylinge of iron, or of
gold, thinking because it is of great value, that it is better for such a
purpose, but yet the fylinge of iron is a great deal better. They let this
fylinge or rubbysh of iron become almost read, without meltinge it, and cast
their Sapphire into it, leaving it therein a pretty while. And after they have
taken it out, if the white color like a Diamond do not like them, they cast it
in again, and so often, till they se it be to their fantasy, than they set it
in a ringe, and color it as before. Now here follows another way a great
deal better. Take white smalte well beaten in poulder, and mingle it with the
said filinge of Gold, or iron, but so that there be as much smalte as
filinge, then take a little other smalte without fylynge, and make it into
dowe, with your spettle, and in this dowe wrappe your Sapphire, and let it dry
well at the fire.

This done, tie it at the end of a small and fine wire, and leave the other
end so long that you may pluck it out when you will. Afterward cover it
with the said filinges, and leave it so on the fire a certain space, until
the filinge be very hot, as is aforesaid, but so that in no case it melt: than
pluck out once your Sapphire, to se if the color please you, if not put him
in again until it be fair to your mind.

To ingrosse thin Ballesses to set in ringes.
IF you have Ballesses as thin as paper, dress them of what greatness or
largeness you will, and take a piece of fine Cristall colored like a Balls:
then take a great grain of Mastick, the which you shall stick upon the
point of a knife, and heat it well again the fire, and sodaynlye it will
cast out a little drop like the tear of a man's eye, having a luster like a
pearl, with the which drop, glewe on the said Balls upon the Cristall,
and fear not that it will gather to a lump, or hinder the color: Then
pollishe it, and give it a luster, and so set it in gold, and it will be very
fayer, and seem to be verily a Balls.

To make Rubies of two pieces, and Emeraudes, as they make them at Mylan.
TAke the drop or tear of Masticke, whereof we have spoken in the Chapter
before, and if you will make Emeraudes, you shall color it with Spanish grene
tempered and mingled with Oil, puttinge to it a little wax, if need be, and
if it be to thick, temper it with water: But if you will make Rubies, take
Gomme Arabicke, Alom succarine, raw Roche Alome, as much of the one as of the
other, and let it boil all together in common water: than put into the said
water some Brasill cut small, and let it sees, puttinge to it some Alome
Catine so called, because it is boiled in a caudron, of the which the more
there is, the darcker it will be: then take the drop of Masticke abouesaid,
and color it with the said read. This done, take two pieces of Cristal,
dressed and trimmed with the whele, of what fashion and greatness you will, so
that the piece which you will lay vppermoste, be not so great as the other
underneath, that is to say, the one dressed upon the other, as the nail upon
the finger, just on every side. After this lay that underneath, upon a little
fire pan, or some other instrumente of iron on the coals, that the said
Cristall may be very hot, and than touch it upon with the said read drop
or tear, which you shall take upon the end of a stick: but it must be so
hot that it may drop down the better: and when you see that the said piece
of Cristall is colored enough, you shall take the other lesser piece, that
must be set above, which likewise must be hot, and set it upon the said
drop, and it will conglutinat^ and glue together the two pieces of Cristal,
without causinge any thickness or let unto the luster of the Rubie, the which
will be clear and brighte on every side. Afterward set it in your ringe,
settinge to the Ruby the red leaf, and the grene to the Emerauldes, as we
will teach you hereafter how to make the said leaves for all kind of stones,
as well fine, as artificial.

To make a paste or dowe for precious stones, as Emerauldes, Rubies, Saphyrs,
and such like, which be but of one piece, well colored within and without.
TAke potters lead burned, iii. ounces, and put it in as much water as will
cover it a finger or two high: then stir it with your finger, letting it go
down to the bottom. Afterward pour out the water, which will serve for to
wette within side the earthen pot leaded, to the intent that the matter cleave
not to the sides of it, wherein you put all the substance. Than take other.iij
ounces of Vermillion dried, and mingle it with the said lead, then an ounce of
Cristall calcined and burned, or else of a Calcidoine stone, with.xiiij.
or.xvj. carattes at the most, of Rubricke, or sparks of Copper. All these
things well stamped, and mingled together, you shall put in a pot of earth
leaded, well wette within with the said water of the lead: then cover it, and
set it in a glass makers furneis, by the space of three or four days, and you
shall have a very fair paste or dowe, the which you may cause to be dressed
with the wheel, as you will. At Venise men bye the stone for a grote or six
pence at the most. And for to make yellow stones, you shall put to it the rust
or rubbishe of iron. And to make Rubies, put to it Cynople or read lead: and
in those that be of colors, you shall follow the order that we will teach you
hereafter.

To make Emerauldes, and other stones or Iewelles.
TAke Sal alcali, and dissolve it in water, distillinge it thorough a felt, and
dry it, then dissolve it again, and dry it so three times, afterward beat it
into poulder: then take fine Cristall; and cause an Apoticarye to stamp and
sift it for you, as they do Cristall prepared. Then take two ounces and a half
of the said Cristal, of Sal alcali, two ounces, Spanish grene an ounce, first
tempered and stieped in Vinaygre, and than strained. The said three poulders,
you shall put in a vessel, as in a new earthen pot leaded, the which pot you
shall lute and clay over, and cover it that it take no vent, then leave it so
clayed and luted the space of three days, the longar the better, until all be
through dry. Afterward, you shall put it in a potters furneis, the space
of.xxiiij. hours. Then take the said composition, and dress it as men do
fine stones, and you shall have them excellent. And if you will have Rubies,
put Cinople to it, in stead of Spanishe green. If you will have Saphirs, put
to it Lapis Lasuli, But if you will have Iacinthes, you must put in Coral in
stead of green Verderame, as is before said.

To calcine or burn Crystal and the calcidoyne stone, to put in the said
mixtions of precious stones.
TAke Tartre calcined and burned an ounce, and dissolve it in a dishe full of
clear water, then strain it out, and take the pieces of Cristall, or
Calcidoin stone, and heat them upon the fire in an iron ladle or fire pan:
than quench them in the water that is in the dyshe: take them out, and heat
them again, and quench them as before in the same water, doing so six or
seven times, and they shall be very well calcined and burned. Then beat them
fynely into poulder and put it into the said mixtion. Nevertheless remember,
that if you will make Emerauldes, you must beat ye said substaunces to poulder
in a brafen mortar: but if you will make Rubies: or other, you must stamp
them in an iron mortar, and beware that they touch not the brass,

A water to harden the said stones.
BEcause that all the said artificial stones are commonly bryttle, for to
harden them, do as follows. Take little pieces of Calamita, and calcine them
as you did the Cristall: then beat them into poulder, and put it in a
moist place, until it be turned and dissolved into water, with ye which you
shall knede Vitriole Almaine, or Romayne, raw, without making it read: then
make thereof a soft paste or dow, or else a syroppe, which you shall still
in a glass or Viol with a crooked neck, or in an vrinal, and with the water
that comes of it, you shall knede barley flower, making a hard past, in the
which you shall wrappe your mass of stones, made as is before said, or the
stones self, when they be dressed and fashioned with the whele: then put them,
so wrapped in the same paste, into an oven with a bache of bread, and take
them out with the bread. And when you have taken of the paste, you shall find
your stones hard, as if they were natural. If you se it be need, you may
cover them with the said paste, and bake them again in the oven, and than
shall you have them parfite and hard.

To calcine fine silver.
Saying that we are entered into the matter of calcininge, we will show you
the calcination of fine silver, and than of Talcum, as we have promised before.
There be diverse ways of calcininge silver, whereof we will put here three of the
best. Take fine silver beaten very fine and thin, then cut it in pieces as
big as a Spanishe ryall, or more or less, for it makes no great matter:
then take a croset, or an erthen pot, and lay in the bottom of it a rank
of common salt, not white, nor prepared or trimmed to eat, but even as it
comes out of the salines or salt pan, and it must be stamped very small.
Upon this salt you shall lay likewise a rank of the said pieces of silver,
and then another of salt, and another of silver, and so consequently as long
as your silver lasts, in such sort, that the last rank may be of salt,
and that good and thick: then cover all this with a paper, lutinge and
clayinge well the croset, or little earthen pot, and leauinge a little hole
in the coueringe the biggenesse of a goose quill. And when it is dry, cover it
over, and round about, with coals and embers, and leave it in such a fire,
at the least three or four hours: then having taken it out, and all being
cool, open the croset, and take out the pieces of Silver one after another,
making them clean that the salt stick not upon them. And if you perceive
that they be so brittle that you may break them with your finger, like a crust
of bread, it is done and made: if not, put them again into the croset or pot,
setting them in the fire as before. And to make it perfitly, you ought to do
this three times or more. This done, make your silver into poulder, and wash it
in a dishfull of hot water, and let it sincke to the bottom. After, strain
out the water so handsomely, that you lose no part of ye said poulder: or to
avoid al dangers pass it through a felt: this done, put other hot water to
it, and strain it out as before, so often till you may know by the taste of the
water, that all the salt is purged away. Than shall your silver be well calcined,
and diminished of the weight, dried, and become from his nature into a massif
part, and somewhat like unto gold. Thus will it serve you for diverse things, if
you can dress it well. The like is done with Talcum, in stead of common salt:
but than you need not wasshe it in hot water. Some calcyne it with salt, or
Talcum twelve or.xv. times, and more, to the intent to have it more massiue and
sounder, and more commodious to take color. It may be also done in this
manner, that is to say, to melte the silver in a Goldsmithes meltinge pot, and
for every ounce of the same, to put in a pound or more of Brimstone stamped,
and that little and little. True it is, that so it will consume more than by
the salt, or Talcum, but it shall be far better if the Brimstone be first
purged in strong lie (that is to say, made with strong ashes, and quick
lime, or such like things.) Now let us come to the other manners of calcininge
silver.

The second manner of Calcininge silver.
TAke Aqua fortis seperatiua, made with Salt peter and Alome, as we have before
declared, then take fine silver, fyled or pollished, or beaten into leaves, or
made in small pieces, or grains, that is to say, of the said silver one
part, and of aqua fortis, three parts, and have the said water in a violl:
then put in the said silver, and you shall se it will incontinent begin to
boil, and that the bottom of the viol will be hot if the water be good. Let
it so boil, until it boil nor eat no more, holdinge still the violl in your
hand, or settinge it in some place far from the fire. But if the water be
not strong, you must set it a little to the fire, holdinge still the violl in
your hand upon the embers, or else you may set it upon a few ashes, or
upon some little furneis. And when it has left boylinge, and eaten all the
silver, you shall se the water wax green, so that there shall remain no
silver in the bottom, if that the water were well calcined and burned: for
than it would make as it were white lyme at the bottom, or if there were any
gold in the silver, it would make it descend to the bottom in little round
pieces, like pearls, or like sand. Now, after that the said silver is
dissolved, and eaten of the said aqua fortis, you shall take another violl
bigger, or an vrinal, or earthen pot half full or more of well or river water,
wherinto you have dissolved, and have in a readiness a good handful of common
white salt: then let the said water be strayned two or three times. This
done, you shall pour the aqua fortis which dissolved the silver into the salt
water, leaving it so the space of.iiij. or six hours: then shall you find at
the bottom as it were a bed of herbs or green rushes, which shall be the
silver dissolved, and the salt aqua fortis, and also a part of the common salt
that you did put in. Afterward distill the said water by a felt, and take the
silver that is so descended to the bottom, and put it in a croset, coueringe
it well, to the intent there fall no ordure nor fylth into it: than bury and
cover it over and over in hot burninge embers, coueringe it well also with
fire, that it may burn the space of.iij. hours or more. Finally, let it cool
well again, and pour the silver out of the croset, into a dishefull of hot
water, stirring it a little together with your fingar, and than let it rest:
and after pour out fair and softly the said water, and put in other, doing as
before, until the water wax no more salt. This done, let the silver dry,
which shall be very well calcined for to serve your turn in any thing that
you will.

The third manner of calcining silver.
YOu shall mix together into dowe or paste called Amalgama, one part of silver
leaves, with three or four parts of quick silver, as we have declared in the
fifth book, in the chapter of the manner how to bray gold: then bray this
Amalgama, or paste, with common salt, and set it to the fire until the quick
silver be vanished away, afterward wash it with hot water, so much and so
often, that the water be no more salt, then shall you have your silver
calcined. After this, if you think good, you may braye it again with other
salt, without other quick silver: and then put it to the fire in a croset,
three or four hours, and wash it again, as is aforesaid.

To calcine Talcum quickly out of hand.
BEcause that Talcum is a thing of so great importance, and so much desired
of all good wits, men have found diverse ways to calcine it, the which
teach us that we must put to it twice as much salt peter as common salt, or
raw Tartre with the Talcum, and then put all this in a furneis certain days,
and then to separate the salt or Tartre, with hot water. Other heat it upon
the coals, and quench it in pysse, and do it often times. Other there be that
wrappe it in little white pieces of woollen cloth, and put it in the midees of a
great fire, the space of half an hour, or more, and than they find it
thoroughly molten and all in a light piece, and full of hooles like a sponge, not
much differing from burned Alome. All the which ways, to say the truth, are
nothing worth, nor do not perfectly calcine it, where they corrupt the nature
of the Tartre, and make it become like unto quick lyme, or Alome, or else of
little strength. Now, for to calcine it out of hand and perfectly, you shall
take the Talcum raw and made into little leaves, or stamped as well as is
possible, and than put it in a croset, or in a fire pan among the hot coals.
And when it is very hot, or rather read hot, you shall put to it drop by
drop, distilled Vineaigre wherein Tartre has been dissolved, and put thereunto
the third part of Aqua vite, pouring it by little and little upon the hot
lees or Tartre, that is to say, three ounces of Vynaigre for every pound of
Talcum: then take it from the fire, and you shall find it fair and well calcined.
Finally, you shall wash it with hot water, to the intent to separate the lees or
Tartre from it. It is calcined also, being made in leaves as thin as is
possible, layinge them by ranckes or beds, with little flat pieces of silver,
in a croset luted and clayed, than put them in a furneis where glass or brick
is made, by the space of four or five days. The like is done also with little
pieces of Tynne.

An excellent and very easy way to gilte iron, copper, and silver, to make it
seem like massyue gold.
FIrst if you will gilt silver, or iron, you must give it the color of copper,
as we have aforesaid? than take beaten gold, which you shall mix with quick
silver, and make Amalgama or paste thereof, as is said before, and shall put the
said Amalgama in a little dishe, upon the which you shall pour the juice of a
fruit called Cucumis asininus, such a quantity that it may be above the said
substaunces a fingar high. Keep this gold thus prepared and trimmed, and cover
it, to the intent there fall no filth nor ordure into it, which you may use and
occupy when you will. Afterward, the things that you will gilt, must be very
clean, and well polished, then with a pensell you shall give them of the said
gold so prepared with quick silver, and as it were dissolved, rubbing it well
all about. If you will not do so, you may gylte after the common manner of
goldsmithes: yet notwithstanding with gold made into Amalgama, or mixed as is
aforesayed, chafinge the work that you will gylte with Aqua fortis, as they
do. Then make the quick silver vanishe away, as the goldsmithes of Italy
commonly do, that is to say, with a lamp of line seed Oil, and with Brimstone,
and make afterward a gylt upon the work, that is like Saffron. But I counsel
you to use this manner in the chapter folowinge, which is partly the same that
the goldsmithes do use, in France and else where, but it is much amended,
and this is it.

A parfyt manner and way to gilte, and to make the quick silver to vanish away
from the thing gylted.
PVt in a pan the rubbish or scumme of copper, and the filinge of iron, then
pour upon it strong Vynaigre not distilled, as much as will cover it two or
three fingars high. Let it boil so the space of an hour, then pour out the
said Vineaigre, and put in other, letting it boil as before, and do thus four
or six times. Afterward make the said Vynaigres put together, to euaporate or
dry up, or else make it distill out, for to have one vynaigre of it, which
will be good for many things. This done, you shall put unto the said poulder
remaining at the bottom, the eight part of Almayne Vitriole, and as much of
Ferrerum of Spain, and the half of an eight part of salt Armoniacke, with a
little Brimstone: then into a little molten wax with a little Oil of line, or
Oil Olyue, you shall put little and little the said poulders well mingled
together. Fynallye take that which you have covered with the said Amalgama of
gold and quick silver, and with a pensyll cover and lay it over well with the
said wax so mixed, than put it, so cyred, in the mids of hot burninge
coals, and let it burn and consume all the wax. This done, you shall have
such a gylt, that it shall be like massiue gold. And at the end you may
pollish it with brusshes of copper wyre and cold water, or you may burnishe it
as you will.

The end of the Secrets of Dom Alexis of Piemount.
Here follows the Table of all the secrets contained in this present volume.
THe manner, and secret to conserve a man's youth, and to hold back old age,
to maintain a man always in health and strength, as in the fairest flower of
his years. Fo. 1 To make a precious licoure, and of inestimable virtue, the
which taken at the mouth, strengthens and augmenteth the natural heat, and
radical moisture, purifieth the blood, and cleanses the stomach from all
superfluity of humors: and by that mean conserueth the health and youth, and
prolongeth the life of him that uses it. Folio. 1. A potion or drink to be
used instead of Syrop, good for men of all ages and complections, that will be
purged: the which taken what day you will dryueth away the evil humors,
without mouinge or troublinge the good, or doing any hurt. And is also very
good for the great pockes, and al infirmities, as well of the stomach as of the
head, and is likewise profitable for them that be in health, to take twice in
the year of an ordinary purgation, that is to say, at the Spring, and in
September. Fol. 5. A very easy and good remedy for to heal all manner of
pockes: which is made with little cost, and requires not that a man keep his
bed or his house, but may use it goinge in the streets. And it is also very
good for all sorts of grief in the ioynctes, in what part of the body so
ever it be. Fol. 6. To resolve and reduce gold into a potable licour, which
conserueth the youth and health of a man, as well taken by it self, as mixed
with the foresaid licoure spoken of in the second chapter of this present
book, and will heal every disease that is thought incurable, in the space of
seven days at the furthest. Fol. 6 To heal an excrescence or growyng up of
the flesh, within the yard of a man, albeit it were rooted in of a long time.
Folio. 8. To heal all manner of inflammation, and evil disposition of the
liver, and by this secret been healed certain persons, which had their
faces as it were Leprie, great swollen legs, their hands inflamed, and
rough within side. Idem. To heal the Emeraudes or Piles, in a night, a rare
secret and very excellent. Folio. 9. A singular oinctmente, which heals all
burnynges with fire, not leauyng cicatrice or skarre where it was. Idem. A
parfite and proved remedy for them that be weak of stomach, and can not
keep their meat without vomityng it up again. Idem. An excellent remedy
wherewith a woman of thirty and six years was healed, that had so marred her
stomach, that in the space of two years and an half, she was never naturally
purged dounewarde: and as soon as she had eaten any thing, she vomited it up
again, so that she became yellowe, and as dry as a stick. Folio. 10. Three
remedies very good against the worms in little children. Idem. The second
remedy. Idem. To third remedy. Idem. To heal children of the Lunatike
disease, which happens unto them, by reason of a worm with two heddes,
that breadeth in their bodies, the which worm, coming unto the heart, causes
them to have soche a passion, that often times it kills the. Fo. 11. A
remedy for the falling sickness. Idem. To make oil of Brimstone, to heal all
manner of Cankers, diseases or sores, which come of a putrified humor, and
run continually, commonly called Fistules, and also to heal inueterate and
old wounds. Idem. To take away the venime or poison from a wound made by
some poisoned weapon or arrowe. Idem. Against the bityng of all venomous
beasts. Idem. To draw an arrowe head, or any other Iron out of a wound.
Folio. 12. Against a vehement cogh of young children. Idem. For him that has a
bunche or knobbe in his head, or that has his head swollen with a fall.
Idem. A good remedy for one that is deaffe. Idem. To heal a woman that has
the Matrice out of her natural place. Folio. 13. To make a womans Milk to
come and increase. Idem. A very good Secret for the Gommes or Burgeons, that
remain of the great Pockes, as well old as new. Idem. An other remedy for
the same burgeons of pockes. Ide^. A very easy and parfite remedy for him
that has any blow with a Sword, Staff, or stone, or other like thing, yea,
though he were grievously wounded. Ide^ A water to heal all manner of wounds in
short space: which is a thing that every manne ought always to have in his
house, for the accidents and chances that may fall, seeing it is easy to
be made, and with little cost, and that it is of so merueilous an operation.
Idem. To make oil of Saint Ihons worte, which is called in Venise, and
diverse other places, read oil, and is of soche virtue, that a man can
skante express it, as well to heal wounds, as other infinite diseases,
whereof we will show the most notable, and those that we have found true by
experience. Fol. 15. To make oil of a red Dog, by the mean whereof
(beside other infinite virtues that it has) I healed a Friar of Saint
Onofres, who had, by the space of twelve years, a lame and dry arm, withered
like a stick, so that nature gave it no moare nourishemente. Folio. 17. To
make an oinctment the most excellent in the world, whose virtues are infinite,
as we will declare afterward, which princes ought to command to be made
and kept in their common wealths: and that it should be made in the presence
of Physicians, as Triakle is made, or at the least every man ought to have it
in his house, and specially because a man may make a great quantity of it, and
the lengar it is kept the better it waxes. Fol. 19. A very true and proved
remedy against a quartayne ague. Fol. 20. To heal wartes, a secret very
excellent and easy to be dooen, proved and experimented upon diverse persons.
Fo. 21 A very profitable and easy remedy to be made against pluresies, which
in two days healed a Smith that was almost dead, and had not slept in.ii.
nights. Ide^ Another secret or remedy against the said disease of the
pluresie. Idem. Another goodly secret against the same disease. Fol. 22.
Another against the same disease. Idem. To make a water good for the breast or
stomach, of the which men use to give them drink that be tormented or
grieved with the stitche in the side, or pluretik apostumes: the which water
is of a marvelous good sauoure, and mondifieth very well the breaste or
stomach. Idem. Against all diseases of the mouth, palate, throat, gummes, and
Jaws. Fol. 23. For all wounds or sores of the legs, be they recente or
old, although the legs were coueerd over with them, and eaten unto the bone.
Idem. To heal swollen knees or legs, read, and full of humors: a secret
marvelous good, easy to be made, and of little charge, and often times proved.
Idem. A very sure and parfit remedy against a Sciatica, oftentimes proved and
experimented in diverse parts of the world. Fol. 24 A water for to heal in.
v. days at the most, all manner of great scabbes, as well inward as
outward, and is a water clear and white, and of an odoriferous sauoure, such
as a man may present to a Queen. Fol. 25. Against the disease or gre^f of
the flanks, and the colic passion, experimented and proved diverse times. Ide^
Another remedy against the same. Fol. 26. Another parfit remedy against the
same disease, and to make a man piss that has been three or four days without
making water, and that in the space of half an hour, and will break the stone
in ten or twelve days. Idem. Another remedy against the stone, and pain of
the reins. Idem The last and most excellent remedy of al, against the stone,
be it in the reins, or in the bladder, of what quality or quantity so ever
it be. Folio. 27. For him that spitteth blood, by having some vein of his
breast broken. Idem. Against the grief in the lunges, and spittinge of blood a
thing experimented. Fol. 28. Against the pain of the flanks, of the reins,
and all other greifes. Idem. Against the stinkinge of the breath. Idem. Against
the bytinge of a mad dog, and the rage or maddenesse that follows the
manne after he is bitten. Idem. To take away the dead flesh that comes or
grows in the nose. Idem. For one which (with falling from some high place)
fears to have something broken in his body. Idem. A very good and easy
remedy against the disease called the kings evil. Idem. Another remedy
against the same disease. Fol. 29. To know whether a woman shall ever conceive
or not. Idem. A very rare remedy for to take the kernelles out of a man's
throat in fifty days at the furthest. Idem. An other remedy easier to be
made. Folio. 29. A thing experimented and proved to be very true, against the
same disease. Idem. To make the skin stretche, and return again into his
place, after the kernel is healed. Idem. A very exquisite remedy against the
disease, called in Latin Augina, and in Greek Synanche, which is an
inflammation of the Muskle of the inner gargille, the French men call it
Squinancie, in English, Quinsey. Folio. 30. An other against the same disease.
Idem. An other against the sickness. Idem. A very good remedy against the
kings evil. Idem. To heal the same disease by a substance taken at the
mouth. Idem. A heavenly water, which has many goodly and notable virtues, as
we will show you after. Folio. 31. Pills of a merueilous operation and
virtue, against the Sciatica, which we promised to speak of, in the Chapter
of the Sciatica. Folio. 32. A notable secret to heal a mad manne, be it
that the madness came unto him, by a whirlyng or giddiness in the head or
brain, or otherwise. Idem. Pills of Master Michaell a Scotte, the which
heal the grief or pain of the head, be it inueterate or recent, purge the
brain, clarify the sight, cause a man to have a good memory, good color in
the face, and be also very good for many infirmities. Folio. 33. Against the
pains of women's breasts, a very excellent remedy. Folio. 44. To ripe a
Fellon, Cattes here, Botche, Boil, or other apostumes or swellynges, which
have need of quick and sudden ripyng. Idem. To resolve a Fellon, Cattes
here, Botle, or Botche at the first beginning. Idem. To make Emplastrum
Aureum, which is of a wonderful virtue, for all sorts of wounds. Idem. An
other excellent secret, which was brought out of India, and is very good for
diverse accidents of man's body. Folio. 44. Against al manner of coghes, as
well inueterate and old as recent and new, a certain and sure remedy. fo. 35.
An excellent conserve against the choghe, and all anguishe of the breast,
which also mondifieth and cleanses the stomach, causes a good voice, and a
fair color in the face. Idem. A goodly and pleasant Secret to heal the
cogh, in rubbyng the solles of the feet: and is a thing very easy and
certain. Folio. 36. A very goodly and easy remeadie to heal, in a day or
twain, al manner of inueterat and old wounds wherein is grown dead and
superfluous flesh, and wounds that can not be cured, by any other medicines.
Idem. Against al manner of pestilence or plague, be it never so vehemente, a
most certain and proved thing. Idem. A very good parfume against the plague.
Idem. An other remedy very good against the plague. Idem. For him that is
sick of the plague. Idem. An ointment to make an apostume break, and the sore
of the plague to fall of. Idem. An other remedy against the plague. Folio. 38.
An other very good remedy against the plague. Idem. An other perfect receipt
against the plague. Idem. An other against the plague. Idem. A thing oftentimes
proved and experimented against the plague. Idem. A preservative against ye
plague oftentimes proved. Ide^ An other. Folio. 39. An other. Idem. In a
suspecte time of a plague. Idem. An other well tried and proved against the
pestilence. Ide^. A very parfite secret against the plague. Idem. An other
very good secret. Idem. To make a carbuncle and all other botches, apostumes
and plague sores, to break, a present remedy, and very easy to make.
Folio. 40. A very good remedy against the marks or spots of the plague,
commonly called Gods marks. Fo. 40. Against the mortality of the Pestilence,
a very perfect remedy. Idem. To make little round Apples or balls against
the plague. Idem. An oinetment to kill the plague. Fol. 41. A very perfect
oil against the plague and al poison. Ide^. A merueilous secret for to
preserve a man from the plague: and has been proved in England of all the
Physicians, in that great and vehement plague, in the year. 1348. which
crepte throughout all the world, and there was never man that used this
Secret, but he was preserved from the plague. Idem. A very sure and parfite
remedy to cure a man of the Pestilence, and some there has been, that have
been cured in a night: the said remedy is also good for Gods marks, and
Carbuncles, Boiles, Botches and soche like sicknesses, as saint Anthonies
fire, and soche other. Idem. A very goodly and present remedy for to heal
the pestilence, and drawyng out the venime from the botche, or sore, or other
like accident. Fol. 42. An advertisement or warnyng of great importance, to
preserve a man in time of pestilence Idem. To dress and order the Juice of
Citrons, for the use of it, as is before said. Fol. 44.
Of the second book.
TO make oil Imperialle, to perfume the here or bearde of a man, to rub
his hands or glooues with, and to put also into the Lie or water, wherein
Princes or great men's clothes are washed, and this oil may a man make
with cost enough, and also with little charge or expense. Fol. 44. To make
oil of Ben with small charge, the which of it self will be odoriferous or
soote in savor, and very excellent, whereof parfumours do use aptly, for to
parfume gloves, or other thyhges with all. Fol. 45. To make an odoriferous and
sweet water very good. Ide^. The second odoriferous water. Idem. The third
sweet water. Folio. 46. The sowerth sweet water. Idem. The fifth sweet water.
Idem. The sixth sweet water. Idem. The seventh sweet water. Idem. The eight
sweet water. Folio. 47. The nineth sweet water. Idem. The tenth sweet water.
Idem. Oil of Orenges very excellent. Idem. Oil of Iasemine and of Violettes.
Idem. Oil of Nutinegges very perfect. Idem. Oil of Bengewin, very
excellent. Folio. 48. Oil of Storar very excellent. Idem. Oil of Myrrh,
good for them that have their flesh full of humors, and carraine lean, for to
make it tractable, quick, natural, and strong. Idem. The manner to make that
oiles shall never wax mouldie, nor putrify. Idem. Poulder of Iris. Idem.
Poulder of Violettes. Idem. A white poulder to put in little bags. Idem.
Poulder of Cypres. Folio. 49. White Musked Soap. Idem. An other kind of
odoriferous white Soap. Idem. To make Damaskine Soap Musked. Idem. To get out
the milk of Macaleb. Folio. 50. Poulder of Ciuet very exquisite. Idem. A
principal poulder. Idem. A white odoriferous poulder. Idem. A red poulder.
Idem. A black poulder. Idem. Poulder of Cipre very exquisite. Idem. An other
way to make it very perfect. Folio. 51. A sweet and odoriferous poulder,
very excellent to lay in chestes and cosers. Fol. 51. An odoriferous and
sweet poulder. Fol. 52. Oil of Bengewine. Idem. A very good and odoriferous
poulder, to carry about a man, or to lay in cofers. Idem Balls against the
pestilence or plague, which also give an odor unto all things. Idem A
princely lycour. Idem. Liquide and soft soap of Naples. Idem. To make the said
soap muskt. Idem. A very excellent paste and sweet, made with musk, which
eaten causes a sweet breath. Folio. 53. Another very excellent. Idem.
Dentifrices or rubbers for the teeth, of great perfection for to make them
clean. Idem Oil of Bengewine odoriferous. Idem. Oil of Storar Calamita.
Idem. To make oil of Labdanum. Fol. 54. Oil of Nutmegges. Idem. Another
manner. Idem. A very exquisite soap, made of diverse things. Idem Soap with
Ciuet. Fol. 55. Soap with diverse and excellent oils, Idem. Soap rosat. Idem.
White soap of a good savor and odor. Idem Perfect soap. Idem. Whole and
massiue black soap. Idem. Damask parfume. Folio. 56. Another parfume of
damask. Idem. An excellent pommaunder. Idem. Another pommaunder. Fol. 57.
Another pommaunder. Idem. Excellent Ipocras. Idem. To make little cusshins of
parfumed roses Fol. 58. Matches or little lights of a very good odor. Idem A
composition of Musk, Ciuet, and Ambergrise. Ide^. A parfume for a chamber very
excellent. Idem. Soap of Naples. Fol. 59. Perfume for a lamp Fol. 59. A short
perfume Idem. An odoriferous perfume for chambers Idem. A very good perfume for
to trymme gloves with little cost, and yet will continue long. Idem. A very
exquysite Cyuet to perfume gloves, and to annoint a man's hands with. Fol. 60.
Oil of roses and flowers, very parfyte. Idem. Oil of Cloves very noble. Idem.
To make an excellent parfume to perfume chambers garments, Couerlettes,
Sheets, and al other things, belongyng to any prince. Fol. 61. Round apples
or balls to take out spotes of oil or grease. Idem. To make a past or dowe
for sweet beads or beadstones. Idem.
Of the third book.
A goodly secret for to condyte or confite Orenges, citrons, and all other
fruytes in syrop, which is a notable thing. Fol. 62. The manner how to
purifye and prepare honnye, and sugar, for to co^fyte Cytrons and al other
fruits. 63. To confite Peches after the spanyshe facion. Idem. To make
conserve or confyture of Quynces, called in latyne Cotoneatum, Cidoniatum or
Cidonites, as they do in valence, which also the Geneuoys do use. Idem. To
make a past of sugar, whereof a man may make all manner of fruytes, and other
fine things, with their form, as platters, dyshes, glasses, cups, and such
like things, wherewith you may furnyshe a table: and when you have done, eat
them up. A pleasante thing for them that sit at the table. Fol. 64. To make
a confection of Melons or ponpones. Idem. To make Melones and (...) sweet and
very delicate. 65. To confyte orange pills, which may be done at all times
of the year and chiefly in May, because than the said pills be greater and
thicker, Idem. To confite Walnuttes. Folio. 65. To confite Gourdes. Idem. To
confite Cherries. Folio. 66. To make little morselles, as they use in Naples,
an exquisite thing, for they be very sauorous, do conforte the stomach, and
make a sweet breath. Idem.
Of the fowerth book.
AN odoriferous and precious water, wherewith a man may weate or bath any
linen cloth, to wipe or rub his face, which will make his flesh white and
well colored: and the more a man rubbeth his face with it, the fairer it is,
and also continues six months, a thing experimented and proved, yea, and it
were for a queen. Foli. 67. To make a water that will make a white and pale
person, well colored. Idem. A very good water, to make the face appear of
the age of.xxv. years. Folio. 68. A water to beautify the face, and all other
parts of the body. Idem. A water to make the skin white, and to take away
the Sun burning. Idem. An other water to beautify the face, and to make it
appear of the age of.rv. years. Idem. An easy water for ladies and
gentlewomen. Idem. To make a goodly luster, or beautifiyng of the face, good
for ladies and dames. Foli. 69. To take out spots, lentilles, or pimpels in the
face, Ide^ A very good way, how to give a luster or show, to all distilled
water. Idem. To make a water of white Melo^s, that makes a fair skin. Idem.
To make a very good water of Gourdes, as well garden Gourdes, as wild. Folio.
70. An ointment for the face, which being kept on, or used continually, the
space of eight days, alters the skin, and renews it finely. Idem. For
him that has naturally a red face. Folio. 71. Ta make Aqua argentata, or
silver water, which makes a white, ruddie, and glistryng face: and is made
like a water, and not like an ointment, that the Dames of Italy, for the most
part do use, although that few men make it, as it ought to be made. Idem To
make an ointment for the face. Idem. To make a red color for the face.
Folio. 72. To make the face fair. Idem. To make the face fair an other way.
Idem. To make the face fair. Idem. To make a water, that makes the face
white. Idem. An other manner to make the face fair. Idem. To take spots,
lintelles, or read pimples, out of the face. Idem. To take of a ring worm or
tetter, that renneth al over a man's, called in French, Le fru volant. Folio.
73. To drive away Lise. Idem. To make a water that takes away al stainyng,
diyng and spots from the hands of artificers, that get the^ by working, and
makes them very white and fair: it is also good for them that be sun
burned. Idem. To make a water, that make the flesh and skin of a man or
woman very fair, and will be kept like a precious baume. Idem. A very
goodly water to wash the face, neck, and the breast, whereof a man may
make a great quantite, for the more there is of it, the better it is: it
makes the skin and the flesh of the face, fair, not hurtyng or destroiyng
the teeth, and shall seem that the face is nothing at al helped with any
color, but that is even so by nature. Folio. 74. To make a very excellent
read color for the face, which is natural, and continues long upon the
face, making it always gaier and fairer. Idem. An other kind of read very
good for the face, easier to make, and with less cost. Fol. 75. An excellent
white above al other. Idem. To make hear as yellow as gold. Idem. To make lie
to wash the head, which (beside that it comfort the brain, and the
memory) makes the hear long, fair, and yellow like gold. Idem Lie to make
hear black. Fol. 76. An oil for to annoint the hear, which makes it
yelowe like gold, long and glistering like burnished gold. Idem. A very
goodly way or manner how to make yellowe aberne hear, without standing long,
or nothing at al in the son, a rare and a very excellent secret. Ide^ An
ointment to make the hears fall from any place of the body. Fol. 77. An oil
or lycour to make the hear fall of, and may be kept as long as a man will:
It is also good for all occasions. Fol. 78. An advertisement or lesson for them
that will make the hear fall of. Idem. To cause that the hear shall grow no
more, or to make them come out thin and fine like the first soft hear or
mosines of the face. Idem. To make a kind of cloth or plaster to take the
hear from the face, neck, and hands, or from any part of the body. 79 A
merueilous secret, which the great lords of the Moors do use, whereby they
make that their children have no hear under their arms, or other place where
they will. And this secret found I in Siria, the year 1521 by the means of a
lord of the country, whose daughter I healed. Idem To make a kind of cloth,
called cloth of Leuant, wherewith women use to color their faces. Fol. 80. The
same another way, Idem To dye a white beard or hear of the head into a fair
black. Idem A noble and excellent poulder to make clean the teeth to make
them fast and white, and to conserve the gommes, a better thing can not be
found, and it were to present to a Queen or princess. Fol. 81. To make a very
excellent conserve to scour the teeth, to comfort the gommes, and to make a
sweet and good breath. Idem An advertisement or lesson concerning the making
of poulders, and conserues for the teeth. Idem An exceeding white and good
poulder to scour the teeth which is meter for lords and great men, than any
of the other before. Fol. 82. A distilled water, excellent for to make the
teeth white immediately, and to preserve them wonderfully. f. 83. Three
aduertisementes or lessonnes of importance, to keep the teeth white and
vncorrupt and also a sweet breath. Idem A decoction to wash and scour the
mouth, to fasten lose teeth, to consolidate and make sound the gommes, and to
make the flesh grow again if it were decayed or fallen a way. Fol. 84.
Of the fyste book.
TO make parfit Asure, such as comes from be yond the seas. Fol. 84. To make
a fine confection of grain, called Lacca of grain. Fo. 86 To dye bones into a
grene color. Idem. Another manner how to die bones, or Iu^rye, into the color
of an Emeraude. Idem. To die bones read, blew, or of any color you will. Ide^
A very goodly secret to die or color wood, of what color a man will, which
some ioyners dovse that make tables, and other things of diverse colors, and
do esteem it among them selves to be of such excellency, that one brother will
not teach it another. Fol. 87 To counterfeit the black wood called Hebenus, or
Hebenum, and to make it as fair as the natural Hebene, which grows no where
but in India. Idem. To die scinnes blew, or of the color of Asure. Idem. To
dye skynnes in Chickweede, called in latyne Rubra mayor or Rubra tinctorum,
into a red color. Fol. 88. To dye Skins green. Idem. To dye the said
Skins an other way. Idem. An other way to dye Skins of Asure color and
fair. Folio. 89. An other manner to dye Skins green. Idem. To dye Neates
leather into a grene color, as well in gal as in leaves. Idem. To dye Skins
grene, with the flower of Ireos. fo. 90 To dye bones in a Turkishe or read
color. Idem. To dye Hogs bristelles, and other things, for to make rubbars
and brusshes. Idem. To dye the said bristelles yellowe, grene or blewe, or any
other color. Idem. To make Purple, which is a color, wherewith men use to
make a color like gold, for to painte and write with. Idem. To make Lacca of
Brasill. Foli. 91. To make white tables to write in, with the poinct of a wire,
soche as come out of Germany. Idem. To make Roset or ruddle. Idem. To gilte
over Parchemente, Leather, or other soche work, which men use in stead of
hangynges, or Tapistrie. Folio. 92. To dye Crimson silk. Idem. To prepare and
trim Brasill, for to make of it four diverse colors. Idem. To make Roset of
Brasill an other way. Foli. 93. To make beyondsea Asure, without Lapis lasuli.
Idem. To make a grene color, to write or paint with. Ide^. To braie fine
gold, wherewith a man may write, or painte with a pensill. Idem. The same
an other way. Idem. An other way with purpurine. Folio. 94. To make a ground
to gilte upon, with burnisshed Gold. Idem. To lay or settle gold with a
single ground. Idem. An other way to lay on gold. Idem. To make colors of
all kind of metalles. Idem To lay gold on a black ground. Idem. To make
letters of the color of gold without gold. Id. To make silver letters without
silver. Idem. To make green letters. Fol 95 To make white letters in a black
field. Idem. To make a green color for to write and paynt withal. Idem. To
trim and dress Asure. Idem. To dress or trim Cinabrium, for to write or
paynte with. Idem. A ground to lay gold upon any metal or iron. Idem. To gylt
the edges of books. Fol. 96. To keep and preserve whites of eggs as long as a
man will without corrupting, and without putting Arsenick to it. A secret not
much known. Idem. The manner how to make the ground or foundation for
Indicum. Idem Another perfect ground for the same thing. Idem A goodly way how
to make gold and silver into poulder, a thing easy to be done, and there will
come of it an excellent color. This is a very rare secret, which has not ben
used nor known until this preset. 96 To make a very fair Vernix, to vernish
the said gold, and all other workmanshippe. Fol. 97. To braye or break gold or
silver easily, after the comen manner that the best workmasters do use. Fol. 98
To make a lyeour, that makes a golden color without gold. Idem. Another
lycour of the color of gold, for to write, and to gilt iron, wode, glass,
bone, and other like things. 98 Another goodly licour, to make a golden color
with little cost, and is a thing easy to be done. Fol. 99. To make incke, or a
color to write with, in a very good perfection. Idem. A good way and manner
how to make ynck for to carry about a man in a dry poulder, which (when he
will write with) he must temper with a little wine, water, or Vinaigre, or with
some other licour, and than he may incontinent put it in experience. With the
said poulder all other yncke may be amended, be it never so evil. Idem. To
make a great deal of ynck quickly, and with little cost. Fol. 100. To make
Printers inck. Idem To make yncke so white, that although a man write with it
upon white paper, it may easily and perfitlye be read. A very goodly thing.
Idem. To make a poulder to take of blottes of yncke, fallen upon the paper, or
else the letters and writing from the paper: which is a rare secret, but yet
profitable. 101. To make a kind of vernyshe, but much fayerer, and better
than that which Scryueners do use, and is of less cost, and stinketh not as
other vernysh does. Idem. To make yncke to rule paper for to write by, whereof
the writynge being dry, the lines may be taken out, that it shall seem ye have
written without lines. 102.
The sixte book.
TO sublime quycksyluer, that is to say, to make common sublime, that
Goldsmithes, Alchemistes, and gentelwemen do use, and that me^ use in many
things concerning physic. 102. To make Cinabrium, and thereof to make loaves
of a hundredth or two hundredth pounds, as great as a man list: as those are
that com out of Almaine, which secret has not before this time been know of
any in Italy Fo. 105 To fine and renew Borax. Fol. 107 A good and easy way to
make aqua fortis better than any other. Fol. 110. The true and parfyte practyse
to cast medalles, and all other workmanshyp, as well in brass, as in gold,
silver, coppar, lead, Tyn, as of Crystal, glass, and marble. Fo. 110. The
first earth to cast in a moulde all manner of fusyble matter. Fol. 111. The
second earth or sand. Idem. The third earth or sand. Idem. The fourth
earth or sand. Idem. The fyfte earth or sand the most parfyte. Idem. The
sixth earth. Fol. 112. A goodly way and manner how to make all these earthes
very fine and small, and almost impalpable. Idem. To make a water called
magistra, wherewith the said earthes to make mouldes, is tempered, and moysted
again at every casting or foundyng. Idem. To make Lutum sapientiae very
parfyte. Fol. 113 Certain things, which he that will take in hand any
foundyng or casting of mettalls, must always have (...), and in order. Fol.
114. The (...) or order that a man ought to keep, when he will cast or found
medalles, or any other things. Fo. 115. To (...) white, to blanch or make
white medalls, or other things newlye molten, and also for to renew medalls
of old silver. Fol. 116. To gylte iron with water. Fol. 117. The like another
way Idem. To gilte iron with gold foil, and water, or else with gold myrt
with quick silver, as gold smiths are wont to gylte silver. Idem. To dye or
color into the color of brass, or also to gilt silver, which she wethe
better, and continues longer. Idem. A water or color to lay under Diamondes
as well true as counterfeyte, that is to say, made of white Saphires, as we
will declare afterward. Fol. 118. To counterfeite a diamo^d, with a white
Sapphire Idem To ingrose thin Balesses to set in ringes. Idem To make Rubyes
of two pieces, and Emeraudes, as they make them at Milan Fol 119. To make a
past or dowe for precious stones, as Emeraudes, rubes, Saphirs, and such like,
which be but of one piece well colored within and without. Idem. To make
Emerauldes, and other stones or Iuels. 120. To calcine or burn Cristall and
the Calcidoyne stone, to put in the said mixtions of precious stones. Idem A
water to harden the said stones. Idem To calcine fine silver. Idem The second
manner of calcining silver. Fol. 121 The third manner of calcining silver. Fol.
122 To calcine Talchum quickly and out of hand. Idem An excellent and very easy
way to gylt iron, coper, and silver, to make it seem like massiue gold. Fol.
123. A parfit manner and way to gylt, and to make the quick silver to danish
away from the thing gylted. Idem
The end of the Table.

