Here begins the Pystles and Gospels, of every Sunday and holy day in the
year.
The Pystle on the first Sunday in Aduent. The.xiij. chapyter to the Romans.
D

BRethren we know that it is time now that we awake out of sleep, for now is
our salvation nerer then we believed. The night is passed and the day is come
nigh let us therefore cast away the deeds of darkness, and let us put on the
armoure of light. Let us walk honestlye as it were in the day light, not in
eating and drinking, neither in chambryng and wantonness, neither in strife
and enuyenge, but put ye on our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Gospel on the first Sunday in Aduent. The.xxj. Chapyter of Mathewe. A.

WHen Jesus drew nigh unto Jerusalem, and came to Betphage unto the mount
Olyuete, then sent Jesus two of his disciples, saying to them. Go into the
Castle that lies over against you and anon ye shall find an Ass bound, and
her Colte with her, lose them and bring them unto me, and if any man say
ought unto you, say ye that your lord has need of them, and streyghte way
he will let them go. All this was done to fulfill yt which was spoken by the
prophet saying. Tell ye ye daughter of Syon, behold thy king comes unto the
meke, and sytti^ge upon an ass and a colte, the fool of an ass used to the
yoke The disciples went and did as Jesus commanded them and brought the ass
and the colte and put on the^ their clothes, and set him there on. Many of the
people spredde their garments in the way. other cut down branches from the
trees and strawed them in the way. * Moreover the people that went before, and
they also yt followed after, cried sa^enge. Osanna the son of David. Blessed
be he that comes in the name of the Lord.

The Pystle on the second Sunday in Aduent. The.xv. Chapter to the Romaynse.
A.

Brethren what soever things are w yre^ before time are written for our
learning yt we through patience and comfort of ye scripture might have hope.
The god of patience and co^solacyo^, give unto every one of you yt ye be like
minded one toward another after ye ensample of Jesus Christ yt ye all agreynge
together, may with one mouth honor god and the father of our lord Jesus Christ*
wherefore receive ye one another as Christ receive us to the praise of god. And
I say yt Jesus Christ was a minister of the Cyrcuncysyon for the truth of god,
to co^fyrme ye promises made unto ye fathers. And let ye gentyls praise god for
his mercy, as it is written, for this cause I will praise the among the
gentyls and sing in thy name. And again he says ye gentyls rejoice with his
people. Again, yrayse the lord all ye gentyls, and laud him all nations. And
in another place Esaias says, there shall be the rote of Iesse, and he yt shall
rise to raygne over ye gentyls: in him shall the gentyls trust. The god or hope
fill you with all joy and peace in beleuynge, that ye may be rich in hope
through the power of the holy ghost.

The gospel on ye.ij. sunday in Adue^t. The.xxj. ^ha, of luke. D

Jesus said unto his disciples there shall be signs in the son and in the moon. and in the stars, and in the earth, the people shall be in such
perplexite, yt they shall not tell which w^y to turn them selves. The sea and
the waves shall rore, and men's hertes shall fail the^ for fear and for
lokyng after those things / which shall come on the earth, for the powers of
heaven shall move, and then shall they se the son of man come in a cloud with
power and great glory, when these thing begin to come to pass then look up
and lift up your heddes, for your rede^cyon draws nigh. And he showed them a
simiytude / behold the fygge tree, and all other trees when they shut forth
their buddes, ye se and know of your own selves that somer is then nigh at
hand. So likewise ye (when ye se these things come to pass) vndestande, yt
the kingdom of god is nigh. Verily I say unto you, this generacyon shall not
pass, till all be fulfilled, heaven and earth shall pass, but my words shall
not pass.

The Pystle on the.iij. sunday in Aduent. The.j. Pystle and the.iiij. chapter
to the Corinthyans. ^.

BRethren let men this wise esteem us even as the mynister of Christ, and
disposers of the secrets of god. Further more it is required of the disposers
/ that they be found faithful / with me is it but a very small thing / that
I should be judged of you (other of man's day) no I judge not mine own self I
know naught by my self, yet am I not there by iustyfyed, it is the lord yt
judged me, therefore judge nothing before ye time until the lord come which
will lyghte^ things that are hyd in darkness and open the counsayles of the
hertes. And than shall every man have praise of God.

The Gospel on the.iij. Sunday in Adue^t. The.xj. Chapyter of Mathewe. A.

WHen John^ being in preson herd the works of Christ he sent two of his
disciples and said unto him. Art thou he that shall come, or shall we look for
another, Jesus answered and said unto them. Go and show John^ what ye have
heard and seen. The blind se / the halte go, the lyppers are cleansed, ye defe
hear, ye dead are raised up again, and the gospel is preached to the poor /
and hapy is he that is not hurt by me. Even as they departed Jesus began to
speak unto ye people for John^ what went ye for to se in the wilderness went
ye out to se a read wauerynge with the wind / other what went ye out to se
went ye to se a man clothed in soft raiment. Behold they yt were soft
clothing / are in kings houses. But what went ye out for to se. Went ye out
to se a prophet? ye I say unto you and more then a prophet / for this is he of
who^ it is written. Behold I send me messenger before thy face* which shall
prepare thy way before yt

The Pystle on the.iiij. sunday in aduent the.iiij. chapter to the
Philippians. A.

BRethren rejoice in the lord always. And again I say rejoice, let your
softenes be known unto all men, The lord is even at hand. Be not careful,
but in all things show your petition unto god in prayer and supplication with
gyuynge of thanks. And the peace of god which passes all understanding keep
your hertes, and mind in Christ Jesus.

The gospel on ye.iiij. sunday in adue^t ye.j. cha. of John^. C.

WHen the Jews sent prestes and leuytes from Jerusalem to axe John^* what art
thou. And he confessed / and denied not, and said plainly, I am not Christ.
and they axed him what then? art thou Helias and he said I am not. Art thou a
prophet And he answered no. Than said they unto him: what art ye / that we
may give an answer to the^ that sent us* what say thou of thy self? he
said I am the voice of a crier in the wyldernes make straight ye way of the
Lord, as said ye prophet Esaias. And they which were sent, were of ye
pharyses and they ared him and said unto him* why baptysest thou the^ if you be
not Christ nor Helias neither a prophet? John^ answered the^ saying I baptyse
with water / but one is come among you, who^ ye know not. He it is that comes
after me which was before me, whose shoo latchet, I am not worthy to unloose.
These things were done in bethabara beyond Jordan where John^ did baptyse.

The pystle at hye mass on Christmas day. The.j. chapyter to the Hebreus. A

Brethren: god in times past diversely and many ways, spoke unto ye fathers by
the prophets, but in these last days he has spoken unto us by his sons,
who^ he has made heir of all things / by who^ also he made ye world. which
son being ye bryghtnes of his glory: and very image of his substance
bearing up all things with the word of his power, has in his own person
pourged our sins, and sytteh on the ryghthande on thy Majesty on hye, and is
more excellent than the angels in as much as he has by euerytaunce obtained
an excellenter name then they have / for unto which of the angels said he at
any time thou art my son, this day begat I the. And again I will be his
father, and he shall be my son. And when he brings in the fy^ste begotten
son into the wor^de he says And all the angels of god shall worship him,
and unto the angels he says, he makes his angels spyrites and his ministres
flammes of fire, but unto ye son he says, god thy seat shall be for ever and
ever, the cepter of thy kingdom is a right cepter. Thou have loved
ryghtwysenes and hated iniquite wherefore has god which is thy god, anointed
the with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. And thou lord in the beginning
have laid the foundation of the earth. And the heuens are the works of thy
hands. The shall perysshe, but thou shall shall endure, they all shall wax
old as does a garment / and as a vesture shall thou change them, and they
shall be changed but you art always the same and thy years shall not fail.

The gospel at hye Mass on Christmas day. The.j. chapyter of John^. A

IN the beginning was ye word, and the word was with god and god was the word.
The same was in ye beginning with god. All things were made by it, and without
it was made nothing that was made. In it was life / and the life was the light
of men, and the light shyneth in the darkness, and the darkness comprehends
it not. There was a man sent from god whose name was John^. The same same as a
wytnes, to bear wytnes of the light, that all men through him might believe, he
was not that light, but to bear wytnes of the light. That was a true light,
which lyghted all men yt come into ye world, he was in the world, and the
world by him was made: and the world knew him not / he came among his own,
and his own received him not, unto as many as received him, gave power to be
ye sons of god, in that they believed on his name, which were borne not of
blood nor of the will of the flesh, nor yet of the will of men, but of god
and the word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we saw ye glory of
it, as the glory of ye on y begotten son of ye father, which word was full of
grace and verite

The Pystle on. S. Steuens day The.vj Cchapiter of the Acts of the Apostles. C

Steven full of faith and power did great wonders and miracles among the
people. There arose certain of the Synagoge which are called Lybertynes and
Syrenytes and of Alexandria and of Cylicia, and Asya, and disputed with Steven
and they could nor resyste ye wisdom, and ye spyryte / with which he spoke.
When they heard these things, their hertes cloue a sonder, and they gnasshed
on him with their tethe, but he being full of the holy Ghost, looked up
steadfastly with his eyes into heaven / and saw the glory of god and Jesus
standing on the right hand of god, and said, behold, I se the heuens open,
and the son of man standing on the right hand of God then they gave a
shoute with a loud voice and stopped their ears and ran upon him all at ones,
and cast him out of the city, and stoned him and the witnesses laid down
their clothes at a young man's fete named Saul. And they stoned Steue^ calling
on and saying Lord Jesus receive my spirit, and he kneled down and cried with
a loud voice. Lord say not this sin to their charge / And when had thus
spoken / he fell a sleep in our Lord.

The Gospel on Saint Steuens day. the.xxiij. chapter. of Matthew. D.

Jesus said unto the Jews and chief prestes, behold I send unto you wise
prophets, wise men and scrybes, and of them some shall ye scourge in your
synagoges, and persecute from city to city and al ryghtuous blood may fall
on you, which was shede upon the earth, from the blood of ryghtuous Abell
unto the blood of zacharias the son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the
temple and the auter. Verily I say unto you, all these things shall light
upon this generacyon Jerusalem / Jerusalem / which kyllest prophets and
stonest them which are sent to the, how often would I have gathered thy
children together, as the hen gathers her chyckens under her wings, but ye
would not. behold your habitacion shall be left unto you desolate. For I say
unto you. ye shall not se me henforth till that ye say. Blessed be he that
comes in the name of the Lord.

The Pystle on S. John^ the Euangelystes day. Eccles. xv.

HE that fears god will do good / and he that keeps the law shall obtain
wisdom and she will come against him as an honorable mother, as a woman yet a
vyrgyn shall receive him, She shall feed him with the bread of life and
understanding and the water of wholesome wisdom she shall give him to drink
and she shall exalte him among his neighbors and shall open his mouth even in
the thyckest of the congregation And he shall fill him with the spyryte of
wisdom and understanding. and with the garment of glory shall apparel him.
She shall make him rych with joy and gladness, and shall inherete him of an
everlasting name.

The Gospel on S. Iohn^s day the Euangelyste. The.xxj. chapyter of John^. E

Jesus said to Peter follow me, Peter turned about and saw ye disciple who^
Jesus loved following which also leued on his breast at supper and said. Lord
which is he that shall betray ye? when Peter saw him, he said to Jesus. Lord
what shall he here do? Jesus said unto him, If I will have him to tarry still till I
come, what is yt to ye follow you me. Then went this saying abroad among the
brethren yt the dysciple should not dye. And Jesus said not to hy^, he shall
not dye, but if I will yt he tarry till I come what is that to ye, the same
disciple is he which testifyeth of these things, and we know yt his testymony
is true.

The Pystle on Chyldermas day. The.xiiij. Chapter of the Reuelacyon of S.
John^.

ANd I looked and lo a lamb stood on the mount Syon, and with him a C. and
xliiij. M. having his fathers name written in their forhedes, and I herd a
voice from heaven, as ye sound of many waters, and as the voice of a great
thonder and I herd ye voice of harpers harpynge with their harpes, and they
song as it were a new song before the seat, and before the.iiij. beasts
and the elders and no man could learn that song but the.C. and xliiij. M.
which were redeemed from the earth. These are the which were not defiled with
women, for they are virgyns. These follow the lamb whyther soever he goes,
these were redeemed from men being the first fruytes unto God and to the
lamb, and in their mouths was found no gyle for they are without spotte
before the trone of god.

The Gospel on Chyldermas day. The.ii. cha of Math. C

THe angel of ye lord appeared to Joseph in a dream saying. Arise and take the
child and his mother, and fly into Egypt and abide there till I bring the
word, for herod will seek the child to destroy him. Then he arose and took
ye child and his mother by night and departed into Egypt and was there unto
the death of Herod, to fulfill that which was spoken of the lord, by ye
propher which says, out of Egypt have I called my son. Then Herod
perceiving yt he was mocked of the wise men was exceadynge wroth, and sent
forth and slew all the children that were in Bethleem and in all the Costs
thereof as many as were two year old and under according the time which he
had dyligently serched out of the wise men Then was fulfilled ye which was
spoken by the prophet Jeremy, saying. On the hills was a voice herd,
mournyng weeping, and great lamentacion Rachell weeping for her children and
would not be conforted because they were not.

The Pystle on the Sunday after Chrystmas day, The iiij Chapyter to the
Galathyans. A.

BRethren I say yt the heir as long as he is a child dy^fereth not from a
servant though he be lord of all bu^ is under tutours and gouerners, until
the time appointed of the father, Even so we as long as we were children, were
in bondage under the ordynacions of the world, but when the time was full come,
god sent his son borne of a woman and mad^ bond unto the law to redeem
them, which were under ye law that we through election might receive ye
inheritance yt belongs unto ye natural sons, because ye are sons. God
has sent ye spyryt of his son into our hertes, which cries Abba father
wherefore now art thou not a servant, but a son, if thou be the son you
art also the Heir of god through Christ.

The Gospel on the sunday after Christmas day the ij. Chapter of Luke. E.

Joseph and Mary, the mother of Jesus maruayled those things, which were
spoken of him / and Symeon blessed them / and said unto Mary his mother
behold this child shall be the fall, and resurreccyo^ of many in Israel and
sign which shall be spoken against / and more over the sword shall pearce thy
soul yt the thoughts of many hertes may be opened and there was Anna a
prophetess, ye daughter of Phannel of ye Trybe of Aser, and she was of a great
age / and had lived with an husband vij. year from her vyrginite and she had been a wydowe about.iiij. score and four years, which went never out of the
Temple, but served there, with fasting and prayer night and day, and she came
forth ye same hour / and praised God and spoke of him, to all ye looked for
redempcyon in Jerusalem. And as soon as they performed al things according
to the law of the Lord, they returned in to Galyle into their own city
Nazareth, and the child grew and wexed strong in spyryte and was full of
wisdom and ye grace of God was with him.

The Pystle on new years day. The.ij. chap. unto Tytus. C

Most dear beloved Tytus. The grace of god yt brings salvation unto all men
has appeared and teaches us that we should deny ungodliness and worldly
lusts, and yt we should live sober minded ryghtuously and godly in this present
world lokynge for the blessed hope and glorious apperynge of ye mighty god,
and our savior Jesus Christ which gave him self for us, to redeem us from all
vnryghtwysenes, and to pourge us peculyer people unto him self feruentlye
given unto good works. These thing speak and exorte.

The Gospel on new years day. The.j. Chapter of Luke. C

ANd when the eight day was come that the child should be cyrcu^cysed his name
was called Jesus which was named of ye angel before he was conceived in his
mothers womb

The Pystle on twelfe day. Esaye.lx.

UP and receive light Jerusalem: for thy light is come, and the glory of the
Lord is up over ye, for behold darkness shall cover the earth, and a thycke
myste the nacyons / but ye lord shall rise as the son over the and his glory
shall be seen upon the / and the hethen shall walk in thy light / and the
kings in the bryghtnes that is risen over the / lift up thine eyes round
about and se, all these are gathered together and are come from far / and thy
daughter shall be ever by the side / then thou shall se and shalt have plenty
/ thy heart shall wonder / and break out in joy / when the multitude of the sea are turned to the, and the a^mes of the hethen are come unto the. The
abundaunce of Camelles shall cover the / and the Dormadoryes of Madian and Epha
shall come all of them from Saba, and bring gold / and fra^kensence / and
shall preach the praise of the lord.

The Gospel on the twelfe day. The.ij. cha. of Mathewe. A

WHen Jesus was borne in Bethlee^ in jury / in the time of king Herod,
behold: there came wise men from ye east to Jerusalem saying, where is he that
is borne king of ye Jews / we have seen his star in the East, and are come
to worship him. Herod the king / after he had herd this was troubled, and
all Jerusalem with him / and he gathered all ye chief priests and scrybes of
the people / and demanded of them where Christ should be borne. They said
unto him in Bethleem in Iurye, for thus it is written by the prophet. And thou
Bethleem in the land of Iurye, art not the lost concerning the Princes of
Judah / for out of the shall come a captain, which shall govern my people
Israel. Then Herod pryuely called the wise men / and diligently inquired of
them / the time of the star that appeared / and sent them to Bethleem saying
Go and search diligently for the child / and when ye have found him / bring
me word that I may come and worship him also / when thy had herd the
king, they departed and so the Star which they saw in ye East, went
before them / until it came and stood over the place where the child was /
when they saw the star they were maruaylously glad and entered in to the
house and found ye child with Mary his mother, and kneled down and
worshypped him, and opened their treasures / and offered unto him gifts /
Gold / Franke^sence / and Myrre. And after they were warned of god in their
sleep, that they should not go again to Herod. They returned into their own
country another way.

The Pystle on the sunday within the vtas of the Epyphanye.

UP and receive light Jerusalem. etc. Ye shall find this pystle on twelfe
day. fo. vi.

The Gospel on the Sunday within the vtas of the Epyphany. The.j. Chapter of
John^. D

John^ saw Jesus coming unto him and said. Behold the lamb of God / which
takes away the sin of the world. This is he of whom I said after me
comes a man which was before me, for he was yer then I, and I knew him not
but that he should be declared to Israel. Therefore am I come baptysynge with
water. And John^ bare record saying: I saw the spyryte descendynge from heaven
/ like unto a done and it abode upon him and I knew him not he ye sent me to
baptyse the in water said unto me, upon whom thou shalt se the spyryte
descend and tarry still on him / that same is he which baptized with the holy
ghost. And I saw and bare record that this is the son of God.

The Pystle on the.i. So^daye after the vtas of ye Epiphany The.xjj. chapter.
to the Romans. A

BRethren: I beseech you by the mercyfulnes of God, that ye make your bodies a
quycke sacryfyce, holy and acceptable unto god, whith is your reasonable
serving of god, and fassion not your selves like unto this world but ye be
changed in your shape, by the rennynge of your wits, that ye may feel what
thing the good that acceptable and perfect will of god is for I say through the
grace that unto me given is to every man among you, that no man esteem of him
self more then it becomes him to esteem, but that he discretly judge of him
self according as god has daelt to every man ye measure of faith as we have
many members in one body, and all members have not one office, so we being
many, are one body in Christ: and every man among our selves one another
members.

The Gospel on ye.i. Sunday after the vtas of the Epiphanie The.ij. Chapter.
of Luke. F

WHen Jesus was.xij. year old, they went up to Jerusalem after the custom of
the feast, and when they had fulfilled ye days, as they returned home, ye
child Jesus bode still in Jerusalem unknown to his father and mother, for
they supposed he had be^ in ye company. They came a days journey, and sought
him among their kynsfolke and acquayntaunce, and found him not They went
back again to Jerusalem and sought him, and it fortuned that after three
days, they found him in the temple sitting in the mids of the doctors
both herynge them, and posynge them and all that herd him, maruayled at his
wit and answers and when they saw him, they were astonyed, and his mother
said unto him, son why have thou thus dealt with us Behold thy father and I
have sought the sorowynge, and he said unto the how is it, that ye have sought
me, wist ye not, that I must go about my fathers busynes, and they understood
not ye saying that he spoke to them, and he went with them and came to
Nazareth, and was obedyent to them / but his mother kept all these things in
her heart / and Jesus encresed in wysedom and age, and infauoure with god and
man.

The Pistle on the.ij. Sunday after ye vtas of ye Epiphanie The.xij. chapter.
to the Romans. C.

BRethren: seeing that we have diverse gifts, according to the grace that is
given unto us, if any man have the gift of prophecye let him have it that it be
agreynge unto the faith. Let him that has an office wait on his office, let
him that teaches take heed to his doctrine, let him that exorteth give
attendaunce to his exortacion, if any man give, let hi^ do it with singlenes,
let him that rules, do it with diligence, if any man show mercy, let him do
it with cherefulnes, let love be without dissymulacyon, hate that which is
evil, and cleue unto ye which is good. Be kind one to another with brotherly
love / in gyuynge honor / go one before another / let not the busynes which
ye have in hand be tedious to you / be fervent in ye spirit, apply your
selves to the time, rejoice in hope be pacie^t in tribulacio^ continue in
prayer, dystribute unto ye necessitye of ye saints and diligently to
harborowe. Bless them which persecute you, bless but curse not, be merry with
the^ ye are merry: wept with the^ that weep / be of like affection one toward
another / be not hye minded but make your selves equal to them of ye lower
sort.

The Gospel on ye.ij. Sunday after the vtas of ye Epiphany the.ij. Chapter of
John^. A.

THere was a marriage in cana a city of galile / and Jesus mother was there,
Jesus was called also and his disciples unto the marriage, and when ye wine
failed Jesus mother said unto him / they have no wine. Jesus said unto her /
woman what have I to do with the mine hour is not yet come his mother said unto
the ministers / what soever he says unto you do it. There were sta^dynge.vj.
water pottes of stone after the manner of purifienge of the Jews co^teynyng.ij.
or.iij. fyrkyns a piece. Jesus said unto them / fill the water pottes and they
filled them up to the hard brym / and he said unto them. Draw out now / and
bear it unto the governor of the feast and they bare it. when the ruler of
the feast had tasted the water that was turned unto wine neither knew whense
it was but the mynisters which drew ye water knew / he called ye bryde grome
and said unto him al men at the beginning, set forth good wine, and when men
be drunk / then ye which is worse but thou have kept back the good wine
until now. This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galylt / and
showed his glory / and his dyscyples believed on him.

The Pystle on ye.iiij. So^day after ye vtas of the Epiphanye the.xij. Chapyter
to the Romans.

Brethren: be not wise in your own opynio^s. Reco^pe^ce to no man evil for
evil, provide before hand things honest in the syghte of all men, if it be
possible / yet on your part have peace with all men derely beloved avenge not
your selves but give rome unto the wrath of god. For it is written / vengeance
is mine / and I reward says the Lord. Therefore if thine enemy hunger feed
him / if he thyrst give him drink for in so doing thou shalt heap coals of
fire on his head / be not overcome of evil / but over come evil with goodness.

The Gospel on the.iiij. Sunday after the vtas of the Epyphanye. The.viij.
Chapyter of Mathewe. A

WHen Jesus was come down from the mountain much people followed him and lo
there came a lepre and worshypped him saying / Master, if thou wylt thou
canste make me clean / he put forth his hand and touched him saying I will be
thou clean / and immediately his leprosy was cleansed and Jesus said unto him se
thou tell no man, but go and show thy self to the priest and offer ye gift
that Moses commanded in witness to them when Jesus was entered into Capernaum
there came unto him a cartayne Centurion, besechyng him, and saying Master my
servant lies sick at home of ye palseye, and is grievously payned and Jesus
said unto him I will come and cure him. The Centuryon answered and said. Sir.
I am not worthy that thou should come under ye roufe of my house but speak
the word only and my servant ssall be healed, for I also my self / am a man
under power, and have sold yours under me / and I say to one go / and he
goes, and to another come and he comes and to my servant do this, and he
does it. when Jesus herd that he maruayled and said to them that followed him.
Verelye I say unto you. I have not found so great faith: no not in Israel. I
say therefore unto you, ye many shall come from the East and west and shall
rest with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven, and the children
of the kingdom shall be cast out into the utter darkness there shall be
weeping and gnashyng of teeth Then Jesus said unto the Centurion, go thy way,
and as thou haste believed, so be it to the, and his servant was healed the
same hour.

The Pystle on the.iiij. sunday after ye vtas of the. Ephiphany. The.xiij.
chapter to the Romans. B.

BRethren to we nothing to any man but to love one another for he that loves
another fulfylleth the law fo these commuandementes thou shalt not commit
aduoutery thou shalt not kyli thou shalt not stele Thou shalt not bear falls
wytnes. Thou shall not desire, and so forth if there be any other
commandments, they are all comprehended in this saying. Love thy neighbor
as thy self, love hurts not his neighbor. Therefore love is the fulfyllynge
of the law.

The Gospel on the.iiij. Sunday after the vtas of the Epiphanye. The, viij.
Chapter of Mathewe. C

WHen Jesus entered into a ship and his discyples followed him, and behold
there arose a great storm in the sea in so much that the ship was hyd with
waves, and he was a sleep and his dysciples came unto him, and awoke him
saying. Master save us we perysshe he said unto them why are ye fearful. O
ye of little faith. Then he arose and rebuked the wind and the sea and there
followed a great calm, and the men marualed and said what man is this that both
wyndes and see obey him.

The Pistle on the.v. Sunday after the vtas of ye Epiphany The third chapter
to the Colossians. B.

BRethren, now as elect of god, holy and beloved, put on tender mercy, kyndnes
hu^blenes of mind, mekenes long suffecynge, forberynge one another, if any man
have a quarrel to another, even as Christ forgave you even so do ye, above all
these things put on love, which is ye bound of perfectnes, and the peace of
good rule in your hertes / to ye which peace ye are called in one body / and se
they be thankful / let ye word of Christ dwell in you plentuously in all
wisdom teach and exorte your own selves in Psalms and Hymns / and
spyrytual songs / which have favor with them singing in your hertes to the
Lord / and all things what soever ye do in word or deed / do in the name of
the Lord Jesus / gyuynge thanks to god the father by him.

The Gospel on the.v. Sunday after the vtas of Epyphanye. The.xiiij. Chapter
of Mathewe. G

Jesus said unto his dysciples. The kingdom of heaven is like unto a man
which sowed good sede in his field, but while men slept, there came his fo and
sowed tares among the where and went his way. When ye blade was spronge up,
and had brought forth fruit then appeared ye tares also, The servants came to
the house holder, and said unto him, Sir sowedest not thou good seed in thy
close, from whense then has it tares he said to them the enuyous man has done
this Then the servants said unto him. wylt thou then yt we go and gather them
and he said nay lest while ye go about to wede out ye tares, ye pluck up also
with them the wheat by the rotes let both grow together till harvest come, and
in time of heruest I will say unto my repers, gather ye first the tares and
bind them in sheues to be brent, but gather my wheat into my barn.

The Pystle on ye so^day after weddi^g goes out called Septuagesyma. The.j.
Pystle to the Corynthians and ye.ix. cha. D

BRethren: perceive you not how yt they which run in a course run all /
yet but one receives the reward / so run that ye may obtain. Every man
that proves maystres abstayneth from all things, and they do it to obstayne a
corruptible crown, but we to obtain an incorruptible crown I therefore so
run, not as at an uncertain thing, so fight I not as one that beats the
air but I tame my body, and bring him into subieccyon, lest after that I
have preached to other, I my self should be a cast away. Brethren: I would not
yt ye should be ignorant of this / as your fathers were all under a cloud,
and all passed through the sea / and were all baptized under Moses in the
cloud / and in the sea, and did all eat of one spyrytual meat, and did al
drink of one manner of spyrytual drink and they drunk of that spyrytual rock
yt followed the^, which rock was Christ.

The Gospel on the sunday after wedding goes out called Septuagesyma.
The.xx. Chapyter of Mathewe. A

Jesus said unto his dysciples. The kingdom of heaven is like unto an
householder, which went out erly in ye morning to hyre laborers in his
vyneyarde and he agreed with the laborers for a penny a day and sent them into
his vyneyard And he went out about the third hour, and fawe other standing
ydel in the market place, and said unto them / go ye also into my vyneyarde /
and what soever is right / I will give you and they went their way. Again he
went out about the syxt and nynth hour and did like wise. And he went out
about the eleventh hour and found other standing ydell / and said unto them.
why stand ye here all the day ydell. They said unto him Because no man has
hired us. He said unto the^. Go ye also into my vyneyarde and what soever
shall be right, that shall ye receive. when even was come, ye lord of the
vyneyard said unto his Steward call the laborers, and give the^ their hyre /
begin at the last till thou come to the first. And they which were hired
about the eleue^th hour / came and received every man a penny. Then came first
/ supposing yt they should receive more / and they likewise received every man
a penny. And when they had received it / they grudged against ye good man of
the house saying. These last have wrought but one hour, and thou haste made
them equal unto us / which have borne the burden and hete of the day. He
answered to one of them saying: friend I do the no wrong / dydeste thou not
agree with me for a penny. Take yt which is thy duty, and go thy way / I will
give unto this last / as much as to the / is it not lawful for me to do as
me lysteth with mine own is thine eye evil / because I am good / so the last
shall be first / and the first shall be last / for many are called / but few be
chosen.

The Pistle on ye Sunday of lx. the.ij. Pystle to ye Corinthia^s and the.xi,
chapter. G.

Brethren suffer foles gladly because that ye your selves are wise / for ye
suffer even if a man bring you into bondage / if a man devour / if a man take
/ if a man exalte him self / if a man smyre you on ye face I speak as
concerning rebuke as though we had been weke how be it wherein so ever any
man dare be bold / I speak folysshelye / I dare be bold also / They are
Ebrues / so am I / They are Israelytes: eue^ so am I: They are the sede of
Abraham / even so am I. They are ye mynisters of Christ. I speak as a fool: I
am more. In labors more abu^da^t / i^ strypes above measure / in prison more
ple^tuously in death often / of the Jews / five times received I / every time xl
strypes save one. Thryse was I beaten with rods. I was ones stoned. I suffered
thryse ship wrake night and day have I been in the depht of the sea in
iorneynge often. In parels of waters / in parel of robbers, in ieopardies of
mine own nacio^ in ieopardies among the hethen / I have been in parels in
cytyes / in parels in wyldernes / in parels in the sea / in parels among false
brethren in labor and travail / in watchynge often / in hungre / in thyrst /
in fasting often / in cold / and in nakedness / beside the things which
outwardelye happen unto me. I am combred daily and care for all co^gregacyons.
who is sick / and I am not sick / who is hurt in faith / and my heart
burns not: if I must needs rejoice / I will rejoice of mine infyrmites. God
ye father of our lord Jesus Christ / which is blessed for evermore knows
that I lie not.

The Gospel on the Sunday of.xl. the.viij. Chapter of Luke. A

WHen much people were gadered together / and were come to Jesus out of the
cytyes / he spoke by a symylytude. A sower went out to sow his sede. And as he
sowed / some fell by the way side / and it was trodden under fete / and the
fowls of the air devoured it up / and some fell on stones / and as soon as it
was spro^ge up / it wythered away because it lacked moystnes / and some fell
among thorns / and the thorns spronge up with it / and choked it. And some
fell on good ground / and spronge up and bare fruit an ho^dreth fold / And as
he said these things he cried / he that has ears to here / let him hear /
his dyscyples asked him saying: what manner symylytude this should be / and he
said unto you it is given to know the secrets of the kingdom of god: but to
other in symylytude / yt when they se / they should not se / and when they
hear / they should not understand / the similitude is this / The sede is ye
word of god those that are beside the way are / they that hear / and after
ward comes the devil and takes away the word out of their hertes, lest
they should believe and be saved. They on the stones are they which when they
hear the word receive it with joy / and these have no rotes / which for a
while believe and in time of te^ptacyon go away. That which fell among thorns,
are they which hear and go forth / and are choked with care and riches and
voluptuous living and bring forth no fruit. That in the good ground, they
are which with a good and pure heart here, the word and keep it, and bring
forth fruit with patience.

The Pystle on the Sunday of.l. the first Pystle to the Corynthyans.
The.xiij. Chapyter. A

BRethren though I speak with the tongues of men and angels, and yet had no
love I were even as sou^dyng brass and as a tynklyng cymball. And though I
could prophesye, and understood all secrets, and al knowledge, ye if I had al
faith so yt I could move mountains out of their places, and yet had no love,
I were nothing. And though I bestowed all my goods to feed the poor. And
though I gave my body eue^ yt I burned and yet have no love, it profyteth my
nothing, love suffers long and is courteous. love enuyeth not, love does not
frowardly, swells not, deals not dishonestly seeks not her own, is not
provoke to anger, thinks not evil, reioyseth not in iniqite, but reioyseth
in ye truth / suffers al thing, believes al things / hops all things. And
endures in all things. Though yt the prophesyeng fail, other tongues shall
cease, or knowledge vanyshe away / yet love falls never away, for our
knowledge is imperfect, and our prophesyenge is imperfect, but when ye which
is perfyte is come / then ye which is vnperfyt shall be done away when I was a
child: I spoke as a child. I understood as a child, I ymagyned as a child:
but as soon as I was a man I put away al chyldyshnes / now we se i^ a glass
eue^ in a dark speaking: but when shall we se face to face. Now I know
vnperfytly. But wha^ shall I know eue^ as I am known, now abides, faith,
hope, and love eue^ these.iij. but ye chyefe of the^ is love.

The Gospel on the So^day of.l. The.xviij. Cha. of Luke. A

Jesus took unto him the.xij. and said unto them: behold we go up to Jerusalem
/ and all shall be fulfilled yt are written by the prophets, of ye son of man,
he shall be delivered unto the gentyls, and shall be mocked, and shall be
despytefully entreated, and shall be spette^ on, and when they have scourged him
they will put him to death / and the third day shall he rise again. They
understood none of these things and this saying was hyd from them and they
perceived not ye things which were spoken. It came to pass as he was come nigh
unto Ierico / a certain blind man sat by the way side beggyng, and when he
herd ye people pass by he asked what it mente. They said unto him, yt Jesus
of Nazareth went by / and he cried saying. Jesus the son of David have
mercy on me / and they which went before rebuked him, because he should hold
his peace, and he much the more cried. The son of David have mercy on me.
Jesus stood still, and commanded him to be brought unto him and when he was
come nere, he asked him saying. What wylt you that I do unto the, and he said
/ Lord that I may receive my sight. Jesus said unto him. Receive thy sight,
thy faith has saved the, and immediately he saw and followed him praysyng god,
and all the people when they saw it / gave land to god.

The Pystle on Asshe wednysdaye. The.ij. Chap. Iohel. D

Our Lord says turn to me with all your hertes in fasting and lamentacyon and
tear your hertes, and not your garments, and turn unto the lord your God /
for he is full of mercy / and compassyon, long yer he be angry / and great in
mercy / and repents when he is at ye point to punysshe, who can tell whether
the Lord will turn and have compassyon and shall leave after him a blessing
sacryfyce and drink, offryng unto the lord your god. Blow a tro^pet in Syon
/ proclayme fasting / and call a congregacyon, gather the people together
bring thou the elders to one place, gather the young children and they that
suck the breasts together, let the brydgrome come out of his chamber, and the
bryde out of her parloure, let the priests that mynistre unto the lord, weep
between ye porche and the altar, and say: spare lord thy people and deliver
not thine inherytaunce unto rebuke yt the hethen should raygne over them / why
should they say, among the nacyons: where is their god. And the lord enuyed
for his lands sake, and had compassyon on his people and the Lord answered
and said unto his people / behold: I sent you corn / new wine and oil
that ye shall be satysfyed therewith neither will I deliver you any more unto the
hethen.

The Gospel on Asshe wednysday. ye.vj. cha. of Mat. B

CHrist said unto his dyscyples when ye fast / be not sad as the ypocrytes
are, for they dysfygure their faces, that it might appear unto men that they
fast. Verily I say unto you they have their reward. But you when thou
fastest, anoint thine head, and wasshe thy face / that it appear not unto men
how that thou fastest / but unto thy father that is in secret and thy father
which seyth in secret, shall reward ye openly. Gather not treasure together on
earth / where ruste and mothes corrupt and where thieves break through and
stele but gather ye treasure together in heaven / where nether rust / nor mothes
corrupt and where thieves neither break up nor yet stele. For whersoeuer you
treasure is / there will your hertes be also.

The Pystel on the.j. Sunday in lent / the second pystle to the Corynthyans
the.vj. chapter. A.

BRethren we exorte you / that ye receive not the grace of god in vain / for
he says I have herd the in a time accepted / and in the day of salvation
have I suckered the. Behold now is that well accepted time: behold now is the
day of salvation / let us give no man occasyon of evil / that in our office
be found no fault but in all things let us behave our selves as the
mynisters of god. In much patience, in affliccyo^s in necessyte / in anguysshe,
in strypes, in prysonment, in strife, in labor, in watch, in fasting, in
pureness / in knowledge, in long sufferynge / in kyndnes / in the holy ghost /
in love unfeigned / in the words of truth / in ye power of god by ye armor of
ryghtwysenes on the right hand, and on the lift hand / in honor and
dishonor in evil report and good report, as disceyuers, and yet true / as
unknown / as dienge: and behold we yet live as chastened and not killed / as
sorowynge and yet always merye as poor and yet make many rich / as having
nothing and yet possessynge in all things.

The Gospel on the.j. Sunday in lent the.iiij. Chapter of Mathewe. A.

WHen Jesus was led away of the spirit into wyldernes to be tempted of the
devil. And when he had fasted forty days and forty nyghtes / at the last was
an hungered. Then came unto him the tempter / and said, if thou be the son of
god command that these stones be made bread / He answered and said, It is
written, yt man shall not live only by bread / but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of god Then yt devil took him up into the holy
cite / and set him on a pynacle of the temple / and said unto him / if you be
the son of god cast thy self down, for it is wryte^, he shall give his
angels charge over the / and with their hands they shall hold yt up that you
dasshe not thy foot against a stone Jesus said to him, this is written also
Thou shalt not tempte thy lord god / The devil took him up again and led
hy^ in to an exceeding hie mountain and showed him all the kingdoms of the
world and all the glory of them, and said unto him / all these will I give the /
if thou wylt fall down and woshyp me. Then said Jesus unto him: avoid Satan
/ for it is written. Thou shalt worship thy lord God, and him only shalt
thou serve.

The Pystle on the.ij. Sunday in Lent / the first Pystle to ye Tessalonians /
the forth chapter. A.

WE beseech you brethren and exorte you in the lord Jesus that you increase
more and more / even as ye have received of us / how ye ought to walk and to
please god / ye remember what commandments / we gave you in ye name of ye
lord Jesus Christ / for this is ye will of god even that ye should be holy / and
that ye should abstain from fornicacyon, that every one of you should know
how to keep his vessel in holiness and honor. And not in the lust of
co^cupiscens / as do ye hethen which know not god that no man go to far and
defraude his brother in bargaynyng / because the Lord is a venger of all such
things / as we told you before time / and testifyeth unto you for God has
not called us unto uncleanness, but to holiness in Christ Jesus our lord.

The Gospel on ye.ij. Sunday in. Lent the.xv. cha. of Mat. C

Jesus went thence and departed into ye costs of the Tire, and Sydo^ And
behold a woman which was a Cananite came out of the same Costs and cried unto
him saying, have mercy on me lord the son of Dauyd. My daughter is petyously
vexed with a devil. And he gave her never a word to answer. Then came to him
his disciples and besought him saying send her away, for she follows us
cryeng, he answered and said. I am not sent, but unto the lost sheep of ye
house of Israel. Tha^ she came and worshypped him saying, Master sucker me, he
answered and said it is not good, to take the chyldrens bread and to cast it
to the whelps, she answered and said it is truth nevertheless the whelps eat
of ye cro^mes, which fall from their masters table. Then Jesus answered and
said unto her. O woman great is thy faith be it to the eue^ as thou desyrest,
and her daughter was made hole even at that same hour.

The Pystle on the.iij. Sunday in. Lent to the Ephesyans ye.v. chapter. A.

BRethren be ye folowers of god as dear children, and walk in love, even as
Christ loved us, and gave him self for us, an offerng and a sacryfice of a
sweet sauer to god, so yt fornicacion and al uncleanness, or covetousness be not
ones named among you, as it be comes saints neither filthynes nether
folyssh talking nether gestyng, which are not comely, but rather gyuyng of
thanks for this ye know that no whoremonger either unclean person / or
covetous person which is the worshypper of images has any inheritance in ye
Kyngedom of Christ and of god. Let no man deceive you with vain words for
through such things comes the wrath of god, upon the children of unbelieve,
Be not therefore companyons with them / ye were ones darkness / but are now
light in ye lord / walk as children of light for ye fruit of the spirit, is
in all goodness, rightwysnes and truth.

The Gospel on ye.iij. Sunday in Lent ye.xj. chap. of Luke. C

Jesus was a casting out a devil, which was domme and it followed when ye
devil was gone out / the domme spoke / and the people wondered. Some of them
said he casts out deuyls / by the power of Beelzebub / the chief of the
deuilles and other tempted him seeking of him a sign from heaven, he knew their
thoughts and said unto them. Every kingdom at debate within it self shall be
desolate. And one house shall fall upon an other. So if Satan be divided wtin
himself, how shall his kingdom endure, because ye say that I cast out deuyls
by the power of Beelzebub, if I by ye power of Beelzebub cast out deuyls, by
whose power / do your children cast them out Therefore shall they be your
judges. But if I with the finger of GOD cast out deuyls, no doubt, the
kingdom of god is come upon you when a strong man armed watched his house.
That he possesses, is in peace, but when a stronger then he comes upon him
and overcomes him he takes from him his harneys wherein he trusted, and
dyuydeth his goods, he yt is not with me is against me, he that gathers not
with me scatters when the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walked
through waterlese places sekyng rest, and when he fynded none, he says I will
return again unto my house whense I came out and when he comes he finds
it swept and garnyshed. Then goes he and takes seven other spyrytes with him
worse then him self and they enter in and dwell there. And the end of that
man is worse then the beginning. It fortuned as he thus spoke, a certain
woman of the company lift up here voice and said unto him happy is the womb
that bare the and the pappos which gave the suck, and he said / happy are
they that hear the word of god and keep it.

The Pystle on mydlent Sunday. The.iiij. chapter to the / Galathyans. C.

BRethren it is written, that Abraham had two sons the one by a bond maid,
the other by a fre woman, ye and he which was of the bond woman was borne after
ye flesh, but he which was of the free woman was borne, by promise which
things betoken mystery / for these women are two, Testament the one from^ ye
mount Syna which gendreth unto bondage which is Agar, for mount Sina is
called Agar in Arabia, ^bordreth unto the cite which is now Jerusalem, and is
in bondage with her children. But Jerusalem which is above / is fre which is
the mother of us al, for it is written, rejoice thou bareyn that bear no
children, break forth and cry thou that traualest not for that desolate has
many mo children then she which has an husband. Brethren we are after the
manner of Isaac children of promise, but as them he yt was borne carnally
presecuted him that was borne spiritually. Even so it is now nevertheless
what says the scripture. Cast away ye bond woman and her son. for the son
of ye bond women shall not be heir with the son of the fre woman. So then
brethren / we are not children of the bond woman, but of the free woman.

The Gospel on mydlente Sunday. The.vj. chapter of John. A.

Jesus went his way over the sea of Galyle nigh to a city called Tiberias, and
a great multitude followed him because they had seen the miracles the the did
on them / which were dyseased. Jesus went up into a mountain and there he
sat with his disciples, and Easter a feast of the Iues was nigh Then Jesus
lift up his eyes and saw a great company come unto him and said unto Philyp,
whense shall we bye bread that these might eat. This he said to prove him,
for he him self knew what he would do. Phylyp answered him. Two ho^dreth penny
worth of bread are not sufficient for them that every man might have a little.
Then said unto him one of his disciples, Andrewe Simon Peter's brother. There
is a lad here, which has.v. barley loves, and.ij. fyshes but what is that
among so many, Jesus said, make the people to sytt down there was much hay
in the place. And ye men sat down, in nombre about five thousand, Jesus took
the bread, and gave thanks. And gave to the disciples And his dyscyples, to
them that were set down. And likewise of ye fyshes, as much as they would,
when they had eaten enough, he said unto his disciples, gather up ye broken
meat that remayeth, ye nothing be lost, They gathered it together and
filled.xij. baskettes with the broken meat of ye v. Barlye loves, which
broken meat remained unto them yt had eaten Then those men when they had seen
the miracle that Jesus did, said. This is of a truth, the prophet which
shall come into the world

The Pystle on passion Sunday. The.ix. chapter to the Hebrews. C.

BRethren: Christ being an hye priest of good things to come came by a greter
and a more perfect tabernacle not made with hands, that is to say not of this
manner bilding nether by the blood of Gotes / and Calves / but by his own
blood / he entered ones for all in to the holy place and found eternal
redemption for if the bold of Oxen and of Gotes / and ye ashes of an Heyfer
when it was spryncled / purified the unclean as touching the purefyieng of ye
flesh / how much more shall ye blood of Christ (which through the eternal
spirit, offered him self without spot to god (pourge our conscyences from
dead works, for to serve the living god / and for this cause is he the
mediatoure of the new Testament, that through death which chau^sed for the
redempcyon of those transgressyons that were in the first Testament they which
were called might receive ye promise of eternal inheritance.

The Gospel on Passion Sunday. The.viij. chapter. of Johan. F.

Jesus said unto the company of the Jews and the hye priests which of you
can rebuke me of sin / if I say the truth / why do not ye believe me / he
that is of god / hear^th gods words ye therefore hear them not / because ye
are not of God. Then answered the Jews and said unto him? say we not well,
that thou art a Samaritayne and have the devil Jesus answered? I have not ye
devil, but I honor my father and ye have dishonored me, I seek not mine own
praise, but there is one that seeks and judges. Verily verily, I say unto
you, if a man keep my sayenges, he shall never se death. Tha^ said the Jews to
hy^ now know we yt thou have ye devil. Abraham is dead and also ye prophets
and yet ye say, if a man do keep my saying he shall never taste death: art
you greater then our father Abraham, which is dead, and the prophets are
dead, whom make thou thy self? Jesus answered, if I honor my self, my
honor is nothing worth, it is my father that honors me, which ye say is
your god / and yet have ye not known him but I know him, and if I should say,
I know him not. I should be a liar, like unto you, but I know him, and keep
his saying: your father Abraham was glad to se my day, and he saw it and
reioysed. Then said ye Iues unto hy^. Thou art not yet.l. year old and have
thou seen Abraham? Jesus said unto the^. Verily, verily I say unto you yer
Abraham was, I am. Then took they up stones to cast at hy^, but Jesus hyd hy^
self and went out of ye temple.

The Pystle on Palm So^day. The.ij. Cha. to ye Philyp. A

BRethren let the same mind be in you, the which was in Christ Jesus. which
saying in the shape of god and thought it not robbery to be equal with god.
Nevertheless he made him self of no reputacyon, and took on him the shape of
a servant and became like unto men, and was found in his apparel as a man he
humbled him self and became obedient unto death, eue^ the death of ye cross,
wherefore god has exalted him, and given him a name above al names yt in the
name of Jesus should every knee bow both of things in heaven, and things in
earth, and things under, earth, and that all tongues should confess, that Jesus
Christ is the lord unto the praise of God the father.

The passion on Palm sunday. The.xxvj. chap. of Math. A

Jesus said unto his dyscyples: ye know yt after.ij. days shall be Easter and
the son of man shall be delivered for to be crucified, then assembled
together the chief prestes and the scribes, and the elders of the people into
the palace of the hye priest which was called Cayphas, and held a counsel,
how they might take Jesus by subtylte and kill him, but they said not on the
holy day, lest any trouble arise against the people, when Jesus was in Bethany
in the house of Symo^ the lepper, there came unto him a woman which had an
alabaster box of precious oyntme^^, and powered it on his head as he sat at ye
bourde when his discyples saw that they had indygnacyon, saying: what neded
this wast? this ointment might have been well sold, and given to the poor,
when Jesus understood yt he said to them why trouble ye the woman. She has
wrought a good work upon me, for ye shall have poor folk always with you /
but me shall ye not have always. And in yt she casted this oyntmente on my
body, she did it to burye me withal. Verily I say unto you, where soever this
gospel shall be preached throughout all the world, there shall also this that
she has done, be told for a memoryall of her. Then one of the twelve, called
Judas yscarioth went unto ye chief prestes, and said, what will you give me,
and I will deliver him unto you, and they appointed unto him thyrty pieces of
silver, and from ye time he sought oportunite to betraye him. The first day of
sweet bread ye disciples came to Jesus saying unto him where will thou that we
prepare for the to eat the Pascall lamb, and he said go into the city unto
such a man, and say unto him, the master says my time is at hand I will
keep mine Easter at thy house with my discyples, and the disciples did as Jesus
had appointed them and made redye the Easter lamb, when the even was come, he
sat down with the.xij. And as they did eat he said. Verily I say unto you,
that one of you shall betraye me, and they were exceeding sorrowful, and began
every one of them to say unto him is it I master, he answered and said. He
that depeth his hand with me in the dyshe shall betraye me, ye son of man goes
as it is written of him, but woe be to that man by whom the son of man shall be
betrayed, it had been good for that man, if he had never ben borne. Then Judas
which betrayed him, answered and said. Is it I master, he said unto him? thou
have said, as they did eat Jesus took bread and gave thanks, brake it, and
gave it to the dyscyples and said, take eat this is my body and he took the
cup, and thanked, and gave it them, saying drink of it every one, for this is
my blood of the new testament, that shall be shed for many, for the remyssyon
of sins I say unto you, I will not drink hensforth of this fruit of the
vine tree, until that day when I shall drink it new with you in my fathers
kingdom and when they had said grace they went out unto mount Olyuete. Then
said Jesus unto them / all ye shall be offended by me this night for it is
written I will smite ye shepherde, and the sheep of the flock shall be
scattered abroad, but after I am risen again / I will go before you into
Galyle. Peter answered and said unto him, though all men should be offended by
ye / yet would I never be offended. Jesus said unto him. Verily I say unto the,
that this same night before the cock crow you shall deny me thryse. Peter
said unto him if I should dye with the, yet would I not deny yt, likewise also
said all the dysciples. Then went Jesus with them into a place which is called
Gethsemane and said unto the dysciples, sit ye here while I go and pray
yonder, and he took with him Peter and the two sons of zebede, and began to
wax sorrowful, and to be in agony. Then said Jesus unto them, my soul is heavy
even unto the death, tarry ye here and watch with me. And he went a little
aparte, and fell flat on his face, and cried saying. O my father if it be
possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless not as I will, but as thou
will, and he came unto the discyples, and found them a sleep and said to
Peter. what could ye not watch with me one hour / watch and pray that ye fall
not into te^ptacyon, ye spirit is wyllyng, but the flessh is weak He went
away ones more and prayed saying. O my father if this cup can not pass away
from me, but yt I drink of it / thy will be fulfilled, and he came and found
the^ a sleep again, for their eyes were heavy, and he left them and went again
and prayed ye third time, saying the same words. Then came he to his
dyscyples and said unto them. Sleep hens forth and take your rest / take heed the hour is at hand, and the son of man shall be betrayed into the
hands of sinners. Rise let us be going behold he is at hand that shall
betraye me. while he yet thus spoke, lo Judas one of the twelve came and with
him a great multitude, with swerdes and staves, sent from the chyef of ye
prestes and elders of the people, and he that betrayed him, had given them a
token saying who soever I kiss that same is he lay hands on him. And forth
with all he came to Jesus and said. Hayle master, And kyssed him, and Jesus
said unto him Friend wherefore art thou come. Then came they and laid hands
on Jesus and took him. And behold one of the^ which were with Jesus stretched
out his hand and drew his swerd and stroke a servant of the hye preeste and
smote of his ear. Then said Jesus unto him. Put up thy sword into his sheth
for all that lay hand on the sword, shall perysshe with the swerd either
thynkest thou that I can not now pray to my father / and he shall give me mo
then.xij. legyons of Angels, but how then should ye scriptures be fulfilled,
for so must it be. The same time said Jesus to the multitude, ye be come out
as it were unto a thief with swerdes and staves for to take me / I sat daily
techynge in the temple among you, and ye took me not. All this was done that
the scryptures of the prophets might be fulfilled. Then all the discyples
forsook him / and fled. And they took Jesus and led him to Cayphas the hye
preeste, where the scrybes ad Elders were assembled / and Peter followed him a
far of unto the hye priests place. And went in / and sat with the servants
to se the end. The cheyfe prestes, and the elders, and all the counsel / sought
falls wytnes against Jesus for to put him to death, but found none / in so
much yt when many false witnesses came, yet found they none. At the last
came two false witnesses and said. This fellow said I can destroy the temple
of GOD and build it again in.iij. days. And the chief priest arose and said
to him / answerest thou nothing / how is it that these bear witness against
the. But Jesus held his peace. And the chyfe pressed answered and said to him I
charge yt in the name of the living god, that ye tell us whether thou be /
Christ ye son of god. Jesus said to him, thou have said, nevertheless I say
unto you / here after shall ye se ye son of man / syttyng on ye right hand of
power, and come in the clouds of ye sky Then ye hye pressed rent his clothes
saying. He has blasphemed, what need we of any mo witnesses, behold now ye
have herd his blasphemye what think ye. They answered and said? he is worthy
to dye, tha^ spatt they i^ his face, and buffeted him with tystes and other smote
him with the palm of their hands on ye face, saying Tell us thou Christ, who is
he that smote the Peter sat with out i^ ye palas / and a damsel came to him
saying. Thou also wast with Jesus of Galyle but he denied before them al
saying, I wot not what thou say. When he was gone out in to the porche,
another wenche saw him, and said unto them that were there This fellow was
also with Jesus of Nazareth, and again he denied with an oath that he knew
not the man, And after a while came unto him they that stood by, and said unto
Peter. Surely thou art even one of them, for thy speech be wrayeth ye Then began he to curse / and to swear that he knew not ye man and immediately the
cock crewe, and Peter remembered ye words of Jesus which said unto him, Before
the cock crow thou shall deny me thryse. And went out at the doors, and wept
bitterly when the morning was come all the cheyf prestes and the elders of ye
yeople held a counsel against Jesus, to put him to death and brought him bound
and delivered him unto Poncius Pylate the debyte. Then when Judas which
betrayed him / saw that he was condemned, he repented him self. and brought
again the.xxx. plates of silver to ye hye prestes and elders saying I have
sinned / betrayeng ye innocent blood And they said what is that to us, se thou
to that. And he cast down the silver plates in the temple and departed, and
went and honge him self, and the cheyfe priest took the silver plates and said
/ It is not lawful for to put them in to the treasury because it is ye price of
blood, and they took counsel, and boughte with them a potters field to burye
strangers in / wherefore ye field is called ye field of blood unto this day,
Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy ye prophet saying, and
they took.xxx. silver plates / the price of him that was valued, whom they
boughte of the children of Israel / and they gave them for the potters field,
as the lord appointed me. Jesus stood before the debyte / and the debyte axed
him saying. Art thou the king of the Jews. Jesus said unto him. Thou
say, and when he was accused of ye cheyfe prestes and elders, he answered
nothing. Then said Pylate unto him, hear you not how many things they lay
against the, and he answered to him never a word in so much yt the debite
maruayled greatly. At ye feast the debite was wont to deliver unto the people
a prisoner, who^ they would desire. He had the^ a notable prisoner called
Barrabas, and when they were gathered together, Pylate said unto the^? whether
will ye that I give lose unto you / Barrabas or Jesus which is called Christ,
for he knew well that for envy they had delivered him. When he was set down
to give judgment his wife sent to him saying. Have thou nothing to do with
that just man, for I have suffered many things this day in a dream about
him. But the chyefe prestes and the elders had persuaded the people that they
should are Barrabas / and should destroy Jesus. Then the debyte answered and
said unto them? whether of the twain will ye that I let louse unto you, and
they said Barrabas. Pylate said unto the^, what shall I do then with Jesus which
is called Christ. They all said to him, let him be crucyfyed. Then said the
debyte? what evil has he done. And they cried the more, saying, let him be
crucified. when Pylate saw that he prevailed nothing, but that more busynes
was made / he took water and washed his hands before the people: saying. I
am innocent of the blood of this just person. And ye ye shall see. Then
answered all the people and said. His blood be on us, and on our children. Tha^
let he Barrabas lose unto the^ and scourged Jesus and delivered him to be
crucified. Then the souldyours of the debyte took Jesus unto the common hall.
And gathered unto him all the company, and they stryped him, and put on him a
purple robe. And platted a crown of thorns, and put upon his head, and a
read in his right hand. And bowed their knees before him / and mocked him /
saying / Hayle king of the Jews, and spytted on him / and took the read and
smot him on the head. And when they had mocked him / they took the robe of him
again and put his own raiment on him / and led hy^ away to crucyfye him And
as they came out / they found a man of Cyren, named Simon, him they compelled
to bear his cross. And when they came unto ye place called Golgotha, yt is to
say, a place of dead men's sculles they gave him vyneyger to drink mengled
with gall / and when he tasted thereof he would not drink, when they had
crucified him, they parted his garments, and did cast lottes to fulfill yt was
spoken by ye prophet. They divided my garments among them / and upon my
vesture did cast lottes and they sat and watched him there, and they set up
over his head the cause of his death written. This is ye king of the Jews, and
there were two thieves crucyfyed with him one on the right hand, and another on
ye left. They yt passed by reuyled hi^, wagginge their heads, and saying.
Thou yt destroyest the temple of god, and buyldest it in three days, save thy
self if you be the son of god, come down from the cross, like wise also the
hye priests mocking him, with the scrybes and elders said. He saved other,
him self he can not save, if he be the king if Israel, let him now come down
from the cross, and we will believe him, he trusted in god, let him deliver him
now, if he will have him / for he said I am the son of god. That same also
the thieves which were crucified with hy^ cast in his teth, from the syxt hour
was there darkness over all the land unto ye nynth hour. And about the nynth
hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, Ely Ely, Lama Sabathany / that is
to say My God, my god, why have you forsaken me. Some of the^ yt stood there,
when they herd yt, said. This man calls for Helyas. And strayt way one of
them ran and took a spo^ge and filled it full of vynegre / and put it on a
read, and gave him to drink. Other said let be, let us se whether Helias will
come and deliver him. Jesus cried again with a loud voice and yielded up the
ghost. And behold the veil of the temple did rent in twain from the top to
the bottom. And the earth did quake. And the stones did rent, and graves did
open, and the bodies of many Saints which slepte, arose and came out of the
graves after his Resurreccyon, and came into the holy cite, and appeared unto
many. when the Centurion and they that were with him watrhynge Jesus, saw the
earthquake and those things, which happened they feared greatly saying, of a
surety this was the son of God. And many women were there, beholdynge him a
far of which followed Jesus from Galile, mynistryng unto him. Among which
was Mary Magdaleyne, and Mary the mother of James and Ioses and the mother of
zebedes children, when the even was come there came a rich man of Aramathya
named Joseph, which same also was Jesus disciple He went to Pylate and begged
the body of Jesus. Then Pylate commanded the body to be delivered, and Iosephe
took ye body and wrapped it in a clean lynnen clothe, and put it in his new
to^be / which he had hewe^ out eue^ in ye rock. And rolled a great stone at
ye door of ye sepulcher, and departed. And there was Mary Magdalene and the
other mary syttyng over against ye sepulcre.

The Gospel on Palm sunday.

THe next day that follows good frydaye, the hye prestes and pharyses got
them selves to Pylate and said Sir we remember / that this deceyuer said
while he was yet alive. After.iii days I will arise again. Command therefore
the Sepulcher be made sure / until the third day / leest perauenture his
discyples come and steal him away and say unto the people, he is risen from
death, and the last error be worse then the first. Pylate said unto them.
Take watchmen go and make it sure as ye can. And they went and made the
sepulcher sure with watchemen, and sealed the stone.

The passion on good frydaye. The.xviij. chapter of John^. A

Jesus went forth with his dysciples over ye broke Cedro^ where was a gardeyne,
into ye which he entered with his dyscyples. Judas also, which betrayed him
knew ye place for Jesus oftymes resorted thither with his disciples. Judas
tha^ after he had received a bond of men, and mynisters of the hye prestes and
Pharyses came thither with lanternes and fire brondes, and wepons. Then Jesus
knowing all things yt should come on him, went forth and said unto them.
whom seek ye. They answered him. Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus said unto the^ I am
he. Judas also which betraed him, stood with them, but as soon as he had said
unto them, I am he, they went backewardes and fell to the ground and he asked
them again. who^ seek ye. They said? Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus answered? I said
unto you I am he, if ye seek me / let these go their way, that ye saying might
be fulfilled which he spoke. Of them which thou gave me, have I not lost one.
Simon Peter had a sword, and drew it, and smote the hye prestes servant and
cut of his right ear. The servants name was Malchus. Then said Jesus unto
Peter / put up thy sword into ye sheath? shall I not drink of the cup which
my father has given me. Then the company and the captain, and the ministers
of the Jews, took Jesus and bound him, and led him away to Anna first, for he
was father in law unto Cayphas which was ye hye priest / ye same year Cayphas
was he that gave counsel to the Jews that it was expediente, that one man
should dye for ye people. And Simon Peter followed Jesus and another discyple,
ye dyscyple was known of ye hye pressed, and went in with Jesus into ye palace of
ye hye pressed, but Peter stood at ye door without. Tha^ went out ye other
disciple, which was known unto the hye priest, and spoke to the damsel that
kept the door and brought in Peter. Then said ye damsel that kept the door,
unto Peter. Art not thou one of this man's disciples, he said. I am not. The
servants and the ministers stood there and had made a fire of coals, for it
was cold and they warmed them selves. Peter also stood among them, and warmed
him self. The hye priest axed Jesus of his disciples and of his doctrine.
Jesus answered him? I spoke openly in the world I ever taught in the Sinagoge
and in the temple whither al ye Jews resorted and in secret have I said
nothing, why axest thou me, axe them which herd me, what I said unto them,
behold they can tell what I said. when he had thus spoken, one of the
ministers which stood by smote Jesus on ye face saying, answerest thou the hye
pressed so, Jesus answered hi^ If I have evil spoken bear witness of ye evil,
If I have well spoken why smytest thou me And Annas sent him bound unto Cayphas
the hye preeste. Simon Peter stood and warmed hi^ self, and they said unto
hi^, art thou not also one of his discyples He denied it and said. I am not.
One of the servants of the hye pressed his cosen whose ear Peter smote of,
said unto him / did not I se the in ye gardeyn with him. Peter denied it
again, and immediately ye cock true. Then led they Jesus from Caiphas into the
hall of Judgment. It was in the morning, and they the^ selves went not in
to ye judgment hal, lest they should be defiled, but that they might eat the
Paschal lamb. Pylate then went out unto them, and said. what accusacion bring
ye against this man. They answered and said unto him. If he were not an evil
doer, we would not have delivered him unto the. Then said Pylate unto them,
take ye him, and judge hi^ after your own law. Then the Iues said unto him it
is not lawful for us to any man to death. That the words of Jesus might be
fulfilled, which he spoke, sygnifienge what death he should dye. Then Pylate
entered into ye judgment hall again and called Jesus and said unto him. Art
thou the king of the Jews Jesus answered? say thou that of thy self, or
did / other tell it the of me. Pylate answered. Am I a Jew / Thine own nacyon
and hye priests have delivered the unto me. what have thou done. Jesus
answered. My kingdom is not of this World. If my kingdom were of this
world, then would my mynisters surely fight that I should not be delivered to
the Jews. But now is my kingdom not from hense. Pylate said unto him. Art
thou a king. Then Jesus answered. Thou say that I am a king for this cause
was I borne, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear
witness unto the truth. and all that are of ye truth here my voice, Pylate
said unto him. what thing is truth, and when he had said that, he went out
again unto them. I find in him no cause at al. Ye have a custom that I should
deliver you one lose at Easter / will ye yt I lose unto you ye king of ye
Jews. Then cried they al again sayng. Not hy^ but Barrabas, yt Barrabas was a
robber. Tha^ Pylate took Jesus and scourged him, and the souldyours wound a
crown of thorns and put on his heed and they did on hi^ a purple garment, and
said. Hayle king of the Jews. and they smot him on the face. Pylate went
forth again, and said unto them. Behold I bring him forth to you, yt ye may
know yt I find no fault in him. Then came Jesus forth wearyng a crown of
thorn and a robe of purple. and Pylate said unto them behold the man. when ye
hye prestes and ministers saw hi^, they cried saying Crucifye him, crucify
him. Pylate said unto them. Take ye him and crucifye him. for I find no cause
in him. The Iues answered him, we have a law and by our law he ought to dye
because he made him self ye son of god. when Pilate herd ye saying, he was
ye more afraid, and went again into ye judgment hal, and said unto Jesus.
whense art thou but Jesus gave him none answer. Then Pylate said unto him,
spekest you not unto me / know you not, yt I have power to crucyfye yt, and
have power to lose yt. Jesus answered. Thou couldeste have no power at al
against me, except it were given ye from above. Therefore he yt delivered me
unto ye, is more in sin, and from thensforth sought Pylate means to louse
him, but the Jews cried saying / If thou let him go, you art not Cesars
friend. For whosoever makes him self a king, is against Caesar. when Pylate
herd that saying, he brought Jesus forth and sat down to give sentence in a
place called the pauement, but in the Hebrewe tongue, Gabbatho it was ye
Sabbath even which (...) in the Easter feast, and about the syxt hour he
said unto the Jews, behold your king. They cried away with him, away with him
crucifye him. Pylate said unto them, shall I crucyfye your king. The hye
prestes answered / we have no king but Caesar Then delivered he him unto them to
be crucyfyed, and they took Jesus and led him away and he bare his cross, and
went forth into a place called the place of deed men's sculles, which is named
in Hebrewe Golgotha, where they crucyfyed him, and two other with him, on
either side one, and Jesus in the mids, and Pylate wrote his title, and put
it on ye cross. The writing was Jesus of Nazareth king of the Jews. This
title read many of the Jews, for ye place where Jesus was crucyfyed, was nigh
to the City. And it was written, in Hebrewe, Greek and Laten. Then said the
hye prestes of the Jews to Pylate. write not king of the Jews, but that he
said. I am King of the Jews. Pylate answered. what I have wryte^ that I have
written. Then the souldyours, when they had crucified Jesus took his garmente
and made.iiij. parts, to every souldyour a part / and also his cote, ye cote
was without seem wrought upon through out and they said one to another, let us
not deuyde it, but cast lottes who shall have it. That the scripture might be
fulfilled, which says. They perted my rayme^t among the^, and on my cote did
cast lottes and the souldyours did such things in deed. There stood by ye
cross of Jesus his mother, and his mothers sister, Mary the wife of Cleophas
and Marye Magdalene. when Jesus saw his mother and the dysciple sta^dynge who^
he loved he said unto his mother. woman behold thy son. Then said he unto ye
disciple behold thy mother / and from ye hour the disciple took her for his
own. After that when Jesus perceived that all things were perfurmed yt the
scripture might be fulfilled, he said, I thyrst there stood a vessel full of
vyneyger by, and they filled a spo^ge with vyneyger, and wound it about with
ysope, and put it to his mouth, as soon as Jesus had received of the vyneyger
he said it is fynysshed, and bowed his head and gave up the ghost The Jews
then because it was the Saboth even that the bodies should not remain upon the
cross on the Saboth day, for the Saboth day was an hye day, besought Pylate
yt their legs might be broken and that they might be taken down. Then came
ye souldyours and brake the legs of the first, and of the other which was
crucified with Jesus, but when they came to Jesus and saw that he was dead all
ready they brake not his legs, but one of the souldyours with a spear thrust
him into the side, and forthwith came there out blood and water, and he yt
saw it bare record, and his record is true / and he knows yt he says
true, yt ye might believe also. These things were done yt the scripture should
be fulfilled. Ye shall not break a bone of him, and again another Scripture
says. They shall look on hy^ whom they persed.

The gospel on good frydaye.

AFter yt Joseph of Aromathia, which was a dysciple of Jesus / but secretly
for fere of ye Jews, besought Pylat yt he might take down ye body of Jesus
and Pylate gave him license, and there came also Nicodemus which at the
beginning came to Jesus by night and brought of Myrre and Aloes myngled
together about an.C. pound weight. Then took they the body of Jesus and wou^d
it in lynnyn clothes with the odours as ye manner of ye Jews is to bury, and in
ye place where Jesus was crucyfied was a gardeyn, and in the gardeyn a new
sepulcher wherein was never man laid. There laid they Jesus because of ye
Jews Sabbath even for the sepulcher was nigh at hand.

The pystle on Easter day, ye.j. pystle to ye Corynth. ye.v. cha.

BRethren pourge the old leue^, yt ye may be new dowe as ye are sweet bread.
For Christ our Easter la^be is offered up for us. Therefore let us keep holy
day, not with old leven, neither with the leven of maliciousnes, and
wyckednes, but with the sweet bread of pureness and truth.

The Gospel on Easter day. The.xvj. chap, of Mark. A

MAry Magdalene, and mary Iacobi and Salome, boughte odoures yt they might come
and anoint Jesus. And erlye in the morning the next day after ye Saboth day /
they came unto ye Sepulcher, when the son was risen and they said one to
another. Who shall roll us away the stone from the door of ye sepulcher. And
when they looked, they saw how the stone was rolled away, for it was a very
great one. And they went into the sepulcher, and saw a young man sitting on
the right side clothed in a long white garme^te and they were abashed. And
he said unto the^, be not afraid, ye seek Jesus of Nazareth which was
crucified, he is risen he is not here, behold ye place where they put him but
go your way and tell his disciples, and namely Peter he will go before you
into Galyle, there shall ye se him as he said unto you.

The Pystle on the Mondaye in the Easter weke. The.x. cha. of the Acts of the
Apostles. F

PEter stood up among the people and said unto them ye know well that Jesus
Christ was preached throughout all Jury, and began in Galyle, after baptyme
which John^ preached, how god anointed Jesus of Nazareth with ye holy ghost
and with power. Which Jesus went about doing good and healynge all that were
oppressed of the deuyls for God was with him and we are witnesses of all things
which he did in the land of the Jews and at Jerusalem, who^ they slew, and
ho^ge on tree, him god raised up the third day, and showed him only not to
all ye people but unto us witnesses chosen before of god / which eat and
drank with him, after he rose from death. And he commanded us to preach unto
the people and testifye yt it is he that is ordained of God a judge of quycke
and dead. To him give all the prophets wytnes, yt through his name shall
receive remyssion of sins all that believe in him.

The gospel on the mondaye in the Easter weke. The.xxiiij. chapyter of Luke. B

TWo of the discyples of Jesus went ye same day to a castle which was from
Jerusalem about.lx. forlonges, called Emaus, and they talked together of all
these things yt had happened. And it chaunsed as they co^moned together and
reasoned, yt Jesus him self drew nere / and went with them, but their eyes were
holden yt they could not know him and he said unto the^. What manner of
communicacyons are these yt ye have one to another as ye walk and are sad. And
ye one of the^ named Cleophas answered and said unto him, art you only a
stranger in Jerusalem, and have not known ye things which have chau^sed
there in these days, to who^ he said what things and they said unto him of
Jesus of Nazareth which was a prophet mighty indede and word before God and
all the people. And how the hye prestes and our rulers delivered him to be
conde^pned to death and have crucified him, but we trusted yt it should have been he yt should have delivered Israel. And as touching all these things, to
day is even ye.iij, day yt they were done, ye and certain women also of our
company made us astonyed, which came early unto ye sepulcher and found not his
body and came saying yt they had seen a vision of angels, which said yt he was
alive, and certain of the^ which were with us went their way to ye sepulcher,
and found it even so as the women had said, but him they saw not. And he said
unto the^. O foles and slow of herre to believe all yt the prophets have
spoken, ought not Christ to have suffered these things and to enter into his
glory. And he began at Moses and at all ye prophets and interpreted unto the^
all the scryptures which were written of him and they drew nigh unto the
Castle which they went to, and he made as though he would have gone further /
but they constrained him saying, abide with us for it draws toward night
and the day is far passed, and he went in. To tarry with the^, and it came to
pass as he sat at meat with the^ he took bread blessed it, brake and gave unto
the^, and their eyes were opened and they knew him, and he vanysshed out of
their sight, and they said between them selves, did not our hertes burn wtin
us, while he talked with us by the way and as he opened to us the scryptures. And
they arose up ye same hour and returned again to Jerusalem and found the
eleven gathered to gyther and them that were with the^, which said ye lord is
risen in deed and has appeared to Simon and they told what things was done in
the way and how they knew him in brekynge of the bread.

The Pystle on ye tewysday in the Easter weke. The.xiiij. cha. of the Acts of
the Apostels. C.

Paul stood up and beckened with the hand and said. Ye men and brethren
children of the generacyon of Abraham and who so ever among you feared GOD, to
you is this word of salvation sent. The inhabiters of Jerusalem and their
rulers, because they knew him not, nor yet ye voices of ye prophets which are
red every saboth day they have fulfilled the^ in conde^pnyng him. And when
they found no cause of ^eath in him, yet desired they Pylate to kill him, and
when they had fulfilled all that were w ytten of him. they took him down from
ye tree, and put him in a Sepulcre. But god raised him again from death, and
he was seen many days of them which came with him from Galyle to Jerusalem,
which are his witnesses unto the people, And we declare unto you, how yt the
promise made unto the fathers god has fulfilled unto us their children / in
that he raised up Jesus again.

The Gospel on ye tewysday in ye Easter weke. The.xxiiij. cha. of Luke. F.

Jesus him self stood in the mids of his disciples and said unto them, peace
be with you And they were abashed and afraid, supposing yt they had seen a
sprite. And he said unto them. Why are ye troubled, and why do thougtes arise
in your hertes, behold my hands and my fete, that it is even my self handle
me and se, for spirits have not flesh and bones as ye se me have and when he
had thus spoken he showed them his hands and his fete, and while they yet
believed not for joy / and wondered, he said unto them / have ye here any
meat, and they gave him a piece of a broyled fyshe, and of an honi co^be and he
took it and eat it before them and he said unto the^. These are the words
which I spoke unto you, while I was yet with you that all must be fulfilled
which were written of me in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the
Psalms. Then opened he their wits, yt they might understand the scriptures
and said unto them, thus is it written, and thus it behooves Christ to suffer,
and to rise again from death the.iij. day. And the repentance and remissyon
of sins should be preached in his name among all nacyons.

The Pystle on the wednysdaye in the Easter weke. The.iij. chapter of the
Acts of the Apostles. C

PEter opening his mouth say / ye men of Israel and all ye ye fear god,
here the God of Abraham / Isaac / and Jacob, the god of our fathers has
glorified his son Jesus, who^ ye betrayed and denied in the presence of
Pylate when he had judged him to be losed, but ye denied the holy and just, and
desired a murder to be given you, and killed the lord of life who^ God has
raised from death, of the which we are witnesses / and now brethren I know ye
through ignorance ye did it, as did also your heddes, but god which showed
before by the mouth of all prophets yt Christ should suffer, has thus wise
fulfilled it. Repent therefore and turn yt your sins may be done away

The Gospel on the wednysdaye in the Easter weke, The.xxj. Chapyter of John^. A

AFter ye Jesus showed him self again to his disciples at ye see of Tiberias.
And on this wise showed he him self There were together Simon Peter and Thomas
which is called. And Nathanael of Cana a City of Galyle and the sons of
zebede, and two other of the discyples. Simon Peter said unto them, I go a
fysshyng. They said unto him, we also will go with the. They went their way and
entered into a ship strayt way and that night caught they nothing, but when the
morning was now come Jesus stood on ye shore, nevertheless ye disciples knew not
yt it was Jesus. Jesus said unto the^, syrs have ye any meat They answered him
no and said unto the^. Cast out ye net on the right side of ye ship, and ye
shall find. They cast out and anon they were not able to draw it, for ye
multitude of fyshes. Then said the disciple whom Jesus loved unto Peter, it is
ye lord. Wha^ Simon Peter herd that it was ye lord, he gyrde his mantel to
him for he was naked, and sprange into ye see. The other disciples came by ship
for they were not far from land, but as it were two hondreth cubytes and
they drew ye net with fysshes As soon as they were come to land, they saw
hoote coals and fysshe laid thereon, and bread, Jesus said unto them, bring
of the fyshe which ye have caught Simon Peter stepped forth and drew the net
to land full of great fysshes an hondreth and liij. and for all there were so
many, yet was not the net broken. Jesus said unto them come and dyne. And none
of the disciples durst axe him, what art thou, for they knew that it was the
lord. Jesus then came and took bread and gave them / and fysshe likewise And
thus is now the third time that Jesus appeared to his discyples / after that
he was risen again from death.

The Pystle on ye.j. so^daye after Easter day called low So^daye, The.j.
Pystel of John^ ye.v. cha. E

Most dear beloved brethren all that is borne of god overcomes the world,
and this is the victory that overcomes the world, even our faith, who is
that overcomes the world, but he which believes ye Jesus is the son of god.
This Jesus Christ is he that came by water and blood not by water only, but by
water and blood, and it is the spirit yt bears wytnes, because ye spryte is
truth, for there are.iij. which bear record in heaven, ye father / the word,
and the holy ghost, and these.iij. are one for there are.iij. which bear
record in earth. The spirit, the water / and blood, and these.iij. are one /
if we receive ye witness of me^, the witness of god is greter, for this is ye
witness of god, which he testyfyed of his son. He ye believes on ye son of
God / has witness in him self.

The Gospel on the.j. Sunday after Easter day called low sunday the.xx
chapter of John^. E

THe same day at night, which was ye morrow after the Saboth day, when the
doors were shut, where the discyples were assembled together for fear of ye
Jews came Jesus and stood in the mids, and said to them. Peace be with you,
and when he had so said, he showed unto them his hands and his side. Then
were the discyples glad when they saw ye Lord. Then said Jesus to them
again. Peace be with you, As my father sent me even so send I you, and when
he had said that, he brethed on them and said unto them. Receive the holy
ghost, who soeuers sins ye remytte, they are remytted unto them, and who
soeuers sins ye retain, they are retained, but Thomas one of the twelve
called Didimus, was not with the^ when Jesus came, the other discipl^s said
unto him We have seen the lord, and he said unto them, except I se in his
hands the prynte of the nails, and put my finger in the hooles of the nails,
and trust my hand into his side I will not believe. And after.viij. days
again, his disciples were within, and Thomas with the^. Then came Jesus when
the doors were shut and stood in the mids, and said Peace be with you, after
that said he to Thomas, bring thy finger hither, and se my hands, and bring
thy hand and thruste it into my side, and be not faythlesse, but beleuyng.
Thomas answered and said unto him my lord and my god Jesus said unto him.
Thomas because thou haste seen me therefore thou beleuest Happy are they ye has
not seen, and yet believe. And many other signs did Jesus in the presence of
his discyples, which are not wryte^ in this book. These are written yt ye might
believe yt Jesus is Christ ye son of man, and that in beleuynge, ye might have
life through his name.

The Pystle on the.ij. Sunday after Easter day the.j. pystle of Peter, the.ij.
chapter. C.

Most dear beloved brethren: Christ suffered for us, leuynge us an ensample,
that ye should follow his steps, which did no sin, neither was there gyle
found in his mouth which when he was reuyled, reuyled not again, when he
suffered, he threatened not, but committed the cause to him ye judges
ryghtouslye, which his own self bare our sins in his body on the tree, yt
we should be delivered from sin, and should live in right wisnes, by whose
strypes ye were healed, for ye were as sheep going astraye, but are now
returned unto ye shepeherde and bishop of your souls.

The Gospel on ye.ij. Sunday after Easter day. The.x. chapter of John^. C.

Jesus said to his disciples, I am the good shepherde, the good shepherde
gives his life for his sheep, an hired servant, which is not the shepherd
neither ye sheep are his own seyeth the wolf coming and leueth the sheep and
flies, and ye wolf cascheth them and scatters the sheep. The hired servant
flies, because he is an hired seruau^te, and cares not for ye sheep, I am the
good shepherd, and know mine, and am known of mine. As my father knows me
even so know I my father. And I give my life for ye sheep, and other sheep I
have which are not of this fold, them also must I bring, that they may hear
my voice, and that there may be one floke, and one shepherde.

The Pystle on the.iij. Sunday after Easter day. The.j. Pystle of Peter the.ij.
chapter. C.

MOst dear beloved brethren. I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims,
abstain from flesshlye lusts, which fight against ye soul, and se that ye
have honest conuersacio^ among the Gentyles that they which backebyte you as
evil doers may se your good works and praise God in the day of visitacyon,
submyt your selves unto all manner ordinance of man for the Lords sake,
whether it be unto the king as unto the cheyfe heed, either unto the rulers,
as unto them that are sent of him, for the punysshemente of evil doers, but
for the land of them that do well, for so is the will of GOD, that ye put to
silence the ignorauncy of the folyshe men, as free, and not as having the
libierte for a cloak of malycyousnes, but even as the servants of god, honor
al men, love brotherly felysshyp fear god and honor ye King, servants obey
your masters with all fear, not only if they be good and courteous, but also
though they be froward, for it comes of grace in Christ Jesus our lord

The Gospel on the.iij. Sunday after Easter day the.xvj. Chapter. of John^.
D.

Jesus said to his dyscyples after a while ye shall not seem, and again after
a while ye shall se me, for I go to ye father, then said some of his discyples
between the^ selves, what is this yt he says unto us. After a while ye shall
not se me, and again after a while ye shall se me, and that I go to the father
They said therefore what is this yt he said says after a while we can not tell
what he says. Jesus perceived yt they would axe him, and said unto them. This
is it yt ye inquire of between your selves, yt I said after a while ye shall not
seem, and again after a while ye shall se me. Verelye verelye, I say unto you,
ye shall weep and lame^te, and ye world shall rejoice, ye shall sorrow but your
sorrow shall be turned to joy. A woman when she trauayleth has sorrow, because
her hour is come, but as soon as she is delivered of the child remembers no
more the anguysshe, for joy ye a man is borne into ye world. And ye now are
in sorrow, but I will se you again. And your hertes shall rejoice, and your joy
shall no man take from you.

The Pystle on the.iiij. Sunday after Easter day. The.j. Chapyter of James. C

MOst dear beloved brethren: every good gift, and every perfyte gift, is
from above, and comes down, from ye father of light, with whom is no
variablenes, neither is he changed unto darkness. Of his own will begat he us
with the word of life yt we should be ye first fruytes of his creatures.
Wherefore dear brethren let every man be swyft to here, flow to speak, and
flow to wrath, for the wrath of man works not yt which is ryghteous before
god. Wherefore lay a part all fylthynes, all super fluyte of malycyousnes. And
receive with meknes the word ye is grafted in you, which is able to save your
souls.

The gospel on ye.iiij. Sunday after Easter day. The.xvj. chapyter of John^.
B

Jesus said to his discyples now I go my way to him that sent me. And none
of you axeth me, whyther go you but because I have said such things unto
you, your hertes are full of sorrow. Nevertheless I tell you the truth, it is
expedient for you yt I go away, For if I go not away that co^forter will not
come unto you, But if I depart I will send him unto you. And when he is come,
he will rebuke the world of sin, and of ryghtwysnes and of judgment of
sin, because they believe not on me, of ryghtwysenes, because I go to my
father, and ye shall se me no more. And of judgment, because ye cheyfe ruler
of this world is judged all ready. I have yet many things to say unto you,
but ye can not bear them away now. How be it when he is come, I mean ye
spirit of truth, he will teach you all truth. He shall not speak of him
self, but what soever he shall hear that shall he speak, and he will show
you of things to come he shall glorify me, for he shall receive of mine and
show unto you. All things yt the father has are mine. Therefore said I unto
you, yt he shall take of mine and show unto you.

The Pystle on the.v. sunday after Easter day, which is ye next Sunday
before the cross days. The.j. cha. of James. D

Most dear beloved brethren se yt ye be doers of ye word / and not hearers
only, deceyuynge your own selves with Sophistrye for if any hear ye word and
do it not, he is like unto a man yt beholds his bodily face in a glass, for
as soon as he has looked on him self he goes his way and has immediately for
gotten what his fassh you was, but who soever looks in the perfyte law of
lybertye and contynueth therein (if he be not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of
ye word) he shall be happy in his deed, if any man among you seem denoute,
and refrain not his tongue, but deceive his own heart, this man's devotion is
in vain. Pure devotion and undefiled before god the father, is this. To vysyte
the frendles and widows in their aduersyte and to keep him self unspotted
from the world.

The Gospel on the.v. sunday after Easter day which is ye next sunday
before the cross days, The.xvj. chap of John^. E

Jesus said unto his disciples, verily verily I say unto you, what soever ye
shall ask ye father in my name, he will give it you, hitherto have ye asked
nothing in my name ask and ye shall receive it, that your joy may be full.
These things have I spoken unto you in proverbs, the time will come when I
shall speak no more to you in proverbs, but I shall show you plainly from my
father. It ye day shall ye ask in my name and I say not unto you that I speak
unto my father for you. For the father him self loves you because ye have
loved me, and have believed ye I came out from god. I went out from the father
and came into the world. I leave the world again, and go to ye father. His
discyples said unto him, behold now speak you plainly, and you use no
proverbs. Now we know ye thou understand all things, and nedest not yt
any man should ask the any questyon. Therefore believe we that you come from
god.

The Pystle on Monday in ye cross days. The.v. Chapyter of James. D

MOst dear beloved brethren knowledge your fautes one to another, and pray one
for another, yt ye may be healed. The prayer of a ryghteous man auayled much,
if it be fervent. Helias was a man in danger to trybulacion as we are, and he
prayed in his prayer, that it might not rain. And it rayned not on the earth
by the space of three years and syx months. And again he prayed, and the heaven
gave rain and ye earth brought forth her fruit, if any of you err from the
truth and another convert him, let the same know, that he which converted the
sinner from going a stray out of his way, shall save a soul from death, and
shall hyde the multitude of sins.

The gospel on ye Mo^day in ye cross days. The.xj. chapter of Luke. B.

Jesus said unto his disciples which of you should have a friend, and should
go to him at mydnyght, and say unto him / friend lend me three loves for a
friend of mine is come out of the way to me, and I have nothing to set before
him and he within should answer and say trouble me not now / ye door is now
shut / and my servants are with me in ye chamber. I can not arise and give
the^ unto the. I say unto you though he will not arise and give him because
he is his friend / yet because of his importunyte he would rise / and give the^
as many as needs / and I say unto you, ask / and it shall be given you Seek
and you shall find / knock and it shall be opened unto you / for every one
that asks received, and he that seeks fyndeth, and to him yt knocks shall
it be opened. If ye son ask bread of any of you, that is a father / will he
give him a stone Or if he ask fysshe / will he for a fysshe give him a
serpent? Or if he ask an egg, will ye offer him a Scorpion? If ye then which
are evil / can give good gifts unto your children? How much more shall your
father of heaven give the holy ghost to them that desire it of him.

The Pystle on the Ascensyon even. The.iiij. Chapyter of ye Acts of the
Apostles. G

THe multitude of the^ yt believed were of one heart and of one soul. Also none
of them said, yt any of ye things which he possessed was his own / but had
all things common / and with great power gave the Apostles wytnes of the
Resurreccyon of our Lord Jesus Christ / and great grace was with them all.
Neither was there any among them that lacked, for as many as were possessors of
lands or houses sold them and brought the price of the things which were
sold and laid it down at the Apostles fete / and distribucyon was made unto
every man according as he had need.

The Gospel on the Ascension even, ye.xvij. chap. of John^. A

Jesus lyfted up his eyes to heaven and said, father the hour is come, gloryfye
thy son ye thy son may glorifye the As you have given him power over all
flesh, yt he should give eternal life to as many as thou haste given him.
This is life eternal yt they might know the, ye only very god / and whom you
have sent Jesus Christ. I have glorified the on the earth. I have fynysshed ye
work which thou gave me to do, and now glorify me you father with thine own
self, with the glory which I had with the yer the world was. I have declared thy
name unto those / which you gave me out of ye world. Thine they were and thou
gave the^ me, and they have kept thy sayenges. Now have they known yt all
things what soever thou have given me, are of the. For I have given unto them
the words, which you gave me, and they have received them, and have known
surely that I came out from the, and have believed yt thou dyddest send me. I
pray for them. I prayed not for the world, but for them which you have given
me, for they are thine, and all mine are thine, and thine are mine, and I am
glorified in them. And now am I no more in the world, but they are in the
world and I come to the.

The Pystle on the Ascensyon day. The first Chapyter of ye Acts of the
Apostles. A

Saint Luke which wrote the Acts of the Apostles says in the former treatise
(dear friend Theophylus) I have written of all that Jesus began to do, and
teach until the day in the which he was taken up after yt he through ye holy
ghost had given commandments unto the Apostles, which he had chosen to who^
also he showed him self a live after his passion, by many tokens apperynge
unto the^ fortye days, and spoke unto them of the kingdom of god and gathered
them together, and commanded them yt they should not depart from Jerusalem,
but to wait for the promise of the father, whereof ye have herd of me. For
John^ baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized with ye holy ghost, and yt
wtin this few days. When they were come together. They asked of him saying.
Lord wylt thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel? He said
unto them / it is not for you to know ye times or seasons which the father
has put in his own power, but ye shall receive power of ye holy ghost which
shall come on you. And ye shall be witnesses unto me in Jerusalem, and in all
Jury, and in Samary, and even unto the worlds end, and when he had spoken
these things, while they beheld he was taken up and a cloud received him up
out of their sight, and while they looked stedfastely up to heaven as he went.
Behold two men stood by them in white clothing, which also said, ye men of
Galile? Why stand ye gasynge up into heaven. This same Jesus which is taken up
from you into heaven, shall come, even as ye have seen him go into heaven.

The Gospel on the Ascension day, ye.xvj. Cha. of Mark. C

AFter that Jesus appeared unto the eleven as they sat at meat, and cast in
their teeth their unbelieve, and hardness of heart, because they believed not them,
which had seen after his resurreccyon, and he said unto them. Go ye into all
the world and preach the Gospel to all creatures: and he that believes, and
is baptized shall be saved, and he yt believes not shall be dampened. And these
signs shall follow the^ that shall believe in my name they shall cast out
deuylles / and shall speak with new tongues and shall kill serpents, and if
they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them, they shall lay their
hands on the sick, and they shall recover. So then when our lord Jesus had
spoken unto them, he was received into heaven, and is set down on ye right hand
of God, and they went forth, and preched every where, And our Lord wrought
with them, and confyrmed their prechynge with miracles following.

The Pystle on the Sunday after the Assencion day ye first Pystle of Peter
and the.iiij. Chapyter. B.

Most dear beloved brethren be ye discrete, and watch in prayers, but above
all things, have fervent love among you, for love covers ye multitude of
sins. Be ye harberous one to another, and that without grudgynge, as every man
has receive the gift, minister ye same one to another as good ministers of the
manyfolde grace of god, If any man speak, let him talk as though he spoke ye
words of god if any man minister, let him do it as of the habilite which god
minystreth unto him ye God in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ.

The Gospel on the Sunday after the Assencyon day ye.xvj chapter of John^. D.

Jesus said unto his disciples, when ye conforter is come whom I will send
unto you from the Father, which is the spyryte of veryte which proceeds of
the Father, he shall testifye of me, and ye shall bear witness also, because
ye have been with me from the beginning. These things have I said unto you
because ye should not be hurt in your faith. They shall excommunycat you, ye
the time shall come that who soever kylleth you, will think you he does god true
service, And such things will they do unto you, because they have not known
the Father / nether yet me. But these things have I told you yt when ye hour
is come, ye might remember the^ yt I told you so.

The Pystle on Wytson Sunday the.ij. Cha, of the acts of the Apostles. A.

WHen ye fyftyth day was come which is Wytson So^day the Apostles with one
accord were gathered to gyther in one place. And suddenly there came a sound
from heaven / as it had been the coming of a mighty wind, and it filled all ye
house where they sat. And there appeared unto the^ cloven tongues, as they had
been fire, and it sat upon each of them, and they were all filled with the
holy ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, even as the spirit gave
them vtteraunce. There were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, devout men which
were of all nations under heaven. When this was noysed about, the multitude
came to gyther, and were astonyed, because that every man herd them speak in
his own tongue, They wondered all and meruayled saying among them selves, look
are not all these which speak of Galyle, and how hear we every man his own
tongue, wherein we were borne? Parthyans / Medes / and Elamites, and the
inhabiters of Mesopotamia of Iewry, Capadocia. Po^tus / and of Asia, Phrigia
Pamphilia, and of Egipte, and of the parties of Libia, which is beside Sirene,
and strangers of Rome, Jews / and Proselites / Greeks / and Arabians / we
have herd them speak with our own tongues the great works of God.

The Gospel on Wytson sunday the.xiiij. chapi. of John^. E.

Jesus said unto his disciples, if any man love me / and will keep my saynges.
My father also will love him and we will come unto him / and will dwell with him. He
yt loves me not, keeps not my saynges, and the words which ye hear are not
mine but ye father which sent me. This have I spoken unto you, being yet
present with you, but ye co^forter which is the holy ghost (whom my father will
give in my name) shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your
remembrance, what soever I have told you Peace I leave with you, my peace I
give unto you not as the world gives, give I unto you, let not your hertes be
grieved, neither fear ye, ye have herd how I said unto you I go and come again
unto you / if ye loved me ye would verily rejoice, because I said, I go unto ye
father, for the father is greater then I. And now have I showed you before it
come yt when it is come to pass ye might believe. Here after will I not talk
many words unto you, for ye cheyfe ruler of ye world comes and has naught
in me, but yt the world may know yt I love the father and as the father gave
me commandment, even so do I.

The Pystle on the Monday in the Wytson weke the.x. cha. of the Acts of the
Apostles. F.

PEter opened his mouth and said. Jesus commanded us to preach unto the
people and to testify, that it is he that is ordained of god a judge of quycke
and dead, to him gives al ye prophets witness, yt through his name shall receive
remission of sins all yt believe in him, while Peter yet spoke these words
the holy ghost fell on all the^ which herd his preaching And they of ye
circumcision, which believed were astonished as many as came with Peter because
that on the gentyls also was shede out the gift of the holy ghost, for they
herd them speak with tongues and mangnyfy god, Then answered Peter can any man
forbid water that these should not be baptized, which have received ye holy
ghost as well as we. And he commanded the^ to be baptized in the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

The Gospel on the Mondaye in the Wytson weke the ye.iiij. Chapter of John^. B.

Jesus said unto a ruler among ye Pharyses God so loved the world, that he
gave his only son for the entente, that none ye believe in him should
perysshe, but should have everlasting life, for god sent not his son into ye
world to co^de^ne the world, but that the world through him might be saved,
he that believes on him shall not be condemned, but he that believes not is
condemned al ready, because he believed not in ye name of the only son of
God. And this is the condempnacyon. That light is come in to the world and the
men have loved darkness more the^ light because their deeds were evil for every
man that does evil hates the light, neither comes to light least his deeds
should be reproved but he ye does the truth comes to the light / that his
deeds might be known, how yt they are wrought in god,

The Pystle on the Tewysday in the Wytson weke the.viij. Chapter. of the Acts
of the Apostles. B.

WHen the Apostles which were at Jerusalem herd say ye Samaria had received
ye word of god / they sent unto the^ Peter and John^ which when they were
come prayed for the^, that they might receive thy holy ghost, for as yet he was
come on none of them, but they were baptized only in the name of Christ Jesus.
Then laid they their hands on them and they received the holy ghost.

The Gospel on the tewysday in the Wytson weke the.x. chapter of John^. A.

Jesus said unto his discyples. Verily verily I say unto you whosoever
enters not in by ye door into ye sheep fold but clymmeth up some other way /
he is a thief, and a robber. He that goes in by the door, is the shepeherde of
ye sheep. To this man the Porter opens the door, and the sheep here his voice
/ and he calls his own sheep by name, and he ledeth the^ out and when he
has sent forth his own sheep / he goes before the^ and the sheep follow him
/ for they know his voice / A stranger they will not follow / but will fly
from him / for they know not ye voice of strangers. This manner of saying spoke
Jesus unto the^, and they understood not what things they were which he spoke
unto them. Tha^ said Jesus unto the^ again. Verily I say unto you, that I am
the door of ye sheep. All even as many as came before me are thieves and
robbers, but ye sheep did not here them. I am the door? by me if any man enter
in, he shall be safe, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief comes
not but for to steal / kill / and destroy I am come that they might have
life / and have it the more habundantly.

The Pystle on the wednysdaye in the Wytson weke. The.ij. Chapyter of the Acts
Apostles. C

PEter stepte forth with the eleven, and lift up his voice and said unto them
/ ye men of Iewry and all ye yt in habyte Jerusalem, be this known unto you /
and with your ears hear my words. These are not dro^ken as ye wene for it is
yet ye third hour of ye day but this is yt which was spoken by the prophet
Iohel. It shall be in ye last days (says god) of my spyryte I will power out
upon all flessh, and your sons, and your daughters shall prophesye, and your
young men shall se visio^s, and your old me^ shall dream dreams, and on my
servants / and on my hand mayde^s I will power out of my spyrite in those
days, and they shall prophesy, and I will show wonders in heaven above and
tokens in ye earth byneth blood and fire and the vapoure of smoke. The son
shall be turned into darkness, and the move into blood, before ye great and
notable day of the Lord shall come, and the time shall come / that whosoever
shall call on ye name of the Lord shall be saved.

The Gospel on the Wednysdaye in Wytson weke. The.vj. Chapter of John^. E

Jesus said unto his disciples and to ye company of the Jews No man can come
unto me, except my Father which has sent me draw him, and I will raise him
up at ye last day It is written in the prophets, And they shall all be taught
of god every man which has herd and learned of the father comes unto me, not
that any man has seen the father, save he which is of GOD the same has seen
the father. Verelye verelye I say unto you he that believes on me has
everlasting life I am the bread of life, your fathers did eat Manna in ye
wyldernes, and are dead. This is the bread which comes from heaven, that he
which does eat of it, should not dye. I am ye living bread which came down
from heaven. If any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever. And the
bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the
world.

The Pystle on Trinite Sunday. The.iiij. Chapyter of the Reuelacyon of saint
John^. A.

I Looked up and saw a door open in heaven, and the first voice which I herd,
as were a trompette talking with me, which said, come up hither, and I will
show the things, which must be fulfilled here after, and immediately I was in
the spyryte, and behold, a seat was put in heaven and one sat on the seat
and he that sat was to look upon like unto Jasper stone and a Sardyne stone,
and there was a rain bow about the seat, to look upon like unto an
Emeralde, and about the seat were.xxiiij. Seats, and I saw on the
seats.xxiiij. elders sitting clothed in white rayme^t, and had on their hedes
Crowns of gold, and out of the seat proceeded lyghtenynges, and tho^drynges
and voices, and there were.vij. la^pes of fire burning before the seat /
which are the seven spyrytes of God and before the seat there was a See of
glass like unto Crystal, and in the mids of the seat, and round about the
seat were.iiij. beasts full of eyes before and behind, and the first beast
was like a Lion, ye second beast was like a Calfe, and the third beast had a
face as a man, and the fourth beast was like a flyenge Egle, and the.iiij.
beasts had each one of them.vj. wings about him, and they were full of eyes
within, and they had no rest day neither night, saying, Holy, holy, holy,
lord god almighty which was, and is, and is to come, And when these beasts
gave glory, honor and thanks to him that sat on yt seat / which lives
evermore, the.xxiiij. elders fell down before him that sat on the trone and
worshypped him yt lives ever, and cast their crowns before the trone saying,
you art worthy Lord to receive glory, honor, and power, for you haste created
all things and for thy wylles sake they are and were created.

The Gospel on Trynite sunday. The.iij. Chap. of John^. A

THere was a man of ye pharyses named Nichodemus / a ruler among the Jews. He
came to Jesus by night and said unto him. Master we know that you art a
teacher which art come from god, for no man could do such miracles as thou
do, except god were with him Jesus answered and said unto him. Verily
verily I say unto the, except yt a man be borne a new, he can not se the
kingdom of God. Nichodemus said unto him. How can a man be borne when he is
old? Can he enter into his mothers womb and be borne again? Jesus answered.
Verily verily I say unto the, except that a man be borne of water, and of the
spyrite, he can not enter into ye kingdom of god. That which is borne of ye
flesh, is flesh, and that which is borne of the spirit is spirit.
Maruayle not yt I said to the ye must be borne a new. The wind blows where
he lyfteth, and thou heareste his sound, but thou canste not tell whe^se he
comes, and whether he goes. So is every man yt is borne of the spyryte.
Nichodemus answered and said unto him. How can these things be. Jesus answered
and said unto him Art thou a master in Israel, and know not these things
Verily verily I say unto the, we speak that we know, and testyfie yt we have
seen, and ye receive not our wytnes, if I have told you erthtly things / and
ye have not believed, how should ye believe if I shall tell you heavenly things.
And no man has ascended up into heaven, but he yt came down from heaven yt is
to say ye son of man, which is in heaven. And as Moses lyfted up ye serpent
in wyldernes, even so must ye son of man be lyfted up yt no man which
believes in hy^ peryssh but have eternal life

The Pystle on Corpus Christi day the first Pystle to ye Corynthyans, and
the.xi. Chapyter. E

BRethren that which I gave unto you I received of the Lord? for the Lord
Jesus Christ the same night in the which he was betrayed took bread and
thanked / and brake / and said: take ye and eat ye this is my body which is
broken for you This do ye in the remembrance of me / after the same manner he
took the cup when Supper was done saying. This cup is the new Testament in
my blood / this do as often as ye drink it, in ye remembrance of me / for as
often as ye shall eat this bread and drink of this cup / ye shall show the
Lords death, till he come. Wherefore who soever shall eat of this bread, or
drink of the cup unworthily, shall be gyltye of the body and blood of the
Lord. Let a man therefore examyne him self, and so let hy^ eat of the bread
and drink of the cup / for he that eats and drynketh unworthily eats and
drynketh his own dampnacyon. Because he makes no dyfference of the Lords
body.

The Gospel on Corpus Christi day. The.vj. cha. of John^. F

Jesus said unto his dysciples and to the company of the Jews, my flesh is
meat in deed / and my blood is drink in deed. He yt eats my flessh, and
drynketh my blood dwells in me. And I in him as ye living father has sent me
eue^ so live I by my father, and he yt eats me shall live by me. This is the
bread which came from heaven, not as your fathers have eaten Manna, and are
dead. He that eats of this bread shall live ever.

The Pystle on the first Sunday after Trinite Sunday. The.iiij. Chapyter of
the first Pystle of John^. B

MOst dear beloved brethren God is love, in this apered the love of god to us
ward because that god sent his only begotten son into the world / that we
might live through him, here in is love not that we loved God / but that god
loved us. And sent his son to make agreement for our sins. Derely beloved
if god so loved us, we ought also to love one another / no man has seen god
at any time. If we love one another god dwells in us and his love is perfyte
in us. Here by know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he had
given us of his spyryte. And we have seen and do testyfye that ye father sent
his son, which is the savior of the world, whosoever confesses that Jesus
is the son of God / in him dwells god, and he in god. And we have known
and believed the love that god has to us. God is love, and that dwells in
love / dwells in God and god in him, here in is ye love perfyte in us / ye we
should have trust in the day of iudgeme^te / for as he is / even so are we in
this world. There is no fear in love, but perfyte love casts out all fear /
for fear has paynefulnes he yt fears is not perfyte in love. We love him
for he loves us first. If a man said I love god / and yet hates his brother,
he is a liar. How can he yt loves not his brother, whom he has se, love god
who^ he has not seen. And this commandment have we of him that he which
loves god should love his brother also

The Gospel on the first Sunday after Trynite Sunday. The.xvj. Chapyter of
Luke. D

Jesus put forth a parable unto his disciples saying, there was a certain
rich man, which was clothed in purple and line raynes, and fared delyciously
every day. And there was a certain beggar named Lazarus which lay at his gate
full of sores desiring to be refresshed with the cro^mes which fell from the
rych man's board. Nevertheless the dogs came and lycked his sores And it
fortuned yt the beggar dyed, and was carried by ye angels in Abraha^s bosom.
The rych man also dyed and was buried / and being i^ hell in torments / he lift
up his eyes and saw Abraham a far of, and Lazarus in his bosom and cried and
said Father Abraham have mercy on me, and send Lazarus yt he may dyp ye typpe
of his finger in water and cole my tongue, for I am tormented in this flambe:
but Abraham said unto him (son) remember that thou in thy life time
receyuedest thy pleasure, and co^traryewyse Lazarus pain. Now therefore is he
comforted and thou art punysshed beyond all this, between you and us there is
a great space set / so that they which would go from house to you can not,
neither may come from thens to us. Then he said I pray the therefore father /
send him to my fathers house, for I have five brethren, for to warn them /
lest they also come in to this place of tormente. Abraham said unto him, they
have Moses and the prophets / let the^ hear the^, and he said, nay ^a^her
Abraham, but if one came unto them from the dead, they would repent. He said
unto him. If they here not Moses and the prophets, nether will they believe,
though one rose from death again.

The Pystle on the second Sunday after Trynite sunday The first Pystle of
John^. and the third Chapyter. C

Marvel not my brethren though the world hate you / we know that we are
translated from death unto life because we love ye brethren. He yt loves not
his brother abides in death Whosoever hates his brother / is a mansleer and
ye know yt no ma^sleer / has etrrnal life abiding in. Hereby perceive we the
love of god in yt he gave his life for us. And therefore ought we also to give
our lives for our brethren. Whosoever has this worlds good, and sees his
brother have need, and shuts up his compassion from him, how dwells ye
love of god in him, My babes let us not love in word, nether in tongue but in
deed and in veryte.

The Gospel on the second Sunday after Trynite sunday The.xiiij. Chapyter of
Luke. D

Jesus put forth a symilytude to his disciples saying. A certain man
ordained a great supper and bad many, and sent his servant at supper time to
say to them that were bydden to me, for all things are now ready, and they
all at ones began to make excuse the first said unto him / I have bought a
town and I must needs go and se it / I pray ye have me excused. And another
said. I have bought five yoke of oxen and I go to prove them, I pray the have
me excused. The third said. I have married a wife and therefore I can not come.
And the servant went and brought his master word thereof. Then was ye good
man of the house dyspleased, and said to his servant. Go out quyckely into the
streets, and quarters, and bring in hither ye poor, and the maimed, and the
halte / and the blind. And ye servant said / lord it is done as thou
commau^dest and yet there is room And the lord said to the servant, go out
into the hye ways and hedges / and compel them to come in / that my house
may be filled / for I say unto you, that none of these which were bydden
shall taste of my supper

The Pystle on the third Sunday after Trynite Sunday The first pystle of
Peter, and the.v. Chapter. B

BRethren submyt your selves under the mighty hand of god yt he may exalte
you, when ye time is come cast all your care to him, for he cares for you. Be
sobre and watch for your adversary ye devil as a rorynge Lion walks about
sekyng whom he may devour, who^ resyst steadfast in the faith remembryng that
ye do but fulfill the same afflyctions, which are appointed to your brethren
that are in the world, ye god of grace which called you unto his eternal glory
by Christ Jesus shall his own self after ye have suffered a litel affliccion
make you perfyte, shall setle strength, and stablyshe you, to him be glory and
dominion for ever, and while ye world endures. Amen

The gospel on ye third sunday after Trinite Sunday. The ^v. chapter of Luke.
A.

THe Publycan^ and the sinners resorted unto Jesus to hear him, and the
^haryses and Scribes murmured saying. He received to hi^ ^ompany sinners, and
eats with them. Then put he forth thi^ ^ymylitude to them saying. What man of
you having an hondrethe sheep, if he lose one of them, does not leave nyntye
and nine in the wyldernes, and go after that which is lost until he find
him. And when he has found him he puts him on his shulders with joy, and
as soon as he comes home, he calls to gyther his lovers and neygbours
saying unto them rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep which was lost, I
say unto you, ye lekwyse joy shall be in heaven more then over nynety and nine
just persons, which need no repe^tau^ce. Either what woman having.x. grotes,
if she lose one, does not light a candel and swepe the house, and seek
diligently till she find it And when she has found it, she calls her lovers
and her neyghbouers saying. Rejoice with me, for I have found the grote which
I had lost, like wise I say unto you, joy is made in ye presence of ye
angels of god over one sinner yt repe^teth.

The Pistle on the.iiij. Sunday after Trinite sunday The.viij. chapter to the
Romans. D

BRethren I suppose yt the afflictions of this life are not worthy of ye glory
to come which shall be showed upon us. Also ye fervent desire of ye creatures
abides lokyng when the songs of god shall appear, because ye creatures are
subdued to vanyte against their will but for his will which subdued the^ in
hope, for ye very creatures shall be delivered from ye bondage of corrupcyo^,
into ye glorious liberty of ye sons of god / for we know yt every creature
groneth with us also and trauayleth in pain even unto this time, not they only,
but even we also which have ye first fruytes of the spirit mourn in our
selves and wait for ye adopcyon, and look for the delyueraunce of our bodies.

The Gospel on ye.iiij. Sunday after Trinite Sunday. The.vj. chapter of Luke.
E.

Jesus said unto his disciples be ye merciful as your father is merciful.
Judge not and ye shall not be judged. Co^dempne not, and ye shall not be
condemned. For give and ye shall be for given. Give, and it shall be given unto
you good measure pressed down shaken to gyther and ru^nynge over shall men give
unto your bosoms. For with what measure ye meat with the same shall me^ meat
to you again. And he put forth a similitude unto them. Can the blind led the
blind, do they not both then fall into dytche. The discyple is not above his
Master, every man shall be perfect, if he be as his master is. Why seyste you a
mote in thy brothers eye, and co^syderest not ye beam yt is in thine own eye
/ either how canste you say to thy brother, brother / let me pull out ye mote
ye is in thine eye / when thou perceyuest not the beam yt is in thine own
eye? ypocrite cast out ye beam out of thine own eye first, and then shall you
se perfectly to pull out the mote out of thy brothers eye.

The pystle on the.v. Sunday after Trinite Sunday. The first pystle of Peter,
and the.iij. Chapyter. A

BRethren be ye all of one mind, one suffer with another, love as brethren / be
petyfull, be courteous, not re^drynge evil for evil, neither rebuke for
rebuke but contrarywyse, bliss, reme^brynge yt ye are thereunto called, even
that ye should be heirs of blessing if any man long after life, and loves to
se good days, let him refrain his tongue from evil and his lyppes that they
speak not gyle. Let him eschew evil and do good, let hy^ seek peace and ensue
it, for the eyes of our Lord are over ye rightuous and his ears are opened
unto their prayers, but the fear of our Lord beholds them yt do evil.
More over who is he yt will harm you, if ye follow yt which is good. Not
wtstanding happy are ye, if ye suffer for ryghtwysnesses sake, ye and fear
not though they seem terryble unto you / neither be troubled / but but
sanctifye our lord god in your hertes.

The Gospel on the.v. Sunday after Trinite sunday. The v. Chapyter of Luke. A

WHen the people presed unto Jesus, to hear the word of god, he stood by ye
Lake of Genezareth and saw two ships standing by the lakes side, but the
fysshermen were gone out of the^, and were washing their nets and he entered
into one of the ships which pertayned to Simon and prayed him yt he would
thruste out of a little from the land, and he sat down and taught the people
out of the ship when he had left speaking, he said unto Simon / launche out
into the deep / and let slype your nets to make a draught and Simon answered
and said to him / master we have labored all night and have taken nothing,
neuerthelatter at thy word, I will lose forth the net, and when they had so
done, they enclosed a great multitude of fysshes and their net brake, but they
made signs to their fellows, which were in the other ship yt they should come
and help them and they came, and filled both the ships that they sonke
again. When Simon Peter saw that he fell down at Jesus knees saying. Lord
go from me for I am a sinful man for he was utterly astonyed, and all that were
with him, at ye draught of fysshe which they took / and so was also James and
John^ the sons of zebede, which were partenars with Simon, Jesus said unto.
Simon fear not from hensforth you shalt catch me^, and they brought the to
land, and forsook all and followed him.

The Pystle on the.vj. Sunday after Trynite Sunday, ye vj. Chapyter to the
Romans. A

BRethren remember ye not yt all we which are baptized in the name of Jesus
Christ are baptized to dye with him, we are buried with him by baptyme, for to dye,
yt likewise as Christ was raised up from death by the glory of ye father even
so we also should walk in a new life for if we be grafte in death like unto
him, even so must we be in the resurreccyo^. This we must remember yt our old
man is crucyfyed with him also, that the body of sin might utterly be destroyed
yt he^sforth we should not be servants of sin, for he yt is dead, is
justified from sin. Wherefore if we be dead with Christ, we believe yt we shall
live with him reme^bryng yt Christ ones raised from death dies no more, death
has no more power over him, for as touching yt he dyed, he dyed concerning
sin, ones. And as touching yt he lives, he lives unto God. Likewise Image^
ye also, yt ye are dead co^cerni^g sin, but are a live unto god through Jesus
Christ our lord

The Gospel on the.vj. sunday after Trinite Sunday. The vj. chapter of
Matthew. C

Jesus said unto his dysciples verily I say unto you except your ryghtwysenes,
excede ye ryghtwysenes of ye scribes, and pharyses, ye can not enter into ye
kingdom of heaven, ye have herd it was said unto the^ of old time. Thou
shall not kill, for whosoever kylleth shall be in danger of judgment, but I
say unto you. who soever is angry with his brother shall be in danger of
judgment. Who soever says unto his brother Racha, shall be in danger of
counsel. But whosoever says thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire.
Therefore when thou offerest thy gift at the Altar, and there reme^brest yt
thy brother has ought against the / leave there thine offering before the
Altar, and go thy way first and be reconcyled to thy brother, and then come
and offer thy gift.

The Pystle on the.vij. sunday after Trinite sunday. The vi. Chapyter to the
Romans. D

BRethren I will speak grosely because of the Infyrmyte of your flesh / as ye
have given your members servants to uncleanness and iniquyte from iniquite unto
iniquite / eue^ so now give your me^bres servants unto ryghtwysenes, yt ye
may be sanctified, for when ye were ye servants of sin, ye were not under
ryghtwysenes. What fruit had ye tha^ in two things / whereof ye are now
ashamed, for the end of two things is death. But now are ye delivered from
sin, and made ye servants of God, and have your fruit yt he should be
sanctified and the everlasting life, for ye reward of sin is death but
eternal life is the gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Gospel on the vij. Sunday after Trynite Sunday. The.viij. Chapter of
Mark. A

WHen there was very great company with Jesus and they had nothing to eat
Jesus called his disciples to him / and said unto the^. I have compassion on
this people by cause they have been now with me three days, and have nothing
to eat, and if I should send them away fasting to their own houses, they
should faint by ye way, for diverse of the^ came from far. And his disciples
answered him, where should a man have bread here in ye Wyldernes to satisfye
these. And he asked them how many Loves have ye? They said, seven, And he
commanded the people to sit donwe on the ground, and he took ye, seven loves,
gave thanks, brake, and gave it unto his disciples to set be fore them, and
they did set the^ be fore the people and they had a few small fysshes and he
blessed them and commanded them also to be set before them, and they did eat
and were suffysed, and they took up of ye broken meat yt was left.vij.
baskettes full, and they yt did eat, were in no^bre about four thousand and
he sent the^ away

The Pystle on the.viij sunday after Trinite sunday the.viij. chapter to the
Romans, C.

BRethren we are now detters, not to the flesh, to live after ye flesh,
for if ye live after ye flesh ye must dye, but if ye mortify ye deeds of ye
body through help of ye spirit, ye shall live, for as many as are led by ye
spirit of god, they are the sons of God, for ye have not received the
spirit of bondage to fere any more, but ye have received ye spirit of
addicio^ whereby we cry. Abba father. The same spyryte certifyed our spirit
yt we are the sons of god. If we be sons, we are also the heirs, the
heirs I mean of God, and heirs annexed and together with Christ.

The gospel on the.viij. sunday after Trynite sunday. The viij. Chapyter of
Mathewe. C

Jesus said unto his disciples. Beware of false prophets which come to you in
shepes clothing, but inwardely they are rauenynge wolves, ye shall know them
by their fruytes. Do me^ gather grapes of thorns, or fygges of breers even so
every good tree brings forth good fruit, but a corrupt tree brings forth
evil fruit, a good tree can not bring forth bad fruit / nor yet a bad tree can
bring forth good fruit every tree that brings not forth good fruit, shall
be hewn down and cast into the fire, wherefore by their fruetes ye shall know
them. Not all they that say unto me. Master, master, shall enter in to ye
kingdom of heaven, but he ye does my fathers will which is in heaven he shall
enter into ye kingdom of heaven.

The Pystle on the.ix. So^day after Trinite so^day, the first Pystle to the
Corynthians and the.x. Chapter. B.

BRethren we may not lust after euel things, as they lusted Nether be ye
worshippers of Idolles as were some of them according as it is written. The
people sat down eo eat and drink and rose up again to play. Neither let us
commyt fornicacion as some of them committed fornicacion, and were destroyed in
one day.xxiij. thousand. Nether let us te^pte Christ as sum of them temptted,
and were destroyed of serpents. Neither murmr ye as some of the^ murmured /
and were destroyed of the destroyer. Al these things happened unto them for
ensanples and were written to put us in remembrance, whom ye ends of ye
world are come upon, Wherefore let him ye thinks he stands, take heed lest
he fall. There has none other te^ptacio^ taken you, but such as follows ye
nature of man but god is faithful, which shall not suffer to be tempted above
your strength but shall in ye mids of ye te^tation make away to escape out.

The Gospel on the.ix sunday after Trinyte sunday the.xvi. Chapter of Luke. A.

Jesus put forth a simylitude unto his discyples saying. There was a certain
rich man which hade a bailey that was accused unto him, that he had wasted his
goods, and he called him / and said unto him. How is it that I here this of
the Give accomptes of thy baylyshyppe, for thou may be no longer bailey, The
bailey said within him self / what shall I do / for my master will take away
from me the baylyshyp. I can not dygge, and to beg, I am a shamed I wot what I
will do, yt when I am put out of the baylyshyp, they may receive me in to
their houses. Then called he at his masters dette^s and said unto ye tyrst
how much owe thou unto my master,and he said an houndreth tonnes of oil,
and he said to him, take the byl, and sit down quyckly and write.l. Then said
the to another, what owe thou? and he said an hondreth quarters of wheat:
he said unto him, take thy byl and write four score, and the lord commanded
the unjust bailey / be cause he had done wisely, for ye children of this world
are in their kind wyser then ye children of light. And I say unto you, make
your friends of ye wicked Mammon, yt when ye shall depart, they may receive you
into everlasting habytacions.

The Pystle on the.x. Sunday after Trinite sunday the first Pystle to the
Corynthyans the.xij. Chapter. A.

BRethren ye know that ye were gentyles, and went your ways unto do^me Idols,
eue^ as you were led, Wherefore I declare unto you, yt no man speaking in ye
spirit of god, defyeth Jesus. Also no man can say that Jesus is the lord, but
by the holy ghost. There are dyuersities of gifts verily, yet but one spirit,
and there are dyfferences of admynistracyons, and yet but one Lord. And there
are diverse manners of operacyons, and yet but one God, which works al things
that are wrought in all creatures. The gifts of the spirit are given to every
man to profete ye co^gregacio^. To one is given through the spirit, the
vtteraunce of wisdom, to another is given the vtteraunce of knowledge, by ye
same spirit to another is given Faith, by the same spyrite, to another the
gifts of healynge, by ye same spirit, to another power to do miracles, to
another prophesye, to another judgment of spirits, to another the
interpretacyon of tongues, And these all works eue^ ye self same spirit,
deuydynge to every man several gifts, even as he will.

Th Gospel on the.x. Sunday after Trinite Sunday the.xix chapter of Luke. F.

WHen Jesus came nigh unto Jerusalem, he beheld ye city, and wept on it
saying, if thou had known those things which belong unto thy peace even
at this time, but now are they hyd from thine eyes, for ye days shall come upon
ye that the enemies shall cast a bank about the, and compass the round and
keep the in on every side, and make the even with ye ground with thy children
which are in the, and they shall not leave in the one stone upon another /
because thou knew not the time of thy vysitacyon / and he went into ye
temple and began to cast out the^ that sold therein, and them that bought,
saye^g unto the^, It is written my house is ye house of prayer, but ye have
made it a den of thieves and, he taught daily in the temple.

The Pystle on the.xj. Sunday after Trinite Sunday, the first Pystle to the
Corynthyans the.xv. Chapyter. A.

BRethren as pertaining to the Gospel which I preached unto you / which ye
have also accepted, and in ye which ye co^tynue / by which also ye are saved.
I do you to wit after what manner I preched unto you if ye keep it, except ye
have believed in vanite, for first of al I delivered unto you ye which I
received how ye Christ dyed for our sins, agreyng to that scryptures, and yt
he was buried / yt he arose again the third day / according to the scriptures
/ and yt he was seen of Ceyphas, than of the.xij. After that he was seen of mo
tha^ five ho^dreth brethren at ones of which many remain unto this day, and
many are fallen a sleep / after ye appeared he to James, then all ye Apostles /
and last of all he was seen of me as of one that was borne out of due time for
I am ye least of all ye Apostles, which am not worthy to be called an
Appostle, be cause I persecuted the congregation of god, but by ye grace of god
/ I am yt I am / and his grace whith is in me was not in vain.

The Gospel on ye.xj. Sunday after Trinite Sunday. The..xviij. chapter of
Luke. A.

Jesus put forth this symilitude / unto certain which trusted in them selves
yt they were perfect and despised other Two men went up into the Temple to
pray / the one a Pharyse, and the other a Publycan / The pharyse stood and
prayed thus with him self. God I thank the that I am not as other men are,
extorcioners unjust, adulterers / or as this Publycan. I fast twyse in the
weke / I give the tyth of all that I possess. And the Publycan stood a far
of, and would not lift up his eyes to heaven / but smote his breast saying. God
be mercyful to me sinner. I tell you this man departed home to his house
justified more then the other / for every man that exalts him self shall be
brought low and he yt humbled him self shall be exalted

The Pystle on the.xij. sunday after Trinite Sunday, The ij. Pystle to the
Corynthyans the.iij. Chapyter. A

BRethren such trust have we through Christ to god ward not yt we are sufficient
of our selves to think any thing as it were of our selves / but our ablenes
comes of god, which has made us able to mynister the new testament / not of
ye letter but of the spirit, for the letter kylleth, but the spirit gyuteh
life / if the ministracyon of death through the letters fygured in stones was
glorious, so yt the children of Israel could not be hold the face of Moses
for ye glory of his countenance which glory nevertheless is done away, why
shall not the ministracion of the spyrite be much more glorious, for if ye
ministrynge of conde^pnacyon be glorious, much more does the ministracyon of
ryghtwesnes excede in glory.

The Gospel on the.xij. sunday after Trinite sunday. The vij. Chapyter of
Mark. D

Jesus departed from the costs of Tire, and came by Sydo^ unto the sea of
Galyle through the mids of the Costs of ten Cytyes, and they brought unto
him one that was deaf and domme, and prayed him to lay his hand upon him,
and he took him aside from the people and put his fyngers in his ears, and did
spyt and touched his tongue, and looked up to heaven and syghed and said unto
him, Ephara, yt is to say be opened, and strayt way his ears were opened /
and the string of his tongue was losed, and he spoke plain, and he commanded
them yt they should tell no man but ye more he forbade the^ in so miche ye more
a great deal the publysshed, saying. He has done al things well / and has
made both the deaf to hear, and the domme to speak.

The Pystle on the.xiij. sunday after Trynyte sunday. The third chapyter to
the Galathyans. C

BRethren to Abraham and his sede were ye promyses made he says not / in ye
seeds as in many, but in thy sede as is in one which is Christ. This I say yt
the law which began afterward / beyond.iiij. hondreth and.xxx. years does
not disanul ye testament that was co^fyrmed before of god unto Christ ward to
make ye promise of none effect / for if ye inheritance come of the law / it
comes not of promise but god gave it to Abraham by promise / wherefore then
serves ye law / ye law was added because of tra^sgression (till ye sede came
to which ye promise was made) and it was ordened by Angels in ye hand of a
mediator. A mediator is not a mediator of one / but god is one / is the law
then against the promise of god? God fordyd howbeit if there had been a law
given, which could have given life / then no doubt ryghtwysenes should have
come by the law / but the scripture concludes all things under sin that ye
promys by the faith of Jesus Christ should be given unto the^ that believe.

The Gospel on the.xiij. sunday after Trinite sunday. The x. Chapyter of
Luke. D

Jesus said unto his disciples, happy are ye eyes / which se yt ye se. For I
tell you yt many prophets and kings have desired to se those things which ye
se, and have not seen the^ and to hear those things which you hear and have
not herd the^ and behold a certain lawer stood up / and tempted hi^ saying.
Master what shall I do to inheryte eternal life? He said unto him what is
written in ye law? how redest you and he answered and he said. Love thy lord
god with all thy heart and with al thy soul, and with all thy strength and with all
thy mind, and thy neighbor as thy self. And he said unto hi^, you have
answered right this do and you shall live, he wyllyng to iustifye him self said
unto Jesus, who is then my neighbor. Jesus answered and said. A certain man
descended from Jerusalem into Ierico, and fell into ye hands of thieves which
robued him of his rayme^t, and wounded him and departed leuyng hi^ half dead
and by chance there came a certain priest ye same way, and when he saw him
he passed by, and likewise a Leuite, when he was come nigh to ye place / went
and looked on him, and passed by. Then a certain Samarytane as he iornyed came
nigh unto him, and when he saw him had co^passyon on him, and went to him and
bound up his wounds, and powered in oil and wine, and put him on his own
beast, and brought him to a common in, and made provision for him, and on ye
morrow when he departed, he took out.ij. pens and gave them to the host, and
said unto him take cure of him and what soever you spendest more, when I come
again, I will reco^pe^ce yt. Which now of these three, thynkest you, was neighbor
unto him yt fell into thieves hands. And he said he yt shows mercy on him.
Then said Jesus unto him go and do you likewise.

The Pystle on the.xiiij. Sunday after Trynite Sunday, ye v. Chapter to the
Galathyans. C

Brethren walk in ye spyrite and fulfill not ye iustes of ye flesh for ye
flesh lusts contrary to the spyrite and the spirit contrary to ye flesh.
These are contrary one to ye other, so yt ye can not do ye which ye would, but
and if ye be led of ye spirit then are ye not under the law. The deeds of the
flessh are manifest which are these, aduoutrye / fornycacyon / uncleanness /
wantonness ydolatry / wytche craft / hatred / variau^ce, zele wrath / strife
sedycyon / sects / enuyenge / murder / dronke^nes / glotony / and such like /
of the which I tell you before / as I have told you in time past, yt they
which commit such things shall not inherit the kingdom of god. But the fruit
of the spyrite / is love, joy peace / long sufferynge / gentylnes, goodness,
faythfulnes / mekenes, temperancy. Against such there is no law. They yt are
Christ's, have crucyfied the flesh with the appetytes and lusts.

The Gospel on the.xiiij. sunday after Trinite sunday. The xvj. Chapyter of
Luke. A

AS Jesus went to Jerusalem he passed through Samaria and Galyle, and as he
entered into a certain town or castle, there met him ten men yt were lepers
which stood a far of and put forth their voices and said. Jesus master have
mercy on us. When he saw them, he said unto them, go and show your selves
to the prestes and it chanced as they went they were cleansed, and one of them,
when he saw yt he was cleansed, turned back again and with a loud voice
praised god, and fell done on his face at his fete and gave him thanks, and the
same was a Samaritane. And Jesus answered and said, are there not ten cleansed
but where are those. ix. There are not found that returned again to give god
praise save only this stranger, and he said unto him / arise and go thy way
thy faith has made the hole.

The Pystle on the.xv. sunday after Trinite Sunday. The v. Chapyter to the
Galathians. D

BRethren if we live in ye spyrite, let us walk in ye spirit let us not be
vain glorious provoking one another, and enuyenge one another. Brethren if
any man be fallen by chance into any fault, ye which are spiritual help to
amend him / in spirit of mekenes, considering thy self, left thou also be
tempted, bear ye one another burden, and so fulfill ye law of Christ if any
man seem to him self yt he is somewhat / when in deed he is nothing, ye same
deceyueth him self in his ymagynacyo^ / let every man prove his own work,
and then shall he have reioycynge in his own self, and not in another, for
every man shall bear his own burden, let him yt is taught in ye word
mynister unto him yt teaches him in all good things, be not deceived god is
not mocked / for whatsoever man sows / yt shall he repe. He yt sows in his
flessh / shall of ye flesh repe corrupcyo^, b he ye sows in spirit / shall of
ye spirit repe life everlasting. Let us not be weary of well doing / for when
ye time is come we shall pe without w^rynes. While we have therefore time let us do
good unto al me^ and specially unto the^ which are of ye household of faith.

The gospel on the.xv sunday after Trinite Sunday. The vj. Chapyter of
Mathewe. C

Jesus said unto his disciples yt no man can serve two masters for either he
shall hate the one and love the other / or else he shall lene to the one, and
despise the other, ye can not serve god and mammon. Therefore I say unto you,
benot careful for your life / what ye shall eat, nor what ye shall drink /
nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on, is not the life more worth then
meat, and the body more of value then raiment? behold ye fowls of ye air
for they sow not, neither repe nor yet carry into the barnes and yet your
heavenly father fedeth them, are ye not much better then they? which of you
though he took thought therefore / could put one cubit unto his stature? and
why care ye then for raiment? Consydre the lylies of the field, how they
grow. They labor not neither spynne / and yet for all that I say unto you, yt
even Solomon in all his royaltye was not arrayed like unto one of these,
Wherefore if God so clothed the grass / which is to day in ye field, and to
morrow shall be cast into the furnesse, shall he not much more do ye same unto
you, O ye of little faith? Therefore take no thought saying. What shall we eat
or what shall we drink, or wherwt shall we be clothed, after all these thing
seek the gentyls, for your heavenly father knows yt ye have need of al these
things, but rather seek ye first the kingdom of heaven and the ryghtewysenes
thereof, and all these things shall be mynistred unto you.

The Gospel on the.xvj. sunday after Trinite sunday. The third Chapyter to
Ephesians. B

Saint Paul wrote unto ye Ephesians saying. I desire you yt ye faynte not
because of my tribulacyons for your sakes which is your praise for this cause
I bow my knees unto the father of our lord Jesus Christ, which is father
over all yt is called father in heaven and earth, yt he would grant you
according to ye riches of his glory, yt ye may be strenghted with might by his
spyryte in ye inner man / yt Christ may dwell in your hertes by faith, yt he
being roted and grounded in love, might be able to comprehend with all saints,
what is yt bredeth, and length, deepth / and heygth, and to know what is the
love of Christ / which love passes knowledge yt ye might be fulfilled with al
manner of fulness / which comes of god, unto him yt is able to do exceeding
habou^dantly above all yt we axe or think according to ye power that works
in us, be praise in the congregacyons / by Jesus Christ, thorowout all
generacions from time to time. Amen.

The gospel on the.xvij. sunday after Trinite sunday. The vij. Chapter of
Luke. B

Jesus went into a city called Naim, and many of his disciples went with him and
much people, when he came nigh unto the gate of ye city, behold there was a
dead man carried out / which was the only son of his mother and she was a
wydow and much people was with her, and when Jesus saw her he had compassyon
on her and said unto her weep not and he went and touched the coffyn, and they
yt bare him stood still, and he said young man I say unto the arise and the dead
sat up and began to speak, and he delivered him to his mother and there came a
fear on the^ all, and they gloryfyed God saying, a great Prophet is risen
among us and God has visited his people.

The Pystle on the.xvij. sunday after Trynyte sunday. The iiij. Chapyter to
the Ephesians. A

BRethren I which am in bonds for ye lords sake exhort you yt ye walk
worthy of the vocacion wherewith ye are called in all humblenes of mind, and
mekenes, and long sufferyng forbearynge one another, through love / and that ye
be dilygent to keep the unity of ye spyrite in the bond of peace, being one
body and one spirit, eue^ as ye are called in one hope of your calli^ge Let
there be but one lord, one faith, one baptyme, one god and father of all,
which is above all / through all. And in you all, which is blessed in the
words of words. Amen.

The Gospel on the.xvij, sunday after Trinite sunday. The xiiij. Chapyter of
Luke. A

WHen Jesus went into the house of one of the chyefe pharyses to eat bread
on the Saboth day / and they watched him and behold there was a man before
him which had the dropsye, and Jesus answered and spoke unto ye lawers and
pharyses and Jesus answered and spoke unto ye lawers / and Pharyses fayeng it
is lawful to heal on ye Saboth day and they held their peace, and he took him
and healed him and let him go, and answered the^ saying. Which of you shall
have an Ass or an ox fallen in to a pyt / and will not strayte way pull hi^
out on ye Saboth day? and they could not answer him again to yt. He put
forth a similitude to ye gestes when he marked how they preased to ye highest
roumes / and said unto the^, when you art bydden to a wedding of any man sit
not down in ye hiest room, lest a more honorable man the^ thou be bydden of
him / and he yt had both him and the / come and say to ye: give this man room
and thou the^ begin with shame to take ye lowest room / but rather when you art
bidde^, go and sit in ye lowest room that when he yt had ye comes / he may
say unto ye: friend sit up hyer. Then shalt you have worship / in ye presence
of them yt sit at meat with the, for who soever exalts hi^ self / shall be
brought low / and he yt humbles him self shall be exalted.

The Pystle on ye.xviij. Sunday after Trinite sunday the.j. Pystle to the
Corynthyans, and the first Chapyter. A.

BRethren I thank my god always on your behalf for the grace of god which
is given you by Jesus Christ / that in all things ye are made rich by him, in all learning and in all knowledge eue^ as ye testimony of Jesus Christ was
co^fyrmed in you / so yt ye are behind in no gift, and wait for ye aperyng of
our lord Jesus Christ which shall strength you unto ye end yt ye may be
blameless in the day of our lord Jesus Christ.

The Gospel on the.xviij. sunday after Trinite sunday ye.xxi. Chapyter of
Mathewe. D.

THe Pharisees went unto Jesus / and one of the^ which was a doctoure of the
law / asked him a questyon / temptyng hi^ and saying Master which is the
great commandment in ye law Jesus said unto him you shalt love thy lord
god with al thine heart, with all thy soul and with al thy mind / this is ye first
and the gretest commandment and there is an other like unto this. Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self. In these two commandments hang all ye
law and prophets. While the Pharyses were gathered together Jesus asked the^
saying. What thy^ke ye of Christ. Whose son is he, they said unto him ye
son of Dauyd He said unto them. How then does Dauyd in spirit call hy^ lord
saying, The lord said to my lord / sit on my right hand till I make thine
enemies thy footstools / if Dauyd called hi^ lord / how is he then his son
/ and none of the^ could answer him again one word. Neither durst any man
from that day forth ask him any mo questyons.

The Pystle on the xix. so^day after Trinite sunday ye.iiij. cha. to the
Ephesians. E.

BRethren be ye renewed in yt spirit of your minds and put on ye new man
which after ye image of god is shaped in rightwysenes, and true holiness.
Wherefore put away lyenge and speak every man truth unto his neighbor, for as
much as we are members one of another be angry, but si^ne not, let not ye son
go down upon your wrath, give no place unto ye backbiter let hy^ ye steal
stele no more, but let hi^ rather labor with his hands some good thing yt he
may have to give unto hi^ that needs.

The Gospel on the.xix. sunday after Trinite sunday / the.xix. Chapter. of
Mathewe. A.

Jesus entered in ye ship and passed over and came into his own city, and
behold they brought unto him a man sick of ye palsy, lyeng in his bed, and
when Jesus saw their faith, he said to the sick of ye palsy, son be of
good chere, thy sins are forgyue^ the, and behold certain of ye scrybes
said in the^ self he blasphemeth, and when Jesus saw their thoughts he said
wherefore think you evil in your hertes? whether is easyer to say thy sins
are forgyuen the, or to say arise and walk? That ye may know, that ye son
of man has power to forgive si^nes in earth, then said he unto the sick of
the palsy arise, take up thy bed and go home to thy house. And he arose and
departed to his house, and when the people saw it they meruayled and glorified
god, which had given such power to men.

The Pystle on ye.xx. sunday after Trinite sunday. The.v. cha. to the
Ephesyans. D.

BRethren take heed that ye walk cyrcu^spetly, not as foles but as wise,
redeminge the time, for the days are evil, wherefore be ye not unwise, but
understand what the will of the lord is, and be not drunk with wine, wherein
is excess / but be fulfilled with ye spirit, speaking unto your selves in
Psalms and Hymns, and spirytuall songs, singing and making melody to ye
lord in your hertes, giuinge thanks always, for all things in the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ to god ye father, submyttyng your selves one to a another
in the fear of god.

The Gospel on ye.xx. sunday after Trinite sunday. The.xxij. chapter. of
Matthew. A.

Jesus said unto his disciples. The kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain
king, which married his son and sent forth his servants to call them yt
were bid to ye weddyng, and they would not come. Again he sent forth other
servants, saying, tell them which are bidden, behold I have prepared my
dinner, mine oxen and my fatlinges are killed, and al things are ready, come
unto the Marriage. They made light of it and went their ways: one to his ferme
place, another about his marchaundyse, the remenaunt took his servants and
entreated them ungoodly and slew them, when ye king herd that: he was wroth,
and sent forth his warrers and destroyed these murderers / and brent up their
city / then said he to his servants / ye wedding was prepared: but they
which were bydden thereto were not worthy. Go ye therefore out into ye high
ways, and as many as ye find bid them to marriage, the servants went out in
to ye high ways / and gathered together as many as they could find both
good and bad / and the wedding was furnysshed with gestes. The king came in to
vysyte his gestes and spyed there a man which had on a weddinge garment, and
said unto him: friend how came you in hither / and have not on a wedding
garmente, and he was eue^ spechles. Then said ye king to his mynisters, take
and bind him hand and foot and cast him into utter darkness, there shall be
weeping and gnasshynge of teache, for many are called and few be chosen.

The pystle on the.xxj. Sunday after Trinite sunday. The vj. Chapyter / to
the Ephesyans. B

MY brethren be strong in the lord, and in the power of his might, put on the
armor of God, yt ye may stand steadfast against the craftye assautes of ye
devil / for we wrestle not against flessh and blood, but against rule against
power against worldly rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual
wickedness, for heavenly things. For this cause take unto you ye armor of god,
yt ye may be able to resyst in ye evil day and to stand perfect in all
things. Stand therefore and your loins gyrde about with veryte having on ye
breast plate of ryghtwesenes and shodde with shows prepared by ye gospel of
peace, above all take to you the shylde of faith, wherewith ye may quence all the
fire darts of the wicked, and take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of
the spirit, which is the word of god.

The Gospel on the.xxi. Sunday after Trinite sunday The iiii. Chapter of
Johan. G.

THere was a certain ruler, whose son was sick at Capernaum, as he herd yt
Jesus was come out of Iewry in to Galile / he went unto him, and besought him
that he would descend, and heal his son, for he was even ready to dye. Then
said Jesus unto him, except ye se signs and wounders, ye believe not, the
ruler said unto him: sir come away or ever yt my child dye, Jesus said unto
him go thy way thy son lives, and ye man believes the words yt Jesus had
spoken unto him, and went his way and anon as he went on his way, his
servants met him and told him, saying. Thy son lives then inquired he of
the^ ye hour when he began to amend, and they said unto him: yesterday ye
seventh hour, ye fever left him, and the father knew yt it was that same
hour, when Jesus said unto him, thy son lives and he believed and all his
household.

The Pystle on the.xxii. sunday after Trinite sunday, the.i. Chap. to the
Phyllyppians. A.

BRethren we trust in our lord Jesus Christ, that he which began a good
work in you shall perform it until the day of Jesus Christ as it becomes me
so to judge of you all, because I have you in my heart, and have you also every
one co^panyons of grace with me in my bonds as I defend, and stablysshe the
Gospel. God bears me record now greatly I long after you all from the
very heart rote in Jesus Christ and this I pray that our love may encreace
more and more in knowledge, and in all fealyng, that ye might accept things
most excellent that ye might be pure and such as should hurt no man's
conscience, until the day of Christ filled with ye fruytes of ryghtwysnes
which, fruytes came by Jesus Christ unto the glory and laud of God.

The Gospel on the.xxii. sunday after Trinite sunday the xviii. Chap. of
Matthew. C.

Jesus put forth a similitude unto his disciples saying. The kingdom of
heaven is lykened unto a certain king which would take acco^ptes of his
servants and when he had begonth reken one was brought unto him which ought
him x. thousand talentes, but when he had naught to pay the lord commanded
him to be sold and his wife and his children and all that he had and payment
to be made. The servant fell down and besought him saying: Sir give me
respyte, and I will pay the it every whyt, then had the lord pity on the
servant and losed him and forgave him the det. The same servant went out and
found one of his fellows which ought him an hou^dreth pens, and laid hands on
him and took him by the throat saying Pay me that you owe, and his fellow fell
down and besoughte him saying. Have pacyence with me, and I will pay the all,
and he would not, but went and cast him into prison till he should pay the det
when his other fellows saw what was done they were very sorry, and came and
told to their lord all that had happened. Then his lord called him, and said
unto him O evil seruau^te I forgave the all the debt / because you prayedst me
/ was it not mete also, that you should have had co^passio^ on thy fellow even
as I had pity on ye? and his lord was wroth and delivered him to ye Ialers, till
he should pay all yt was due unto him. So likewise shall my heavenly father do
unto you, If ye will not forgive with all your hearts, each one to his brother
their trespases

The Pystle on the.xxiij. sunday after Trinite sunday the iij. Chap. to the
Philyppyans. C.

BRethren follow ye me, and look on the^ which walk even, so as ye have us
for an ensample / for many walk (of who^ I have told you often, and now tell
you weping) that they are ye enemies of the cross of Christ, whose end is
dampnacyo^, whose god is their belie, and whose glory is to their shame which
are worldy minded / but our co^uersacion is in heaven, from whense we look, for
the savior even the lord Jesus Christ which shall change into an other
fasshyon our vile bodies, yt they may be fassioned like unto his glorious body
accordy^g to the workynge whereby he is able to subdue all things unto him
self, in Jesus Christ our lord.

The Gospel on the.xxiij. Sunday after Trinite Sunday The.xxii. Chapyter of
Mathewe. B

THe Pharyses went and took counsel, how they might tangle Christ Jesus in his
words, and sent unto him their disciples with herodes servants saying. Master
we know yt thou art true, and that you techest the way of god truly neither
careste for any man, for thou co^siderest not me^nes estate tell us therefore
how think you? Is it laweful to give tribute unto Caesar or not? Jesus
perceived their wylynes, and said. Why te^pte ye me ye Ipocrites? Let me se ye
trybute money, and they took hi^ a penny and he said unto the^? whose is this
Image and superscripcio^ / They said unto hi^ Cesars then said he unto the^.
Give therefore to Caesar yt which is Cesars, and give unto god yt which is gods

The Pystle on the.xxiiij. Sunday after Trinite sunday. The.j. Chapyter to
the Collossyans. B

BRethren: we cease not prayenge for you desiring yt ye might be fulfilled with
the knowledge of his will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding, yt ye
might walk worthy of the lord in all things yt please, being fruyteful in
all good works and increasynge in ye knowledge of god, stre^ghted with all
might, through his glorious power unto al pacye^ce, and long sufferyng, with
ioyfulnes in Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Gospel on the.xxiiij. Sunday after Trynite sunday The.ix. Chapyter of
Mathewe. C

Whiles Jesus spoke unto ye people, behold there came a certain ruler, and
worshypped him saying, my daughter is even now deceased but come and lay thy
hand on her, and she shall live, and Jesus arose and follow him with his
discyples, and behold a woman which was diseased with an issue of blood twelve
years came behind him, and touched ye heme of his vesture, and she said in her
self. If I may touch but even his vesture only, I shall be safe. Jesus turned
him about, and beheld her saying, daughter be of good comfort, thy faith has
made ye safe, and she was made hole even the same hour.

The Pystle on the next Sunday before Aduent sunday. Ieremias.xxxiij.

Brethren behold ye days will come says ye lord yt I will stere up unto Dauyd
a ryghtuouse brau^che, and he shall raygne a king, and shall be wise, and shall
do equity and justice in the earth, and in his days Judah shall be safe, and
Israel shall dwell without fear, and this is ye name yt they shall call him the
lord our ryghtousnes, wherefore ye days will come says ye lord yt they shall
say no more, ye lord lives yt brought ye children of Israel out of the
land of Egypt, but ye lord lives which delivered and brought ye sede of the
house of Israel out of the land of the north, and from all lands whether I
thrust them, and they shall dwell in their own land says the lord God
almyghtye.

The Gospel on the next sunday before Aduente Sunday. The.vj. Chapyter of
John^. A

When Jesus lyfted up his eyes and saw a great company come unto him and said
unto philip. Whense shall we bye bread yt these might eat. This he said to
prove him, for he him self knew what he would do. Philip answered him, two
hondreth penny worth of bread are not sufficient for the^, yt every man have a
little. Then said unto him one of his discyples Andrewe Simon Peter's brother.
There is a child here, which has.v. barley loves and.ij. fysshes, but what is
yt among so many? Jesus said, make the people to sit down (there was much
hay in the place) and the men sat down: in no^bre about five thousand Jesus
took ye bread and gave thanks, and gave to his disciples, and his disciples
to them yt were set down. and likewise of ye fysshes as much as they would /
when they had eaten enough, he said unto his dysciples, gather up ye broken
meat yt remains, yt nothing be lost. They gathered it together, and
filled.xij. baskettes with the broken meat / of ye five barley loves, and two
fysshes which broken meat remained unto them yt had eaten. Then those men, when
they had seen ye miracle yt Jesus did / said. This is of a truth, the same
Prophet, which shall come into the world.

The Pystle on the dedycacyon day. The jxxj. Chapyter of the Reuelacion of S.
John^. A

John saw ye holy cite new Jerusalem come down from god out of heaven prepared
as a byrden / garnysshed for her husband, and I berde a great voice from ye
trone / saying, behold the tabernacle of god is with me^ and he will dwell with
t^e^ and they shall be his people / and god him self shall be with them, and be
their god, and god shall wype always all tears from their eyes and there
shall be no more death / neither sorrow / neither cryenge neither shall there be
any more pain for ye old things are gone and he yt sat upon the seat said
/ behold I will make all things a new

The gospel on the dedycacyon day. The.xix. Cha. of Luke, A

Jesus entered in / and went through Ierico / and behold there was a man named
zacheus / and he was a ruler among the Publicans and rich also and he made
means to se Jesus / what he should be, and he could not for the preace /
because he was of a low stature. Wherefore he ran before, and ascended up in to
a wild fygge tree, to se him, for he would come ye same way and when Jesus
came to the place he looked up and saw him and said unto him, zache, hastily
come down, for to day I must abide at thy house, and quicly he came down, and
received him joyfully and when they saw yt they all grutched saying, he is
gone in / to tarry with a man yt is a sinner / zache stood forth and said unto
the lord. Behold lord / ye half of my goods I give to the poor / and if I
have done any man wrong I will restore him.iiij fold. Jesus said unto hi^,
this day is health come unto this house, for as much as this same house is
become ye child of Abraham, for ye son of man is come to seek and to save yt
which was lost

Here ends ye Pystles and gospels of the Sondayes
Here begins the Pystles and Gospels of ye Saints,
The Pystle on Saint Andrews day. The.x. Chapyter to the Romans. C

BRethren the belefe of the heart iustifyeth, and to knowledge with ye mouth
makes a man safe. For ye scripture says who soever believes on him, shall not
be ashamed. There is no dyfference betwne the Jew and the Gentyle. For one is
lord of all, which is rich unto all that call unto him, For whosoever shall
call on ye name of the lord shall be safe. How shall they call on him? on whom
they believed not? How shall they believe on him, of who^ they have not herd? How
shall they hear without a precher, and how shall they preach except they be
sent: As it is written how beutyful are the fete of them which bring glad
tidings of peace, And bring glad tidings of good things, but they have
not all obeyed ye Gospel. For Esaias says / Lord who shall believe on our
sayenges? So then faith comes by herynge / and hearing comes by ye word of
God. But I ask have they not herd? No doubt their sound went out into all
lands, and their words in the ends of ye world.

The Gospel on saint Andrews day. The fourth Chapyter of Mathewe. C

AS Jesus walked by the sea of Galyle, he saw two brethren, Simon which was
called Peter and Andrewe his brother casting a net into the sea (for they were
fysshers) and he said unto them, follow me, and I will make you fysshers of
men. And they straight way left their nets, and followed him And he went
forth from thense, and saw other two brethren, James the son of zebede, and
John^ his brother in the ship, with zebede their father mendynge their nets.
and called them, and they without taryenge lef the nets, and their father and
followed him.

The Pystle on Saint Nicolas day. Eccle. xliiij.

Behold an excellent pressed which in his days pleased god and was found
ryghteous, and in time of wrath made an atonement: like to him there is not
found yt kept the law of the most hiest. And he was in the covenant with him,
and in his flessh he wrote ye covenant, and in time of te^ptacyo^ he was found
faithful. Therefore he made him a covenant with an oath ye nations should be
blessed in his sight, and yt he should be multiplied as ye dust of ye earth, he
knew him in his blyssynges and gave him an inheritance and he kept hi^ through
his mercy, yt he fon^d grace in ye eyes of god. An everlasting covenant did he
make him / and gave him ye office of ye hye pressed, he made him happy i^ glory,
in faith, and in softnes, he made hi^ holy, and chose him out of al flessh

The Gospel on Saint Nicolas day. The.xxv. Chapyter of Mathewe. B

Jesus said unto his disciples. A certain man ready to take his journey to a
strange country, called his servants to him, and delivered to them his
goods, and unto one he gave v. talentes, to another.ij. and to another one, to
every man after his abylite, and straight way departed. Then he yt had received
the.v. tale^tes went and bestowed them, and wan other.v. likewise he that
received two, gained other.ij. but he that received one, went and dygged a pyt
in the earth and hyd his masters money. After a long season, ye lord of
those servants came and rekened with the^. Then came he that had received v.
talentes and brought other five saying. Master you delyuerest unto me five
talentes, lo I have gained with the^.v. mo Then his master said unto him, well
good servant and faithful, thou have ben faithful in little, I will make ye
ruler over much. Enter into thy masters joy, also he that received two
talentes came and said, master, thou delyueredst unto me.ij. talentes, lo I
have won. two other with them, and his Master said unto him well good
servant and faithful I will make the ruler over much go into thy masters
joy.

The Pystle on the Concepcyon of our Lady. Eccl. xxiiij.

AS a vine, so brought I forth a savor of swetenes and my flowers are ye fruit
of glory and riches. I am ye mother of beutyfull love and of fear, and of
greatness, and of holy hope In me is all grace of life and truth, and in me is
al hope of life and virtue. Come unto me all that desire me, and be filled with
ye fruytes that spryng of me, for my spirit is sweter tha^ honey or honey comb.
The remembrance of me is for ever and ever. They that eat me shall honger ye
more, and they yt drink me shall thurst the more he that harkeneth to me shall
not be ashamed, and he that works by my counsel, shall not sin and they
that bring in to light shall have eternal life.

The Gospel on the Concepcyon of our Lady the first chapyter of Matthew. A.

THis is the book of the generacyon of Jesus Christ the son of David, the
son also of Abraham, Abraham begat Isaac. Isaac begat Jacob. Jacob begat
Judas, and his brethren. Judas begat Phares, and Saram of Thamar. Phares
begat Esrom. Esrom begat Aram. Aram begat Aminadab. Aminadab begat Naasson.
Naasson begat Salmo^ Salmon begat Boos of Rahab. Bohos begat Obed of Ruth Obed
begat Iesse. Iesse begat David ye king, David the king begat Salomo^ of her
yt was Vries wife. Salomo^ begat Roboam begat Abia. Abia begat Asa. Asa begat
Io saphat. Iosaphat begat Iora^. Iora^ begat Ozias. Ozias beg at Ioatham.
Ioatha^ beg at Achas. Achas begat Ezechias. Ezechias begat Manasses. Manasses
begat Amo^. Amo^ begat Josias. Josias begat Iechonias and his brethren, about
ye time they were carried away to Babylon and after they were brought to Babilo^
Iechonias begat Salachiel. Salachiel begat zorababel. zorababel begat Abiud.
Abiud begat Eliachi^. Eliachim begat Azor. Azor begat Sadoc. Sadoc begat
Achim. Achim begat Eliud. Eliud begat Eleasar. Eleasar begat Mathan. Mathan
begat Jacob. Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was borne yt
Jesus, which is called Christ.

The Pystle on saint Thomas day ye Apostle. The.ij. chapter to the Ephesians.
D.

Brethren now ye are no more strangers, and foreners but Cetezins with ye
Saints. and of the houssholde of god, and are bilte upon ye foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ being ye head corner stone / in who^ every
building coupled together, grows unto an holy temple in the Lord in who^ ye
are bylte together and made an habytacio^ for god in ye spirit.

The Gospel on. s. Thom^s day ye Apostle, ye.x. cha. of John^. F

THom^s one of ye twelve called Didimus was not with them when Jesus came. The
other disciples said unto him we have seen ye lord. And he said unto the^:
except I se in his ba^des ye prynt of ye nails, and put my fi^ger in ye holes
of ye nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe, and
after.viij. days again, ye disciples were wtin and Thom^s was with the^.
Jesus came when the doors were shut / and stood in the mids and said. Peace
be with you. The^ said he to Thom^s, put in thy finger here and se my hands, and
put forth thy hand and thrust it into my side, and be not with out faith but
believe. Thom^s answered and said unto him my lord and my God. Jesus said unto
him. Thom^s because you haste seen me, therefore haste you believed. Happy ar they
yt have not seen, and yet have believed.

The Pystle on the conversion of s. Paul. The.ix. Chapyter of the Acts of the
Apostles. A

SAul yet brethynge out treatenynges and slaughter against ye disciples of ye
lord, went unto ye hye pressed, and desired of hy^ letters to Damasco^, to ye
synagoges ye if he found any of this way whether they were men or weme^, he
might bring the^ bound unto Jerusalem. As he went on his iornei it fortuned yt
he drewnie to Damasco^, and suddenly their shyned round about him a light from
heaven, and he fell to the earth and herd a voice saying to him. Saul, Saul.
Why persecutest you me? And he said, what art you lord. The lord said, I am
Jesus who^ you persecutest, it shall be hard for ye to kycke against ye prycke,
he both tre^blynge and astonished said, lord what wylt you have me to do? And ye
lord said unto him, arise and go into ye city, and it shallbe told ye what
you shall do. The men which co^panyed with him on his way, stood amassed, for they
herd a voice, but saw no man. Saul arose from ye earth, and when he had
opened his eyes he saw no man. Then led they hy^ by the hand, and brought hy^
into Damasco^ and he was three days without sight, and neither eat nor drank.
There was a certain discyple at Damasco^ named Ananias: to him spoke the lord
in a vision, Ananias, And he said behold, I am here lord. And ye lord said
unto him arise and go into ye street, which is called strayte, and seek in the
house of Judas, after one saul of the city of Tharsus, for behold he prays
and has seen in a visyon a man named Ananias coming in unto him, and putting
his hands on him yt he might receive his sygh e. Ananias answered / lord I
have herd by many of this man, how much hurt he has done to the saints at
Jerusalem, and in this place he has auctoryte of the hye prestes to bind al
yt call on thy name. The lord said unto him. Go thy ways, for he is a chosen
vessel unto me to bery my name before the ge^tyls and kings, and children of
Israel for I will show him how great things he must suffer for me names sake.
Ananias went his way, and entered into the house, and put his hands on him, and
said: brother Saul the lord, yt appeared unto the in the way as you came sent
me unto the yt ye myghtest receive thy sight, and be filled with the holy ghost
And immediately there fell from his eyes as it had been scales, and he received
his sight, and arose and was baptized, and received meat and was comforted.
Then was Saul certain days with the disciples which were at Damasco^, and strayt
way he preached Christ in ye synagoges, how yt he was the son of god. Al yt
herd him were amassed and said, is not this he yt spoiled the^ which called on
this name in Jerusalem? and came hither for the intent yt he should bring the^
bound unto the hye prestes? Saul increased in strength, and co^fou^ded the
Jews which dwelled at Damascon affyrmynge that this was very Christ.

The gospel on the Co^uersio^ of s. Paul. ye.xix. cha. of Mat. D

PEter said unto Jesus. Behold we have forsaken all and have followed the what
shall we have therefore, Jesus said unto the^, verily I say unto you, yt ye
which have followed me in the second generacyon (when the son of man shall
sit in the seat of his majesty) shall sit also upon.xij. seat, and judge
the.xij. trybes of Israel, and whosoever forsakes house or brethren or
systers, or father or mother, or children or lyuelode, for my names sake, the
same shall receive an hundredth fold, and shall inheryte everlasting life.

The Pystle on Candelmas day. Malachie.iij.

Behold I send my messenger which shall prepare ye way before me, and suddenly
shall the lord who^ ye seek come unto his temple, and the messenger of the
covenant who^ ye desire Behold he comes says the lord. Sabothe. Who shall
e^dure in the day of his coming, or who shall stand to behold him? for he
is as tryenge fire, and the herb yt fullers score wtal, and he shall sit
tryenge and purging silver, and shall puryfye the sons of Leuy, and shall
fine the^, as gold and silver and they shall bring offering unto ye lord of
ryghteousnes, and the sacryfyce of Judah and of Jerusalem shall be delycyous unto
the lord as in the old times, and in ye years that were at the beginning.

The gospel on Ca^delmas day. The second. Cha. of Luke. D

WHen the time of Puryfication (after ye law of Moises) was come, they brought
Jesus to Jerusalem, to present him to the lord, as it is written in ye law of
ye lord? every man child ye first opens the matryx, shall be called holy to
ye lord and to offce as it is said in the law of ye lord, a pair of turtle
doves, or.ij. young Pygyons, and behold there was a man in Jerusalem, whose
name was Simeon and the same man was just and feared god and longed for the
consolacion of Iraell, and the holy ghost was in him, and an answer was given
him of the holy ghost, that he should not se death, before he had seen the
Lord Christ. And he came by inspiracion into ye temple. And when ye father
and the mother brought in ye child Jesus to do for him after the custom of
the law. Then took he him up in his arms and said lord let you thy
servant depart in peace acordynge to thy promise, for mine eyes have seen ye
savior sent from ye, which you have prepared before ye face of al ye people. A
light to lyghte^ ye ge^tils and the glory of thy people Israel.

The Pystle on S. Mathias the Apostle day. the.j. chapyter of the Acts of the
Apostle. C

PEter stood up in the mids of ye disciples and said) ye no^bre) of the names
were about an hondreth and twenty) ye me^ and brethren, this scripture must
needs be fulfilled, which ye holy ghost through the mouth of David spoke before
of Judas which was guide to them yt took Jesus, for he was no^bred with us and
obtained fellowship in this ministracion, and he has now possessed a plat of
ground with the reward of iniquite / and when he was hanged, braste a sonder in
the mids, and all his bowels gusshed out / and as it is known unto all the
inhabyters of Jerusalem. In so much yt that field is called in their mother
tongue. Acheldema, that is to say ye bloody field. It is written in ye book of
Psalms his habytacyon be void, and no man be dwelling therein, and his
bysshopryke let another take. Wherefore of the me^ which have companyed with us
(all ye time yt the lord Jesus went in and out among us, beginning at the
baptysme of John^ unto the same day yt he was taken up from us) must one be
ordened to be a witness with us of his resurreccion. And they appointed. Joseph
called Barsabas (whose surname was Iustus) and Mathias, and they prayed
saying. Thou Lord which know the hertes of all men, show whether thou
have chosen of these two, yt the one may take the room of this ministracyon,
and Apostleshyp from ye which Judas by tra^sgression fell, yt he might go to
his own place, and they gave forth their lottes and ye lot fell on Mathias,
and he was counted with ye eleven Apostles.

The Gospel on S. Mathias the Apostles day. The.xj. Chapter of Matthew. D

THen Jesus answered and said I praise ye. O father lord of heaven and earth
because you have hyd these things from ye wise and prude^te, and haste opened
the^ unto babes, even so father for so it pleased yt all things are given unto
me of my father / and no man knows ye son but ye father, nether knows any
man ye father save ye son and he to who^ ye son will open him. Come unto me
al ye ye labor and are lade^, and I will ease you take my yoke on you and learn
of me, for I am meke and lowely in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your
souls / for my yoke is easy / and my burden is light.

The Pystle on ye Annunciacyan of our Lady. Esaye. vij.

Our lord spoke to Achas saying. Axe yt a sign of ye Lord thy god, from a
low byneth, or from an hye above. But Achas answered. I will not axe, nether
will tempte ye lord Wherefore ye lord says herke^ ye of ye house of David. It
is so small a thing for you to be grievous to men / but ye ye should also be
paynfull unto god never the later yet ye lord, he will give you a sign. Behold
a virgin shall be with child, and shall bear a son, and shall call his name
Emanuel. He shall eat butter and honey yt he may have understanding to refuse
the evil and to chose the good.

The Gospel on ye Annu^ciacion of our lady. The.j. chap. of. Luke.C.

ANd in the.vj. month the angel Gabriell, was sent from god unto a city of
Galyle named nazareth to a vyrgin sponsed to a man whose name was Joseph of the
house of Dauyd, and the vyrgyns name was Mary, and the angel went in unto her
and said: Hayle full of grace, the lord is with the, blessed art thou among
women. When she saw him she was abashed at his saying, and cast in her mind
what manner of salutacio^ yt should be And ye Angel said unto her, fear not
Mary, for you have found grace with god, lo you shall co^ceyue in thy womb, and
shall bear a son and shall call his name Jesus. He shall be great, and
shall be called the son of the highest, and the lord shall give unto him the
seat of his father Dauyd, and he shall raygne over the house of Jacob for
ever, and of his kingdom shall be none end, Then said Mary to the Angel / how
shall this be, seeing yt I know not a man? and the angel answered and said
unto her / the holy ghost shall come upon the and the power of the highest shall
over shadow the. Therefore also that holy thing which shall be borne and shall be
called the son of god and mark thy cosyn Elyzabeth / she has also conceived
a son in her old age / and this is the.vj. month to her which was called
barayne for with God shall nothing be impossible. Mary said. Behold the hand
maiden of the lord / be it unto me even as thou have said.

The Pystle on S. Georges day. The first Chapyter of James. A

MY brethren count it exceeding joy / when ye fall into diverse teptacions for
as much as ye know that the tryeng of your faith brings patience have her
perfect work, that ye may be perfect and sound, that nothing be lacking
unto you / if any yt is among you lack wisdom / let him ask of god (which
gives to all men indyffere^tly / and casts no man in the teeth) and it shall
be given him / but let him ask in faith and waver not for he yt doubts is
like the waves of the sea / toste of the wind / and carried with violence.
Neither let that man think that he shall receive any thing of God. A
wauerynge minded man is unstable in all his ways / let the brother of low
degree rejoice in that he is exalted and the rych in that he is made low, for
even as the flower of the grass, shall he vanyssh away The Son ryseth with
heat and the grass haboundaunce. Happy is the man that endures in temptacion
for when he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of life, which the Lord
has promised to them that love him.

The gospel on S. Georges day. ye xv. cha. of John^. A.

Jesus said unto discyples I am the true vine and my father is an housba^de
man, every brau^che yt bears fruit in me, he will take away every branch yt
bears fruit will pourge yt it may bring more fruit. Now are ye clean by
ye means of the words which I have spoken unto you bide in me, and let me
bide in you, as ye brauu^che can not bear fruit of it self, except it bide
in ye vine? No more can ye except ye abide in me, I am the vine, and ye are the
branches, he yt abides in me, and I in him the same brings forth much
fruit / for without me, ca^ ye do nothing, if a man bide not in me, he is cast
forth as a branch, and is whythered and men gather it, and cast it in to ye
fire, and it burns, if ye abide in me, and my words also bide in you, ask
what ye will, and it shall be gives to you.

The Pystle on s. Mark the Eua^gelystes day. The.iiij. chapyter to the
Ephesyans. B

BRethren unto every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the
gift of Christ. Wherefore he says he is gone up an hye, and has led captyuite
captive, and has given gifts unto me^. That he ascended / what means it /
but yt he also dysce^deth first into ye lowest parties of the earth. He yt
dysce^ded / is even ye same also that ascended up eue^ above al things to
fulfill al things, and the very same made some Apostles some prophets, some
Euangelyst, some shepherdes, some teachers that ye saints might have all
things necessary to work and mynistre wtal, to the edefyeng of ye body of
Christ, till we ever pchone (in ye unite of faith and knowledge of ye son of
god) grow up unto a perfect man, after ye mesure of age of ye fulness of christ

The Gospel of S. Mark the Euangelyste day. The.xv. Chapyter of John^. A

I Am the true vine, etc. as it is written word by word in the Gospel of
saint George day.

The Pystle on Phylyp and James day. Sapiencie. v.

THen shall the ryghteous stand with great constaunce against them yt vexed
them and took away yt they had labored for. When the wicked shall se that,
they shall be troubled with horrible fere, and shall wonder at the sudden and
unlooked for vyctory, and shall say in them selves, repentyng and sorowynge for
an guysshe of heart. These be they which we sometime mocked and iested on. We
were out of our wits and thought their living madness and their end to be
without honur, but behold how they are counted among the children of God / and
have their enherytaunce among the Saints.

The gospel on S. Philyp and James day. The.xiiij. Chapyter of John^. A

Jesus said to his disciples let not your hertes be troubled, believe i^ god,
and believe ye i^ me. In my fathers house ar many mansyons / if it were not so I
would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you, and if I go to prepare a
place for you I will come again, and receive you eue^ unto my self, yt where
I am, there may ye be also, and whether I go ye know, and the way ye know.
Thomas said unto him. Lord we know not whether thou go. Also how is it
possible for us to know ye way Jesus said unto him. I am ye way, the veryte,
and the life No man comes unto the father / but by me, if ye had known me,
ye had known my father also. And now ye know him and ye have seen him.
Philip said unto him. Lord show us the father and it iustifyeth us. Jesus said
unto him / have I ben so long time with you / and yet have you not known me.
Philip he yt has seen me has seen ye father, and how say you then, show us
ye father? beleuest you not yt I am in ye father, and the father in me. The
words yt I speak unto you, I speak not of my self but ye father dwelling in
me, is he yt does ye works believe me yt I am ye father, and the father in me,
at ye least believe me for ye very works sake. Verily verily I say unto you
whosoever believes on me, the works yt I do, ye same shall he do, and greater
works then these shall he do because I go unto my father, and whatsoever ye
ask in my name, that will I do.

The Pystle on the Inuencyon of the Cross. The.v. Chapyter to the Galathyans. B

BRethren I have trust toward you in god: yt ye will be none otherwise minded.
He ye troubles you shall bear his judgment, whosoever he be, brethren if I
yet preach circu^sicion, why do I then yet suffer persecucion, for then had ye
offense which ye cross gives ceased. I would to god they were sondred from
you / which trouble you, as many as desire with outward aperaunce to please
carnally, they co^strayne you to be circumcysed, only because they would not
suffer persecucion with the cross of Christ / for they themselves which are
circumcised keep not the law, but desire to have you circumcised that they
might rejoice in your flesh. God forbid that I should reioce, but in the
cross of our lord Jesus Christ whereby the world is crucyfyed as touching me
and I as concerning the world.

The gospel on ye inuencyon of ye cross / ye.iiij. cha. of John^. A

There was a man of ye Pharyses named Nicodemus a ruler among the Jews, he
came to Jesus by night and said unto him. Master we know that thou art a
teacher, which is come from god, for no man could do such miracles as thou
do, except god were with him. Jesus answered and said unto him. Verily
verily I say unto the, except a man be borne a new he can not se the kingdom
of God. Nicodemus said unto him, how can a man be borne when he is old, can
he enter into his mothers body and be borne again? Jesus answered Verily
verily I say unto ye, except yt a man be borne of water and of ye spirit he
can not enter into ye kingdom of god. That which is borne of ye flesh, is
flesh, and ye which is borne of ye spyrite, is spirit. Marvel not yt I
said to ye, ye must be borne a new. The wind blows where he lysteth, and you
hear his sound, but you cast not tell whense he comes and whether he goes
So is every man yt is borne of the spirit. Nicodemus answered and said unto
him. How can these things be? Jesus answered and said unto him. Art the a
master in Israel, and know not these things? Verily verily I say unto the
we speak yt we know, and testyfie that we have seen, and receive not our
wytnes, if I have told you earthlye things, and ye have not believed how
should ye believe if I shall tell you of heavenly things? And no mand has ascended
up to heaven, but he yt came down from heaven, that is to say the son of man,
which is in heaven. And as Moses lyfted up ye Serpent in wyldernes even so must
the son of man be lyfted up, that no man which believes in him peryssh / but
have eternal life.

The Pystle on the Natiuite of S. John^ Baptyst. Esaie.

THus says ye Lord. Herke^ ye Isles unto me, and give head ye people yt are a
far the lord called me out of the womb and made mencyon of my name / when I
was in my mothers bowels, and he made my mouth like a sherp swerd. In the
shadow he led me with his hand, and he made me as an excellent arowe, and hyd in
his quyuer, and he said unto me you art my servant, O Israel, in who^ I will be
gloryfyed: and I said. I labor in vain and spend my strenght for naught and
vnprofytably, howbeit my cause I commit to the lord, and my travail unto my
god, and now says the lord yt formed me in the womb to be servant, and to
turn Jacob unto him, behold I have made the a light, yt thou should be
salvation unto the end of the world kings shall se, and rulers shall stand
up and shall worship because of the lord which is faithful and the holy of
Israel has chosen the.

The Gospel on the Natyuite of Saint John^ the Baptyst. The first chapyter of
Luke. F

ELizabethes time was that she should be delivered and she brought forth a son
and her neighbors, and her cosyns, herd tell how the lord had showed great
mercy upon her they reioysed with her And it fortuned the eight day? they came
to cyrcumcyse the child and called his name zachary after the name of his
father, and his mother answered and said not so, but he shall be called Johan.
And they said unto her. There is none of thy kind that is named with this name,
and they made signs to his father how he would have him called, and he asked
for writing tables and wrote saying, his name is John^. And they meruayled all
and his mouth was opened immediately, and his tongue and he spoke lauding god,
and fear came on them al ye dwelt nigh, and al these things were noysed abroad
through out all the hylly country of Iewry? and all they that herd the^ /
laid the^ up in their hertes, saying. What manner of child shall this be? And the
hand of god was with him, and his father zacharias was filled with the ghost /
and prophesyed saying. Blessed be the Lord of Israel for he has visited and
redeemed his people

The Pystle on S. Peter and Paul's day. The.xij. Chapyter of the Acts of the
Apostles. A

IN that time Herod the king laid hands on certain of the co^gregacyon to
vex the^ / he killed James the brother of Johan, with a sword, and because he
saw yt it pleased the Jews he proceeded further / and took Peter also. Then
were the days of the sweet bread / and when he had caught him / he put him in
Prison / and delivered him to.iiij. quaternyons of souldyours to be kept /
entendynge after Easter to bring him forth to ye people / Then was Peter kept
in prison / but prayer was made without ceasynge of the congregacyon unto God
for him / when Herod would have brought him out unto the people / the same
night slept Peter between two souldyoures / bound with two chains / and the
kepers before the door kept the Prison, and behold ye angel of ye lord was
there present, and light shyned in ye lodge, and smote Peter on ye side, and
styred him up saying* Arise up quyckely, and the chains fell of from his
hands, and the angel said unto him / gyrde thy self, and bind on thy
sandalles, and so he did and he said unto him cast on thy mantell about the,
and follow me, and he came and followed him, and wyste not yt it was truth
which was done by the angel, but thought he had seen a vysyon when they were
paste the first and the second watch, they came unto the Irongate that
ledeth unto ye city which opened to them by his own accord. And they went
out and passed through one street and by and by ye Angel departed from him. And
when Peter came to him self, he said now I know of a suertye yt the lord has
sent his Angel and has delivered me from ye hand of Herod and from al ye
wayti^g for of ye people of the Iues

The gospel on s. Peter and Paul's day. ye. xvj. cha. of Mat. C

WHen Jesus came into ye costs of ye ryte which is called Cesarea Philyppy, he
asked his discyples saying, who^ do men say yt I ye son of man am? They said
some say that you art John^ baptyst some Helias, some Ieremias, or one of ye
prophets. He said unto them, but who^ say ye yt I am. Simon Peter answered and
said. Thou art Christ ye son of the living god. And Jesus answered and said
unto him. Happy art you Simon ye son of Jonas, for flessh and blood has not
opened unto the yt, but my father which is in heaven. And I say unto ye that you
art Peter and upon this rock I will buld my co^gragacio^, and the gates of hell
shall not prevail against it, and I will give unto the, ye keys of ye kingdom
of heaven, and whatsoever you byndest upon earth, shall be bound i^ heaven, and
whatsoever you losed on earth / shall be losed in heaven.

The Pystle on the co^memoracion of s. Paul, the.ij. chapter to the
Galathyans, B

I Cercyfye you brethren, yt the Gospel which was preched of me, was not after
ye manner of men, neither received I it of man, neither was I taught it, but
received it by ye reuelacio^ of Jesus Christ? ye have herd of my co^uersacion
in times past in the Jews ways, how yt beyond mesure. I persecuted ye
congregation of god, and spoiled it, and prevailed in ye Jews law above many
of my co^panio^s, which were of mine own nacio^, and was as much more fervent
mayntener of the tradicions of the elders, but when it pleased god which
separated me from my mothers womb, and called me by his grace / for to declare
his son by me yt I should preach him among the hethe^ / immediately I co^mened
not of ye matter with flesh, and blood / neither returned to Jerusalem to the^
which were Apostles before me / but went my ways into Arabia, and came again
unto Damasco^. Then after. iij. year I returned to Jerusalem to se Peter, and
abode with him.xv. days none other of ye Apostles saw I, save James ye lords
brother, the things which I write behold / god knows I lie not. After yt I
went into the costs of Syria and Cilicia, and was unknown as touching my
person unto ye co^gregacyons of Iewry which were in Christ but they herd only
that he which persecuted us i^ time past, now precheth ye faith which before he
destroyed / and they gloryfyed god on my behalf

The gospel on the Commemoracion on saint Paul. The xix. Chapyter of Mathewe.
D

PEter said unto Jesus / behold we have forsaken. etc. ye shall find this
gospel on the conversion of S. Paul. Folio. l.

The Pistle on the vysitacion of our Lady. Cantic. ii.

I Am the flower of ye field, and Lylyes of ye valeys / and the Lylye among
thorns, so is my love among ye daughters As the Apple tree among the trees
of the wode / so is my beloved among ye sons, in his shadow was my desire to
sytte for his fruit was sweet to my mouth. He brought me unto his wine seller
/ and his behauer to me ward was lovely / behold my beloved said to me: up and
haste my love / my done my beutifull and come for now is winter gone / and
rain departed and past the flowers appear in our country and the time is come
to cut ye vynes. The voice of ye Turtyl done is herd in our la^d ye fyggetre
has brought forth her fygges / and the vine blossoms give a savor up haste
my love, my dove in the holes of the rock, and secret places of the walls,
show me thy face and let me hear thy voice for thy voice is sweet, and thy
fasshyon beautyfull.

The gospel on ye visitacyon of our lady. ye.j. cha. of Luke. D

MAry arose in those days and went into the mountains with haste into a
City of Iewry, and entered into the house of zachary, and saluted Elyzabeth,
and it fortuned as Elyzabeth herd the salutacyon of Mary, the babe spronge in
her belly, and Elyzabeth was filled with the holy ghost, and cried with a loud
voice, and said? Blessed art you among women and blessed is ye fruit of thy
womb, and whense happens this to me, yt the mother of my lord should come to
me. Lo as soon as ye voice of this salutacio^ sou^ded in mine ears, ye babe
lept in my belly for joy, and blessed art you that beleuest for those things
shall be performed which were told ye from the Lord. And Mary said. My soul
magnyfyeth the Lord, and my spyryte reyioseth in God my savior.

The Pystle on relyke Sunday. Eccle. xliiij.

THese are the men of mercy, whose ryghteousnes are not forgotten. Goodness
abide with the sede of them / their kynsfolke, are an holy inherytaunce, and
their sede has stand in witnesses, and the sons of them abide unto ye
worlds end for them, the generacyon of them, and the glory of them shall not
be left, their bodies are buried in peace and their names shall live in the
worlds, all people shall tell the wisdom of them, and all the co^gragacyon
of saints shall show yt laud of the^

The gospel on Relyke sunday, The.v. cha. of Matthew. A

WHen Jesus saw ye people he went up into a mountain and when he was set his
dysciples came unto him, and he opens his mouth and taught the^ saying.
Blessed are ye poor in spirit. For theyrs is ye kingdom of heaven. Blessed ar
they yt morn for they shall be comforted. Blessed are yt meke, for they shall
inherit the earth. Blessed are they which ho^gre and thrust for ryghtuousnes,
for they shall be filled. Blessed are ye mercyful, for they shall obtain mercy.
Blessed are ye pure in heart, for they shall se god. Blessed are ye maynteners
of peace, for they shall be called ye children of god. Blessed are they which
suffer persecucio^ for righteousness sake, for theyrs is the kingdom of heaven.
Blessed are ye when men shall reuyle you, and persecute you, and shall fastly
say all manner of evil sayenges against you for my sake. Rejoice and be glad
for great is your reward in heaven.

The Pystle on Saint Margaretes day.

O Lord my god thou haste exalted my habytacyon upon ye earth, and I have
prayed for death to come. I have called ye lord, ye father of my lord yt he
forsake me not in the day of my tribulacyon. And in ye time of proud men without
help, I shall laud thy name diligently, and shall praise it in confession, and
my prayer is hero you have delivered me from perdicio^ and from a wicked time
therefore lord my god, I shall confess and give land unto thy name

The gospel on S. Margaretes day, ye.xiij. cha. of Mat. G

Jesus said unto his disciples. The kingdom of heaven is like unto treasure hyd
in ye field, ye which a man found and hyd it, and for joy thereof, goes and
sells all yt he has, and byeth yt field. Again ye kingdom of heaven is like
unto a merchant seky^ge after good peerles which when he has found one
precious perle, went and sold all yt he had and bought it. Again ye kingdom
of heaven is like unto a net cast into ye see / ye gathers of all kinds of
fisshes which when it is full, me^ draw to land and sit and gathers ye good
into their vessels and cast ye bad away, So shall it be at ye end of ye world.
The Angels shall come and sever ye bad from ye good, and shall cast the^ i^to a
furneys of fire, there shall be wayly^ge and gnasshy^g of teth. Jesus said unto
the^, have ye understand dal these things they said ye sir. Then said he unto
them, therefore every scrybe which is taught unto the kingdom, is like an
householder, which brings forth out of his treasure things both new and
old.

The Pystle on Mary magdaleyn day. Prouerbi. xxxi.

A Woman of power and veryte if a man could find ye value of her were far
above perles. The heart of her husband trusts in her that he needs not
spoils. She rendereth him good and not evil all ye days of her life. She
sought wolle and flax and did as her hands served her. She is like a
merchants ship yt brings her vytayles from far. She ryseth yer day / and
gives meat to her household and fode to her maidens. She co^sydered a ground
and bought it, and of the fruit of her hands planted a vine. She gyrde her
loins with strength / and couraged her arms. She perceived yt her huswyfry was
profitable / and therefore did not put out her ca^dell by night. She set her
fyngers to the spendell, and her hands caughte hold on ye dystaffe. She
opens her hand to the poor / stretched out her hands to ye nedy. She
feared not least ye cold of snow should hurt her house for all her household were
double clothed. She made her gay ornaments of byce / and purple was her
apparel. Her husband was had in honor in the gates, as he sat with the elders
of the land. She made lynnen and sold it, and delivered to ye merchant
Strenth and glory were her raiment, and she laughed in the latter days. She
opened her mouth with wysdom and the law of righteousness was on her to^g. She
had an eye to her household and eat not bread ydely. Her children arose and
blessed her, and her husband co^me^ded her. Many daughters have done
excelle^tly but thou have passed the^ all. Favor is a deceauable thing, and
beauty in vanite, but a woman yt fears god / she shall be praised. Give her of
ye fruit of her hands / and let her works praise her in ye gates.

The gospel on Mary magdaleyns day. ye.vi. cha. of Lu. E

ONe of the Pharyses desired Jesus that he would eat with him / and he came in
to ye Pharyses house, and sat down to meat. And behold a woman in yt cite /
which was a sinner as soon as she knew you Jesus sat at meat in ye Pharyses
house she brought an Alabaster box of oyntmente / and she stood at his fete
behind him weeping and began to wasshe his fete with tears and did wype them with
the hears of her head / and kyssed his fete / anointed them with ointment. When
the Pharyse which had him to his house saw that he spoke within him self
saying If this man were a Prophet, he would surely have known who and what
manner woman this is, which touched him, for she is a sinner. And Jesus answered
and said unto him, Symo^ I have some what to say unto ye, and he said:
Master say on. There was a certain le^der which had two detters, ye one
ought.v. ho^dreth pens, and the other fyfty. When they had nothing to pay, he
forgave the^ both. Which of the^ tell me will love hi^ most? Symo^ answered
and said, I suppose yt he to whom he forgave most / and he sayede unto him
Thou haste truly judged. And he turned to ye woman / and said unto Simo^.
See thou this woman, I e^tred into thy house / and thou gave me no water to
my ete? but she has wasshte my fete with teres, and wyped them with the hears
of her heed. Thou gave me no kiss: but she sense ye time I came in has not
ceased to kiss my fete. My heed with oil you dydest not anoint, and she has
anointed my fete with oyntme^t. Wherefore I say unto ye many sins are forgyue^
her, because she loved much. To who^ less is forgyue^ ye same does less love.
And he said unto her, thy sins are forgyue^ ye. And they that sat at meat
with him, began to say within them selves. Who is this which forgyueth even
sins, and he said to the woman. Thy faith has saved the go in pe^ce.

The pystle on S. James day the Apostle. The.ij. Chapyter to the Ephesyans. D

BRethren now ye are no more strangers and foreners, but cytesens with ye
saints, and of ye household of god and are bylte upon ye fou^dacion of ye
Apostles, and prophets. Jesus Christ being ye heed corner stone, in who^
every building coupled together / grows unto an holy temple in ye lord, in
whom ye also are buylte to gyther and made an habitacion for god in ye spirit

The gospel on S. James day the Apostle. The.xx. chapyter of Mathewe. C

THere came to Jesus ye mo^her of zebedes children with her sons, worshyppynge
him, and desiring a certain thing of him, he said unto her, what wilt you have
she said unto hi^. grant yt these my two sons, may sit one on ye right hand,
and the other on thy left hand, in thy kingdom. Jesus answered and said, ye
wotte not what ye ask. Are ye able to drink of ye cup yt I shall drink of?
and to be baptized with the baptime yt I shall be baptized with? They answered to
him. That we are. He said unto them? ye shall drink of my cup, and shall be
baptized with the baptyme yt I shall be baptized with, but to sit on my ryghtha^d /
and on my left hand is not mine to give but to the^ for who^ it is prepared of
my fader

The Pystle on saint Annes day.

A Woman of power and veryte. etc. Ye shall find this Pystle on saint Mary
Magdaleyn day. Folio. lij.

The Gospel on S. Annes day. The.j. cha. of Mathewe. A.

THis is the book of ye generation. Ye shall find this gospel on the concepcion
of our Lady. Folio. xliiij.

The Pystle on. S. Peter's day ad vincula. The.xij. Chapi-of the Acts of the
Apostles. C

WHen Peter came out of preson, he came to ye house of mary ye mother of one
John^ which was called mark, where many were gathered together in prayer / as
Peter knocked at the enter door, A damsel came forth to harken named Rhoda
and when she knew Peter's voice, she opened not ye enter for gladness, but ran
in, and told how Peter stood before the entrey, and they said unto her, you
art mad, and she bore the^ down yt it was even so. Then said they, it is his
angel. Peter continued knocking, when they had opened ye door, and saw him
they were astonyed, he beckened unto them with the hand to hold their peace and
told the^ by what means ye lord brought him out of prison

The gospel on s. Peter's day ad vi^cula, ye.xvj. cha. of Mat. B

WHen Jesus came into ye costs. etc. ye shall find this gospel on S. Peter's
and Paul's day. Folio. l.

The Pystle on the transfyguracyon of our lord, The second Pystle of Peter
and the first chapyter. D

Most dear beloved brethren we followed not deceyuable fables when we opened
unto you ye power and coming of our lord Jesus Christ but with our eyes we saw
his majesty. Even then / verily, when he received of god ye father honor and
glory, and when there came such a voice to him from ye excellent glory. This is
my dear beloved son, in who^ I have delight, hear him this voice we herd
when it came from heaven, being with him in ye holy mount we have also a right
sure word of prophesy whereunto if we take hyde, as unto a light yt shyneth in a
dark place, ye do well until the day daune and the day star arise in your
hertes.

The Gospel on the transfyguracyon of our lord. The xvij. Chapyter of Mathewe.
A

Jesus took Peter and James, and John^ his brother and brought the^ up into an
hye mountain out of ye way and was transfigured before the^ and his face did
shine as ye son, and his clothes were as white as ye light. And behold there
appeared unto the^ moses and Helias, talking with hi^. Then answered Peter and
said to Jesus. Master here is good being for us, if y^ wylt / let us make
here.iij. tabernacles, one for the, and one for Moses, and one for Helias While
he yet spoke / behold a bright cloud shadowed the^ and behold there came a
voice out of the cloud and said. This is my dear son, in who^ I delight /
here him And wha^ the dicsiples herd yt they fell flat on their faces, and
were sore affrayd And Jesus came and touched the^ and said arise and be not
affrayde. The^ lyfted they up their eyes and saw no man but Jesus only. And
as they came down from the Mountain. Jesus charged them saye^g / se that ye
show the Vysyon to no man till the son of man be risen again from deaehe.

The Pystle in the feast of name of Jesus. The.iiij. chapter of the Acts of
the Apostles. A.

PEter full of ye holy ghost said. ye rulers of ye people and elders of Israel,
if we this day be examyned of ye good deed done to the sick man / by what
means he is made hole be it known unto you all, and to all the people of
Israel that in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucyfyed, and
whom God raised from death again, this man stands here present before you
whole, this is ye stone cast a side of you buylders, which is set in ye chyefe
place of ye corner, neither is there saluacyo^ in any other, nor yet also is
there any other name given to men, wherein we must be saved.

The Gospel in the feast of the name of Jesus. The first Chapyter of Matthew.
C

THe Angel of god appeared to Joseph in sleep saying. Joseph ye son of David,
fear not to take unto ye Mary thy wife, for yt which is conceived in her, is
of ye holy ghost. she shall bring forth a son, and thou shall call his name
Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins. All this was done to
fulfill yt which was spoken of our lord by ye prophet saying. Behold a maid
shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his name
Emanuel, which is by interpretacio^ god with us

The Pystle on S. Laurence day, the.ij. Pystle to the Corynthyans. The.ix.
Chapyter. B

BRethren, he which sows little, shall repe little, and he yt sows
ple^teously shall repe ple^teously, and let every man do according as he has
purposed in his heart, not grudgelynge or of necessyte, for God loved a
cherefull gyuer. God is able to make you rich in all grace yt ye in all things
having sufficient unto ye uttermost may be rych unto al manner good works, as
it is written. He has sparsed abroad, and has given to the poor his
ryghteousnes remains for ever. He that finds ye sower sed shall mynister
bread for fode, and shall multyplye your sede, and increase the fruytes of your
ryghteousnes.

The gospel on S. Laurence day. The.xij. Cha. of John^. D

Jesus said unto his dysciples. Verily verily I say unto you, except yt wheat
corn fall i^to ye ground and dye, it bydeth alone, if it dye it brings forth
much fruit. He ye loves his life shall destroy it, and he yt hates his life
i^ this world, shall keep it unto ye life eternal if any man ministre unto me
let him foolw me, and where I am, there shall also my mynister be, and if any
man minister unto me, him will my father honor which is in heaven

The Pystle on the Assumption of our Lady. Eccle. xxiiij.

IN all those things I sought rest, and in some man's enheritau^ce would have
dwelt. Then ye creator of al thing commanded and said unto me, and he yt
created me did set my tabernacle at rest, and said unto me. Dwell in Jacob, and
have thine enherytaunce in Israel, and cote thy self among mine elect. From
the beginning, and before the world was I created, and unto ye world to come
will I not cease / and before him have I ministered in ye holy habytacyo^ and so
in Syon was I settled, and in ye holy city likewise I rested and in Jerusalem
was my power. And I roted my self in an honorable people, which are ye
lords part / and he their inheritance, and among the multitude of saints I
held my fast. As a Cedar tree was I lift up in Lybanon and as Cypres tree in
mount Hermo^. As a Palm tree was I exalted in Caoes, and as Rose plants in
Ierico. As a beautyful Olyue tree in ye feldes and as a plantayne tree was I
exalted upon ye waters. In ye streets. I gave an odor as Sinamo^ and Balm ye
smells well and gave an odor of swetnes as perfect Myrre.

The gospel on ye assumpcion of our Lady. ye.x. cha. of Lu. G

Jesus entered into a certain Castle. And a certain woman named Martha,
received hy^ into her house / And this woman had a sister called Mary, which
sat at Jesus fete, and herd Jesus preaching. Martha was co^bred about much
seruyng, and stood and said? Master do you not care, yt my sister has left
me to ministre alone, bid her therefore yt she help me. And Jesus answered and
said unto her. Martha Martha. Thou carest and art troubled about many things,
verily one is nedful. Mary has chosen ye best part which shall not be taken
away from her.

The pystle on Saint Bartylmewes day. the second Cha. to the Ephesians. D

Now ye are no more strangers. etc. Ye shall find this Pystle on S. James day
the Apostle. Folio. liij.

The Gospel on Saint Bartylmewes day. The.xxij. Chapyter of Luke. C

THere was a strife among the disciples of Jesus which of them should be taken
for the greatest, and he said unto them the kings of the Gentyls raygne over
them and they yt bear rule over them, are called gracyous Lords / but ye shall
not be so / but he that is greatest among you shall be as the youngest, and he
that is chyefe shall be as the mynistre, for whether is greater / he that
sytteth eat meat? or he that serves: is not he that sytteth at meat? And I
am among you as he that mynystreth / ye are they which have bydden with me in
my temptacyons, and I appoynte unto you a kingdom as my father has appointed
to me that ye may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and sit on seats,
and judge the twelve trybes of Israel

The Pystle on the decollacion of Saint John^. Proverb. x.

THe lokynge of just men is gladness / and the hope of wicked men shall
perysshe. The strength of a simple man is the ways of the lord, and fear to
them ye work evil. The just shall not dwell upon the earth. The mouth of a
just man brings forth wisdom, and the tongue of evil me^ shall perysshe. The
lyppes of a just man considers pleasant things, and the mouth of wicked
men, froward things. The symplycyte of just men shall dyrecte them and the
supplantacyon of evil men shall destroy them. The ryghteousnes of ryghteouse
men shall deliver them, and the wicked men shall be taken in their awaytes. The
just man is delivered from heaviness / and the wicked man shall be taken from him.
A dyssembler deceyueth his friend with the mouth and the just men shall shall be
delivered with science. A city shall be exalted in the goods of just men / and
laud shall be in the loss of wicked men. A city shall be exalted in ye
blyssynge of just me^

The Gospel on the decolacyon of saint John^. The.vj. chapyter of Mark, C

Herod the king him self sent forth and took John^, and bound him and cast
him in preson, for Herodias sake, which was his brother Philippes wife. For he
had married her. John^ said unto Herod. It is not lawful for the to have thy
brothers wife. Herodias laid wait for him, and would have killed him but she
could not, For Herod feared John^ knowinge yt he was a just man, and an
holy, and gave him reverence and when he herd he did many things and herd him
gladly. And when convenient day was come. Herod on his birth day made a supper
to the lords. Capteynes, and chyefe estates of Galyle. And ye daughter of the
same Hecodias, came in, and daunted, and pleased Herod, and them yt sat at the
bourde also. Then the king said unto the mayde^, ask of me what you wilt, and
I will give it ye, and h^ swear unto her. What soever you shall ask of me, I will
give it the, eue^ unto the one half of my kingdom. And she went forth: and
said to her mother. What shall I axe and she said John^ baptistes head. And she
came in strayt way with haste unto the king and asked saying / I will that you
gyuest me by and by in a dysshe the head of John^ Baptist. And the king was
sorry. yet for his oath sake, and for their sakes which sat at supper also, he
would not put her beside her purpose. And immediately the king sent the ha^g man,
and commanded his head to be brought i^, and he went and beheded him in ye
prison and brought his head in a dysshe, and gave it to ye maiden, and the
maiden gave it to her mother. When his discyples heard of it / they came and
took up his body and put in a to^be.

The Pystle on the Natiuite of our Lady.

AS A vine so brought I forth a. etc. ye shall find this pystle in the
Concepcyon of our Lady. xliiij.

The gospel on ye Natiuite of our lady. The.j. cha of Mat. A.

THis is ye book of the generation of Jesus. etc. ye shall find this gospel on
the Co^cepcyon of our Lady. Folio. xliiij.

The Pystle on the Exaltacyo^ of the Cross the.v. cha. to the Galathyans. B.

I Have trust toward you in god. etc. Ye shall find this Pystle on the
Inuencyon of the Cross. Fo. xlix.

The Gospel on ye Exaltacio^ of ye Cross ye.xij. cha. of John^. E

Jesus said unto ye people of ye Jews, now is ye judgment of this world now
shall ye prince of this world be cast out And I (if I were lift up from ye earth)
will draw al me^ unto me. This said Jesus sygnyfie^g what death he should dye.
The pople answered him. We have herd of ye law yt Christ bydeth ever? And
how say you then yt the son of man must be lift up. Who is ye son of
man? Jesus said unto the^, yet a little while is ye light with you: walk while ye
have light lest ye darkness com on you. He that walks in ye dark woteth not
whither he goes. But while ye have light, believe on the light that ye may
be the children of light.

The Pystle on saint Mathewes day the Apostle.

THe similitude of ye faces of ye four beasts, The face of a man and the face
of a Lion, on ye right hand of ye four of the^ And ye face of an Egle above
them four And their faces / and their wings stretched out above an hye. Each
had two wings coupled together, and two yt covered their bodies, and they went
al strayt forward, and whether they had lust to go / thither they went / and
turned not back again in their go^ng. And ye symilytude of the beasts, and
the fasshyon of them was as burning coals of fire and as fire brandes, walking
between ye bestes and the fire did shine, and out of ye fire proceeded
lyghtnyng, and the bestes ran and returned after the fasshyon of lyghtnyng

The Gospel on Saint Mathewes day the Aposti^e. The ix. Chapyter of Mathewe. B

WHen Jesus went forth, he saw a man sit receyuynge of a coustome named
Mathewe, and said to him Follow me, and he arose and followed hy^. And it came
to pass / yt Jesus sat ate meat in ye house behold many Publycans and sinners
came and sat down also with Jesus, and his discyples. When the Pharyses had
perceived yt they said to his disciples. Why eats your master with Publycans
and sinners? When Jesus herd yt: he said to the^ The whole need no Phisicia^
but they yt are sick. Go and learn what yt means? I have pleasure in mercy,
and not i^ offering for I am not come to call ye rightwyse, but ye sinners to
repe^tau^ce.

The Pystle on S. Myghels day. The first Chapyter of the Reuelacion of saint
John^. A

Jesus sent and showed by his angel unto his servant John^ which bore record
of ye word of god, and of ye testimony of Jesus Christ, and of al things yt
he saw. Happy is he yt hereth and redeth ye words of ye prophesye, and keep
those things which are wryte^ therein, for ye time is at hand. John^ to ye
vij. co^gregacio^s in Asia. Grace be with you and peace from him which is, and
which was and the which is to come and from ye vij. spirits, which are present
before his trone, and from Jesus Christ which is a faithful wytnes and first
begotten of ye deed, and lord over ye kings of the earth unto him yt loves
us, and washed us from our sy^nes, in his own blood

The Gospel on s. Myghels day. the.xviij. cha, of Math. A

THe disciples came unto Jesus saying. Who is ye gretest in ye kingdom of
heaven? Jesus called a child unto him and set him in the mids of the^ and
said, verily I say unto you except ye turn and become as children, ye can not
enter into ye kingdom of heaven. Whosoever therefore shall submit him self as
this child he is ye greatest in ye kingdom of heaven. and whosoever received
such a child in my name, receives me, but whosoever offend one of these
litel ones, which believes in me / it were better for hi^ yt a mylstone were
hanged about his neck, and yt he were drowned in ye depth of ye see. Woe be
unto ye world because of offenses / howbeit, it can not be^ avoided nevertheless
woe be to the man by who^ ye offense comes. Wherefore if thy hand or thy foot
gives the an occusacyon of evil, cut him of, and cast him from ye it is
better for yt to enter into life halte or maimed, rather then you should
having two hands, or two fete be cast into everlasting fire. And if also
thine eye offend y^ pluck him out and cast him from ye. It is better for ye
to enter into life with one eye, tha^ having two eyes to be cast into hell
fire. Se that ye despise not one of these little ones. For I say unto you,
that in heaven angels, behold the face of my father which is in heaven.

The pystle on ye Tra^sfiguracio^ of s. Edward ki^ge and confessor

THe just man will give his heart and watch in ye morning to ye lord which
made him, and will pray in ye sight of ye most highest. He will open his mouth i^
prayer, and will pray for his sins And if ye great lord will, he will fulfill
him with the spirit of understanding and he will show forth y^ eloquence of his
wisdom of sweet shoures, and will know^edge to ye lord in prayer, and he will
dyrecte his counsel and discyplyne, and will have counsel in secret things.
and he shall speak openly, ye discipline of his doctrine and shall glory in the
T^stame^t of y^ lord Many me^ shall praise his wisdom, and it shall not be done
away unto ye worlds end. His remembrance shall not go aw^y, and his name
shall be requyr^d from generacyon into genera^ion.

The gospel on the Translacion of s. Edward king and confessor. The, xj.
chapyter of Luke. E

Jesus unto his disciples. No man lighted a ca^del and puts it in a preuye
pla^e, neither under a busshell but on a ca^delstycke yt they yt come in, may
se light. The ^yght of thy body is thine eye. Therefore when thine eye is
syngle, then is all the body full of light, but if thy^e eye be evil, then shall
al thy body be full of darkness. Take heed therefore yt the light which i^ in the,
be not darkness, for if all thy bo^y shall be sight having no part dark then
shall all be full of light even as when a ca^dell does light the with his
bryghtnes.

The Pystle on Saint Luke the Euangelystes day

THe similitude of the faces. Ye shall find this Pyst^e on Saint Mathewes day
the Apostle. Folio lvi.

The gospel on s. Luke ye Eua^gelistes day. ye.x. cha. of Lu. A

Our lord appointed other seuentye also, and sent the^ two, and two before his
face, into every city and place, whether he him self would come. And said
unto the, ye harvest is great, but the laborers are few, pray therefore the
lord of the harvest to send forth his laborers into his harvest. Go your
ways behold I send you forth as La^bes among wolves, bear no wallet neither
scrippe, nor shoes, and salute no man ^y ye way In what soever house ye enter
in first, say, peace be to this house. And y^ ye son of peace be there, your
peace shall rest on him. if not it shall return to you again and in the same
house ^ary still eating and drinking such as they have, for ye labourer is
worthy of his reward

The Pystle on the.xj. thousand Vyrgyns day.

O How fair is a chaste generacyon with charity, ye memory of it is immortal, for
it is known to god and man and when it is present they follow it: and desire it
when it ledeth the^, and it triu^pheth crowned euerlastyngly, over coming of
batayles undefiled, a great multitude of wicked me^ shall not be profitable and
evil pla^tes shall not bring forth hye trees, neither shall set a sure ground
and if they spryng in time in bows, they shall be unsure put they shall be moved
with the wind, and shall be plucked up with vehemence of ye wind, ye imperfect
bows shall be broken, and the fruit of the^ shall be unprofitable and bitter to
eat, and profitable to nothing and all the children which shall be borne to
wicked men / are witness of wyckednes against their pare^tes in their
interrogacyo^ the just man shall be in rest, if he be occupied with death.

The gospel on the.xi. M. vyrgyns day. ye.xxv. cha. of Mat. A

Jesus said unto his discyples. The kingdom of heaven is lykened to.x vyrgi^s
which took their la^pes and went to mete the brydegrome, and fine of them were
folyshe, and five were wise. The foles took they la^pes, but took none oil with
the^ but ye wise took oil with the^ in their vessels with their la^pes. While ye
brydgrome tarried, al slo^bred and slept, and eue^ at my dayght there was a
cri^e made / behold ye brydg^om comes: Go and mete him: Then al those vyrgyns
arose and prepared their la^pes. And ye folyssh said unto ye wise give us of
your oil for our la^pes go out. but ye wise answered saying not so lest
there be not enough for us and you, but rather go to the^ yt sell, and bye for
your selves, in co^clusyo^ while they went to bye, the brydgrome came, and they
yt were ready went in with him to ye wedding, and the gate was shut up.
Afterward came also the other vyrgyns saying, Master, master open to us /
but he answered and said. Verily I say unto you I know you not, look yt you
watch therefore, for ye know neither the day nor yet the hour when the son
of man shall come.

The Pystle on Simon and Judas day. The.viij. chapyter to the Romans. E

BRethren we know well yt all things works for ye best unto the^ ye louethe
God which also are called of purpose for those which he knew before, he also
ordained before ye they should be like fassioned unto ye shape of his son, yt
he might be ye first begote^ son among many brethren. More over which he
appointed before, the^ also he called, and which he ^al^^d, the^ also he
justified, which he justified / the^ he also glorified. What shall we then say
unto these things, if God be on our side who ca^ be a gaynst us, which spared
not his own son but gave him for us al, how shall he not with him give us al
things also, Who shall say any thing to ye charge of god^es chose^? it is god
yt justifies, who then shall co^de^pne It is christ which is deed ye tather
which is risen again which is also on ye right hand of god, and makes
intercessyon for us. Who shall separate us from gods lone. Shall trybuiacyon?
or anguyshe, or persecucion? either ho^ger, either nakedness? either parel
either sword? as it is written, for thy sake are we killed al day long and are
cou^red as sheep appointed to be slain. Nevertheless in all these things we ever
come, strongely through his help ye loved us. Ye and I am sure ye neither death
neither life, nor Angel, nor rule, nether power, neither things present, nor
things to come / neither heeth, neither loweth neither any other creature
shall be able to depart us from gods love, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord

The Gospel on Simon and Iudes day ye.xv. cha. of John^. C.

Jesus said unto his disciples. This I ce^maunde you, yt ye love together, if
ye world hate you, ye know yt it hated me / before it hated you, if ye were of
ye world, ye world would love you / his own, because ye are not of ye
world, but I have thosen you out of ye world, therefore hates you ye woild,
Remember my saying that I said unto you ye servant is not greater the^ his
lord, if they have persecuted me, so wylthey persecute you, if they have kept
my saye^ge, so will they keep yours / but all these things will they do unto
you, for my names sake because thy have not known him yt sent me. If I had not
com and spoken unto them / they should have had sin / but now have they
nothing to cloak their sin with al. He ye hates me, hates my Father, if I
had not done works among the^ which none other man did, they had not seen, but
now have they seen, and yet have hated both me and my father, even yt the
saying might be fulfilled yt is written in their law, They hated me without a
cause.

The Pystle on ye al Halowes day. The.viij. cha. of ye Reuelacyon of saint
John^. A.

Johan saw an angel ascendyng from ye rysynge of ye son which had ye seal
of ye living god, and he cried with a loud voice to the.iiij. angels (to who^
power was given to hurt the earth, and the sea) saying hurt not the earth,
neither ye see, neither ye trees till we have sealed the servants of our god
in their forehedes, and I herd ye no^bre of the^ which were sealed, and there
were sealed.C. and.xliiij.M. of al ye trybes of ye children of Israel. Of ye
tribe of Judah were sealed.xij.M. of ye tribe of Rube^ were sealed.xij.M. of ye
trybe of Gad were sealed.xij.M. of ye trybe of Asser were sealed.xij.M. of the
trybe of Neptali^ were sealed.xij.M. of the tribe Manasses were sealed.xij.M.
of ye tribe of Symeo^ were sealed.xij.M of ye tribe of Leuy were sealed.xij.M.
of the trybe of Isacar were sealed.xij.M. of the trybe of zabulo^ were
sealed.xij.M. of the tribe of Joseph were sealed.xij.M. of ye trybe of Beniamyn
were sealed.xij.M. After this I beheld and lo a great multitude (which no man
could no^bre) of al nations and people and tongues, stood before the seat, and
before the la^be, clothed with long white garments / and Palms in their
hands, and cried with a loud voice saying salvation be ascribed to him yt
sytteth upon ye seat of our god, and unto the lamb and all the angels stood
in ye co^ place of the seat and of ye Elders, and of the four beasts, and
fell before the seat on their faces and worshypped god saying. Amen Blessing
and glory, wisdom and thanks, and honor, and power, and might be unto our
god for evermore. Amen.

The Gospel on all Halowes day. The.v, chap. of Math. A

WHen Jesus saw the people. etc. ye shall find this gospel on Relyke Sunday.
Folio. lj.

The Pystle on al souls day. The.iiij. chap. of the first Pystle to the
Tessa. C

I Would not brethren have you ignorant, as co^cerrynge the^ which are fallen
a sleep, yt ye sorrow not as other do which have no hope, for if we believe ye
Jesus dyed and rose again, eue^ so the^ also which sleep by Jesus, will god
bring again with hy^. And this say we unto you in ye word of ye lord, yt we
which live and are remaynyng in ye coming of ye lord shall not come ere they
which sleep, for ye lord hy^ self shall desce^de from heaven with shut and the
voice of the archangel and tro^pe of god, and the dead in Christ shall arise
first, then shall we live and remain be caught up with them, also in the clouds
to mete ye lord in ye air, and so shall we ever be with the lord. Wherefore
comfort your selves one another with these words

The gospel on all souls day. The.xj. chapyter of John^. C

MArtha said unto Jesus, lord if you had ben here my brother had not been
deed, but nevertheless I know yt what soever you ask of god, god will give
it the. Jesus said unto her, thy brother shall rise again. Martha said unto
him, I know well he shall rise again in ye last day. Jesus said unto her. I am
the resurreccyo^ and the life. Whosoever believes i^ me ye though he were dead
/ yet shall he live, and whosoever lives and believes on we shall never dye,
beleuest you this. She said unto him ye lord I believe ye thou act Christ ye
son of god, which have come into ye world.

The Pystle on saint Martyns day. Eccle. xliiij.

Behold an excellent priest. etc. ye shall find this Pystle on saint Nicholas
day. Folio. xliiij.

The gospel on s. Martyns day. The.xxv, chap. of Math. B

A Certain man ready to take his journey. etc. ye shall find this gospel on
Saint Nycholas day. Folio. xiiij.

The on saint Katheryns day.

Word I did lift up my prayer upon ye earth and besought to be delivered from
death, I called upon the lord, ye father of my lord, yt he shall not leave me
helpelesse in ye day of my tribulacio^, and in ye day of ye proud man I
praised thy perpetually and honored it with co^fess o^ and my prayer was herd,
and thou sauedst me yt I perisshed not and delivered me out of ye time of
unrighteousness Therefore will I confess and praise ye, and will bliss ye name of
ye lord.

The gospel on saint Katheryns day. the.xiij. cha. of Mat. F

THe kingdom of heaven is like unto treasure. etc. Ye shall find this Gospel
on Saint Margaretes day. Fo. lij.

The Pystle on the day of weddyng. The.vj. chapter of the.j. Pystle to the
Corynthyans. C.

BRethren remember ye not yt your bodies are the me^bres of Christ / shall I now
take the me^bres of Christ, and make the^ me^bres of an harlot? God forbid. Do
ye not understand yt he which coupled himself with an harlot, is become one
body for two (says he) shall be one flesh, but he that is joined unto the
lord, is one spirit, flee fornicacio^. All sins yt a man does are with out
the body but he that is a fornicator, synneth against his own body. Know ye
not how that your bodies are the temple of the holy ghost, which is in you
who^ ye have of God, and how yt ye are not your own, for ye are dereli bought
Therefore glorify ye in god in your bodies and in your spirits, for they are
gods.

The gospel on the day of weddyng the.xix. cha. of. Math. A.

THe Pharyses cam^ unto Jesus to tempte him and said to him, is it lawful for
a man to put away his wife for all manner of causes. He answered and said unto
the^, have ye not read how yt he which made man at the beginning made the^
man and woman, and said for this thing shall a man leave father and mother, and
cleue unto his wife, and they twain shall be one flesh, wherefore now are they
not twain, but one flesh. Let no man therefore put a sondre ye which god has
coupled to gyther.

The Pystle at buryenges, ye first pystle to the Tessalonyans and the.iij.
chapter. C.

I Would not brethren have you ignorant. etc. ye shall find this pystle on al
souls day. Folio. lv.

The Gospel at buryenges. The.xij. chapter of Johan. C.

MArtha said unto Jesus lord if you. etc. ye shall find this Gospel on all
souls day. Folio. lv.

Here ends the Pystles and Gospels of the Saints. And here after follows
the Table of this present book.
Finis.
This is the table wherein ye shall understand in what lefe ye shall find the
Pystles and gospels after the use of Salysbury of every sunday and holy day in
the year.
THe Pystle on the first sunday in Aduent. Folio. i. The gospel on the same
day. Folio eodem. The pystle on the second sunday in Aduent. Folio eodem The
gospel on the same day. Folio eodem The pystle on the.iii. sunday in Aduent.
Folio. ii. the gospel on the same day. folio eodem The Pystle on the.iiii.
sunday in Aduent. Folio eodem the gospel on the same day. folio eodem The
pystle at hye Mass on Christmas day. Folio eodem. the gospel on the same
day. Folio. ii. The Pystle on saint Steuens day. Folio eodem. the pystle on
the same day. folio eodem. The Pystle on saint Johannes day the Euangelyst.
Folio. iiii. the gospel on the same day. folio eodem. The pystle on Chyldermas
day. Folio eodem. the gospel on the same day. folio eodem The Pystle on the
sunday after Chrystmas day. Folio eodem the gospel on the same day. Folio.
v. The pystle on new years day. Folio eodem. the gospel on the same day.
folio eodem The pystle on twelfe day. Folio eodem the gospel on the same
day. folio eodem. The pystle on the sunday within the vtas of the Epyphanye.
Folio. vi. the gopel on the same day. folio eodem. The pystle on the first
sunday after the vtas of the Epyphanye. folio eodem the gospel on the same
day. folio eodem The pystle on the second sunday after the vtas of the
Epiphanye. Folio. vii. the gospel on the same day. folio eodem. The pystle on
the.iii. sunday after the vtas of the Epiphanye. folio eodem. the gospel on
the same day. folio eodem. The pystle on the.iiii. sunday after the vtas of
the Epiphanye. Folio. viii. the gospel on the same Sunday. folio eodem. The
pystle on the.v. sunday after the vtas of the Epyphanye. Folio eodem. the
gospel on the same sunday. folio eodem. The pystle on the sunday after wedding
goes out called septuagelima. fo. eo. the gospel on the same day. Folio. ix.
The Pystle on the sunday of.lx. to the Corynthyans. folio eodem. the gospel
on the same day Folio. x. The pystle on the sunday of.l. folio eo. the
gospel on the same day. folio eo. The pystle on asshe wednysdaye. Folio. xi.
the gospel on the same day. folio. eo. The Pystle on the first sunday in
Lent. folio eodem the gospel on the same day. folio eodem. The Pystle on the
second sunday in Lent. Folio. iii. the gospel on the same day. folio eodem.
The Pystle on the third sunday in Lent. folio eodem. the gospel on the same
day. folio eodem. The pystle on mydlent Sunday. Folio. xiii. the gospel on
the same day. folio eodem. The pystle on Passion Sunday. Folio. xiiii. the
gospel on the same day. folio eodem. the pistle on Palm sunday Folio eodem
the Passion on the same Sunday. folio eodem the gospel on the same day.
Folio. xviii. The Passion on good frydaye. folio eodem. the gospel on the same
day. Folio. xx. The Pystle on Easter day. folio eodem. the gospel on Easter
day. Folio. xxi. The pystle on the Mondaye in the Easter weke. folio eodem. the
gospel on the same day. folio eodem. The Pystle on the Tewysdaye in the
Easter weke. Folio. xxii. the gospel on the same day. folio eodem. The Pystle
on the wednysdaye in the Easter weke. folio eodem the gospel on the same day.
folio eodem The Pystle on the first sunday after Easter day called low sunday.
fo. xxiii the gospel on the same day. folio eodem. The pystle on the second
Sunday after Easter day. folio eodem the gospel on the same day. Folio.
xxiiii. The pystle on the third Sunday after Easter day. folio eodem. the
gospel on the same day. folio eodem. The pystle on the.iiii. sunday after
Easter day. folio eodem. the gospel on the same day. Folio. xxv. The pystle
on the.v. So^daye after Easter day / which is the next sunday before the cross
days. folio eo. the gospel of the same day. folio eo. The pystle on the
Mondaye in the Cross days. Folio eodem. the gospel of the same day. Folio.
xxvi. The pystle on the Ascension even. folio eodem. the gospel on the same
day. folio eodem. The pystle on the Ascensyon day. folio eodem. the gospel
on the same day. Folio xxvii. The pystle on the sunday after ascensyon day.
folio eodem. the gospel on the same day. folio eodem. The pystle on the
Wytson sunday. folio eodem. the gospel on the same day. Folio. xxviii. The
pystle on the Mondaye in Wytson weke. folio eodem. the gospel on the same
day. folio eodem. The pystle on the tewysdaye in the Wytson weke. folio eodem.
the gospel on the same day. Folio. xxix. The pystle on the wednysdaye in the
wylson weke. folio eodem. the gospel on the same day. folio eodem. The pystle
on Trinite So^day. folio eo. the gospel on the same day. fo. xxx The pystle on
Corpus Christi day. fo. eo. the gospel on the same day. fo. eo. The pystle on
the first sunday after trinite sunday. Folio. xcxi. the gospel on the same
Sunday. folio eodem. the pystle on the second sunday after trinite Sunday.
folio eodem. the gospel on the same Sunday. folio eodem. the pystle on
the.iii. sunday after trinite Sunday. Folio. xxxii the gospel on the same
day. folio eodem the pystle on the.iiii. Sunday after trynite Sunday. folio
eodem. the gospel on the same day. folio eodem. the pystle on the.v. sunday
after trynite Sunday. Folio. xxxiii. the gospel on the same Sunday. folio
eodem the pystle on the.vi. Sunday after trinite sunday. Folio eodem the
gospel on the same day. Folio. xxxiiii. the pystle on the.vii. Sunday after
trynite sunday. folio eodem. the Gospel on the same day. folio eodem. the
pystle on the.viii. Sunday after tryuyle sunday. folio eodem the gospel on
the same day. folio eodem the pystle on the.ix. Sunday after trinite sunday
folio xxxv. the gospel on the same day. folio eodem. the pystle on the.x.
sunday after trynite sunday. folio eodem. the gospel on the same day. Folio
eodem. the pystle on the.xi. Sunday after trinite sunday. Folio xxxvi the
gospel on the same day. folio eodem. the pystle on.xii. sunday after trinite
Sunday. folio eodem the gospel on the same Sunday. folio eodem. the pystle
on the.xiii. Sunday after trinite sunday. Folio. xxxvii. the gospel on the
same dayde. folio eodem the pystle on the.xiiii. Sunday after trinite sunday.
folio eodem. the gospel on the same Sunday. folio eodem the pystle on the.xv.
sunday after trinite sunday. Folio. xxxviii the gospel on the same day.
folio eodem. the pystle on the xvi. sunday after trinite sunday. folio eodem.
the gospel on the same day. Folio. xxxix. the pystle on the.xvii. Sunday
after trinite sunday. folio eodem. the gospel on the same day. folio eodem.
the pystle on the.xviii. Sunday after trinite Sunday. folio eodem. the
gospel on the same day. Folio eodem. the pystle on the.xix. Sunday after
trinite Sunday. Folio. xl. the gospel on the same day. folio eodem the
pystle on the.xx Sunday after trinite Sandaye. folio eodem the gospel on the
same day. folio eodem the pystle on the.xxi. sunday after trinite sunday.
Folio. xii. the gospel on the same sunday. folio eodem. the pystle on
the.xxii. sunday after trynite sunday. folio eodem. the gospel on the same
day. folio eodem. the pystle on the.xxiii. Sunday after trinite sunday.
Folio. xlii. the gospel on the same day. Folio eodem. the pystle on
the.xxiiii. Sunday after trinite sunday. folio eodem. the gospel on the same
day. folio eodem. the pystle on the next sunday before Aduent Sunday. folio
eodem. the gospel on the same day. folio xliii. the pystle on the dedicacion
day. fo. eo. the gospel on the same day. fo. eo. Here ends the table of the
Pystles and gospels of the sondayes.

Here after follows the table of the Pystles and gospels of the Saints.
THe pystle on saint Andrews day. folio. xliii. the gospel on the same day.
folio. xliiii. The Pystle on s. Nicholas day. fo. eo. the gospel on the same
day. fo. eo. The pystle on the Concepcion of our Lady. folio eodem. the gospel
on the same day. folio eodem The pystle on s. Thomas the Apostle day. folio.
xiv. the gospel on the same day. Folio eodem. The pystle on the Conuersyon of
saint Paul. folio eodem. the gospel on the same day. folio. xlvi. the pystle
on Candelmas day. fo. eo. the gospel on the same day. fo eo. the pystle on
saint Mathias the Apostle day. folio eodem. the gospel on the same day.
folio. xlvii the pystle on the Annunciacian of our Lady. folio eodem. the
gospel on the same day. folio eodem the pystle on s. Georges day / folio eo.
the gospel on the same day. fo. xlviii the pystle on s. Mark the Evangelists
day. folio eodem. the gospel on the same day. folio eodem. the pystle on
Philip and James day. folio eodem. the gospel on the same day. folio eodem.
the pistle on the Inue^cio^ of the cross. fo. xlix. the gospel on the same
day. fo. eo the pystle on the Natyu^^e of saint John^ the babtyst. folio eodem
the gospel on the same day. folio. l. the pystle on s. Peter and Paul's day.
fo. eo. the gospel on the same day. fo. eo. the pystle on the co^memoracyon of
saint Paul. folio eode^. the gospel on the same day. folio. li. the pystle
on the Visitacion of our Lady. folio eodem the gospel on the same day. folio
eodem the pystle on Relyke sunday. fo. eo. the gospel on the same day. fo.
eo. the pystle on s. Margaretes day. fo. iii. the gospel on i. Margarets day.
fo. eo. the pystle on Mary magdaleyn day. fo. eo. the gospel on the same day /
fo. eo. the pystle on s. James day. fo. liii. the gospel on the same day. fo.
eo. the pystle on s. Annes day. folio. eo. the gospel on s. Annes day. folio
eo. the pystle on s. Peter's day advincula. fo. eo. the gospel on the same day.
fo. eo. the pystle on the transfyguracion of our lord. folio eodem. the
gospel on the same day. folio liiii. the pystle on the feast of the name of
Jesus. folio eodem the gospel on the same day of Jesus feast. folio eodem.
the pystle on saint Laurence. folio. eo. the gospel on the same day. folio
eo. the pystle on the Assumpcibu of our Lady Folio lv. the gospel on the same
day. folio eodem the pystle on s. Bartylmewes day. fo. eo. the gospel on the
same day. fo. eo. the pystle on the decollacion of saint Johan baptist. folio
eodem the gospel on the same day folio eodem the pystle on the Natiuite of
our lady. folio. lvi. the gospel on the same day folio eodem the pystle on
the Exaltacion of the Cross. folio eodem the gospel on the same day folio
eodem the pystle on s. Mathewes day the Apostle folio eodem the gospel on the
same day. folio eodem the pystle on saint Myghels day. fo. lvii. the gospel on
the same day. folio eo. the pystle on the trans. of saint Edward the King and
confessor. folio eo. the gospel on the same day folio eodem the pystle on
saint Luke the euangelyst. folio eodem the gospel on the same day folio eodem
the pystle on the Xi. thousand vyrgyns day folio. lviii. the gospel on the
same day. folio eodem the pystle on s. Simon and Judas day. fo. eo. the gospel
on the same day fo. eo. the pystle on al halowen day. fo. lix. the gospel on
the same day. fo. eodem the pystle on al Souls day. folio lx. the gospel on
the same day. folio eodem the pystle on s. Martyn day. folio eo. the gospel
on the same day. fo eodem the pystle on s. Katheryns day. fo. eo. the gospel on
the same day. folio lx. the pystle on the same day of wedding folio eodem the
gospel on the same day folio eodem the pystle at buryenges / folio eodem the
gospel on the same day / folio eo.
FINIS TABVLAE.
Imprynted at London in Pater noster row, by my John^ Redman.


